GUNfIRE
The limited artillery resources made strong con-
centrations of fire impossible.
Dispersion, and the fact that initiative almost
every time was lost in battle, made pre-planned
concentrations of firepower an art that was com-
pletely neglected, as Bidwell saw it. The same
could be said about counter-battery fire. That
was almost never applied. Lack of long-range
firing guns and less understanding on the part
of commanders of units to be
supported
regarding the importance of such fire led to
negligence
The British Army had before the war largely
neglected the importance of close cooperation
between infantry, armour and artillery. This was
particularly the case as regards armoured forma-
tions. These considered it best to run their own
battle; their own weapons would do what was
needed in the context of firepower. That seems
to have been the general opinion. The result in
the Desert War was that tank formations ran into
traps arranged by the Germans again and again.
The traps were the result of carefully emploved
tank units cooperating with lines of anti-tank
guns, cleverly positioned. To the latter were
several of the famous '88' anti-aircraft guns often
added. They were then used as a long-range anti-
tank gun. It is amazing to note that the British so
often accepted great losses due to erroneous use
of tank resources. The situation did not become
better by the absence of high explosive shells for
the British tank guns.
Solid armour-piercing
shells were
quite useless against
anti-tank
positions. Bidwell again:
Our armoured doctrine of the day, which was
quite opposite of the German, was that to exploit
its full potential armour must operate in its own.
untrammelled br
any need to seek or lend
support to the infantry and artillery. ... British
armour seldom, if ever, used its artillery correctl
in a coordinated plan. Nor did it discover how to
cooperate with anti-tank guns, in the German
manner 300
the gunner and the commander to be supported
takes a long time to establish. Much exercising
together was needed. Personal relations must
also not be underestimated. The understanding
of this was lacking during the first years of battle
in North Africa, according to Bidwell.
But changes were to come, and this not only
regarding the discussed deficiencies! A new
situation emerged when Montgomery arrived
and took command of 8th Army. He had the will,
the self-confidence and the visions regarding
what was needed.
Montgomery in command
'Monty', as he was called, took command of the
army with a clear task given by Churchill. He
should
Only
prevent
Rommel from
occupying Egypt, he should also once and for all
destroy the German-Italian army, now called the
Panzerarmee Afrika. With this in mind, he at once
initiated a number of measures.
Montgomery was concerned when he found
that the morale of the 8th Army was low. People
lacked confidence in the High Command. A
widespread practice existed ligh Command of
command to
yueston orders and plans
Authority of command was missing. He also
recognised a large need for training. This must
include improvement of personal skills related to
individual tasks but also collective training at
different unit levels. An offensive was out of
question until we are ready', he stated. This
See also Fig. 19-2.
Bidwell raises the interesting comment also
that the frequent disruption of the ordinary or-
ganisational
structures,
establishing
temporary battle formations including changes
of commanders, contributed to the fact that
artillery
resources were not properly used. A
trustful relationship and cooperation between
Fig. 19-2 Montgomery and his artillery commander
Kirkman failed to changent is artillent comed for
long amongst many come the Dad habit rooted units
to attack without proper, planned artillery support.
Losses were large when their tanke ran stricht into
the well-planned Germanheir tanks ran ls, This
Sherman tank may be seen as a representative of
such armoured units (AWM No. P01614.017)
232
'IT WILL BE A KILLING MATCH'
EL ALAMEIN
could not take place in September as Churchill
wanted, rather in October at the earliest.
Some of the immediate measures taken by
Monty were the following:
First, he stated emphatically that no retreat
whatsoever from El Alamein should take place.
The army should stay on where it now was, to
victory or death. Retreat towards the Nile Delta
from now on, was out of the question,
planning for this should cease immediately. Plans
prepared earlier for this should go into the waste-
paper basket! This first message alone gave a
distinct boost to morale and fighting spirit.
Montgomery's next step was to replace
high-level commanders. He recruited Brigadier
Francis de Guingand from the General Staff at
Cairo as his own Chief of Staff, this after having
interviewed him and established his view on the
overall military situation. This choice proved to
be fortunate. De Guingand (later Major General
Sir Francis de Guingand), known as 'Freddie' by
Montgomery as well as others, was to serve
Fig. 19-3 Brigadier (later General) Sidney Chevalier
Kirkman was another of the most important reformers
of Royal Artillery after Dunkirk. Montgomery consid-
ered him to be 'Britain's best Gunner' and wanted to
see him as artillery commander of 8th Army. Kirkman
became his principal artillery advisor when the plan
S. Morris Brown, RAHT Collection)
for the battle of El Alamein was prepared (Portrait by
under Montgomery until the end of the war.
Montgomery wanted to replace also all
Corps Commanders, but had to retain one,
Lieutenant General Lumsden.
With great
appreciation, he managed to get Brian Horrocks
released in England to come to Egypt and
assume command of XIII Corps. An already
close relation between the two Generals was here
further strengthened. Horrocks remained one of
Montgomery's favourites as Corps Commander
through the war, which we will see more of later
on in the book.
Another important change was his nomination
of an army artillery commander. Montgomery
knew the importance of artillery and how it should
be employed. To make sure that this was to take
place
the coming offensive, Montgomery
requested that London gave him Brigadier Sidney
Kirkman (Fig. 19-3).
They knew each other very well; Kirkman
had as we have seen been divisional artillery
commander
(CRA)
and
Corns
artillery
commander (CCRA) under Montgomery. The
latter used to say that Kirkman was the best
gunner in the British Army'. We may recall his
most important role as chief artillery umpire
under Montgomery when the huge Exercisc
'Bumper was run in October 1941 in England 301
Montgomery
made
clear
Trom
the
beginning that the fighting onwards should be
done by coherent divisions. There must be an
end to Jock Columns' and other types of frag-
mentation of high-level resources. The artillery
should be given a prominent role and be used ir
a concentrated manner.
When he visited various units in the field ho
became angry when finding commanders who
did not train their people continuously. This was
another reason for re-shuffling of commanding
officers.
We may also observe another important
change in the army. Montgomery demanded
that evervone was well informed about the
battle they were to conduct. Evervone, irrespec
tive of rank, must know exactly what their
personal role would be in the coming opera
tions. He checked through numerous visits to
units that this order was adhered to when the
time came for engagement.
Furthermore. Montoomery made it clear to
all officers that no objections to given orders
were tolerated hencetorth. Orders
were not
intended for discussion. they were to be strictly
233
