ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
this. I thank him especially for the large number of photographs that he has put at
my disposal, some of which are included in this book.
My book is based on extensive archival studies in the UK for many years. I want
to thank the staff at the Imperial War Museum's records department and photo
archive for valuable help throughout the years. Sincere thanks also to the British
National Archives at Kew, London, which is a real 'gold mine' for anyone looking
for original sources. The staff are very service-oriented, always offering kind and
efficient assistance when it comes to finding and producing interesting documents
for review. I am very grateful for all the assistance I have received and having been
given permission to use my own digital camera when visiting the institution.
My principal thanks as regards help from various archives go to the Librarian
at the James Clavell Library, Paul Evans. The library, now closed, was the official
repository and archive of the Royal Artillery Museum at Woolwich Arsenal in
southeast London. No one has helped me as much, and with such an interest, as
Paul Evans. For more than a decade, he has during all my visits with the utmost
readiness and skill sought and found numerous original documents for my review.
He has well understood what kind of photographs that I have been interested in
and has presented a large number, of which many now are reproduced in the book.
I also want to thank Paul Evans' research assistant during the first two years of my
research, Matthew Buck. He introduced me to the archive collections and gave
valuable assistance by providing long lists of documents of potential interest to me
and, after my review, readily got them out in the light for my detailed examination.
I owe Matthew Buck too, my sincere thanks.
My thanks also go to the former Curator of the now closed Royal Artillery
Museum, Woolwich, Mark Smith, and his staff for their help on many occasions
to find objects in the museum's collections that have been of particular interest to
me. For many interesting photographs that the museum's staff have provided, I
am much indebted.
In this context, I would like to extend my sincere thanks to the formal owner
of the museum's collections and archives, the Royal Artillery History Trust. Thanks
to the Trust's generosity, I have been able to copy and use numerous original
documents and - not the least - photographs.
My thanks go to the Association of Friends of the museum and its former
chairman the late Major General Mike Steele for many valuable contacts. From
the Association's Secretary Philip Jobson I have been much supported as regard
terms and acronyms. His magnificent 'Royal Artillery Glossary of Terms and
Abbreviations. Historical and Modern', has been of great value in my work.
The Royal Artillery Publications have given me permission to include in my
book several quotes from the two journals 'Royal Artillery Journal' and 'The
Gunner'. For this, I convey my sincere thanks to the Regimental Secretary, HQS
RA, Colonel R. Robson.
Another institution that I would like to thank for valuable help, not least in con-
nection with copyright issues, is the Royal Artillery Association.
The large number of photographs that can be found in this book originate
partly from some private collections, but to a large extent from the artillery
museum's archive, i.e. James Clavell Library representing the Royal Artillery
History Trust, and from the Imperial War Museum. I especially thank the staff of
these two institutions for all their help with the finding of suitable photographs and
providing copies from the original negatives. Several photographs have been
AcKNOWLEDGEMENTS
provided also from other public sources such as Australian War Memorial. I extend
my sincere thanks to these institutions.
I am much indebted to Major Jon McCleery, who, when commanding the 'O'
Headquarters Battery (The Rocket Troop) 1st Regiment Royal Horse Artillery,
kindly helped me with photographs of the paintings in the officers' mess showing
the British rocket artillery in action at Leipzig in 1813. The Rocket Troop then
fought under Swedish command against Napoleon. My thanks go to McCleery's
successor as commander of the battery Major J.E. Allen for reconfirming the per-
mission to include one of them in this book.
My special and heartfelt thanks go to my late brother, Äke Moberg, who helped
me by producing twenty of the book's thirty-six maps. This help has been invalu-
able. Unfortunately, he suddenly and unexpectedly passed away, when he was just
about to take on the remaining maps. For preparation of these, I later received
excellent help from Oskar Karlin. I am grateful for his willingness to help me. My
thanks go also to Mrs. Amis Halldin who quickly and skillfully drew printable
copies of all sketches and numerous diagrams; and to my brother Jan Moberg for
valuable general support and improvement of some illustrations and maps.
I want to convey special thanks to two prominent Swedish gunners who reviewed
my first, Swedish, manuscript. They are Colonel 1.Cl. Gustaf Ankarcrona and Colonel
Leif Martensson, the latter now head of the National Artillery Museum in Kristianstad,
Sweden. Both have spent a lot of time on critical review of my draft material and have
provided many valuable suggestions for improvements and additions.
When expressing my gratitude to many persons for help given to review and
comment on my manuscript, I must stress that the responsibility for the book's
subjects and facts, however, rests entirely on myself.
I have endeavored to find all relevant copyright-holders, but despite extensive
inquiries failed in some cases. I hope this can be excused and that those concerned
still can feel satisfaction that their documents and pictures will be well observed by
others, as they deserve. To all those who have generously given me permission to
use copyright material, including illustrations, I extend my sincere thanks.
It was a great privilege to me when the Publisher Martin Mace offered to
publish an English version of my book. It has been a great pleasure to cooperate
with Martin and his staff at Frontline. Thank you all!
My sincere thanks go also to the Commissioning Editor Mark Khan who has
been so kind to undertake the onerous task of bringing my translation from
Swedish to become more like English as it should be written by people having
English as their mother tongue. Mark has with great patience and good humour
been an excellent teacher. For this I am very grateful.
During the preparatorv phase. Bricadier (rat) Ken Timbers offered to submit
the Foreword now included in the English version. For this I extend my sincere thanks.
Last but not least I extend a warm than to my dear wife Gunilla who during
the long time that I have worked on this project often saw me disappear into work
and thoughts in the 'writer's study', to which came my absence for all trips to British
archives and other places. My subject matter has not been particularly attractive to
her, but has rather been a source of reminders of war atrocities and human suffering.
Despite this, I have got a very valuable help with the reading of the script and wise
comments on what I tried to express. Her good sense of languages has led to many
proposals for text enhancement for which I express my great gratitude.
