GUNFIRE
The Batteries comprised around 200 men
each, (approximately 600 men for all three gun
batteries). The balance of 122 men was needed
for the Regimental Headquarters and Adminis-
trative functions. The total number 722 men,
(plus around 50 replacement staff to cover up for
illness and battle losses), comprised a regiment.
The Regiment's Commanding Officer was
an officer with the rank of Lieutenant Colonel.
His deputy, Second in Command, was a Major.
The latter was responsible for deployment
reconnaissance. He often commanded
the
Regiment on marching and deployment and was
the commanding officer at the headquarters
when the Commanding Officer was absent
which he normally was as he acted as Brigade
Artillery Commander with the support of a
small headquarters detachment.
Looking now at the different 'boxes' of Fig.
5-1 and how they were organised more in detail
during
Inarch
and
deployment,
Manoeuvre Organisation, the following detach-
ments can be identified.87 First, Commanding
Officer's Group and Regimental Headquarters:
a) Commanding Officer's Party:
-Commanding Officer and Second in
Command
-Signals Officer (Subaltern)
-Survey Officer (Captain/Subaltern)
-Staff Officer (Subaltern)
-Other ranks (Signallers, surveyors,
dispatch riders etc.)
b) Adjutant's Party:
-Regimental Adjutant (Captain)
-Other ranks (Staff assistants, signallers.
dispatch riders, mechanics, local defence)
c) Survey Party:
-Survey Officer and Surveyors with
equipment
d) Regimental HQ Group
-Medical Officer
-Regiment Sergeant Major
-Other ranks (medical orderlies, signallers.
staff assistants, technicians, dispatch riders
(This group was larger than the others and
needed several vehicles for transport)
e) 'B' Echelon and Light Aid Detachment
REMR
-Regimental Quarter Master
-Ordnance technicians
-Other ranks (cooks, store keepers, techni-
clans etc.)
(Besides several vehicles for supply
transport, two vehicles with 20mm anti-
aircraft guns on travelling platform. One
PIAT anti-tank weapon and six light
machine-guns for local defence were also
transported)
We will now look at the detachments and groups
in which the Batteries were grouped on transport
and deployment.
Manoeuvre organisation of batteries
As Fig. 5-1 illustrates, each Battery comprises
two four-gun Troops. A pair of guns was called
a Section.
The leader was the Battery Commander
with the rank of Major. His deputy was the
Battery Captain. Normal practice was for the
former to act as Battalion Artillery Commander
and thus as advisor to the commander of the
battalion. In this role he could also directly
observe and control artillery fire when the
situation so required. The Battery Headquarters
remained at the gun deployment area, where also
resources for supply were deployed.
The deputy had nothing to do with fire
control once the battery had been deployed. His
post normally was at the Wagon Line where the
battery's all vehicles were kept. His main task
here was to manage the supply of the battery
with ammunition, fuel, food etc.
The person in charge of final deployment of
the guns and then control and direction of the
firing was the Battery Command Post Officer
(CPO). He was also responsible for organising
the local defence of the gun positions. It was
customary that he was the most senior of the
subalterns
When leading the preparations for
fire and directing it, he was assisted by Special-
some
whom
signallers
were NCOs.
and some
The two Troops were commanded by the
Troop Commanders with the rank of Captain.
We have seen that they normally were posted as
Observation Post Officers (OPO). Their role
was to
act as Forward Observation Officers
(FOO) when the infantry or armour attacked.
Hence they seldom were close to their guns
during battle. With support of Specialists) and
ARTILLERY GROUPING, ORGANISATION AND EQUIPMENT
signallers they were detached to the commander
of the infantry or armoured unit to be supported
by artillery fire, normally a company. By means
of telephone or, more often, radio they could
communicate with the former, but also with their
Battery Commanders and the gun positions.
More about this later.
The four guns of a troop were deployed
quite close to each other. The distance between
the two troops normally was 300-500 vards.
The deployment could be much tighter when
terrain and battle conditions so required. The
deployment of a troop was the responsibility of
a deputy, the Troop Leader, who often was
a young
subaltern.
The technical gunnery
services, l.e. preparation for and direction of
fire, were the responsibility of the Gun Position
Officer (GPO) assisted by Specialists and sig-
nallers. They established the Troop Command
Post for this purpose. As we will see later, a
telephone line to the Battery Command Post
was established as soon as possible and also
forwards to the Troop Commander if there was
time to do so. Most often the substitute was
radio communication.
Towards this background, we will now look
closer at the Organisation for Manoeuvre and its
division into groups and parties when the battery
was on the march for deployment:
Battery Commander's Party:
-Battery Commander
-Command Post Officer
-Other ranks (Specialists, signallers,
dispatch riders etc.)
(The Battery Commander used a jeep, a
tank or a half-track vehicle for transport).
Observation Party (2 of them):
-Troop Commander
-Other ranks (Specialists, signallers, carrier
drivers etc.)
(Normally an 'O' Party was equipped with
a light armoured carrier, the Universal
Carrier, or more often called the Bren
Carrier. If the party was to support ar
armoured unit, it was in most cases given a
tank instead).
Headquarters Party:
-Battery Captain
-Assistant Gun Position Officers)
-Other ranks (Specialists, staff assistants,
signallers, local defence and drivers).
d) Gun Position Party (one or two):
-Gun Position Officers (A Tp GPO and B
Tp GPO)
-Battery Sergeant Majors (A Tp BSM and
B Tp BSM)
-Other ranks (Specialists, assistants, tech-
nicians and drivers etc.)
e) Gun Group (one or two):
-Troop Leader (A Tp Leader and B Tp
Leader)
-Four gun detachments with driver and
technician
-Other ranks (Specialists, drivers, local
defence etc.)
(A Gun Section had three tractors,
Tractor 4x4, field artillery. Two of these
towed the guns and their ammunition
trailers, the third carried ammunition in
two trailers for both guns. The tractor was
the famous Quad, a four-wheel drive
tractor that carried the gun crew with their
personal equipment and belongings and in
addition to that 32 complete rounds of am-
munition, of which eight were armour-
piercing).
f)
Ammunition Group:
-Ammunition crew, medical orderlies,
assistants, local defence)
(The Group was transported in three
3-ton lorries, 4x4, G.S. In total 480
complete rounds of ammunition were
transported on these vehicles. They also
brought camouflage nets, PIAT anti-tank
guns and machine guns for local defence
Two 20mm anti-aircraft guns on separate
vehicles were also attached to the Group).
'B' Echelon:
-Battery Quarter Master Sergeant
-Supply crew, staff assistant, cooks, electri-
cian, vehicle mechanic, water attendant.
drivers
The total number of vehicles in the Field Regiment
was 110-130 plus a few motorcycles. When on
march this meant a column about 5-6km long
We may also note that when the war broke
out only a few gunners had personal weapons
Most of them were unarmed, probably a remi-
