GUNFIRE
retreat westwards. Before leaving the area, the
troop had surveyed and registered 25 'Bearing
Pickets', with bearing and coordinate data for the
artillery units being provided by the surveyors.
The troop had also participated in survey of the
two new sound ranging bases
Now, going back to the 'parent unit', 1
Survey Regiment RA, which had been ordered
to be prepared to march across the Belgian
border at two hours' notice on 10 May. Its re
connaissance detachment actually crossed the
border at 07.15 hours on 11 May. At 12.00
hours the main body of the regiment followed
suit. The next day, 12 May, the regiment was
ready to commence surveying near river Dyle.
But, at this time there was no sound ranging
unit available and the resources for ordinary
survey of artillery units continuously arriving
had been depleted by the redirection of 'Y
Troop'. This made it necessary to use the Flash
Spotting Battery instead, thus giving establish-
ment of observation bases lower priority. This
battery had to organise a replacement troop for
IST SURVEY BATTERY RA
ESCAUT.
Fig. 16-6 1 Survey Regiment RA prepared the survey
of all artillery formations to be deployed behind the
Escaut-line into a common grid by means of triangu-
lation and traverse to fix a number of Tria Points
(Control Points). From one of these each unit should
carry survey data to its own position (The National
Archives WO 167/571)
survey work as replacement for 'Y Troop'. On
12 and 13 May survey went on. After this, it was
possible to move the surveyors to the planned
defence line along the Brussels - Charleroi
Canal.
On 17 May, the order came that the entire
regiment would be redeployed to the area behind
river Escaut, where they would meet 1 Sound
Ranging
Battery coming back from the Saar
arca
It was now out of the question to prepare for
sound ranging. The sound ranging battery was
instead ordered to organise a number of survey
sections near the river.
These were to assist in
surveying in arriving artillery units to the grid.
Besides fixing battery p
sitions and observations
post, they would also
survey likely targets at the
south-eastern side of the river such as groups of
farm buildings, woods, road junctions etc.
The survey
started from a number of
available Trig Points and was done by triangula-
tion in open landscape and in more woody
terrain by 'resection' towards places with known
coordinates, in particular church towers and so
on. But also angle measuring by traverse and
measurement of distances had to be used when
fixing artillery positions. A beautiful example of
such a survey record is shown in Fig. 16-6.
The triangulation seems to have started
from the top line marked 'RE'. 'Bearing Pickets,
with bearing and coordinate data for the artillery
units, were delivered by the surveyors, Bearing
Picket Cards' 232
When the surveyors had finished at river
Escaut, they were ordered northwards to prepare
for repeated redeployments towards the coast.
They were engaged near river Lys between Ar-
mentières and Comines i Fiver Lys Detween the
order was given to them to immediately cease
surveying and to go to Dunkirk for evacuation.
This was done already on 26 May in good order
and without having to leave instruments and
other vital equipment behind.
We
have now followed the events of I
Survey Regiment RA, but what had 2 Survey
Regiment RA been through? We can get a
glimpse of that by studying the regiment's war
diary. First, we eas see that this regiment also
Went to river Dyle earl as this regimery abo
crossed the Belgian border at 00.30 hours on 11
May and the main body of the regiment later the
same day. Upon arrival at river Dyle, units were
engaged gradually and on 13 May all units were
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD - ACROSS THE CHANNEL
in action. Probably all artillery regiments were
surveyed and maybe one observation base fixed
as well. No notes on deployment of any sound
ranging base are found in the diary.
On 16 May the regiment was ordered to
withdraw and on 18 May it was back behind
river Escaut. The regiment did not stay here for
long before again ordered to withdraw to the
Dunkirk beachhead. On 26 May the order had
been given to destroy all supplies and unneces-
sarv
equipment
except instruments. Several
attempts were made during the subsequent days
to evacuate from the beach, but to no avail. In
the morning of 29 May, the regiment walked to
the pier at Dunkirk where they
could embark on
destroyers. On their way
across the Channel, one
of the ships with personnel from the regiment
was torpedoed which led to a great loss of life.
What happened to 3 Survey Regiment RA?
Well, the regiment commenced survey at the
Gort Line as soon as it was fully equipped and
ready in the middle of April 1940. As late as 8
May, they had actually completed a sound
ranging base close to the Belgian Border just
north of Lille. The regiment went into Belgium
on 12 May for survey along river Escaut where
III Corps, to which it was attached, was to be
deployed as of 'Plan D'. The regiment was rein-
forced by two survey sections from '514 Survey
Company RE'. The first task was to fix bearing
pickets for the artillery of six divisions, which
was to be completed in a week, it was hoped. In
addition to that, observation bases for Flash
Spotters and Sound Rangers would be estab-
lished. No sound ranging bases materialised,
however. A fairly small observation base for three
observation posts was arranged east of Escaut
and this was ready to register targets on 17 May.
The southernmost observation post was located
at the 145 m high Mont St. Aubert, which is a
dominating hill just north of Tournai, a few kilo-
metres east of the river.
The divisions of the two other Corps were at
this time in full retreat westwards and those of III
Corps had to move backwards as well. 3 Survey
Regiment RA was now also forced to withdraw
stepwise from one position to the other. The
regiment was at Ploegsteert just northwest of
river Lys on 21 May. Here, it was ordered to send
a large detachment to the 46th Infantry Division
Which was to be up-graded with some artillery
resources giving it better prospects for defending
the canal front to the west. But the regiment was
not to contribute with survey resources, but with
equipment
and personnel for radio and
telephone communication.
Then, on 22 May, parts of the regiment was
ordered to go to Dunkirk and left St. Omer at
14.30 hours, which place the regiment had
reached the previous evening. Still in the area
was 3 Survey Battery RA and the detachment
sent to the 46th Infantry Division. Those sent
back to Dunkirk were ordered at 15.45 hours on
25 May to evacuate at 18.00 hours, which they
did, bringing with them 'a large amount of
technical stores which were saved'.
The survey battery and the left detachment
were later also evacuated, the former on 28 May
and the latter on 29 May.
In summary,
all survey tasks could be
fulfilled
despite
the quick retreat toward:
Dunkirk. In particular along rivers Dyle and
Escaut extensive survev of artillery positions
were made. There was time for quite a lot of
fixing of potential targets just in front of these
major defence lines. This could also take place
near temporary delaving lines to the advantage
of retreating infantry and FOOs. But, as noticed,
no sound ranging bases could be established
apart from those brought into action in the Saar
region [51st (Highland) Division].
The last shots - the gunners fire to the end
Jack Parham has described how he received the
evacuation order, and how he experienced the
unavoidable end of the campaign in France:
The G.1. de Fontblanque came along and told
me we were to throw away and destrov all vehicles
other than the guns, wireless cars and essential
fighting vehicles. otherwise the force would never
get back to embarl
— So it was as bad as that.
was it! It is difficult long afterwards to remember
what ones feelings were on hearing this, for it
meant, if not that the capture of the British Army
was imminent, that the whole Britich effort on th
Continent was more or less finished for the time
being. 45o
The last deployments of artillery became more
and more difficult as all roads were jammed with
not only retreating British, but also French units
coming from the North and which were crossing
the British routes. Many angry comments about
the comolete lack of traffic discipline on the par
of the retreating French units can be read in
