GUNFIRE
these enemies were caught, the process was
short. The war diary of 7 Field Regiment RA
from 15 May 1940 gives an example:
An order was issued that all civilians were to leave
by midnight. During the morning a civilian was
apprehended on suspicion, sent to 9 Inf Bde for
interrogation and released by them [...] In the
evening the suspected civilian who had been ap-
prehended in the morning was again found in the
village, and it was discovered that he had been
cutting marks in the grass. He was again taken to
9 Inf Bde for interrogation, and 5 minutes later
was, by order of the Brigadier, taken out and shot.
On 20 May the war diary had a similar story:
9/17 Bty caught a civilian snooping round their
area in the early hours of the day. He ran away
when challenged, was caught and shot.
The evacuation beachhead was exposed to con-
tinuous artillery fire and attacks from the air. The
latter were restricted mainly to daytime, but still
they were very wearing. The casualties on the
shores and among ships and boats just off the
beach were heavy. But the fact that the area now
could be covered by RAF fighters from bases in
England changed
the
air battle
Luftwaffe could still retain the initiative.204
although
From the final beachhead which became
smaller and smaller every day, most units were
evacuated under amazingly good and disciplined
order. After a slow start, the evacuation was
speeded up on 26 May and went on to 4 June as
far as the British were concerned. The width of
the beachhead was on 1 June still as much as
20km and it was around 5km deep. After 4 June,
evacuation of some French units went on for
another day, but on 5 lune all was over; no more
allied soldiers could be rescued.
Strong management had made it possible to
pursue the evacuation without disorder or panic.
This does not exclude many examples of units
that found conditions on the beaches chaotic and
also found the long waiting for embarkation very
nervous and tedious. In London it was thought
that some 45,000 men as a maximum could be
rescued from France. When the operation was
over 338,000 British and French soldiers had
disembarked in England from the numerous
ships and boats that had taken part in Operation
Dynamo, indeed a remarkable success! About
half of the BEF had been rescued, albeit without
any heavy equipment and guns.
What role did the British artillery play?
What did the artillery units go through during
the three weeks of fighting up to the evacuation
at Dunkirk, and what tasks did they face? How
were these resolved? We will now return to the
beginning of the battle at river Dyle.
As we have seen, the march to river Dyle
could be done without any major complications.
After all, this had been trained so many times
and the Germans wanted to get the BEF into the
trap as soon as possible, hence air attacks were
almost non-existent. The planning of the march
and traffic control worked well and no streams
of refugees along the roads had yet commenced.
But the advance of the BEF was a tiresome a task
on the part of the drivers. They had to drive in
the dark and without any lights ahead of the
vehicles, only a minor rear light on the vehicles
was allowed.
10 Field
Regiment RA still
managed to cover 200km in 42 hours without
any major accidents or breakdowns.2 The
artillery units were deployed beginning 11 May
and it was completed a few days later. This was
also the case as regards the Corps artillery to be
deployed at forward gun positions.
In the
northern sector, where the 3rd
Infantry Division was deployed, the reinforce-
ment regiment, 2 Field Regiment RHA, which
had been put under command of the division,
was in position and ready to fire early on 11
May. It was thereby prepared to support advance
protecting units and reconnaissance detach-
ments which had crossed river Dyle to the
eastern side of it. The regiment had been allotted
an advanced deployment area for this task. The
main part of the divisional artillery had their gun
positions 5-6km west of the river. From the
latter there were another 1-2km eastwards to the
area where the first fighting was to comment.
In order
to get a shorter range initially,
temporary gun positions would be used for
single batteries, or more often, a few troops.
They were reconni more often, a few troops.
front line (See also Map 16-2).
As we have seen, one field regiment was
allotted for support to each of the forward
brigades, ie. they were to each of the of that
The third regiment of under command of these.
the front of both brigades when necessary. The
possibility for concendes when neediaisional
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD - ACROSS THE CHANNEL
artillery towards the same target, either a Corps
target or a divisional target, was not a viable
option. Short ranges and lack of adequate com-
munication means were amongst the reasons for
Stockpiling ammunition close to the guns
was included in the battle preparations. The
artillery of the 3rd Infantry Division was ordered
to prepare 100 rounds per gun and day although
initially only 30 were to be used. Obviously one
was expecting a fairly moderate firing, still influ-
enced by peacetime requirements. 206
All artillery units were surveyed into the
same grid by 13 May; DF and SOS targets were
prepared in cooperation with the infantry.
Observed fire organised from Forward Obser-
vation Posts (FOP) against advancing German
columns began taking place this day. The
foremost units east of river Dyle were ordered to
withdraw west of the river and towards the
evening, the first German units entered Louvain.
The next day, 14 May, the fighting became
more intensive as was the artillery fire. But at this
stage the batteries had to be restrictive as regards
ammunition expenditure. The war diary of
HQRA 3rd Division tells:
Fighting general all along the R. Dyle. Enemy
held. A certain amount of German aerial activity
with bombing attacks on LOUVAIN and targets
to the rear. Arty activity restricted owing to
limited number of rounds being allotted for
ordinary observed shooting. During the night,
regts had a number of defensive fire tasks and
concentrations. 201
7 Field Regiment RA also tells us about the
initial fighting:
About 2100 hours the sound of heavy firing was
heard on the front and at 2140 hours the S.O.S.
and defensive fire tasks were fired almost contin-
uously until midnight on the left of 9 Inf Bde
front, held by 2 R.U.R. Several times a report was
received that the situation was critical. It was later
learned that the whole affair was a 'flap' caused
by conflicting reports, and, possibly, the natural
nervousness of troops under fire for the first time
About 700 rounds were fired during the flap',
and the infantry stated later that the expenditure
had been worthwhile if only for the additional
confidence it had given the troops. 208
The German air force was not any longer
satisfied with just reconnaissance sorties. Every-
thing was now done to destroy the allies. Two
troops of 76 Field Regiment RA were attacked
this day by dive-bombers for the first time. The
troop positions and the
nearby road with
refugees were strafed with machineguns from
the air.
On 15 May, the task given to 2 Field
Regiment RHA to support advance units east of
river Dyle was over. The Divisional artillery
commander decided to put the regiment under
command of 33 Field Regiment RA. 7 Guards
Brigade was, thereafter supported by the '33rd
Artillery Group'. This way of delegating artillery
resources to a lower level and to commission a
regimental
commander to
act as
Group
Commander' was quite common during the first
years of the war.
The order to withdraw to the area north and
west of Brussels was given to the 3rd Infantry
Division on 16 May. The artillery regiments
were ordered to leave at 20.30 hours. 7 Field
Regiment RA and 33 Field Regiment RA would
leave one troop each to cover the divisional with-
drawal. The troops were put under command of
respective infantry brigade.
At the right flank of the BEF, where the 2nd
Infantry
Division was deploved.
several
regiments were also deployed, amongst them 99
Field Regiment RA and 10 Field Regiment RA.
The initial fighting resembled that on the left
flank. 10 Field Regiment RA, under command
of Lieutenant Colonel lack Parham, had been
ordered first to deplov one troop on the eastern
side of the river, this in order to be able to answer
calls for fire from the foremost observation
party, which was positioned around 8km east of
river Dyle in support of recce detachments.
Wireless sets for communication with armv-co
operating aircraft (Lysanders) were taken with
them. The troop was ordered back west of the
river in the evening for better protection. Besides
these activities. reconnaissance of various gun
and HQS positions had taken place, as had been
done by their colleagues further to the north.
On 13 May, enemy artillery fire reached the
aruillery positions and retreating Relgian and
French tanks were be observed. The fighting was
in full swing on 14 May. 99 Field Regiment RA
reported that it had been engaged in heavy firing
against prepared S.O.S. targets. The regiment
also fired against many unprepared targets. i.e.
