GUNFIRE
from 210 Battery RA before the operation.
The regiment supported several of the
brigade attacks launched by the 6th Airborne
Division during the following days. This required
redeployment once per 24 hours. It is, further-
more, noted in the war diary of 29 March 08.00
hours that the regiment returned to the normal
three-battery organisation. The number of guns
was still limited to 17 plus one 25-pounder. It
was decided to act from then on with six guns
per battery organised as one troop only.
The regimental headquarters was deployed
and ready to lead the artillery from 12.45 hours
on D-Day. It was then to act as a hub in the
extensive communication network we have seen,
which included all the reinforcing regiments west
of river Rhine. Restrictions on firing had been
cancelled in the British sector at 11.30 hours but
had to be
maintained in the southernmost
section until 13.30 hours due to the American
landings. A break also had to be done around
13.00 hours when the bombers were to drop
supplies over the British sector.
War diaries give different points of time
when the message 'Varsity all clear' came over the
radio networks, but it seems to have been around
13.45 hours. All firing restrictions were then
lifted, and many FOOs were certainly now eager
to get through with their fire orders!
Despite the great losses, the British airborne
brigades captured their objectives already in the
afternoon D-Day, 24th March. A first link-up
with ground forces coming up from the Rhine
was made around 2
p.m., amongst them
Commando Brigade. As was planned, the latter
was put under command of XVIII US Airborne
Corps when Wesel finally had been cleared.
Perhaps the success the first day was due to
fairly weak resistance in the XII Corps area.
were
spared from counter-attacks
armoured reserves as XXX Corps had been
exposed to in the north. In retrospect, one may
still wonder as to whether the air-landings with
such large losses were worth its high price,
Maybe it had been possible to break down the
German resistance, with smaller losses, by the
forces that crossed the river. In such a situation,
these had been able to use more than 600 guns
in support all the time instead of having to see
them silent for several hours
should, however,
noted that for the
coming breakout from the bridgehead the British
in the 6th Airborne Division had a very strong,
motivated and well trained formation with offensive
capability. This capability was strengthened, not the
least, by the artillery put at the division's disposal in
addition to its own light regiment.
Breakout towards the Baltic coast
The scope and purpose of this book does not
permit a detailed account of the battle during the
final week of March when the bridgehead was
enlarged. A large combined bridgehead was then
established for both Corps with a depth of 10-
15km in the north, where XXX Corps was, and
20-25km in the South where the XII Corps and
the XVIII US Airborne Corps were deployed.
The latter was to be relieved by the VIII British
Corps after this initial period of fighting.
It had indeed been a tough week for all, the
gunners included. The commander of 190 Field
Regiment RA, Lieutenant Colonel R.J. Streat-
field, wrote in the war diary of his regiment on
30 March 1945:
The day was spent in cleaning and maintenance.
Everything badly
needed these after the
operation, which had been one of the most
intense ones we have ever performed. Rarely were
the guns quiet for longer than an hour ever
during the nights and all command post staffs
and gun detachments were worn out. 458
As had been the case in Operation Veritable,
"Victor Targets' had again and again been engaged
by all Corps artillery. Concentrated fire from all
artillery of the various army artillery
groups
(AGRAs) had also been requested by FOs and
AOPs almost every day, i.e. "Yoke Targets'.
No ammunition shortage arose despite all the
firing. Pemberton (1950) shows that only about
50%
of ammunition allotted to XII Corps was
used, as regards smoke ammunition only 2.7% 49
While the British were to break out in north-
easterly direction, the Americans would turn
eastwards and take part in the encirclement of the
Ruhr industrial area. For the British, a rush to the
Baltic coast took place in April. This was not
without any fighting and many artillery units
were employed to the last day. The extension of
the area controlled by the Russians had by this
been constrained. The road to Denmark was
closed to them, should the temptation to liberate'
this country have been persisting in Moscow.
As regards the Royal Artillery, Operation
Plunder and Operation Varsity had been the very
THE FINAL ONSLAUGHT - THE RHINE CROSSING
last really big concentrations of firepower. They
represented the big Finale! Montgomery's
guests, Churchill and Alan Brooke, had been
able to follow the first days of this battle. On 26
March 1945, a final 'picnic' took place on the
western shore of river Rhine. We may here recall
for a moment the initial pages of this book,
where the picture so often published from this
event is commented on (Fig. 1-2).
Summary of the artillery role in
Operation Plunder - the Rhine Crossing
Good planning at all levels secured an
unusual concentration of firepower. Of
particular importance here was that
brigade attacks could be supported by
larger numbers of guns than usual. Besides
the large number of guns as such, the
firepower was exceptional as roughly 50%
of the guns were medium and heavy guns
(El Alamein ca 5%, Normandy 20-40%).
• It was an impressive achievement by the
various staffs to overcome all logistic
challenges and hurdles. As was the case in
the preceding Operation Veritable, all
transports must take place in darkness and
under strict traffic discipline to get the
more than 1,300 guns deployed in time,
with up to 600 shells per gun dumped in
advance.
As it this time was a matter of assault
crossing over a wide river. it was not the role
of the artillery to support the attacking
formations with rolling or creeping
barrages, this contrary to Operation
Veritable. Extensive fire plans were instead
devised with timed concentrations against
numerous targets and fire, on demand,
against recorded potential targets. Some
targets were line targets (Stonks).
Preparations for large smoke belts were also
made, but these were fired only to a very
limited extent. All the plans were based on a
careful analusic of both the terrain and the
possible and likely counter-actions by the
Germans. Roughly speaking, preparations
were made for covering an area of 5 x 30km
with artillery fire in connection with the
assault crossing (British sector)
When the bridgehead was expanded, all
now well-tested tools as regards artillery
support were used; this included
regimental and divisional concentrations
(Mike & Uncle targets) as well as the use
of the most powerful tool, concentrations
against a single target from all available
artillery of a Corps (Victor target).
Concentrated fire from all artillery of an
AGRA (Army Group Royal Artillery) was
another option used (Yoke target). Certain
attacks were supported by barrages. All
types of quick defensive fire procedures to
repulse counter-attacks were used.
As was the case in Operation Veritable, the
preparatory, softening fire plans were
extreme and went on for many hours before
the crossing commenced. The similarity
with First World War huge barrages is here
obvious. Question marks were raised as to
whether the spending of artillery
ammunition was indeed beyond the optimal
level. There was, however, never any
shortage of artillery ammunition. 460
The British adhered strictly to the doctrine
of centralised tactical Command and
decentralised Control. This made the large
concentrations possible in a short time, but
also direct support at opportunity targets
down to Battery and even Troop level, when
this was adequate. Centralised fire planning
at Corps level was now much more
common than it had been earlier in the war.
A unique feature as regards the overall
operational concept was the combination of
the Rhine crossing with a huge air-landing
operation, Operation Varsity. This caused a
big problem seen from artillery perspective.
Landing of the airborne troops after the
initial phase of the river crossing, meant
that a 'cease fire' had to be ordered to all
the artillery west of the Rhine. During two
to four hours this powerful resource of
some 600 guns supporting XII Corps stood
idle. Those brigade formations, which had
already crossed the river and were engaged
in battle, nor the air-landing formations,
could get any substantial fire support
during this period. The fact that the main
objectives still were taken can be seen as the
result of weaker resistance in this sector
than further north, where the XXX Corps
made its crossing.
The air-landings as such were not a
complete success. Too short a counter-anti-
aircraft fire programme neutralised or
destroyed only a few guns out of the total,
