GUNFIRE
the two regiments of the Guards Division, 55
Field Regiment RA and 153 Field Regiment
RA, should follow close behind the front units
with the latter, equipped with SP guns, being the
first. This regiment was in support of the leading
battle group from 5 Guards Brigade, Irish
Guards Group. A section of two guns from 84
Medium Regiment RA were attached to the
leading battery of this regiment.
With the second brigade of the Guards
Division, 32 Guards Brigade, 55 Field Regiment
RA would follow with its towed 25-pounders
and this regiment would also be accompanied by
a section from 84 Medium Regiment RA.
The maior part of 55 Field Regiment RA
was to march close behind the divisional head-
uuartere
Behind the Guards Division with its 3,500
vehicles would march the three special battle
groups allotted for support of the American 82nd
and the 101st Airborne Division, including a
battery in
each one
of them from
4 Field
Regiment RHA, 86 Field Regiment RA and 147
Field Regiment RHA respectively. It was planned
that the last vehicle of Guards Division would
pass the starting point at 13.00 hours on D+1.
The next division would be the
43rd
(Wessex) Division to which were attached 8 (In-
dependent) Armoured Brigade and the Dutch
brigade. Within its long column of some 5,000
vehicles, the three divisional field regiments
would march as would 64 Medium Regiment
RA, the latter under command of this division
during the march. Attached to this regiment 419
Heavy Battery RA was to march. The plan called
for all vehicles of the divisional column to have
passed the starting point before dark on D+2.
l.e. at around the same time as the first unit of
the Guards Division was planned to reach
Arnhem.
Finally, the third division of XXX Corps, the
50th (Northumbrian) Division, would march
with its three divisional regiments
Under
command of
this division was
7 Medium
Regiment RA. The vehicles of this divisional
column were planned to pass the starting point
at the Maas-Schelde Canal during the whole
fourth day, D+3.
If the Guards Division could march without
any interference all the way up to Arnhem, and
no bridges on their way were demolished, the
final vehicles would pass the starting point, Joe's
Bridge', when the first vehicles arrived at
Arnhem. 375 The first artillery units to be able to
support the airborne division would be this
division's two field regiments and 84 Medium
Kegiment RA, but they would have to move
forward, passing numerous vehicles, crossing
river Waal and deploying well into the 'Island', as
the area between this river and river Rhine was
called by the British. Otherwise their firing range
would be insufficient for fire at targets north of
Rhine. No detailed plans for such deployment
seem to have been prepared.
Before the advance towards Arnhem by
XXX Corps could be commenced on D-Day, a
strong preparatory artillery fire had to be
arranged north of the small bridgehead at the
Belgian-Dutch border (Joe's Bridge'). A couple
of hours before the start all known enemy
artillery deployments and fortifications were to
Fig. 21-3 The rolling barrage fired in connection with
the break out by the Guards Division from its bridge-
head at the Belgian-Dutch border on the 17th
September. It was split into two parts, one in which
six Field Regiments (144 guns) took part, B-A-C-D,
and one further ahead in which three Medium
Regiments (48 guns) were engaged, X-W-Y-Z. Other
units fired against targets on the flanks and even
further ahead along the 'Club Route'. The only heavy
battery available fired against the village Valkensward
(cf. upper right corner] (RAHT)
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
be bombarded, in particular by the medium and
heavy guns. Then a rolling barrage would follow,
coordinated with all the air-landings along 'Club
Route'. In this fire plan six field regiments and
the three allotted medium regiments would par-
ticipate. The former would open with two
regiments beside each other on the first line and
the others two and two on the subsequent two
lines of the barrage (Fig. 21-3). 376
The distance between the different line
targets was 200 yards, and a total of 21 lines were
planned. This meant that the barrage would
cover around 4km of the advance route north-
wards towards Valkenswaard. The width would
be around 1,400- 1,500 yards, i.e. around 700-
800 yards per regiment. This required the
regiments to place the fire of all three batteries
beside each other 37 The normal barrage design
was, as we have seen, to place the fire of two of
the batteries beside each other and to have that
of the third battery superimposed across the fire
of the others, which would imply a regimental
barrage width of 500-550 yards.
The fire plan had been designed so that the
attacking armoured units could follow close
behind the artillery fire. The advance speed was
thus set at 200 yards per minute, about twice the
speed of the attacking infantry on foot. As a
regiment needed about two minutes to shift from
one line to another, the barrage must be a rolling
one. This meant that although the barrage
moved forward 200 yards per minute each
regiment would stay on its line firing for two
minutes, sometimes even three, before lifting to
a new line further ahead as illustrated by the
following scheme taken from the fire plan.
The barrage commenced three minutes
before Z. hour, which is 'ка in the plan. The six
regiments opened up on the following lines:
Line a-a 74 and 124 Field Regiment RA
Line b-b 94 and 112 Field Regiment RA
Рђб Line c-c 147 and 179 Field Regiment RA
Ar " the first shift takes place when the a-a line
is let free from fire and the two first mentioned
regiments shift to the fourth line d-d, where they
are firing for two minutes. One minute after their
hit, in b-b is left free when 94 and 112 Field
Regiment shift their fire to line e-c, where they
are engaging for two minutes. And then the
barage and shifts are moving ahead like this,
implying that all regiments is firing two or three
minutes on each line engaged by them. 378
In a similar way a barrage was planned for
medium regiments. The difference is that the
firing should commence ten minutes before Z
hour and end at Z+10 minutes, i.e. when still ten
minutes remained of the barrage fired by the
field regiments, which undoubtedly looks a bit
strange. On the other hand it is stated in the fire
plan that it might prove necessary to repeat the
barrage or a part of it a second time. The
medium guns should therefore immediately be
re-laid on the starting line once the first barrage
had been completed. 379
A unique feature thus is the separate barrage
for medium regiments well beyond the one fired
by field regiments. It was also a narrow concept
as the three regiments were placed on different
lines and not beside each other. The width was
not more than around 900-1,000 yards, but the
length was about the same as for the field
regiments' barrage. Another 4km of the advance
route and adjoining areas on both sides of it were
thus to be covered with fire.
Fire density was ordered to be 'Normal' for
both barrages,
which meant that the 25-
pounders should fire in average three rounds per
minute and the medium guns one round per
minute
The fire plan did not make provision for a
gap between the field regiments across the road
to avoid craters on it as is sometimes stated in
the literature. However, verbal orders may have
been given late for this purpose.
In addition to the barrages, some timed con-
centrations were included in the plan. These
were placed primarily on the flanks along roads
and across potential advance routes of enemy
armoured vehicles. The following units were
allotted for such tasks:
86 Field Regiment RA
90 Field Regiment RA
151 Field Regiment RA
419 Heavy Battery RA
Belgian battery
Dutch troop
165 Heavy Anti-Aircraft Regiment RA
The plan for timed concentrations called for fire
from 'ка to '0+15'. Some targets were engaged
as regimental concentrations, others as battery
concentrations. The heavy battery was to fire at
the village Valkenswaard with highest possible
2831
