GUNFIRE
blow up the railway bridge just before Frost's
men could capture it. The pontoon bridge
proved not to be in position.
In his war diary, which includes some inter-
esting maps, Krafft says that the British passed
his left flank, despite heavy counter-attacks to
stop them, and encircled his battalion. This made
him decide to make an attempt to break out in
the dark and then to follow the railway towards
the East. This is what happened when reinforce-
ments began to arrive from the North during the
late evening.
Krafft
making a thought-provoking
reflection in his war diary: If the British had been
satisfied with the encirclement and keeping his
battalion tied down instead of trying with great
efforts to annihilate it, they could easily have
advanced without opposition to the Arnhem
bridge also along the northern route and this
before he had received reinforcements. Well
placed in the city centre with the majority of
their forces in place, the British would get help
from what Krafft called 'terrorists', the Dutch
resistance fighters. It would then have been
extremely difficult to defeat them and retake the
city before the British forces advancing from the
South had reached Arnhem. As we know, the
sequence of events turned out differently.
What could the gunners do the first days of
the battle? The arrival and landing of 1 Air-
landing Light Regiment RA was successful. Out
of the regiment's 24 guns only two had been lost.
It was one of the guns of F Troop which did not
reach Arnhem on D-Day, and one of the guns
of C Troop not arriving on the second day as had
been planned. This was the first time a complete
regiment had been transported by air to the
battlefield with gliders and engaged directly in
battle. It would later turn out to be the onlv
operation in the war when as many as 22 guns
were employed 82 In this respect i Air-landing
Light Regiment RA became unique.
After
landing,
the
first
two batteries
assembled quickly and could be deployed near
the
landing and dropping
zones close
Wolfheze. As regards 3 Battery this was onlv a
temporary position as it was to accompany 1
Parachute Brigade towards the Arnhem bridge.
Dark came before they could leave but during
the afternoon the battery could provide efficient
support for the parachute brigade, in particular
1 and 3 Parachute Battalion.
munication failed
Wireless com-
with
Battalion
advancing towards the bridge. 383 Maybe the first
target engaged by 1 Battery (or was it 3
Battery?) was Wolfheze Hotel (still a hotel then)
where Krafft established his headquarters during
the afternoon.
The 1st Battalion of the Border Regiment,
which had been landed by gliders the first day,
had the task defending the landing and dropping
zones to the South and dispatched a company
down to Renkum at the
river shore.
1 he
company was soon engaged in heavy fighting
and during the night DF targets were engaged
extensively to protect it from being overrun.
Before the second wave of aircraft and gliders
arrived on the second day, both batteries of the
light regiment had to engage numerous targets
at different places and later, all firing had to be
concentrated southwards to make a retreat of the
Border Company from Renkum possible.
The artillery starts the battle in the South
- XXX Corps breakout
Excitement was peaking,
expectations too.
General Horrocks had, with his usual enthusi-
asm and determination in metaphorical terms,
electrified his subordinate commanders the day
before. This he did when he briefed them at the
cinema in Leopoldbourg about the latest details
of the plan for Operation Market Garden. The
role of XXX Corps in the advance to Arnhem he
summarised with the words we are the cavalry'.
Now, in the morning of 17 September, 300
guns were ready, crowded just south of the bridge-
head at Joe's Bridge'. Certainly some of them were
already engaged in firing northwards, but most of
them just waited for the time when Operation
Garden was to start, 'Z? hour. This would coincide
with the first landings at Arnhem in Operation
Market. They had to wait, but around 13.00 hours
came the order, 'Z' is 14.35 hours!
During the Sunday afternoon, the Guardsmen
would make their way up to find the En, ardsmen
capture it as a first objective or to link up with the
Americans if these had already done so. Preceded
by the far-reaching but brief barrage, the tanks and
other vehicles of the waiting divisions commenced
their advance. Traffic control was a demanding
task. The Guards Division had around 3,500
vehicles to move forward along the only route (the
Corps had in total around 20,000 vehicles). At the
head of the column the Irish Guards Group
ganisation arranged during the summer.
advanced. The Group was part of Gie into malup
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
A British Armoured Division comprised one
armoured brigade and one infantry brigade. In
the new informal organisation, four battle groups
had been organised from these. Each group had
one tank battalion, one infantry battalion and
some command and support units. Another idea
was that the two battalions should come from the
same parent regiment, e.g. Irish Guards. The two
brigade headquarters were to lead two battle
groups each. 384
Besides the leading battle group, the three
others were the Welsh Guards Group, Grenadier
Guards Group and Coldstream Guards Group.
Problems arose at the start. After only a
couple of kilometres' march the first nine tanks
were destroyed. The infantry had to leave their
vehicles and get involved in fighting with the
Germans at both sides of the road ahead. By and
by they could continue the march but were
stopped again, this time south of Eindhoven. A
halt for the night at Valkenswaard became
necessary. A fraction only of the distance to
Arnhem had been covered (around 10 out of
100km).
The American divisions, neither of which
could be flown in complete on D-Day, had been
landed at the right places and thus had a
successful start. Units from the 82nd Airborne
Division quickly captured the large bridge at
Grave intact, which was one of the most
important results the first day of the battle.
German counter-attacks against the Groesbeek
Hill required the concentration of most of the
division there, which made any surprise attack
on the two large bridges at Nijmegen impossible.
The 101st Airborne Division also scored
several initial successes, but the great setback was
that the important bridge crossing Wilhelmina
Canal at Son was blown up just as the Americans
reached it. This proved to delay the advance of
the Guards Division by about 24 hours.
The message to the gunners that 'Z' was
1435 hours came from the artillery head-
quarters of XXX Corps and was
distributed to all regimental headquarters and
then down to batteries and every gun.
quickl
The sound rangers and flash spotters (long
bass) of 4 Survey Regiment RA had, during the
days before D-Day, located all German artillery
noth of the bridgehead. The data were used as the
basis for an extensive counter-battery programme,
XXX Corps Counter Battery Neutralisation
Programme No. 25385 This bombardment would
mark the start of Operation Garden and began at
14.09 hours. One field regiment from the 50th
(Northumbrian) Division, another from the 43rd
(Wessex) Division, 7 Medium Regiment RA and
64 Medium Regiment RA as well began what
General Horrocks called the 'Milk Round', the
successive bombardment of all the enemy gun
positions.
This time it was a fairly mild 'round'. Twelve
or possibly thirteen targets were engaged for
three minutes each. In the first series of the fire
plan, at 14.09-14.12 hours, most of the targets
were engaged by two troops of field artillery and
two troops with medium guns, i.e. in total 16
guns. The second series was fired after a five-
minute pause at 14.17- 14.20 hours by 3-4
troops against each target. 386 In respect of the
heavy enemy
bombardment of the British
bridgehead taking place the first days, the results
of this first 'Milk Round' seemed quite limited.
Some neutralisation effect was accomplished
during the initial breakout.
After completing their firing, the medium
regiments had five minutes to change laying
and prepare for the rolling barrage, this being
the signal for the tanks of the Guards Division
to start their advance northwards. The field
regiments had thirteen minutes to do likewise.
At 14.25 hours the medium regiments and
419 Heavy Battery RA opened fire, the barrage
was on. This was the northernmost barrage that
began, but at 14.32 hours the
six field
regiments started their barrage and when they
made the first shift 200 yards forward at 14.35
hours, the tank engines roared into life and off
they went.
During the
preceding days 4 Survey
Regiment RA had not only by means of its sound
ranging and flash spotters located the targets for
the initial 'Milk Round'. They had also surveyed
all participating regiments into the same grid
which was a prerequisite for firing the barrages
without extensive prior, revealing ranging.
The survey regiment had also by using short
bases (two well-fixed observation posts) ranged
the heavy anti-aircraft guns against the farthest
ground targets.
The
observers made their
measurements with theodolites against high
airbursts (likely to be 40-50 yards above ground
surface).
In the air some hundred fighter-bombers
equipped with rockets and guns were ready
(Typhoons). See Fig. 21-6.
287
