GUNFIRE
that the 5th Infantry Division had only two
brigades of 600 men each left after these final
days. The 50th Infantry Division had also been
mauled and was down to two brigades with
1.200 men each (the nominal strength of an
infantry division at the time which was some
14.000 men). Alanbrooke's conclusion was clear:
He wrote that it was no doubt that 5th Infantry
Division and its artillery saved Il Corps and
BEF228
Fragmentation - the 'indirect fire system'
put out of order
We will now return for a moment to the south-
western front along Aire (Aa) Canal. It was here
the artillery, the little they had, was to be used in
particular for direct fire at critical bridges and
other vital passageways. Seven guns from 98
Field Regiment RA were, for instance, deployed
like this
on 22 May and fought heroically.
although it was a losing battle against a superior
force. The fate of these gunners is described in
the official story of the campaign, but also in the
history of the Royal Artillery, Farndale: The
Years of Defeat. From the latter an extract illus-
trates what they had to endure. It is about the
gun deployed at Renescure (an 18-pounder):
Enemy-held houses
across the bridge were
destroved by gunfire, and though two of the de-
tachment were wounded the gun remained in
action till the late afternoon. An enemy attack
then developed from the flank. One enemy tank
was knocked out but accurate mortar fire was put
down on the gun position and under cover of this
the enemy closed in. It was decided that the gun
must be saved, but as it was limbering up the
tractor was put out of action. Before anything
could be done the position was overrun. 229
A person really disliking this way of using the
artillery was Jack Parham, who wrote in his
account from 25 Mav
The 'Boche' were pretty active, both with aero-
planes, 4.2 inch guns and trench mortars. We had
one Tp in a purely Anti-Tank role with it's guns
scattered along behind the La Bassee Canal (2 in
Givenchy and 2 nearer La Bassee). It was a rotten
job [italic by author], very difficult to feed the
men and I hated the idea. This was F Troop of
51/54 [Battery] with MacGregor and Epsom.
They got shelled but never got a shoot and were
withdrawn before the Boche tank attack on 27th
[May]. Had they stayed perhaps 2 guns would
have done some execution if not knocked out be-
forehand. 230
The heavier guns were not employed in the final
phase of the battle, i.e. those of 52 Heavy
Regiment RA and the two No. 1 and 3Super
Heavy Batteries. The gunners made however a
good fight as infantrymen along the front from
St Omer to the coast.
Before following the surviving artillery units
into the beachhead, we will look at the Survey
Regiments and their efforts from 10th May to
the end.
The unremitting work of the surveyors
1 and 2 Survey Regiment RA came along with
the first BEF divisions to France. The former
was put under command of I Corps and arrived
already in September 1939. The latter became a
Corps unit too, attached to II Corps. The
regiment was on French soil in October. During
the final phase of the build-up of the BEE, 3
Survey Regiment RA arrived and consequently
was put under command of III Corps. This was
in April 1940.
The three regiments had the pre-war organ-
isation with Commander and regimental HQ's
and three batteries, one Survey Battery, one
Flash Spotting Battery and the third, a Sound
Ranging Battery. The batteries had the same
numbers as their 'parent' regiment, i.e. '1 Flash
Spotting Battery', etc.
The first two regiments had plenty of time
to survey gun positions and observation posts at
the Gort Line; sound ranging and observation
bases had been surveved as well. The third
regiment could not do much before the battle
started.
It was stipulated in the artillery order
attached to 'Plan D' how the survey regiments
were to be employed. When coming back to the
related I Corps artillery order, we can see that 1
Survey Regiment RA was to leave the first day
together with the Corps artillery commander
and his staff, this in order to take part in the
initial reconnaissance of gun positions near river
Dyle. As we have
seen, the entire surve
regiment was to march in a fore entiresition of
a divisional column. By this they were to
commence the field survey work as early a
possible. Late the second dav. the regiment had
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD - ACROSS THE CHANNEL
been informed about the gun positions and
could begin surveying them in to the Corps grid.
The order from the Corps artillery commander
was to undertake the survey in the following
order of priority:
• Battle Positions surveyed into the
permanent grid
• Survey of likely target positions including
likely enemy gun positions, this in accor-
dance with directives of CRAs and the
CMAI
• Survey of alternative battery positions and
temporary gun positions
A survey section from Royal Engineers,
Topographical Section 13 Survey Company RE
was attached to the regiment. This arrangement
was to last until the two first mentioned tasks had
been completed
The Flash Spotting Battery and the Sound
Ranging Battery ' were ordered to prepare for
observation along the entire front of the two
divisions of the Corps with emphasis on likely
zones for enemy gun positions, i.e. the northern
part of the Corps front. In a similar way engage-
ment of 2 Survey Regiment RA was planned in
Il Corps area near river Dyle.
A number of Trig Points, and other easily
recognisable reference points such as church
towers, large buildings, etc., had to be used as a
basis for the survey. A register of Trig Points had
been prepared already before the war. This was
now of much help.
This was the plan at large, but changes were
to come. Around 25 April, Y Troop, a section
from 13 Survey Company RE and 1 Sound
Ranging Battery were ordered to go to the 51"
(Highland) Infantry Division deployed behind
the Maginot Line north of Metz where they were
to come under command of that division. The
divisional artillery had been reinforced there by
a GHQ unit, 1 Field Regiment RHA, and a
battery from 97 Field Regiment RA and 51
Medium Regiment RA, all of which had to be
surveyed into a common grid.
The reduction of resources from 1 Survey
Regiment RA was thought to be temporary.
When the survey at the Maginot Line was
finished, the detached resources would return to
river Dyle. When arriving in the Saar region, the
survey for all regiments was commenced imme-
diately. The positions of a sound ranging base
were also fixed and the base was ready for
measuring on 3 Mav.231
The base was in
operation for the first time on 5 May 1940 and
by this, they claim to be the first battery to
measure against German artillery during the
war. They also claim to be the first unit of I
Corps to take up the fighting in France.
A second sound ranging base was prepared
beginning on 8 May. It would have an unusual
curve form for six microphones positioned 2km
from each other. Two 'Advance Posts' were
employed.
There was more of rumbling sounds further
to the north and eventually it was decided that a
third base would be established with its zone of
ranging in that direction. The microphone
positions were surveyed beginning on 10 May,
this with the assistance of 'Y Troop'. When the
German attack came on 10 May the units began
preparations for a quick return to I Corps and
stopped surveying the third sound ranging base,
and also stopped measuring at the two other
bases at 20.00 hours. Retrieval of microphones
and cables started during the night and was
continued on 11 May. The RE Section was
ordered back this day and left the area. But the
same dav new orders were
unexpectedlv
received, two new sound ranging bases should
be surveved.
One of these was to be surveved by 'Y
Troop' and was to be 10km wide with six micro-
phones. The other one should be surveved bv the
sound ranging battery itself. It would be 8km
wide and have five microphones. The survey
continued on 12 May and when extensive enemy
artillery firing was encountered in front of the
division, it was decided that the two bases should
be put in operation immediately. The battery
managed to reel out 80km of telephone cables!
The next day, 14 May, measuring could start
and the results were soon found satisfactory.
Ranging up to 18,000 yards from the base was
said to be possible. This was much longer than
the range of the available artillery.
The same day came, however, the order that
1 Sound Ranging Battery should return to I
Corps at the Escaut Line. All cables were taken
in the following day and during the afternoon
the battery was ready to leave. It could report to
the commander of 1 Survey Regiment RA just
west of Tournai on 17 May. The 'Y Troop' stayed
on, however, to support the divisional artillery
when the 51st (Highland) Division began its
