GUNFIRE
As is so often the case with the British Army, the
regiments and units fought well. There was much
individual heroism and men died in gallant
defiance to the last or advanced in local counter-
attack with great ferocity. Many times the
Japanese reported the toughness of the fighting
and many times they held back when they knew
the consequences of attacking prepared positions.
But it is above unit level that the problems arose.
Units were cobbled together in brigades and com-
manders lacked experience at the operationa
level, co-ordination failed frequently, as will
always be the case if training at this level is faulty.
More than anything else the disaster in Malaya
was caused by failure to keep the armed forces up
to date and to make timely decisions once the die
was cast.
Next Phase - Burma
The Japanese crossed the border to Burma in
January 1942. The task to capture the country
was assigned to the commander of the 15th
Army. The
attack was initiated by
the 55th
Infantry Division from Siam near the city of
Moulmein.
This
division was
followed
February by the 33rd Infantry Division. The
division was assigned the task to seize Rangoon,
the capital with its so important harbour for the
build-up of the Japanese forces, Map 23-2:
Burma is a long country with high ridges
and mountains
stretching
north-south
direction. The country is covered with dense
jungle, except for plains with rice fields.
On the eastern side, Burma is bordering
Siam and China, on the western side India
(Assam) and the Bay of Bengal. The southern-
most part of the country, a narrow coastal strip
south of 16th Latitude, had no significance as
regards military operations. The mountains in
the country reach heights in the order of 3,000-
4,000m.
Low farmland, with several large rivers, is
located between the high land north of Rangoon.
The largest river, the Irrawaddy, runs from the
northernmost part of the country through the
city Mandalay down to its large
delta near
Rangoon. East of this river, near the eastern
highland, flows another river that was to prove
important during the coming fighting, the river
Sittang. The large river Chindwin also had great
military significance. It runs from the high land
in northwestern Burma and joins Irrawaddy near
Mandalay.
The infrastructure of the country was in a
poor state. The large rivers and the only railway
running from Rangoon to Mandalay were the
most important transport routes. The railvay
stretches beyond Mandalay up to the city of
Myitkyina from which roads proceeded north-
wards and northeasterly towards China. The rest
of the national road network was weak with only
a few
roads crossing the large mountainous
parts. Numerous gorges, streams and marshy
land added to the difficulties for road transport
with motor vehicles.
The climate in Burma was hot and humid
with heavy monsoon rains from May to
October-November. The soldiers had to walk
around all the time in damp clothes. The envi-
ronment, so hard for Westerners, was made even
worse by the abundant presence of snakes, mos-
quitoes and other insects. This made disease
flourish among units, in particular malaria,
dysentery, typhus and various kinds of jungle
ulcers. Hardly any soldiers in the Second World
War had such a demanding battle environment
as the soldiers fighting in Burma; so completely
different from North Africa and Northwest
Europe. But for the gunners it was a matter of
Ubique! They had to accept the situation and
never give up their professionalism despite the
appalling conditions. Anyone visiting the jungles
of South East Asia today in monsoon rains may
get a feeling what it was like, although being
there under war conditions is something else and
much worse.
The resistance that met the Japanese when
the battle started was primarily put up by the Ist
Burma Division and some local defence units.
The 17th Indian Infantry Division should be
added to these forces; the division had arrived in
Burma in January 1942 and went to battle early
but was soon struck by a major setback. The
bridge over the violent river Sittang was blown
too early due to fear for a strong Japanese attack
to capture it. Half the division was left on the
wrong side and all heavy equipment was lost;
only a few soldiers managed to escape across the
river.
The
5th
and 6th Chinese Army was
deployed in the border area towards China.
These armies were parts of Chiang-Kai-Shek's
Nationalist forces. They were actively supported
by USA, who supplied them extensively by air
India
two
armie
were
command of the
American general Joseph
FROM DEFEAT TO SUCCESS - BURMA
Stilwell, nick-named 'Vinegar Joe' due to his
blunt manner, not least in his contacts with the
British, whom he disliked very much.
The Japanese captured Rangoon on 8
March 1942 and a long delaying battle to the
north then followed, basically along the large
rivers in central Burma. See Map 23-2.
On the British side, the battle was from 19
March led by Lieutenant General William Slim.
He assembled and grouped the scattered forces
in one Corps, the Burma Corps. Slim's skill
prevented all Japanese attempts to encircle and
annihilate the Corps. After having fought a
delaying battle over a long distance, some 600
miles, what was left of his Corps crossed river
Chindwin and the border to India.
This
happened in the middle of May 1942, just before
the arrival of the monsoon rains. Burma was now
completely occupied by the Japanese. They
stopped at the border: India could wait.
A small British success, but important to
morale, was the rescue of ten 25-pounders and
fourteen 3.7-inch mountain howitzers back into
India, 466
To the fury and frustration of Slim, his
exhausted soldiers were not well-received and
taken care of in India. This seems to have been
caused by personal antipathies between senior
commanders in India and by unwillingness to
understand what the Burma Corps had been
through, and what it had accomplished against
appalling odds.
war, was
Slim, maybe the best British general in the
made commander of the new
Corps, which he immediately began to train sys-
rematically for a coming offensive against the
Japanese invaders. As the basis for his training
programme, an analysis was made regarding
what was needed to make it possible to match
the Japanese in jungle warfare
Some of the
points he
stressed were the following in
summary): 467
All, officers and other ranks alike, should
get accustomed to the jungle and learn to
use it for their own benefit as a good
environment for concealed movement,
reconnaissance, ambushing, etc. The jungle
should thus not be regarded as an hostile
battle environment, but as a friend offering
many onnortunite.
At the unit level, patrolling in the jungle
should be introduced and they should all
be responsible for their own security. The
Japanese should not be able to surprise any
unit. And no 'non-combatants' were to be
acceoted
At the operational level Japanese
outflanking tactics and attacks on the rear
of positions should be adopted. This also
meant that frontal attacks should be
avoided as much as possible. If encircled,
the units should stay on and not retreal as
had happened previously so many times.
Counter-attacks should be well prepared
and the terrain for these be well
reconnoitred in advance. lo make this
operative policy work, units, even very
large ones, should be re-supplied from the
The battle was to continue even during the
monsoon period
Slim's experience and ideas were not well
received initially; many conflicting wills within
Indian High
Command
delayed the
necessary adaptation. Strong political pressure
from London, Washington and Chiang-Kai-Shek
made that the 14th Indian Infantry Division was
employed in the Arakan towards the end of 1942
before it was well prepared for it
The commander of Eastern Army, General
Irwin, led the operation. Slim's proposal that his
XIV Corps should be used instead, this in com-
bination with an amphibious landing behind the
Japanese lines, was rejected.
Several frontal attacks attempted by the 14th
Division failed. Such operations had to be
abandoned eventually and the division forced to
retreat. The threat to be encircled by Japanese
units through the jungle the
usual way had
become imminent. The Indian High Command
had to give in and transfer regional command to
Slim for stabilisation of the situation. He was
given also the responsibility for the planning of
a large-scale offensive into Burma.
building
operative
strength
continued on both sides in 1943. The Allies
prepared a massive ground offensive from
Assam southwards. At the same time, Stilwell
was to
attack from Northeast with strong
Chinese forces. Along the right (Western) flank
several amphibious
operations
were to be
prepared. The big offensive was to commence at
the beginning of 1944.
The required forces were organised as the
