GUNFIRE
In this phase the vehicles of the artillery units
were put at disposal of the infantry to speed up
their retreat. The eventual deployment of the
artillery behind river Escaut is illustrated on
Map 16-5
The artillery remained in positions here
during the afternoon and evening. It was decided
at the divisional headquarters at 22.30 hours that
7 Field Regiment RA was to stay where it was
during the night to perform harassing fire and.
if necessary provide S.O.S. fire, up to 08.00
hours on 19 May. The regiment would then re-
deploy nearer the coast. Iwo troops would be left
until 12.00 hours in support of retreating
infantry. The situation became more serious
during the night and the two troops were
ordered at 01.00 hours to leave their positions
one hom
earlier than ordered during the
evening, i.e. at 11.00 hours. The main parts of
the regiment were at 02.00 ordered to leave two
hours earlier than had been planned, i.e. 06.00
hours. The other regiments of the division were
to re-deploy during the day. 8 Infantry Brigade
would act as the rear guard and be supported in
this task by one troop per battery of these two
regiments. 2 Field Regiment RHA was also
given that role
7 Field Regiment RA worked its way back
during the morning of 19 May along roads filled
with refugees, horses, wagons and other vehicle:
but
eventually
reached Estaimburg
the
western
side
of river Escaut
around 9km
northwest of Tournai. After reconnaissance the
regiment was deployed later during the day in an
area around Dottignies 5km further to the north
and was to support 8 Infantry Brigade which
was to arrive during the following night. All the
divisional artillery units were gradually brought
to the same area where the entire 3rd Division
was to take up the defence along the river
That division
was to get the 4th Infantry
Division as it neighbour to the left and the latter
was to have the 46th Infantry Division deployed
at its left as the BEF's flank division. The 3rd
Infantry Division
was to have the lst Infantrv
Division on its
right side. Further to the right
followed
42nd
Infantr
Division
2nd
Infantry Division and 48th Infantry Division,
the latter then being BEF's right flank division
south-east of Tournai. After these arrangements
there was a new complete defence line with
extended width along river Escaut
7 Field Regiment RA received a medium
battery from 53 Medium Regiment RA under
command from 03.00 hours on 21 May
The artillery of the 2nd Infantry Division
began, as mentioned, its withdrawal from river
Dyle during the night between 15 and 16 May. 99
Field Regiment RA deployed that afternoon at
temporary position south of Brussels and fired
from 18.00 hours to 18.45 hours 300 rounds
against enemy concentrations before continuing
south-westwards to river Dendre. The first stop
was a halt at Moerbeke,
which the
reached during the night. The regiment deployed
the next morning west of the river and was ready
to fire at 14.00 hours. A day later, it redeployed
again, this time near La Glaneri, around 10km
southwest of Tournai. This
' Position was behind
river Escaut, but on the 19 May the regimen
moved closer to the river, where it was ready to
fire at 20.00 hours about 4km south of Tournal.
In this position,
of the regiment's
batteries was attacked from the air by dive
bombers on 21 May, but was spared any casual-
ties; only one gun was destroyed. This lucky
outcome was considered to be due to the fact
that the gun crews were well protected in
foxholes and trenches, which they had started to
dig immediately after arrival.
10 Field Regiment RA from the same
division had also a troublesome move from river
Dyle to the southwest. Redeployment section:
wise, night marches, a few hours rest and sleep
here and there, often exposed to enemy fire from
ground forces and from the air. The commander
of one of the batteries,
Major R. Gordon-
Finlayson, wrote in his diary for the night
between 18 and 19 May:
0018. Column starts for TOURNAI. We are told
to join in and get to TOURNAI somehow. All
goes well until Infantry trucks etc. begin to
overtake us, then tremendous jam ensues
0400. It is light and we are still jammed up in
road North East of RENAIX. How we escaped
bombers don't know. S.R.N.S. and I most of
night trying to sort out traffic and wake up
drivers
05.00 O.C. comes back along column. Sees me
and tells me to get all our vehicles out of the
column and formed up in a suitable place.213
The diary then gives a detail the
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD - ACROSS THE CHANNEL
difficulties encountered almost hour by hour
when Gordon-Finlayson did his best to get his
battery to the goal just southwest of Tournai.
Around 10.00 hours Gordon-Finlayson himself
crossed river Escaut but due to taking wrong
turns, air attacks
and
other mishaps
it took
another three hours before arriving at lournal.
All the afternoon and evening was required for
getting all in place for the night near Ere about a
kilometre south-west of the city
The gunners now got a well-earned rest and
during the next day, 20 Mav, a battery position
and observation post were reconnoitred. T'his
was done at 16.30 hours, even if the location of
the OP was
not the best, in particular as the
infantry was
s not yet in place.
With whom to
cooperate and where had no answers. Recon-
naissance
continued during the evening
During the night the observation party preparea
for the coming actions by camouflaging, digging
and improving their positions
Despite all difficulties observation parties
continued preparations for firing. In his diary
entry for 10.00 hours he writes that 'Banks' [the
FOO/OPO] made a panorama sketch including
silent registrations. In addition to his binoculars,
Gordon-Finlayson had a telescope to make ob-
servation less exposed. During the afternoon,
communication with the battery command post
ceased. The telephone line had been cut and the
telephone batteries discharged. The latter could,
however, be replaced around 16.00 hours. The
fighting was intensive all the day and the gunners
were all the time exposed to shelling.
They managed to survive due to the dug-in
positions, but found the telephone line cut again
and again. A signaller crawling backwards to
mend it was killed. The observation team had its
remote control for the wireless set, but it did not
work well. The batteries had to be charged but
this could not be performed. In addition to in-
sufficient training this turned out to be a general
problem during the campaign in France. Due to
such deficiencies radio communication was not
used much. An exception was Jack Parham's
regiment, 10 Field Regiment RA. He had long
before the battle been very interested in wireless
technology and the possibilities it offered. As
mentioned above, he trained his regiment in
using it properly
Fatigue takes its toll
The battle at river Dyle and the hard retreat to
river Escaut with its constant delaying actions
had been extremely onerous for all and many
accounts of completely exhausted drivers falling
asleep at the driving wheel were recorded. Many
lOSt Control
and went into ditches, others
managing to keep awake but immediately falling
asleep when the column halted.
'Tiredness of course also fell upon command-
ers. Jack Parham is commenting on this in his
account. During the retreat from river Dyle, the
commanding officer of the 2nd Infantry Division.
Major General Lovd, collapsed due to lack of
sleep and overwork; a temporary successor from
his HOS had to be nominated. At a meeting with
the divisional artillery commander during the
chaotic situation between the rivers Dyle and
Escaut Tack Parham was in a critical state and was
told by his commander: 'Tack, vou are no damn
good for anything more - I'm going to get Tubby
Tyler (Comdr 16 Fd) to relieve vou?' He had
fallen asleep a dozen times during this rather
dramatic staff conference. He also writes:
I think it was a bit after 0200 hrs that I was
relieved. I think I must then have lain down on a
rather untidy heap of blankets there were in the
room and got a bit of sleep.
But he had to leave after an hour:
About 0300 hrs MacRae and I started off, he
travelling in my car with his own following. He
drove and I tried to keep awake but was only
partially so!!214
In his article in the Roval Artillery Tournal about
experience from France, which Parham wrote
after his
England, he further
commented on the problem with exhaustion:
'Here let me sav a word about the vital necessity
for the conservation of energy by everv legiti-
mate means. One must have an absolute v 'cast
iron system of reliefs, particularly of officers and
one must stick to itl'215
Those readers, who have tried to be effective
after a week without. or just with a few hours™
sleep, know what Parham is talking about!
Lysanders - not suitable for air observation
Tack Parham was, as we have seen, one of the
pioneers as regards fire observation and control
from aircraft. The BEF artillery could not vet use
any of their own aircraft but were directed by the
