GUNFIRE
as the photographic film must be developed and
fixed before becoming avallable for plotting. The
sound wave was affected by weather conditions
(temperature, wind, air pressure) and also the
terrain characteristics. This made it necessary to
correct the time difference recorded in order to
determine the direction to the firing gun with ac-
ceptable accuracy.
The evaluation/plotting centre was normally
located several kilometres behind the micro-
phones, Connecting the APs and the micro-
phones with the centre thus required extensive
cable laying before
anv
measuring could
commence. Another time consuming prepara-
tory activity was survey of the microphone
locations to get these accurately fixed in the co-
ordinate grid system used by own guns to be
employed in the counter-battery fire. Taking all
activities together the establishment of a working
sound ranging base normally took 10-12 hours
If good topographical maps (Scale 1:25 000)
were available one could start measuring a bit
earlier subject to completion of line laying. But
the accuracy was not always up to required
standard in such cases. Final survey was essential
in order to get accurate coordinates for all mi-
crophones
An ever-lasting problem was to keep all the
telephone cables in order. They were frequently
damaged by enemy
fire and tracked vehicles
Signallers must always, day and night irrespec-
tive of weather conditions, be prepared to go out
and find line breaks and get them repaired as
soon as possible. The risks for meeting enemy
patrols was very trying and imminent. Tack
Tobbit writes:
Here my most uncomfortable experience was
looking for a break in the line in no-man's-land
during the night (the party comprised Capt
Small, Sam Kemp and myself). We got to the
forward infantry and told them of our intentions
Then we went ahead of them between the
exchange of spasmodic bursts of small arms fire
- very quietly toe-tipping along the grass verge of
the road between ominous looking thick woods
on each side. We found the line and fixed the
telephone on. Now came the awkward moment
I'd got to give a buzz on that telephone when ever
breathing seemed to create too much noise. I
waited for a burst of machine gun fire...it came -
and I buzzed. Another wait for a burst of fire
before I could speak. No answer! I breathed a sigh
of relief, for that meant the break in the line must
be further back nearer home. 112
When a gun fired, three different types of sound
could be registered. The first one was the
signature when the shell left the gun, which was
a fairly low-frequency dull noise. This was what
the sound rangers wanted to record. The second
type was the sound from the flying shell, which
if it travelled in supersonic speed, produced a
sharp, high-frequency sound, - the bow-wave
sound. The third type was the sound of the
bursting shell. Guns of different type and
calibres produced different marks/'clicks' on the
recorder's film. An experienced person at the
plotting board could distinguish these differ-
ences from each other and thus determine what
type of enemy gun that had been recorded; a
valuable piece of information for the counter-
battery office besides the location of the gun.
The Germans had not as much artillery as
the Allies, but they had many mortars. The
ordinary sound ranging equipment was not ver
effective in locating enemy mortars, although it
was not impossible altogether. In the summer
1944 a new lighter
type of sound ranging
equipment was provided which was much more
adapted to the task of locating mortars. It was
the 4-pen recorder. Recording was made on a
strip of paper and not on a photographic film.
An electrical signal initiated by a mortar firing
burned an oscillating strip on the moving paper.
Without the need for developing and fixing a
photographic film the paper strip could imme-
diately be taken care of by the plotter. Evaluation
thus could be speeded up. As mortars produced
a sound with different frequency as compared
with artillery, the microphones were equipped
with filters adapted to this frequency, which
prevented other battle noises to disturb the
recording
A microphone base for the '4-nen recorder
was shorter, around 1.500m and comprised only
3-4 microphones, which were located fairly close
to the evaluation/plotting centre. This meant tha
a sound ranging base of this type could be ready
for measuring within a couple of hours.
The
Army was provided with this lighter equipmen
during the autumn 1944 and into early 1943.
Experience was very favourable, and it became
a very good tactical complement to the tradi-
tional 'heavier' equipment. Further on in thi
book, I will call a base with the '4-pen recorder
LOOKING FAR INTO THE BATTLEFIELD
a light' sound ranging base when not using the
term '4-pen recorder
The accuracy in sound ranging was, as
mentioned, affected by many factors. Correct
survey for determination of microphone coord-
inates was one factor; another was the influence
from terrain and its dispersing effects on sound
waves. The weather conditions were of utmost
importance also to have a firm grip on, as these
affected the speed of sound waves and disper-
sion of waves. The sound
rangers
needed
weather data to correct for deviations from
nominal conditions. Data was delivered by a
RAF metrological section attached to the head-
quarters of the Survey Regiment
The enemy gun to be located must not be too
far away from the microphone base. As a rule of
thumb the British used to state that the maximum
distance for location should preferably not be
more than 0.6-0.8 times the length of the micro-
phone base, i.e. 6-8km (the 'heavy equipment).
When all conditions were favourable this could,
however, be extended.
A difficulty for all sound ranging programs
was that the fire from own artillery could make
measurement impossible. To avoid such problems
a pause was sometimes included in the fire plan
for a short period. This could be an option, for
instance, when the firing of an extensive barrage
took place.
In order to give those concerned with
counter-battery fire planning a better idea of the
accuracy of the locations submitted, a classifica-
tion system was applied by which the expected
maximum deviations from correct location was
given. The likely maximum deviation was
10 vards
25 varde
50 vardo
100 vards
200 vards
300 yards
400 yard
It seems that 'Z' was regarded as a kind of
acceptable quality standard when using the
traditional ('heavy') equipment. 113
Radar - a new intelligence resource
An almost unfailing method for mortar location
is radar by which the trajectory of the mortar
shell from the firing place to ground impact is
measured. The trajectory is near to a parabola
curve and fixing it by recording one point in the
upward part of it and one point in
the
descending part gives the mortar location with
good accuracy.
*I'his technology was to become available for
the artillery intelligence in the last vear of the
war. Some trials had been undertaken already in
1943 with the anti-aircraft radar GLIII but
without success. Towards the end of 1944 a new
version had been provided by which the mortar
location could be determined with an accuract
of 25-50 meters. The type classification was AA
No. 3 Mik 2 (F), which is shown in Fie, 6-7
Towards the summer 1945 it was finally
concluded that radar was the technology of the
future for mortar location. Work was thus
continued on developing equipment specially
designed for this role. Besides being a device for
the field artillery, a version specially adapted
for air-landing was contemplated to meet
requirements of airborne formations. Experience
from Normandy landings gave inspiration also
for implementing radar on landing crafts. Radar
could there, it was thought, be used for mortai
location in the beach defence posiuvus. However,
none of these ideas materialised during the war
Flash spotting' - artillery observation
bases
Firing guns and other heavy weapons had in all
times been at risks of being revealed due to
muzzle flash and smoke. In open terrain, as in
the deserts in North Africa, this
Was a
particularly serious problem. It was reduced to
some extent when flashless propellant was
Fig. 6-7 During the final months of the war radar
equipment was provided for location of enemy
mortars. This is a GLIll radar originally developed for
anti-aircraft purposes (RAHT)
