Air-Cooperation
Administration/Supply
Communication
- Headquarters
- Liaison Officers
- Telephone
- Radio
- Frequencies
- Call signals
- Code words
- Communication with air bases and air units
Time
Order distribution
Planning and production of the regimental
operation order started when the regimental
headquarters received an order from the artillery
commander of the division (CRA) with applica-
ble items of this structure filled in. The regimen-
tal order needed more of technical details than
the divisional order, for instance regarding gun
GUNFIRE
positions, marching orders, fire zones, fire ob-
servation and control etc. Fire plans often had to
be broken down to the battery levels, as were
orders for registrations and fire ranging
Sometimes were written marching orders
prepared at higher levels, for instance when re-
deployment of numerous units in preparation
for a large operation required coordination and
many details to set and control regarding traffic
discipline.
As regards supply, strict coordination was
often needed regarding ammunition dumping
and replacement. Location of dressing stations
and evacuation of wounded could also require
coordination at high levels, the same also for
maintenance and repair services
When
larger
operations
were to be
launched, the supply matters normally required
their own order,
an Administrative
Order
Sometimes special orders were required due to
all the details that had to be fixed, and which
Fig. 14-3 In the hierarchical structure of command that prevailed during the war orders must be prepared and
submitted at all levels based on the orders from the top level. Here is a unit commander giving his order to sub-
ordinates (RAHT)
SUCCESS REQUIRES EFFICIENT STAFF WORK
were not required by all, but only concerned spe-
cialists. Detailed instructions on communication
might be such an area; another could be detailed
task tables for OPO/FOOs and guns
The Operation Order was the fundamental
order, but a few others might be noted:
Standing Order
Warning Order
Operation Instruction
The first mentioned contained numerous items,
which were
not specific
particular
operation, but would apply for all operations.
Such an order could stipulate, for instance, how
reconnaissance was to be undertaken and by
Whom, who would lead the march to new gun
positions and be in command during deploy-
ment, how local defence should be organised and
prepared etc. The second order type aimed at
getting an early start of preparations for a
operation
engagement
before
complete orders could be finalised for distribu-
tion. An example could be an order to get recon-
naissance for new gun positions started as early
as possible. Much could be gained by not losing
time!
The third type was often used when the
largest operations were to be planned and work
at different levels was required. It was to be seen
as an order for planning given to the first subor-
dinate level from which later 'operation orders'
were prepared. Sometimes a sequence of
"Operation Instructions
would be
required
before a final Operation Order' could be fixed
and distributed. We will in Part 3 see examples
of such a process
Once an order had been prepared and
signed, it would be distributed to all units
concerned. At the highest levels, it was normal
practice to call commanders of subordinated
units or their authorised representatives to a con-
terence at the headquarters of the commander
responsible for the order. At the conference, the
latter presented the order with the help of senior
staff members after which a written copy was
distributed. An alternative could be to distribute
orders by means of liaison officers. Command-
ers had their
preferences, but the tactical
situation had also to be taken into account
to his Corps
General William Slim preferred to travel around
handing over his order 'face to face'
and Divisional Commanders
At regimental levels, oral orders from the
commanding officer were normal, but in such
cases the practice was to distribute a short
written confirmation as soon as possible after-
wards. An example showing a commander pre-
senting an order to his subordinates is given in
Fig. 14-3, although the participants are not
gunners.
Among practical things to attend to at a
headquarters was acquisition and distribution of
maps. At Army and Corps levels, and often at
the divisional level as well, this was a demanding
task, in particular in mobile operations over a
large area.
The Order is given, control and support
Tollow
The
headquarters
of higher
formations.
including attached artillery headquarters, were
quite big and required quite a large force for
their local defence. It was discussed from time to
time where the headquarters should be located
in relation to the forward front line. Telecommu-
nication, accessibility for visitors from units at
the front and so on, were arguments for a
forward location. Against it were the risks for
artillery shelling and surprise attacks from
patrols, so a compromise was needed. It might
also be recalled that the heaviest burden on staff
officers was imposed during the planning phase
of an operation. When the orders had been
given, the work was reduced to monitoring the
battle progress; focus was changing towards
future operations. Hence, it was not so important
then to be close to the front.
The immediate, short-term control of the on
going fighting was the responsibility of the com-
manding officer with the assistance of a small
group of staff officers and assistants. It was a
matter of giving additional oral orders, or to alter
some items of the written order. when needed
Hence he had to, with 'perspective' (ef. above),
understand how the battle developed and react
quickly on critical changes. This was best done
when being close to the foremost fighting units
A Tactical Headquarters (Tac HQS) was estab-
lished in that area. sometime
also called
Advance Headquarters, whereas the main part
of the headquarters stayed behind and could be
called Main or Rear Headquarters.
From this it follows
that an artillery
commander of a Corps or a Division should be
well forward too, supported by as small a number
1601
161
