GUNFIRE
a strengthening of the command structure. It was
realised also that the cooperation between Lord
Cork and General Mackesy did not work, which
was another reason for a change.
An experienced mountain warrior takes
over
In England the IV Corps prepared itself for de-
ployment in France as the fourth Corps of BEF
after having finalised training during the winter
and spring. The Commanding Officer was Lieu-
tenant General Claude Auchinleck, who for
most of his career had served in India 253 He had
extensive battle experience and, not the least, ex-
perience from leading military forces in tough
mountainous terrain at the Indian northwest
frontier. In January 1940, he was called back to
England to take command of IV Corps. At this
time he was not particularly well known at home.
but was later to be one of the most written about
and controversial British commanders in the
Second World War
After the Norwegian campaign, he sub-
mitted a lengthy report in which he described in
detail the course of the battle and his own con-
siderations and decisions.254 We will first look at
a quotation from the report where the General
recalls how it all began on his part:
On the evening of April 28th I was summoned by
the Chief of Imperial General Staff (General Sir
E. Ironside) to the War Office and informed by
him that I, with part of the 4th Corps Staff, would
be required to go to NARVIK in the immediate
future
I returned to my
ALRESFORD and
headquarters
arranged for an advance
headquarters to be established in the War Office.
..] For the next week, my staff were fully
employed collecting and collating information
concerning Northern Norway and the existing
situation in that theatre. 255
On 6 May he received his final instructions from
the Minister of Defence. It was to secure and
maintain a base in Northern Norway from which
it would be possible:
To deny ore supplies to Germany via
NARVIK
To interfere with ore supplies to Germany
from LULEA in Sweden.
To preserve a part of Norway as seat for
the Norwegian King and Government.
He
was
now
appointed
General Officer
Commander-in-Chief of the Anglo-French land
forces and of the British Air Component in the
theatre of operations. Initially he was subordinate
of Lord Cork.
The General was requested to submit infor-
mation, in conjunction with Lord Cork, of the
forces deemed necessary for attaining the three
objects, and also the area, which should be
occupied. A special task was to investigate the
possibilities for shipping iron ore from Narvik to
United Kingdom and resuming a supply of iron
ore from Swedish mines at GALLIVARE
[Author's note: Why was not the largest mine
field at Kiruna mentioned?].
On 13 May, General Auchinleck assumed
command of land and air forces of what was now
called North-Western
Expeditionary
Force
(NWEF) and began dealing with the tasks that
had been assigned to him. His headquarters was
located at Harstad. He had understood that Lord
Cork and General Mackesy for personal reasons
could not work together and decided, with the
consent of the Lord, to sack the latter.
The Commander of the Guards Brigade,
Brigadier Fraser, was ordered to take the brigade
headquarters and the Irish Guards battalion to
Bodö, where he was to hold the city 'perma-
nently. He should as long as he could defend
also the small city Mo further to the South. Since
the beginning of the month, the Scots Guards
battalion of the brigade and an Independent
Company were operating in that area.?56
Auchinleck's assessment
Next on the programme was to analyse the
resource requirements, as Auchinleck had beer
instructed. This was done and on 16 May his
findings were dispatched to London. But the
General had a
reservation.
The estimated
strength would be
sufficient
for holding
Northern Norway provided the country was not
invaded by the Soviet Union through Finland or
Norway
was
attacked
Germany
Sweden?" His estimate in by Germad vil
resources. Looking allan included air and naval
considered necessary for the tasks given:
One divisional cavalry regiment
One squadron armoured cars
One mounted infantry unit (Lovat's
Scouts)
Five field artillery batteries (60 guns)
FAILED INTERVENTION IN NORWAY
Two medium batteries (16 howitzers)
Thirteen heavy anti-aircraft batteries (104
Sulls)
Eight light anti-aircraft batteries (96 guns)
(i.e. Bofors]
Five companies engineers;
Seventeen infantry battalions
One machine gun battalion
It is noted that Auchinleck does not speak in
terms of higher formations (Corps, divisions,
brigades) and as regards the artillery not in terms
of regiments. Maybe his experience from the
outskirts of the Empire had influenced him here.
Converted to higher formations, the numbers
above would be equal to two infantry divisions
and two and a half field regiments
and one
medium regiment. In other words, a fairly weak
artillery force as compared with BEF where each
division alone had two, sometimes three, field
regiments, here thus about half that strength.
It is also amazing that Auchinleck did not
foresee a need for any anti-tank resources.
If the importance of artillery in a modern
war still was not clear to all, the importance of
anti-aircraft guns was already obvious, as we can
see from the list above.
Auchinleck furthermore stressed that Bodö,
Narvik and Tromsö must be seen as strategically
interdependent. Hence the defence of them must
be well coordinated.
needed as a base besides Harstad.
Not least Tromsö was
Looking again at the three tasks assigned to
Auchinleck, the first was already settled, i.e.
stopping the iron ore export to Germany from
Narvik. The Royal Navy and the Germans
themselves had already destroyed the port facil-
ities. The second task, interference of ore export
from the Swedish town Lulea, was not "a
practical proposition unless the active and full
cooperation of the Swedish armed forces could
be assured'. With these statements, only the third
task required immediate consideration, Auchin-
leck concluded.
Auchinleck was notified by London already
on 17 May that due to the battle in France he
could only have twelve French battalions and
three British. In addition to these he would be
allotted ten independent British companies. Some
support from Engineers and artillery would come
as well. To what extent, nothing was said. 258
Auchinleck could do nothing but to accept
the situation and make the best out of it.
The southern front a great concern
Béthouart's plan for the recapture of Narvik was
fixed. The attack was to be done across the
Rombak Fjord the night between 24 and 25
May, but was postponed to 27 May after a
decision made by Achuinleck. The reason was
that the first Hurricane fighter aircraft would not
arrive before that day. Their role was to protect
the attackers when landing on the southern shore
of the fjord. 259 Besides the date, the General felt
confident with the plan, although he considered
the operation to be an extremely risky business
It was to be executed by French, Polish and
Norwegian forces.
Auchinleck himself now concentrated on the
southern front, i.e. Bodö and Mo. How to effi-
ciently stop the German advance there? They were
advancing in force since the arrival of the German
2nd Mountain Division, which recently had landed
in Trondheim,
thus reinforcing
a mountain
regiment landed there already on 9 April. The
German force now available for advance north-
wards amounted some 5,000 men. 260
With a
battalion from 137 Mountain Regiment in the lead,
the Germans now moved quickly northwards
aiming at reinforcement of General Dietl's 3rd
Mountain Division in the Narvik area
In their way was the Scots Guards battalion
from the Guards Brigade since the middle of
May. It was deploved far to the South nea
Mosjöen together with three
independent
companies.
Une of the companies of the
battalion was still in Bodö where two more inde
pendent companies had also been landed.
Auchinleck ordered the two other battalions
of the Guards Brigade and the brigade head-
quarters to go to Bodö. Due to bombing and
sinking of the troop carrier used by the Irish
Guards battalion and grounding of the ship
transporting the South Wales Borders battalion
only a portion of the brigade could get into the
battle down south as planned.
As a result of the measures taken, no British
fighting units were left in the Narvik area from
around 20 May, only many supply and denot
resources and part of 203 Battery RA. Recap-
turing Narvik thus became a true French-Polish-
Norwegian affair.
The situation at Mo and Bodö became
hopeless in the last week of May, not least due to
shortage of artillery. The British units were
under heavy delaying fighting forced back to
Bodö, where evacuation was the final option.
209
