GUNFIRE
obeyed, to the point. 'Belly-aching' was no longer
tolerated!
Finally, Montgomery also made clear that
the army and the Royal Air Force were not to
wage separate wars. The forces were to be well
coordinated for maximum effect. In order to
make this easier.
Montgomery moved his
headquarters to the location of the RAF:s
headquarters close to the Mediterranean coast
and made arrangements for the staff officers to
work together and get well acquainted with
each other
Recovery and then - a new battle
Not only were the structural changes mentioned
above important in August 1942. What has been
called
the
Jirst
battle of El Alamein was
concluded on 27 July 1942
and prevented
Rommel from reaching the Nile Delta. After
this, both sides
started to
consoldate their
positions. There was need for recovery and re-
placements for those lost had to be arranged; lost
or damaged equipment had to be compensated
for as well. On the British side new resources
were provided also besides replacements.
A new infantry
division arrived from
England, the 44th Infantry Division, which had
no previous battle experience, but was to prove
a most valuable reinforcement during the
coming battles. A very important addition came
on the equipment side, namely
some
American Grant tanks. These had both a 37mm
and a 75mm gun. The latter was not a turret
gun but was placed to the right in the hull in a
sponson. With this tank, the British had a
resource capable of matching the German tanks
of the time. A disadvantage was however that
the 75mm gun had a very limited field of
traverse. If targets suddenly appeared to the left
or right of the tank it had to turn completely
lowarde
the
target before
firing
could
commence. The Grant was not a tank for
mobile battles in open terrain and the emerging
duel situations with enemy tanks.
Further reinforcements were expected in
September, amongst them the 51st (Highland)
Division but
also more
equipment.
American Sherman tanks and a few
300
self-
propelled 105-mm howitzers, 'Priests', provided
a great reinforcement of the 8th Army. The
'Priest' was a modern SP gun that quickly
replaced the out-dated Bishop'
as the prime
weapon in field regiments attached to armoured
divisions. As we have seen, it remained in service
until 1944 when being replaced gradually by
Sextons'
At El Alamein,
(Honourable
Artillery Company) Field Regiment RHA was
rearmed with 'Priests' just in time for the great
offensive to come. This SP gun could easily
follow fast moving tank battalions.
The artillery intelligence resources were
not abundant in the Desert War. The 8th Army
had only
survey
regiment, the 4th
(Durham) Survey Regiment RA. This came to
North Africa with the type of organisation pre-
vailing when the war broke out, i.e. beside the
regimental headquarters there were a 'Survey
Battery'
a 'Flash
Spotting Battery' and a
'Sound Ranging Battery'. It was, however, re-
inforced by an independent survey troop. This
structure was soon to be found to be unsuitable
when fighting formations were deployed over
large areas and fighting was going on at mally
places simultaneously. As we have seen this led
to a revision of the regimental organisation in
1942, by which a new structure that survived
the entire war emerged.
The resources were grouped into two
Composite Batteries', each comprising a survey
troop, a flash spotting troop and a sound rangis
troop. A survey troop was attached to the regi-
mental headquarters.
The new organisation quickly proved to be
very versatile and efficient. But the regiment was
struck by a serious loss. The 2nd Composite
Battery, in June 1942 was deploved in the Gazala
Line and was amonest those ite driven into
Tobruk by Rommel's offensive and forced to ca-
pitulate on 21 June 1942.30
Going back in time, the Regiment had in the
Spring 1942 been transferred to Syria in order
to undertake survey work for the Ith British
Army, which prepared itself to meet a possible
German attack from Turkish territory.
When Rommel continued his advance from
the Gazala Line to El Alamein, 4th Survey
Regiment RA was called back to the Nile Delta.
The regimental commander, Lieutenant
Colonel Whetton began to immediately rebuild
his regiment after the loss of one of his batteries
at Tobruk. He made it by carefully recruiting
skilled individuals from England. In order to
speed un
the process, an independent survey
troop from Syria was transferred to the regiment
and included in the new 2nd Composite Battery:
The regiment was used for survey of
2341
'IT WILL BE A KILLING MATCH' - EL ALAMEIN
planned artillery deployments in the Nile Delta,
but for operation of a few observation and sound
ranging bases as well. In July, the 'A' Troop
(Flash Spotters)
and the
'R' Troop (Sound
Kanging from lst Composite Battery were
employed at El Alamein and were positioned in
the XXX Corps area. The re-established 2nd
Composite Battery was ready for action towards
the beginning of October. As we will see, the
battery was then put under command of XIII
Corps
When Montgomery after his arrival gave the
order that all preparations for a battle in the Nile
Delta would be
terminated.
the
remaining
resources of the 4th (Durham) Survey Regiment
RA could be transferred to El Alamein where
they were better needed. In this area, a survey
company of South African Engineers was now
also engaged with production of maps for the
whole area down to the
Qattara Depression.
With this company the British surveyors estab-
lished a fruitful cooperation.
Montgomery had his thoughts correct from
the beginning on the strategy for his offensive
against Rommel - aiming at a final annihilation
of his forces, but it would take some time to
prepare for it. He realised that he first must meet
another strong attack by Rommel which could
be expected to come around 1 September. His
judgment was that Rommel by that time had
recovered and restored his force for a new attack.
At this date, the attack could be launched during
the night, as full moon conditions would provide
some light for the attackers.
His considerations proved to be correct.
Rommel himself had realised that he must make
a final attempt to destroy the 8th Army at this
date. In the middle of September and onwards,
the British resources would be so strong that the
8th Army could not be defeated, as he saw it.
Rommel's plan was similar to what the British
had experienced before. He intended to take his
armoured units in a swift move around the British
southern flank and then turning northwards
towards the coast. When the main part of the 8th
Army had been encircled and its supply lines been
cut off, he would direct one of his armoured
divisions towards Alexandria and another towards
Succeeding infantry divisions
would
complete the destruction of the enclosed British
forces. A prerequisite was, however, that large
supply stores needed to be captured; petrol being
the most important commodity.
The British had well understood the tactical
situation and prepared themselves for this
scenario. Montgomery decided to deploy the
British armoured units for defence with the
tanks well protected behind hillcrests or dug in
'hull down' in positions where they could fire at
the attacking German tanks. This time the tanks
were not to be lured out into open terrain where
they would fall easy victims to Rommel's tanks
and numerous anti-tank guns.
The British tanks were to be assisted in the
German manner by a line of anti-tank guns.
And now a modern, effective gun had been
provided, the 6-pounder. During the first vear.
of the Desert War there had been a shortage of
modern guns. Only obsolete 2-pounders with
inadequate
armour
penetration
capability
against German tanks were available. As a con-
sequence, 25-pounders of the field artillery had
to be used often for direct fire against attacking
tanks instead of being used for concentrated
indirect fire.
The shortage was eliminated in October
1942. A large number of the new anti-tank gun
had been delivered to the 8th Army just before
the great offensive, and they could match any
German tank. With this the 25-pounders could
be relieved from anti-tank tasks, except when
protecting their own deployments.
For the expected attack defence positions
had been selected at the Alam el Halfa Ridge and
its extension southwards to the Bare Ridge. That
location was a distinct advantage as it was to be
seen. The newly arrived 44th Infantry Division
was deployed here, and southwest of this the 10th
Armoured Division. Other infantry division‹
were to hold the front further to the west.
Montoomery had decided that the artillery
this time would be used for concentrated fire; the
resources were not to be fragmented. Further-
more,
RAF
bombers and fighter-bombers
should attack the German advancing tanks and,
not the least, the German supply transport.
This battle, which commenced on the night
between 30 and 31 August 1942, resulted in
success for Montgomery, albeit the 8th Army
suffered great losses. After a week of hard
fighting Rommel had to give up and break off
this his last offensive on 6 September. The result
strengthened Montgomery's position and repu-
tation.
This battle will not be described in detail
here. Reference is made to the numerous books
235
