Operation Market Garden - still
controversial
The operation ended with the evacuation from
the Oosterbeek perimeter during the night 25-
26 September 1944 although attempts were also
made on the following days to save a few more
stragglers from the northern shore of the river
Rhine, but without any significant result.
The operation was a costly undertaking;
Cornelius Ryan wrote that the losses were
greater than those of D-Day in Normandy. On
the allied side, he wrote, 17,000 men were lost in
killed.
wounded
and missing captured
compared with 10,000-12,000 in Normandy. 420
The British at Arnhem lost 1 485 killed and
Fia. 21-11 T
and Dick Robb were among the some 6500 soldiers
who became prisoners of war at Arnhem. This was
equivalent to roughly 65 per cent of the landed force.
The picture was taken on 20 September 1944 by the
German photographer Kutzner and is said to be the
first picture from Arnhem published by British news-
papers. It has been assumed that it came to Britain
via neutral Sweden or Switzerland at the beginning of
October (Imperial War Museum HU 2131)
GUNFIRE
almost 6,500 wounded and captured as prisoners
of war (Fig. 21-11). A high human price.
A person who had to digest a number of
difficult
impressions
was
Major General
Urquhart, who was amongst those evacuated
and who would return to England within a
couple of days.
The battle on the 'Island' and at Groesbeck
Hill went on far into the month of October and
became a tough fight. During this period the
artillery played an important role, often decisive.
The large bridges at Nijmegen, which remained
intact during Operation Market Garden, were
attacked on 29 September by German frogmen
who, in a spectacular raid, blew up the railway
bridge and badly damaged the road bridge. This,
however, could be provisionally repaired with
Bailey bridge material, by which traffic soon
could be resumed.
Operation Market Garden was strategically
a large failure according to many observers, a
90% success as seen by others, amongst them
Montgomery. The strategic objective which was
to secure a large bridgehead north of Arnhem,
could not be accomplished. But, on the other
hand, the Germans had been pushed back from
a large area north of the Belgian-Dutch border.
Risks must be taken in war, both strategic and
tactical, but discussions will persist as to whether
they here had been too large at the outset. To
what extent had the allied side made them
greater than they had had to be? The questions
do not have a single definite answer. Without
trying a deep analysis here, a set of issues and
aspects that remain under debate to this day, will
be commented briefly below.
Planning of landing zones
The
zones determined for landings and
droppings were perfect as such but were located
too far away from the primary but were lecte
the Arnhem road bridge, why facial obtative,
surprise was lost. Many say that this was a
distinct failure on the part of the planners.
Strong German anti-airpart of the planers.
suitable terrain near the bridge for gliders
excluded alternatives, others have argued.
Insufficient air transport capacity
Shortage of air transport capacity made it im-
possible to land more it capacity made itable
airborne resources
on the first dav of the
operation. Bad weather then resulted in several
310
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
delays of further transport, which had severe
tactical consequences. The operation should not
have been started when this shortage of capacity
became obvious, some critics have stated.
Insufficient offensive capacity
The former transport factor in combination with
unexpected bad weather had resulted in only one
of the four British brigades (the Polish included)
being used offensively on the first day. The
Americans lacked resources for capturing the
Nijmegen bridges that day before German rein-
forcements could arrive, which delayed the
advance of the
Guards Division towards
Arnhem by two days. Were the risks reasonable?
Suppression of intelligence data
The intelligence situation was good as regards
anti-aircraft positions
around Arnhem and
German formations that were active in this
region. The late incoming information about the
two SS Panzer Divisions' rehabilitation north of
Arnhem was paid no attention to or was sup-
pressed. This is one of the most debated
examples of self-made risk taking. Whether this
as reasonable or not there are many opinions.
Underestimated German battle worthiness
Affected by the quick breakdown of German re-
sistance in France and Belgium the Allies under-
estimated the German resistance, which the
planners presumed to be very weak. Losses and
diminishing will to fight were wrongly thought
to have reduced the battle worthiness of German
formations.
Part of this problem area is the underesti-
mate of the resources of the 15th German Army
north of river Schelde that were not stopped im-
mediately after the liberation of Antwerp. These
resources could, without interference, reinforce
the German defenders north of Maas-Schelde
Canal. This threat, some argue, was underesti-
mated by the planners. Others argue that by re-
inforcing the American airborne regimental
combat groups between Eindhoven and Grave
with British tank and artillery units from XXX
Corps, this threat had been taken into account
in a reasonable way by the planners.
Criticised also is that the well-known skill on
the German side at all command levels to
quickly improvise and take action in accordance
with the local tactical situation was not better
observed, i.e, what was called Auftragtaktik' in
the German language was overlooked in general.
Lack of offensive spirit
Here foremost three issues have been discussed.
One is whether the Guards Division had been
able to reach the planned objective of the first
day, capture of Eindhoven, despite the darkness,
had they demonstrated more aggressiveness. The
second issue, and here the criticism is strongest,
is whether the Division had been capable of
fighting its way up to Arnhem in the evening of
20 September after having captured the large
Nijmegen bridges. Some have stressed that this
had been possible as German forces that evening
had not yet arrived in force in the Elst area. Was
it due to lack of offensive spirit and aggressive-
ness or a sound and realistic judgement of the
terrain and the tactical situation?
Much debated too, is the third issue. Had
the 43rd (Wessex) Division been able to reach
the 'Island' much earlier than was the case, when
it became obvious on 21 September that more
infantry was badly needed there? Some have
stated that the divisional commander, General
Thomas, was too cautious and methodical in his
approach, which delayed the appearance of his
forces on the 'Island' by, say 24 hours. Others,
including the Corps commander, General
Horrocks, have defended him and argued that
traffic jams and hindrances as well as German
interferences made a faster advance impossible.
Catastrophic communications
Battle command in the 1st Airborne Division at
Arnhem did not work as had been expected. The
communication
system required collapsed
Communication with the headquarters and units
of XXX Corps neither worked as it should, nor
was it the case with communication with the
commander and staff of 1 Airborne Corps south
of Nijmegen.
Many have wondered if it was due to
neglected equipment maintenance and bad
battery charging. Others have wanted to point to
lack of training in using the equipment correctly
under adverse conditions and over lone
distances. Relevant frequency tables had also
been left behind in England, some have argued.
Could all communication difficulties that 1st
Airborne Division encountered been presumed
in advance, and by that affected the planning, is
another often discussed aspect of the battle.
3111
