8. How to Hit the Target - Technical Gun Characteristics
To hit the target, gunners must master:
The internal ballistics of the gun
The external ballistics of the shell
The geodetic relation between the gun and
the target
First, we will now have a look at the two first-
mentioned aspects.
Internal ballistics
When discussing the movement of the shell
through the barrel and the velocity of it when
leaving the muzzle we are talking about the
internal ballistics, often also called the interior bal-
listics. The most important factors affecting this
ballistics are:
Weight of projectile and fuze
The rotation of the projectile imposed by
the rifling in the barrel
Length of barrel
Wearing of barrel
Size and composition of cartridges (pro-
pellant) and thus the chemical energy
released
The temperature of the propellant, which
also affects the energy
Vibrations of the barrel
Loading force when the shell is inserted
into the barrel
As seen, some of the factors are unique for each
gun, whereas others are the same for several
guns, for instance of a battery to which certain
batches (consignments) of shells and propellant
had been supplied. It would then be natural to
assume the
same weight of shells from such a
batch for all guns of the battery and, similarly,
the same temperature for charges taken from the
same batch.
Upon ignition of the propellant a rapidly
increasing gas pressure is built up which pushes
the projectile through the barrel accelerating it
up to its maximum speed. Once the projectile
leaves the muzzle
the driving
gas pressure
instantaneously drops to zero. Part of the gas
pressure is sometimes used to dampen the recoil
by means of a 'muzzle brake'
External ballistics
The trajectory of the projectile would be close to
the parabola if no air was present and the
elevation of the barrel would then determine the
range. Maximum range would be reached at 45°
elevation. Reality is, however, more complicated.
A number of factors have an impact on the tra-
jectory, such as:
• Shape and weight of the projectile
including the fuze
Rotation of the projectile
The earth's rotation
Air pressure
Air temperature
Wind direction and strength along the tra-
Jectorv
Range Tables were available for all types of gun
and the different types of ammunition to be used
by those guns. Basic data such as muzzle velocity,
elevation, trajectory peak, range, impact angle,
flying time and much more of nominal data could
be retrieved from the tables. But the gunners also
needed to know the magnitude oh in unes abo
the trajectory due to deviations from nominal
data, for instance various weather data, in order
to calculate necessary corrections of aiming data
needed for hitting the target. When it comes to
wind speed the nominal value was Oft/s, but if the
wind was 30ft/s obliquely from left or right against
the projectile, it would be necessary to know
exactly how to make corrections for that. This
could be done by means of information from the
'Range Tables'. The projectile is affected by
meteorological deviations at all heights through-
out its trajectory and the problem is to determine
the significant deviation and its level. Ideally this
should be determined just when the projectile was
to fly towards its target.
Weather data could be collected at various
heights by means of a small balloon, the route of
100
HOW TO HIT THE TARGET - TECHNICAL GUN CHARACTERISTICS
which was monitored by means of a theodolite,
(Fig. 8-1). This function was performed during
the war for the Royal Artillery by Mobile Met
Units of the Royal Air Force. This was developed
and improved initially by attaching such a unit
to HQRA at Corps and one each to the Survey
Regiments and AGRAs. Later improvements
saw units attached down at divisional levels. "9
The weather data was collected for the
various heights every four hours using a theodo-
lite to record the bearing and angular height to a
met balloon after a set time. From 1943 and
onwards also radar could be used for tracking
the balloon. Recorded data were presented in a
met telegram, which was distributed to all
artillery regiments and headquarters in the
relevant
battle
area.
When
particularly
important ranging was to take place a special
'met telegram' could be provided as near as
possible to this in order to get up-to-date and
accurate weather data. When the battle at El
Alamein was prepared 'met telegrams' were
provided every 30 minutes. Yet, sudden and local
changes of weather conditions often remained
unrecorded.
Weather data were also collected by aircraft,
which often was a very valuable complement to
sround data
Fig. 8-1 Acquisition of best possible weather data
along the trajectory of the shells was always
important. Recording the route and speed of a
balloon by means of a thedolite was the principal
method to get wind data needed. The method
applied during the war remained also after the war as
this image illustrates (RAHT)
Declining muzzle velocity a scourge
The projectile's range was affected bv muzzle
velocity, which in turn is very dependent on the
degree of the wear to the bore of the barrel. A
decline of the velocity was inevitable when the
numerous rounds had caused barrel wear. If this
reduction was, for instance, 5% this implied a
significant reduction of the range that must be
compensated. A problem to be encountered was
the lack of instruments for measuring the decline
in the muzzle velocity. The wear as such could
be measured, but what it meant in reduced
muzzle velocity was not obvious. The method
adopted was to undertake calibration shoots.
These were made against a target well defined
geodeticallv. i.e. well-known coordinates were at
hand. Other factors influencing the trajectory
were also to be recorded as
accurately
possible, leaving the muzzle velocity as the
remaining unknown variable. Such calibration
shoots could be done for one gun only or for
many, for instance all of a regiment. In order to
make it easier special 'calibration troops' were
organised by the Royal Artillery. They had guns
with well-defined muzzle velocity for compar-
isons. The guns to be 'calibrated' fired at the
well-defined target as did the gun(s) of a 'cali-
oration troon'
and impact differences were
measured and used for velocity corrections
which were done on the range marker of the gun
Hence, the calibrated velocity could be used as
a known, fixed quantity, in the target data calcu-
lations leaving fewer factors to be corrected for
the calculation of the gun laying data. See Fig.
10-1 and 10-3
peacetime calibration was
seldom
necessary due to the limited number of rounds
fired in exercises. No significant barrel wearing
took place. In war the situation was completely
different, which if not dealt with correctly, could
imply serious deviations from the planned point
of impact. The 25-pounders were the guns
suffering least from the problem, more critical it
was for medium and heavy guns. One of the
Gun Position Officers of 112 (Wessex) Field
101|
