GUNFIRE
BAR /W4
beach for their turn to get evacuated (RAHT)
Fio. 16-8 Despite repeated air attacks and artillery fire panic rarelv occurred and men natiently queued on th
The battle is over - but not south of
Somme!
The campaign in Northern France was over and
all the BEF artillery equipment north of river
Somme had been lost. Pemberton (1950) has
given a summary of the losses; anti-tank and
anti-aircraft guns here excluded:
18/25-pounders, 704 guns (including 72
reserve guns)
18-pounders, 216 guns
4.5-inch howitzers, 96 pieces
Hence, in total 1,016 guns lost.
In addition to lost light guns came the loss of
medium guns
6-inch howitzers, 221 pieces (including 45
in reserve
60-pounders, 51 pieces
Hence, in total 272 medium guns.
Teal guese lose came shrary and super
The campaign in Flanders became a setback
of immense magnitude for the British. They had
met an opponent superior in everything, except
numerical strength, and lost the battle. But the
British were not defeated! Confidence and spirit
to fight were not broken. The gunners returned
to England with retained, not to say, improved
self-confidence!
The fighting was to continue for some more
weeks
south
river
Somme
nei
(Highland) Division left the Saar Region when
the German break-through at river Meuse came
The division was engaged in the battle further to
the South when the bridgehead at Dunkirk had
been eliminated and the river Somme could be
crossed. The British 1st Armoured Division
which had been landed at Cherbourg and Le
Havre around 20 May was now engaged. Both
British divisions were attached to French armies.
As a consequence of the political decision
not to let down the French after Dunkirk, a new,
second BEF was organised in England. It was
under command of General Alan Brooke and
was to be sent to France over the 11-14 Junt
Besides the two divisions already in France south
of river Somme, visions already in Fira Desh
and Canadian Is Infand (Lowland) Disson
be dispatched from England.
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD
ACROSS THE CHANNEL
Soon it was obvious that the allies could not
decisive impact on the outcome of the
stand up to the German onslaught. The S1st
battle when the attacking German forces
(Highland) Division was pressed towards the
were prevented from cutting off the BEF
coast where it could not be evacuated and had
from the beaches.
to surrender on 12 June 1940 at St. Valery en
• No fire planning at higher levels other than
Caux. With it followed one of its field regiments,
regimental headquarters seems to have
23 Field Regiment RA, 1 Field Regiment RHA
taken place. An exception might be HQRA
(except one battery) and 51 Medium Regiment
of the 5th Infantry Division. The role of di-
RA.238 The 1st Armoured Division was released
visional artillery headquarters was to
from the fighting and taken home via Le Havre.
delegate artillery resources primarily to co-
Brooke managed also to get the political leaders
ordinate marches and redeployments.
to accept a total British evacuation from France.
Sometimes, however, planning of harassing
There should be
no BEF II! Units already
fire was coordinated at higher levels.
arriving were quickly evacuated and those under
Planning of 'Defensive Fire', 'SOS Fire'
way to France were ordered to return. In total
and 'Counter Preparation Fire' dominated
192,000 men were evacuated from Le Havre,
fire planning in addition to observed fire
Cherbourg, St. Nazaire and other ports further
on 'Opportunity Targets' and Covering
to the South before the truce between France
Fire' in support of counter-attacks. The
and Germany was signed on 22 June. Around
latter generally at battalion level, never
332 guns of different calibres were saved back
attacks by higher formations
to England
The limited range of vintage guns made
fire concentrations at depth, for instance
Summary of the role of British artillery
in France 1940
against enemy artillery positions, difficult,
not say impossible.
It has not been possible to follow the use of BEF • Support of armoured units was never
artillery in every detail. Numerous documents
required, as no such units had arrived in
including war diaries, plans, written orders, etc.
France before the evacuation.
were destroyed on the beaches at Dunkirk
Smoke was rarely used.
Much of written documents about the events
The battery or the troop was normally the
and participating units and headquarters were
fire unit, in particular during the delaying
produced after the return to England, most often
battles back from river Dvle. During the
during the summer 1940, but often much later.
last davs before evacuation, even sections
Hence, there can be mistakes and errors as well
(2 guns) and single guns became fire units.
as critical gaps in reviewed documents. I feel,
Field artillery units were often given anti-
however, that I can summarise my impressions
tank tasks based on direct fire, 1.e. an
and findings as follows:
important deviation from the main task of
field artillery, ie. 'indirect fire'.
• The BEF had much artillery, but a large
Ammunition supply varied between units.
part of it was obsolete and not adapted to
There was plenty at river Dyle, whereas it
the requirements of a Blitzkrieg.
was down to a critical level at river Escaut
Engagement of artillery was generally
at the forward units retreating from the
delegated to brigade and battalion level.
river Dyle. Regiments belonging to
Concentrated fire by regiments took place,
divisions in the rear reported no shortage
but not very often. Concentration of fire
of ammunition
from divisional and even higher levels took,
The ordered radio silence during the whole
probably, never place.
'Phoney War' made efficient training in
Physical concentration of artillery
radio communication impossible. In com-
resources was organised during the hard
bination with inferior wireless sets that
fighting on 27-28 May by II Corps at
made concentrations above the regimental
Ypres, in particular. Here, the divisional
level very difficult to arrange.
artillery was reinforced with several field
The dispatch riders were invaluable as a
regiments, some medium regiments and
means for communication and liaison as
one heavy battery. This might have had a
replacement for bad radio equipment and
197
