GUNFIRE
Summary of the role of artillery in
Operation Market Garden
This summary is limited to the role of British
artillery only. The artillery battalions landed by
the two American airborne divisions played
important roles but it is bevond the scope of the
above analysis to cover also their actions.
In this summary it has been practical to look
at the two sub-operations separately, and I will
begin with the air-landing operation
Operation Market (one British and two American
airborne divisions)
As compared with an ordinary infantry
division the British 1st Airborne Division
went into action with only one third of the
artillery of the former. This situation was
planned to last for two days; it became four
days. This risk accepted at the planning
stage was significant and was not to be
repeated in future operations. It was
fortunate that 22 of the 24 guns of the light
airlanding regiment could be brought to
Arnhem, albeit it took two davs
Thanks to the allocation of eleven observa-
tion parties from 1 FOU the division was
not in a worse situation than the ordinary
infantry division as regards fire observation
and control resources.
The divisional artillery commander (CRA)
had at the planning stage decided that the
light regiment should be used united under
his command, although the three batteries
were to be in support of one brigade each
Through this arrangement, direct support
could be launched quickly to these
brigades, but concentrated fire from the
entire regiment was still always an option
As seen, it was not possible, however, to
deploy the whole regiment at the same
location (near Oosterbeek Church) until
the third day. During the critical initial
phase it was thus not possible to concen-
trate fire. Frost's battalion could be
supported by one battery only (3rd
Battery.
From the selected deployment areas fire
around the horizon was possible, and was
also implemented. A restriction was
however the shortage of ammunition. Most
of the replacement supplies from aircraft
were lost
The terrain made fire observation very
difficult, in most cases impossible, by
which ranging and control of fire was
severely hampered. Radio communication
was also difficult due to the terrain, but
worked well with a few exceptions. The
artillery nets were often the only ones
working in the brigades. Despite being
exposed to enemy shelling from artillery
and mortars day and night the light
regiment could most of the time meet
requests for fire. The regiment did deliver
what was expected from it, and did so in a
most commendable way.
One lesson learned was that the CRA
headquarters lacked capacity to effectively
manage and coordinate a large number of
external regiments, when these came
within range. Afterwards, this led to an
upgrading for future operations, including
upgrading of the CRA position to the rank
of Brigadier.
Close air support from medium bombers
and fighter-bombers could have been a
good complement to the artillery, but the
number of sorties was fairly low. This was
due to the fact that air space had to be
reserved for several hours every day for the
extensive supply transport. Bad weather
during the week the battle was going on
also reduced air activity. However, when it
was possible to give the besieged forces at
Arnhem (Oosterbeek) direct support from
the air, the results were much appreciated.
Operation Garden (XXX Corps)
The XXX Corps was initially supported
by some 300 guns, which at the time was
quite normal for a Corps attack. Due to
allocation of these resources to individual
divisions and brigades, which were spread
out over the very long march route, 'Club
Route', strong concentration of fire was
possible only on the first day, when the
Corps broke out northwards. During the
final day, when the evacuation of the
British survivors from the Oosterbeek
perimeter took place, it was possible to
concentrate about half of the initial
artillery resources.
The field regiments were given their
ordinary role to support one brigade each
within the divisional colton brigade en role
seems to have been foreseen in the
312
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
planning. Fire concentration was not an
option during the march forward.
• The medium regiments were allocated
with one for each division and were to
march at the rear of the divisional columns.
An exception was the allocation of two
sections (from 84 Medium Regiment),
which marched under command of the
leading batteries of 55 Field Regiment RA
and 155 Field Regiment RA who were
supporting the leading brigade groups of
the Guards Division.
• The role planned for the medium
regiments was reinforcement of the divi-
sional regiments and to be prepared for
counter-battery actions, in particular
support of the 82nd American Airborne
around Groesbeek Hill SE of Nijmegen.
No role in support of the 1st British
Airborne Division before arrival north of
Rhine seems to have been planned.
The formations equipped with guns having
the longest range, 419 Heavy Battery RA
and the two medium batteries with 4.5-
inch guns from 7 Medium Regiment RA
and 64 Medium Regiment RA, were to
march at the rear of the Corps column,
which implied start 2-3 days after the
Guards Division had commenced its dash
northwards.
Corps artillery planning was thus not
focused on bringing up much artillery
within range of Arnhem as early as
possible. Neither was there any plan to
secure effective radio communication with
the airborne division at the earliest possible
time. Obviously there was not much of
advance training in making radio contacts
over long distances. The battle made these
mistakes embarrassingly clear.
The initial barrage in support of the
breakout by the Guards Division had a
unique design. Six out of ten available field
regiments fired a rolling barrage, fairly
narrow (1,400m), along the road north-
wards over a distance of 4km. It started
three minutes before the tanks began
moving and was completed 23 minutes
later. No preparations were made for
imposing pauses or to halt it in case of
contingencies, which with hindsight is
amazing. When the tanks were stopped
after 2km, the barrage continued for
another 2km for no purpose.
At the flanks of the barrage four field
regiments fired during the first 15 minutes,
both concentrations and fire against line
targets. It is not clear as to whether the
intention was neutralisation or destruction
of the targets, e.g. anti-tank guns. The
overall fire plan also included harassing fire
at targets many kilometres from the main
road, which seems reasonable.
Of particular interest is the fact that the
fire of the medium regiments was not su-
perimposed over the fire of the field
regiments. Each regiment fired its own
barrage simultaneously bevond the one
fired by the latter. This was even narrower:
about 900m. Contrary to normal practice
it was fired long before any tanks nor
infantry were up close to it. On the other
hand it was planned for a repeat shoot,
which took place three hours after the first
one had been executed, this time with
better effect. The whole arrangement with
this division of fire resources cannot be
seen as anything but a wrong use of
artillery.
The chosen fire intensity was moderate for
both field regiments and medium
regiments by which the barrage(s) can be
said to have been fairly light. In view of the
importance of the operation this is strange,
particularly as the opponents were battle-
experienced troops dug in and positioned
in well-prepared fortified positions.
The counter-battery programme
preceding the barrages was quite moderate
in terms of scope and intensity.
Furthermore, it is strange that no need for
smoke belts along the flanks to protect the
tanks of the Guards Division from long
range firing enemy tanks and anti-tank
guns was foreseen
As the dash for Arnhem was not as quick
as planned due to German interference,
the distribution of artillery units along the
long column (some 20,000 vehicles were
on the road) had the advantage that some
guns at least were almost everywhere
available when and where the road was
blocked.
A decision at high level seems to have been
made early morning of the 20 September
that the guns with the longest range should
3121
