GUNFIRE
(except two divisions) to the left, Z to Z + 90
hours
Movement day and night.
Phase 2 Advance of the 48th Infantry Division
in the period J.5 to J.9, and one division from II
Corps in the period T.5 to T.9.
Movement during nights only, if possible
Phase 3 Advance of the third division from II
Corps in the period J.8 to J.10. Deployment
behind the division deployed in Phase 2. At the
same time adjustment of boundaries between the
two Corps close to river Dyle.
Movement during night only, if possible
Phase 4 Advance of Ill Corps as GHQ Reserve
at the time decided later
Movement during night only, if possible
It was furthermore decided that the French
1st Army was to deploy to the right of I British
Corps, front Namur - Wavre, with the French III
Corps nearest BEF. Its advance was to be
protected by a cavalry Corps comprising a
number of light mechanised divisions
The operational order had been devised on
the assumption that BEF would be in place
within ten days and that fighting at the river Dyle
would commence after fourteen days at the
earliest. Reality was to be something else. The
foremost units were in battle after only a few
davs
The frontal divisions would, as understood
from the Phase 1 plan, start their advance
towards river Dyle immediately. They were to
advance just behind their own recce units with
an advance force of brigade strength reinforced
with artillery. As far as I Corps was concerned.
the 1st Division was to march to the left along a
given route and the 2nd Division to the right of
it. For the latter two routes were allotted. A third
route was reserved within the Corps boundaries
for other transport
The cavalry units (recce) of the divisions
were to cross the start line one hour after 'Z
Hour', They would upon arrival at river Dyle
replace 12 L east of the river. Detachments from
the advance brigade with machine-gun and anti-
tank units would follow suit. These units would
secure the Dyle defence line within 48 hours
according to the plan. The main parts of the
divisions would follow suit and be deployed
within Z + 84 hours. Infantry was to move
forward with buses (from RASC transport
companies)
13 Air-cooperation Squadron RAF, which
was attached to I Corps, was ordered to survey
the area east and north of river Dyle. They would
also survey the transportation area, this in order
to assist in traffic control and in time detect
sabotage attempts, risks of ambush, etc.
A tactical Corps headquarters was to be es-
tablished during the second day and the mai
part of the headquarters would come later and
be established south of Brussels on the fouru
day. The Corps commander with his artiller
commanders, CRA and CCMA, and reconnais-
sance detachments would leave the first day
the
divisional commanders with their
artillery commanders, would leave as soon as
possible and have their tactical headquarters in
operation the second day, while the main stat
resources were ordered to be in place the third
and fourth day.
The Corps order included numerous details
in the main document, but most of detailed di-
rectives were given in a number of voluminous
annexes and the special 'Administrative Order'
which were issued at the same time
Now, what is said about artillery in the
Corps Operation Order? First, it is noted that it
does not include any provision regarding the
march forward and deployment of divisional
artillery. It is focused on the Corps artillery anc
GHQ units that were attached to the Corps. As
is the case for the other arms, the order contains
provisions regarding the marching and deploy-
Table 16-2. Army and Corps formations under command during marcr
to River Dyle
1 Infantry Division
140 Army Field Regiment RA
1 Medium Regiment RA
3 Medium Regiment RA
2 Infantry Division
61 Medium Regiment RA
4/7 Medium Battery RA
3 Heavy Battery RA
Under CCMA | Corps command
27 Army Field Regiment RA
98 Army Field Reaiment RA
5 Medium Regiment RA
1 Heavy Regiment RA (except 3 Battery RA)
Under CCRA I Corps command
115 Field Regiment RA
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD - ACROSS THE CHANNEL
Table 16-3. Employment of Army and Corps artillery at River Dyle
Under command of 1 Infantry Division
140 Army Field Regiment RA
1 Medium Regiment RAI
Under command of 2 Infantry Divisior
61 Medium Reaiment RAI
Under command of CCMA | Corps
27 Army Field Reaiment RA
98 Army Field Regiment RA
3 Medium Regiment RA
5 Medium Regiment RAI
63 Medium Regiment RA
4/7 Medium Battery RA
1 Heavy Regiment RAI
3 Super Heavy Battery RA (if and when ordered forward
ment of these artillery units behind river Dyle.
For the march, the artillery units were allotted to
formations as listed in Table 16-2.
The 1st Infantry Division was ordered to
reserve space in their columns for reconnais-
sance detachments from the Corps artillery
some 85 vehicles. The 2nd Infantry Division
similarly was to reserve space for the 89 vehicles
of 1 Survey Regiment RA and 11 vehicles from
13 Survey Company RE, the latter now being
attached to the Survev Regiment
The reason why these divisions were made
responsible for several Corps and GHQ artillery
units was not only a matter of traffic control.
Another reason was that the divisions would be
well equipped with artillery at hand if they were
attacked and had to stop marching. By this
arrangement, the
Corns
could
also take
advantage of units with the longest range and the
opportunities for these to deploy early if needed.
When the Corps and GHQ units had
arrived at river Dvle they were to be grouped as
shown in Table 16-3.
Deployment areas where the units under
CMA command would have priority were
specified in Annex Z of the Corps Operation
Order
It is interesting to note that no units would
be under command of CCRA, the Corps
artillery commander. but under CCMA, the
commander of Corps medium artillery. This
meant that the latter would be commanding not
only medium and heavy regiments as was his
normal duty, but also a few field regiments. It
Table 16-4. Coordination of observation and fire areas
1 Infantry Division artillery Between coordinate lines 37 and 47 North
2 Infantry Division artillery Between coordinate lines 43 and 56 North
Medium/Heavy Corps artillery Between coordinate lines 38 and 48 North
The Heavy Regiment should cover the entire Corps front line
French 3 Army artillery
Up to coordinate line 42 North (at least)
was to take a few vears until a less fragmented
command structure at the Corps level had been
introduced.
We have now briefly studied the main
features of the 1 Corps Operation Order for
'Plan D'. Based on this, a specific artillery order
was prepared and issued by the Corps artillery
commander, CCRA. This order deals with all
aruillery, hence also anti-tank artillery and how
these resources were to be used in a coordinated
way for the protection of all the units marching
towards river Dvle. When it comes to ground
artillery, we may notice a few specific issues of
principal interest.
All reconnaissance in the forward area was
to be well coordinated under the CCRA, who
was to have a staff conference with all the CRAs.
the CCMA and the commander of 1 Survey
Regiment RA. This was to take place at 17.30
hrs the second day. One intention was to make
sure that the units with longest range could be
deployed as early possible. Fire and observation
zones were coordinated as well, Table 16-4.
The artillery units were to deploy as soon as
possible, but when it was dark. Furthermore an
'Active Artillery Policy' was to be applied while
all defence preparations
were forthcoming
behind the river. This meant that temporary gur
positions, Active Positions, were to be used
Single guns 'roving' firing from site to site were
also to be used. At least 50% of the guns at the
primary positions, the Battle Positions, were to
remain silent
When these positions
completed gradually with fortifications and cam
ouflage, this share could be reduced and more
and more guns open fire
The explanation of the fact that the firing
zone for the medium artillery was limited to the
northern part of the Corps area, apart from the
assumptions that French artillery was expected to
help in the southern sector, is found in the
counter-bombardment provisions in the order
(Paragraph 7). There. it is stated that it had beer
found from map studies that the most likely de-
ployment area for the enemy's artillery was in the
172
