GUNFIRE
The brigade had been organised in three
battalion groups supported by infantry and
drullerv
In front of the attackers was open terrain,
good tank terrain as it was said,
which
dominates the whole area southeast and south of
Caen. Spotted in the area were many village:
including orchards, grown up trees and hedges
These were prepared for artillery fire later and
are to be seen as targets beyond and on the
flanks of the barrage
For Operation Goodwood, 712 guns had
been made available plus 48 heavy anti-aircraft
guns to be employed in a ground role. Appendix
4 has the details. These resources were to be used
not only by VIII Corps but also by the two Corps
on the flanks, the Il Canadian Corps to the right
and the British I Corps to the left.
A problem was the fact that most of the
artillery units had to be deploved north and
northwest of Caen. This implied long ranges
from the start of the offensive for those units (the
majority) that were to support the main attack.
It was known that many regiments quickly would
have to fire at maximum range and then had to
see the attackers disappear out of range. Some
units would be able to later re-deploy to the
eastern side of river Orne, but it is obvious that
the overall operation plan suffered from flaws as
regards possibilities for the artillery to support
in depth (see Map 20-6)
In order to make sure that the 11th
Armoured Division in the lead would at least
have some artillery close to the front its regiment
equipped with SP guns, 13 Field Regiment
RHA, was split up with one battery attached to
each battalion battle group. By this arrangement
they could at least avoid being stuck in traffic
jams
west of river Orne
Strong fire programmes were implemented
before the attack. The first one was firing to neu-
tralise anti-aircraft batteries that were a threat
against the strategic bomber armadas. Then
followed counter-battery bombardment against
enemy artillery deployments. Some 600 guns
were employed for this task. The commander re-
sponsible for these programmes was not, as one
might expect, the artillery commander of VIII
Corps, but his colleague on the left, i.e. the
artillery commander of I Corps.
The barrage in the assault area was to be
opened at Z Hour across a 1.6km-wide front and
was to continue until Z + 80. 192 guns from
eight field regiments were engaged, firing two
beside each other at four lines of the barrage. All
fired during one and a half minute followed by a
shift of 150 m to the next line. Several pauses
had been prepared in the plan, one longer after
the first phase during which the direction of the
barrage
would change a
little in westerly
direction (Map 20-5). Despite this pause, the
advancing tanks had difficulties in keeping pace
with the barrage as it moved forwards.
We can also notice that concentrations were
to be fired at targets along the flanks. For that
particular task, VIII Corps had allotted two field
regiments, six medium regiments and four heavy
batteries, i.e. in total no less than 160 guns. In
parallel with all these programmes, various
counter-battery programmes were included too
in the overall fire plan
As we can see on the map, barrages were to
cover also the advance of the divisions attacking
along the flanks of VIII Corps.
A critical situation developed when the
advancing tank units left the infantry behind and
became victims of a murderous anti-tank fire
from well-positioned German guns.
The Germans were in general well prepared
to meet the offensive and had skilfully deployed
several lines of tanks and anti-tank guns in
depth. With the long and effective superior range
of all these guns the fight was uneven an under-
taking. The British were to lose 300 tanks before
further attacks were cancelled. The fact that the
open terrain with its villages and orchards was
not as 'good tank terrain' as expected became a
harsh lesson.
If the British had better envisaged what
would come, they had made sure that tank units
and infantry fought together all the time. They
had arranged also for a better employment of
avallable artillery resources to combat anti-tank
guns and tanks deploved in villages and behind
concealing terrain formations. The lessons from
El Alamein had obviously not been fully learnt.
It is also remarkable that no plans were
made for taking advantage of the artillery option
to protect advancing tank formations with smoke
screens
It might be of interest in this context to see
what lessons the Corps Commander O'Connor
noted. He wrote:357
(...] a direct advance over open country on
enemy tanks in position should be avoided, unless
268
A NEW FRONT IS OPENED - NORMANDY
they have been masked by smoke, or so heavily
bombarded by bombs or artillery that they are
unlikely to be able to shoot
Obviously O'Connor after the battle believed
much in the use of smoke. He added:
No risk seems to me to be so great as to launch a
number of tanks directly on the enemy tanks in
position, without some arrangements being made
to mask their fire.
French observers
A few French ex-officers happened to become
witnesses within the battle area in Normandy
and they could, based on their observations,
provide interesting information to the British. By
means of the regularly compiled RA Artillery
Notes experience from the various theatres of
war were distributed to formations and head-
quarters, and one did not fail to pass on these
French observations. The summary of these,
below, including some direct quotations, are
taken from one edition of the
Notes' 358
'RA Artillery
One of the French observers was positioned
at the Cotentin Peninsula whereas two others
were in or just outside Caen.
The former reported that the Germans were
afraid foremost of the American artillery when
that was firing airbursts or high velocity shells,
which they could not hear before the shells
arrived. He estimated that 70% of the German
losses were due to these types of artillery fire.
He was very critical against the Allies for
often destroying totally villages and cities by
bombing and artillery fire. These actions lead to
unnecessary killing of civilians and destruction
of their houses and belongings. The Germans
stayed outside villages and went in only when
destroyed buildings
Offered
them
protection and opportunities to
better
meet the
advancing Americans. This observation proved
to be particularly correct when Caen was
bombed to ruins in the night between & and 9
July 1944. That was a big mistake, which was
unfortunately repeated before the end of the war.
A general observation made by this observer
and also by the two others, was that the Germans
were very skilled in quickly changing gun
positions after firing, this in order to avoid
British counter-battery fire. Redeployment to
alternative positions had been trained on a drill
basis. They were skilled also in taking advantage
of pauses in the firing by British artillery for
movement to new positions for tactical reasons
One of the other French observers wrote
about similar observations he had made:
The German SP Arty is extremely mobile. As
soon as the British fire has found the mpi mean
point of impact] they change position and I
cannot help admiring the masterly drill and the
rapidity with which they open fire again after
moving (e.g. 150mm bty shooting again 10
minutes after changing position).
An observation made several times by the
French observers was that air bursts often were
too high above the target, and this was not
corrected in time. One of them, located at Caen,
made this observation on 18 June:
At about 1800 hrs the British Arty opened fire for
the first time on the — road [the name deleted in
the RA Artillery Notes]. They ought to have
started days before. About 50 air bursts were seen
stretching along 500m of the road. They were well
on for line but much too high (about 100 m
above the target. The German vehicles were
going along at 200m intervals and did not stop.
But on 14 June it was reported:
At 1245 hrs there was well-sustained fire for 20
mins on - [name deleted]. The lower time bursts
were at about 8 m height and were very effective.
Over M - [name deleted] they were bursting at
roof-top height. The firing was a bit wide and half
the bursts were on percussion. The result was
most effective: all traffic was completely stopped
and it was turned back by the Germans.
The observers also discussed a frequently re-
occurring
problem,
namelv
which
battle
technique that was the best: Should the F00 go
for precision by ranging before fire for effect was
ordered, or should he order predicted fire and
compensate, when needed, poor accuracy with
more chelle?
One of them had a firm opinion:
It is always the first shells, which have the greatest
effect owing to the surprise they give. It is most
necessary therefore to send as many as possible
"Time on Target.
