GUNFIRE
The exercises eventually were extended for
many units also to include amphibious training
i.e. attack from the sea against a fortified coast.
Such exercises were, with preference, done in
Scottish fjords and with live ammunition. It was
during the final months of training that some
gunners in SP
regiments
to be
landed 1n
Normandy developed firing procedures to be
applied when the landing craft were on their way
to the shore. It was called 'run-in-shoot'. We will
see more of that in a later Chapter
Preparations were done to the last by all
units to take part in the Normandy landings
Douglas Goddard has recalled the final training
programme for his regiment, 112 (Wessex) Field
Regiment RA:295
March 26 to 31
Took part 12 Corps
Exercise 'Shudder'
April
May
01 to 03
05 to 07
13 to 15
01 to 06
Firing practice at South
Downs at Alfriston
43 Div Exercise 'Sabre 1'
43 Div Exercise 'Sabre 2'
Final firing camp at Lydd,
for field firing at
Dungeness
The night between 23 and 24 June, Douglas
Goddard's regiment landed in Normandy and
engagement in real battle became a reality for the
gunners after four years of waiting and training.
For others,
serious business had begun on
D-Day itself, i.e. 6 June 1944.
For many other gunners, the battle baptism
came much earlier, at the beginning of the now
ended 'third phase'.
We will now turn our
attention to those who became engaged overseas
in the summer and autumn of 1942 already.
19. 'It will be a killing match' - El Alamein
This battle for which we are preparing will be a
real rough house and will involve a very great dea,
of hard fighting. If we are successful it will mean
the end of the war in North Africa, apart from
general 'clearing-up' operations; it will be the
turning point of the whole war. Therefore we can
take no chances.
Morale is the big thing in war. We must raise
the morale of our soldiery to the highest pitch
they must be made enthusiastic, and must enter
this battle with their tails high in the air and with
the will to win
The new commander of the 8th Army in North
Africa, Lieutenant General Bernard L. Mont-
gomery, informed in a
memo dated
September 1942 how he intended to defeat the
German-Italian forces by launching Operation
Lightfoot. The quotation is retrieved from this
memo and illustrates how important it was for
Montgomery to strengthen the fighting spirit
and self-confidence in the army. 296 If this failed,
it would not be possible to match an opponent
like Rommel. We will look at the plan and Mont-
gomery's measures taken, but first a few words
about what had passed before his arrival.
Varying initiatives
As we know, Mussolini had imperial dreams in
the 1930s and commenced his fight for it by
attacking Abyssinia (today Ethiopia) in 1936.
When the British were forced out of France and
could not resist the German assault, he found the
time ripe for challenging the British in North
Africa As seen, the declaration of war came on
10 June 1940. His objective was to force the
British out from their protectorate Egypt, this as
part of his grand strategy, control of the whole
Mediterranean region.
He was not that successful at the beginning.
He suffered a decisive defeat at the hands of the
British general O'Connor in December 1940.
This was followed by a number of British
victories in January and February 1941. The
talians were forced back all the way to B
Aghelia, some 600 miles to the west. The British,
however, failed to avail themselves of this
davantage.
A historical mistake was done.
Resources were dispersed by sending a large
force in springtime 1941 to Greece - a country
threatened by an attack from Italy. This caused
a strong reaction from the German side
By means of a more successful invasion of
Greece than the Italians had launched earlier, the
Wehrmacht quickly pushed the British out of the
country, at first to Crete and then eventually to
Egypt. They also sent Rommel with his Africa
Corps to North Africa to support the Italians,
whom they did not have any better thoughts
about. Further on, the Germans also were strate-
gically attracted by the oil fields in the Middle
East. These could be captured if the British were
defeated in Egypt and Palestine at the same time
as a German thrust through the Soviet Union to
Iraq and Iran took place. Conquest of the Suez
Canal and cutting the British lines to India was
also an attractive strategic objective. 297
During 1941, the battle in North Africa
raged back and forth along the coast and at the
end of the vear, the British were again at El
Aghelia. They had relieved the besieged town of
Tobruk. However, the initiative went again to
Rommel who in 1942 forced the British back to
El Alamein. On his way, he also forced the
British garrison at Tobruk, some 30,000 men, to
capitulate on 21 June. Large stocks of petrol,
vehicles, heavy equipment including artillery and
ammunition were lost. The shock in Britain over
this defeat was immense. It became a huge
national burden just four months after the largest
British defeat in history, the capitulation in
Singapore on 15 February.
But the British could stand much and never
gave up. The British Commander-in-Chief.
Auchinleck, whose lack of leadership qualities
had contributed much to the sad outcome of the
war during the first half of 1942, managed to just
Ston Rommel at A Alamein in Ty 1042
Churchill and the CIGS Alan Brooke were not
satisfied with what they had seen and heard
about Auchinleck's way of waging war in North
Africa. He was sacked as C-in-C Middle Fast at
