GUNFIRE
25th Army stood against the 1st Canadian Army.
We can briefly see the initial deployments
just before Operation Plunder on Map 22-2.422
Large airborne resources had been allotted
to Montgomery. The XVIII American Airborne
Corps with
the
13th
and 17th Airborne
Divisions and the British 6th Airborne Division
were made available, at least on the paper. He
gave directives to his staff as to how these were
to be employed in principle: 423
a) They should be used concentrated and
in strength
b)
The area in which they were to operate
should be within artillery range of, at least,
medium artillery
Following from (b), the timing should be
such that the airborne drop was
coordinated with the main assault across
the river
There should be a quick link-up between
the ground and airborne troops
We can here clearly see that Montgomery was
affected by the experience from Arnhem. A
lesson learned was that the weather could have a
significant impact on air-landing operations. In
this case, it was decided that the river crossing
would be done even if the airborne part of the
operation had to be cancelled due to bad
weather. But a certain amount of flexibility was
maintained by the decision that the whole
operation could be postponed a couple of davs
while
waiting
for better
weather
The
postponement must never, however, be more
than five days.
It was,
furthermore,
decided that the
landings of all airborne troops would take place
on one day only in order to minimise the risk of
weather interference.
It was unknown as late as at the beginning
of February when the airborne divisions would
be landed, and how many
of the tentative
divisions that could be made available.
This
impacted on the timing of the operation. These
issues were central on the agenda when a large
planning conference with the concerned main
actors took place on 9 February.424
One of the first decisions at the conference
was that two airborne divisions would be
employed with the task to capture the Diesfordt
Woods and the closest area around it. The terrain
here rises slightly above the area closer to the
eastern shore of river Rhine. It was deemed
serious a threat to the units attacking across the
river.
Furthermore,
much
ar ullery and
numerous anti-aircraft guns were thought to be
deployed by the Germans in the woods or its
surroundings.
Good observation conditions
southwestwards towards the river and other
lower areas were another critical factor. Besides
Diesfordt Woods itself, the air-landed troops
would capture a few nearby bridges across river
Ijssel. Once the attacking units had linked up
with the air-landed troops the latter would be
either withdrawn or given special tasks in the
area around Wesel.
The operation was assigned to the 6th
British Airborne Division and the 17th US
Airborne Division. If and how the third division,
the 13th US Airborne Division, was to be
employed was unclear. That was at the beginning
of February an issue requiring further studies
and deliberations. A possible alternative was to
let it support the advance of the 9th US Army
across the rivers Rhine and Lippe. There were,
however, no transport resources available for
bringing the division to the battlefield on the
same day as the two others. Employing it later
when all surprise was gone was deemed to imply
unacceptable risks. As it was to be shown later,
the division was never employed as an airborne
formation.
As regards the timing of Operation Varsity,
as the airborne operatio of Operation Varsity
opinions differed. 42:
5 The British 6th Airborne
Division had in haste been transferred to
Holland in December 1944 to reinforce XXX
Corps when the German Ardennes offensive
was to be stopped. The division had now been
engaged as a fighting infantry division for more
than a month. The British Command stated that
the division could be rish Cord nand stated that
days after
withdrawal from the fighting in
Holland and returned to England. The division
was well trained and an air-landing exercise with
the whole division had been done just before it
was taken to Holland. Furthermore, it had
gained much battle experience in Normandy
and later. Montgomery perience in Nommoray
units engaged at Rhine on 15 March was no
problem as far as this division was concerned
The situation was tenser as
regards the
American divisions.
17th US Airborne
Division was at the time 17th US Airborn
engaged in ground fighting but had never beer
318
THE FINAL ONSLAUGHT - THE RHINE CROSSING
trained as a complete formation in an air-landing
operation. The Airborne Corps Commander
stated as his opinion that this division could not
be engaged before 1st April in respect of the
need for further training. The division had also
suffered from losses of 4,000 men who had to
be replaced in total. This made the need for
training even more acute.
After much of discussions, a compromise
was agreed on. D-Day was set at 24 March. This
meant that the German defenders got another
two weeks for rehabilitation and preparations
east of river Rhine. An officer who became
worried about this was the commander of XXX
Corps Lieutenant General Horrocks. On the
other hand, the formations of the 2nd Army
needed about a month of preparations too,
before being ready to attack across river Rhine.
It was now considered necessary to give the
orders to the attacking divisions not later than
two weeks before D-Day. If so, enough time
would be given at lower levels for planning and
distribution of orders. Time was also needed for
further training and bringing forward the huge
amounts of assault boats, ferries and bridge
equipment required for this large-scale attack.
Provision and stocking of artillery ammunition
was another logistic challenge requiring at least
XII Corps headquarters had plenty of time
for their preparations. It was known by the staff
at the beginning of February what the Corps role
would be and a first set of planning instructions
could be distributed to subordinate units already
on 5 February. These had of course to be
followed later by many other instructions when
the staffs at higher levels continued their work
and completed their planning and coordination.
This was a good start. Final instructions were
given to divisions
anci
brigades
staff
conferences on 8 and 10 March. The final Corps
order was ready for distribution on 21 March.
The colleagues at XXX Corps had a much
tougher situation. This Corps was, as we have
seen, deeply engaged in Operation Veritable, the
dearing of the whole area between rivers Meuse
and Rhine. This battle implied an immense stress
on the Corps commander and his staff week after
week. The temporary
Corps grouping
extremely unusual in terms of strength and the
umber of participating formations.
At the
beginning of March when the order was given to
prepare for the attack across river Rhine on 24
March, all concerned were extremely exhausted.
In order to make it possible to fully con-
centrate on the new task, XXX Corps head-
quarters was relieved from the responsibility of
controlling the still ongoing battle. This task was
transferred to the Il Canadian Corps and later to
the VIII British Corps. Horrocks declared that he
needed 21 days for planning and all preparations
His staff had to concentrate entirely on this task.
They should be given a chance also to get some
rest and time for recovery. But unfortunately this
time was hardly available.
It was necessary with a quick start on 4
March when a first sketchy planning instruction
was issued to all units of the Corps to take part
in the operation. This was then followed by new
instructions every day until 20 March when the
final order to lower units must be given. The
short time available made it necessary to work in
parallel at Corps, Division and Brigade levels in
order to meet the deadline. This called for
leadership and efficient staff work of highest
calibre. Horrocks was perhaps the only Corps
commander in the British Army capable of
bringing this process to a successful end in time.
In the XII Corps sector, the planning426
resulted in the decision that the attack was to
commence by the 1st Commando Brigade
attacking on D-1 at 22.00 hours. The main
attack would then follow on D-Day at H Hour,
which was 02.00 hours when the 15 (Scottish)
Division would attack. The division was to cross
with two brigades beside each other and a third
as reserve. The objective was to capture and
secure an initial bridgehead on the eastern shore
of river Rhine. Tanks equipped for swimming
(DD tanks) from the 44th Tank Battalion would
cross at an early stage to reinforce the infantry. 427
The Scots would of course attack headed by
bagpipers in the first units. This can even today
be heard in a recorded BBC-report from the
attack.
Behind the Scots would follow a brigade
from the 52nd (Lowland) Division and the
independent 4 Armoured Brigade with the task
to link up with and support the air-landed units
in the Diesfordt Woods. Later (D+2 and D+3)
another three divisions would cross the river as
soon as the bridgehead had been enlarged and
the necessarv ferry lines and bridges had been
arranged. This would include the 7th Armoured
Division to the left and most of the 52nd
(Lowland) Division to the right of this division.
319
