GUNFIRE
as reserve behind them. Each brigade would
deploy their three battalions beside each other.
The order gives details also about the boundaries
between the units. Furthermore, it was stated that
the Il Corps artillery commander for medium
artillery, CCMA, would command two field
regiments and two medium regiments, which
were to be engaged for counter-bombardment
tasks and harassing fire.
The details for the divisional artillery were
given in an additional order, the Operation In-
struction No. 1,193 From this, it is seen that 25
Field Regiment RA was to support 8 Infantry
Brigade, 33
Field Regiment RA 5 Guards
Brigade and 7 Field Regiment RA the divisional
reserve, 9 Infantry Brigade. The latter regiment
was ordered to support the front brigades. With
a series of map sketches, the deployment area for
the divisional artillery units, the Corps artillery
and wagon lines were given. Fire zones and
observation zones to be prepared were also
presented.
Much space in the order was used for in-
structions on local defence and protection of
own artillery deployments. Each regiment was
ordered to prepare direct fire from ordinary gun
positions against enemy tanks within specified
zones. It is of interest to note that the regiments
were ordered also to assign two troops each for
just anti-tank tasks in depth of the divisional de-
ployment area, l.e. in total 24 guns of the
division's 72. It is stated explicitly that the guns
should be deployed on an individual basis and
not to be given any other fire order. The fact that
one third of the divisional artillery thus was
withdrawn from the primary task, indirect fire,
illustrates how important direct anti-tank fire
from the divisional artillery was considered to be
during the initial phases of the war.
Another observation is that the batteries
were ordered also to reconnoitre gun positions,
not more than 3,000 yards from the front line,
for one or two guns (a Section,) to be used for
harassing fire
and fire
targets at an early stage of the battle to come.
against opportunity
Regimental headquarters were to be recon-
noitred with care and be fortified with the help
of Sappers.
The 'Operation Order' contained a regula-
tion which was directed to the entire BEF and
which had been ordered by the French, namely,
that all units should observe strict radio silence.
Communication was to take place by means of
telephone lines and dispatch riders only. From
observation posts visual signalling should be
prepared as backup.
The
stipulations
regarding radio silenc
remained in force right up to the break out of the
fighting in May 1940. Only minor exemptions
for exercises were allowed; a unit could occasion-
ally get a 'radio day' for training purposes. But
on the whole, this implied that the units had not
got enough training when the German attack
came, and this with severe consequences.
The next step in preparation for battle was
to prepare for marching and redeployment.
Detailed
for
such
scenarios were
prepared. Stipulations were included regarding
alertness to be implemented when the crisis
emerged.
In parallel with all these preparations, sys-
tematic training from the individual level to col-
lective training of troops, batteries and regiments
took place. This training encompassed marching
and deployment procedures and much more.
Practice firing with live artillery ammunition
could be organised in France to some extent, but
'dry firing' seems to have predominated as far as
gunnery training was concerned. The Com-
manding Officer, Major General Montgomery,
known to be much interested in training
organised a number of divisional exercises
These comprised in particular marches and re-
deployment of the entire division, which was to
prove a great advantage in May 1940.
But now to the big principal question: Where
to take up
the
battle against the invading
Germans? Should it be near the Belgian borde
where so much of preparations had been carried
out on the 'Gort Line'? The French had early
made absolutely clear that an allied offensive was
out of the question. They were stuck in the same
type of defensive thinking that prevailed during
the Great War. The only thing the allies could do,
according to the French view, was to meet and
stop the German offensive
which oll were
convinced would come. A possible allied offensive
would have to wait until the allies were sufficienty
equipped and prepared for this,
which was
deemed to be a matter of a couple of years.
Different opinions prevailed between the allies
as to where the German attack would be concen-
trated. The French thought the Germans would
advance through the Netherlands and Belgium, as
was the case during the previous war. Hence, a
repetition of the "Schlieffen Plan', and they con-
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD - ACROSS THE CHANNEL
sidered that the best way to meet the offensive was
to meet it frontally in Belgium as early as possible.
And here, the German forces would be tied down
for a long time, as it was thought.
The plan called for decisive allied counter-
attacks where strong German forces would cross
the river and where the main defensive line
would be established. The problem was that this
line could not be prepared and fortified in
peacetime in respect of the Belgian neutralty. A
request for help must first come from the
Belgian Government.
The British on the other hand were more
inclined towards mobile battles during the
interwar period as we have seen, and also trained
for that, albeit at a small scale. The British did not
like having to have to abandon the well-prepared
positions at the Belgian border. Being forced to
re-deploy to unprepared positions in Belgium
was not considered an attractive strategy.
The
British
CIGS,
General
Edmund
Ironside (later Field Marshal Lord Ironside), felt
more convinced that the attack would come
much more
to the
south than the French
thought. He believed the Germans would attack
the shortest way through Luxembourg to the
English Channel and thereby cutting off the
allied forces to the north. This must, it was con-
sidered, be met offensively. As it was to be
shown, this British view on the likely course of
the battle was to prove more in line with the
course of the real battle in May 1940.
After discussions during the autumn 1939
regarding
various potential defence lines in
Belgium, the choice eventually made was to
deploy BEF along the river Dyle. This river runs
in a north-southerly direction east of Brussels.
The plan was given the name 'Plan D'.
The
British would have preferred a 'Plan E' which
implied a defence line to be established along
river Escaut further to the West (its northern-
most section called the Schelde), this if the allies
were to be ordered to march into Belgium.
The autumn of 1939 saw more of a concen-
tration of forces and training, both individual
training and later on, as mentioned, collective
training
at gradually higher
unit levels. The
winter 1939/1940 proved to be very cold and
snowy, which made training almost impossible
for some periods. With heavy rains during the
autumn and thawing of snow after the winter,
the troops experienced almost the same condi-
tions as prevailed during the Great War in the
Flanders: evervthing becoming wet, wet and wet
and fields and roads transformed into mud.
Many exercises had therefore to be cancelled, as
most troops were il prepared for such adverse
weather conditions. But units did what they
could and practiced whenever possible despite
snow and conditions they were not accustomed
Fig. 16-4 The winter in France 1939/1940 was extremely cold and snowy as well as in England. But the British
soldiers had to accept it and tried to 940 was to it. They continued training and exercises as much as possible.
Here are gunners with their 18/25-pounders (RAHT)
