GUNFIRE
bombing and naval bombardment during the
assault
By this time (0845) the second half of the
Regiment were due to land. It was getting difficult
to find a clear spot on the beach. The strong wind
and tide had made the first boats ground almost
sidewavs to the coast instead of head on and far
too much of the beach was covered by ships
sides. Also boats which should have pulled away
after unloading had been damaged or stuck and
the beach was fast becoming jammed
The regiments came ashore and were immedi-
ately engaged in the fighting beyond the beaches
At the beginning, it was a matter of support of
battalion and company attacks by single troops
or a battery; soon enough also support with di-
visional artillery concentrations. As far as Beck's
regiment was concerned, this happened the first
time on 9 June when an important road junction
was the target. And it was reported on 12 Tune
already that 'Victor' targets were engaged, i.e.
concentrated fire by all available artillery of a
Corps. This took place when heavy German
counter-attacks were to be met in particular.
Sometimes fire was opened before the attack was
staged and the enemy was forming up his forces
Fig. 20-4 The planned build-up of artillery resources
for 2 British Army in Normandy shown for different
types of artillery formation. The divisions landed the
first day should be complete with divisional artillery
already this first day. Within about two weeks the
army should have enough artillery on shore for
attacks by one or
several Corps. 'Field Regiments'
basically means 25-pounders and self-propelled guns
with 105-mm howitzers (Author, data have been
compiled from RAHT Collection MD/185)
for the attack, i.e. 'Counter Preparation Fire' as
it was called.
Now, how was the build-up of artillery
resources at the beachhead organised?
Continuous landing of artillery resources
As we have seen much artillery came ashore
already on D-Day despite the chaotic conditions
on the beaches and much more was to follow.
The artillery headquarters of 2 Army had under
Jack Parham planned in detail how the further
build-up of resources was to take place. We car
from this plan get a view graphically as to how
field, medium and heavy guns would be available
in Normandy during the first month (Fig. 20-4)
It is noted that after two weeks already, the
total number of guns was well over 1,000; anti-
tank and anti-aircraft guns excluded. The further
increase was mainly medium and heavy guns. It
should also be noted that a continuous inflow of
anti-tank and anti-aircraft guns had also been
organised for the first six weeks. Many heavy
anti-aircraft guns were later to be used more for
ground tasks than against aircraft.
According to the plan, all artillery for twelve
divisions of I, VIII, XII and XXX Corps would
be available in Normandy on D+17. Each Corps
was reinforced by an AGRA. Around D+30, XII
Corps was to get a second AGRA. Even more
artillery was later provided in the bridgehead
when the Il Canadian Corps had landed.
The AOP Squadrons would, as we have
seen, be redeployed to Normandy from England
as soon as possible. Within two weeks, all would
be available according to the plan. A similar plan
was applied for intelligence resources. They were
all in action after about two weeks
In this
context we must remember all
mortars that were brought ashore. The largest
ones were the 4.2-inch mortars, the fire of which
now preferably was coordinated with that of the
artillery (Fig. 20-5)
These were the plans made by Jack Parham
and his staff. 352 But the situation and how it
changed made certain adaptations necessary
The severe gale around 20 June made landing of
artillery units impossible during the period 20-
24 June. Among those affected were three
regiments
the 43rd
(Wessex) Infantry
Division, which had to wait outside the beaches
these days in the very rough sea. With mines
drifting around, it was not only the stormy
weather as such that made the waiting extremely
A NEW FRONT IS OPENED - NORMANDY
Fig. 20-5 Besides all auns brought ashore in Normandy tha Pritich also used a large mumhar of A 2-inci
mortars, the fire of which often was well coordinated with the artilley (RAHT)
tough (the troop carrier, on-board which the
and the task to capture it and restore its capacity
division's 'Recce' battalion was waiting for
was assigned to the Americans. This in its turn
landing, was hit by a mine and went down with
required capture of the entire Cotentin Peninsula
hundreds of men being drowned)
in the West.
Another problem with the storm was that
While the Americans pressed for Cherbourg
supply transports to the troops already deployed
and eventuall a breakout to the South. the
in the bridgehead must be halted, a consequence
British and Canadians had to consolidate their
of which was an acute shortage of artillery am-
sector of the bridgehead and enlarge it gradually.
munition during a few critical days.
Of particular importance was capture of Caen,
Consolidation and enlargement of the
which was hoped to be achieved late on D-Day.
bridgehead
This plan failed and it would take a month before
the city fell into the hands of the Allies. Before
The overall objective was to bring as strong
that, it had been bombed to ruins by an armada
resources into Normandy as were needed for a
of strategic bombers killing more than 2.000
breakout that would be the initial phase of the
civilians. The bombing made it more difficult
dash into Germany. This could, however, not be
rather than easier for the Allies to nush the
accomplished unless supply problems were elim-
Germans out of the city. The operation has since
inated. Besides supply lines over the beaches and
then been heavily criticised. not the least in
artificial harbour facilities, a large harbour with
France, where bitterness has remained to this day.
capacity to accommodate ocean-going ships was
Montgomery's plan was to bind as much as
needed. The harbour selected was Cherbour®
possible of the German armoured reserves by
