GUNFIRE
vintage 8-inch howitzer. Some new carriages of
this design were manufactured too, by which 160
pieces were made available. These guns were of
course
applied with pneumatic
tyres
anal
modern dial sights. A detachment of thirteen
men was required for serving the gun. We can
see the howitzer in Fig. 4-7. The weight of the
piece was around 10.3 tons and it fired a 200lb
(91.6kg) projectile up to 17,000 yards (15,450 m)
when using Charge 4.
A great disadvantage was that it lacked a
buffer to absorb the entire recoil energy when
firing. This was instead taking care of by placing
ramps behind the wheels. When the howitzer was
fired the piece moved up the ramps settling back
to its original firing position again afterwards.
This implied that no one could stand close to the
piece when firing. This arrangement also made
it necessary to re-lay (re-sight) the piece after
each round. Hence the fire intensity was by
necessity low, normally less than one round per
minute
Even if cooperation between artillery and
the air force became very efficient from 1942,
there was still a need for heavy artillery with
capacity for long range firing. This was accom-
plished during the last years of the war, when
155-mm guns were bought from USA. The gun
was the famous 'Long Tom', as it was called. It
had a carriage with eight wheels and a fire
platform-facilitating traverse. It could launch a
951b (43kg) projectile 25,000 yards (23,000m),
which made it one of the most versatile guns
during the war. It has been stated, although it has
not been able to confirm, that Britain bought
111 pieces for delivery in 1943 and 1944.6 We
can see the gun in Fig. 4-7.
New American guns were supplied towards
the
end of the war for the Super Heavy
Regiments, although on a limited scale, a few
tens of them only. They had the calibres 203mm
(8-inch) and 240mm (9.4-inch). The former is
seen in Fig. 4-8.
The 'Bishop', the 'Priest' and the 'Sexton'
on stage
So far we have looked at towed guns and
howitzers, and these dominated the stock. But
self-propelled pieces were gradually added, in
particular to meet the requirements of the
Fig. 4-8 A few super heavy guns were purchased from USA and used during the final years of the war. Here an
8-inch gun (RAHT)
A DECISIVE REARMAMENT
armoured divisions for better mobility. As
mentioned above, some experiments with such
guns had already been made during the 1920s
as part of the work on the Experimental Mech-
anised Force (EMF). One was the Birch Gun,
which was an 18-pounder combined with a re-
markably modern tracked carriage. Some exper-
iments with application of armoured protection
for the gun detachment were also
made.
However, the project was dropped when the
EMF was disbanded and no further develop-
ment took place.
During the first years of war in North Africa
it was realised that one had been on the right
track twenty years earlier. In haste was the
"Bishop' developed. It was an 18/25-pounder
applied to the light tank carriage Valentine. It
came into service just before the battles at El
Alamein in 1942 and can be seen on Fig. 4-9. It
cannot be claimed to have been a success. I he
gun was slow and the large armoured upper
structure on its top made it difficult to conceal,
and at the same time the elevation was restricted
to 15°. This made the maximum range less than
approximately
6,000 yards. The weight was
however a modest 8 tons. In any case it was to
serve well during the North African Campaign
and was also used on Sicily.
Again, the Americans could help. They had
developed a light
self-propelled howitzer of
105-mm calibre on an M3 tank carriage. The
weight was 22 tons. The British could acquire a
number of these self-propelled (SP) guns just in
time for the battle of El Alamein. The protecting
armour plate around the
carriage for an anti-
aircraft machine gun gave it a special look, which
inspired the British gunners to call it the 'Priest'
as the carriage had a slight resemblance to a
church pulpit. The piece is also illustrated on
Fig. 4-9. It proved to be a good and useful piece
of equipment
and it was supplied to
many
regiments by
the British and was used for two
years in North Africa
Italy
and Northwest
Europe. In Burma it was used until the end of
the war in August 1945, albeit on a limited scale.
There was for logistic reasons a strong need
T facilitate training this was
for standardisatior
also wanted. Hence a new self-propelled carriaoe
with the
• 25-pounder applied to it was urgently
needed. The task was given to the Canadians and
they developed the Sexton using a RAM tank
carriage
4-9). Just before the D-Day
landings in Normandy, re-equipment of British
Fig. 4-9 Self-propelled guns became an important
addition to the artillery of armoured divisions trom
1947
Rong odo 9
Bishop Entered service in 1942 just before the
battle of El Alamein, a 25-pdr on a Valentine tank-
carriage (RAHT)
Priest American design and equipped with a
105-mm howitzer. The first guns arrived basicallv
at the same time as the 'Bishops' (RAHT)
Sexton A 25-nounder annlied on a RAM tank.
carriage. Change to this piece in British regiments
commenced in the middle of 1944 (RAHT)
regiments commenced; the 'Priests' left and in
came the
'Sextons'. In total 1,450 pieces were
provided for British and Canadian regiments 77
The design proved to be very good and the
British
retained it for active service into the
1960s. The weight was around 25 tons and due
