GUNFIRE
transport to Norway went out of sequence, not
least due to shortage of resources for transport
of equipment, ammunition and stores.
In France there was a strong political
pressure for engagement against
Germany,
preferably outside French territory. To arrange
this together with the British in Norway was seen
as an attractive alternative, and the planning for
this commenced.
Planning of the attack
In Britain planners reverted to the initial scope.
mining of Norwegian waters. The political reluc-
tance to do this disappeared quickly later in
March 1940. On 3 April the British Government
decided to put the plans in operation on 5 April,
a date that due to some controversies was
postponed until 8 April. The French acknowl-
edged the decision. 243
Mines would later be dropped also outside
the Swedish port Lule to stop the shipping of
iron ore to Germany during summer months, as
it was thought
In respect of the risk for a large-scale German
intervention in Norway, it was decided that a
British infantry brigade and a French unit would
be landed in Narvik to secure the harbour and
then proceed to the Swedish border. Landings of
ground forces were furthermore to take place in
Stavanger, Bergen and Trondheim. By military
presence near the latter citv, one would be better
prepared to provide help for Sweden should
Germany decide to
meet the British-French
actions with invasion of Sweden
Again, the focus was on landing at Narvik
but with more limited scope than capture of the
Swedish ore fields. If Sweden was not willing to
accept help with allied 'protection' of the fields,
the allies could at least prevent iron ore export
via Narvik. this
preferably with
Norwegian
consent. The British view on Sweden's position
had been fairly moderate before the war brok
out, even with Churchill, who had said: '…..it is
far from our wish to quarrel with the Swedes '24
Now it became harsher.
Through the British decisions on action in
Scandinavia, the Norwegian neutrality was lost.
and Sweden was brought into acute danger.
As for the Germans, the planning for an
invasion of Norway had started on 14 December
1939 upon a directive from Hitler. The final
decision to launch the attack, Operation We-
serübung, was made by Hitler when the so-called
Altmark Incident took place. This was the action
ordered by Churchill to free 300 captured
British sailors on board the German steamer
Altmark, which took place in the night between
16 and 17 February 1940 in a Norwegian fjord.
The action was a clear violation of the country's
neutrality. The British excuse was
that the
Germans had violated neutrality by taking
prisoners of war into Norwegian waters. The
event convinced Hitler that the British did not
respect Norway's neutrality and that further
actions on Norwegian
territory
could be
expected. So the respect for this neutrality was
lost also on the German side. Strategic interests
on the part of larger countries had definitely
taken over.
The British planning was hastily done with
too many political and military 'cooks' involved,
the result of which would prove disastrous. The
German planning, on the other hand, was metic-
ulously done, characterised by professional skill
and determination. Operation Weserübung was
to be one of the largest and most daring surprise
attacks on any nation. By means of timely coor-
dinated attacks troops were to be landed in the
morning of 9 April 1940 in Oslo, Kristiansand,
Arendal and Egersund in the South, and in
Stavanger, Bergen and Trondheim in the middle
part of the country and in the so important city
Narvik in the North as well. The invading
soldiers were to be landed primarily from ships,
but some also with parachutes and some units
were to be landed with aircraft.
It was not only the quality of planning that
differed dramatically. Also the choice of troops,
their equipment and, not the least, their training
differed. The British decided to use some regular
forces with adequate training, but also untrained
territorial units were engaged. They had no
personal kits and training for the terrain condi-
tions meeting them; and they were not used to
the weather prevailing this time of the year in
Norway with deep snow and low temperatures.
The British did not plan for offensive actions, at
least not at the beginning of the campaign.
On the German side, adequate units with
the right equipment were landed. First, two
infantry divisions with its own artillery, anti-tank
guns, etc and a mountain division were to be
landed. Another three infantry divisions would
later follow suit. In addition, large reserves were
available in Germany, for instance an infantry
division, more artillery and light tanks. German
FAILED INTERVENTION IN NORWAY
strategy
and
operation plans
Were
well
conceived, and allotted resources, by strength
and types, sufficient for securing success, albeit
large risks were taken
To forestall or be forestalled - the battle
begins
Plans were on both sides put into operation
through final decisions by top war leaders during
the first week of April 1940. The British and the
French had avoided getting dragged into war
with the Soviet Union, and had put plans for oc-
cupation of the Swedish ore fields on the shelf
for the time being. Now the objective was mining
of Norwegian water lanes, and in combination
with this a limited landing of ground forces on
Norwegian territory to forestall a possible
German counter-action. As a start, mining
would commence on 8 April to be followed later
by landings at Narvik and cities to the South,
provided the Norwegians would be in favour of
the plan. Acquisition of permission to do the
mining was not an issue
For Hitler the challenge was a matter of
forestalling the allies and he gave the final order
for the launching of Operation Weserübung. The
German surprise attack was to begin in the early
morning on 9 April.
Both sides thus commenced operations
against Norway within one day from each other.
And they were equally surprised to encounter
the action of the opposite side. On the British
side, the surprise came despite information from
sources
several
davs!
beforehand,
Fig. 17-1 Royal Navy plaved an important role in the
battle of Norway. British ships attacked German
warships already from the first day. Much needed
artillery support for the allied ground forces was also
provided till the end. Here is the British destroyer
HMS Southampton (AWM No. 001990)
including from Sweden, that military units and
supplies had been loaded and that columns of
ships had started to leave German ports and
were on their way northwards.
The British had dispatched three groups of
naval ships towards Norway for the planned
mining and escorts (Fig. 17-1). They were in
place when the German invasion groups came
closer, but initial armed contacts on 7 April were
not interpreted as the prelude of an invasion. In-
telligence reports from reconnaissance aircraft
and submarines were also misinterpreted. The
British had met Marinegruppe I on its way to
Narvik
and Marinegruppe
II heading for
Trondheim, but they thought it was a matter of
breakout to the Atlantic and not an invasion.
'The result of this was a decision to get the
troops already on board numerous ships to
disembark and get Home Fleet to leave for a
chase of those 'breaking out' westwards. For
logistic reasons it was necessary for Germany to
simultaneously capture also Danish territory.
This country surrendered on 9 April in a couple
of hours. The Germans seems to have hoped for
something similar in Norway, but this was not to
happen. Norway mobilised its army gradually
and took up the fight against advancing German
units. As usual, the politicians had not dared to
give the mobilisation order in time for meeting
the invaders right from the beginning. A quick
build-up of German strength, both ground
forces and air forces, could thus take place. This
made the situation for the Norwegian army very
difficult. Formations reacted with mixed feelings
of defeat and resolution to resist. Certain units
gave up almost immediately, whereas others only
reluctantly
retreated northwards under
the
pressure of hard delaying fighting. To avoid an-
nihilation, the major part of a Norwegian
division crossed the border to Sweden where it
was interned. Other resources were to some
extent also moved to Sweden in order to prevent
that they came into German hands (Fig. 17-2).
The allies had forestalled the Germans with
one day when starting the mining on 8 April. but
they were deeply forestalled by Hitler when it
came to landing of ground forces in Norway.
The much-divided allied war leadership was
now hesitating about what to do in the new
situation; the initiative had definitely passed to
the Germans.
The result was a half-measure although the
decision to land ground forces remained in
