GUNFIRE
to its design the maximum range of a 25-
on the shadow of an enemy aircraft when ap-
pounder could be used, which was much more
proaching it. This was a foregoer to the VT-fuze
than that of the 'Priest'.
to be developed for field artillery towards the
A detail in this context is that when the
end of the war, and which was to use a radar
'Priests' were taken out of service in 1944 the
signal to determine the distance to the target
guns were removed and the carriages adapted
with great accuracy.
for transport of infantry. In this shape it was
It was decided that each rocket was to have
called Kangaroo and was to be the first
armoured fighting vehicle (AFV) after the Bren
its own launching ramp, which later was to be
Carrier.
modified implying a ramp built for two rockets
or, to some extent eight rockets. In March 1941
the Royal Artillery was ready to establish its first
The Congreve legacy - rocket renaissance
The rockets designed by William Congreve
rocket anti-aircraft regiment and already in the
following month an enemy aircraft was shou
played an important role in the Royal Artillery
even a few decades after Waterloo 1815. But the
down for the first time. Rearmament went on,
interest for them gradually declined in parallel
and in December 1942 there were no less than
with the decline of their comparative advantage
91 anti-aircraft batteries in active service, each
relative ordinary artillery, the longer range. Fur-
of them equipped with 64 launching ramps for
thermore, artillery had the advantage of much
two rockets. This was the situation, when the
better accuracy. But some rocket competence
threats from the air over the British Isles had
was, however, always retained although no
declined significantly.
further technical development took place. When
The development of rockets as of Priority 2
the Second World War broke out in 1939, no
was slow. The interest on the part of the Royal
rocket artillery for ground targets existed in the
Artillery was limited. The technology was not
artillery arsenal.?8
considered promising enough. Development to
It had, however, been observed that
meet Priority 3 took over, as was development
something was under way in Germany in the
of anti-submarine rockets. With inspiration from
1930s and in some other countries too, amongst
the failed assault landing at Dieppe in 1942, de-
them the Soviet Union. A high-level committee
velopment of rockets that could be massively
was therefore established under General Sir
launched from amphibious landing ships took
Hugh Elles, Master Gunner of Ordnance, to give
place. The anti-aircraft rockets could easily be
it a closer look. The committee concluded already
adapted for this purpose. Although accuracy still
in 1936 that development of new rockets should
was bad, it was considered that there was a great
be commenced in accordance with the priority:
psychological effect, negative for the defenders
and positive for the attackers. Such rockets were
1. Anti-aircraft rockets
used on a large-scale basis, at first at the landings
2. Long-range rockets against ground targets
3. Rockets for fighter-bomber application
in Italy in 1943 and later in connection with the
4. Rockets for take-off assistance for heavy
Normandy landings on 6th June 1944. At the
latter occasion rockets for fighter-bombers were
aircrait
extensively used for the first time (Typhoon
aircraft in particular).
A concentrated development effort was initiated
on the first priority rockets and some test
launchings had materialised when the war broke
out. Rockets with diameters of two to three
inches (50 to 75mm) were manufactured for
these tests. Various types of launching arrange-
ment were also tested. Much remained however
to be done; which included development of
suitable fuzes to be adopted for ignition of the
high explosive loads of the rockets. An interest-
ing idea was the attempts to develop a fuze based
on photo-electrical principles, which was to react
When it comes to the Priority 2, task suspI-
ciousness was still widespread as to whether it
was a good idea to use rockets against ground
targets, which can be considered a bit strange as
the British were well aware of the extensive use
of such rockets by the Red Army on the Eastern
Front.
Industry made an attempt in 1943 to
raise the interest by suggesting to the infantry
and the artillery that a new five-inch rocket with
improved flying characteristics should be
developed. But, no! Not until March 1944, it was
accepted that such a rocket should be developed.
The range to target was to be increased up to
A DECISIVE REARMAMENT
around 9,000 yards (8,000m) with better
accuracy than earlier rockets had shown. By this
the rocket (salvo) became an attractive weapon
for causing impacts over a lairly large area.
A prototype was available for demonstration
in June 1944 to the concerned authorities. It was
not the 'thumb down', but enthusiasm was still
pending. This changed when the Canadians in
July 1944 saw the new rocket in action. They im-
mediately asked for as many as could be
delivered without delay. They deemed the
rockels to be an excellent complement to tradi-
tional artillery in large barrages designed to
support large-scale attacks. Twelve mobile units
each with 30 launchers were soon supplied to the
Canadian Army. A technical feature was intro-
duced in order to make it possible to vary the
firing range. This was done by means of a kind
of spoilers', which affected the air resistance in
the trajectory. However,
problem
remained; the accuracy could not be improved
as much as was wanted. A battery salvo covered
for instance an area of around 700x700 yards.
But despite this disadvantage, the Canadians
used rockets several times with success during the
battles in Northwest Europe during the autumn
1944 and later, not least the massive allied
crossing of the River Rhine in March 1945 (Fig.
4-10). Concentrated rocket salvoes definitely
proved to have a decisive psychological effect
against the opponents. Now some rocket units in
the Royal Artillery had been organised, so - at last
- rockets became part of the Royal Artillery
arsenal, although not as much as on the Eastern
Front. Positive experience achieved made rockets
again a permanent complement to traditional
artillery and have remained so even today.
Fig. 4-10 Rockets were first introduced as a comple
nent to anti-aircraft guns, later also as ground
artillery for ground targets. The Canadians were here
the driving force. The picture is taken at a Canadian
rocket battery towards the end of the war (©Imperial
War Museum BU 1/55)
Modernisation of anti-tank artillery
As mentioned at the beginning of this book I am
not dilempung to cover the story of the Royal
Artillery Anti-Tank formations. They
will,
however, not be completely overlooked; one
reason being the fact that anti-tank guns often
were included in large plans for attack covering
fire during the last years of the war.
Britain went to war with anti-tank guns with
about the same calibres and capability as those
of her opponents.
the main gun was the
2-pounder which had a calibre
of 1.6 inch
(40mm) and which was manufactured in large
numbers till the end of 1940. It was towed by a
truck but could also be taken loaded on a truck
or lorry, Portee. The latter arrangement made it
possible to make surprise attacks
distances, Which partly compensated for the
poor penetration capability in armour.
The gun was the standard equipment of the
Anti-Tank Regiments that were gradually estab-
lished during the 1930's in the Royal Artillery,
and which were to be attached at a divisional
level. A regiment had 40 guns distributed
amongst four batteries. Some of these regiments
were part of Army and Corps artillery.79
Beside the 2-pounder there were also a
number of Bofors 37-mm anti-tank guns. The
British had just before the war placed an order
with Bofors for delivery of 250 guns, but only 80
could be supplied before the war broke out. 80
These were given to formations sent to Egypt
during the first years of the war. Apart from the
Anti-Tank Regiments of the Royal Artillery, there
were a few independent batteries as well. It is in-
teresting to note that, for instance, 3 Field
Regiment RHA had a 'Bofors Battery' attached 81
The war would soon demonstrate that the
calibre was insufficient when meeting modern
German tanks, which forced the British to use
the 25-pounder with its armour-piercing shell as
an anti-tank weapon; this as an interim solution
in 1941 and early 1942 while waiting for a new
stronger gun. However, a problem was that
maximum range for penetration of the armour
of the enemy tanks was around 700-800 yards
with the 25-pounder, whereas the most modern
