GUNFIRE
'IT WILL BE A KILLING MATCH' - EL ALAMEIN
available, in particular the one written by Jon
Latimer (2002). His book is to a large extent
based on original sources. I have therefore found
it being of special value.
Montgomery's plan for his own great
offensive
The preparations for the great British offensive
geared up when the battle at Alam el Halfa had
petered out. For the gunners of 64 Medium
Regiment RA there was no time for rest. They
had to fire against enemy transport and artillery
positions every day and were often called out to
counter enemy patrols and smaller reconnais-
sance attacks. One troop (4 guns) was sent to the
south to act as a 'roving unit' for harassing fire
After having been active as such for a week or
more, it was replaced by another troop of the
regiment. A battery of the newly arrived 69
Medium Regiment RA was put under command
of the former regiment in September. There
were then six troops alternating (Fig. 19-4).
A typical day is recorded in the regimental.
war diary, 21 September:
A fairly busy day for the guns. CTp were ranged
by sound rangers on hostile battery, but condi
tions were against a final accurate result. Captair
Wilson at the O.P. also engaged enemy vehicles
and gun area. A Tp, Lt. D-Young at the O.1.
twice engaged a hostile battery and Lt. McKillop
later in the day, engaged an infantry gun using 37
rounds and causing it to retire. He reports the
enemy frequently run this gun forward, in full
View, and use it to harass the O.P. area
Captain Whitworth-Jones, at the O.P., used
B Tp to engage, on six separate occasions
throughout the day, a number of infantry, appar-
Fig. 19-4 Just before the battle of El Alamein in October 1942 the few British medium regiments had beer
rearmed with the new modern 4-5-inch and 5.5-inch guns, which implied tish medic improvement of the Britist
firepower. One of these new guns is here seen firing during the battle of El Alamein (RAHT)
ently working around 3 vehicles South of the
Minassib Depression. The Regiment used 147
rounds in all. D Tp is still down South.
In his headquarters, Montgomery prepared his
'Master Plan' for the great offensive. This is how
he always worked. He wrote in his memoirs that
he always prepared his 'Master Plan' himself. He
was the 'Master' and therefore 'I could not have
my headquarters prepare it'. As to the offensive
at El Alamein, he produced a plan of 42 points
Several such plans with many numbered
sections were to come later on during the war.
The plan for Operation Lightfoot was aimed
at complete destruction of the enemy forces
opposing the 8th Army. Montgomery adds that
if 'minor elements' flee westwards they would be
pursued and taken care of later. In respect of
What was to happen this is of interest to note
Montgomery had decided that XXX Corps
would launch a direct attack in the northern
sector with four infantry divisions beside each
other with the object to capture a large bridge-
head through which X Armoured Corps later
would pass. 303 The four divisions assigned for
the task were the 9th (Australian) Infantry
Division in the north, the 51st (Highland)
Infantry Division and the 2nd (New Zealand)
Infantry Division and south of the latter the 1st
(South African) Infantry Division. The bridge-
head which these divisions were to establish
would cover all the enemy main front positions
and, as it was hoped, the majority of his artillery
positions. It would include the important
Miteiriva Ridge
Through a northern corridor, the 1st
Armoured Division would pass, through a
southern the 10th Armoured Division.
The New Zealanders, who nominally were
part of X Corps,
would initially be under
command of XXX Corps as one of four
divisions. When the armoured Corps broke
through, the division was to revert to this Corps
and turn in behind the Italian-German units
cutting off their supply lines. See Map 19-2
In the southernmost sector Horrock's XIII
Corps was to attack with the aim to tie-up the
German and Italian armoured reserves. A
further objective was to launch a number of
brigade attacks to create uncertainty on the part
of the enemy as to where the main thrust of the
offensive was to be directed. A few diversionary
attacks were also included in the plan for the first
night and day. A special role was given to the 1st
(Free French) Infantry Brigade, which would
make an attack, well coordinated with the main
attack, against the dominating high ground at
Heimimat and Hunters Plateau in the South. 304
When Montgomery devised his 'Master
Plan', he had in mind also a sea landing to take
place in the enemy's rear. This force was to work
its way eastwards to join up with the advance
units of XXX Corps. 303
lhis operation was
however, deleted from the final plan.
Map 19-3 illustrates the main attack in the
North with first-hand and final obiectives
indicated. We can see that the envisaged bridge-
head included the wide and dominating - albeit
not that high - Miteiriya Ridge. Some of the suc-
ceeding operations, which will be discussed later,
are indicated on the map as well.
Montgomery stressed that success of XXX
Corps' attack into the main enemy positions was
critical for the outcome of the whole operation
'This will in its turn depend on correct use of the
artillery resources. He writes:
Up to 400 guns will be available and the concen-
trated use of this great fire power should ensure
success
He adds that all the Corps artillery resources
should remain under command of the artillery
commander (CCRA) XXX Coros to secure
concentration. Decentralisation was not to be
allowed. When the bridgehead had been estah.
lished, artillery should be ready to fire into the
depth of enemy positions and also to meet strong
counter-attacks 306
An important part of the plan was coopera-
tion with the Royal Air Force. Besides night
bombardment of air bases at the full moon
towards the end of September violent air bom-
bardment of enemy tank columns and artillerv
deployments should take place through the first
night of the operation.
The fact that it must be a frontal attack
could not be concealed. But on the other hand
Montgomery wanted to. and could. surprise his
opponent as regards the date and time of the
operation, and also where the main attack would
come. He therefore gave detailed instructions
about deception measures to be taken, and also
how to minimise the risks of such information
getting into wrong hands. 308
After these provisions, he issued clear direc-
236
