Fig. 7-1 The 75-mm mountain howitzer made in the
USA was the standard howitzer used by the light air-
landing regiments of the British airborne divisions. It
is here seen when used by a mountain regiment in
Italy. Re-supply of ammunition with the help of mules
is going on (RAHT)
25-pounder was not an alternative as it was too
heavy for transportation in gliders, and further
more it was not available as yet in sufficient
quantities. In the spring 1943 it was, however.
possible to equip the entire Light Regiment with
the American 75-mm pack howitzer mentioned
earlier (Fig. 7-1).
When this gun arrived it was not yet adapted
for airborne units. It still had for instance iron-
clad wooden wheels. But they were immediately
"pneumatised' and were provided with means for
GUNFIRE
towing by jeep. There were a few more minor
shortcomings to rectify when the Regiment, in
haste, was ordered to move to North Africa in
May 1943. By using spare guns the difficuties
were overcome.
This howitzer was to prove its value in the
coming battles, not least due to its longer range,
about 9km. The vintage mountain howitzer had
only a range of 4-5km, so this was a significant
improvement. Another advantage was better am-
munition with stronger impact effect. In the
normal case the gun detachment comprised the
howitzer with a towing vehicle, a Jeep, and an
ammunition trailer. In addition to this a second
Jeep with two trailers for
ammunition and
supplies were part of the gun detachment.
As Peter Wilkinson told us the plans were to
have the Light Regiment transported in Horsa
Gliders except for Observation Parties and some
signallers, who were to be dropped with para-
chutes. Before the Horsas
became available,
training had to be performed with the smaller
Hotspur gliders and other types of aircraft, but
these were not capable of transporting of heavy
equipment such as guns and Jeeps
When the Horsa came it was big, in a double
sense. This elegant glider could transport some
25 soldiers with equipment, and it could as an
alternative take on-board an air-landing howitzer
with its Jeep and trailer with ammunition. Net
weight of the load was maximum 3,130kg. In
Fig. 7-2 The British Horsa was possibly the best glider in the war. It could
a load of 25 soldiers. Alterna-
tied. Tr mountain howitzer with its tractor or other types of heavy equipment could be transported to the battle
field. Transportation of ammunition for those to thee to the bat
AIRBORNE ARTILLERY
total 137 rounds per gun were carried. If the
formation was not to be transported a very long
distance up to 242 rounds could be taken, but
the ammunition Jeeps had to be left behind. The
Horsa is seen in Fig. 7-2.
Transporting the whole light regiment with
equipment and supplies would need 115 gliders.
It was often not possible to get as many as that,
so other transport alternatives also had to be
devised. Once, it was requested that the regiment
should use only 36 gliders, a completely unreal-
istic alternative. Less than 115 gliders meant that
the regiment must be reduced. When the 1 Air-
landing Light Regiment RA had arrived in
Tunisia in May 1943, several transport alterna-
tives were devised in detail including
the
adoption of load tables for every glider.
By
means of the latter any over-loading of a glider
was prevented. Based on these tables standing
regimental orders were prepared. The main al-
ternatives are summarised in Table 7-1.
Table 7-1. Air transportation of 1 Airlanding Regiment RA
Alternative Number of gliders
Entire regiment with reduced equipment
Regiment with three six-gun batteries
Regiment except one battery
Regimental HOS plus two six-gun batteries
One normal 8-qun battery
Britain was to set up a second complete
airborne division, the 6th Airborne Division, a
process that commenced in early 1943. This
division also had its own artillery, the 53 Air-
landing Light Regiment RA. This was a converted
anti-tank regiment, and was ready for action in
November 1943. A third airborne formation was
organised in India and came into action during the
final phase of the Burma campaign.
Besides the Horsa a larger glider had been
developed, the Hamilcar, which could carry a
much heavier load, up to 8 tons. It could
therefore transport the heavy 17-pounder anti-
tank gun with its tractor or a light tank. Although
it was not planned it could also transport a 25-
pounder. This glider was available in a limited
numbers, however. It lacked a nose-wheel, which
often was a dicadvantage when landing on rough
fields. The non for over-turning was great, and
when it happened the consequences often were
catastrophic, both for the pilots in the raised
Fig. 7-3 By the artist Terence Cuneo, this scene
depicts an airborne assault underway during the
Second World War. Note that Cuneo has included a
number of General Aircraft Limited GAL. 49
Hamilcar gliders and Light Tank Mk VII Tetrarchs
(The National Archives)
cockpit at the top of the glider and the passen-
gers. A Hamilcar being unloaded after landing is
seen in Fig. 7-3
Both airborne divisions were to suffer from
severe shortage of gliders in the operations to
come. Ideally, a complete division should be
transported in one hft onlv, or if a second was
necessary, this should arrive the same day. The
capacity for this was not available in the opera-
tions of 1943 and 1944, it was only so for the
first time in the final major airborne operation of
the war, the Rhine Crossing in March 1945.
In an operation the gliders were allotted two
to three separate landing zones where the terrain
was open, preferably with fields without ditches.
Of course also the parachute formations were to
be dropped in open terrain, if possible. To speed
up unloading of the Horsas the tail section was
removed after landing, if possible just before the
glider had reached its final standstill. A later
version of the Horsa was designed for unloading
at the front after the cockpit section had been
opened and turned to the side.
The light artillery regiment was expected to
be ready to fire at 360ยบ, immediately after
landi
and re-assembling.
The landing zones could look quite chaotic
with all the gliders scattered around as can be
seen in Fig. 7-4. This photograph was taken by
an AOP pilot in Normandy, in July 1944.
