GUNFIRE
river Rhine. They also provided much needed
support to the 43rd (Wessex) Division. In the
former case it was mostly a matter of defensive
tasks. In the latter, it was offensive tasks
including barrages
and
concentrations
support of several brigade attacks on the 'Island'.
But numerous DF tasks were required as well.
The group also had to support the remaining
parts of the Guards Division north of Nijmegen
and even eastwards on calls from the Americans.
One artillery unit remains to be mentioned
in this context. It is 419 Heavy Battery RA with
its 'Long Tom' guns with a range exceeding
20km. The battery commander, Major Palmer,
had accompanied the armoured units rushing
forward to link up with the Poles late in the
evening 22 September. There he personally got
an important role as relay station and provider
of tactical information during the final days of
the battle. Before arriving he had led the march
of his battery from the South. His account of this
is a good illustration of how the rushed advance
of the medium and heavy guns was effectuated
once the decision had been taken.
During the night 20 to 21 September he was
still south of the Belgian-Dutch border and
ready to march:
There was no point in leaving the guns in action
so we got them limbered up ready to move as
soon as we got the word to go. At long last this
came and, at 0830 hours on 21 Sep. I led the
remainder of the Battery out on to the main road
where we joined the advance part of the second
Brigade of 43 Div. Soon afterwards I received a
message over the wireless to report to the head of
Divisional
column which
was then
Eindhoven. This was easier said than done as I
had to overtake all the vehicles ahead but eventu
ally I made it and was told that 30 Corps HQ had
ordered the Battery to be given top priority on
the road and that as far as possible the route
ahead was being cleared of other traffic to let us
through. I was told that this was because, apart
from the one 4.5" Battery of 64 Medium
Regiment, our 'Long Toms' were the only guns,
which could reach Arnhem from South of the
Rhine at Nijmegen and so give support to 1st
Airborne who were desperately in need of any
support they could get from 30 Corps. I switched
out of my rather slow half-track into my nimble
jeep, although this reduced me to one wireless
instead of my usual two, so that I could race
ahead to tell Tod Slaughter [Gun Position Officer
to have everything ready for the guns arriving
much earlier than planned and to warn the
military police at all the Traffic Control Posts on
the way forward that they must do all they could
to ease the Battery's march, 400
The battery was delayed by jubilant citizens in
Eindhoven. The Dutch brigade was advancing
just ahead of the battery and the enthusiasm had
no limits when they arrived. But at 15.30 hours
the battery finally reached Nijmegen and was
ready to fire twenty minutes later, Palmer recalls.
The gun positions were situated at the south-
western outskirts of Nijmegen, about 2km south
of the river Waal. There they
remained in
position for the rest of the battle. No problem
with the range to Oosterbeek on their part, but
soon enough problems with ammunition supply.
As we have seen, 84 Medium Regiment RA
marched along with the Guards Division and
deployed near Malden, south of Nijmegen. 40!
From this
position the regiment provided
artillery support northwards and eastwards. A
Troop was moved forward close to the river
shore and was attached to 64 Medium Regiment
RA as far as fire control was concerned. This was
the only unit of 84 Medium Regiment RA that
could reach Arnhem/Oosterbeek.40
In summary, we can note that the majority
of the
advancing artillery formations had
reached the Nijmegen area by 21 September
without interference of the repeated German
attacks on 'Club Route' at Veghel, which became
particularly serious 22-23 September. We can
also note that 153 Field Regiment RA was the
formation deployed
already on
September near Malden 5km south of the
Nijmegen bridges after having passed the big
bridge at Grave during the morning.
About 5km from the Nijmegen, five field
regiments, two medium regiments and the heavy
battery were deployed on 22 September, in total
156 guns. And to these we can add the American
guns available in the area. Unfortunately all of
these were out of range as far as the Oosterbeck
perimeter was concerned. This was also the case
for the only field regiment deployed on the
'sland', i.e. 153 Field Regiment RA. Towards
24-25
September
several regiments were,
however, deployed north of the river Waal and
so close to Oosterbeek that they could engage
targets around the perimeter
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
Just before the final phase of the battle a few
regiments were still south of Veghel, namely 74,
90 and 124 Field Regiment RA from the 50th
(Northumbrian)
Division
and
Medium
Regiment RA except its 27/28 Battery RA. The
86 Field Regiment RA was still in that area as
The most extensive artillery support for the
Ist Airborne Division was delivered by the XXX
Corps aruillery.
Without it the fighting at
Arnhem/Oosterbeek
would not have
been
possible for the division to undertake for such a
long period as nine days. This is despite the fact
that no artillery fire had been possible to deliver
from the outside before 21 September.
The British airborne division had, right
from the first day, been isolated from the outside
world. Only occasionally had radio communica-
tion with the headquarters of the Airborne
Corps at the Groesbeek Hill
southeast of
Nijmegen been possible to establish. Nor had
morse communication with London worked.
When such contacts had been opened they were
immediately disturbed by German counter-com-
munication transmitters and had to shut down.
Loder-Symonds headquarters had, as we
have noted, two types of wireless set, No. 19 and
No. 22, both to be used either for Morse traffic
or orally (i.e, telephone communication). The
range was dependent on weather and terrain
conditions, interfering traffic, types of aerial,
time of the day or night. As a rule of thumb a
maximum range of 15-30km could be achieved,
the longest range with telegraphy. With some
luck it would have been possible technically to
reach units approaching Nijmegen from Grave,
but this had not taken place.
Maybe the reason was that Loder-Symonds
staff did not have access to the correct frequencies,
as some experts have argued. Whatever the reason,
it was silent until the morning 21 September. A
liaison officer of 1 FOU positioned at the
headquarters of 1 Airlanding Brigade had, as
normally was the case, his flick frequency' tuned
to one of the approaching regiments command
net, in this particular case 64 Medium Regiment
RA. Around 9 a.m. he suddenly heard traffic on
this flick frequency' and immediately opened up
reserve set on this frequency and made a
which was
received at the regimental
headquarters. With much of fussy adaptations of
the all, he managed to determine from where it
came and direct contact was wanted.
Several versions have been published as to
what really was said when from the regimental
side attempts were made to get confirmation that
the call was correct and not a German pirate
radio trying to infiltrate, such as questions about
mutual acquaintances, interests of wives and
much more.
When all felt satisfied Loder-
Symonds opened a No. 19 set on the same
frequency. From this moment there were two
working connections open all the time. They
were to be used over the following days
intensively not only for artillery traffic but also
as General Urquhart's only connection with the
commander and headquarters of XXX Corps.
Certainly he must have been very satisfied with
this help from the gunners after all the mishaps
with the divisional radio communication and
failed attempts to contact the outside world.
The artillery had skilled and experienced
signallers and officers used to getting contact
under adverse conditions, which was now a great
help. They were also used to arranging relay
signalling when the range was too short, which
normally was the case during the night with the
technology available during the 1940s. This
ability to arrange relay signalling was a special
advantage in this particular situation, as we have
learnt from Major Palmer's account.
Around 11 a.m. on Thursday, 21 September,
the first rounds were shot by artillery from XXX
Corps in support of the British at Arnhem. Or
more correctly: in support of those inside the
Oosterbeek perimeter. It was here that the
remains of the airborne division were pressed
together in their final bitter fight. Artillery
support was called for more or less day and night
during the subsequent phase, and this with good
result. Often targets very close to own positions
were engaged. Normal safety distances could not
be respected. This required highest precision in
the work by command posts and gun crews.
Many comments have been made on the
incident when Loder-Symond himself ordered
fire with the heavy battery against an infiltrating
unit just south of Hartenstein. He began ranging
and placed his first round around 400 yards
south of the target to be on the safe side. After
having observed the impact he gradually moved
the fire towards the target before fire for effect
was ordered, and this was fired with excellent
result. It would certainly not have been appreci-
ated if the shots, without ranging, had landed
right upon the divisional headquarters!
