GUNFIRE
units by firing a smoke screen or a few smoke
rounds at certain intervals. Smoke could be fired
also in front of the advancing infantry, for
instance, to indicate objectives or just a line in
the terrain to indicate roughly the position of the
advancing unit. More about this later. Firing
smoke was dependent on the prevalling weather
conditions and could be disturbed by clouds of
dust or smoke from burning vehicles. The
methods had to be applied with due considera-
tions of possibilities and restraints.
Tracer firing
A very useful method for indicating boundaries
between units or the correct direction for their
advance was firing of tracer bursts from Bofors
guns
(40-mm
semi-automatic
anti-aircraft
guns). Often a few rounds or a couple of bursts
would be
sufficient help
to the
advancing
infantry. When two brigades were attacking in
parallel, this method proved to be very helpful
when indicating directions but also to keep them
apart within the divisional boundaries.
This method as it was here applied in grand
style became the norm for the rest of the war
when attacks at night took place with large for-
mations.
Creeping artillery fire
A creeping or rolling barrage with artillery fire
on line targets shifting forwards at given intervals
and fixed distance between the targets was
an
efficient way of guiding the infantry. At
Alamein, it was decided that barrages were not
to be used in general as we will see below, but ex-
ceptions were accepted. In the sector for the
advance of the New Zealanders, it was decided
that one field regiment was to fire a creeping
barrage for the purpose of helping the attackers
in their navigation on the battlefield, this while
all the other field regiments were firing timed
concentrations against well located
enemy
positions. 324 The regiment used for the barrage
was also assigned the task to fire smoke when
needed
A smaller version of this method was also
utilised by the Scottish division. In the fire plan
for this division, a number of 'print out lines' had
been included in the fire plan. These were to
cover the whole divisional front and were posi-
tioned forward of the infantry's pause lines.
Smoke
rounds were fired for two minutes
against these lines just before the planned arrival
time of the infantry at the pause lines. When the
advance was to be resumed, fire with high
explosive shells was released for two minutes
along the whole 'print out line'.
Intensive covering fire - but no barrages
In the overall planning of the artillery fire plan, it
was decided that the covering fire in assistance of
the attacking divisions was not to be fired as
barrages. It should instead be planned as timed
concentrations against located enemy positions.
After opening, the fire was to move forward in
pace with the advancing infantry with the aim to
neutralise the enemy before the infantry broke in.
The reason for this concept was twofold.
One was that the Corps lacked resources for a
barrage covering the whole front and the large
area to be crossed by the infantry. Each division
had a front of around 4km and the final objec-
tives were located about 6km from the start line.
The second reason was, as has been indicated
previously, the fact that for once a complete
knowledge of the location of the enemy
positions was in hand. Why then to waste large
amounts of precious artillery ammunition on
terrain where the enemy had not deployed any
soldiers?
The different targets were of course not
located symmetrically, which made it necessary
to have different length of the fire against them.
The time was dependent on the time for th
infantry to advance. Ideally, the fire would be
lifted when the infantry reached the sately
distance. The varving
sizes of the targets
required different width and depth of the fire.
As the basic conditions regarding the
enemy's positions varied between the divisions,
it was natural to have them to design and plan
their own covering fire. However, the time to
commence the attack in Phase I should be the
same for all, and the same would apply for Phase
II. The advancing pame would sp by for Share
100 yards per minute.
Principally
the fire nlans of the foul
attacking divisions were about the same even if
the targets were of diff aboutoche sa size and
character. The timing of fire concentrations thus
varied as well. A typical examone inthe fire plan
prepared for the attack by the 51st (Highland)
Division. Map 19-S illustrates the targets to be
engaged, some of them by a battery anly, others
by one or several regimeny a battery On Concen
rations against the same point others required
244
'IT WILL BE A KILLING MATCH' - EL ALAMEIN
a wider and deeper fire pattern as we can see.
The trace is an example as to how all
concerned units were informed graphically
about the fire plan at large. The different objec-
tives have been indicated on the trace by means
of broken lines. The 'print-out-lines' are clearly
labelled. All timing data for fire and pauses are
given. The final objectives were to be reached at
Z+291 minutes in the left sector and at Z+310
minutes on the right. A number of pause lines of
15 minutes duration were planned in order to get
it easier for the infantry units to reassemble
before proceeding. A gap between the moving
fire (100 yards/3 min) and the advancing
infantry must be prevented. A related written fire
plan gave all the details needed by the guns for
all the shifts forward.
In XIII Corps, fire plans were prepared for
the different brigade attacks. These often were
quite simple and designed for several phases.
Some included simple barrages in combination
with timed concentrations against targets in the
direction of attacks or at the flanks.
21.40 hours on 23 October 1942
At this time the thunder of the guns broke the
silence when all the artillery in the northern sector
opened fire, see Map 19-4 and Map 19-6. With
Montgomery's words: 'We are now ready'. One
and a half month of preparations after the
second battle at El Alamein was over, and the
troops and equipment were in the best order and
readiness. The extensive exercises and rehearsals
with live ammunition had raised self-confidence.
The large deception programme, Operation
Bertram,
seemed
have
worked
Advancing lanes were in good order; the battle
positions were prepared during many nights and
were well camouflaged and had now been
occupied by their units, ammunition stores were
complete etc. The Game could commence. And
the attack surprised the enemy.
At the time given above, artillery opened fire
from the Mediterranean coast to the Qattara De-
pression in the South. The sky was illuminated
by muzzle flashes and the noise was deafening,
everything almost unreal to those present (Fig.
19-5). Never had anyone experienced such a
violent artillery bombardment during the first
years of the war. After three years, the British
Army had gained this capability.
The commanding officer of 11 (HAC) Field
Regiment RHA who moved forward with his
new 'Priests' at the end of one armoured
battalion column of the 1st Armoured Division
gave later his account of what he experienced
this night:325
Waiting in the 'deception' leaguer under no
movement orders was hot and boring, but by the
early evening of 23rd October we were all set.
Peter Thompson Glover (G. Troop) and Tom
Butler Stoney (H. Troop) and myself went over
to a brief orders at the 9th Lancers and had a
quick drink - back to the Battery with orders to
move into our positions in the 9th Lancers
column at 19.30 hours. Last minute personal
preparations, and curious and apprehensive quiet
pervaded, still no movement from our 'hides was
permitted for even now a Boche recce plane
might put in an appearance - waiting as the sun
went down in its usual glorious technicolour came
that old hollow feeling in the stomach! Engines
were warmed up and as the full moon rose in the
cloudless sky, a great orange red ball until it
cleared the lower atmosphere, when it and the
desert turned silver, the air was filled with the
deep throb of the hundreds of diesel engines. The
long lines of tanks and guns moved forward
towards the start line, an ominous black frieze
against the light of the desert. Then above the
engine noise came the familiar drone of Boche
plane, followed by the whistle and crump as a
Fig. 19-5 The offensive at El Alamein commenced at
21.40 hrs on 23 October 1942 with an unusual,
forceful counter-battery artillery program fired by
some 400 guns within the sector where the main
attack was to take place (Wikimedia)
249
