GUNFIRE
declaration of war against USA came soon after-
wards. This meant that the enormous human
and industrial resources of USA could directly
benefit Britain in its war effort too.
At the same time, the Japanese launched also
an attack against the British Empire. Capture of
the Malayan peninsula and Singapore were the
prime objectives. The attack began with the
Japanese landing in the early morning of 8
December 1941 on both sides of the border to
Siam (Thailand). Large air attacks took place,
which the obsolete British fighters could not do
much about. Japanese air superiority was soon
secured. Hong Kong was attacked the same
morning. The difference of dates, 7 and 8
December, is due to the fact that the Pearl
Harbour and the Malayan peninsula are located
on opposite sides of the International Date Line.
See Map 23-1 for a general view.
A humiliating blow on the Royal Navy came
on 10 December 1941 when the battleship HMS
Prince of Wales and the battle cruiser HMS
Repulse were sunk in the South China Sea by
Japanese aircraft. The ships that had arrived in
Singapore on 3 December went to sea without
any air protection and became thus easy prey to
the Japanese Air Forces.
The British now met an enemy who was
utterly motivated and well trained. 462
As it would be shown, the Japanese was a
different type of soldier compared with the
German and Italian soldiers the British had met
so far. Cultural, social and ideological differences
meant that only victory or death mattered to the
Japanese soldier. A Japanese unit never gave in
and had to be killed to the last man. Becoming a
Prisoner of War individually or collectively was
unthinkable. The last hand grenade was reserved
for the soldier's own ultimate death if no alter-
natives to being captured could be seen. With
prisoners
attitude, they were also reluctant to take
themselves,
not
even
when
The
opponent was wounded or lacked possibilities to
continue fighting. Better then to put the bayonet
into him. Doctors, nurses, medical orderlies and
wounded at aid posts or hospitals would meet
destiny
evacuate them.
if there were
massacres
Many examples
no time
of collective
have been presented. The brutality
and ruthlessness of the Japanese soldier made
him a much-feared enemy, particularly as he at
was a very
whatever his undertakings were.
skilled opponent
First Phase - Malaya and Singapore
The British had prepared themselves for an
attack from the north against Singapore, a plan
that had been
already prepared in 1937.
According to this plan, the British were to
quickly occupy the area just north of the
Malayan border to Siam when an attack on the
peninsula or Singapore was deemed imminent
and unavoidable. A revised concrete plan was
prepared in 1940-41, Operation Matador. 63
This was, however, politically sensitive and the
relations not only with Siam, but also with USA
complicated the issue. This had the consequence
that necessary decisions were not taken in time,
despite good intelligence information about the
pending attack. Another complicating factor was
the unclear command structure between the
civilian side, primarily the Governor, and the
military high command. A question mark must
still be raised as to whether an early order to
apply Operation Matador,
nad chanced the
outcome of the battle.
The few British formations were not well
trained for jungle warfare. This was even more
the case as regards the reinforcing formations
coming directly from England and the Middle
East. Nor were the forces trained to cooperate.
All-arms-training had not been prioritised in the
British Army during the first years of the war.
Neither had any real preparations in terms of
fortifications and mine fields to meet an attack
from the North neither been made at Singapore.
Lieutenant General Arthur E. Percival was
commander of the ground forces. He decided
battle
down
through the Malaya
Peninsula should initially be assigned to Ill
Corps comprising of the 9th and 11th Indian
Infantry Divisions. The 8th Australian Infantry
Division was
assigned the
defence of the
southern part of the peninsula, i.e. Johore and
Malacca down to the island of Singapore where
fortress troops were deployed.
Amongst the
latter were two Malayan local defence brigades
who prepared to meet the invasion as well as
they could. Lacking an operative plan for this, it
not easy. A number of permanent coast
artillery guns built to defend the island with its
naval base from seaborne attacks added to the
fortress garrison. The Australians were the only
formation that was to some extent trained for a
jungle war (Fig. 23-1)
The
18th Infantry Division arrived in
January 1942 as reinforcement directly from
341
FROM DEFEAT TO SUCCESS -
BURMA
Fig. 23-1 The Australians were better trained for
jungle warfare than the Enalish and Indian units. After
the bitter defeats at Singapore and in Burma 1942, a
systematic rearmament and training took place tor
the latter in India as preparation for the coming
offensive against the Japanese. One part of this was
to get all men used to the jungle and to take
advantage of it, individually and when to fight in large
formations. For those successful many opportunities
for patrolling, for camouflage, surprise attacks and cir-
cumventing etcetera would emerge. Everyone had to
become as skilled in this as the Japanese, if
otherwise, one would stand small chances to survive
(AWM No. 007179)
England. This division of course lacked training
for jungle warfare. It coucourse lack a veining
Kept as a strong reserve for counter-attack
against the Japanese invasion of the Singapore
Island, but was spite invasionino the Singapore
stuck in fighting far from the Island. And for that
kind of campaign it was not trained.
On the Japanese side the 25th Ammo under
command of General
Yamashita Tomoyuki,
(often just referred to mashite His army
comprised the
5th,
and 56th Infantry
Divisions and the Imperial Guards Division. The
initial landings were carried out by the 5th and
18th divisions. The 56th Infantry Division was
kept in a stand-by position ready to move into
Burma. The Guards Division had as a first task
to subiugate Siam by
quickly seizing Bangkok
and then prenare for advance tow.
ards Singapore.
The Japanese attack tow
as Map 23-1 indic:
te mainlv carried out usin?
the main roads southu
rds with a concentration
of forces to the western part of the peninsula.
The Japanese tactic was to attack by s
strenoth against British positions
then encircled through the jungle. Facing this
risk the British quickly withdrew. This was re-
peatedly done all the way down to Singapore.
Many outflanking movements at sea along the
western coast of Malaya were performed by
abanese units as well
The
British divisions had 2-3 field
regiments each. Armament was a mixture or
gunsi
vintage
18-vounders
and 4.J-inch
howitzers and new 25-pounders. Some 3.7-inch
mountain howitzers were also part of the arsenal.
Neither medium nor heavy guns were available.
Coast artillery positions on land had beer
constructed near Singapore. Some of these
could be laid on targets in the north, but the
necessary high explosive shells were missing
Armour piercing shells for maritime targets were
abundant. but were of no use against aavancine
infantry.
The artillery could never stop the rapid
Japanese advance
Ine
terrain
made
close
deployment of regiments impossible and, as we
have seen, the necessary training of infantry and
artillery together had never taken place.
At the beginning of February the Japanese
entered the
Singapore Island by launching a
strong attack from the northwest, at the same time
as a deception attack against the eastern part of
the Island was
arranged. The British forces
were exhausted
after having been exposed
continilous/v
to Japanese artillery fire and air
attacks for ten days and nights. No reserves for
strong counter-attacks had been organised, and
local Japanese superiority claimed its right. The
few artillery units were dispersed and, due to the
short range of the old guns, had few opportunities
to affect
the final battle
Concentration
firepower was not possible, nor was any efficient
counter-battery bombardment.
Lieutenant General Percival was on 15
Rebruary
forced to surrender to the Japanese
Commander-in-Chief, General Yamashita. Some
85,000 men went into harsh captivity. If depot
personnel and civilian defence employees arc
included, the total number increases to some
130,000.464 The defeat is the largest in British
history. Churchill would never forgive Percival
for not having stopped the Japanese. It is perhaps
not surprising that discussions have been going
on since this disaster about what could have
otherwise been
done. These discussions will
probably
continue
the future.
General
'arndale writes about this in his book about the
regimental history: 465
