GUNFIRE
completed the Regiment had still not received its
full complement of twenty-four guns. ... But
in the third week in August the news was received
with no little surprise that more guns were on the
way. Nobody can now recall at what stage we
learnt that these were to be the famous
"soixante.quinze' - the French-built 75-mm gun.
We were most certainly astonished and not a little
shocked. The gunners were even more surprised
when they went to Yoxford station to collect the
new weapons. They were quite small with four-
foot diameter wooden spoked wheels and were
covered in grease. They did not look very robus
[...] Each Battery set to clean the guns and this
took several days ...] The barrels were packed
tight with grease from muzzle to breech and
proved very difficult to clean. The local residents
- the few still left - were asked to produce all the
old clothing and bed linen they could spare to
assist in the task [.
... 1 Before the guns could be
taken to their firing positions [.] it was essential
to test each one. The guns were taken four at a
time to a field about two miles from the coast and
placed on accurately surveved positions. On the
cliff edge in front of the guns the Regimental
Survey Party had placed their equipment through
which the fall of the shells into the sea would be
observed. This would enable the accuracy and
consistency of each gun to be determined. ...
Everybody held their breath when the order 'Fire'
was given, but they need not have worried. The
gun behaved perfectly and the round exploded on
hitting the sea at the desired spot. [... During
the day the other guns fired their trial five rounds
and to evervbody's astonishment and delight ther
all performed exactly as (the first one]. From tha
day the gun detachments accepted their new
equipment with complete confidence and held
them in the highest regard.
Table 3-2. Gun data - medium guns
Calibre
velanti
Shell weight Max. range
6-inch 26 cwt howitzer 15.2
Mark I
4. U01
60-pounder Mark Il
27.2
11,250-14,900
It may be added that some of these guns later
were equipped with pneumatic tvres and could
then be towed after a truck on roads. The gun
could fire up to 7km and fired a fixed round (the
projectile and cartridge case fixed together as a
single item). The weight of the projectile was a
modest 16 pounds. From the deployment point
of view, the maximum elevation of 17° was a
problem; this meant a very flat trajectory.
The Medium Regiments also had to stick to
vintage pieces, albeit somewhat modernised. The
two old pieces that were retained for the time
being were the BL 60-pounder gun and the BI
6-inch 26-cwt howitzer, (Fig. 3-2). During the
initial battles in North Africa the former was
often used with its old iron clad wooden wheels,
Whereas the pneumatic rubber tvres were used
at home. Some of these guns were modernised
with a new 4.5-inch barrel. As seen in Fig. 3-2,
a few other old pieces were also parts of the
arsenal. Approximate gun data are given in
Table 3-2.
No development of a modern heavy piece
took place before the Second World War, despite
the fact that the need for heavy guns had been
distinctly recognised during the Great War 1914-
1918. Only a limited number of formations with
obsolete guns were retained. As mentioned, it was
stated in the 1930s by the RAF, and by some
army officers, that bomber aircraft could take
over the role of heavy artillery in the future, so
there was no need to develop new guns of this
type, it was argued! Hence, 'a dead hand' was laid
over the development programme. Those units,
which were retained despite this attitude, were in
most cases equipped with the 6-inch Mark XIX
and the
8-inch howitzer. The Heavy
Regiments typically had one battery equipped
with the former and two or three with the latter.
The even heavier 9.2-inch and 12-inch howitzers
still existed in a limited number when the
war broke out as were some railway guns. See
Fig. 3-2. Approximate gun data for the heavy
pieces are seen in Table 3-3
The Royal Artillery went to war also with a
large number of anti-aircraft and anti-tank guns,
and in addition to these coast artillery guns as
well
These will, however,
not he furthel
discussed here.
When it comes to other types of equipment for
artillery such as motor vehicles, survey instruments,
communication equipment, personal weapons, etc.,
we will come back to the rearmament aspects later.
It should be observed however that there was a
severe shortage of everything during the first year
TWILIGHT -
WAR AND MOBILISATION
Fig. 3-2 The gun legacy - As well as the light field
guns, obsolete medium and heavy guns were at
hand when the war broke out.
Table 3-3. Gun data - heavy guns
BL 60-pdr Gun (RAHT)
BL 6-inch 26-cwt Howitzer (RAHT)
6-inch Gun (RAHT)
BL 12-inch Howitzer (RAHT)
Calibre Weight Shell weight Max. range
6-inch gun Mark XIX
9.400
45.4
17.000
8-inch howitzer Mark VI
9,000
90.7
11,000
9.2-inch howitzer Mark I| 23.4
16,500
131.5
12,750
of the war, in particular as regards the needs of the
Territorial Army units. Interesting to note is that the
Royal Artillery was far better off in terms of radio
equipment than the infantry when the war broke
out. At least in theorv, all Observation Officers
could communicate with the guns by means of
radio and telephone equipment. It has been stated
that a British infantry division had only 75 radio
sets, out of which, 55 were held by its artillery
regiments. Many older infantry commanders found
it sufficient with a loud voice and dispatch riders.
The war changed this attitude. In 1944 a division
had around a thousand radio sets. The artillery had
doubled its stock. 56
Artillery mobilisation
Brian Hulse has told BBC how he experienced
the mobilisation in September 1939.57 He had,
when sixteen years old, reported for enlistment
as a volunteer for the artillery regiment Bedford-
shire Yeomanry. He was to serve through the
entire war, and for him it became, as for others
survivors, seven vears
uniform
betore
returning to civilian life. In May 1941 he was
commissioned as artillery officer.
In August 1939. Hulse tells. all knew that
war was unavoidable: it was onlv a matter of
when. For all who had reported for enlistment
as volunteers, for men this in the Roval Navv
Voluntary Reserve (RNVR), Territorial Army
(TA) or Roval Air Force Voluntarv Reserve
(RAFVR) and for women in Women's Royal
Naval Service (WRNS or
"Wrens'). the
Auxiliary Territorial Army (ATS) or Women's
Auxiliary Air Force (WAAF), it was of no
surprise when on 1 September 1939 it was
announced in radio broadcasts that all men and
women in the Armed Forces should immedi-
ately report to their respective unit So this was
exactly what was done, pencils, saws, spades and
other tools were laid down. professions were lefi
