GUNFIRE
XXX Corps and those artillery regiments which
were expected to come within range of Arnhem
first
Loder-Symonds grouped his own and the
allotted fire observation resources so that 1
Parachute Brigade would get six observation
parties, 1.e. each battalion would have two. 1 Air-
landing Brigade was given six parties. 4 Parachute
Brigade would also get extra observation parties
after arrival so that each of its battalions would
have at least one, preferably two observation
Valued
He also decided that once the division had
reached Arnhem and been deploved there as
illustrated on Map 21-2 all observation parties
of 1 FOU should return under his command and
some of them would be put under command of
the Polish Brigade
Of the eleven observation parties of 1 FOU
seven marched on foot and had the light wireless
set No. 68R. Each FOO/OPO was assisted by
two signallers. The other four parties were jeep-
borne and could therefore bring the more
powerful, but heavier, No. 22 set. As was normal
practice, the battery commanders also had this
type of set, which also was the case as regards
the
regimental
headquarters
and
Loder-
Symond's staff. The latter also had a No. 19 set.
which was
normally installed in armoured
vehicles, but was chosen because of its long
range
In his
capacity
as divisional artillery
commander, Loder-Symonds, had his command
net open for communication with subordinate
units. The intention, furthermore, was that he
Via this
network, should b
in contact also
with XXX Corps and 5 AGRA. Once external
artillery units later were close enough to support
the airborne division he could attach these to his
command net as well
An
ordinary
regimental net was open
between the regimental headquarters and the
three batteries of the light regiment. Normally
the latter
would have their battery nets in
operation. Here a special arrangement was made
for 3 Battery. During the advance of 1 Parachute
Brigade towards the Arnhem road bridge this
battery was the only one that could support the
brigade. As it was assumed that the two troops
of the battery would have to engage different
targets
simultaneously, in particular against
much feared 88-mm guns, a second battery
frequency
was
allotted.
by
Which
Iwo
independent troop nets could be operated.
FOO/OPOs equipped only with the smaller
No. 68R set would often be in a situation where
they could not reach the batteries due to the
short range of this set. Hence it was decided that
relay signalling via brigade headquarters should
be prepared. Initially the observation parties of
1 FOU should be attached to Loder-Symonds
command net. But as soon as external batteries
came in range, which was assumed to be the case
once advance units had passed Grave, they
should turn to their own net, the FOO Contro
Net, by which they would communicate with
artillery units of XXX Corps. Another measure
taken was that FOO/OPOs still at brigade
headquarters should monitor the command nets
of regiments advancing from the South. Hence
their 'flick frequency' would be, as an example,
the frequency of the 84 Medium Regiment RA
command net. Once they heard traffic on this
they could either switch their sets on to this
frequency, or open up a reserve set for direct
communication.
Fire preparation lists of all known enemy
positions, in particular 88-mm deployments, had
been prepared and distributed to the batteries
by which quick engagement of targets could be
done. These lists were brought to the battle by all
FOOs. Unfortunately, none of the lists seems to
have been preserved, so we cannot know how
extensive they were. No other pre-planned fire
plans seem to have been prepared.
When planning Operatepared. den.
Loder-Symonds anticipated that three regiment
from XXX Corps would be put under his
command once the first units had reached
Arnhem. 372 Naturally. he presumed that the two
regiments of the Guards Division would be
amongst them. The medium regiment under
command of this division could be the third.
As regards the American divisions we will
just record that they had three or four artillery
battalions each. The 82nd Airborne Division had
two
parachute
battalions,
whose
guns
(dismantled) were dropped by parachute, and
two glider-borne battalion e73 by parachutes had
three 4-guns batteries nS, he battalion foul
batteries. The 101st Airborne Division had one
parachute battalion and two glider-borne
Most of these battalions were equipped with
the same 75-mm howions were equippen air.
landing regiment had. Twelve 105-mm guns
were also landed by the welve 13)-mhere are
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
different statements in the literature as to which
battalions) these guns had been provided. Most
likely, as it seems to me, it was 319th Glider Field
Artillery Battalion, which was part of the 82nd
Airborne Division
With the 105-mm howitzers included, the
Americans would bring no less than 84 guns to
the battlefield, albeit not all on the first day
According to the overall plan, the 82nd Airborne
Division was to bring one of its artillery
battalions the first day and 10lst no artillery at
all. The reason for the latter might be that the
need for artillery was not considered to be large
and it was assumed that artillery from XXX
Corps could bring help very soon after the
landings. This help would in particular come
from the Hunt Group, which included 7, 64 and
84 Medium Regiment RA, a group designed for
reinforcement and counter-battery bombard-
ment during the advance towards Nijmegen and
Arnhem
The artillery plan - Operation Garden
A massive deployment of artillery south of
Mass-Schelde Canal was planned to support the
breakout of XXX Corps from its small bridge-
head. Some 300 guns were to be deployed for
this task within an area of 7 x 7km. Beside these
all the artillery of the flank-protecting two Corps
would also be deployed. As regards XXX Corps
the following field regiments were engaged:
Guards Division
55 Field Regiment RA
153 Field Regiment RA
43rd (Wessex) Division
94 Field Regiment RA
112 Field Regiment RA
179 Field Regiment RA
50th (Northumbrian) Division
74 Field Regiment RA
90 Field Regiment RA
124 Field Regiment RA
Reinforcing these were the field regiments
supporting
The
independent
Armoured Brigade, 147 Field Regiment RHA
which was now put under command of XXX
Corps. The Army Field Regiment, 86 Army
Field Regiment RA, was allotted as well
Furthermore, in the initial phase, XXX
Corps was given one of the many regiments of
the flank-protecting Corps, 151 Field Regiment
RA. This regiment normally belonged to the
11th Armoured Division. Also part of the same
Corps, VIII Corps, was the independent 4
Armoured Brigade, under whose command 4
Field Regiment RHA fell. As we have seen, one
of its batteries had been allotted to one of the
special battle groups north of Eindhoven. We
may also note the employment of the following
units:
A Belgian battery from the Belgian
Brigade
One troop of the Dutch Irene Brigade
165 Heavy Anti-Aircraft Regiment RA
(for ground tasks)
Turning now to heavy artillery resources of the
three Corps we can see that
these were
significant too. Each Corps was supported by
one AGRA (Army Group Roval Artillery)
comprising one Army Field Regiment, four
medium
regiments
and
one
heavy
For
Operation Garden,
7. 64 and 84 Medium
Regiment RA from 5 AGRA were in support of
XXX Corps. From the same AGRA's 52 Heavy
Regiment RA, one battery, 419 Heavy Battery
RA, was put under command of 64 Medium
Kegiment RA.
The two first mentioned medium regiments
had a past from El Alamein, where one battery
of each regiment was rearmed with 4.5-inch
guns and the second with 5.5-inch guns. 84
Medium Regiment RA had been established
later and had two batteries with 5.5-inch guns
from the beginning.
The 4.5-inch gun had a maximum range of
around 20.000 vards. The 5.5-inch gun had, as
earlier mentioned, and could fire two types of
shell. The first one provided was the 100lb shell
which could be launched up to around 16,000
vards. The 801b shell developed in 1943, and
delivered to the field units in mass from third
quarter 1944, could increase the range to around
18.000 vards.
The gun with the largest range was provided
by 419 Heavy Batterv RA. This battery was
equipped with the 155-mm 'Long Tom' gun of
American manufacture, which could reach
targets at ranges of up to about 23km.
Differences in range of the various guns of
the Corps would later prove to be of great im-
portance during the course of the battle.
The employment of resources dictated that
291|
