many war diaries
When the final orders for withdrawal to the
last beachhead along the Bergues - Furnes Canal
came on 26 May, the units were also ordered, as
we have seen, to leave and destroy vehicles and
equipment at the sides of the roads when
approaching the bridgehead. The gunners were
to proceed on foot once their vehicles had been
destroved. It had also been decided that no
medium and heavy guns should be brought into
the beachhead but be destroyed. This was also
the case as regards the oldest light guns, the 18-
pounders
and
4.5-inch howitzers,
from
Territorial units. The personnel of these units
were to fight as infantry until they could be
evacuated. But despite these orders some crafty
Gunners still took some 18-pounders with them
into the beachhead, and they were of much help,
in particular when the northern part of the front
towards Nieuwpoort had to be stabilised.
Certain artillery regiments were more and
more split up during the last few days, others
were thanks to skilful leadership kept together.
albeit
not always with all their guns. But
Whatever the status was, the gunners kept on
firing there guns as well as they could. Patrols
were sent out to collect abandoned ammunition
and at the end remaining guns in action were
quite well supplied
with
ammunition.
disasters everywhere could not be prevented;
some regiments were overrun and annihilated.
The bridgehead was defended by remnants
of II Corps in the northeastern sector during the
last few days, by I Corps in the centre and by the
French 68th Infantry Division west of Dunkirk.
A few more French divisions, or more correctly
small remnants, were mixed up with British units
inside the bridgehead. Out of the original 40
field regiments
of the BEF there were now
complete, or remnants of, 16 regiments left to
the end. One medium regiment, 59 Medium
Regiment RA, was still relatively
intact inside
the bridgehead.
Actions during these final days were rather
chaotic but everything was done to use the
remaining artillery resources as efficiently as
possible
Several
divisional
and
regimental
headquarters still worked as they should and, for
instance, as late as 30 May, the HQRA of the
50th Infantry Division issued an operation order
subordinate units
one
of the
original
divisional regiments, 92 Field Regiment RA and
three regiments from other divisions. Regimental
GUNFIRE
headquarters went on producing written orders
to the
last,
though
these were normally
confirmation of already given oral orders. They
were short and distinct and stipulated which unit
that was to support which infantry unit or to be
put under command of it. The location of the
headquarters was also confirmed. Sometimes
such
orders
could include administrative
directives regarding supply of ammunition, fuel,
food and water etc.
One gets the impression from the war
diaries and personal accounts that the actions
were much focused on independent engagement
by lower units, batteries and troops, sometime.
even sections (2 guns). This was all done in a
well-disciplined way, albeit there were some
exceptions, and was generally initiated in line
with the 'Intentions' of higher command. A
couple of examples follow further below.
An overview of the final deployment is illus-
trated on Map 16-7.
I have taken the first example from the
account of one of Jack Parham's officers,
Captain R.B. Taylor. It is about a troop of 10
Field Regiment RA:
All four guns of 'A' Troop got back into the
Dunkirk area. Two escaped from the roadblock
under Sgt. Smith D.C.M., joined Capt Moulton
later. These were the two concerned in Major
Sheil's party. The other section I brought back
myself and we remained in action two miles east.
of the mole and within 100% of the hench unti
2300 hrs on Sat June 1", when the general order
to upsticks was given.
This section attached itself to 27/72 Bty R.A.
16th Fd Regt R.A. who had 11 guns with them,
the lay out being 5 on Z.L. (Zero Line) due East,
8 due South, a tremendous amount of firing was
done during the last two days to the South in the
form of concentrations chosen from the map at
random, as there were no communications, down
to the range of 6000. We did not however have to
fire to the East as no Boche came within 1,000
[yards] of us from this direction, at any rate, not
until the order to withdraw had been given.?34
Turning then to 7 Field Regiment RA that we
have followed above. This egiment Ras in the
beachhead when receivinis tee imentation order
on 31 May. One of its batteries ee 9/17, was to
leave two sections and the second battery, the
16/43, one. The six guns the second batthe three
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD - ACROSS THE CHANNEL
battalions of 8 Infantry Brigade by means of two
guns each. The regiment still had another 13
intact guns and brought back to England the dial
sights, but were required to dump the gun mech-
anisms in a nearby little stream. This was the in-
struction of what to do with all guns left behind
when their crews embarked. Before the guns were
finally destroyed however the Gunners continued
to fire them. Some 3,000 shells had been collected
from abandoned guns, which all were fired
towards enemy positions. They availed themselves
of some pre-registered targets, but also fired on
opportunity targets. The accuracy was probably
not the best as good maps were missing. Only one
1:250,000-scale map was available instead of the
normal 1:25,000 or 1:50,000 required.
The divisional artillery commander gave at
17.30 on 31 May the order that the remaining
six-gun crews should embark when ordered by
8 Infantry Brigade HQS. From this headquar-
ters, the guns were notified that they were to
close down at 22.30 hours, but the guns should
continue firing until 02.30 hours on 1 June. At
this time, the last soldiers of the brigade would
leave their positions along the Bergues - Furnes
Canal. The commander of 7 Field Regiment RA
and his remaining staff officers left for the beach
at midnight. All their telephone lines had then
been destroyed by German artillery fire and
nothing more could be done.
The supply situation had seriously deterio-
rated for all units still in the beachhead during the
final days. The shortage of food and, in particu-
lar, water was critical. The regimental war diary
however allows itself a small joke on 31 May:
Regt H.Q. Water trailer had been abandoned on
the journey from Oostvleteren, and by the start
of the day the water situation became precarious.
The Officers Mess had a fairly large supply of
whiskey and gin left, and this was used for
washing and washing up. This procedure was
started by the M.O.; a strange thing for a true
Scotsman!
One of the last artillery regiments, not to say the
last, to leave Dunkirk was 27 Field Regiment
RA, which was
a I Corps regiment. The
Command Post Officer (CPO) in 37/47 Battery
was Lieutenant (later Brigadier) E.R.D. Palmer.
His regiment was intact apart from one gun that
had been positioned for anti-tank tasks. He could
thus prepare, in accordance with the book, a fire
Fig. 16-7 While waiting for evacuation at the shores
at Dunkirk the soldiers were continuously exposed to
attacking German aircraft strafing them with machine-
guns and dropping bombs on the beaches (AWM No
plan during the last night for the three troops in
the battery. It comprised five tasks for each one
of the troops, each target to be engaged for
15 minutes. The first task was at 19.00-19.15
hours. The battery had registered three DF
targets (Defensive Fire) close to important
bridges towards the beachhead and also a
number of enemy mortar position
In accordance with
Palmer's plan. the
regiment fired between 19.00 hours and 21.00
hours. Palmer added a sort of 'goodbye salute' in
connection with the destruction of their guns. He
ordered the E Troop to destroy their guns at
21.40 hours, D Troop at 21.45 hours and at
21.50 hours, finally, the FTroop. But Palmer had
ordered also each gun to fire ten rounds gunfire,
the first round of which to be fired as a troop
salvo exactly five minutes before the time ordered
for destruction of the guns. Palmer reported after
all rounds had been delivered: 'The result was
most impressive as the flashes lit up the night sky,
and it gave our morale a boost '233
When the war broke out, they had been 70
men in the Battery Headquarters, now
besides Palmer himself remained. He tried to
boost their fighting spirit and saw to it that they
would leave France with dignity and in a way
befitting a fine regiment. 236
While waiting for transport, the survivors
were attacked by Luftwaffe every day and did
what they could to meet the threat by digging in
and using anti-aircraft guns but also personal
weapons (Fig. 16-7).
Discipline was strictly enforced on the beaches,
which was a prerequisite for avoiding panic and
securing the planned boarding (Fig. 16-8).
104
