GUNFIRE
Our Battery motto was 'Bash On' and soon we
were beyond the town and in positions about
three miles on. We had one interesting shoot from
Teddy Thompson doing F.O.O. He sent down the
map reference of a target out of our range but we
were able to shoot a troop of medium guns who
were well behind us. Sam Wilkinson and I were
shouting orders from one wireless set to the other
since we had shifted the sets out of the Command
Post and into jeeps on the road ready to move
forward. The orders were passed back to the guns
through five wireless nets! (A number of sets
operating on the same wavelength). The report of
"shot one" from the 5.5-guns was reaching the
F.O.O. long before the shell fell and that after
being relayed through ten sets!"
hours. In most cases they comprised three or
four letters.
Frequencies were changed fairly often also
for security reasons, although there was a general
shortage of frequencies, which made changes
difficult or even impossible during large opera-
tions with numerous formations involved.
A special standardisation in this context
were the denominations of certain officers:
It is obvious that this type of improvisation
would not materialise unless the signallers were
skilled and well trained.
Shortage of nets and frequencies raised the
demand for rigid voice discipline, and much
training to maintain this. Standardised acronyms
and codes etc. were gradually introduced to make
telecommunication more efficient. In particular
communication of fire orders and control of fire
required a special nomenclature to speed up this
type of communication and for avoidance of
mistakes. Expressions and words used must be
exactly understood and known by all. It is said
that the Americans were not so strict on this and
when, using one example, an American FOO
said: "Frank, you may fire when I tell you', a British
FOO in the same situation would give the
command: 'Fire by order! when ranging had been
completed. The order 'Fire for effect' would then
follow. All concerned in the British unit knew
exactly what the expression meant
Identification abbreviations were for security
reasons used for calls between sets, and these
could be changed one or more times every 24
'Sunray meant the officer in charge
'Acorn' was used when communication with the
Intelligence Officer was requested
'Seagull' meant a high-ranked Staff/Planning
Ufficer
'Molar' was called when communication with the
Officer in charge of Administration was wanted
'Sheldrake' was the artillery commander or his
representative at an infantry headquarters
At higher levels various types of cipher machine
were used for strictly confidential messages
about operational
plans
lower levels
temporary coded words, names and orders were
used to protect sensible information for shorter
periods at least. In 1943 the Slidex system was
introduced for improvement of security. It was a
simple manual encoding system. The principle
was to conceal expressions, names and numbers
of units, names of places and commanders
etcetera with a four-letter code. Cards were
prepared
for
different
types
of
military
formation and activity such as artillery, plans and
signals, engineers and so on. There were 12x17
rectangles (204) on each card. The cards fitted
into a frame with horizontal and vertical flanking
cursors that were movable.
By changing the
cursor letters/keys and their positions a coded
message could be devised. Keys were changed
on army basis and normally at midnight, but it
could be done more frequently."7
6. Looking Far into the Battlefield
The artillery regiments we have studied above
all had good resources for delivering efficient
support for
the
infantry
andi
armoured
formations.
But the artillery
also had the
important task to prevent, or at least reduce, the
enemy's artillery and mortar fire. This fire by the
enemy made the own fighting more difficult and
it could cause significant losses. This was not
only a scourge for the infantry, but also for
gunners. Colonel E.R.D. Palmer, who took part
as a young command post officer in
Thel
evacuation of 27 Field Regiment RA at Dunkirk
in early June 1940 (the battle of France is
discussed in Part 3 of the book), has illustrated
this in his account Last Days at Dunkirk, the
Royal Artillery Journal, Vol. CXVII, No. 2, p. 19:
At intervals during the next 40 minutes D Troop
continues to be heavily shelled but it was in shor
bursts and very fortunately none fell sufficiently
close to the guns while they were actually being
fired to cause any further casualties. However it
was an unpleasant time for the troop as they had
only rudimentary gunpits due to the high water
table and, from my command post 300 yard:
away, I quite frequently could see no sign of the
guns as they were hidden by the smoke and dust
from the bursting shells
Well, this time it did not end too badly. The enemy
probably could not direct too much of his
resources against this target. Generally, counter-
battery fire was very important for both sides
This
type
artillerv
engagement was a
prioritised task
at the beginning of maior
operations. As much as possible of available
resources were then concentrated. But in order to
succeed finding the
exact location of enem
batteries was a prerequisite, the same as regards
his mortar deployments. Another prerequisite was
well-deployed guns with adequate range. On the
British side Medium and Heavy Regiments were
the primary resource for counter-battery fire, but
also regiments with light/field guns had always to
be prepared to participate when possible.
The first resource for target acquisition and
fire control was the Observation Post Officers
(OPO) in the front line, this in cooperation with
commanders of units to be supported. A
problem, however, was that they normally lacked
opportunities to look very far bevond the front
Ine, to the terramn where enemy batteries were
deployed. This became instead the role of the
specific intelligence
Unite
established and
equipped for survey deep into the battlefield.
These supporting resources were as mentioned
earlier in the book (Chapter 5) the following:
Survey Regiments RA
Army Cooperation Squadrons, RAF
Air Observation Posts, RA/RAF
In the Survey Regiments three types of resource
were at handi
Surveyors for geodetic work
Sound Rangers
Flash Spotters
The Surveyors had an important role when
concentration of artillery fire was required over
large areas and at long distances. Their methods
are a matter of technology and procedures and
this will later be discussed more in detail. when
gunnery and tactics will be in focus. So, for now.
we are leaving them and should just remember
them as an intelligence resource. The two other
resources
of the
Survey Regiment will be
presented in this Chapter, but first let us look at
the air resources available for target acquisition
far beyond the front line.
Army Cooperation Squadrons, RAF
The Royal Air Force had a number of Army
Cooperation Squadrons when the war broke out.
Their role was primarily
survey
and air.
photography. Later they were also to assume
fighter-bomber
tasks and were equipped for
such a role. In 1940, there were five squadrons
equipped with Westland Lysanders. This was a
single-engine high-wing aircraft, which made its
first flight in 1936 and entered active service in
