SELECTION OF SYMBOLS, TERMS AND ACRONYMS
DF(SOS)
Gunfire
Met met
Met Telegram
Neutralization
Predicted Fire
Preparatory Fire
Ranging
Registration
Defensive Fire. Pre-planned fire to be launched for the protection of
own positions when the enemy is attacking
Defensive Fire ordered in case of emergency. If no other fire mission was
ordered guns should rest aimed, and loaded, at such a target for quickes
possible engagement when needed. A 'gun sentry' was often left when
the detachment was at rest, thus the first round could be fired without
any delar
A fire order where each gun fired as rapidly as possible, without concern
for the other guns in the Battery, or if an interval (a specified number of
seconds) had been ordered by the originator, it was fired at that required
time interval after its previous round
Meteorological
Gave air pressure, wind speed and direction at certain projectile flight
times as one input to calculation of CoM
Fire which was delivered in order to hamper or interrupt movement
and/or firing of weapons by the enemy. It used much less ammunition
than fire for destruction. See also Covering Fire and Destruction
Target engagement prepared with necessary gun data including
Corrections of the Moment but before ranging or fire for effect
Fired prior to an attack to disrupt enemy communications,
headquarters, artillery positions etc. See also Covering Fire
The observer's procedure for directing the fire to the target before
ordering fire for effect onto the target. Normally this was done by
bracketing' over the target, successively halving the brackets
Targets recorded for future engagement, either after ranging or as silent
registration', i.e. all gun data prepared onlv. See also Predicted fire
Some British awards
CBE Commander of the Order of the British Empire
KBE Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire
MBE Member of the Order of the British Empire
OBE Officer of the Order of the British Empire
CB Companion of the Order of the Bath
GCB Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath
KCB Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath
TD Territorial Decoration
DSO Distinguished Service Order
MC Military Cross
MM Military Medal
VC Victoria Cross
Measurement units
1 mile = 1.609m
1 yard = 0.91m
1 foot = 30.48cm
1 inch = 2.54cm
1 cwt (long hundredweight)
= 112 pounds (1b) = 50.8kg
1 pound (1b) = 0.45kg
1 ounce = 28.35g
Maps
Map 16-1 The British Expeditionary Force (BEF)
was deployed around the cities Lille and Arras in
Northern France between 1 and 7 French Army
when the German attack commenced on 10 May
1940. A large number of French armies were
deployed to the right of them along the whole
border down to Switzerland in the Southeast.
Ballin
20 =
Map 16-2 When BEF had been deployed along the River Dyle in Belgium, each infantry division could be
upported by at least four Field Reciments and three Medium Regiments. The map illustrates the number of
tield and medium guns within the demoment area of the three foremost divisions (The map is a revised and
simplified version of a map from Farndale: The Years of Defeat)
260
