GUNFIRE
infantry, i.e. all-arms coordination and planning,
were organised. This was also a prerequisite for con-
centration of firepower from as many fire units as
possible irrespective of ownership'. The need for
systematic counter-battery fire against the enemy's
artillery and other types of fire in depth also
required a more advanced command structure. Fire
planning including extensive fire plans for barrages,
unknown in 1914, became normal practice.
Fire observation and control was enhanced
by the use of aircraft, albeit initially at a small
scale, and balloons. Artillery intelligence was also
improved by use of air resources and the possi-
bilities to provide air photographs of the enemy's
artillery positions. Another way of improving in-
telligence was the invention and introduction of
sound ranging systems as well as resources for
coordinated observation against enemy artillery
flash spotting. We will see more of these methods
later in this book.
A major
problem
was communication
across the battlefield. Radio was not vet available.
so one had to rely on telephone communication
with field lines. Dispatch riders were retained as
well for transmitting orders, fire plans etc. Huge
amounts of telephone wires were laid but often
destroyed by enemy artillery fire, horses, and
vehicles etc.
Hence, large
resources
were
required for repairing lines cut off. This problem
was to repeat itself in the Second World War.
With the change to 'indirect fire' a new
problem faced the gunners: How to hit the target
with accuracy, when it could not be observed
from the guns? And to do this with all units to
engaged irrespective of where they were
deployed? A small error in fire direction or gun
elevation would result in a large impact deviation
relative the target, this when the firing ranges had
increased considerably
with new guns. The
impact of weather conditions on shell trajectory
became a critical factor, as were changes of
muzzle velocitv. The voluminous firing during
the war meant significant wearing of barrels with
a reduction of the latter as a consequence that
must be observed and corrected. Furthermore,
indirect fire required better data as regards the
location coordinates of gun deployments and
targets. This could be achieved by introduction
of efficient resources for survey and better maps
Methods and resources to match all these new
requirements were gradually provided during
the war. It is interesting to notice that the British
Expeditionary Force had only one single officer
specialised in survey when the war commenced;
and he had only one assistant! Four years later,
when the war ended, there were almost 10,000
surveyors, out of which 4,000 were officers.?
Methods for daily regular acquisition of
weather data (several times a day) were intro-
duced. The aim was to determine strength and
direction of wind at different heights above
ground where the shell trajectory was to pass.
Even air pressure at different heights had to be
measured. With such weather data the trajectory
could be corrected in advance in order to
improve accuracy, thus making it more likely that
the target would be hit. Procedures for 'calibra-
tion' of the guns to correct deviation of muzzle
velocity were also by necessity developed. I will
later in the book discuss more in detail the
problems related to hitting the target.
When the First World War commenced
'mobility' was the word of honour, then it soon
changed to 'firepower'. However, towards the
end of 1917 and early 1918 the former doctrine
again began coming into focus, but still at the
battle at Vimy 1917, the operation commenced
with a huge fire plan, which went on for seven
ot surouise
days! Of course no elements
preceded that attack, this to the advantage of the
defenders.
Another part of the new doctrine that was
developed gradually during the war was that
artillery should in the first place be used against
targets in depth, and not only against the nearest
enemy lines on the battlefield as before. Bailey
(2004) is summarising the doctrine during the
last year of the war as follows: 39
A typical fire-plan attacked enemy headquarters
communication systems, artillery logistics, bridges,
and depots simultaneously. It blinded enemy
observers and destroved strong points and fiel
defences. It attacked enemy positions in depth, es-
pecially the enemy reserve before it could join the
contact battle, sealing off the battlefield. At the same
time it provided close support to the manoeuvre
force as it advanced on its objectives. All this was
accompanied by ruses and deceptions, including a
complete dummy fire-plan if necessary. The
planning for operations was conducted at high level
under centralised command, but measures were
taken to make the plan responsive to the unex
pected events that inevitably occurred.
Basically this doctrine came to last over the
THE PERIOD UP TO THE SECOND WORLD WAR
Second World War and long after that war, but
as Bailey noted, in 1914 it would have been
regarded as 'bizarre'!
The First World War ended on 11 November
1918 with the British artillery comprising 540,000
men and 2,000 batteries of various types.40 Only
a minor part comprised regular formations, the
majority had been established by means of soldiers
conscripted from civilian resources
Barnett (2000) is summarising in his book
Britain and her Army that the army of civilians
had become battle-experienced.
The British
soldier was stubborn and resolute but not very
dashing'. The British Army was good at organ-
ising and controlling the attack in detail. Barnett
meant that there was a rigidity and concentratior
to hierarchy and firm control from the top that
would hamper individual initiatives and actions
to take advantage of rapidly changing situations
(see interview
with General
Balley
in the
Epilogue).*
At the end of the Great War, an organisational,
technical and tactical foundation had been laid for
the future British artillery.
It can be presumed...that the British
Empire will not get engaged in a major
war during the next ten vears'
This was the directive of the British Government
in 1919 as the basis for all military planning after
the devastating Great War. The 'Ten Years Rule'
would be seen applied until 1932 when politi-
cians had to reluctantly admit that the trend not
only in Europe, but also in the Far East, required
a new policy to be implemented.
The dreadful number of victims of the
Great War (three-quarters of a million killed and
more than one and a half million wounded from
the United Kingdom alone) caused widespread
pacifist sentiments in Britain
In this context, the above directive was not to
be seen as unreasonable. After demobilisation of
the conscripted men that dominated the armed
forces during the Great War, the Army had to
revert to its traditional role as a sort of 'imperial
police force'; so also the role of the artillery.
The Great War brought about, however,
some actions also closer than those that occurred
in the colonies. In the allied occupation of what
was called the Rhine-Land, which lasted ten
years until 1929, several batteries from Royal
Field Artillery and Royal Garrison Artillery were
engaged. The allied protection of the border
between Poland and Germany also required par-
ticipation of batteries from the Royal Artillery.
Britain also became involved in the Russian Civil
War after the Bolshevik revolution in 1917. This
included engagement of several thousand men in
many places in Northern Russia; many British
and Canadian batteries came into action as well.
The British landed in 1918 on the coast of
the Kola Peninsula and at Archangelsk. The
North Russia
Expeditionary Force became
involved in heavy fighting with the Bolsheviks
along the
two railways running
in north_
southerly direction, Murmansk-Petrograd and
Archangelsk-Vologda Moscow.
until
finally
withdrawing and being evacuated in 1919. This
engagement had required great skill in adapta-
aon to the
severe climatic conditions
and
movement in a land almost without roads. The
art of fighting (down to the northern shores of
Onega) also required adaptation of organisation
and methods for the use of the guns available
(some 18-pounders and howitzer were placed on
railway trucks and river steam boats). This is a
good example of the outstanding ability on the
part of the Royal Artillery to get engaged Every-
where' as expressed in its Motto, Ubique!
Development against the odds
Much of lessons learned and experience from
the large-scale of the First World War took time
to implement during the years between the two
World Wars. There were, of course, people
looking ahead. Some gave much thought to the
development and role of armoured formations
in future conflicts. A test concept was devised,
the Experimental Mechanized Force (EMF),42
It was however disbanded towards the end of the
1920s, and much was again to remain as before.
The different arms slipped away from each
other, and the interest for all-arms training faded
away, each arm proceeded on its own
However, it is worthwhile to observe, that
the Royal Artillery tested self-propelled (SP)
guns in the 1920s. Some attempts in this regard
had been made already during the war, but it was
too early. When the EMF concept went to the
grave, the interest for development of such guns
was dropped. Again, Britain should lose ground
to other more progressive countries. Towards the
end of the 1920s. and at the beginning of the
1930s, another debate emerged: would aircraft
replace heavy guns? Those arguing for aircraft
as a substitute for heavy guns, amongst them the
