GUNFIRE
he one day concentrated the fire from all his 24
guns against the same target, an armoured enemy
unit halted for refuelling and rest. He could do
this by personally giving fire orders to the
batteries on radio, which was a fairly untested
procedure at that ume. I his artillery engagement
has been described as the very first regimental
concentration fired in the war.
Jack Parham was soon after his return in
England promoted Brigadier and artillery
commander of the 38th Infantry Division. He
now had a platform for developing the methods
for concentrating fire from a very large number
of guns, for which he has been best known. His
priorities were speed and simplicity based on the
fact that artillery on technical grounds was an
area-covering weapon.
Targets
were often
scattered over a fairly large area. He turned a
technical disadvantage into a tactical advantage.
The earlier practice of prioritising accuracy by
focusing on time-consuming ranging, was not a
good doctrine, he used to argue. With the tech-
nology available absolute precision could still not
be achieved. Long communication ways through
the hierarchy for acquisition of permission to
open fire should also be eliminated. That was
another point that he stressed.
Parham proposed a simplified method for
description of targets to be engaged, at the time
used as an order for calling up guns for firing. If
the FOO/OPO wanted a whole regiment (24
guns) to fire he just ordered Mike Target followed
by its location and rounds to be fired. If he
wanted all the divisional artillery (72 guns) to
engage a certain target, he ordered Uncle Target
over his radio set, and a real blow was Victor
Target, where the entire Corps artillery was to
fire (200-300 guns, or many more). Parham's
message was, that large-scale concentrations
were possible to effectuate by using modern
survey and communication technology in the
right way. A prerequisite was, however, that sim-
plified fire ordering procedures including this set
of target descriptions were applied. In late 1941
he invited a number of high officers to witness
how the fire from no less than 144 guns could
land at the same target within five minutes, the
target to be pointed out by one of the spectators.
As we have seen. Parham's ideas were
accepted, albeit not immediately. But eventually,
they were officially approved of as methods for
imposing quick and very strong blows against
the enemy. Training manuals were soon revised
accordingly. This contribution made by Parham
was of utmost importance during the last three
years of the war
From autumn 1942, Parham served in turn
as artillery commander of the 1st, 2nd and 14th
Army. He had hardly assumed the latter position
when the war was over in August 1945. He was
known as the officer also
responsible for
planning
the
extensive
preparatory
fire
programme preceding the Normandy invasion
on 6 June 1944.
Parham was promoted Major General in
1946 and commander of the 3rd Anti-Aircraft
Group in Scotland, a position he held until re-
tirement in 1949. At the beginning of this period
he acted as Aide-de-Camp to H.M. the King.
In retirement, Jack Parham got more time
again to attend to his old interest in aviation and
aircraft design. He studied the subjects both in
theory and practice and wrote books and
articles. He was fascinated by the shape of birds
and their flying technique and tried to transfer
some of his findings to the design of aircrant
wings. Of his books, one in particular has been
much observed and appreciated. Its title is Bira
Flights for Bird Lovers. He made all the illustra-
tions in the book himself. He was an eminent il-
lustrator and artist, and many elegant panoram.
sketches from observation posts made by him
have been preserved. He was always fond of
combining various tactical reports with well-
drawn sketches.
Another area of interest to Parham after re-
tirement was sailing. In this field, he wanted to
improve design of sails and masts with inspira-
tion from the world of birds. He made several
practical trials with his own-designed and built
catamaran
Major General Hetman Jack Parham died at
the age of 79 on 29 December 1974 after having
suffered a lot from bad health and diminishing
sight during his final years.
General Sir Sidney Chevalier Kirkman, GCB,
KBE, MC
Kirkman was born in 1895 in Bedford where he
spent his school years before getting the oppor-
tunity to enlist at Royal Military Academy at
Woolwich. He was commissioned 2nd Lieu-
tenant in 1915 and served in the First World War
to its end; this in France, Belgium, Italy and
other places. He was appointed a Battery
Commander before the war was over. He was
GUNNERS WE HAVE MET
wounded three times and awarded the Military
Cross (MC). During the inter-war period he
served in Egypt, Palestine, Malta and India. He
got further training at Staff College, Camberley,
Surrey in 1931-1932.
However, his career
upwards was slow, despite all his qualifications.
When the war broke out, he was a Major
and still a battery commander. But then his
career gathered momentum. In 1940 he was
promoted Lieutenant
Colonel
andi
commander of 65 Medium Regiment RA, a Ter-
ritorial regiment, and with this he took part in
the battle of France. After having returned from
Dunkirk, it took about a year
until again
promoted, this time to the rank of Brigadier and
artillery commander
of the 56th
Infantry
Division. Montgomery, who had seen Kirkman's
qualities, made him artillery commander of XII
Corps later the same year, 1941. It was now that
Kirkman made his large contribution to the de-
velopment of artillery
doctrines and tactics.
Thanks to him, the establishment of a new trend
as to the use of artillery came about. His sugges-
tions were presented in connection with the
largest-ever peacetime exercise, Exercise Bumper
in October 1941. Highest umpire in the exercise
was Montgomery and Kirkman assisted him as
chief umpire on the use of artillery.
Kirkman then showed convincingly that it
would lead to
serious consequences
when
command of artillery units was decentralised too
much within Corps and divisions. When so
done, he explained, concentration of firepower
could not be arranged when much needed, and
artillery units remained idle,
or kept as a
reserve', in critical situations. As a counter-
measure he proposed a doctrine, which was to
be very successful during the rest of the war. The
doctrine said that Command, i.e. the tactical use
of artillery units in the operative situation in
question, should be kept as high as possible in
the organisation, and Control, i.e. primarily fire
observation and control, should be decentralised
to lowest practicable level. By this, concentration
of firepower across unit boundaries would be
possible. A better co-ordination of the artillery
plan with the overall operative plan would also
be secured.
'Control' should, if the doctrine was
followed, rest with the one having the best view
of the tactical situation in detail. This was
normally
the Forward Observation Officer
(POO) acting together with the infantry, or
armour, commander to be supported. Together
with the latter he could best judge how the battle
should be pursued. Based on this he could advise
the infantry/armour commander as to whether
fire from a troop of four guns or many more
would be the best tactical alternative. If and
when a strong and sudden enemy counter-attack
threatened the infantry/armour, the FOO was in
a position to immediately take action with all
available artillery resources.
It can be said that Jack Parham in 1941 es-
tablished the technical procedures for quickest
and strongest
possible
concentration
firepower from all artillery within range. Sidney
Kirkman established the necessary command
and control structure for such an employment
of artillery to become possible. Both of them
broke by this an out-of-date doctrine on how
artillery should be used. They were successful
also thanks to personal qualities in convincing
those hesitant or reluctant to accept new ideas.
Furthermore, they had the capacity to get things
done; they were real 'doers'.
Montgomery called for Kirkman when he
needed a top-class artillery commander for the
8th Army in Egypt. He assumed his new role in
mid-September 1942 and became immediately
the principal advisor and co-ordinator of the
huge artillery employment in the battle of El
Alamein 23 October-4 November 1942. This
made the application of the new doctrine
possible. 1he 800-900 guns available to Mont-
gomery were used very efficiently and made a
decisive contribution to the success of the battle
Before the fighting in North Africa came to
an end in May 1943, Montgomery made
Kirkman commander of the
50th Infantrv
Division with the rank of Major General. Just
before this, he acted as artillery commander of
18 Army Group, which comprised the Ist and
8th Army. He led the 50th Infantry Division in
the invasion of Sicily in July 1943 and the sub-
sequent battle
for
the
island.
He
commanded this division when it later landed on
the Italian mainland in September 1943. It was
then time for the next steo in Kirkman's career
Kirkman was promoted Lieutenant General
at the beginning
O1 1944 and annointed
commander of XIII Corps, which on the British
side was given the task to finally break throual
the German 'Gustav Line' south of Rome. This
attack has been called the fourth battle
Cassino and commenced on 11 May 1944. It
