Foreword
FOREWORD
closely reviewed by the author in the process, resulting in a thoroughly readable
exploration of the subject. It is of particular interest because it is a study by an
officer of a foreign army, who provides an extraordinarily detailed analysis of the
role of artillery in the Second World War.
Brigadier Ken Timbers (late RA), September 2016
'O, wad some Power the giftie gie us
To see oursels as others see us!'
ROBERT BURNS
Having spent my working life either serving in the Royal Regiment of Artillery or
as the Curator of its famous historical collections, I was inevitably hooked by the
idea of a book on the Regiment's role in World War II. It was without doubt a period
when British artillery reached a peak of power and performance, prompting
encomiums from wartime military leaders of the calibre of FM Montgomery and
General Horrocks, both of whom attributed much of the British Army's success to
its artillery. Finding that the book was written by a Swedish artillery officer added
to my interest.
In addition to a successful career in his field of expertise, with managerial roles
in electrical engineering and power supply companies, Stig H. Moberg's experience
as a reservist artillery officer in Sweden is extensive. He served from 1957 to the
late 1980s, keeping up to date by attending courses and field exercises at many
levels. His interest in history and the principles of indirect fire led him to explore
the subject, settling on British artillery in the Second World War as the 'state of the
art'. His choice was influenced by finding that the archives in England were full of
valuable sources, making it much easier to study the subject.
The author has done an immense amount of research in producing this book,
which covers a wide range of topics, including a historical background that explains
how artillery firepower developed, particularly with the dramatic switch from direct
to indirect fire shortly before the First World War. He discusses the many conse-
quent changes in technology, including improvements in range, weight of fire,
accuracy, communications, transport and logistics, showing a system at its peak
when that war ended. However, the system lay dormant in the period between the
wars, and enormous efforts were needed to get the Royal Artillery's performance
back to a level where it could begin to help turn the tide against the Axis powers in
the Second World War. In this context he highlights the decisive contribution by
Brigadiers (later Generals) Sidney Kirkman and Jack Parham. Their initiative led
to new tactical and gunnery principles which enabled swift and unmatched massing
of artillery.
This book takes the reader through that period of development, showing not
only the technical improvements and advances, but also illustrating them with
accounts of events and actions during the early days of the War. It goes on to
discuss organisations and equipment, both of which are helped by clear illustrations
and photographs. A masterly account of the progress of the War shows how artillery
made its contribution. A glance at the bibliography and the detailed footnotes show
how much work has gone into producing a comprehensive account of his subject.
The book is a translation from the original publication in Sweden, but it has been
