GUNFIRE
Operation Goodwood, one of the largest
operations in Normandy. It is tempting to
assume that the plan and execution of this
operation had been much different if larger
focus on all-arms cooperation had been
prioritised and more distinct objectives had
been formulated. If so, the artillery
resources most likely had been in a much
better position to contribute better than
became the case.
The battle of Normandy introduced a
distinct shift of roles. The artillery lacked
resources for combating targets at great
depth from the front line such as enemy
long-range artillery, armoured reserves
etcetera. This now became the prime re-
sponsibility of heavy and medium bomber
formations, not to mention rocket- and
gun-armed fighter-bombers. These air
resources got a particular important role
thanks to the fact that the Allies managed to
retain almost complete air superiority. The
artillery became the prime actor closer to
the front line, say up to 10-15km from this.
21. BERLIN tonight' - Arnhem
No, it was not about moving ahead towards
Berlin. That was still beyond the capability of the
Allies. The order issued on the morning 25
September 1944 was the final confirmation that
Operation Market Garden had to be aborted,
and that the evacuation of The British 1st
Airborne from Arnhem should be done that
night. Or more correctly: the remnants of the
division. Nine days of extremely hard fighting
had reduced the number of combatants from
over 10,000 to little more than 2,000. What had
happened, and what had the artillery meant for
the outcome of the operation?
The remarkably quick advance by the Allies
from the bridgehead in Normandy against com-
paratively weak German resistance had given
hopes for a quick victory, hopefully by the end
of 1944. The triumphant reception by the
French and Belgian population added to the
euphoric sentiments. But there were problems.
The great losses had, in particular on the
British side, been difficult to replace. In August
1944 the British were forced to break up the
59th Infantry Division and a few reserve
divisions in England in order to keep up the
nominal strength of the divisions in Northwest
Europe. The three field regiments of the 59th
Division were, however, rescued temporarily and
were re-organised as 59 AGRA.
A gigantic problem affecting all units during
the quick advance after the breakout from
Normandy was that all supplies had to come
from harbours and beaches in Normandy. There
Were just not enough transport resources to cope
with these long supply lines when five allied
armies were advancing quickly. Several artillery
units had to stop at river Seine for a couple of
weeks to let the RASC use their vehicles, thus
speeding up the preparations for the next large
offensive. It is true that besides
Brussels,
Antwerp had been captured on 4 September,
but the latter harbour could not be used as the
German 15th Army still held the northern shore
of river Schelde, which prevented any ships from
approaching this large harbour. The smaller
harbours at Boulogne, Calais and Dunkirk were
still held by German garrisons. So, it became im-
possible to supply all the advancing armies with
fuel, ammunition and other vital commodities,
at least if the armies were to pursue their offen-
sives at the same time.
This was the situation when Montgomery
received Eisenhower's permission to launch
Operation Market Garden. It was preceded by
intensive discussions, debates
and pohtical
pressure and where the rivalry between the
highest allied commanders was obvious to all.
One might wonder why the Allies did not
give priority to Antwerp to reduce the supply
problems. A strategic mistake took place on
September when the city was captured. In the
course of capturing the city and meeting jubilant
Citizens, the 11th Armoured Division was
ordered to stop its advance at the Albert Canal.
Had the division proceeded only some 30km,
they would have cut off the line of retreat for the
German 15th Army. This army was just then
crossing the outer parts of the river Schelde. It
is estimated that up to 80,000 men, 600 guns,
6,200 vehicles and 6,200 horses avoided capture
by the Allies before 23 September. 363 Nothing
prevented the Germans from transferring huge
resources to Northern and Eastern Holland,
where they were to play an important role during
the course of Operation Market Garden. At the
same time strong forces were left at Schelde,
making allied use of the harbour at Antwerp im-
possible
That failure, and what caused it, is worth a
separate study, but this is beyond the scope of
this book. It might also be of interest to note that
the commander of XXX Corps, Lieutenant
General Brian Horrocks, when asked about it
after the war, said that at the beginning of
September all focus and thoughts were directed
at crossing river Rhine before the Germans
could establish a strong defence line along this
river. That led to plans for Operation Market
Garden. The strategic gain, if this operation
would be successful, was presumed to be so
great and tempting. The idea was to turn
eastwards once Arnhem was in allied hands and
