GUNFIRE
Fig. 18-2 Most of the gunners had to become
infantry soldiers in the invasion defence after their
return from Dunkirk while waiting for replacement of
guns, vehicles and other types of equipment that had
been lost in France (©Imperial War Museum H 4741)
The limited number of guns they had would
of course be engaged in invasion defence, at first
with static tasks only. Artillery fire as of the
"higher school' was not a realistic issue.
The 5th Infantry Divison, which had done
so well in France but had suffered great losses,
was reassembled in Scotland and given the task
to defend against invaders and air landings in
North-Eastern Scotland. Its artillery regiments
were ordered to organise and train an infantry
company each. The divisional artillery head-
quarters described the situation in its war diary:
During this period Div H.Q. was at Enverurie.
Guns, equipment and vehicles were arriving spas-
modically. Had the Div Arty been required to go
into action during the first 10 days in Enverurie,
it would have consisted of 15 rifles. Immediately
before moving to Perth on 30 June, it could have
produced the fire power of some 10 guns, but
owing to shortage of essential equipment and gun
stores, only bow and arrow methods would have
been possible.279
Not only the evacuated units faced difficulties.
There was still a severe shortage of equipment
mobilised new
Territorial units
under
training. Captain G.W. Robertson of 136 Field
Regiment RA gives an
illustration of the
situation in his regimental history:
I. Meanwhile 348 Battery down south of the
River Alde at Sudbourne Hall were split up into
small detachments and posted as infantry at
various points considered to be danger spots
along the river. Rifles were still in short supply in
the Regiment and those available were only
enough to arm one man in three. Ammunition
was equally short - five rounds a man. Those
without rifles were told to provide themselves
with pieces of wood, which were to be fashioned
into clubs. Shortly afterwards, to the great
amusement of all, there was an issue of pikes!
These were bayonets of Great War pattern welded
into the lengths of steel tubing. They proved quite
dangerous to the user. The wags claimed that the
idea was to show the pikes to the invading soldiers
who would then die from laughing.280
British humour in a very critical situation!
Not only lack of equipment made the task
difficult but also other problems influenced the
situation. This is illustrated by the task given to
72 Field Regiment RA in the evening of 26 June.
The regiment was ordered to move to the
Weymouth area on the southern coast where the
regiment was to come under command of 151
Infantry Brigade (one of the brigades of the 50th
Infantry Division). The brigade was to defend a
sector of the coast near Weymouth and to Lyme
Regis,
the latter
around
40km
west of
Weymouth. Here 285 Battery RA was assigned
a 5km wide sector west of Weymouth and the
second battery, 286 Battery RA, a sector east of
the city, around 3km wide. The batteries should
each deploy one infantry company with three
platoons in respective sector and in addition to
this, they should have one infantry company in
reserve. It is stressed in the war diary that the
armament was one rifle per gunner!*
Artillery units engaged for the defence of a
coastal sector like this began immediately to
build fortifications.
Trenches, foxholes
shelters protected by wired fences were built
wherever possible. Observation Posts, preferably
in high buildings, water
were
lowers ele
arranged. Numerous sand bags were filled and
in true British sports tradition competitions
between units were arranged to see who could
fill most sand bags at a given time. Competitions
in carrying sandbags on ladders up from the
beach were also arranged.
became
When resources from Royal Engineers
available, provisional constructions
216
FROM IMMINENT INVASION THREAT TO OFFENSIVE TRAINING
protected by sand, soil, wood etc. were replaced
by new ones made in concrete, some still to be
seen today. Gun pits were also built the same
manner, often placed in such a way that enfilad-
ing direct fire could be fired by the guns along
the beaches.
In order to strengthen the invasion defences,
a fast-track programme for construction of coast
artillery positions near harbours was launched
quickly. The Royal Navy provided already in
May no less than 150 6-inch guns to be used in
the programme. These had long been in store for
use on merchant ships in case of war, but were
now to be used for other tasks. Later even more
guns of different calibres were made available.
During the three summer months, a coastal
defence line with more than 600 guns was con-
structed, indeed an impressive achievement!282
The shortage of field artillery for fire against
potential invasion beaches made inclusion of old
naval guns in the field artillery necessary. Even
a few old salute guns were deployed! It became
an important task on the part of Royal Engineers
to construct suitable foundations of concrete for
these guns and also protective structures for
them and the crews. But it was not obvious how
to man them. Initially it became the responsibil-
ity of field and medium regiments still waiting
for new guns as replacement for those lost
abroad. A
sood.
example is 69 Medium
Regiment RA deployed near the southern coast.
In August 1940 the regiment
arSenal.28=
had 1n 1ts
Eight 6-inch howitzers (received on 4
August)
Two 2-pound naval guns
Two 100-mm naval guns for shells where
shell and cartridge was one entity
Two 100-mm ship guns for shells where
shell and cartridge were loaded separately
Two 3-pound naval guns
Sixteen 6-inch mortars
Five light machine guns (Spandau)
Three heavy machine guns (Hotchkiss)
Itis furthermore stated in the war diary that the
regiment had six Campbell armoured cars
Attaching artillery units to fixed positions
like this was not what these units wanted. They
wanted to be free to assume normal duties and
be ready to re-deploy quickly when the tactical
situation so required. Meeting the needs for gun
crews for the coast artillery positions was
therefore transferred gradually to new Defence
Regiments; eventually ten were constituted. As
we have seen, some were later reorganised to
become field regiments; others were disbanded.
The process was concluded in 1942 when no
invasion threat existed any longer
Further tasks on the part of gunners in the
summer 1940 were to build road blocks across
roads leading to the
coast, an undertaking
requiring lots of men for filling sand bags, col-
lecting timber, stones etc. They also assisted in
removing road signs, name signs at villages and
railway stations, everything in accordance with a
Governmental decision on 31 May 1940.
A new regimental organisation is born
The Royal Artillery was a learning organisation.
Lessons learned during the initial campaigns
were to be taken care of. Soon after the evacua-
tion, a lively discussion followed regarding what
had been good and what must be changed. As
seen, one of the most important lessons was that
the battery organisation with two 12-gun
batteries from 1938 had several disadvantages.
It was too 'heavy' and difficult to lead in a
modern mobile war. Neither did it fit well with
the three-pronged organisational structure of the
infantry. It was normal practice in a division to
have one field regiment to support one brigade.
With three regiments this was not a problem, but
it was also required that each one of the three
battalions in a brigade could be supported by a
battery, and this
was not possible when a
regiment had two batteries.
The solution was obvious. The resources
available in a regiment should be split up in three
batteries instead of two, each one with two
instead of three troops. In total the battery was
to have eight guns in two troops and the
regiment three batteries with, as before, 24 guns.
(Cf. Chapter 5)
A division that made the change early without
asking for permission was the 2nd Infantry
Division. Its three field regiments (10, 16 and 99
Field Regiment RA) were reorganised directly
after their return to England Who took the initia
tive? Was it the divisional artillery commander?
Or was it one of the regimental commanders) A
good guess is that the commander of 10 Field
Regiment RA, Lieutenant Colonel Jack Parham,
is the most likely candidate. He was untiringly
working to make the best out of the artillery
