pg_0406.pdf:
V07795 (405) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
374
[Appendix III.
ii. The pay book which is detachable and when completed is
replaced by a new issue. Every issue of pay must be
signed for by an officer, who will state legibly under his
signature his rank and unit.
2. Part I, as explained above, is the property of the soldier and,
except in case of death, should always be in his possession.
Anyone
finding an A.B. 64 whose owner he is unable to trace, should at once
send it to the O. i/c 2nd Ech., who will take steps to restore it to
its rightful owner.
3. In case of death the A.B. 64 is sent to the O. i/c 2nd Ech., as
described in Sec. 195. On receipt by that officer, the will (if any)
is extracted, attached to B 20904 and sent to the War Office; the
remainder of the book is treated as part of the man's effects and
dealt with as explained in Appendix VI.
4. Part Il when completed is sent to the paymaster at home and
replaced by a fresh issue; in case of death it should accompany
Part I and will be extracted by the O. 1/c 2nd Ech., and despatched
to the base paymaster with a copy of A.F. B 2090A.
(19) A.F. W 3241.
This form fulfils the same purposes in the case of officers as A.B. 64
(Part Il) does for other ranks and is dealt with in a similar manner.
(20) A.F. W 3190 (Kit certificate).
This form is described in Appendix VI, and is made out by the
officer despatching and enclosed in the parcel of effects.
On receipt by the O. i/c 2nd Ech., it is checked against the effects
received and acknowledged as correct or otherwise.
(21) 1. Fs. W 3301 and W 3043 (Special labels for effects of deceased
officers, nurses and other ranks).
These forms must be used in forwarding the effects of the deceased
personnel to the O. i/c 2nd Ech. The method of dealing with effects
is detailed in Appendix VI. The reason that these special labels.
have been designed is to ensure that the effects go straight to the
effects section of the 2nd Ech. and are thus only dealt with by the
staff specially authorized for this purpose. Any enquiries which
may arise or deficiencies which may occur are thus much more easily
answered and traced.
On receipt all parcels will be registered, checked against the list
of contents and acknowledged.
V07795 (405) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

