pg_0397.pdf:
V07795 (396) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Appendix III.]
365
iv. Names of officer battle casualties, for information only of
commanders, but for reporting by O. i/c 2nd Ech. to the
War Office for notification to next-of-kin.
Bde. (or formation) H.Q. for transmission to Div. H.Qs., for con-
solidation and transmission as stated in Note (5).
3. The details of this state (A.F. W 3006) will also be telegraphed
by units and detachments daily to O. i/c 2nd Ech. to enable the
reinforcement section to be kept in daily touch with the situation
in personnel of each unit, and so be prepared to meet reinforcement
demands.
4. The officer battle casualties notified in the daily strength state
(A.F. W 3006) will be reported by the O. i/c 2nd Ech. to the War
Office by telegrams and included in the daily casualty list referred to
in para. 5 of Note (7), for notification to next-of-kin. Except as
provided in Appendix!,, l, a casualty will not be notified to a
next-of-kin by anyone serving in the theatre of war.
(5) A.F. W 3007. Fighting strength.
The daily strength state of units (A.F. W 3006) will be consoli-
dated in terms of units at Div. H.Q. on A.F. W 3007, the necessary
deductions being first made from the total strengths to arrive
at the fighting strengths.
The deductions which should be made
will be notified from time to time as may be necessary by the general
staff. The consolidated fighting strength of the Div. will be trans-
•
strength, thence to G.H.Q. for consolidation of the fighting strength
of the whole fighting force in the field. G.H.Q. will send daily a
copy of the consolidated strength to the War Office. This procedure
will result in all commanders and the War Office having a daily
knowledge of the approximate fighting state of the forces in the
field.
Note. The consolidation at corps and army H.Q. and G.H.Q.
should be in bulk, i.e., by Divs., Corps and Armies.
V07795 (396) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

