SERVICES
SOUS
renang daa vanun. Conuet os taese depots was difficult
There was no
I owte warwana cad these installations
mee pat tmia miian conpe te menne menae mane me te cespansi
bility behind railhead.
The depot at Penang, unfortunately, had to be sited in the dock area. In
order to réctify this sot coompleted eation of temporary buildings was begun
at Glugor, but was not cotipleted on the outbreak of war with Japan.
additional A.A.D. was parive the mpleted and taken into use at Bukit Siput,
and another A.O.D. to serve the Johore Area was sited at Batu Anam but
never operated.
On Singapore island, the original magazine had been augmented by a new
and large magazine at Kranji on the north of the island.
Lack of storage space for general stores at the B.O.D. necessitated the
hiring of additional accommodation at various points on Singapore island.
In this accommodation sub-depots were set up holding bulk stores ; certain
items classed as essential were distributed between these sub-depots on a
3-point dispersal plan when their quantity made this possible.
Vehicle parks
to store reserve vehicles were set up on Singapore island (1,000 vehicles),
Kuala Lumpur and Valdor (500 vehicles each), after considerable difficulty
had been experienced in negotiating with the civilian government to obtain
suitable ground in Singapore for this purpose.
The map facing page 288 shows where the R.A.O.C. installations were
situated before and during the campaign.
When it became apparent that Thailand might ask for assistance, an
ordnance field park was considered essential ; India undertook to send one
but it did not materialize.
A small but efficient ordnance field park was
improvised and sent up to 3 Indian Corps.
Shortly before the attack on
Malaya, two small ordnance field parks arrived from Australia for the
Australian Division.
Owing to the shortage of certain warlike stores, "Q" staff controlled the
initial issues of M.T., and "G" staff all weapons and ammunition.
This
control continued until the end of the campaign.
The distance of Singapore from the sources of supply of stores and
ammunition made the problem of efficient provision a difficult one.
Before
1941 all stores and ammunition were supplied from the United Kingdom
except certain clothing and tentage which were supplied from India.
In 1941, when the Eastern Supply Council was set up, demands for clothing
and general stores were rendered monthly to the Central Provision Ofice
(C.P.O.) at Delhi, although demands for warlike stores continued to be sub-
mitted direct to the United Kingdom.
A Malaya Provision Officer was appointed on the Command Staff who was
intended to handle all questions relating to policy between the C.P.O., Deinl
and Malaya.
This officer was an A.Q.M.G., who was given many other duties
so that he had of necessity lo delegate most of the Malaya Provision duids to
e subordinate with little or no knowledge of ordnance procedure.
Malaya Frovision Officer been a senior ordnance ofncer trained in provision
duties quicker and smoother working would undoubted si_ave resulted.
289
W02797/57
WO 277/21
