construction or non-existent, now had to tackle the load thrown at it from
Woolwich.
The depot was therefore compelled to scrap its original planned
development and resort to rapid improvisation.
Housing the personnel, both military and civilian, was a major difficulty
and for many months living conditions were rough and uncomfortable.
The
many
civilian employees transferied from
Woolwich were temporarily
billeted in adjacent villages and towns, while plans were agreed with the
local housing authority to build 500 houses as part of the long term project
for accommodating the permanent civilian staff.
Early in 1941, in order to help the development of Donnington and to
cope with the increasing warlike stores commitment, C.O.D. Greenford, till
then only a bulk store for Donnington, was made a shadow depot, and in
lune, 1941, further relief was afforded to Donnington by opening a sub
lepot at Otley in Yorkshire with the primary function of supplying signals
stores to all units in Northern Command.
Otley sub-depot provided a road
delivery service in the form of binned store lorries which called on units
at regular intervals, normally weekly.
In addition, this sub-depot stored
Northern Command's reserve of signals stores and assembled large numbers
of unit mobilization signals equipments.
During 1941, a further important step was taken to spread the Donnington
load by opening ten new sub-depots, in requisitioned
premises in Leeds,
Bradford and Bingley, for the receipt and issue of searchlight equipments.
Meantime the internal organization of Donnington had progressed suffi-
ciently to enable that C.O.D. to carry out successfully the issue of large
consignments of warlike stores to Malta, and to carry out its share in the
task of supplying equipment to Russia, which involved special packing and
complicated documentation as well as identification marking in Russian.
Donnington had also established by this time a large Returned Stores
Group (R.S.G.), approximately 200,000 sq. ft. of covered storage, in which
non-serviceable warlike stores returned by units were conditioned and
repaired, an important asset in helping to maintain the supply of many items
still in short supply from manufacture.
This R.S.G. activity was later
removed from Donnington as part of the scheme which concentrated such
work in the Central Repair Depot, Woolwich.
By 1942 the increased storage accommodation constructed at Donnington
and the general development of depot facilities enabled the C.O.D. to handle
largely increased receipts from manufacture including supplies from America ;
to carry out efficiently the packing and issue of landing reserves for the
campaign in North Africa; and later to meet heavy operational commit-
ments for the Sicilian and Italian war theatres.
In the latter half of 1942 heavy receipts of machine tools from America
accentuated the storage problem at C.O.D., Old Dalby and added much to
the difficulties of census recording and controlling the increasingly diverse
range of machines and accessories.
The stock of some 700 machinery lorries
was moved to a new park on the Golf Course, Stanford Park, from the
V.R.D. at Breedon which had proved unsuitable.
Covered storage accom-
modation at Old Dalby was re-arranged and extended and the depot roads
were used to provide outside storage.
By October, 1943, it had become
necessary to spread the storage commitment and certain types of heavy
machinery were accordingly stored at Donnington and Bicester.
34
Till 1943, the original Donnington organization of two store groups, one
for armament and one for engineer, signals and wireless stores, had operated
satisfactorily, but it was then apparent that the latter group, much inflated
by the fast increasing range of wireless and radar stores, was too unwieldy
for efficient control and needed division into two separate groups, one for
signals and wireless stores, one for engineer, bridging, searchlight and radar
stores.
Radar equipment, then on the
" top secret" list, needed separate
storage under special security measures.
The re-organization was carefully planned and successfully executed, by
the expenditure of 35,000 man hours.
It involved the physical movement,
re-stacking and re-racking of 8,000 tons of stores, the dismantling and re-
assembly of some 10,000 feet run of steel racking for detail stores and the
transfer of some 50,000 separate store accounts.
During this considerable
task, the C.O.D. managed to meet all its issue commitments up to the set
target dates.
The storekeeping of radar had its own peculiar problems.
Radar main
equipments ranged from lightweight types of approximately 3 cwt. to heavy
types mounted in lorries and trailers and weighing up to 40 tons. As many as
500 radar vehicles at a time were stored at Donnington and their kitting, ser-
vicing, road testing and storage, under the strictest security conditions, con-
stituted a highly technical task.
By the end of 1943 the enormously expanded and modernized C.O.D.
organization for warlike stores had evolved progressively to a set of well-
organized parent C.O.Ds. with shadow depots and sub-depots. It had become a
flexible organization which was coping successfully with the receipt, storage
and issue of the vastly increased quantity and range of warlike stores needed
to maintain the armies already in the Field, to equip the formations training
and mobilizing for future operations, and to prepare the reserves for new
war theatres yet to open.
Towards the end of 1943 these depots had already begun the special
operational packing of landing reserves (L.Rs.) and beach maintenance packs
(B.M.Ps.) for the coming invasion of Europe.
During 1944 they had to deal
with abnormally heavy issues of anti-aircraft equipment and spares resulting
from the intense activity of our anti-aircraft defences against the enemy flying
bomb attacks then in progress.
All these issues were operationally urgent.
During a flying bomb attack the C.O.D. at Greenford received one direct hit
which inflicted 110 casualties and caused serious destruction of stocks and
much damage to buildings.
Another flying
bomb inflicted 47 casualties
among a party of A.T.S. on the march from their camp to Greenford Depot.
During the weeks immediately preceding the invasion of Europe, all
C.O.Ds. made special arrangements designed to ensure that on embarkation
the war equipment of every formation and unit of 21 Army Group would
be complete and serviceable in every detail.
Programmes and timetables
were arranged with ordnance representatives of 21 Army Group formations
and arrangements made for units to call with transport at designated C.O.Ds
where immediate issues were made in accordance with the deficiency lists.
In spite of the very great numbers of units so dealt with and the tens of
thousands of storekeeping transactions entailed, practically every unit in 21
35
wO 277/21.
18
