SERVICES
of ordnance stores, equipments and ammunition to all the forces in the
Command. Hitherto, regiments of the Royal V Go friman Frontier Force
had been equipped and clothed by the Colonial Governments.
Each regi-
mental headquarters had a staff captain (O) who arranged the provision of
clothing and equipment. This commitment now became the responsibility
In January, 1942, the senior ordnance appointment was
The D.D.O.S. was faced with the problem of re-organizing the Ordnance
services in West Africa, having regard to the following factors: -
(a) The distance of the theatre from the base in the United Kingdom-
(b) The lack of land communication between the Colonies.
(c) The undeveloped nature of the country, e.g., dearth of roads and
(d) The lack of covered storehouse accommodation.
(e) The poor port facilities.
(1) Poor labour supply. Base ordnance installations could not operate
on their military establishments, which required to be diluted very
The West African was usually illiterate,
and had to be taught English, ordnance procedure, typing, etc.
Despite these handicaps, it eventually became possible, as a result
of careful instruction and education, to dilute the R.A.O.C. estab-
lishment in the theatre to the extent of 93 per cent.
(g) The effect of the climate on ordnance stores.
The average tem-
perature is 87° F. with a high degree of humidity (over 99.4 per
There was widespread prevalence of rust, woolly-bear,
teredo-worm, fungus, mildew and plagues of moths.
practicable to unpack stores and place them in bins ready for future
use since, very soon after they had been removed from their cartons
or packages and exposed to the climate, dust and damp caused
irreparable damage.
Therefore, it became a rule that stores should
not be unpacked until required for immediate issue.
and maintenance work was always a heavy commitment.
preventative action was useless, e.g., although the bristles of brushes
were completely covered with naphthalene dust they were rapidly
Development of the Base Ordnance Installations
The idea of having one large B.O.D. to serve the whole theatre was
considered by A.D.O.S. (later D.D.O.S.) at various stages after the outbreak
of war. However, on each occasion it was decided that, although this course
might be both economical and practicable in peace-time, it was not expedient
during war, when troops with modern equipment were spread over fou
colonies served by such poor communications.
to site a B.O.D. in each colony.
It was therefore decided
The fall of France had an immediate effect on the theatre, since it was
so closely flanked by French territory.
time as follows: --
Five small B.O.Ds. existed at this
312
No. 1 West African B.O.D., Nigeria.
No. 2 West African B.O.D., Nigeria.
No. 3 West African B.O.D., Gold Coast.
No. 4 West African, B.O.D., Sierra Leone.
No. 5 West African B.O.D., Gambia.
On the French capitulation and in anticipation of the possible threat
1o West Africa by the Vichy Government, the flow of Ordnance Stores into
the theatre was immediately increased.
The development of the five B.O.Ds.,
some of which had not yet been brought into full operation, was accelerated.
At the same time, the naval and air defence of the colonies was greatly
It was the danger of air attack, and lack of accommodation,
as well as the lack of harbours, which forced the wide dispersal of B.O.Ds.
Internally, considerable dispersal was necessary between the sub-depots of
each B.O.D., and this hampered their efficient working.
For example, in
the case of No. 3 B.O.D., the M.T. Sub-Depot was situated 175 miles from
the headquarters of the B.O.D. and from the base workshops.
stores depots were established at each B.O.D. and resulted in immediate
economies, both in respect of provision and shipping space.
Owing to the fact that there already existed, in North Africa, No. 1
and No. 3 B.O.Ds., it was decided in 1943 to change the designation of the
B.O.Ds. in West Africa to the 300 series, e.g. 301 B.O.D., 302 B.O.D.
The transfer of part of the functions of the R.A.S.C. to R.A.O.C. had
the effect of placing additional personnel under ordnance command.
viously, the R.A.S.C. had been responsible for the provision and storage of
its own M.T. spares
The transfer enabled the R.A.S.C.
personnel concerned to be absorbed into the M.T. sub-depots of the respective
The intake of stores was expedited by the building of a jetty, a harbour,
docks and an aerodrome at Takoradi.
These projects not only facilitated
the receipt of ordnance stores for West Africa generally, but assisted in the
maintenance of both the Middle East and Abyssinian campaigns.
stores were flown or shipped from the United Kingdom to Takoradi and
were then transported by road and air to the Middle East, thus avoiding
the trip around the Cape.
B.A.Ds. were, for the most part, well sited and well planned.
sheds (100 tons capacity) were used, spaced at safety distances of 75-100
yards; many were traversed.
The type of construction varied from concrete
buildings to a barbed-wire shed with a thatched roof extending well beyond
the storage ground to keep out the rain.
The depots had adequate roads and traffic circuits; they were normally
sited on or near a railway.
Considering the temperature and the humidity,
the ammunition suffered surprisingly little deterioration.
Expansion and Development of Ordnance Services
In mid-1943 there was a further re-organization of ordnance depots and
locations.
facing page 314:-
The final set-up was as follows and may be seen on the map
Nigeria
No. 301 West African B.O.D.
No. 301 West African B.A.D.
313
