SERVICES
que
arrivals, R.A.O.C. drivers were not available to meet the craft carrying the
In some cases, replacement vehicles were driven off the craft by
individuals who had never driven before.
Owing partly to the anxiety of the
Royal Navy to turn round their craft, men were put into the drivers
seats, engines started, first gear engaged and the vehicles precipitated into
three feet of water-
-somewhat to the detriment of the vehicles' condition.
A most careful control had to be exercised over the arrival of replacement
vehicles to prevent units from acquiring vehicles without authority.
The first mobile laundry and bath units landed on 18th June.
The bath
sections of these units operated often under she lath mortar fir with
forward units, providing baths and a change of clothing for the troops.
In the early stages of the compaign the laundry sections concentrated on
providing clean linen and clothing for hospitals a unit escapa
hospital laundries.
One mobile laundry and bath unit was capable of
providing clean underclothing and a bath for every man in a division once
each week.
An Army Industrial Gas Unit landed on 24th June to produce oxygen
and acetylene for workshops, R.E. services and medical units, thus easing
the problem of shipping empty cylinders to the United Kingdom for refilling.
The reconnaissance party of 14 A.O.D.,
which was to be the main
ordnance depot in the R.M.A. landed on the 28th June.
The plan to open
the depot in the Caen area could not be fulfilled as the area was still in
enemy hands but as it was necessary to press ahead with the preparation
of the depot a site was selected at Audrieu.
During the time 14 A.O.D.
was being prepared 17 A.O.D. maintained the force from B.M.Ps. and the
residue of L.R.
Maintenance of the force during the attempts to break out of the bridge-
head was effected without serious difficulty except in the case of ammunition.
It became necessary to restrict the issues
of certain types of ammunition
because the landing programme was behind schedule and expenditure of
artillery ammunition had been very heavy, the break-out not being achieved
as quickly as had been expected.
All ammunition ships were given top
priority for unloading and the situation was further improved by selective
discharge of ships, the more important types required being 25-pounder and
5.5-inch B.L. gun ammunition.
It was also agreed with the Navy on 20th
June that ammunition ships would be of-loaded within the inner harbour
although this was regarded as highly dangerous.
At the same time, it was
decided to cut the shipments of petrol, oil and lubricants, of which good
reserves had been built up, in order to provide space for artillery ammunition.
Large reserves of tank and A.A. ammunition had accumulated because
tank battles expected after the break-through had not yet taken place and
enemy air attacks were on a scale smaller than that anticipated.
therefore, possible to cut 3,600 tons from the ammunition shipping pro-
gramme for certain tank and A.A. ammunition and allot this tonnage to field
artillery ammunition.
and lubricants and extra shipping made available socially for ammunition
This, together with the cuts in import of petrol, oil
increased the artillery ara munition shipping programme by 10,000 tons, all
of which arriveriley an un and ended the temporary crisis.
229
WO 277/21
18
