GERIA
SEYIF.®
AP 3
COYSTANYI
eventually reaching 75,000 tons.
It also had to store about 6,000 tons of
American ammunition for which the American forces had made no arrange-
Eventually, an American Ammunition Ordnance Company joined
No. 1. B.A.D. to take over the commitment and achieved complete integration
with their British opposite numbers.
The Americans' transport which was
on a much more lavish scale than that
permitted by the British war
establishment was always at the disposal of No. 1 B.A.D.
road served and covered 40 miles of road.
The depot was
In the case of No. 3 B.A.D. at Bone, an initial difficulty was that its
personnel were sent to Algiers.
As a result. the O.B.D. at Bone had to
cope with the initial flood of incoming ammunition, and congestion and
disorder at the quayside were considerable.
The site was the best available,
and like No. 1 B.A.D. was road served but it was liable to flooding and much
constructional work was necessary. In addition
to rail and road issues
3 B.A.D. had to load Tank Landing Craft (T.L.C.) with ammunition for
delivery to the small port of La Calle.
Each depot had a company of the Pioneer Corps which did invaluable
work.
The pressure of work during the first few weeks of the campaign was
very great and it was not relieved until the front became stabilized.
is doubtful if the staff could have continued work at such pressure for a
longer period.
Subsidiary ammunition depots were opened at Bougie and Philippeville
in view of the insufficient capacity of the ports of Algiers and Bone.
Administration of Ordnance Services and System of Supply
During the first two months of the campaign, ordnance services in the
theatre were controlled by D.D.O.S. First Army.
It was not until three
days before the first slow convoy sailed that a D.O.S. was appointed to the
Force. He*
arrived in N. Africa in the middle of December, 1942.
At this time the system of supply to forward troops was on an improvised
basis and changed almost daily.
Stores were either collected by units or
sent forward to ration dumps, according to the convenience of the moment.
A railhead had been established at Souk El Arba, the R.A.O.C. personnel
being provided by No. 1 Railhead Ordnance Company.
The war estab-
lishment of this unit had been fixed on the assumption that there would
be no large holdings of stores or ammunition at railhead.
In actual fact,
the bad communications, shortage of transport, the long distance from
Algiers and lack of air freight facilities made it essential for large stocks
to be held in this forward position. Formations collected from railhead.
To enable No. 3 B.O.D. to develop, in the early days only very urgent
indents were passed on to the B.O.D.; in such instances the stores were
usually drawn direct from the B.O.D. by units.
Later all indents were
sent to No. 3 B.O.D., those for stores not available there being passed on
to No. 1 B.O.D.
Stores were then sent from the B.O.Ds. to railhead whence
they were delivered to formations by R.A.S.C. transport under A.D.O.S.
control.
* Brigadier W. E. C. Pickthall, C.B.E.
Page 195
WO 277/21
18
