1S 10
SER
VICRS
were to be held at Nirsa) and 217 A.A.D. for 3,000 tons of ammunitiol
The plan covered the supply of units east of the Brahmaputra and south.
of Mymensingh, Chittagong and the Arakan.
The two depots were to be located at Mymensingh which is situated in
East Bengal on the banks of the Brahmaputra, an area which was unfortu-
nately low lying and subject to flooding during the monsoon period.
Com-
munications were poor, consisting of a single metre gauge
track of the
Burma and Assam Railway from the Brahmaputra Ferry.
Indeed, from
the outset, the entire project suffered from a lack of appreciation
of the
requirements of an ordnance depot and reflected every error made in the
early days at Katha.
In September, 1942, almost all available accommodation in the town had
already been occupied by other services; of the 150,000 square feet of
covered accommodation required by 215 A.O.D. alone, less than 30,000
square feet was available, and this was of very poor quality and in a
congested area.
One alternative site was discovered on the West bank of the river at
a village approximately three miles south of Mymensingh and well clear of
the congested area.
The site consisted of paddy fields, most of which could
be drained, within a bamboo grove which would afford excellent natural
camouflage.
It was finally decided to use this site for 217 A.A.D. and, as
there was no suitable ground on the higher West bank of the river, to site.
215 A.O.D. on the East bank at Jogendranaga-Mymensingh.
Two good jute factories (63,000 sq. ft.) were requisitioned, the premises
being rail-served.
A camp site was available for construction of the balance
of storage accommodation required.
Owing to lack of building material,
sheds had to be made of thatch, bamboo and tarpaulins suitably camouflaged.
The railway ran alongside this area so it was possible to construct a loop,
siding and marshalling yard.
According to local information no previous flooding had taken place
since 1937.
As ill-luck would have it, flooding occurred during the monsoon
of 1943, and 2,500 tons of stores (stocks were then 6,000 tons) had to be
evacuated by boat to the higher side of the river to requisitioned jute sheds
which had lately become available.
Owing to man-power shortage, staff problems became acute.
To add to
the difficulties,
O.F.Ds.
did not have separate war establishments and war
equipment tables, so that the A.O.D. had to undertake the formation and
stocking of all O.F.Ds. as well as finding the staff for them.
Three such
O.F.Ds. had to be formed (Chittagong,
Comilla and Silchar) as well as
several ordnance detachments at Cox's Bazaar, Bawli and other forward
locations which at this time were still in our possession.
The majority of reinforcements had to be dispersed to other off-shoot
depots so that A.O.D. strength rarely exceeded 20 per cent. of its authorized
establishment.
The C.O.0, had, therefore, to rely upon local labour of a
sury low standard. He was also compelled to spend much time on the
supervision of these smaller depots at a time when his own depot had
become responsible for maintaining five or more divisions instead of the
two to three for which it was originally scaled.
It was some time before
with a separate W.E.
this state of affairs was remedied by making O. FDs. independent charges
272
7
WO 277/21
