LOUS 10 SERVICES
GAUHATI
MAP 7
MANIPUR
(DIMAPL
collected at North Camp on 19th May, 1942.
the on sanded body orchance personer east of the Dranmaputra a
These men were undoubtedly
this time.
The chief difficulty at Katha was the fact that the location, although
admittedly on the only railway in North Burma and adjacent
Irrawaddy, was too far from the troops dependent on it.
transport was virtually non-existent.
The eventual overloading and ultimate
breakdown of the rail transport system only hastened an unfortunate end.
The capture of Akyab and Myitkyina on 8th May, 1942, by the Japanese
was soon followed by the withdrawal of the British forces to the Indian
REORGANIZATION OF ORDNANCE SERVICES
Throughout 1942, the two depots on the Manipur Road (213 A.O.D.
and 413 A.A.D.) supplied local troops and the whole Burma Army which
started arriving in the Imphal area on 10th May.
to be almost completely re-equipped.
The Burma Army had
The depots were responsible for
supplying the 23rd Division and 4th Corps Troops, most of whom arrived
at railhead poorly equipped.
O.F.Ds. each holding up to 600 tons of stores
and 1,000 tons of ammunition were established at Kangla-Tongbi, Palel,
Gauhati and Makum.
A vehicle reception group at Gauhati was also
established.
These were all started and maintained by the resources of the
A.O.D. and A.A.D. and with personnel drawn from the establishments of
those units.
All Indian ordnance depots, both stores and ammunition, were made up
of a headquarters and one or more companies; each company in turn being
made up of a headquarters and a number of platoons.
The object of this
organization was that a depot of any size from the smallest to the largest,
could be made up by the addition of the requisite number of companies or
platoons to the headquarters, but this organization was found to be unsuited
to modern conditions.
In practice, platoons and companies could not retain
their identity, and there was therefore little chance of inculcating a team
spirit into a unit.
The correct proportion of clerks and storemen of the
various kinds could not be maintained.
The theory assumed that stores of
all types should be held in all depots whereas, in practice, only the largest
depots were capable of handling M.T. and warlike stores.
Although it was
not possible during the campaign to have these Indian war establishments
amended, the
depots
were not staffed
in accordance
with
the war
establishments.
Casualties due to sickness were enormous.
entirely to malaria and the consequent anaemia.
than 25 per cent. of the staff at depots was at work.
lack of amenities, discipline and morale remained very good.
1942.
In September, 1942, it was decided to construct two new a which
215 A.O.D. holding all stores excluding M.T. vehicles and spares, which
0 277/21.
18
