and an ammunition maintenance company or alternatively that the split should
have been made laterally into corps maintenance companies and army main-
tenance companies.
The mobile stores repair unit (M.S.R.U.) was devised to undertake " stitch
in time" repairs in the army area, in order to save
the return of large
quantities of textile stores, boots, etc. to the base at a time when the Eighth
Army was operating many hundreds of miles from the base.
As the labour
for the boot repairs, textile and carpenters shops was found from local civilian
resources, the moves of this repair unit were naturally restricted.
At an early stage in this campaign it was decided to divorce the vehicle
company from the base and advanced ordnance depots ane to treat it as a
Thus the two vehicle companies were merged into one
eparate organizations
nd rate de parks were located in echelon between the base and the L. of C.
arminal, one park being allotted permanently to Eighth Army, with the role
f holding and maintaining the army reserve of wheeled vehicles and carriers.
The organization of R.A.O.C. stores convoy units introduced for the
lesten Desert campaigns remained unaltered, and actual experience proved
onclusively that without this means of rapid road and air supply of vital
ores, efficient maintenance of the fighting troops would have been impossible.
le normal rail or sea communications were too unreliable and the delay in
nsit was too great to enable the sudden and urgent needs of the armies to
met by the usual channels.
The two standard A.O.Ds. used during this campaign were organized on
principles of an advanced component of a B.O.D.
Although they were
e to fulfil their functions without great difficulty, considerable alterations
he war establishment might have been effected to give a better balanced
Only one B.O.D was established in the theatre, and at one time it was
taining up to 22 equivalent divisions with the complete range of ordnance
This depot eventually consisted of an advanced component, main
ponent and two increments.
It would not, however, have been able to
its task without the attachment, from time to time, of large numbers
ritish troops of all arms who were employed more as storemen than
bourers, the labour being provided from Italian civilians.
Here again
es in the war establishment would have been beneficial.
le two main lessons learned from the installation and operation of
epot were the inadvisability of relying on existing buildings for storage
modation and the need for proper R.A.S.C. control of the M.T. allotted
depot for internal working.
th regard to the first point, in accordance with normal practice, when
was captured all the maintenance services, both British and American,
began a highly competitive search for suitable accommodation for
and installations of all types.
The industrial part of the city had
ery heavily damaged by allied bombing and enemy sabotage.
1 result the R.A.O.C. had to instal the B.O.D. in a series of small
s and factories spread out over an area extending some 45 miles.
such conditions its efficiency was bound to suffer and expansion
ly aggravated the fault.
This experience again indicated that in
modern warfare it is desirable to provide in the maintenance project, for
the construction by works services of a rail-served ordnance depot, to a
predetermined design, composed of easily erected shedding.
Taking the second point, although only 18 vehicles were authorized in
the B.O.D. war establishment, in actual practice 250-300 load carriers were
invariably required to cover the internal transport commitment.
case of the base depot in Italy, these were provided under
In the
arrangements
made by the staff, but the vehicles were in a low state of mechanical
eficiency and only Italian civilians could be found as drivers.
No provision
was made in the war establishment for the staff required to control and
maintain the large fleet of vehicles, and the problem was solved by the
formation of two " depot transport control units R.A.S.C." which were placed
under the orders of the C.O.O. of the depot.
The North-West Europe Campaign June, 1944-May, 1945
The projected invasion of Normandy presented, for the first time, the
opportunity for a long period of planned preparation and mobilization of
the R.A.O.C. field units allotted to the force.
It was, therefore, possible to
take stock of the organization in use in North Africa and Italy and to
prepare and train meticulously the units which would be required in the
order of battle of the invasion force.
At the War Office the D.G.A.E. had been redesignated Deputy Quarter-
Master General (Army Equipment) (D.Q.M.G. (A.E.)), the appointment of
Controller of Ordnance Services (C.O.S.) had been re-introduced and the
responsibility for R.A.O.C. field organization and procedure had reverted
to the C.O.S. In March, 1943, a new ordnance branch at the War Office
(Ord.
1) was created under a Deputy Controller of Ordnance Services
(D.C.O.S.) (Brigadier C. Cansdale), to deal with all questions relating to
R.A.O.C field force organization and procedure, and in conjunction with
the Staff, the formation, training and mobilization of R.A.O.C. field units.
This was an important organizational change since, in the past, the C.O.S.
had never been provided with an adequate staff to deal with the field force
aspect of ordnance services.
In addition, an R.A.O.C. standing committee
(field force organization) under the chairmanship of Major-General W. W.
Richards was set up to consider all aspects of field force organization and
planning.
In the initial stages of the planning, which began early in 1943, it
became obvious that this operation would have peculiarities which would
necessitate alterations in the existing field force organization, and certain
basic principles were laid down to ensure that all Services would plan on
uniform lines.
These principles were as follows: —
(a) That the operation would involve only a short sea voyage up to
a maximum of 120 miles; that the main base for this operation
would be in the United Kingdom and that the main base installa-
tions would have to share the load of daily maintenance for the
force.
(b) That initially, and for some indeterminable period, maintenance over-
seas would have to be from beach maintenance areas.
63
WO 277/21
18
