these three sections should rejoin their parent workshop about 14 days later,
but this they never did, as their retention indefinitely on recovery work in
the L. of C. area proved to be necessary.
The main shop and No. 4 L. of C. recovery section were located at
Saulty 11 miles W.S.W. of Arras.
Here they were joined in October by
the main recovery section, and by Nos. 5 and 6 L. of C. recovery sections,
on arrival from England.
No. 2 L. of C. recovery section moved to Poix,
14 miles S.W. of Amiens in October for recovery work in the rear of G.H.Q.
G.H.Q. troops were spread over a wide area which necessitated the plac-
ing of a detachment of the main recovery section at Lumbres in October
for the maintenance of searchlights, to act as a workshop section for 2nd
A.A. Brigade workshop and for local repairs.
The two A.A. Brigade Workshops were efficient units equipped to do all
2nd line repair to the equipment of an A.A. Brigade but they suffered from
the handicap that circumstances necessitated their dispersion in detachments
over a wide area. The most noticeable instance was No. 2 A.A. Bde. Work-
shop, with H.Q. and one section near Doullens and one section at Epernay
Disembarkation of Vehicles
The four port workshop detachments sent to France at the beginning gave
invaluable service.
Their primary duty was to assist in the speedy dis-
embarkation of M.T. vehicles and to effect any repairs necessary to enable
them to be cleared from the dock area.
These units were stationed at
Nantes, Brest, Cherbourg and St. Nazaire.
They found much needless damage caused by the neglect of units to carry
out orders regarding the preparation of vehicles and the method of loading.
The principal points brought to notice were that: —
(a) vehicles had not been properly stowed in the holds resulting in damage
to mudguards, radiators, headlamps and track rods ;
(b) vehicles had been manoeuvred into holds by means of the engine
starter motors. This caused delay and congestion in the docks, while
the batteries were being recharged ;
(c) ignition keys were not attached to the panel or steering column.
the case of Yale type locks, this necessitated modification to the
wiring system before the engines could be started ;
(d) petrol cans, marked for petrol, were filled with diesel fuel or water
These were poured into vehicle fuel tanks in error,
and the complete fuel system had then to be dismantled.
To reduce the damage likely to be caused by careless unloading, it was
arranged with the Docks Directorate at Nantes that all mechanical movement
in the ships' holds should be done by No. 1 P.W.D.
This was found to be
very satisfactory, no damage was incurred and the work was considerably
speeded. This system was introduced at the other ports at a later date.
Chemical Warfare Requirements
At the beginning of the war, there was an expectation that the Germans
would use toxic or vesicant gases in great quantities.
to deal with the decontamination of clothing was one of the most difficult
that the Ordnance Directorate had to consider, on account of its potential
magnitude and because the arrangements would have to be improvised as no
equipment was available, from England, or likely to be for several months.
Although the French staff were more apprehensive of gas warfare than the
British, the B.E.F. took the problem of decontamination more seriously.
Early enquiries were made to ascertain what practical arrangements had
been organized by the French Army; the initial reply was that they had it
all worked out and would gladly supply information.
This information
proved, however, to be merely a translation of the British Army's existing
technical instructions on the subject and the French admitted that they had
no practical plans beyond the general intention to hang out contaminated
clothing for exposure to the weather.
Initially it was proposed by the War Office that a central installation
should be erected at the Base, to which all contaminated clothing should
The Q.M.G., B.E.F., did not agree to this as he wished to have
this service north of the River Seine. Search was made for suitable accom-
modation and equipment north of the River Seine, but nothing could be
The Q.M.G. decided that, for the time being, the service must be decen-
tralized and orders were issued at the end of September to Corps, G.H.Q.
Troops, and L. of C. area that they were to make arrangements by improvisa-
tion or adaptation of local facilities, such as laundries.
After consultation with the War Office, the Ordnance Directorate put
forward a scheme that decontamination and laundry duties should be com-
bined, and that ordnance mobile units should be provided on the scale of one
a division and static plants on the scale of one for each two corps.
these plants would be capable of doing all the laundry and decontamination
work for 100,000 men, other than that done in the mobile laundries.
production of these units was placed in hand but none reached France
It was considered that even the best improvised methods that could be
devised for decontamination in the forward areas would not suffice, and that
there would be need of a central organization on the L. of C. so that an
improvised service could be provided if need arose.
The laundries in the Paris and Le Havre areas refused to consider
decontamination work as they feared the adverse effects on their laundry
was therefore reserved in disused laundry
buildings at Le Mans, Le Havre and Isse 40 miles S.S.E. of Rennes.
building at Le Mans was fully equipped and used as a laundry: in addition,
boiling tanks were installed in readiness for decontamination work.
were made to improvise decontamination plant, and staffs were earmarked
at the B.O.D. for the buildings at Le Havre and Isse.
wester 17
WO 277/21
