Ammunition Reserves
In October, 1939, the General Staff decided that, as the B.E.F. was com-
mitted to the defence of a prepared line, approximately our days' estimated
expenditure of ammunition was to be dumped in front of railhead, under
corps and divisional control, and that, in addition, further quantities should
be held well forward owing to the great length of the L. of C.
The minimum time between demand and delivery
ammunition at
railhead was estimated at five and a half days, and it was therefore decided
that stocks at A.R.H. and on rail, should be increased to nine days' supply
and held as follows: —
1st Corps-
-5 days at A.R.H., 2 days on rail within 12 hours of A.R.H.
and 2 days within 36 hours of A.R.H.
2nd Corps—7 days at A.R.H. and 2 days within 36 hours of A.R.H.
The reason for the difference in the arrangements between the two Corps
was to minimize the amount of rolling stock immobilized.
A railhead was established at Ecoust St. Mein, ten miles S.E. of Arras,
to serve Ist Corps and air components, and another at Aubigny, eight miles
N.W. of Arras, to serve 2nd Corps and G.H.Q. Troops.
Later another railhead was opened at Harfleur, near Le Havre, for the
issue of small quantities of ammunition to units landing north of the Seine,
and A.A. units in that area.
A.S.Es. were also loaded for the A.A.S.F. and " stabled'" near Chateau
Thierry, 35 miles S.W. of Rheims.
In the despatch of these ammunition reserves to A.R.Hs., serious errors
were made by one of the B.A.Ds.
Ammunition was loaded in open trucks
without protective sheeting, the loading was unevenly distributed, resulting in
too much weight on some of the wagon springs, and boxes were insecurely
when these reserves were inspected at A.R.H.,
it was found that unstable stacks had fallen down, boxes were damaged,
and the ammunition was wet.
The trains concerned were, therefore, returned
to the base and fresh reserves in closed rail wagons ordered forward in
At this time,
as the result of no battle expenditure, stocks of new
ammunition in England were piling up, and the War Office requested the
B.E.F. to increase the stocks in B.A.Ds. from 45 days to six months.
was accordingly arranged by retaining No. 2 B.A.D. (Plouraret) as a
permanent depot, notwithstanding its unsuitability, and by expanding No. 1
B.A.D. to include a fourth sub-depot.
The A.A.D. already in the B.E.F.,
but not employed or needed as such, was disbanded in order to provide the
man-power to staff the fourth sub-depot.
Deficiencies in Unit War Equipment
As stated earlier, most
in France with considerable
te iciencies in their war equipments and demanded at once on the B.O.D.
to make up the shortages.
These demands had a very adverse effect on the
deficiencies as well.
base stocks, which were scaled to meet maintenance requirements, not initial
144
The position was, however, realized at the War Office and it was decided,
in October, that indents from units of the Force must continue to be met
from stocks in France as far as possible and in addition, that C.O.Ds. in
England would pass issue orders to No. 1 B.O.D. for any stores still out-
C.O.Ds. to expeditionary force units leaving the United
Kingdom.
The extremely heavy work-load at the B.O.D. imposed severe strain on
the depot personnel
and there was
periods or recreation.
no possibility of providing any rest
Some relief was obtained by the opening of a base sub-area depot in
Nantes to deal with all detailed issues to L. of C. units in the sub-area and
to units passing through the port.
Another effort to reduce the strain of
dealing with the mass of detail indents at No. 1 B.O.D. was the introduction
of the system of bulk indents under which defined classes of stores in
frequent,
recurring demand were issued in bulk to formation ordnance
officers, instead of in separate unit packages.
The system was not altogether
successful, as the forward transport arrangements did not allow adequate
facilities for breaking bulk, and formation ordnance officers tended to
accumulate too much stock.
Winter Clothing
Considerable difficulty arose in the B.O.D. over the matter of winter
clothing.
The depot carried stocks of summer clothing from the outset
but demands for winter
clothing began early in October, less than one
Although supplies of winter garments were very speedily sent out from
England, the War Office deciding the scale in order to save time, some delay
in meeting the requirements of all troops.
notably woollen gloves, were not available for general issue until Christmas.
For the B.O.D. clothing group, the date of starting the war had not been
It set a very difficult problem, the simultaneous storage
of both summer and winter clothing stocks, the urgent issue of winter
clothing immediately it came in from England, with no chance to arrange
an adequate storage plan and a timetable of issues.
Opening of the A.O.D., and 2 B.O.D.
At the end of October it was decided to open the advanced ordnance
depot (A.O.D.) in the St. Pol-Arras-Doullens area, and to use it to hold
forward reserves of selected stores of operational importance not included
in the scales carried by ordnance field parks, reserves of anti-gas stores,
20 per cent. of the clothing reserves for the forward troops to replace gas.
contaminated clothing and a stock of expendable stores and
materials and
spare parts to service the advance workshop.
The original intention of the Q.M.G. to allot separate storage locations
for the reserves for each of the two Corps, and G.H.Q. Troops, was decided
to be impracticable, and the A.O.D. was finally located in scattered buildings
in the towns of Arras, St. Pol-sur-Ternoise, Acheux, Doullens, Bucquoy and
Mailly Maillet.
WO 277/21
