Development of the Ammunition Organization
A special organization was set up to deal exclusively with ammunition
Full responsibility for the inspection and maintenance of land service ammuni.
tion and explosives was accepted by the D.O.S. India, Major-General G. L. S
Hawkins, in 1943.
This had previously been controlled by the Director of
Armaments working through inspecting ordnance officers (I.O.Os.) who were
based at the ammunition depots.
An immediate development was the forma-
tian of an ammunition section at the Ordnance Directorate at G.H.Q. India,
and the appointment of senior .O.Os, at headquarters of armies and com-
mands with mobile ammunition inspection and repair units under
their
control.
At the same time, the training of I.O.Os. and ammunition examiners
was accelerated and ammunition depots brought up to strength.
304
PART VII
MISCELLANEOUS THEATRES OF WAR
CHAPTER XIX
ORDANCE SERVICES IN EAST AFRICA AND MADAGASCAR,
1939-1945
Situation Before and After the Outbreak of War
It this theatre the Ordnance services developed from very small roots into a
In the East African Command, these services maintained
full organization.
tres which advanced through Italian Somaliland and British Somaliland,
one-fan the enemy in Ethiopia and occupied Madagascar.
The East African Command eventually covered an area considerably
banger than India. Only part of this area was rail-served-and that by a
sage track, small-gauge railway with limited rolling stock. Nearly all the
mads were unmetalled and soon degenerated into pot-holed, corrugated, dusty
tracks, impassable after a few hours' rain.
Apart from the vast L. of C. extending over diflicult territory and
te resultant problem of ensuring a steady supply of stores in such country.
Ordance was handicapped because its military staff was quite inadequate
in tumbers for the immense task imposed upon them.
The dilution of this
suf with native labour brought problems of its own; for instance, the
Alican could not read the markings on the cases, much less identify the
sores. He was uneducated, had the mentality of a child and found it hard
brist playing with the stores when he was not actually considering how
o piler them.
To appreciate the growth of the East African Command during the
Send World War, it is necessary to recall that East Africa was
a Imperial peace-time station.
not
and these had no mechanical transport (M.T.).
Only small Colonial forces were maintained
There was no
Army
Ordance organization, the supply of equipment, clothing, etc, being the
aponsibility of the Colonial Office.
On the outbreak of war an A.D.O.S. was sent to East Africa by the War
Oice, and on the 18th September, 1939, the East Africa Army Ontrance
aps (E.A.A.O.C.) was formed.
The total strength on formation
doen, 2 warrant officers, 3 sericants, 14 Asiatics and 38 Africans.
was
No time was lost in requisitioning buildings, and, although the manu-
barted fruites of the heatre were small, contracts for the making of
and tentage were quickly placed.
kared 16000 land-mines and spares for small arms and mortars.
The railway workshop manu-
By October the fint ordnance stores shed had been completed and three
at sheds were in use as an ammunition depot.
* t the months of 1940, the Ordinance Services had the
here was opened in December, 1939, at Nanvuld in Kenya
The first A.O.D. in the
of tailing up their own organization while at the same time equipping
mobilizing units and also providine stores normally of encineer and
loply. Two light and acachments (L.A.Dt.) were attached to
305
LOUS
