Reorganization, Expansion and Training
DEVELOPMENTS FOLLOWING DUNKIRK
On the evacuation of France in June, 1940, a spirit of urgency provided
the spur for the complete overhaul and reorganization of the ammunition
services.
The most pressing concern was the supply of ammunition for the forces
deployed to
meet the
threatened invasion.
depots-situated at Bramley,
Corsham
The permanent ammunition
and Longtown—were not suitably
placed for this role and could not make rapid issues by road to forces
expected to be engaged on or near the East and South-East coasts.
A series of small ammunition depots was, therefore, set up.
These depots
were located in Eastern, South-Eastern and Northern Command areas and
were each designed to hold 5-6,000 tons of ammunition.
The need of further
expansion soon became evident, since these quantities of ammunition were
insufficient for a major action.
Some of the depots might be over-run, and
the scheme gave rise to an uneconomic use of man-power.
Further, provision
had to be made for the storage of the very considerable supplies of ammuni-
tion that would soon be coming into production.
Although the C.A.Ds. at
Bramley, Corsham and Longtown had reduced their stocks by issues to the
newly formed operational dumps, there was not enough accommodation for
this new production which would soon flood into the C.A.Ds.
EXPANSION OF WAR OFFICE BRANCHES
It was realized that, to prepare for this contingency, and to provide for
the rapid development of ammunition services generally, additional War
Office branches were required, so that direction of policy, and planning for
the future, could be conducted speedily on a high level.
War Office branches were, therefore, established in July, 1940 under the
control of a deputy director; these were O.S.16 and O.S.15 (later W.S.8 and
W.S.9).
The responsibilities of these new branches were respectively, the
administration of ammunition services, and the dealing with all technical
problems after the ammunition had been received from the Ministry of
Supply.
It was also considered necessary to appoint a Chief Inspecting Ordnance
Officer (CI.O.O.) to cope with inspection matters, to co-ordinate the work
of inspecting ordnance officers in commands, to organize routine and special
examinations, and to enquire into accidents.
were not, however, incorporated in the War Office, although they
The C.I.O.O. and his staff
under instruction from the War Office.
worked
The position, therefore, by July, 1940, was that three branches had been
organized within the Ordnance Directorate at the War Office to direct and
organize the future development of ammunition services generally.
Army.
The work of W. 2. was confined to provision and allocation of ammuni-
tion and in effect it kept a central
ammunition.
account of world-wide holdings of
122
The supply of ammunition was strictly controlled and allocation of avail-
able stocks was made by an Ammunition Allocation Committee which was
part of the London Munitions Assignment Board ; Assistant Director of War-
like Stores (A.D.W.S.) (W.S.2) and the Secretary of the Assignment Board
were joint Secretaries of this Allocation Committee.
Allocation of reserves to the various theatres from production in the United
Kingdom, Dominions and U.S.A. was made by W.S.2, subject only to con-
firmatory approval at the monthly meeting of the Ammunition Allocation
Committee.
In addition to these duties, W.S.2 was responsible for the detailed plan-
ning of initial and follow-up ammunition supply for the North African cam-
paign in 1942, and for the landing in Normandy in 1944. This work of major
importance and of immense detail was done in the closest contact with the
staffs of First Army and 21 Army Group.
The work entailed the tactical
stowage of scores of ships and hundreds of landing craft, and in the case of
21 Army Group, the pre-loading also of several hundred lorries for the
different beaches.
Other responsibilities of this branch were the preparation of Staff tables,
the calculation of Staff requirements, records and statistics of ammunition, and
the supply of information for Directors, the Cabinet
and the Defence
Committee (Supply).
Early in 1940 a provision branch (P.7) was established at Bramley for
the detailed work of providing inert ammunition components and laboratory
equipment: this work had previously been done by another branch (P.3) at
Woolwich.
P.7 was, however, in no way concerned with the provision of live
ammunition which was entirely dealt with in the War Office.
The immediate problems facing W.S.8 on its formation were: —
(a) How and where to store ammunition for anti-invasion use.
(b) Where to store the vast quantities impending off the production lines.
(c) How to obtain and train personnel to man the new field depots to
be opened.
(d) Numerous aspects of the administration of these depots, including
the provision of storage areas, billets, railway sidings, communica-
tions, guards, transport and labour, and the acquisition of land.
(e) To work out new safety instructions for the storage of ammunition in
the English countryside since it was clear that the Explosives Act,
and Home
Office Regulations could
not apply to the present
conditions.
(t) To consider the problem of gas warfare ammunition and to produce
regulations for its storage, handling and decontamination.
involved close work with the Home Office, County Police officials
and Regional Commissioners.)
123
westert
WO 277/21
18
67619
