SERVICES
relations with the Japanese had been bad.
made extremely
Movement of stores had been
sought.
difficult as, in most cases, Japanese consent had to be
The provision of ordnance stores
Command, and under
was never an easy task in the China
war conditions it was found almost impossible to
maintain a regular supply of arms and equioment from home sources Eu...
efort was, therefore, made to harness local resources.
Certain ammunition
and stores had necessarily to be obtained from the United Kingdom but,
wherever possible, arrangements were made to produce stores locally. War-
time substitutes for sealed patterns were quickly introduced and by far
the greater bulk of the clothing, camp and
personal equipment, barrack
stores and tentage were soon rolling off the work-benches in the back streets
of Kowloon.
The quality of these goods was remarkable.
and web equipment made locally were considered to be quite as good
The tentage
as that imported from the United Kingdom.
Machinery and tools were
procured from Shanghai. A barbed wire factory was set up in Hong Kong-
Following this early effort to develop local resources the Hong Kong
Civilian War Supply Committee was formed.
This body, which operated
under the civil government, was a commercial committee whose task was
to organize the manufacture and supply of warlike stores from Hong Kong
for the Far Eastern War Supply Board sitting at Delhi.
Its
organization
was superimposed upon the original framework set up by the R.A.O.C.,
and, established on this basis, it became so efficient that the war stores
supplied by the small colony, in proportion to its size, became far in excess
of those produced by any other country in the Far Eastern scheme.
The
R.A.O.C.
officer who had originally initiated this local procurement, was
attached to the new committee to guide its development, and the R.A.O.C.
had its full share from the expanding local production.
An indication of
the quantity and range of items covered may be gained from the following
short list:
Jack knives
1,000,000
Cotton garments
4.000,000
Water bottles
2,000,000
Vices
100,000
Hurricane lamps
1,000,000
Cotton blankets
50,000
Woollen garments
3,000,000
6,000,000
Canvas rubber shoes
2,000,000
Web equipment stores
500,000
Batteries, dry cell ...
2,000,000
Hair brushes
However, the creation of this large production centre proved unvise
in the long run, sicke it fell, ready-made, into the hands of the enemy, who.
exploited it for his own use so long as the supply of raw materials lasted.
With the growing threat of war, the Hong Kong defence scheme was
re-organized and ordnance stores were distes ... e their safety as
W02 944/57
WO 277/21
