MAP 14
MALIA
GEORGE CROSSI
E FERENCE.
ROADWATS.
ORDNANCE SERVICES IN MALTA 1939.1945
Situation at the Outbreak of War
Plans were made in 199le dispersal andstruction of a new ordnance depor
in which the m.a.o.e. su upon can weston services for the whole of
Malta woul be centralized, the new depot was to be located in open country
on a site then considered to be will away from the target areas. When
war broke out, work before, erection of this now depol, which had been
started a few months betore, was expedited. Progress, however, was slow
because the work involved blasting and cutting away a great deal of rock.
By the time Italy declared war in June, 1940, no buldings had been
the plan was abandoned.
as the steel girders and other components had not arrived, and
The two pre-war depots, which in the meanwhile had been expanding,
were situated at Marina Pinto and Ospizio respectively. They were in
the main constructed above the ground, although the depot at Marina Pinto
had a large underground storehouse providing some 12,000 square feet
of accommodation.
This space lay 60 feet below the rock surface and was,
therefore, invaluable for the storage of important items. There was also
some underground storage accommodation at the depot at Ospizio, but this
was by no means so extensive.
The depots, both several hundred years old,
were located on the edge of the two main harbours and consequently were
likely to suffer in the event of air bombardment.
In 1938 the War Office had agreed to the construction of underground
These were prepared adjacent to the existing
R.A.O.C. ammunition sub-depot at Fort Musta. The location was in open
country, well away from probable bombing areas. When the war broke
out, R.A.O.C. stocks of ammunition were held above ground in various
old forts and magazines which were not bombproof.
depot at Fort Musta was completed just in time to enable all vital ammuni-
tion stocks to be placed underground one day before Italy intervened.
On the outbreak of war the only workshop facilities available were at
the two existing workshops at Ospizio and Sa Maison. These workshops were
The garrison of Malta consisted of one British infantry brigade, a Maltese
infantry battalion, coast defence artillery and a very small contingent of A.A.
artillery. There was only a small R.A.O.C. detachment, consisting largely of
workshop personnel.
There were no R.A.O.C. storemen, all storehouse work
being carried out by Maltese civilians.
Developments following the Italian Intervention
As the projected new depot and workshops had not materialized, the more
important and vital warlike stores were dispersed in the rock storage space a
the ordnance depots in Marina Pinto and Sa Maison. At Sa Maison this rock
cover varied in thickness from 3 to 10 feet.
Ammunition was swiftly stored underground in the newly constructed
magazines, and, despite the heavy bombing which ensued, the dispersal and
317
.B.H. 18179 - Wt. 33744 - Dd. 8807 - 750 - 3/5C
To face Page 317
