RICTED
Stores" (D.W.S.).
His various "O.S." branches were re-named "W.S."
branches, and organized as follows: -
Old Branch
Responsibilities
New Designation
W.S.1
Alaming and co-ordination of Dominion issues
0.S.2
0.S.3
earchlight and G.L
Engineer,
Anti-aircraft (A.A.), Coast Defence (C.D.) and Field
Artileryles
W.S.6
CO.Us.
Central Ar
WS.X
W.S.9
Ammunition inspection and repair …
O.S.5
O.S.6
A.D.O.S.(W)
O.S.16
O.S.3(b)
O.S.14
W.S.13
Signal stores
WS.14
Infantry weapons and optical instruments
At this time D.W.S. had two deputy directors; D.D.W.S. who acted as
his personal deputy and was responsible for administrative matters connected
with depots, and D.D.W.S.(A), who was responsible for the provision
and
issue of ammunition.
D.W.S. himself dealt direct with all his other
W.S.
branches.
He was responsible for the vast War Office establishments situated
all over the country, e.g., the great central depots at Chilwell,
Donnington,
Corsham, etc., which held and issued warlike stores and ammunition.
He
was also responsible for all matters in connection with the provision and
issue of these stores and the organizing and mobilization of Ordnance Field
Parks, Base Ordnance Depots (B.O.Ds.) and Advanced Ordnance Depots
(A.O.Ds.), etc.
Owing to the vast increase in work, it was decided to appoint an additional
deputy director and to re-organize the deputy directors' responsibilities.
D.D.W.S.(A) became responsible for the provision and issue of artillery, small
arms, mortars, optical instruments and ammunition.
D.D.W.S.(B) became
responsible for the remaining W.S. branches, which embraced the provision
and issue of "A" and "B" vehicles, M.T. spares, engineer, signal and wire-
less equipments and machinery.
Later, in view of the growing importance and volume of work in connection
with vehicles, it was decided to divorce responsibility for these and their
spares from D.D.W.S.(B) and to appoint two more deputy directors.
These
were D.D.W.S.(C) who dealt with "B" vehicles and D.D.W.S.(D) who dealt
with Armoured Fighting Vehicles (A.F.Vs.).
There still remained, however, a considerable amount of work common
to all W.S. branches and it became apparent that major questions such as
operational planning and issues, and the basic principles of provision, should
be centrally co-ordinated for all warlike stores.
Accordingly, in September, 1942, D.D.W.S.(A) assumed
over-riding
responsibility under D.W.S. for all W.S.
provision
D.D.W.S(C)
ranched
including
and D.D.W.S.(D).
deputy of D.D.W.S.(A).
Coincidentally,
D.D.W.S.(B)
became
the
The administration of ammunition depots had been carried out by W.S.8
under the general direction of D.D.W.S. but the work entailed in administering
these and all other depots was too great for one deputy director.
A new
+ 7-
WO 277/21
18
appointment, D.D.W.S.(E), was, therefore, made to deal with the administra-
tion of all ammunition
depots, formation of ammunition units, storage of
ammunition,
and in addition, technical inspection, maintenance and repair.
When these increases had been authorized, the lay-out of the D.W.S.
Directorate became as shown at Appendix 2.
Final Re-organization of War Office Directorate
On 23rd October, 1942, the Army Council decided to re-institute the
appointment of C.O.S.
This had fallen into abeyance in March, 1941, when
the
Q.M.G.
had appointed the
Director-General of Army
Equipment
(D.G.A.E.)-to control and co-ordinate the whole sphere of War Office
ordnance administration.
The senior major-general (Major-General Williams) was appointed C.O.S.
in addition to his normal appointment as D.W.S. ; and the title of " Director
of Ordnance Services" was changed to " Director of Clothing and Stores"
(D.C.S.).
The appointment of C.O.S., with the introduction of a Deputy Controller
of Ordnance Services (D.C.O.S.), successfully provided a central co-ordination
of regimental matters and general corps policy but it did not entirely eliminate
certain difficulties inherent in the existence of two separate ordnance direc-
torates, each dealing with the provision of defined classes of ordnance stores.
It was decided, however, that to make any major change in organization
in the direction of centralizing control of the two provision directorates,
would be quite impracticable during war, and it was not until after the
cessation of hostilities that the Q.M.G. sanctioned a re-organization which
placed the entire direction of ordnance services at the War Office under the
C.O.S.
In October, 1942, therefore the C.O.S. (Major-General Williams) became
responsible for all policy and regimental questions affecting the Corps as
such and its activities as a whole; for general supervision of ordnance staffs
at headquarters of commands, corps, areas, districts, field force formations
and of all other ordnance establishments within the field force; for recom-
mending
officers to fill
senior appointments;
and for. issuing Corps
Instructions.
The D.W.S. (formerly D.O.S.(W)—also Major-General Williams) became
responsible for all matters concerning the provision, receipt, storage and
issue of: all wheeled and armoured fighting vehicles; armaments,
small
arms, ammunition and explosives; bridging, searchlights, and other engineer
stores ; wireless and line signalling equipment, radio direction-finding (R.D.F.)
equipment; workshop lorry plant and test equipment; allocation of these
stores on G.S. priorities and their scaling in conjunction with the G.S. and
with the Director of Mechanical Engineering (D.M.E.) ; the management and
administration of C.O.Ds. for these stores and of C.A.Ds., and Anti-Aircraft
Ordnance Depots; and for the inspection and repair of all ammunition in the
service.
The D.C.S. (formerly D.O.S.-Major-General C. H. Geake, subsequently
Major-General W. W. Richards) became responsible for all matters concern-
ing the provision, receipt, storage and issue of: clothing and necessaries ;
