SP
ouie
There was, however, great difficulty in accommodating the large number
of formations which had to be assembled within the small concentration
ared.
Owing to the bad weather and considerable
snow falls, covered
accommodation became more necessary than ever.
Widespread floods further
increased the difficulties.
There was a large demand for all types of huts and
canvas to supplement the existing accommodation.
More than one thousand
six hundred, 160-1b. tents and three thousand five hundred bivouacs were
provided for forward troops of 30 Corps for use in the Reichswald forest
during the operation.
In the meantime, the build-up of stocks and dumping of ammunition had
been continuing.
Because of the heavy road movement programme, it was
essential to move as much as possible by rail.
Fortunately the railways in
the army area were well-developed and a large number of railheads were
available.
The ammunition dumping programme was completed on 4th February,
14.200 tons being dumped at gun positions and 22,700 tons divided between
the forward maintenance centres (F.M.Cs.) of 2 Canadian Corps and 30
British Corps.
More than 2,500,000 rounds of 25-pounder were released by
H.Q. 21 Army Group for the operation, with other types in proportion.
Towards the end of the operation, which lasted 32 days compared with the
estimated 30, it was possible to begin the stocking of No. 13 Canadian Army
Roadhead over the Maas in the Nijmegen area, in order to ensure that First
Canadian Army was administratively prepared to undertake further advances.
This was carried out both by road and rail, and Nijmegen was then opened
as a railhead area thus permitting free traffic
movement to complete the
final stages of the operation and to assist in the build-up for the assault
across the Rhine.
PREPARATIONS FOR THE ACTUAL CROSSING OF THE RHINE
Meanwhile, Second Army was engaged in the administrative planning for
the actual assault across the Rhine (Operation " Plunder"), as well as assist-
ing First Canadian Army in the concentration of the forces, the maintenance
of routes and also in the provision of certain additional administrative units
required for " Veritable".
During the later stages of Operation " Veritable",
the build-up for the assault began.
As soon as operations permitted, Second
Army No. 10 Roadhead was opened in the area Goch-Weeze-Kevelaer-
Geldern —Venlo, between the Maas and the Rhine, so that when the assault
took place maintenance problems would not be complicated by having two
rivers between the Army and its roadhead.
8, 12 and 30 Corps were based
on this No. 10 Roadhead, while the Canadian formations under command of
Second Army were maintained for all purposes by First Canadian Army.
On 8th March the build-up began in earnest and proceeded at full speed
until 23rd March.
The target stocks for ammunition and ordnance stores
to be dumped in No. 10 Roadhead before D-Day for the operation, which
was 24th March, were:-
60,000 tons-Ammunition.
5,400 tons-Ordnance and miscellaneous stores.
The very large ammunition build-up, which included an allotment of more
than 1,500 rounds a gun of 25-pounder ammunition alone, was assisted by
240
corps drawing some of their ammunition direct from the ammunition rail-
head and dumping it at gun positions and formation dumps.
in addition
30 Corps drew
600 tons of ammunition a day direct from the Advanced
Base.
In spite of these aids, the receipts and issues of ammunition handled
by No. 10 Army Roadhead ammunition depot amounted to a total of 85,000
tons during the build-up.
A large proportion of the tonnages of all stores had to be moved by
road in spite of the limitations imposed by damaged routes and bridges.
In the week preceding D-Day for operation
"Plunder", three corps
were concentrated and the movement of something like
130,000 tons of
stores, in addition to the ordinary daily maintenance requirements, into an
area of approximately 400 square miles, was accomplished in 16 days.
THE OPERATIONS EAST OF THE RHINE
After the successful crossing of the Rhine, Second Army began the break-
out from the bridgehead.
From the administrative point of view, this opera-
tion was considerably simpler than the break-out from Normandy across
France to Belgium, as there was a well developed base behind the force and
a roadhead was established right up to the Rhine with stocks built up and
transport resources allocated well beforehand.
In view of this, it was not
necessary to direct operations to the capture and opening of a port such as
Emden to supplement the L. of C.
The 30 Corps assault on Bremen gave rise to some anxiety whether the
heavy ammunition demands could be met.
However, the situation was eased
by the arrival of 4,600 tons of ammunition pre-loaded on some of the
transport provided by H.Q. 21 Army Group.
The expenditure of ammuni-
tion on that operation was not high, however, and this enabled the 12 Corps
demands for the projected assault on Hamburg to be met in full.
ORDNANCE DEVELOPMENTS ON THE L. OF C.
15/17 A.O.D. at Antwerp continued to build up stocks and from the
middle of January took over from 14 A.O.D. the whole issue load for the
As the number of A.A. units opposing the V weapons increased in the
Advanced Base, an A.A. Ordnance Depot (staffed by specially trained per-
sonnel from the United Kingdom) was opened in conjunction with
Forward Trailer Section, to hold equipment such as radar and spare parts
which were peculiar to these units.
As the A.A. units were also based
on 14 Forward Trailer Section for M.T. spare parts, the siting of these
two depots together proved most convenient.
Towards the end of the
campaign, many of these A.A.
units were disbanded or re-organized for
other roles and a disused airfield adjacent to 15/17 A.O.D. was used to
accommodate the larger stores and
equipment made surplus, while
remainder were returned to the normal R.S.D. of the A.O.D.
A gas-producing detachment attached to 15/17 A.O.D. produced inert
gas for flame-throwing equipment which was much in use during the fighting
between the Maas and the Rhine.
Unfortunately, a V2 bomb made a direct
hit on it, completely destroying the plant and killing all the senior N.C.Os.
241
westert 17
WO 277/21
18
