Port facilities were poor at first.
Forward Moves of Ordnance Depots in Support of the Advance
railheads at Mersa Matruh,
again taken into use.
As the advance progressed, the old
Mischiefa, Capuzzo and then Tobruk were
which had to be used both as railhead and seahead until the port of Benghai
was opened.
The railway was never extended beyond Tobruk
At this stage 500 A.O.D. and 501 A.A.D., both reconstituted
from base installations, opened as temporary depots on new sites at Tobruk.
It was planned originally to stock them fully in these sites but, owing to
the speed of the advance, this was not done.
Stores and ammunition were
fed forward during this period from these two depots by road; urgent
fighting stores were sent by R.A.O.C. stores convoy and the remainder by
the normal R.A.S.C. channel.
When the port of Benghazi was clear of mines and obstructions,
500 A.O.D. and 501 A.A.D. moved forward and established permanent
depots in the vicinity, but by this time Tripoli had been captured and the
Army was 700 miles ahead and again out of reach.
However, the two
depots had to be used until the port of Tripoli was cleared.
Sea Maintenance to Tripoli
The port of Tripoli was cleared and an advanced base developed in a
remarkably short time but its distance from the main base in the Delta was
so great that an entirely new maintenance system had to be instituted.
Under this system Tripoli was maintained from the Delta in the same manner
as if it were an overseas base served from depots in the United Kingdom.
All stores were sent by sea and the land L. of C. was gradually closed
except for vehicles.
Vehicles still had to be sent by the land route of 1,500
miles because of the lack of M.T.
ships.
Stores, the movement of which
had to be planned six weeks ahead, were allotted in bulk and sent in convoys
which sailed from Alexandria to Tripoli at intervals of about ten days.
Advanced Ordnance Installations Open at Tripoli
This new policy entailed the establishment at Tripoli of an A.O.D., an
A.A.D. and a vehicle company.
The formation of these units was made
peisible by the recent arrival in the theation of considerable R.A.O.C.
reinforcements.
The new A.O.D. (No. 57) was formed partly from 500 A..D. (which
was still heavily involved at Benghazi supplying 10 Corps who were in
reserve in Cyrenaica) and partly from 6 A.O.D. and base depots.
was established verv radidly and took nar detail sudbly to unite within a
few weeks of its arrival.
It was stocked with three months' requirements
for the Eighth Army. stock renlenishment heing effected hu the submissio
of demands on the Delta B.O.Ds.
to Tripoli leaving only one company at Benghazi.
No. 501 A.A.D. was split, two ammunition companies being sent forward
the Eighth Army ammunition reserve the Tripoli denot had to take over larg
In addition to holding
stocks of Italian and German cantured ammunition which had been subiecte
to damage and pilferage by the local Arabs and were in a highly dangerou
182
MEDIT
MISUREA
To face Page 18:
N
E
AN
BIDI BARRANI.
G
N
BOUT
M OT C
RAIL
