In addition to the covered storage, the B.O.D. occupied more than 300 acres
of open storage
The organization included two gun parks at San
Giorgio:
aora CT. Stores transit depot at Capua: an alSo o of 2 sub.
depot at Castellamare to handle anti-gas stores, materials for oxygen and
acetylene manufacture and an overflow of slow-moving bulk items:
and an
R.S.D. in Naples with numerous sub-depots.
In the later stages of develop-
ment. another gun park was
established in Rome.
THE MAIN B.O.D. PROBLEMS
In the great task of organizing and operating this large base depot,
there were no particular technical ordnance problems which need recording.
The main difficulties were man-power shortage, especially in trained R.A.O.C.
personnel able to supervise effectively; the general problem of obtaining
storage accommodation where and when it was needed and getting it suitably
adapted: and the shortage of depot internal transport.
MAN-POWER-SHORTAGE OF R.A.O.C.
The shortage of R.A.O.C. personnel was accentuated by the scattered
layout of the installation.
Although the war establishment of the B.O.D.
was increased to a total of some 1,700 British other ranks, extensive help
had to be obtained by attaching miltary
personnel from other arms of the
Service, Including one A.A. regiment R.A., large numbers of low medical
category men and personnel awaiting posting at the general reinforcement
training depot.
These personnel were used mainly to supervise Italian civilian
anour.
In addition, Basutos, Indians, Italian ordnance co-operator companies
and Italian army units were employed.
The Italian civilians in the B.O.D. numbered 23,000, including typists and
clerks as well as manual labourers.
Clerks were given training in simple
ordnance procedure; they learned quickly and, although their work was
not particularly accurate, their employment in storehouse grades freed
military staff for more important duties.
The unskilled manual labourers
were lazy and required close, constant supervision both to make them work
and to curb their zest for pilfering.
Germans, both surrendered personnel and prisoners of war, were also
employed.
They worked very well.
STORAGE ACCOMMODATION-WORKS SERVICES
The development of the B.O.D. was hindered at the outset by shortage of
R.E. services.
Work began in May, 1944, and by the end of the campaign,
1,500,000 sheds of Romney, Flambo and Dutch barn types
had been
constructed.
SHORTAGE OF DEPOT TRANSPORT
The unit transport authorized for a B.O.D. was only a small fraction
of the overall requirement.
Apart from the heavy daily movement of stores
in and out, between rail and sub-depots and within
depots,
557
B.O.D.
had to provide lorries to transport the civilian employees daily to and from
their work.
It was found that the B.O.D. demands for transport from the
pool controlled by area headquarters could never be fully met.
To ease the
206
situation horses and carts were used, and at 2 sub-depot a Decauville rail
system was installed, but the transport difficulty was not completely over-
come until April, 1945, when two depot control transport units, R.A.S.C.
(D.C.T.Us.) were attached to the B.O.D.
Each D.C.T.U. operated 132 load
carriers, manned by Italian civilian drivers or by German prisoners of war.
These units were of immense value.
SAFEGUARDING B.O.D. STOcKs
Bulk stealing of stores from the depot by organized gangs of Italians
was a persistent nuisance which called for countermeasures involving time,
man-power and materials which could have been put to better use.
The
man-power that could be spared for guard purposes was not adequate to the
task: the employment of police dogs was effective up to a point.
AcHIEVEMENT
The size of the task accomplished by 557 B.O.D. during the Italian
campaign may be gauged by the tonnage figures recorded below,
tonnages
not of a few simple commodities, but made up of an immense, complex range,
running into many tens of thousands of different items, of modern Army
equipment.
During the 17 months from January, 1944, to June, 1945, 557 B.O.D.
handled the following tonnages: —
1 Sub-depot
(M.T. Stores)
Receipts
239,000.
141, 200
2 Sub-depot
(Choral Stores
232,500
138.400
3 Sub-depot
Warlike Stores)
R.S.D.
Totals
149,800
2,000
658.300
278.100
FORWARD MOVEMENT OF A.O.DS.
35 A.O.D. Ancona
In May, 1944, when the allied offensive was resumed on the main front
and the enemy key defences of Cassino were successfully breached, the opera-
tional plan was to press forward before autumn to the Pisa-Rimini line of
enemy defence.
At that time, the supply of ordnance stores to the advancing Armies was
from 557 B.O.D. (Naples) and 500 A.O.D. (Bari), and the L. of C.
becoming too lengthy for efficient maintenance from those increasingly distant
depots.
It was accordingly decided to open an A.O.D.
well forward, at
Ancona.
But shortase of R.A.O.C. personnel and limited theatre stocks of
warlike stores (including M.T. spares) precluded the formation of a fully
stocked A.O.D. on a
normal war establishment.
A compromise solution was therefore decided on.
A new unit, 35 A.O.D.,
was formed om a solution was establishment using as a nucleus the R.A.O.C.
personnel available at the temporary
ordnance depot at
Taranto, and a
modified range of A.O.D. stocks was drawn up to consist of the full range
of clothing and general stores but, as regards warlike stores, only a restricted
scale confined to heavy lift items such as engines,
tyres,
tank bogies and
tracks, etc.
207
wes 947/17
WO 277/21
28
