By experiment, it had been found economically possible to extend the range
of repairs.
Patching was considered undesirable, but complete sections of
garments
were replaced by serviceable sections taken from
unserviceable
garments.
Invisible mending was very successfully developed for socks and other
knitted wear.
Heels and toes were made from pieces of unserviceable socks,
and square patches were also obtained from this source to mend large holes.
All work-tables, racks, etc., were made from vehicle packing cases by the
local R.E.M.E. workshops.
Baling presses (eight) were locally made, hand-
operated type.
Sewing machines, needles, scissors, etc. were provided by the
operatives, who were paid an inclusive wage to cover their work and hire of
their machines.
In Palestine a similar service was established at No. 1 R.S.D. at Haifa.
CHAPTER XII
ORDNANCE SERVICES IN NORTH AFRICA, 1942-1943
The Landings
The campaign in N. Africa originated with a plan to secure French Morocco
and Algeria with a view to the earliest possible occupation of Tunisia and
the safeguarding of passages through the Mediterranean.
In July,
1942, orders were given for an Anglo-American expedition to
be mounted, whereupon War Office assumed direct control of First Army
and preparations for the despatch of the force were, speedily undertaken.
The ordnance plan presented some new features.
For the first time
R.A.O.C. units were to land on the beaches in immediate support of the
assault force.
For this purpose new units were
created, to be known as
Ordnance Beach Detachments (O.B.Ds.).
Stores for the initial maintenance
of the assault troops were to be held by the O.B.Ds.
These stores known
as "Landing Reserves "* were specially packed in packages of limited weight
and with raised markings to facilitate handling and identification.
Five O.B.Ds. were included in the Order of Battle ; other R.A.O.C. units
in the Order of Battle were: —
2 Base Ordnance Depots.
2 Base Ammunition Depots.
8 Ordnance Field Parks.
9 Mobile Laundries.
1 Base Hospital Laundry.
2 Officers' shops.
The first landings in N. Africa were made on 7th-8th November, 1942.
All the initial landings were undertaken by U.S. troops except that at Algiers,
where the British 11th Infantry Brigade Group and two Commandos landed
simultaneously with the Americans.
The landings were effected with very little opposition. The harbour of
Algiers was open to shipping on 9th November.
Thereafter the role of the
British First Army was to establish a base at Algiers and to occupy Eastern
Algeria and Tunisia as speedily as
possible.
The ports of Bougie and Bone
were occupied on the 11th and 12th November.
The five O.B.Ds. arrived on 11th November, and were soon followed by
other R.A.O.C. units.
Nos. 2 and 4 O.B.Ds. went to Algiers, No. 3 to Bougie,
No. 5 to Philippeville and No. 6 to Bone.
Considerable losses of ordnance stores from landing reserves were caused
by enemy action.
Other stores failed to arrive at the right ports.
direction of convoys was the responsibility of the Navy. A rapid turn round
of ships was essential and, to achieve this, many ships were directed to ports
other than those to which they were scheduled, i.e., to ports where it was
known they could be rapidly unloaded.
The result was that landing reserves
became divided, parts going to one port and the remainder to others,
The
importance attached to a rapid turn round often resulted in ships leaving
N. Africa
before their cargoes had been completely discharged.
* Landing Reserves are more fully described in Chapter V.
189
67612
G*2
188
WO 277/21
18
