The distance was found to be too great for efficient working ; consequently,
in July, 1940, the unit was strengthened by the loan of personnel from Ist
Cavalry Division in Palestine and a reserve of tanks was sent forward to a
site east of Sidi Barrani not far from rear H.Q. of 7th Armoured Division
and adjacent to the divisional workshops.
The site was used also as a transit
camp for b vehicles.
The normal system for the supply of ordnance stores was for unit indents
to be sent by A.D.O.S. to the A.O.D. at El Daba where they were either
met from stocks held there or passed back to base at Cairo.
The time
taken between submission of indent and the receipt of stores varied from
10 to 20 days.
Advance of Western Desert Force-Destruction of Italian Tenth Army
During October and November, 1940, the Western Desert Force was
reinforced and re-equipped; artillery
units receiving 25 pounder equipments
in place of their 18-pounder guns and 4.5 in. howitzers. Dumps of ammunition
and supplies were formed forward of our lines at Mersa Matruh in prepara-
tion for further offensive action by our troops which began on 7th December
and resulted in the Battle of Sidi Barrani, the subsequent advance of 500
miles to Benghazi and the destruction of the Italian Tenth Army, the remnants
of which surrendered on 7th February, 1941.
Before the outbreak of war it had been foreseen that during operations,
where replacement Armoured Fighting Vehicles (A.F.Vs.) were required to
cover large distances before joining their units, there would be need for an
organization which would not only ensure that vehicles were fit mechanically
but would also supply them with ammunition, petrol, reserve water and a
crew
The need for this organization was proved in the early fighting, and
in October, 1940, the 7th Armoured Division consequently formed its own
vehicle park by withdrawing workshop personnel from units. The functions
of this
vehicle park were to take over from the ordnance field park all
vehicles intended for the 7th Armoured Division, to service them and to
deliver them to the units, provided with crews obtained from the newly
formed divisional reinforcement camp.
The ordnance field park was augmented sufficiently to allow two store
lorries to accompany each of the brigade workshops.
In December, Ist Armoured Division ordnance field park arrived. This
was organized into three brigade sections and one corps section (each with
12 stores lorries), a reserve section and a vehicle section.
unit it was decided that all indents for
With this larger
spares and assemblies for M.T. and
warlike stores should go to the field park instead of to the A.O.D. at El Daba.
A despatch rider service was introduced to ensure the rapid transit to base of
those indents which the field park could not meet from stock, and a nightly
lorry service was started for the delivery of the stores.
Main Ordnance Problems during the Advance
December, 1940—February,
1941
The transporting of ordnance stores during the advance presented a serious
The normal system in those days of giving priority to supplies,
petrol, ammunition and water was followed, and only if any transport remained
168
available after meeting those priorities, was any allotment made for the
carriage of ordnance stores.
In practice no adequate allotment was made.
"B" vehicles from reserve, sent forward as replacements, were invariably
made use of to full capacity for the forward delivery of ordnance stores but in
spite of this measure and of the constant effort to get ordnance stores forward,
they accumulated at railhead to a serious extent, with the result that units
were submitting fresh indents for stores already consigned to them but held
up in transit.
Other factors which at this time added to the ordnance task were the
change over from summer to winter clothing and the necessity for carrying
reserve water in the desert.
Earlier it had been decided that British and Indian troops in the Western
Desert should remain in khaki drill throughout the winter, fortified by woollen
underclothing (not normally issued in Egypt).
However, the weather of early
December, 1940, was abnormally cold (to the extent that anti-freeze mixture
was issued for vehicles), and the clothing decision was reversed.
Service dress
(later battledress) was authorized to replace khaki drill for winter wear.
Australian troops and some of the later arrivals of British troops had retained
their service dress and the problem was confined mostly to supplying 7th
Armoured Division (the troops who were furthest from railhead) and corps
troops.
The clothing did not arrive at railhead until after the advance had begun.
As far as practicable, it was sorted at railhead into unit groups but some
re-distribution by the divisional staff was necessary, assistance for which was
obtained from the ordnance field park.
With regard to the supply of water to the troops, the arrangement was that
each unit vehicle carried water for daily consumption varying trem was hait
to two gallons plus a reserve of two gallons for each man on the vehicle.
water was carried in two gallon cans similar to petrol cans, most of which
were made locally from thin sheet metal.
The practice was for empty cans to
be exchanged for full ones by 2nd line R.A.S.C. companies but the wastase
rate was very high and demands were constantly made by all units for new
cans.
Dumps were formed in forward areas and a large reserve of cans was
held at railhead but the replenishment of the dumps was not easy because the
cans were bulky and liable to damage in transit.
New water cans initially
sent forward from the base were filled with water by R.A.O.C., but at railhead
the ordnance responsibility was confined to matintaining the supply of cans.
An advanced base was established at Tobruk after its capture on 22nd
January, 1941.
Ordnance installations there included a stores depot and an
advanced ammunition depo installations there indu pa a store open advanced
installations at Benghai pote 30) It was als tulanted to but the plans
did not materialize because hu this time arrangements were already bein
made for the withdrawal of troops to go to the aid of Greece. However, a
forward ordnance dump with a restricted range of stores, was established
169
WO2947/17
WO 277/21
18
