units and an ordnance field park located at Kitale (Kenya) railhead.
An
R.A.O.C.
officer and N.C.O. arrived to carry out an inspection of arms
and ammunition held by
units garrisoning the
northern Ironuer.
strength of the E.A.A.O.C. grew to 16 officers and planning went forward
with great urgency in view of the evidence that Italy would shortly enter
the war.
Among the lessons learned from these early preparations, the following are
outstanding
(a) •A better start could have been made if a skeleton staff of R.A.O.C.
personnel had been available at the beginning.
As it was, only
the A.D.O.S. had previous experience.
(b) There was no agreed source of provision of stores in the event
of war.
Rifles, ammunition and some general stores were obtained
by placing demands, at first without authority, on India.
Per-
mission to purchase from South Africa was not granted until
(c) Earlier liaison with the South, African Mobile Field Force with
regard to ordnance matters would have enabled a joint and more
efficient service to have been planned.
The entry of Italy into the war put East Africa in an even worse position
so far as the receipt of stores was concerned.
had to travel the long journey round the
Beginning in June, 1940, the South African Mobile Field Force arrived in
Kenya with its various services, including the South African "Q"
(handling general stores and clothing) and "T"
service (handling warlike
Close liaison was immediately established with these services by
the A.D.O.S. and thenceforward planning proceeded jointly. Personnel from
the "Q" service were attached to the East African Ordnance Corps for
special jobs, and an ammunition section of the "T" service was attached
to the ordnance ammunition depot.
In August, 1940, the appointments of A.D.O.S. and D.A.D.O.S. were
upgraded to D.D.O.S. and A.D.O.S. respectively By the close of the year,
the ordnance installations included a B.O.D. at Nairobi and A.O.Ds. at
Nanyuki and Mombasa
Three mobile workshops and one ordnance field
park were operating in the field and a base ordnance workshop (B.O.W.)
was in course of formation.
After the arrival of two officers and 22 British
other ranks in November, 1940, there were no further reinforcements from
the United Kingdom until March, 1942.
Situation on the Liberation of Abyssinia
When the advance into enemy-held territory
took
place, additional
A.O.Ds. had to be formed as the advance proceeded, and three ordnance
field parks were maintained in addition to various mobile workshops and
ammunition dumps.
The immense distances covered, and the speed of the advance made it
necessary to despatch stores and personnel long before
their destination
had been captured.
One example was the refitting of the 5th South African
Brigade at a few days' notice in order that it might be transferred by sen
from Mombasa to Berbera in British Somaliland, in time to reappear in
the Abyssinian highlands at an opportune moment.
This was achieved by
calling in stores from all sources and delivering them to the Brigade at
points on its route to the coast, and to the actual ships on which it was
to travel.
At the close of the
campaign, the following ordnance installations
which are shown on the map facing page 308 were in being, and some
impression of the administrative problems faced will be gained from noting
the vast distances which separated the advanced installations from the base :—
(a) Base Ordnance Installations
B.O.D., Nairobi (including R.S.D.)
B.O.W., Nairobi
B.A.D., Mitubiri (40 miles by road or rail from Nairobi)
(b) Advance Ordnance Installations
(i) Kenya
A.O.D.,
Gilgil
A.O.D., Nanyuki
Distance from Base by most
reliable route
81 miles by road or rail
130
A.O.D., Mombasa
ii) Uganda
A.O.D., Junja
435
(iii) N. Rhodesia
A.O.D., Lusaka
2,291 miles by rail, lake steamer,
road and rail.
(iv) British Somaliland
A.O.D., Berbera
1,655 miles by road (farther still via
Mombasa and sea route)
(v) Italian Somaliland
A.O.D., Mogadiscio
Ammunition Dump, Afgoi
884 miles by road
900
(vi) Ethiopia
A.O.D., Diredawa
A.O.D., Addis Ababa
1,743
2,030
(vii) Mobile Advance Units
Two forward ammunition sections.
Eight mobile workshops.
(c) Ordnance Field Park.s
Ordnance field parks were maintained with two African divisions and
with a South African division.
During this phase the chief difficulty-that of transport-was rendered
more acute by the speed
of the operations.
An A.O.D. was landed at
Kismayu in Italian Somaliland but was soon left behind.
This event had,
however, been anticipated by the despatch of a further A.O.D. which land to
at Merca.
When the forces reached Harar, an A.O.D. was despatched to
Berbera in anticipation of the landing there.
The L. of C. extending over
subject to
frequent closure owing to the rains was so long
that it was found necessary to carry about a month's supply of stores
67612
307
