Complete equipments and vehicles were not included in the tonnage bids.
In conjunction
with the Stafl, a programme was worked out for
their
shipment and bids for " vehicle spaces
" were then submitted by the Staff.
In addition to stores of ordnance concern, the special requirements of
other Services for stores of ordnance origin had to be catered for
The
most important of these was the Signal Officer-in-Chief's Reserve of signal
stores (known as S.O.C.R.).
Forecasts of requirements (amended from time to time),
were prepared
by the Signal Officer-in-Chief (S.O-in-C.) in conjunction with the Director
of Signals, War Office, and submitted through Ordnance to War
Office.
On acceptance by War Office, C.O.Ds. prepared the stores for shipment,
Royal Signals personnel being loaned to supervise.
The initial shipments
for the period D to D + 18 were planned to be shipped direct to Royal
Signals units in the beach-head.
In fact, however, these special consign-
ments were delivered to the A.O.D. as soon as it arrived and were then
held in separate dumps for each consignee.
At about D + 33 the separate
dumps were amalgamated into a separate part of No. 3 Sub-Depot of
the A.O.D., and control of stocks assumed by the S.O.-in-C.
Requirements for Works and Transportation projects were dealt with
on similar lines except that stores went direct to engineer
StOres
and
transportation depots.
In addition, there were various special requirements
for reserves of stretchers and blankets for R.A.M.C., foam for fire extin-
guishers, survivors' kits for ship-wrecked personnel, spare barrels, etc.
In view of the time lag between the submission of shipping bids and
receipt of stores in the theatre, it was essential to have alternative methods
of getting stores across at short notice in an emergency.
These methods
were either by express coaster or by air freight.
Freight applications were
not required in these cases and stores could be shipped at 3 days' notice
or even less in a grave emergency.
Daily bids were made by Services on
"Q" and the available tonnage allotted by them.
Throughout the campaign,
Ordnance had on an average 150 tons of stores and 15 tons of ammunition
a day on express coaster.
Quantities sent by air freight fluctuated consider-
ably, the highest tonnages being attained in September and October, 1944
in the case of ammunition (120 and 180 tons a day) and November and
December in the case of stores (255 and 166 tons a day).
Another speedy method of shipping stores was afforded by the ordnance
ship.
This was primarily designed to deal with stores to be sent in response
to units' indents extracted to the main base, but it was also used to ship
stores urgently required for special projects.
This method of shipment
was only slightly less speedy than express coaster since once again freight
applications were not required.
DRAFTING THE FIRST KEY PLAN
Sites for the ordnance installations in the beach-heads had to be chosen
to fit in with the operational plan and there was often difficulty in reconciling
the requirements of the administrative units with the requirements of the
fighting troops for harbour areas, etc.
Sites were
selected on the best
information available from air photographs and from
geological maps
showing the nature of the ground.
It was important that the first key plan
222
should be flexible.
This was proved by experience ; 14 A.O.D. was originally
planned to go into Caen but because of the operational situation it had to be
switched to Audrieu to a site with few material advantages where an A.O.D.
had to be created out of literally a few fields.
The
diagram facing page
224 shows the planned lay-out in the first
key plan and the eventual lay-out on the ground.
ARRANGEMENIS FOR DESPATCH AND EMPLOYMENT OF UNITS
As soon as an outline stores programme had been drawn up,
it was
possible to estimate the units required to handle the stocks,
the eccentiat
feature being that personnel and equipment should arrive in the beach-head
before the stores.
All personnel
and portions of units which
could he
dispensed with in the early stages, e.g. returned stores companies and forward
trailer sections of the A.O.Ds. were left behind for embarkation later.
On completion of mobilization and training, units were moved into con-
centration areas and thence to marshalling areas.
Each party of each unit
was given a serial in the 21 Army
Group
R.A.O.C.
Build-Up Table.
Considerable accuracy was necessary in the splitting of units and sub-units
into serials in order to ensure that all parties met again in the beach-head.
A complication was the movement of heavy unit equipment, such as cranes
and industrial gas tralers.
Special arrangements had to be made for their
conveyance to port and particular care was necessary to ensure that they
did, in fact,
"marry up" with the parent unit in the beach-head.
Vehicle
parties and personnel parties frequently sailed from different ports with the
result that personnel arrived in beach-heads in some cases before their
vehicles.
While in the
marshalling area, each O.C. was told what the role
of his unit would be,
and where
it was likely to go.
Before D-Day
this
was done by the issue of maps with all place names removed.
After D-Day
units were shown their actual proposed locations on the map.
Two points of importance arising out of the despatch of units were-
first-that
close liaison
with
Build-Up
ontrol
Organization
(B.U.C.O.)
was vital in order to effect, as operations progressed, the many changes in
priorities of unit parties for embarkation.
Second, to ensure that pioneer
companies were sent over on the same day as the R.A.O.C. units with which
they were working
Wherever nossible.
pioneer companies were affiliated
to their own R.A.O.C. units for
work during the training and mobilization
periods.
It was also necessary to plan the method of employment of special types
of units.
whether mobile
For example a decision had to be made on
laundries should initially
undertake unit washing
or whether they
should be
reserved for hospital work.
A similar problem of particular importance arose in connection with
the employment of forward trailer sections,
which had not vet been tested.
Early in the planning stage it was realized that one forward trailer section
could not
carry a useful range
of all types
at stores
Each of the four
sections was,
given
specialized
male
14
Forward
Trailer
Section was scaled fore, given a s heavy requirement of M.T. spares and
assemblies for
of C
and
G.H.O.
units.
15 Forward
Trailer Section
was scaled to cover three
tank brigades.
It was not, in fact, used as planned
223
wesqer7/17
WO 277/21
28
