VY
OUts
in off-loading and then returned to the United Kingdom.
Before the
campaign
began,
the fourth company had been split up into two bodies.
The first helped with the waterproofing of vehicles, and the second manned
a number of operational sites in the assembly areas on the South and East
coasts and was responsible for the replacement of unfit vehicles of assembling
units.
At the end of June the company was withdrawn from these duties
and regrouped in preparation for its future role.
The first company ashore accepted the whole intake of replacement vehicles
from 8th June to
4th September.
The second company assisted the first
in this task but 75 per cent.
of its personnel were used to ferry
vehicles
from the beaches to the vehicle parks.
Early in August when the Force
broke out of its bridgehead,
one of its parks was detached to Second
Army
and about the same time a second park was
detached for duty
with the L. of C. The third company, which arrived between 30th June
and 3rd August, assisted temporarily in the clearance of vehicles from the
beaches to the vehicle parks.
One park was detached to the Canadian
Army at the time of the break-through.
The fourth company started
arrive in the theatre on 25th August and relieved the third company of its
ferrying duties, allowing the latter to be re-grouped for its proper role.
On
4th August the third company took over the whole theatre intake
and to assist it in this task the second company was placed under its
command.
The area in which the first (No. 17) A.O.D., with its vehicle companies
was to operate, was allotted some weeks before D Day.
measured roughly two miles by three miles and was bounded on the North,
East and West by roads corresponding to English second or third class
roads, while along the Southern boundary ran a third or fourth class road.
All were main Army
" up" and "down" or main inter-connecting roads.
Internal traffic circuits had to be planned to conform with those on the
main roads, which were varied from time to time as roads collapsed under
the weight of traffic.
About one-sixth of the area referred to above was
allotted to the vehicle companies and within this area there were no roads
in the normal sense of the word.
There were a number of lanes and tracks,
a few of them semi-metalled, but none of them capable of taking more
than one line of traffic.
There were no standings or internal roads suitable
for vehicles except in very favourable weather conditions, and, as the weather
during the first two months was unfavourable, at times the greatest difficulty
was experienced in maintaining vehicle movement.
From a vehicle company point of view, it was perhaps fortunate that the
bridgehead was restricted during the first two months because, largely as a
result of this, exceptionally good R.E.
services were available during the
period.
When the Force broke out of its bridgehead, the R.E.
services
diminished at once and the vehicle companies were thrown back on their
own resources.
From about 4th September no further vehicles were accepted on this site
and its progressive evacuation—
-firstly, by normal issue and,
secondly,
stock transfers
to the Advance
Base- began.
The later stages of the
evacuation took place in the winter months in appalling ground conditions.
In a few cases the location of vehicles had to be indicated by flags!
252
When une evacuation of the first vehicle parks to the Advance Base began
the port of Antwerp was not available and the greater part of the theatre
intake was still being accepted over the Normandy beaches.
It was, there-
fore, necessary to establish
new parks in the R.M.A.
Though only fair
weather standings could be found, these were selected and developed with
care; consequently movement, though seriously handicapped, never became
impossible even during the winter months.
In general, the condition of replacement vehicles upon receipt was good,
the majority of them
neino new.
Up to early
August, all vehicles
were
received waterproofed.
The maintenance and servicing of vehicles upon
receipt, in storage and before issue was, during the first two or three months.
confined to a few essential tasks.
The stock of vehicles during the initial
phase of the campaign was necessarily small although turnover was rapid
and the absence
of thorough servicing and maintenance did not seriously
affect serviceability.
By the time the second series of vehicle park sites were established in
were becoming considerable and the daily intake of
vehicles was 400 to 500 a day.
More personnel and equipment were, how-
ever, available and ground conditions were less unfavourable.
efficient Transit Vehicle Park organization was built up and in a short time
was able to receive and service thoroughly 400 light vehicles a day.
servicing of heavy "A" vehicles was carried out by an armoured fighting
vehicle (A.F.V.) servicing unit from the
armoured replacement group and
this unit was located near the heavy
serviced by this unit before issue.
As the British and Canadian Armies advanced, a vehicle park was
attached to each and came under the complete control of the D.D.O.S. of
One roadhead after another was established for the receipt of ordnance
stores and equipment from the Base, and army vehicle parks were established
For about six weeks after the initial break-through, all load
carriers from vehicle parks were loaded with ordnance stores for delivery
to the roadheads before the vehicles themselves were delivered to the appro-
This tied up vehicle park drivers for lengthy
periods in the A.O.Ds. and at roadheads, thus reducing drivers for park
As the speed of the advance increased, demands for replacement vehicles
became progressively heavier.
The actual movement of vehicles over an
of C., added to the necessity to transfer thousands of
stock vehicles of all types to forward parks, presented a problem which
became more difficult with each leap forward.
Roadheads with their army
vehicle parks were sited and in some cases evacuated within a few days.
Many of the G.H.Q. vehicle parks established in their wake had a similar
experience.
A turn-round of six or seven days was
now
involved in
delivering replacement vehicles from Base to army parks and the shortage
of drivers became acute.
A detachment of 1,500 Canadian ordnance drivers
arrived from the United Kingdom and was employed solely in assisting with
the driving of stock vehicles.
These conditions continued until the advance
was held up close to the German border when the main tasks became to
253
I*2
67612
wester
7
wO 277/21.
18
