(e) The scale of stores, replacement vehicles, ammunition, survivors'
kits, and decontamination reserves to be held in marshalling areas.
It is of interest to note that the stores held in the depots in the
marshalling areas were drawn on to such an extent that a number
of items (principally mine detectors, mortars, rifles, brens, stens,
revolvers and watches) had to be replenished from C.O.Ds. two or
three times by D - 3.
War Office then ordered a considerable
increase in the scale which originally had been agreed with D.O.S.,
21 Army Group.
(A) The assistance in personnel to be rendered by 21 Army Group to
War Office and Home Commands.
In the case of the R.A.O.C., the man-power problem was particularly
acute owing to the lamentably low ceiling. Various Service discussions took
place as a result of which a compromise was reached.
Personnel of the
A.O.Ds. were left to work in C.O.Ds. for as long as possible, thereby obtain-
ing useful experience by selecting and packing L.R.s and B.M.Ps. and
preparing documents.
Similarly, personnel of the vehicle companies worked
and trained in V.R.Ds., receiving and issuing vehicles and helping to water-
proor them.
Later, personnel of units not required for the early stages were
loaned to Home Commands to assist in the manning of the marshalling
As D-Day approached, it became apparent that under existing arrange-
ments, formations for the assault phase
This was partly because C.O.Ds. had no priority
list on which to work, with the result that in many cases action was taken
to complete units for the later stages before those required for the assault.
Instructions were eventually given to all formations to submit new lists
of their deficiencies and for stores to be collected by road transport from
each C.O.D. in accordance with a detailed timetable.
this was probably the only practicable solution, but it imposed a great
strain on depots, ordnance representatives and on transport, long streams of
which waited-sometimes for days—at each C.O.D.
uneconomical, since innumerable duplicate issues resulted, not only because
the new deficiency lists ignored stores already on the way to units but also
because units made further demands on marshalling area depots when
stores were on the way to them or were being collected under the new
Formation ordnance representatives were not in a position to continue
to administer their formations during the later stages of concentration and
this work was taken over by Home District A.Ds.O.S. from the date of the
final concentration order.
Stores then in transit to these units were diverted to special dumps opened
by the District A.Ds.O.S.
The intention was that stores which did not
catch up with the units at this stage were to be sent on to the appropriate
marshalling area sub-depots in the hope (which proved to be
vain) that
there would still be time for them to reach the unit before embarkation.
If this failed the stores were to be sent on to the main base stores trans
sub-depot. In actual fact, there was such congestion that the scheme operated
only in respect of first aid M.T.
outfits, which were vitally needed, but
226
could not be obtained from the marshalling area installations.
stores were returned to the issuing depots or to returned stores depots.
All other
Vehicles and equipments scheduled to land over the beaches had to be
waterproofed.
Experiments in the methods of waterproofing had been going
on for months and changes in procedure were made up to a late stage.
a result adequate quantities of the requisite materials were not always
available, and many units received the materials only in the nick of time.
In the assault formations,
"B" vehicles had to be exchanged for so-called
" pre-waterproofed" vehicles which had been subjected to a process designed
to enable wading to a greater depth than that covered by the normal
method.
This exchange also had to be carried out at the last moment.
The exchange of vehicles often necessitated many last-minute alterations in
first aid M.T. outfits and in ordnance field park scalings.
It had been decided that the personnel of assault formations should be
given clean shirts, vests and socks at the last possible moment, the shirts
being specially impregnated as a protection against lice and typhus.
through the static organizations was decided on and within 72 hours all
the underclothing was distributed and the used underclothing withdrawn
At a very late stage it was decided to
improve the facilities for personnel who would have to remain on landing
Requirements were ascertained and the
stores rushed down by special trains, or obtained locally.
a special port ordnance organization which, in conjunction with the Navy,
delivered from lorries and D.U.K. Ws. the additional blankets and cooking
and washing equipment (and incidentally removed them, or what remained
of them when the craft returned).
The job was only completed on the eve
of D-Day. Despite all the difficulties and last minute changes formations
were fully equipped before embarkation.
The First Stage (6th June to 25th July, 1944)
The first stage of the campaign, which comprised the assault, and the
Battle of Caen and the build-up of the force for the break-out from the beach-
head, saw the administrative support of the armies develop from dumps
rapidly formed on the beaches in the first few hours of the operation to
the firm establishment of the large and complex organization of the Rear
Maintenance Area (R.M.A.).
The first key plan had been made on the assumption that Caen would be
quickly captured.
The stubborn resistance of the enemy in this area, however,
necessitated some alterations to the plan for the lay-out of the R.M.A. These
alterations are shown in the diagram facing page 224.
The ordnance units which landed on D-Day (6th June, 1944) were six
ordnance beach detachments (O.B.Ds.), two independent ammunition coni-
panies (to assist the ammunition sections of the O.B.Ds.), two port ammuni-
tion detachments (P.A.Ds.) and one port ordnance detachment (P.O.D.).
These units had the task of maintaining the assault troops with ammunition
and with stores from the landing reserves.
The first dumps were formed on oth and Ith June just clear of the
beaches; they consisted mainly of ammunition, survivors' kits, blankets and
w9s997/17
WO 277/21
