SNO
were found to be completely beyond repair and immediat ly put to malvage:
these vehicles might well have been left in the forward areas from which
A task which proved formidable and dangerous was the removal of
ammunition from A.F.Vs. backloaded.
Ammunition should, of course, have
been removed from these vehicles before they were backloaded, but as many
came back direct from the battlefield, this was not always done.
not uncommon i find half a ton or more ammunition, some of it in a highly
dangerous condition, in an A.F.V., and over 1,000 tons were removed in one
returned vehicle park over a period of five or six months.
this task was normally obtained by liaison with local sub-areas
provided ammunition examiners; at one time,
an a sin tea get that two complete port
ammunition detachments were employed full time for about two weeks on this
The third vehicle company which, up to December, 1944, had been used
in support of the other vehicle companies, was reformed so that in 1945 there
were four vehicle companies available, each operating independently under
the C.O.O., Vehicle Companies.
In addition, the total resources available
were at a later date increased by the drafting into the theatre of four vehicle
parks, two from C.M.F.
and two from the United Kingdom.
allotted one to each vehicle company.
Pilferage was a major problem at all times.
stage from issue in the United Kingdom to final receipt by the unit.
spite of preventive measures, such as systems of checking, ingenious methods
of sealing, locking of kits and excellent co-operation
Investigation Branch, whereby improvements did result, there remained a
In the case of A.F.V. kits, it was normal practice at the beginning of the
campaign to leave the kits boxed and on the vehicles.
it was decided to open an independent depot for all A.F.V. kits held in the
Stocks from all parks were drawn into it and all new vehicle intakes
into the theatre were de-kitted at the depot.
The experiment proved success-
Pilfering was virtually eliminated in respect of A.F.Vs.
THE AMMUNITION ORGANIZATION
The ammunition units available to 21 Army Group to maintain the two
armies in the field were: —
(a) Four base ammunition depots (Nos. 2, 3, 15 and 17).
(b) Four independent ordnance ammunition
(c) Eight ordnance beach detachments (subsequently reduced to two).
(d) Fourteen port ammunition detachments.
(e) Twenty-one forward maintenance ammunition sections (plus four
(f) One field ammunition repair factory.
(g) Seven mobile ammunition repair units (plus two Canadian).
(h) Six ammunition rail/ roadheads (plus three Canadian).
There were also two additional B.A.Ds. (Nos. 1 and 12) operating as such
in the theatre for a short time, but these were re-formed into three enemy
ammunition depot control units.
Early in April, 1944, 21 Army Group obtained from the War Office a list
of all kinds of ammunition which would be available.
This information was
passed to Second Army who, it had been agreed, were to plan the require-
ments for the initial phase of the operation.
In agreement with Second
Army and War Office, a complete detail of the ammunition to be supplied
for the first 30 days was drawn up and distributed to those concerned.
This
detail was broken down not only into quantities to be supplied by days, but
to which of three beaches and in which particular vessel the ammunition was
to be sent.
In addition to the estimated maintenance, the planned shipment included
quantities for the build-up of agreed reserves.
Extra holdings were allocated
to formations large and small over and above their first and second line
holdings.
On the morning
of D-Day 8 O.B.Ds. and 3 ammunition companies
followed the assault divisions and within a few hours had established dumps
on the beaches and in gardens along the promenades in spite of constant
enemy shell fire, sniper fire and bombing.
Clerks worked incessantly on
stock records in order that the Staffs of formations should be kept fully
informed of the up-to-date ammunition position.
This was of vital import-
ance. as the
ammunition intake was not on such a
scale as to allow
unrestricted expenditure.
A loss of 400 tons of ammunition through enemy
bombing created a difficult situation for a time.
Nos. 11 and 12 O.B.Ds. and 44 Ordnance Ammunition Company operated
dumps in the 101 Beach Sub-Area, Nos. 9, 14 and 15 O.B.Ds.
dnance Ammunition Company operated in 102 Beach Sub-Area, al
os. 7, 10 and 36 O.B.Ds. and 43 Ordnance Ammunition Company operat
During the early days of the campaign, dumps were
under the direct control of Corps H.Q., 1 Corps being responsible for 101 and
102 Beach Sub-Areas and 30 Corps for 104 Beach Sub-Area.
From D-Day onwards, the plans laid for the arrival of ammunition
worked smoothly
and the intake was maintained except for some delays
during rough weather. During the early days, the few units ashore handled
a larger tonnage of ammunition than had ever before been moved through
beaches.
Slight adjustments in the types loaded were made at short notice
to cover the differences which arose between the estimated and actual expendi-
Thre
For instance, it had been anticipated that before the end of June
two million rounds of 75-mm. tank ammunition would have been expended
but the expenditure was negligible, and a major storage problem was caused
which lasted until large quantities were expended by the Canadian Army in
the last battles of the campaign.
The first B.A.D. (No. 17) arrived in Normandy on 11th June and super-
imposed its organization over that of the O.B.Ds.
With the advent of No. 17
B.A.D. it was possible to plan ammunition dumps on a bigger scale inland.
On 18th June No. 15 B.A.D. arrived and took over ammunition dumps
in 104 Beach Sub-Area.
By this time 1 Ordnance Maintenance Company
257
~02947;
17
WO 277/21
18
