Return by (19/11/2025 07:00:01)
WO 171/567
AR Duan
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (GOMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
iv Detailed account of operations.
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
PARA.-1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
nd area or sub-area of the L. of
(i) Unit commanders
(ii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NOTE A.-
-In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
ept from the first day of embodiment
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
Nor he queti, ho dent water or not, to the diary should be ot be 5. .
v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks of
or and the numbed of other tanks or owens in stres, transport a bo
wers and of animals should be noted.
vl) Meteorological notes.
(vul) summary or important intormation received, whether military or political.
OTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
ccur. or come to nouce.
At une close of each day. events (vi and vi might he added
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
and of each operation or
(e) Acting of each felt retion sue dis the pet covered ay dio cure of votine of
he war diary.
i Copies re orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.-A war diary is Secret.
nd to provide data upon
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
mprovements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration
• term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
A war diary will be entered up daity,
I entry initialled v the ofncer detalled to keep I
traction and retention or appenaices, maps, clu
rom a war ciary is an oftence.
under the Official Secrets Acts.
or other person
Ner perse meni he in de die , hot the offer who is to die entire the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
() Impotent orders, instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and isued,
i Dare cations. the case of targe mits of of formations are
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
in) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staft.
/ Lovies or unportant ane reevant demi-omcial letters by commanders of formations
hey should be included, have been marked personal provided the writer consider
ARA. o.-Al dames will contorm to the regulations for dratting orders. renorts en
ee F.S.R., Volume Il).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month wil
arded on the first day of the succeeding month direct
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendice:
raniedom to the Undied.
nd Echelon to be transmitted to records offices at home for safe custody.
SPECIAL NOTE.-
-The time entered should be the time the information or order reaches
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if know
Intellial.
Month and Year..
JUNE, 44
ORIGINAL
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form
53 INP DIV O.F.P.
MAJOR I. SHA
84110.
BRO
Commanelle once
Yoodside
Major Shapeero
10.00
16.
18.00
01.30
27
Improst e/o closed in sterling opened in ourrency. IS
Advance party left to report to 160 Be HQ.
Unit less residue left Woodside Green to proceed to Marshalling Area.
Unit left Marshalling Area and embarked ready to proceed to France. Il
Arrived off coast of Pranoe. US
One part with It. Pilcher in charge landed and proceeded to Unit
Loation in 53 Div Aan Group Area. US
Remainder of Unit landed and joined rest of Unit. 1S
WAR DIARIES SECTION
13 JUL 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
