unit representatives on a phased programme drawn up by the Controller of
Ordnance Services and the Director of Warlike Stores for Vote 9 stores and
Clothing and Stores in the case of Vote 8 stores.
Similar arrangements were made to speed up the collection of outstanding
deficiencies in vehicles, spares, first-aid outfits, etc., which had been delayed
partly through late arrival from America.
Before " D" day, reports were received in the Mobilization branch from
all Assistant Directors of Ordnance Services of formations in z1 Army Group
to the eflect that, with few exceptions, all major items of equipment and all
vehicles were in the possession of their units.
COMMENTS AND LESSONS
preparation of a large force for an overseas operation, the
earlier that finality can be reached as regards the " Order of Battle" for the
force, the less likelihood of delays and complications involved in changes.
of 21 Army Group, its Commander-in-Chief, Field-Marshal
has given his opinion (" From Normandy to the Baltic"
page 33) that the speed and efficiency of planning the initial phases might
lave been greatly improved if there had been some set-up in the Army Group,
analagous to the United States Task Force system,
Commander already appointed.
B.—The importance of deciding also upon the War Establishment for
each unit at the earliest moment and of adhering to these in all main essentials
was very clearly emphasized in this phase.
It was not sufficiently realized by senior commanders (or staff officers),
who demanded that their units should be prepared on certain new establish-
ments, that it takes considerable time and labour to implement a new War
Establishment which entails any major reorganization, change of weapons,
The Equipment Scale (Army Form G10g8) has to be prepared and
issued before any action towards mobilization can be taken by the Royal Army
The War Office branch (Q.(A.E.)I) dealing with the
preparation of these Equipment Scales was very much overloaded at this
stage and all such changes of detail, priority, etc., added greatly to their
Here again the earlier appointment of the Force Commander would
probably have avoided piece-meal demands for changes in establishments by
C.- The decision proved to be sound whereby the War Office control of
units was retained for purposes of completion of mobilization and for some
time afterwards, ie. until such time as Force Headquarters became firmly
established, and assumed the status of an organized operational and adminis-
trative headquarters with its own and Echelon.
Losses of equipment, vehicles, etc., on training exercises are inevitable and
until such time as Force Headquarters was in a position to replace these from
its own reserves and to replenish in bulks moh post units had to be brought
and maintained up to scale through the normal channels of priority demands
by Assistant Directors of Ordnance Services on Command and Central Depois.
WO21T
D.- A suggestion was made by Headquarters 21 Army Group, to the
effect that the mobilization of units in the latter stages, when secret moves to
concentration areas, etc., were taking place, should be effected in bulk and
controlled by that Headquarters.
No detailed plan was put forward.
This was not agreed to as it was considered impracticable, owing to the
very large amount of administrative work connected with mobilization,
eig. detailed checking of large quantities of equipment,
clothing, unit
ammunition, vehicles, and spares, arriving for numerous and various units
The Field Service system of issue of stores and equipment working on
deficiency lists based upon a 100 per cent. mobilization scale (and at this
stage the knowledge of stores nomenclature)
would have been quite beyond
the capacity of the administrative staff and organization of Headquarters
21 Army Group when added to their duties directly connected with the
concentration of the Force.
In certain cases where stores arrived at a unit's " place of mobilization"
after the unit's departure, these were re-directed to an advanced depot in
the concentration area to which administrative cadres of units were despatched
to collect stores labelled to their serial number.
Personnel
afe here were ceton ten factors as rards persp, ad pring due arlich
single mobilization yet undertaken.
The numbers involved were very large; new types of units of all kinds
had sprung up requiring more, and in some cases new kinds of, tradesmen ;
recently called-up men were still very young ;
overseas (especially those who had seen heavy fighting) were suffering from
war weariness and needed rest.
In effect there were not enough of the right type of individuals to fill all
the vacancies required at once.
Lists of priority units were therefore drawn
up by S.D. branches and given effect to by A.G. personnel branches, but for
reasons already indicated, these lists frequently underwent considerable
In the earlier stages, units were found to be far short of their War Establish-
ment both in officers and men on the date fixed for the completion of their
mobilization, and, in spite of progress reports, little advance could be made
towards bringing units up to strength.
In other cases, though numerically up to strength, units would be holding
a large number of " immatures" i.e. men under i? years of age, who under
existing orders were not allowed to accompany their units overseas.
were left with units for two reasons :—
(i) It was not then known when exactly "D" day was to be and it was
hoped that many of these you g men would reach the age of ig before
(i) Efforts were being made to reduce the restricting age to 183, and it
was hoped that the Cabinet would agree.
