CHAPTER XIII-INTERMEDIATE PERIOD - NOVEMBER, 1942,
TO FEBRUARY, 1943
First Army sailed for North Africa during the last week in October, 1942.
After that date and early in 1943,
68 follow-up units were mobilized and
proceeded overseas
as soon as required by G.O.C. in C., First Army.
addition, during this phase a number of units were mobilized for a variety of
despatch without any definite destination being assigned to them.
It was also known that, as soon as General Staff planning had reached a
sufficiently advanced stage,
the mobilization of the Expeditionary Force
would be continued as a prelude to further operations in Europe. Advantage
was therefore taken of the comparative lull to profit from the lessons learnt
during the mobilization of First Army. - Procedures were overhauled and
revised and methods devised for the provision of every available man for the
Expeditionary Force.
Orders were issued in February, 1943, imposing the strictest economy upon
the use of man- and woman-power at home, and attention was also drawn
to the necessity for the conservation and correct use of all classes of transport.
Force MemoranduD
" Planning
and Preparation of an Overseas
issued by
Director of Staff Duties in June, 1942
(page 43),
was completely re-written and improved in consultation with branches
concerned.
It is of interest from the mobilization aspect to note the stages
laid down in this memorandum for the preparation of the force-
(a) Outline plan by Joint Planning Staff, including cover plan.
(b) Consideration by Chiefs of Staff and final approval.
(c) Operational movement and administrative planning.
(d) Preparation of Order of Battle.
(e) Preparation of units.
(f) Preparation of reserves of ammunition, equipment, supplies, etc.
(g) Movement to port of embarkation.
(h) Concentration and despatch of rear details.
(i) Despatch of tactical follow-up convoys to build up the force to pre-
determined size.
(j) Normal reinforcement programme.
Until stage (d) has reached some degree of finality, mobilization cannot be
begun.
The firmer the Order of Battle the less likelihood of wasted effort,
disorganization of priorities of personnel, equipment, etc.
Where there are
constant changes, either additions or withdrawals of units (and especially of
formations), priorities and action in the subsequent stages are bound to be
adversely affected.
Comprehensive appendices were attached to show the list of subjects for
discussion at S.D. branches meetings preliminary to mobilization and also
lia of points on which information must be supplied to A.G.5 (Mob. by
War Office branches before mobilization orders could be issued.
52
28
WO21
LESSON
This short lull in the preparation of forces between the despatch of
First Army and the beginning of mobilization of Second Army provided an
invaluable opportunity for the check-up, and where necessary the overhaul,
of our whole system of preparation and mobilization of the Expeditionary
Force.
The revised and amplified orders issued on this subject did much to
simplify and aid the efficient execution of the very heavy programme of
mobilization that lay ahead.
