equipment had to be packed into their vehicles when accompanying units
overseas.
some cases where a unit was not proceeding overseas im-
mediately, vehicle instructions were not issued until a later date when it was
known more definitely when the unit was likely to embark.
A training and
domestic scale was issued in the meantime.
As production increased and the threat of invasion decreased the vehicle
situation improved.
By 1941. " Standing Orders " (see page 37 above) were able to include more
comprehensive orders for the issue of vehicles, e.g.—
(a) Separate orders for diferent types of veh, les were is ed by Wisy
service Corps Vehicles).
W.S.6 (" B
In addition release authority was required
for workshop, machinery and technical lorries (W.S.1o) and technical
signal vehicles (W.S.i3).
(6) In some cases vehicles accompanied units; in others, owing to loading
difficulties, vehicles were sent direct to the port and loaded in vehicle
In certain cases, these were provided at destination.
Spares of all kinds, e.g. wheels, tyres, spare parts and First Aid outfits were
in very short supply.
Owing to the very great, though unavoidable, shortage of vehicles, con-
sequent upon the heavy losses in France and the conflicting needs of G.H.Q.,
Home Forces, with those of mobilization, no special lesson is to be derived
from this period as regards vehicle procedure.
WO217
CHAPTER XII-MOBILIZATION OF FIRST ARMY, 1942
Organization of Expeditionary Force
In February, 1942, orders were issued by Director of Staff Duties
(20/Misc/2093 (S.D.5) of zoth February, 1942) for the setting up of an
organization to be termed " The Expeditionary Force."
In the accompanying Directive, it was laid down that this Force must be
prepared to act in either of two capacities :-
(a) Operations of a limited scope-requiring special forces.
(b) Operations of a wider scope in which infantry and armoured formations,
specially trained in combined operations, would be required in addition.
The Expeditionary Force while in this country was to be under control of
the Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, for all purposes, including training,
unless specifically nominated for some operational project outside the
sphere of the Commander-in-Chief.
Units of the Force were not to be moved without the authority of the
Chiefs of Staff.
On 25th February a meeting was held under the Deputy Director of Staff
Duties to settle in broad outline the composition of the Force.
A provisional " Order of Battle" was drawn up.
No specific destination
was announced, but it was decided to proceed with the mobilization or
re-mobilization of a number of units.
By the end of May, a firmer Order of Battle had been agreed upon to
One Armoured Division (6).
Three Infantry Divisions (I, 4 and 43)—new organization.
Two Infantry Divisions (56 and 78)—old organization.
As it seemed probable that this proposed composition would be accepted
in general terms, with only minor modifications, it was decided to change
the title of the Force to Headquarters First Army.
Mobilization Procedure
On 20th June Deputy Director of
Staff Duties issued instructions
(S.D. 5/00/85) for the procedure to be adopted by all concerned for the
mobilization of
units as agreed for inclusion in the
(see Appendix C).
These instructions were drawn up in consultation with the Mobilization
branch as a result of the lessons learnt in the earlier phases of mobilization,
many of which have already been mentioned.
The most important features of this Directive were :-
(a) War Office " Sponsor" branches were made responsible that all
relevant data necessary for the mobilization of units were sent to A.G. 5 (Mob.)
throuch S.D.r.
agreed direct
Any subsequent modifications
between A.G.- (Mob.) and the
" Sponsor" branch concerned.
In this way S.D.5, which was in danger of becoming the " bottleneck," was
relieved of much work, and avoidable delays were thereby reduced.
