(g) Move into Sudetenland, October, 1938.
(h) Occupation of Czechoslovakia, March, 1939.
With the European background becoming increasingly dark, fresh British
military plans to meet the changing situation had to be worked out based on
various hypotheses, including the possibility (or, alternatively, the improba-
bility) of co-operation with the armed forces of other countries.
These revised plans gradually contemplated the use of larger and larger
forces.
From the one divisional basis of 1935, the initial requirements were
increased to two divisions in 1937-38 and to four divisions with an advanced
air striking force in 1939. The final plan envisaged a total mobilization
commitment of four contingents amounting to 32 divisions, of which six
With each increase there were consequential further demands for trained
ersonnel for training units and establishments, staffs of Officer Cadet
Training Units, etc., and it became evident that these greatly increased forces
could not be met without devising new measures for the amplification of our
In May, 1939, the Military Training Act was given
Royal Assent, and the first 33,000 men called up joined on ist July, 1939.
As regards the Territorial Army, instructions were issued on 3oth March, 1939
War Office letter 79/Mob/2534 (T.A.1)] for units to be raised to their War
Establishments, an increase of about 40 per cent.
On the following day
instructions were issued [War Office letter 79/Mob/2778 (T.A.I)] ordering
a further increase of establishment, amounting to almost a duplication, with
all the repercussions upon the production of equipment, vehicles, clothing,
A number of changes were also introduced in 1937-39 which depleted
available man-power resources, e.g. the " Schedule of Reserved Occupations,"
a very necessary step designed to avoid the call-up of men in skilled trades,
whose services could be more usefully employed in the manufacture of
armaments, aeroplanes, equipment, etc.
This Schedule was not, however,
applied at the time to Territorial Army recruiting.
The effect of this was
that later on, e.g. after Dunkirk, some 30,000 key men in industry had to
be released for urgent work on armament and aircraft manufacture.
Wastage rates and dates were also constantly being varied.
In addition, the mechanization of transport and the reorganization of
certain field units (e.g. field regiments into anti-tank regiments; machine-gun
battalions into infantry) all had to be given effect to during this period.
As indicated above, all these various changes must inevitably entail con-
siderable revision of the Mobilization Plan.
The more drastic the changes,
the more serious the effect upon mobilization calculations, production and
supply programmes, etc.
With the threat of war in the offing, as was the case in 1939, the introduction
of additional field forces, reorganizations, etc., might well vitiate all existing
mobilization calculations as regards availability and production of personnel
and material, and result in there being no executive plan ready at the moment
of actual crisis.
The total estimated difference in personnel between the 1938 Plan
(New Conspectus) and that of 1939 (F.F. Sub. 33 ist Contingent) was 48,300.
W027 7/26
WO2T7
In addition, the dates of despatch were put forward. In August, 1939, the
approximate man-power deficiency was reported to be 1,800 officers and
47,000 other ranks, of which 14,000 were in the R.A.S.C.
Surpluses did
exist in certain arms, but only a small proportion of these could be looked
upon as assets in other arms.
The final plan, on which the Army was to be mobilized for war, necessitated
a complete re-cast of the very detailed instructions regarding mobilization
These revised instructions were not in the hands of recipients until
the first week of August, 1939.
This plan was required to be implemented by ist September; thus the
change-over of plans coincided with actual mobilization.
LESSON
In view of the very complicated process required to bring a modern Army
into a state of preparedness for war and the length of time needed to make
any ation ad arrange to that roase, phons up hahieh as rari an
possible, and then only if absolutely essential and adequate time is available
in which to make the necessary modifications to existing plans.
