APPENDIX B (contd.)
H.Q. COMMAND
MOBILIZATION PROGRESS REPORT (vide attached instructions)
(Specimen pro forma)
EQUIPMENT DEFICIENCIES
(important items only).
Code Letters.
Unit...
Serial No...
*PERSONNEL DEFICIENCIES
(by trade).
VEHICLE DEFICIENCIES
(by types).
A*
Posted, not yet
joined.
Not posted.
C*
Casualties
since
report.
WORT
Columns A and B MUST
-Column C must show casualties since submission of last personnel deficiency report.
iencies, taking into account Column C.
Signed.
* Note:
how personnel dene
APPENDIX C
(See page 43)
PART 1
INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR MOBILIZATION
1. Unit.—Correct abbreviated title of unit.
This should be checked with S.D.3 and
confirmation sh Late elevant Wom S.is shat th be achecked pend amend-
(b) If on special W.E. this should be prepared on wax stencil in correct form
including :-
(i) Men.
ii) Distribution of rank and file by trades and duties.
(iii) Transport.
(iv) Notes including first reinforcements.
If, as is preferable, a modification of an existing W.E. can be used, difference will
be shown on above headings.
and dif unit is already formed on special W.E. give A.G. UM. reference number
(d) If modifications to W.E. are required for :—
(i) Men.—Details of ranks and trades must be given.
streng on a rags ad trades misten in on amention in offices
normally
require clerke
(ii) Scale of Transport.—Complementary alterations in scale of drivers must
(e) If unit is to reorganize on a different W.E. involving alteration in strength of
unit, availability of extra men required should be verified with A.G., or recommenda-
tion should be given regarding disposal of surplus.
(f) Necessary recommendations should be
permissie say to me ation shout made regarding the mispretation ter
trucks or trailers according to theatre of war.
whit S unit orches va oblie that the televant A.F. G1098 for the W.E. on
unit. sain reement. Sce etit reinforcements, if any, to be mobilized with
4. Present Location.—This must be verified with S.D.I (Locations).
OM, of hobilization- is must be steed with O.t, in consultation with
6. Order for Move to Place of Mobilization-Date of move.
S.D.I should be
asked to move after availability of accommodation at place of mobilization has been
confirmed with Q.I.
If unit is under Home Forces or A.A.
Command control,
S.D.1 should normally be asked to revert it to War Office control when ordering move.
7. Type of Mobilization.—-Home, M.E., etc., or as agreed at S.D. meeting.
decided at S.D. meeting.
Mobilization. -Give latest possible date.
Usually
in case high priority
8. Date Sompletion of Meatime of unit during period of mobili tar
Wherê guns, vehicles and war
to eateries vard ete. When t mobilization, the
gui on which they aed to lie called fouard been (se diso para. to below te shing
deserte, su that are which tan the date for completion.
Also the dates by which any advanced or other parties are required should
(C27014)
