W027 7/26
WO2T7
orders issue ay Ah.5 (Moppendices, for inclusion in the comprehensive
In the case of vehicles, similar co-ordinated instructions were drawn up
by O.S.5 (afterwards W.S.5) and O.S.6 (afterwards W.S.6).
Civilian Branches
Provision of office equipment, publications, stationery, etc., was arranged
by direct contact with C.2(c).
CHAPTER VI-GENERAL HEADQUARTERS, HOME FORCES,
AND HEADQUARTERS OF COMMANDS
General Headquarters, Home Forces
During the period that General Headquarters, Home Forces, existed,
its functions were mainly directed to defence and operational training.
Although it was kept fully informed of all mobilization measures and activities
and its representatives attended all mobilization meetings, it was not required
to take any active part in the mobilization of units.
At first, units in course of mobilization sometimes received orders from
G.H.Q. to move from their place of mobilization for operational or training
purposes.
To a certain extent this was unavoidable, since it was undesirable
at that stage, owing to the threat of invasion, to remove G.H.Q.'s authoritv
to use these units if an emergency arose.
It was, however, partly owing to
lack of co-ordination at G.H.Q. between " A
" Branch, who were aware of
units' state of mobilization, and "G" Branches (Operations and Training),
who had not been informed of the fact or the implications of moving such units.
In the later stages, all units detailed for mobilization were removed from
G.H. Q.'s control to that of the War Office (S.D.).
If a unit was not required
to proceed overseas shortly after completion of mobilization, it was handed
back to G.H.Q. for training and administration, but personnel, equipment,
vehicles, etc., were not allowed to be taken away during this interval.™
Headquarters of Commands
General
With the exception of Anti-Aircraft Command, headquarters of commands
were made responsible for the supervision of mobilization of all units located
in their commands, which included the submission of mobilization Progress
Reports (see Part III, Chapter IX).
Anti-Aircraft Command was excepted as being an operational command
and anti-aircraft units located in other commands were mobilized under the
supervision of these commands. As a general rule, anti-aircraft units on
gun sites, or otherwise located unsuitably for mobilization, were moved to a
mobilization centre.
Staffs of commands were not suitably or adequately organized to deal with
their mobilization responsibilities.
It is difficult once a war has begun to
impress upon commanders and staffs the relative importance of mobilization
As the war progressed commanding officers and their staffs, rapidly
promoted from junior rank or recently recruited from civil life, found
themselves without knowledge or experience of unit administration, mobiliza-
tion problems, etc.—moreover, in a large number of cases, units were formed
immediately before mobilization, and no pre-mobilization action was possible.
For these reasons it was essential that staffs of commands should be able
to help and advise commanding officers and their staffs in their mobilization
problems, and in view of the urgency of mobilization, there is no more
efficient or practical way of assistance than by personal visits to the unit
