J9/10/2
WO 171/1316
AR DUAN
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
(iv) Detailed account of operation
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affectin
TARA.
-A war diary will be
• kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
nerations, topographical and climati
Clear sketches showine pestuons or tour e
creation of the particular command or appointment by :-
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate commanc
und area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(i1) Unit commanders
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
rept tom the is the case of formati
In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will 1
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and rank
ah. os toloress and of animals should be noted
in acts and it the case of units on the I. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as give
occur, or come to notice,
At he cred up, not day, e order (give i ve hht at the time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F.
. W.3009
NOTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
Po pro? A a for wide to e object is to fume historia record of operations,
and mispion de data mistration.
of tier per i houd be made dear, that the otice who mit do the lette is the co
ParA. 3.—Ummew
preparing a diary:-
4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded wher
(i) Ind diatos ters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i) Daily locaties in there entarin
Movements during the past toenty four hour and present dispositions
(11) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(ti) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subor
nished in the text of th
, and each wil
diary (para.
tompend, an ill be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
chipe eat, any tie author. Keri te
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war c
for transmission to the war
to the preceding month vil
(ji) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as
The SPECTAT. NOThethe time catered should a tha ting the nom at the tor or co
FIELD.
WAR DIARV
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army. Form C. 211,
Unit Be the Kings legumeal
Commanding Officer le CL. D. 1. N. 148
References to Appendices
PACKI
kuas und
mones l munchelling
Embarkation from the maxins centes.
appointel lay Cammande of
Cast / Role: / 4. Langlen
last. A.4. A. Kissack lo he Aula
Serials remained
Exercise postponed fu 2t has..
haund cuft at lea
famile.
usumell .
"H" hour 0620 Las
Beuck bramp Serials Knackel
B. M. A bung
und establishul Beaches .
in steleton
Nigh wind blowing in from the dea and
the chay.
frequent suing specs
well -
I Assault phase went extemely.
passing chaugh che transit
wens
michaut
Kaulle
819/12L OM
VVILL OM
LULLIOM
99E2/12
219/12L OM
1 808/1LL OM
- 9S8/121 OM
1 008/12L OM
