ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
o1 moDIlsatiOn Or
bordinate command
c. 36). and persona.
I his representatives.
, war diaries will be
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
No, i te tet hot dent wheter or not a vat diary should be hept by ai,
The an Omice, London, S.W.1.
ong no ron and aimintration
or it yet and he made it hot the other he a ta tete is the comander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4_ In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:-
" In detonation
instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(ii) Patch tables in the cas
(iv) Detailed account of operations
#xact hour of imnortant occurrences. tactors aftecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops ai
important phases
(v) Nature and description of held engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in
is should branke
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
be noted
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE
-Events should be
occur, or come to notice.
teach day, events (V) and (Vil) might be addeine they
PaRa. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F
and of each operation o
route oruer or mistruction issued arns tue period covered Dy tie current volume of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(ii) A copy of
each narrative of report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formatio:
rations furnished in the text of the diary (para, 4, iv above)
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. Reference
to appendices will be made in the last commn of a.r. Carto
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc
(See F.S.R.,
PARA. 7.-FOKMALIONS AND UNIIS OL LArEDILIONARY FORCES.
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows
WO 171/1316
# co
Si i preparat in man
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY.
Army Form
Unit 5ML BN., THE KING IS RUGIMIT.
Commanding OfficerTlout-Colonel D.H.V.
Summary of livents and Information
toshed down, antina.
Naval bombardnant of tha conat offactive and
Beant Op and Asault Diviadon landed on frat two tides.
Landinga rather wet and toe landad in mont asea up to 2 - J reat of water.
No desatera bendied during thia ireroiao.
Dumb Stares brought into Exeroise
hy nantral souve - adao fron a dam at Kinlona Aerodroue wide had been
prepared by Reach. p bedore the Saurolsa.
Conniated of dummy jerricans,
The Beach metedovell and a great ingrovement ms
Hotteed in the Beach Qp
alnse the laat tro Strerodaes
A gutt night - vexy
said and hoeth
en Sivanced in unto aresa.
ch dp = No 6 Mench de Landed at 0630 has sud proceeded to
Whate allotted are
been prepared
tate over and run the daiss of the Sallade which haa
3 Jesh Ge mor sponsible onto for the
or the Denolos Quae atores faten date daps sad
r Joggrese dee to me. 1100 Jas 1 Aga
NES-NET--
Liest-Color
Sin 5N D
98:66:91
2ZE/LZ1 OMA
1 806/LLL OM
1 00E/121 OM
9Zt/1LI OM
mont
819/12L OM
IV/LLL ON
688/121 OM
