Much hoped this convoy would have included best part of a British
already detailed for you but all this formation is frozen out
by administrative units.
Would you re-examine your order of priority and let me know if it
would be possible to delay sending some of the administrative units..."
General Wavell sent a cable in reply setting out very succinctly the reason
why administrative units were so urgently required, pointing out that ever
since the outbreak of war there had been a shortage of administrative units,
base, L. of C., and divisional, in the Middle East, and reinforcements for
these had lagged.
It was this time delay that he was endeavouring to over-
He emphasized the fact that the Australian, New Zealand, and Indian
formations had come to the Middle East with very few G.H.Q. and L. of C.
except hospitals.
the apparently abnormal requirements
of engineer works services and general supervising units were necessitated
by the fact that the Middle East was very deficient in billets, accommoda-
tion, roads, water, rail and port facilities, and that the holding of reserves for
150 days involved very great constructional commitments.
Again he explained that climatic and desert conditions caused a high
rate of wear and tear necessitating a large number of such units as M.T.
He drew attention to the disposition of Middle East forces in
several theatres of operations, which proportionately increased the main-
tenance commitment and consequently the number of administrative units
to carry out these commitments.
His argument, to a certain extent, carried
the day but, throughout the next two years, the proportion of "tail" to
"teeth " was a constant source of controversy between London and Cairo.
Further Expansion
To sum up, the planning of the base in Egypt during 1940 can be divided
into two phases.
The first was the immediate expansion of the small existing
base to put on a war footing the maintenance requirements of the existing
garrisons of Egypt, Palestine and the Sudan together with the reinforcements
which had either arrived in Middle East or were definitely due to arrive.
The second phase was the expansion of the bases in Egypt and Palestine
to the ultimate maintenance target of nine divisions, six in Egypt, three in
Initially, in accordance with War Office instructions, this expansion was
not to be implemented but was to remain as a planned extension only, but,
in point of fact, G.H.Q. planned from the start on the basis of nine divisions
with an allowance for further expansion up to an additional four divisions,
and the planners' wisdom and foresight were completely justified when,
in August, 1940, the authority was given by the War Office for the imple-
mentation and immediate extension of the complete plan for a nine-division
base. Thus the first and second phase merged into one without necessitating
further reconnaissance of sites but merely entailing the execution of the
planned expansion of depots and camps partly constructed; the greatest
obstacles to the rapid completion of the work were, of course, the recurring
shortages of the various materials, especially timber.
WO2T7
1 p
Still looking ahead, G.H.Q., Middle East, then began tentative planning
for an expansion of the base to maintain up to 15 divisions so that when,
in October, 1940, the War Office raised the planning basis to 14 divisions
by June, 1941, G.H.Q. was more than prepared.
the subsequent target for March, 1942,
At the same time, of
One fact emerges.
associated service planners in G.H.Q. by surprise.
The increases did not take the "Q" staff and the
had, to a great extent, been foreseen in the planning requirements submitted
to the War Office during 1940. Many of these demands (notably those for
a reserve of constructional stores and engineering material) which were based
on far-seeing plans for future expansion, had been reduced by the War Office.
This reduction together with the grave deficiency of administrative person-
nel resulted in the rate of completion of the base installations being slowed
down and difficulties in their operation when ready for use.
demands of the " man on the spot" will always appear excessive to those
in final authority who have to consider each theatre as only part of the
overall picture, and distribute accordingly.
By the end of 1940, with the prospect of 14 divisions in the Middle
East by June, 1941, considerable progress had been made towards the com-
pletion of the base in Egypt on the basis of nine divisions.
of a division (or " divisional slice") for planning purposes was taken as
35,000, which included an allowance for a proportion of corps, L. of C.
This figure was queried by the
War Office, who suggested that, as native labour was not organized in
regular military units, a better planning figure would be 27,000 soldiers and
The immediate problem facing G.H.Q. was, therefore, that of planning
base installations and accommodation for a strength of nearly 500,000 by
June, 1941, involving the expansion of existing depots etc., and the recon-
naissance and siting of entirely new base areas.
would have to be capable of still further expansion to maintain the strength
of approximately 800,000 in the subsequent year.
new areas suitable for base development would, on account of the limited
rail and road communications and
the closing of the Mediterranean to
convoys, be extremely difficult to find.
Alexandria and Port Said were, in
the autumn of 1940, diminishing assets as ports of entry, the one remaining
port, Suez, was largely undeveloped and-
even with the uninterrupted use
of the Canal the spectre of port congestion loomed ahead.
Office to increase the forces in
Middle East to some 800,000 in 1942 was naturally a source of considerable
satisfaction from a fighting point of view, but the administrative implications
were a source of considerable misgiving.
It intensified the problem of the
shortage
of R.E.
constructional units and engineer stores generally and
emphasized the acuteness of the "teeth and tail" controversy,
which was,
at that time, aggravated by the inadequacy of R.A.S.C. and R.A.O.C. base
units to take over and run additional installations.
The shortage of British
manpower for employment in the base was mitigated to some extent by
173
