often discovered in combined operations, a lighter beached on a rising tide
must, as the tide rises, be hauled up or it will float off again.
If it is put
ashore on a falling tide and left to " dry out" much valuable working time is
wasted waiting for the next tide to take it off.
A second setback was
encountered in the rapid deterioration of the earth or coral roads which
proved quite incapable of standing up to the volume of traffic, and these
difficulties were increased by " teething
" troubles inevitable in any new port
such as complications over tugs, stevedoring and labour.
The lighters had reached the beach on the morning of 19th February.
It will be remembered that the force had set out on 11th February with ten
days' supplies so that, allowing time for distribution of their urgently needed
contents,
the lighters had arrived none too soon.
Indeed on the morning
of 20th February the position in Kismayu looked very black.
lighters were all fast on the beach, the tugs could not get them off and unless
they were got off on the next tide it looked as if they would be there for a
month.
In the town itself the road had collapsed completely and there were
some hundreds of yards of lorries jammed radiator to tail-board,
and helpless and completely blocking the way to any other traffic in either
direction.
Order, however, eventually prevailed.
The lighters were success-
fully floated off, and slowly the traffic began moving while sappers worked
feverishly to keep the roads open.
Gradually the stores unloading pro-
gramme took shape and became organized.
Meanwhile the advance dumps built up forward of the Tana were being
It was decided to use Afmadu and Kismayu
only as dump areas, Afmadu being stocked by road and Kismayu by sea—
although balancing and special items were sent by road to the latter.
Demands on the embryo maintenance system in Kismayu, as is always the
case after any advance when formations have to some extent been
" living
Units had expended their private
and " hidden reserves, and their efforts to replace expenditure completely
upset planned estimates of replacement requirements.
The same effect was
to be seen in nearly all theatres in similar circumstances.
OPERATIONS BY 1 SOUTH AFRICAN DIVISION
While preparations were still being made for the capture of Kismayu by
the two African divisions as the main thrust, 1 (S.A.) Division had been
operating on the central sector of the front.
2 and 5 (S.A.) Brigades were
located at Marsabit, while 25 (E.A.) Brigade was at Lokitaung west of Lake
Rudolf.
In efiect 25 (E.A.) Brisade was completely separated from the two
South African brigades—
of the lake.
the only road communication being round the south
Between Marsabit and southern Abyssinia lay some 120 miles
of waterless desert across which ran two roads the first Marsabit-Moyale,
which wound through country very favourable to the defender, and was likely
to become impassable in wet weather, and the second via North Horr to
Dukana.
This road was in equally bad condition, but it did provide an alter-
native to the Moyale route which was the obvious line of approach.
In an effort to assist natriot forces who had been receiving a good amount
of arms and ammunition and in the hone of touching off a spark of rebellion
which might spread through southern Abyssinia, it was decided that active
144
WO277
support should now be given. As a result operations began about mid-January
when we pushed over the border, and the initial results soon led to a decision
to attack the Moyale-Mega escarpment.
Considerable opposition was en-
countered before Mega fell and the appalling heavy rain saturated the black
cotton soil and prevented any transport with water and supplies from reaching
the troops for some time, affording a cruel contrast with the start of operations
when the heat, combined with the lava dust, greatly exaggerated the difficulties
While the two South African brigades were so occupied east of Lake
Rudolf, 25 (E.A.) Brigade had begun an offensive against the Merille tribes-
men on the west of the lake. Operations were necessarily on a reduced scale
owing to the low strength of the brigade, but after initial objectives had been
secured administration brought them to a halt, through failure to capture
water holes at a time when transport was unable to reach the forward troops
owing to appalling road conditions.
Eventually the troops were extricated
after air action had dispersed the enemy, and water was brought forward
under special armoured car escort, but it was clearly inopportune to continue
operations at this stage, and so the brigade halted and took up defensive
In both these operations the dominant factor was water.
25 (E.A.) Brigade were virtually terminated by lack of it and those of the two
South African brigades severely handicapped. At one time just before the
capture of Mega, all water required by the South African brigades had to be
carried up some 200 miles from the rear, and at no time could continuous
search for water holes be relaxed.
Rail-head for this front was Nanyuki and, as has already been mentioned,
part of the force resources of transport had to be diverted to provide the third
Road conditions were appalling as they were for the remainder of
the force in their drive on Kismayu.
Perhaps the most notable engineering feat of the campaign occurred during
this period, when South African engineers constructed a new road, 180 miles
long, from Marsabit via Kalacha to Mega.
The road replaced the route taken
by 1 (S.A.) Division across the Chalbi desert to North Hort and Dukana and
was chiefly valuable for its being an all-weather route.
Rising 4,000 feet in
the last 20 miles it was completed in six weeks in spite of the most trying
conditions of work amongst lava debris in the intense heat of the sun.
After the capture of Mega and Moyale which followed closely on the cap-
ture of Kismayu, it was intended to use the better-equipped South African
division for the advance on Mogadishu, and to this end the two South
African brigades were relieved in early March by an East African brigade
but, later, it was decided that H.Q., 1 South African Division and 5 South
African Brigade and divisional troops must be transferred to Egypt.
THE CAPTURE OF MOGADISHU
For the advance on Mogadishu, General Cunningham intended to use
11 (A) Division.
12 (A) Division, following upon the capture of Kismayu,
had successfully forced crossings of the River Juba in two places and on
22nd February captured Gelib on the road to Mogadishu.
It appeared that
145
