The disaster to 2 Armoured Division could be attributed almost entirely
to the appalling
transport
mechanical state of its A.F.Vs, and to the shortage of
tied the
division to a vulnerable series of dumps
restricted its power of manoeuvre.
The remnants, part of the support group,
were,
with other troops, organized into a mobile force called " Mobforce"
on which responsibility for the frontier rested.
It seemed, however, that for the moment the enemy threat in the Western
Desert was abating.
After a determined attack on Tobruk on 1st May,
which was repelled with heavy losses of both tanks and men, he was content
to remain on the frontier of Egypt, conscious of the ever-present threat
to his L. of C. which Tobruk constituted.
Most of the available manpower in the Middle East was now sent to the
Western Desert,
but the primary need
in early May containing some 200 tanks with which to re-equip 7 Armoured
Division, but unfortunately
one ship containing
by a mine.
In the period before these tanks arrived all preparations were
made so that the many
" desert" modifications required could be carried
out without delay after arrival.
The majority of the tanks were, however,
found to be the Mk. II "I" tanks which were far too slow and limited in
range for use in the desert, quite apart from the fact that they still mounted
the 2-pdr. gun which was hopelessly inadequate against the German Mk. IV
with its 75 mm. gun.
The bad news concerning these tank reinforcements was only one further
the steady decline of our fortunes which set in at that time
culminating in our evacuation of Greece, so that by the beginning of May
the situation in the Middle East was one of great anxiety.
Although opera-
tions in Abyssinia were proceeding satisfactorily enough if only they could
be completed before the rainy season set in (see Section 4), it was clear
that the enemy was about to launch operations against Crete (see Section 9).
Trouble was also brewing in Syria and Iraq and it is necessary to digress
slightly from the Desert to deal with these diversions.
Revolt in Iraq
Although by treaty Iraq was pledged to assist us in war. our relations
had, since the outbreak, been far from satisfactory, and were still steadily
the Iraq Army,
and the
R.A.F. training stations at Habbaniyah and Shaiba,
were the only British
military forces in Iraq,
and for these the R.A.F. had only training and
April, 1941, a pro-German clique overthrew the
Iraq Government and it was decided to exercise our treaty rights and land
a force at Basra. An L. of C. from Basra to Baghdad by rail and thence
road across the desert to Haifa had been prepared early
the war
as an alternative L. of C. to the Middle East should the Red Sea become
unsafe through enemy action; a large sum of money had been spent in
improving the route across the Desert from Haifa to Baghdad.
A brigade group about to be sent from India as reinforcement to Malaya
was accordingly diverted to Basra and this at first had a fortunate effect.
The arrival of a second Brigade was,
however, followed by an action at
Habbaniyah when Iraqi troops attacked the airfield there and beseiged the
196
WO2T7
18
Command in Iraq had been a Middle East responsibility from the out-
break of war but now that it appeared that the majority of troops likely
to be employed in Iraq would be Indian, command passed to G.H.Q. (D:
this was a logical move as the administrative L. of C. was via the Persian
An additional battalion was flown in to Shaiba from Karachi and thence
to Habbaniyah, but on 5th May the War Cabinet transferred responsibility
for Iraq
back tỏ Middle East and a force had to be found from Middle
East resources to relieve Habbaniyah and occupy Baghdad. Difficult though
it was to find enough M.T. for a mobile force, a cavalry brigade was
eventually
formed and crossed the frontier on 10th May.
was quelled on 31st May on which date an armistice was signed.
The rebellion
A successful rebellion in Iraq would have enabled the Germans (a) to
oil refinery at Abadan at the head of the Persian Gulf; (c) to cut off the
(d) to gain control of the Iranian Railway from Bandar Sharpur (on the
The Occupation of Iran
Iraq had been no more than an incident.
It had no serious administrative
repercussions at the time except the improvisation in Palestine of a mobile
force.
Yet once more did command pass; India assumed command of
the Iraq theatre on 18th June, and, as soon as the Germans had crossed the
Russian frontiers, Iraq took on a new importance.
Not only had permanent
constructed
a hostile
advance
through
Anatolia or Iran but Basra was to be developed as a base capable of
maintaining ten divisions and thirty R.A.F. squadrons, while Um Qair
and Kuwat
were to be developed as auxiliary ports.
At the same time,
in view of the unsatisfactory attitude of the Government of Iran, preparations
had to be made for Allied forces to enter the country to safeguard the oil
wells and refinery at Abadan, Naft-i-Shah and other oilfields in south-west
Iran.
For this purpose
brigade were earmarked.
one
Indian
division
and
Indian
armoured
Operations began on 25th August and a junction with Russian forces
was achieved on 29th August-later Teheran was occupied jointly on 17th
September.
As soon as hostilities finished, work proceeded on the con-
struction of fortress areas not only in North Iraq but also in Iran and,
in spite of a very severe winter, good progress was made.
Control of Iran enabled British and Russians to open up a common front,
and opened up communications between Russia (via the 870 mile Trans-
Iranian Railway, etc.) and the Persian Gulf, the only sea route by which
supplies could reach the U.S.S.R. at all seasons.
A main base area at
Basra-Shaiba was steadily
bases started near
Baghdad and at Kirkuk and Ahwaz (Iran).
The construction of airfields
went ahead together with improvements in road, rail and river communica-
Um Qair and Bandar Sharpur were developed as Persian Gulf ports.
On 15th November a new directive indicated that the primary task was
the defence of Iraq and Iran from a possible enemy attack from Anatolia
