The shortage of vehicles found its natural counterpart in a corresponding
shortage of spare parts.
Commands held a reserve of M.T. assemblies and
spares to replace battle casualties if necessary and in addition workshop
officers
given fairly wide powers under
the Defence Regulations to
make use of civilian organizations for emergency repairs.
One of the first measures taken upon the imminence of invasion was
the requisitioning of a large number of motor coaches to increase the mobility
of the counter-offensive formations.
These motor coaches were in most
cases issued to units which had been employed on third line transport tasks
in France.
They were formed into motor coach companies and placed under
commands which allotted them to divisions and independent brigades in
accordance with the operational needs.
Later the coaches were replaced by
the Bedford quick loading troop carrying vehicle and the units were renamed
troop carrying companies.
In 1941 advantage was taken of the general re-organization and re-equip-
ment of the Army to abolish the commodity basis of second-line R.A.S.C.
transport units and to introduce the composite company into the infantry
and armoured division.
At the same time all R.A.S.C. transport was re-
formed into companies composed of a varying number of standard 30-vehicle
transport platoons.
Although general approval was given to the latter innovation the former
was the cause of endless argument which continued for the remainder of the
war.
It cannot be said that the
"commodity versus composite company
battle" was ever decided, but it was generally agreed that the matter was
largely one
of common sense.
As will be seen in other chapters.
most
formations were prepared to operate on either basis as operational circum-
stances dictated.
SUPPLIES
With the chaotic state of unit administration following the evacuation
from France it became evident that the peace-time system of messing account-
ing was going to be almost impossible to continue at home.
A decision
had, therefore, to be made quickly to relieve units as far as possible of the
peace-time system of cash accounting.
A complete ration scale (called the Home Service Ration Scale) was
therefore designed during the last few days of May, 1940, based on the
provision of breakfast and dinner with a substantial evening meal which
could be split if required into a tea and light supper. On 12th June, 1940, the
system of messing on a cash basis was replaced by the issue of this fixed
scale of rations in kind.
Under normal circumstances the R.A.S.C. were
to continue to issue their usual items of supply and the items that were
normally obtained from N.A.A.F.I. were to continue to be issued from that
source, although in emergency the R.A.S.C. would issue the whole of the
ration.
An improved system of ration indenting was also introduced.
supply depots affiliated to C.S.Ds.
Supplies were issued from command supply depots or from duplicate
This was to be the normal method of
issue, but against an emergency, arrangements were made to deliver to a
supply rail-head for onward distribution by divisional supply companies etc.
Command and duplicate supply depots were located all over the country and
included provision for the custody and issue of N.A.A.F.I. stocks.
WOZY
command supply depots was extremely great throughout the war, especially
in the years 1940-41 when nearly two million troops were serviced by little
more than one hundred C.S.Ds.
During normal conditions it was not always necessary to operate the
normal system of supply by R.A.S.C. second line transport and in many
cases units drew direct from C.S.Ds. Or—as was often the case in certain
commands. " milk rounds" were organized on an area basis.
G.H.Q. Home Forces had laid down that the holdings of, reserve rations
in the more vulnerable parts of the country should be stabilized at ten
days, the remainder of the country holding seven days.
This ruling referred
to reserve stocks held either in C.S.Ds. or with units; the proportion to
be held in C.S.Ds. and in units was left to the discretion of army commanders.
Before the return of the B.E.F. there was no supply depot in between
the large War Office supply reserve depots and the C.S.Ds.
The possibility
of operations made it clear that the situation might arise whereby C.S.Ds.
would for one reason or another be unable to function, and that rail-heads
supported by improvised field supply depots would have to be brought into
operation.
Under these circumstances it would be impossible to service a
varying number of rail-heads satisfactorily from the supply reserve depots
and therefore the necessity for an organization on the lines of an advanced
base depot was clear.
The War Office accordingly created a series of ten
main supply depots (M.S.Ds.).
These ten M.S.Ds. were so located as to
provide easy rail access to each other and to areas in which operations
might be envisaged, their principle object being to feed formations during
active operations in situations where C.S.Ds. could not do so.
They also
assisted in maintaining the stocks of the existing C.S.Ds.
The M.S.Ds.
each held a minimum of two days' reserve rations of staple items for 500,000
men and had also facilities to issue fresh rations.
Initially the M.S.Ds.
were stocked and controlled by the War Office although arrangements were
made to hand them over to commands should the occasion arise.
Later
in 1941, M.S.Ds. were handed over to commands for all purposes other than
the control of foodstuffs.
The War Office retained control of the foodstuffs
because the reserves held formed part of the general reserves for the whole
country, and the manner in which they were dispersed throughout the country
could not always be related to the feeding strengths of the commands in
which the depots were situated. War Office control was therefore inevitable
in this respect.
The system of supply from rail-heads that was envisaged was similar to
that laid down in Field Service Regulations, Volume I, 1930, modified to
meet home defence conditions.
A comparison between the home organization
and the field force equivalent existing alsone timen the home organ
Home Organization
Field Force Equivalent
War Office Supply Reserve Depots.
Base Supply Depots.
Main Supply Depots and N.A.A.F.I.
Advanced Base and L. of C. Depots.
Main Warehouses.
Command Supply Depots or Field
Rail-head and Detail Issue Depots.
Supply Depots.
245
