The requirements of both stationery and office machinery
pletely under-estimated, and the scales laid down by H.M.S.O. were quite.
divorced from actual requirements.
The consumption of duplicating paper
alone reached roughly 3,000,000 sheets a month, which was many
more than the most extravagant Stationery Office forecasts.
perhaps a cynical comment, it is probable that this quantity would have
been much reduced had the force been sooner committed to active operations.
N.A.A.F.I. was represented by the Expeditionary Force Institutes (or
H.Q. Field Force Institutes, as it was called) the headquarters of which was
first installed at Le Mans but later moved to the G.H.Q. area at Arras.
Bulk stocks of N.A.A.F.I. supplies were held at base canteen depots at
Nantes in the southern base, and at Rennes in the northern base.
Rennes depot was closed upon the formation of the advanced base, and
moved forward to Le Havre.
An advanced canteen depot was established
at Rheims to serve both the army and R.A.F. personnel located in the
Canteens for the force were first opened at Nantes during the third week
The number of institutes and canteens increased rapidly to
meet the needs which arose everywhere in the atmosphere of unreality that
pervaded the theatre, and by the following February E.F.I. was conducting,
in addition to its base depots, no fewer than 25 bulk issue stores (for issues of
canteen goods to units) and 88 canteens and institutes, including a leave
club at Paris and large central institutes in such towns in the forward areas
as Arras and Lille.
The above study does not pretend to give a picture of the exact situation
at any one time inasmuch as conditions were continually changing and
locations altering,
and it does not therefore provide more than a
general survey of the development of the base during the period of the
campaign which Mr. Churchill has called the
"twilight war".
months covered by this section was notable for the complete absence of
engagements with the enemy, other than desultory skirmishes on the Saar
The B.E.F. was thus permitted to proceed unhindered with its task of
building up the base and L. of C. organization with the satisfactory result
that, by the time operations began, the main base in the Brest peninsular
had been well established, the advanced base around Le Havre and Rouen
been opened, and steps to open installations
still further east near
The administrative services therefore
start of active operations with confidence in the knowledge that the force
On 10th May, 1940, at 0615 hours the C.-in-C. received orders to put the
"Dyle Plan" into effect and at 1300 hrs. on the same day the first British
troops crossed the frontier into Belgium.
50
WO27
THE B.E.F. IN FRANCE AND BELGIUM: 1939-1940
SECTION 3—THE WITHDRAWAL AND EVACUATION
On 10th May, 1940, the Germans launched their attack on Belgium and
Holland. Within 11 days the lines of communication of the B.E.F. had
been severed, necessitating the opening of an emergency base in the Boulogne-
By 3rd June all British troops fighting north of the
Somme had been evacuated to the United Kingdom, and on 14th June the
evacuation of the remainder of the force stationed south of the Somme began.
In a little over three weeks of actual campaigning the enemy thus swept the
Continent with his armoured and mechanized troops.
The Dutch and the
Belgians in turn gave way under the onslaught, the French Army disinte-
grated and the B.E.F.
was pushed back into the sea, leaving behind,
scattered in dumps and depots over the deserted battlefield, the vast collec-
tion of supplies and equipment of all descriptions which virtually represented
the greater part of the country's output during the preceding two years.
It is not possible in a record of this nature to attempt to give other than
an outline of the campaign of the B.E.F.
Far less is it possible to describe
in detail the arrangements (in many instances improvised on the spot) made
for the maintenance of the troops during the confused and fluid fighting
subsequent to the withdrawal to the Escaut.
Although the notice given was short, and to a great extent unexpected,
the necessary moves required to implement Plan
"D" worked smoothly.
1 and 2 Corps took up their positions on the line Waire to Louvain and, in
accordance with plans prepared in advance, rail-heads were pushed forward
Although enemy air attack increased during the later stages
of the move forward to the River Dyle there was little or no serious inter-
ference with the maintenance of the force.
area of 1 Corps after the completion of the move to Belgium.
ary arrangements had been made so thoroughly that little or no alteration to
the administrative plans was found necessary.
Ammunition of course at once took first priority over any other commo-
dity.
The resources in front of the base ammunition depots at the start of
operations were: —
Four days estimated expenditure in corps or divisional dumps in front
1 Corps A.R.H.—Five days supply on the ground.
2 Corps A.R.H.—Seven days supply on the ground.
3 Corps A.R.H.—In process of formation (probably about 1,000 tons
on the ground representing about three days supply).
Three A.S.E. trains within twelve hours of A.R.H.
Six A.S.E. trains within thirty-six hours of A.R.H.
At once the large dumps formed at, and forward of rail-heads became
a source of embarrassment.
It was manifestly impossible to lift them for-
ward during the move and it was therefore arranged that the forward forma-
tion dumps should be moved under corps and divisional arrangements while
