ven caused by air bombardment had been successfully repaired by the
civu staff of the municipal water engineer, augmented by European volunteers,
most of whom were refugees from the mainland.
Commodity Services
The
ammunition
the whole, satisfactory, except for
or., 40 mm., Bofors and some categories of mortar ammunition.
The
two magazines which had
constructed
were at
cuangi and at Alexandra (west of Singapore town).
These were bomb-
proof,
and contained all types of ammunition.
There was also a small
magazine at Pulau Brani and one of Fort Canning for S.A.A. only.
Under
the dispersion policy a large shell-proof magazine had been constructed on
the east bank of the Kranji River, and dumps had been formed in the Nee
Soon and Bukit Timah areas, and elsewhere.
Stocks calculated at F.F.C.
rates were : -
Pistol and Thompson sub-machine gun—12 days.
Anti-tank •55-23 days.
S.A.A. and mortar—1] months.
Artillery ammunition (except A.A.)-3 months.
Normal equipment scales were, of course, held at gun positions both
in the fixed defences and the field regiments.
In spite of the large amount of transport available, it had been found
impracticable to back-load much of the unconsumed petrol from the main-
land, largely owing to the bulkiness of the containers.
Nevertheless there
were considerable army reserves on the Island.
The main reserves were held
in the Bukit Timah area with subsidiary dumps at Bukit Panjang and
Alexandra.
The main R.A.F. reserves were held in underground tanks at Woodlands,
just south of the causeway, and large reserves were held on most of the
airfields.
The civil government held no petrol reserves,
but considerable
stocks were kept by the Asiatic Petroleum Company at Kranji and Pasir
Panjang.
The Company's main reserves were on Pulau Bukum.
The naval reserves of fuel oil were stored in three groups of large tanks,
at the naval base, at Kranji, and at Normanton.
Considerable reserves were
also stored on Pulau Bukum.
Accommodation for all military hospitals withdrawn from the mainland
had been found—not without difficulty- in the town area where there was
naturally much congestion. There were good supplies of medical stores at
The main R.A.O.C. depot was at Alexandra, with sub-depots at Nee Soon
and in the town area. Clothing was sufficient for two months and general
Signal stores were deficient
in certain items but sufficient for island communications for two or three
months, and it was calculated that after units had made good their losses
there would be no reserves of weapons and no spares.
As a result of air raids on the docks, labour difficulties, similar to those
which had been experienced elsewhere, developed towards the end of January.
The Asiatic labourers, who were in the regular employ of the Singapore
298
WORT
1
Harbour Board, and most of whom occupied quarters adjoining the docks,
disappeared as soon as the air raids became more intense, with the resul
that ships bringing military stores had to be unloaded by troops.
The Attack on the Island
The main fighting echelons of 18 British Division had arrived by the end
of January, and on 5th February a convoy of four ships approached Singapore
carrying the remainder of the division, including certain administrative units.
Unfortunately, the convoy was attacked by dive-bombers, and one ship was
sunk.
The loss of life was small, but nearly all weapons and equipment on
board were lost.
Owing to heavy air attacks on the docks, some of the
vehicles and heavy stores were not discharged from the other ships, which left
again the following night. It thus happened that some of the units landed
without their equipment.
small arms and fought thereafter as infantry.
These were re-equipped as far as possible with
In retrospect, even in the light of knowledge of the course of events, it is
doubtful whether a better administrative lay-out could have been evolved
under the circumstances.
The weakness, of course, lay in the fact that the
reserves were held forward of the town area, which was inevitably the nodal
point of the defence.
It must, however, be remembered that when the lay-out
was planned, dispersion to avoid losses from air attack was one of the main
considerations and that the policy was to avoid the congested town area.
Further, Singapore Island was exposed to attack from the south as well as
from the north.
The town area, being inevitably the main target for air
attack, could not possibly hold the bulk of the theatre reserves, and there
was thus no alternative to their being located in the centre of the Island.
The fact that they probably lay in the path of the enemy's attack was regret-
table, but, on the face of it, unavoidable.
Similarly, the water supply was
equally vulnerable.
These two main objections apart, the administrative position was strong,
and there is little doubt that the garrison could have been maintained without
serious difficulty for a considerable period, provided the security of the water
supply and the supply reserves could be ensured.
The general attack on the island began on 4th February, when the naval
base was raided and set on fire.
Built, as it was, on the inner side of the
island, the base was obviously untenable once hostile forces held the opposie
side of the narrow Johore Straits.
So, too, of course, was the neighbouring
R.A.F. station at Seletar.
The facts that the naval base ceased to be of use to us, and that the R.A.F.
was then except for one sasadian evacuated, had a most adverse effect
on the morale both of the troops and the civilian population.
It could not
be said that the atmosphere raps and thespait, but, on the other hand, the
long and weary withdrawal tram one mainland, and the general worsening
of the military situation, did title to cheer the troops on Singapore as they
prepared for the inevitable attack.
Ubin Island at the eastern entrance to the Tohore Straits and the same night.
They did not have long to wait.
On 8th February the Japanese occupied
crossing the straits, they landerance a 16.000 yards long strip of coast between
299
1* 2
12090
