vehicles and the result was that rations were delivered later to batteries who,
in turn, delivered later to sites.
This state of affairs fortunately became
less acute as A.A. Command reached its peak of expansion and as the supply
of vehicles and drivers improved.
These companies are dealt with in greater
detail below.
Like units of the home army, A.A.
units relied upon nearby pumps for
their petrol, the usual system of indenting on the Petroleum Board, through
R.A.S.C., being in force.
In the case of sites etc., where no convenient
pump existed, A.A. Command drew petrol from reserves held on A.A. account
at Petroleum Board depots and delivered to gun and searchlight sites.
this purpose, the petrol sections of the A.A. divisional companies possessed
flat tanks of 400-600 gallons capacity which were carried on 3-ton lorries ;
these delivered to steel barrels (45-50 gallons) installed at gun and searchlight
sites sufficient to hold about one day's expenditure.
Quantities in excess of
this amount were delivered in cans or tins.
In addition, a reserve was held on
wheels by the petrol sections amounting to approximately three days' supply.
The delivery of diesoleum in 5-gallon drums was also undertaken by the petrol
sections.
For petrol the home commands had no responsibility other than
of a technical or accounting nature.
Ammunition expended by A.A. units was replenished from equipment
ammunition magazines (E.A.Ms.) of which there were a considerable number,
sited in relation to possible defended areas.
E.A.Ms. were, in effect, ammuni-
tion stocks ancillary to those held on sites, the usual ratio of holding being
two days on site to two and a half days in E.A.M.
of the A.A. divisional companies, R.A.S.C., were responsible for delivery from
E.A.M. to gun site, the length of lift varying from ten to forty miles.
E.A.Ms. were in turn replenished from intermediate ammunition depots
(I.A.Ds.).
Ammunition was moved from I.A.Ds. by road or rail under home
command arrangements, the responsibility of A.A. Command being limited
to notifying the command the tonnages which were required to be moved.
Both E.A.Ms. and I.A.Ds. were administered by A.A. Command who were
also responsible for notifying the War Office when it was necessary for
ammunition to be sent forward from War Office central depots to I.A.Ds.
Originally A.A. Command had no labour force but relied on such Pioneer
Corps units as were placed from time to time under command for specified
tasks. As a result of the acute shortage of labour these were seldom suff-
cient, and it is not surprising to learn that eventually, when a large scale
accommodation project had to be carried out entaly, when a large quired
had to be found from within A.A. Command by the formation of a number
of A.A. construction batteries.
Reference has already been made to A.A. divisional companies, R.A.S.C.,
which on the scale of one to a division constituted the sole transport
reserve at the disposal of A.A. Command.
Originally formed from AA.
brigade companies of the Territorial Army, they were initially divided into
supply, petrol and ammunition sections.
The commodity basis of working-
as sometimes found in the field army was not economical and was certainly
not suitable for the specialized requirements of A.A. Command.
In fact, by
1941 it was clear that these companies were working made diet
and potentially dangerous conditione in readed to the contes cantanance
268
WO277
1 P
of A.A. units during periods of intensive air attacks.
This was primarily
due to the fact that their development did not keep pace with the creation
of new A.A. units; they were thus unable to service, without difficulty, more
units than the scale provided for.
Consequently, they were seriously over-
loaded and were only able to carry on by resorting to such improvisations as
using ammunition lorries to supplement supply sections, and by borrowing,
where possible, vehicles from the station transport companies of the home
Although they were divided into commodity sections, there was no pro-
vision for a specific number of vehicles for the conveyance of engineer and
ordnance stores etc., as there would be in a corresponding field army organiza-
Thus a further strain was put on the R.A.S.C. since the first-line trans-
port allotted to units was so small that it was almost out of the question
for them to provide their own transport for any appreciable quantity of such
The practice of pooling ammunition and supply vehicles and of borrowing
from the station transport companies in order to keep A.A. units during
1941 properly supplied was obviously extremely dangerous in view of the
possibility of heavier and more prolonged air attacks than were being experi-
enced, and more particularly, of air attacks on one area over a number of
consecutive days or nights.
Under these circumstances there would be a
considerable risk of either the ammunition or the supply service, and possibly
both, breaking down.
There was also the further danger that the Home
Forces might become engaged in operations against the enemy, so that not
only would the station transport companies not be available for assistance
but, also, the difficulties of getting ammunition and supplies to A.A. units
would be greatly increased.
The Home Forces operations would also inevit-
ably involve diversions of road traffic that would probably make access to
many A.A. sites difficult and circuitous.
The obvious solution to all these difficulties was, of course, to increase
the strength of the companies and allow them to expand on a sliding scale
in accordance with the programme of provision of new A.A. units.
was recommended by the A.A. Reorganization Committee and generally
agreed, but inevitably the general shortage of vehicles precluded fulflment.
Later the commodity groupins of sloR A of vehicles preouis fulfilment.
AA. divisional companies were dis banded, A.A. mis was abolisteo ana ins
R.A.S.C. being formed in their place.
These were A.A. Command (as apart
from divisional) troops, located on an area basis, and organized into a number
of transport platoons, some manned by A.T.S. Their introduction certainly
cased the transport situation anted by AA.S. Mmand rod onerned, but
did not solve it.
Calls from other theatres of war for more transport robbed
the command of several of ita new dammanies while the changing form of
A.A. requirements and the increasing mobility of A.A. units caused heavy
redeploument programmes and moves divina rise to further demands on
It may be said that at no time during the war did A.A. Command have a
sufficiency of transport.
In this it was. of course, by no means unique, but
considering the importance of tie i aS of coursezation in pre-ar planning
it is open to question whathar it chould not at least have been given an
adequate measure of mobility at birth.
Had this been done in the years
269
