were also authorized to pay bona fide claims up to £200 Os. Od.
in cases where the right of the claimant was clearly established.
of the hirings directorate were in fact saved and brought home to provide
useful source of reference after France was subsequently liberated.
It is difficult to assess the saving thus made for the British taxpayer, but it
is obvious that it was considerable.
A final word regarding the achievements of the personnel of the admini-
strative units in the battle. Almost without exception they had been taken
from civilian life or the Supplementary Reserve, with little, if any, military
training and they lacked their full complement of equipment.
These defi-
ciencies were not apparent in their courage and determination.
Men of the
rearward installations
placed their localities
in a state of defence and
manned them to the end.
Drivers of lorries, cars and, especially, ambulances
drove for long hours without respite along roads jammed with troops and
refugees and under constant attack from the air. Officers and men of depots
and stores performed remarkable feats of improvisation in distributing the
dwindling stocks of rations, etc., to disorganized and scattered formations.
Lord Gort states that the major administrative lesson of the campaign
is that complete reliance cannot be placed on any one channel of maintenance,
and that therefore the proportion of reserves held forward under load, on
rail or in lorry, must be high despite the resultant extravagance in transport.
The advantages of such a course are undeniable, but at the same time are
outside the concept of good modern administration, which calls for both
and economy of effort.
In normal circumstances, reserves held
by corps should not exceed two days requirements.
stances may dictate an increase, which must be judged according to the
conditions prevailing at the time.
Modern war tending to even greater
mobility dictates that grounded reserves must always be of a size readily
transportable by the transport resources of the formation which controls
Although it is hoped that a British force will never again enter into
battle without air superiority, the possibility of local air attack cannot be
disregarded, and even the maximum amount of dispersion will not entirely
protect a large maintenance area from considerable damage by modern high
explosive bombs.
So far as the authors know there has not yet been a
satisfactory explanation of the amazing omission of the Germans to make
heavy air attacks on our base.
Apart from air bombing, risk of a flanking attack is also to be con-
sidered, even if regarded as unlikely at the time of making
the decision.
The enormous stocks built up by Second Army in Belgium during 1944 were
laid open to considerable danger during the German attack in the Ardennes
(see Chapter XII, Section 5) notwithstanding the fact that when the road-
head was projected some three months previously, the likelihood of danger
from the flank was hardly conceivable.
Yet had the enemy met with full
success, a débâcle on the same scale as betell the B.E.F. might well have
And so the B.E.F. returned to the United Kingdom to defend the
homeland against the growing threat of invasion and to re-equip so as to
WO277
be ready when the time came to embark once again for the mainland of
Europe.
The arrangements which were made in England under the code-
name of " Dynamo" to receive the force are dealt with in the next section.
After hostilities have ceased and with the experience of six years of
war it is an easy task to find errors and mistakes. That the B.E.F. was
starved of the majority of the necessary modern weapons and stores of war
was not the fault of the administrative staff of the Force, neither was it
blameworthy that the principles upon which they had built up their organiza-
tion were proved to be unsuited to " blitzkreig" warfare.
made and infallible systems were found wanting as has happened in previous
campaigns and will no doubt happen again.
The misfortune of the B.E.F.
therefore be remembered not as the military
undoubtedly was, but rather as a heaven-sent opportunity to profit by
Realistic administrative exercises in the
regrettably conspicuous by their absence; if the battle of 1940 is observed
through exercise eyes it will be found that it was in effect one of the greatest
administrative exercises of all time expensive, no doubt, but it proved its
value when, four years later, a new expeditionary force set foot upon the
THE B.E.F. IN FRANCE AND BELGIUM: 1939-1940
SECTION 4 OPERATION " DYNAMO"
Operation " Dynamo" was the code name given to the plan for the
evacuation of the B.E.F. from Dunkirk and the neighbouring beaches and
for the reception of the force in the United Kingdom.
Two other plans were
"Cycle", the evacuation of 51 Division
and the Northern Base troops from Le Havre and St. Valery; and, sub-
" Aerial", the evacuation of the remaining British and Allied
troops in France, which started about 16th June and continued until the
middle of August.
This short section will deal only with the " Dynamo"
peration, the period of which was from about 19th May to 4th June
"Cycle "
and " Aerial", although both tasks of considerable magnitude
did not present quite the same problem of urgency and improvisation as
" Dynamo
" since there was more time to prepare the plans, the more
normal methods of sea transport were available, and the preparations made
for " Dynamo" served as the general basis for the reception of the troops.
The army arrangements made under the "Dynamo" plan, although not
strictly falling into the classification of maintenance in the field, must never-
theless be regarded as such ; the operation was directly related to the situation
on the other side of the channel, and in any case the conditions prevailing
in England at the time were indeed rapidly approaching those of a theatre
of war.
Although this account is only concerned with the military aspect of
the operation, it must be borne in mind that " Dynamo" was essentially a
naval responsibility, and credit for its great achievement must be given first
and foremost to the Royal Navy.
57
12090
