the ships had been loaded and even after some of them had sailed. The
intention was: —
(a) for " Stratford" to capture Trondheim by a pincer movement carried
out from landings at Namsos and Andalsnes supported by a frontal
assault on the town supported by strong naval forces.
(b) for " Avonmouth" to enter Narvik, not known at this stage to have
been occupied by the enemy.
Later, after the convoys had sailed, the all-out assault on Trondheim was
cancelled and, without the knowledge of the force commanders, the supporting
operations were called off.
At Narvik, the British troops, prepared for an
unopposed
landing, were
confronted by a strong enemy garrison.
Both
expeditions ended in complete failure.
The Consequences of Bad Planning
The brief campaign which took place and which is more fully described
in the next two sections caused profound disappointment and perturbation
at home.
This was later tempered only by the feeling that it was perhaps
fortunate that we were prevented from building up a substantial army in
Norway because the great battles in France,
only a month hence, would
probably have put to naught any local successes that might have been gained.
First from Namsos, then from Andalsnes and finally from Narvik, came the
same story; frustration, caused by the lack of proper preparation and failure
to observe many of the most elementary rules of warfare, leading to disillusion-
ment and evacuation.
It sometimes happens that a campaign marred by bad planning or weak
direction is redeemed by brilliant administration.
Sometimes, administrative
risks being deliberately taken, it is found that extra efforts can be made
and for short periods the scope of the administrative plan can be exceeded.
This, however, does not mean that the administrative machine can be con-
tinually over-strained to facilitate operations.
If this is done the machine
—however adequate-will inevitably break down.
In Norway, in 1940, as
the next two sections will show, the machine provided was never adequate
and was continually over-strained.
It will be seen that the three landings had much in common.
and difficulties experienced by one force were invariably experienced, to a
greater or lesser extent, by the others.
As the history of the sorry campaign is
read, it will be hard to credit that after 20 years of study between the wars,
the enormities perpetrated on all sides could really occur, and that the
British Army participated in such a venture after little or no planning and
with an almost complete lack of administrative intelligence.
It is not easy to find a scapegoat.
Certainly no blame could be attached
to those gallant men who were hastily gathered together to form the expedi-
There is no doubt that circumstances, far beyond the control of the
military command, partly dictated the course of events, but although they
may explain much of the hesitation and vacillation which characterized the
preliminary planning they are not a convincing excuse for the lamentable
conditions under which the force was collected and despatched.
In this
connection two glaring mistakes
administrative staffs (particularly those destined for the Trondheim expedi-
tion) were gathered together in a haphazard manner which simply invited
1 Ф
chaos.
Individuals whose sole qualification was perhaps that they were
" unemployed" at the time, were arbitrarily detailed and despatched to join
their new colleagues, most of whom had been similarly detailed.
Thus the
" Q" staffs, bereft of little plan or direction and strange to one another,
departed on their mission. Admittedly, it was in the early stages of the war
when trained staff and service officers-let alone trained staffs were not
easily available, but for an operation of this sort, it would probably have
been better. to have extracted, say from the B.E.F. in France, experienced
cadres from an established headquarters.
of good staff work-
Then, at least, one of the attributes
methods-would have been secured from the outset.
confidence in one's colleagues and knowledge of their
Secondly, the operations drove home the truth of the principle that those
Such information as was available to, and such
plans as were made for, the force were the responsibility of individuals who
were not to take part in the expedition.
One result of disregarding this
axiom was that General Paget's administrative staff was in possession of
hardly any information regarding Morgan's brigade (see Section 3), and time
did not permit the collection and digestion of the necessary data.
The campaign was waged with typical Teutonic thoroughness and ruth-
lessness. It was our first experience of the unrestricted warfare which was
to become so familiar in the next two years.
The enemy was utterly
contemptuous of the rights of neutrals and of course, under these conditions,
reaped all the benefits of an unopposed landing.
On the other hand, although
the Allied forces were troops of liberation landing in friendly territory, no
provision had been made for effective liaison with the Norwegians.
adequately to attend to this deficiency and the value of small parties akin
to the subsequent civil affairs organization would have been considerable.
As it was, civilian morale was very low and we were unable to achieve
any marked degree of co-operation from the local inhabitants.
In a mountainous country with sparse population and few communications,
the force which
"gets there first" has advantages which are of immediate
The enemy were controlling the more thickly populated areas.
fore, we could hope for little in the way of local resources, whether of
food or equipment, while airfields from which our aircraft could operate
were enemy-held, and carrier-borne aircraft in adequate quantity were not
Only at Narvik were there sufficient facilities to effect at least a minimum
degree of dispersal against air attack ; at both Namsos and Andalsnes the
weight of bombing on the base ports made maintenance almost impossible
and virtually dictated the decisions to evacuate.
The value of the ports
used was thus directly related to the scale of enemy attacks, and, therefore,
to the adequacy of anti-aircraft protection.
Again only for the force for
Narvik was any effort made to provide that protection,
and then only
to a very limited extent; dock working had therefore to be confined to
the hours of darkness.
Had the air menace been properly appreciated, it
would surely have been evident that priority would have to be
given
to sending over
A.A. units if the docks were to be cleared with
the
maximum of efficiency and expediency.
If an assurance to the effect that
A.A. units were being sent could not be obtained from the General
12090
