such as Home Guard and the administration of non-field force units.
Their
ancillary services on the other hand could be considerably reduced, especially
in regard to R.E., R.A.S.C. and R.A.O.C. units.
(As an example, the three
R.A.S.C. companies were replaced by one divisional composite company.)
All British field force divisions forming part of corps districts were so
modified and eventually completely replaced the county divisions.
They
became known as L.E. (lower establishment) divisions, the only divisions on
the higher establishment being those in G.H.Q. mobile reserve or earmarked
for overseas service.
The saving in administrative manpower, with the
minimum loss of efficiency, is obvious.
In certain territory which was administered by corps districts or districts,
but which could not be defended either by field force or county divisions, it
was necessary to retain area or sub-area headquarters, albeit of a somewhat
different character to their pre-Gale Committee structure. The first essential
in regard to these reconstituted area or sub-area headquarters was to eliminate
the fallacy that they were concerned only with the administration of static
It was necessary for them to be recognized as a vital link not only in
the administrative but also in the operational chain of command.
Within
their own territory their role had to be exactly similar to the role of divisional
or brigade headquarters elsewhere.
Action was taken to raise the standard of the average commander and staff
officers at the more static headquarters and certain alterations were made in
the composition of the staffs and services.
upgrading of the senior administrative officer, district headquarters, to colonel
in charge of administration, thus facilitating the delegation of financial powers
below command headquarters.
The Committee took note of the artificial relationship between Eastern
Command and London District which was mentioned at the start of this
chapter.
Although directly
under G.H.Q. Home
Forces for operations,
London District still retained some of its old administrative ties to Eastern
Command.
why this should be, and the report recommended that it should be completely
independent of Eastern Command or any other
formation.
As a result
except in one or two isolated instances, London District operated as an inde-
pendent district for the remainder of the war.
In considering the chain of military command appropriate to Great
Britain, the Gale Committee had in mind the German technique of creating
confusion and disorder behind the lines.
To counter this, and to ensure that
it could not succeed in causing serious embarrassment to the armed forces,
it was necessary to rely in large measure on the regional civil defence organi-
zation.
As stated previously this organization became concerned not only
with air raid precautions, but with many additional civilian administrative
matters which, should invasion occur, could not be entirely divorced from
military administration.
For this reason, care was taken to ensure that wherever possible command,
corps district and district boundaries should conform to those of civil regions.
This made possible, partoularly in those commands which included terri-
tories of several regions, a delegation to corps districts or districts of responsi-
bility for detailed liaison with regional commissioners.
264
WO277
1 p
It has already been mentioned that the Committe's findings covered a
wide field of army administration, the only subject dealt with here being the
reorganization of the chain of command.
Other recommendations, although
perhaps less spectacular in effect, were, however, of no little value, i.e. :-
Introduction of Staff Secretaries.
Increased delegation of financial powers below Command H.Q.
Training of staff officers.
Replacement of officers and men by A.T.S. in certain appointments,
and a new nomenclature for staff and service officers.
(Note: This last recommendation was not adopted as far as it concerned
nomenclature.)
The Committee's recommendations resulted in an increase of about 100
staff officers, the other rank figures approximately balancing (although there
was the possibility of a substantial saving in manpower by the suggested
replacement of officers and men in certain appointments by A.T.S.)
The
effect of the proposals on the manpower situation were, however, little more
than trivial in comparison with the wider issues involved. Early action was
taken to implement such recommendations as were agreed, and for the
changing conditions as the war progressed.
tration and in training for operational roles, in the one country where
defeat would truly spell disaster".
THE HOME THEATRE
SECTION 3- ANTI-AIRCRAFT COMMAND
The Anti-Aircraft Command shared with Fighter Command the responsi-
bility for the Air Defence of Great Britain, and, with the home commands,
the responsibility for the maintenance of the anti-aircraft formations and
units.
It occupied throughout the war years a unique position within the
military structure of Home Forces.
In September, 1939, the A.A. defences of the country
were organized
in Headquarters A.A. Command (previously A A. Corps), seven A. A, divi-
sional headquarters with a varying nueber of A.A. brigades in each division
and a varying number of vary and searchlight units in each brigade.
the end of 1040 a considerable re aroanination was effented and five new
AA divisions were conater, ble retalizatin all also, to ease the super-
vision of the resultant organi making tee A. A corps were created.
1943, altered circumst ores niction, thi a further large scale re-organization
involving the substitution of hath A A corns and A A divisions, by A.A.
12090
265
