In accordance with recommendations of 13 Corps and
7 Armoured Division's losses, a regiment of cruiser tanks
was to be sent first, followed by strong workshops element.
arrival of the latter was imperative because the workshops of 7 Armoured
Division had more than one month's work in hand.
The remainder of
2 Armoured Division were to be sent by sea to Tobruk.
In view, however,
of the speed of the campaign, and as the relief could not be accelerated,
7 Armoured Division could only be assured of relief on completion of the
present operation.
The most important result of this was that 7 Armoured
Division's deficiencies in cruiser tanks could not be made good
tank strength of the Division became equal only to one armoured brigade.
At first light on 4th February, 7 Armoured Division left its leaguer area
at Mechili and duly started its advance on Msus; it was rationed up to and
February, and had 100 tons of water and sufficient petrol
for the 90 mile march. The going was appalling for the first 50 miles and
took a heavy toll of vehicles, particularly the light tanks.
due to the fact that, for deception purposes, preliminary reconnaissance had
been strictly forbidden.
West of Bir-El-Garrari the going improved and the
was continued in moonlight, Msus being occupied at daybreak on
On arrival the divisional commander split his force into two,
sending one-half straight to the coast via Antelat, to cut the main Benghazi-
Tripoli road north of Agedabia.
Antelat was to be by-passed if occupied.
The other half was directed on Soluch, via Sceleidima.
the first ship to be diverted from Tobruk had arrived at
Derna loaded with petrol, and was being rapidly unloaded by local labour,
and on 5th February the first petrol convoy left Derna en route for 16 F.S.D.
The bad going conditions which had hindered the advance of
7 Armoured Division were no less arduous for the replenishing convoys,
and it was felt that the administration of the armoured echelons would be a
precarious undertaking.
The final battle of the campaign began on 6th February, and ended the
next day when the surrender of Benghazi was received.
moment too soon from an administrative point of view.
It has been already
shown that 7 Armoured Division's advance to Msus had been carried out
with the slenderest margin of safety, and on oth February the weather had
A blinding sand-storm blew up which reduced visibility to five
yards, and supply convoys on the Mechili-Msus run had to move on
compass bearings over the appalling and virtually invisible desert, if they
All work ceased in Tobruk owing to the sand-storm
and the heavy seas which accompanied it, and also owing to a number of
mines which had been dropped by enemy aircraft during the night 5th/ 6th
One of these mines was struck by a petrol ship which caught
fire and, breaking her moorings, collided with another ship loaded with a
cargo of ammunition, setting her, too, on fire.
Frantic efforts fortunately
succeeded in quelling the flames on the ammunition ship, and the blazing
petrol vessel was beached with her fore-hold fully ablaze.
Had the opera-
tions against Benghazi been more protracted, it is doubtful whether adminis-
tration could have surmounted these setbacks.
WO2T7
1 0
Meanwhile 17 F.S.D. was being established some ten miles east of Barce,
fed direct from Tobruk and Derna via the main road, for the maintenance
of 6 Australian Division.
The fall of Benghazi also dictated the establish-
ment of 18 F.S.D. at Ghemines to feed 7 Armoured Division, and convoys
for 16 F.S.D. were diverted accordingly. Those elements of 2 Armoured
Division which had arrived forward were ordered to remain at El Adem,
from where they could be administered from Tobruk. The inevitable mass
of prisoners again caused considerable embarrassment to the "''' staff,
but a decision to concentrate all P.W. in the barracks at Benghazi simplified
some of the problems, particularly those concerned with feeding, watering
Benghazi offered a great deal more as a port than Tobruk, and when
clear, administration of the force in the forward area would be greatly simpli-
fied. In the distribution of 13 Corps in a garrison role which now took
place, 18 F.S.D. at Ghemines would suffice for the forces on the frontier
while advanced depots in Benghazi met the needs of the troops centred
round the town and port.
Fighting had ceased on 7th February, just under two months from the
start of what had been planned as a five days' raid.
A corps consisting of
divisions, one armoured, with corps troops, had
annihilated the Italian Tenth Army, capturing a total of some 130,000
prisoners, 400 tanks and 1,290 guns, besides vast quantities of other material
for the loss of 500 killed, 1,373 wounded and 55 missing.
cost of so few casualties had only been won by the supreme endurance of
British men and vehicles alike, by superb strategy and by administrative
staff work and improvisation of a high order.
space of two months, the threat which had hung over the Nile Delta.
The question now was whether success could be exploited even further
and the Italians, by a further advance, swept right out of their North
African colonies.
Certainly the morale of the British troops could hardly
have been higher, while that of their opponents had reached its nadir.
Furthermore, the possession of the whole of Libya would have had many
In the first place it would have freed the greater part of our
Middle East forces for operations elsewhere-in particular Greece. Secondly,
by the capture of Tripoli we would strengthen our naval and aerial position
in the central and eastern Mediterranean, and ensure better contact with
Finally, the British occupation of Libya might have greatly en-
couraged the French Army in North Africa and strengthened its position,
safeguarding to some extent the important naval base of Bizerta.
Coupled with the loss of the Italian territories in East Africa, it might even
have proved sufficient to overthrow the Fascist régime in Italy.
Against all these tangible advantages it had to be remembered that there
is a limit to the extent to which even the most willing of horses can be
flogged. T Armoured Division had been more or less continuously employed
in the desert for some nine months, the last two of which had been spent
in a war of rapid movement, and, even if the men were not overtired, the
vehicles undoubtedly were.
7 Armoured Division was about to be
relieved by 2 Armoured Division, but the latter were not yet desert-worthy
