By 30th May the enemy's plan had gone awry and he had failed in his
initial objectives.
None the less his presence astride our mine-field effectively
prevented our putting into action our own plan of sending tanks around
his southern flank.
Mention has already been made of the reorganization of the tank delivery
and recovery arrangements prior to the battle.
Proof was now given of the
30 Corps workshops now cleared the battle
The only tanks left were 17
Within one day 70 of the damaged tanks had been repaired,
and as some 150 tank replacements had been received since the battle began
(tanks and crews of a formation not yet committed to battle were now
being used as replacements) the position as regards our tank strength was
now much the same as it had been at the beginning of the battle.
the less, by 1st June, every single tank was necessary to reduce the enemy's
striking force in order that we might proceed with our own oflensive.
It now seemed that, even if the enemy's plans had suffered a setback,
little could go right with our own, and the ultimate failure of Eighth Army's
counter-attack on 5th June was probably the turning-point of the battle.
Ammunition expenditure in the first few days had average 25,000 rounds
of 25-pr. a day and this was far beyond expectations.
On 1st June H.Q.
Eighth Army therefore arranged for an ammunition train to be sent forward
daily to Matruh; this could then be routed on to rail-head if necessary.
Needless to say, there would be a delay of some four to five days before the
train would materialize.
The possibility of running ammunition forward
from Matruh to Tobruk by sea in lighters was also examined, and this service
began on 7th June, four lighters bringing up 150 tons a day to Tobruk.
Bir Hacheim on the extreme left flank of Eighth Army was a thorn in the
side of the enemy and provoked him to consistent heavy attacks, and on
8th June it became necessary to drop urgently needed medical supplies to the
Fighting French garrisoned there.
This was carried out successfully, but the
maintenance of the garrison was difficult for two or three days.
30 Corps, under whose command the garrison was, had had no information
on the administrative situation in Bir Hacheim since despatching a mainten-
ance convoy on 5th June.
A further maintenance convoy was prepared and
despatched on 7th June and part was delivered that night, but it proved im-
possible to get the remainder through on the subsequent night.
became necessary to drop both rations and water by air to the beleaguered
garrison. Heavy fighting continued round Bir Hacheim, and though the Fighting
French resisted with the utmost gallantry the enemy slowly
"box" until it was almost completely sealed off. Under these circumstances it
was inevitable that the decision was taken to evacuate the garrison on the night
Our resistance was based on a number of these defended sites or " boxes"
for which demands of wire and mines now became very large.
Both corps
had instituted a system of rationing 25-pr. ammunition in an effort to conserve
the rapidly dwindling stocks.
30 Corps rationed their formations to some
3,000 rounds a day (a great blow to 1 Armoured Division who had been using
some 12,000 rounds daily); 13 Corps instituted a system of rationing by
requirements.
226
WO277
1 p
By 11th June 30 Corps had, since the battle began, recovered some 343
tanks.
Matters had been simplified by our retaining control of the battlefield,
but the armoured fighting which now began reduced our armour, in the
Acroma area, to only 30 cruiser and 20 infantry tanks by 13th June, and,
moreover, lost us the inestimable advantage of possession of the battlefield
and ability to recover our own damaged tanks.
It was now hoped that the Eighth Army would be able to stand on the
western perimeter of Tobruk, at El Adem and Bel Hamed, and orders were
issued accordingly.
Meanwhile stocks in No. 4 Forward Base were reduced
rapidly either by transfer to Capuzzo and Tobruk or by steadily eating down
of the reserves
in stock.
1,853 tons were removed on 14th June and by degrees the large
stocks at Bel Hamed were whittled down while ships continued to enter Tobruk
and unload against the possibility of its being invested again.
While the
far more complicated.
Where possible divisions and brigades were based on
the forward bases, but F.M.C.s also sprung up and closed down-rather like
mushroom growths.
(30 Corps for some time used " mobile F.M.C.s.")
The Capitulation of Tobruk
The enemy was now beginning to surround Tobruk and on 17th June all
hope of preventing this died.
All administrative units in Tobruk had already
been thinned out as far as possible.
13 Corps were responsible for ensuring
the evacuation of stores surplus to the garrison's requirements in accordance
with priorities already laid down by Eighth Army.
American tank spares
were amongst the highest priority stores to be backloaded, and returning
lighters were used for the purpose.
The enemy began his attack on Tobruk on 20th June and, in view of his
rapid gains, 30 Corps were ordered to send forward 7 Armoured Division.
The division came within 20 miles of the southern perimeter before dark.
but that evening the enemy advance had cut off the harbour from the com-
mander of the garrison.
Moreover the majority of the garrison transport
had been cut off in the harbour area and it was impossible to move it to the
troops within the perimeter.
Eventually, in the early hours of 21st June a
message from the garrison announced the destruction of all water and petrol
and the capture of the whole of their transport.
An order was circulated to
all units of the garrison by its H.Q. that a capitulation had taken place and
that all vehicles, equipment and arms were to be destroyed.
Certain detach-
ments which were in possession of vehicles then broke out and some units
continued fighting up to 22nd June.
Losses of stores of all natures were naturally considerable and although
it was possible to destroy some stores the enemy undoubtedly secured a good
haul.
Just before the fall Tobruk held some 3,000,000 rations, 4,000 tons of
ammunition and 1,750,000 gallons of P.O.L.
Some 6,000 tons of water was
held in storage.
Exactly how much of these fell into the hands of the enemy
is difficult to assess because re morts of demolitions to tre somershat naturally
impossible to check. Certainly the enemy would has veen delighted to receive
227
12
12090
