long before the fall of Rangoon and the steps that were at once put in
hand, especially the backloading of supplies right back to Mandalay and
later to Ye-u, laid the foundation of as sound an administrative programme
as was possible, having regard to the many shortages.
" The troops who fought in the Burma campaign were subjected to
a very severe strain.
They were opposed by a well-trained, vigorous
and determined enemy, usually superior in numbers; they had to fight
in a type of country and under conditions quite unfamiliar to the
majority; they had no relief and very little rest during more than five
months; in the latter stages they were almost entirely deprived of air
support.
After the fall of Rangoon they felt themselves cut off from
outside help and from all amenities.
Every effort was made to send
mails and a supply of stores to Burma, but the limitations of air transport
made it impossible to meet the full needs.
Rations, however, thanks to
the efforts of the administative staff, were not short."
(General Wavell.)
Our reverses in Flanders,
Norway, Malaya and now in Burma were
slowly driving home our weaknesses.
The lessons were not lost to sight.
Factories at home were beginning to reduce our deficiencies in aircraft and
other equipment.
Our later return to Burma proved that at least one problem
of jungle warfare had been understood and mastered.
Air transport, so
lacking in 1942, was to become, three years later, the solution to many an
administrative problem.
334
WO27
1
CHAPTER VII
INDIA
It is opportune at this juncture to quit the field of military operations for
the convulsions which now began to shake the sub-continent of India.
The authors must, however, emphasize that, neither as an operational
theatre nor as an administrative base, is India given full credit in this short
chapter for her war effort.
The major operations mounted from India are
described in the pages devoted to the South-East Asia Command (Chapter
XIII, while the full story of the economic and industrial development of
India into a vast base and main support area is outside the scope of this
history.
Apart from a passing reference to the operations mounted by India after
the Allied disasters in Malaya and Burma, we have endeavoured therefore
to limit the narrative to a brief account of the purely military aspects of
maintenance as seen through the eyes of G.H.Q. India.
order properly to appreciate the significance of her war effort to the Allied
victory in the East, it is essential to have an outline of India's overall
economic background and so it has not been easy entirely to differentiate
between the military, the political and the economic problems which were
such a feature of the development of the base. Neither can a certain amount
of overlapping with the activities of S.E.A.C. be avoided.
(Note: The partition of India into the two Dominions of India
and Pakistan came about after the cessation of hostilities and they are
not referred to in this chapter-the name India is therefore used in the
geographical sense and embraces the whole of the sub-continent.)
Operations Mounted by India, December, 1942-June, 1943
THE THREAT FROM THE EAST
India was rudely awakened from a somewhat detached interest in the war
by the shock of the Japanese aggression and the wholly unexpected disasters
in Malaya and Burma.
When the retreating forces of Burmarmy arrived in
Assam both the armed forces and the
nation were unprepared to meet
invasion.
Before the war began India had maintained a small standing army of
some 200,000 men, of whom about 40,000 were British, and these forces were
responsible for her internal security and for her defence.
The administrative
lay-out for
Frontier at such
this pre-war
army was concentrated behind the North-West
places as Lahore, Rawalpindi, Quetta and Karachi.
As the
war spread in 1941 to Egypt and the Middle East, the threat to India from
accordingly.
the west increased and th existing administrativa lav-out was ernandes
Despite the increasing threat of her security India, as we have a, in.
continued to send her troone to nacict the allied cause in Persia and Traa, in
Abussinia, in the earlier campaions in Curenaina in France and in Norway.
335
