other than rubber shoes by horses in the danger area was forbidden.
The
only accident was at Brest during November, when a petrol ship blew up
with the loss of some 6,000 tons of fuel.
Precautions in the forward areas
were in
accordance with the R.A.S.C. regulations on the subject, and no
evidence exists that they were other than satisfactory.
Ordnance Stores
The main difficulties experienced by the R.A.O.C. can be summarized
as follows: —
Lack of personnel possessing the necessary knowledge and experience.
Absence of direction regarding R.A.O.C. procedure.
Faulty pre-war planning.
One or another of the above deficiencies dogged the R.A.O.C. from the
time of disembarkation.
The lack of sufficiently trained personnel and the
shortage of material were not peculiar to Ordnance but, unfortunately, were
only too common to all arms.
The failure to evolve and impart the current
text-book available was out of date, and the revised edition was not issued
before the force embarked.
As the accounting and provision procedure to
be adopted by the base ordnance depots was based on a new system, the
instructions for which were only contained in the revised edition, it is not
surprising that it got off to a bad start.
No large storeholding organization
—whether military or civilian-can operate without an adequate accounting
method fully understood by the entire staff.
difficulties it must be recorded that the R.A.O.C. did in fact do a remarkable
job, the magnitude of which cannot be properly appreciated from a bare
recital of events and figures.
Certain accommodation had been earmarked for ordnance depots during
reconnaissances in 1938 in the Nantes area, and were shown as available in
In the meantime, however, owing
to the misunderstanding which had arisen over the size of the original force,
the French Government had in all good faith, but unknown to us, made
other use of certain of the premises, and immediate alternative arrange-
The buildings which remained were quite
unsuitable, a fact which led to much bitter criticism directed against the
As has already been seen, this criticism
The Ordnance directorate was represented only at G.H.O. and at head-
quarters of corps,
representatives at headquarters of either L. of C. area or the L. of C. sub-
This meant that the large number of units stationed on the L. of C.
had no R.A.O.C. link between them and their base ordnance depot and did
not conform to the policy that close personal touch should be maintained
between Ordnance and commanding officers.
The deficiency was later partly
rectified by the loan of a senior ordnance officer from G.H.Q. to H.Q., L. of C.
Area, but even this was not regularized until April, 1940.
WO2T7
1 p
organization: —
The original ordnance plan for the B.E.F. was based on the following
One Base Ordnance Depot.
One Advanced Ordnance Depot.
Rail-head detachments at supply rail-heads.
Detachment at Dieppe Medical Base Sub-Area.
The divorcing of units from their equipment has been referred to else-
where, but it must be stated that No. 1 Base Ordnance Depot was among
The non-arrival of the depot equipment until 14 days
after stores had started to pour in meant that the unit had no facilities for
handling and stacking stores or breaking bulk in a convenient manner, nor
any accounting documents even if they had known how to use them.
unit was situated at Nantes, and previous reference has been made to the
difficulties caused by the loss of pre-allotted accommodation.
of October this depot was occupying some 28 buildings and store tents,
spread over an area of 20 square miles. Many of these buildings were quite
unsuitable for the purpose.
The total of covered accommodation amounted
to over half a million square feet, and during December a bid was made
on the French authorities for the acquisition of a further 500,000 square feet.
This caused some consternation, which was not surprising having regard to
the fact that the original bid (on the basis of a two-division force) was for
only 300,000 square feet.
A second base ordnance depot was to be opened in the northern base,
and work was started in November at Bruz, near Rennes, on the con-
struction of a permanent installation.
Later in the month the War Office
suggested that this idea be dropped and Nantes developed as the main depot.
The urgent necessity of shortening the L. of C. precluded this in the eyes
"Q" staff at G.H.Q., but it is interesting to imagine the accom-
modation repercussions at Nantes had the suggestion been adopted.
depot at Bruz could not, however, be ready for many months, and efforts
were made instead to establish No. 2 Base Ordnance Depot temporarily in
These efforts were unsuccessful, and finally the depot was
opened at Le Havre in December.
In the meantime certain of the hutments,
etc., earmarked for Bruz, had been diverted to the Nantes area to alleviate
the accommodation problems of No. 1 Base Ordnance Depot.
Maintenance reserves and stocks of ordnance stores were laid down by
"Q" to consist of two months' maintenance and one month in transit with
an additional month in base reserve.
The fact that this target was seldom
reached resulted in much hard work endeavouring to meet current demands,
and the R.A.O.C. had to make use of such irregularities as cannibalisation
of eqiupments in order to maintain the force.
(Again one considers the
effect on Nantes had the programme kept up to schedule.)
The advanced ordnance depot did not function for some weeks after
its arrival, and was lent to No. 1 Base Ordnance Depot pending a final
decision as to its use.
It was originally suggested that it could be used for
detail issues, but it was finally decided that it was to be located in Arras
as an advanced holding of stores required by the forward troops and not
The total covered area occupied by the depot
amounted to 150,000 square feet, but inevitably this soon proved to be
