was held packed.
Before the War a suggestion had been made to erect four
tanks, each to hold 4,000 tons of bulk petrol, but War Office approval had
not been received by the time war with Germany broke out. After the out-
break of war however, work began on the project (known as the " Gebel
Dave " scheme) and by June, 1940 one tank had been completed and filled.
As in every other theatre there was a shortage of transport, but this was
perhaps not so greatly felt in Egypt as elsewhere because a certain amount
of local transport and drivers could be found, albeit not without difficulty.
On the outbreak of war there were ten R.A.S.C. transport companies in the
Middle East to carry out all essential peace-time transport duties, while by
June, 1940 this total had been increased to seventeen.
course, equipped with second line but this was rarely complete and consider-
able improvisation had to be resorted to, the effect of which may be noted
in the next section.
The system for the supply of ordnance stores and ammunition was
organized on orthodox lines.
The ordnance depot and workshops were at
Abbassia with a depot at Alexandria and dumps at El Daba and Matruh.
The two latter dumps held stocks of tentage, accommodation stores and
ammunition reserves for the units ordered to mobilize for operations in the
Except for one skeleton ordnance field park and one R.A.O.C. de-
contamination unit, R.A.O.C. field units were non-existent; but it is interesting
to note, in the light of future events, that chemical warfare at this stage was
considered a strong possibility and the decontamination unit was given priority
over other units more urgently required.
The equipment in possession of units was neither complete nor up to date,
while stocks in ordnance depots were inadequate.
deficiencies in holdings were spares for recently introduced vehicles and
armaments, recovery vehicles, tank transporters and engine assemblies.
was further aggravated by the production policy then in force in the United
Kingdom, under which production of spares for obsolescent equipment was
stopped before sufficient were available, whilst new types of equipment were
generally shipped without spares.
The inevitable result was that neither
the old nor the new types could be adequately maintained.
Ammunition was stored partly in the main depot at Abbassia and partly
in a new depot which was being constructed in a subterranean network of
natural caves, about eight miles from Cairo, known as the Tura Caves.
Initially only one of these caves was adapted for storage purposes, but
eventually seven were taken into use.
The Western Desert
Throughout the early period of the War, all eyes were on Libya. Perhaps
it was merely a local state of mind, or possibly it is simply being wise after
the event, but it does seem that general opinion in the Middle East tended
always to consider Italy as an inevitable enemy and mistrusted her neutrality.
Nevertheless, although operations in Libya against Italy were always con-
sidered most likely by those on the spot, the outbreak of war saw Britain
singularly unprepared in this direction.
The many soldiers later to be
familiar with the Western Desert might be surprised to learn that originally
the familiar main coast road did not run west of Dekheila and the utmost
96
1 0
pressure had to be put on the Egyptian Government to complete it to
Matruh and later to Sidi Barrani.
The construction of this road was a
vital preliminary to any operations in the Western Desert, as was the con-
struction of a pipe-line to carry fresh water from Alexandria to Matruh.
Not only was this latter necessary for the maintenance of troops, but it also
meant considerable economy in the running of trains.
General Wavell, in early September, 1939, had instructed each of the
commands under H.Q., Middle East, to provide a forecast of requirements
both in troops and materials for a period of six months, i.e. up to March,
On receipt of these estimates, which served to show how pitifully
were Middle East's resources for war, an appreciation was
forwarded to the War Office in October, 1939, of which the gist was that
Middle East Command could maintain a purely defensive role with its
existing resources, provided the air forces were increased, certain anti-aircraft
units provided, and approval given for the extension of the desert railway
and the construction of a water pipe-line from Alexandria to Matruh.
In reply to this appreciation, the War Office informed H.Q., Middle East,
that a defensive policy would be maintained in the Western Desert and
that that would constitute the criterion on which forces and administrative
facilities were to be based. Such a policy was not to exclude operations
of a diversionary character which might be carried out.
As a result, work was put in hand for the completion and improvement
of defence works in the Matruh area, the extension of the desert railway,
the laying of an eight-inch water pipe-line to Matruh and the erection of
additional accommodation for formations and units to be located in the
Western Desert.
THE MIDDLE EAST, 1939-1942
SECTION 2-WAVELL'S FIRST DESERT CAMPAIGN, 1940-1941
As we have seen in the previous chapter, on the western frontier of
Egypt our foremost defended positions were at Mersa Matruh, which was
over 200 miles west of Alexandria and about 120 miles from the Egyptian
frontier with Libya.
The garrison in Egypt at the time of Italy's entry
into the war consisted of:-
7 Armoured Division (two armoured brigades and support group-not
up to full strength).
4 Indian Division (two infantry brigades only).
New Zealand Division (part).
Fourteen unbrigaded infantry battalions (Commonwealth).
It had always been considered that in fulfilling a purely defensive role
7 Armoured Division could operate at a distance of 60 miles from Matruh,
and that any increase in this radius of action would entail a corresponding
reduction of force.
As Matruh is some 70 miles from Sidi Barrani and
the frontier at Sollum a further 50 miles, it was obvious that 7 Armoured
Division's resources were inadequate for operations on the frontier. Sollum
n*
