AUTHORS' PREFACE
In compiling this history we have endeavoured to present a comprehensive
survey of the activities of the administrative services during the war of 1939-45.
Space considerations have, however, intervened and several apparent incon-
sistencies may be found in the treatment given to the various theatres.
It
should become immediately obvious that we have examined each Command
from the aspect that we consider of greatest value to the student of military
administration.
In some theatres we have regarded the campaigns through
the eyes of G.H.Q., in others, through the eyes of Army, of Corps and, in
some cases, of Divisions and Brigades.
Sometimes emphasis has been laid
on administration in the base area, sometimes on the forward battle.
Many principles, practices and experiences are common to all, or most,
theatres and we have tried to avoid needless reiteration and monotonous
repetition.
Bearing this in his mind, the reader must not be surprised to find
one chapter containing details concerning the location of the smallest field depot
while the next rarely moves below the activities of the High Command.
It is possible that we have more than once succumbed to the inevitable
temptation of the historian of being
"wise after the event".
We make no
apologies for this-it is inescapable.
We have tried, however, to be impartial;
where possible we have praised, often we have sympathized, frequently we
have criticized and, in one or two cases we have damned.
We hope that
our praise and sympathy will be welcomed; if our criticism and condemnation
seems unreasonable at times to the informed reader, we can only plead the
evidence of available information which-as we point out below-is sometimes
pitifully incomplete.
We also wish to take this early opportunity of making due apologies for
any plagiarism which may become apparent.
Our contrition is somewhat
tempered by the knowledge that,
had the official records,
documents to which we were given free access while compiling the history
been complete and comprehensive, such plagiarism would not have been
necessary.
It is understandable that, in the stress of war, the needs of posterity should
tend to be disregarded under the pressure of current events, resulting in the
later discomfort of historians.
None the less, if there is one lesson which
the authors have themselves learnt in compiling this history, though it will not be
apparent from the general text, it is probably the need for a fuller appreciation
preparation.
the importance of War Diaries and a more imaginative attitude in their
Fortunately where shortcomings exist in the official records,
it has, in some cases, been possible to bridge the gaps by drawing upon articles
and accounts of a more personal nature which have appeared in Service and
other periodicals.
In most of these cases it has already been possible to make
due acknowledgment to their authors; in others, it is hoped that this general
acknowledgment will suffice.
Very great help has been freely given by many officers, both serving and
retired, who consented to check draft chapters and sections covering campaigns
in which they served, and who made many useful suggestions and amendments.
For this valuable assistance the authors wish here to record their gratitude.
Finally, it is hoped that readers better informed on individual portions of
the history than the authors themselves will be tolerant of its shortcomings
and indulgent of its omissions.
J.A.H.C.
D.N.K.
vini
RESTRICTED
CHAPTER I
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE QUARTER-MASTER-GENERAL
SECTION 1-ORGANIZATION BEFORE THE OUTBREAK
OF WAR
The War Office Act of 1870 vested the direct and immediate control of
every aspect of Army administration in the
War,
administration being divided between three great officers, viz.: the Officer
Commanding in Chief, the Surveyor General of Ordnance, and the Financial
The duties of these three officers as defined by the Act over-
lapped in all aspects of the present conception of the functions of military
administration and it is not surprising that such divided control was detri-
mental to both the public purse and the efficiency of the Army (the former
being the major consideration at the time).
An effort was therefore made in the early part of 1888 to achieve a
measure of co-ordination by concentrating the entire responsibility for military
efficiency on the Commander-in-Chief who was made responsible to the
Secretary of State that the Army was efficient in material, as well as in men
as hitherto. It was his duty to demand proper supplies of all stores for
current use and for reserves, thus being responsible that the forces were duly
fed, clothed, equipped and paid.
The department of the Surveyor-General
of the Ordnance was then suppressed.
This rather excessive centralization of responsibilities was, however, short-
lived and, by an Order in Council of 1895, abolished.
Under this Order,
the Commander-in-Chief retained the responsibility for general command
over the Army, but was given
" general supervision" only over certain
military departments of the War Office.
These included that of the Quarter-
Master-General whose office had hitherto been part of the Commander-in-
The Quarter-Master-General now had direct charge of the food,
forage, quarters, fuel and transport of the Army, and of the pay department,
and was directly responsible for his department to the Secretary of State.
This division of duties remained with certain minor alterations until
the conclusion of the South African War when a Royal Commission under
the presidency of the Earl of Elgin and Kincardine criticized the weakness
of War Office organization in regard to consultative power.
1903, the Esher Committee was appointed to advise as to the creation of
a Board, similar to the Board of Admiralty, to carry on the higher adminis-
trative business of the War Office.
This led, in 1904, to the constitution
of the Army Council, of which the Quarter-Master-General became the Third
Military Member.
He retained the work formerly done by his department
(except the administration of the pay department) and, in addition,
made responsible for the provision
of clothing and equipment,
the duty of the Director-General of Ordnance who was abolished.
12090
