garrison was considerable, and it is of interest that the reports of all official
nd independent observers have mentioned the clouds of black smoke which
g over the sky in their rear during the close of the campaign.
ll female members of the nursing services
were evacuated with the
forces, together with certain trained staff officers and technicians.
The
ion to evacuate the nurses was taken as a result of reports received
on the treatment of nurses by the Japanese after the fall of Hong Kong.
Throughout 13th February both the Japanese aircraft and artillery were
active, and, at about midday, there was a particularly violent and accurate
air raid on one of the main thoroughfares leading from the town.
Alexandra ammunition magazine came under shell and mortar fire, and
deliveries had to be temporarily suspended.
During that day
General Wavell made it clear that, while he fully
appreciated the position, continued action was essential, and he instructed
the garrison to continue to inflict the maximum damage
on the enemy
for as long as possible.
The next day, however, he qualified this by stating
that troops should go on fighting in all places where there were sufficient
water supplies.
The effect of the collapse of civil labour now began to make itself felt.
At the docks all civil labour had disappeared, and the harbour board staff
was no longer in control. In the town, debris from the bombing and shell-
ing (the town was now under continuous shell-fire) remained untouched,
the dead remained unburied, and water ran to waste from the mains from
lack of labour to clear the demolished buildings.
The water, seeping away unattended, was perhaps symbolical.
Water
was the life blood of the stricken city, and early in the morning of 14th
February the municipal water engineer reported that he considered a com-
plete failure of the water supply was imminent.
Owing to breaks in the
water mains and pipes,
and though both pumping stations were still working,
well over half the
supply was being lost.
All civil labour had gone, and it was almost impos-
sible to get repairs done.
days at the outside, and that it might last only for one day.
To remedy
the situation, additional R.E. assistance was ordered, but it was not possible
for this to be done without delay, since all available engineers were fighting
as combatant troops
It must be explained that there is no adequate record of the capture
by the Japanese of the remaining reservoirs, but it seems that they were in
fact lost by 14th February although it appears that, owing to some over-
sight, water continued to flow to the pumping stations, one of which was
only a few hundred yards from the enemy.
The Capitulation
Singapore was by now taking on the appearance of a doomed city.
The
government and municipal offices were operating in skeleton form only.
The only newspaper being published was a government controlled single-
sheet of which free issues were made.
and shops were closed.
Practically all offices, business houses
The majority of the large buildings had been wholly,
or partly, taken over as temporary military hospitals, and were already full.
302
WORTY
1
The civil hospitals were working to capacity, and those on the higher levels,
including the general hospital, were without water, except what could be
obtained by carrying parties.
The electric power was still working, but
the plant was directly threatened as the enemy was within one mile. The
local population, with few exceptions, was apathetic, and there were few
The next day, 15th February, the water supply showed signs of total
failure within the day, in which case it would, at the best, take several days
to obtain piped water again, even if the defenders held the reservoirs.
rations that remained had been reduced to a few days' supply, and litle
petrol was left apart from what was in vehicle tanks.
all natures of ammunition were dwindling, and the magazine itself was
practically in the front line, more or less out of action, owing to fires. The
only hope of staving off surrender was the recapture of the reservoirs and
the Bukit Timah installations by an immediate counter-attack. All forma
tion commanders were of the opinion that this was impracticable, and, after
with all the interested parties, General Percival decided to
Hostilities finally ceased at 2030 hours, 15th February, and
Japanese troops entered the city the next morning.
It was nearly six days, with engineers and water parties working at full
pressure, before water again reached the lower areas of the town.
ten days before water again reached the general hospital and many other
buildings on the higher levels.
The fall of Singapore was, not unnaturally, surrounded by considerable
controversy, much of it ill-informed.
It is, however, not the purpose of
this narrative to enter into controversy.
Although the course of the battle
was dictated largely by administrative considerations, this was wholly due
to circumstances outside the scope of theatre maintenance. Like the defence
plan the general administrative lay-out was designed primarily to meet an
attack from the north combined with the possibility of a direct landing in the
It was greatly influenced also by the possibility of an advance into
Thailand (Operation " Matador").
Perhaps, after the withdrawal from the mainland, the policy of retaining
the reserves in the Bukit Timah area she wainland, the policy of retaining
even had time permitted the depots to be re-sited,
whether any location on the island could have e-sited his is open treasonin
degree of security. On the other hand, the fact that chose w we relatively few
losses sustained from air attacks may be quoted in support of the dispersion
The confused fighting caused by the nature of the terrain, and the tactics
adopted by the enemy, freqused by the mature of the te foiard areas being
cut off from normal supply.
The staff were forced to the
expedient of ordering units, which supply dange of being cut of, to hold
reserves in excess of normal holdings.
This was wasteful, since these reserves
were embarrassing during the many rapid moves, and more often than not
The answer would of course have been air supply,
but to refer to this in a campaign where not even one fighter plane appeared
in the closing stages is wishful thinking carried to the extreme.
