established at Moulmein with further dumps at Tavoy and Mergui.
When
operations began, however, only field supply depots of the R.I.A.S.C. were
functioning.
Although the area of the Southern Shan States was initially the location of
1 Burma
Division
it was subsequently occupied by the Chinese Forces,
and the administrative difficulties which then arose have been referred to
above.
The L. of C. ran by rail from either the main base at Rangoon or the
advanced base at Mandalay via Thazi to the rail-head at Shwanyaung, which
was about 12 miles short of Taunggyi.
Maintenance forward was by L. of C
transport companies by road from Taunggyi to the ferry over the Salween
river to Takaw and thence to Kengtung, a distance of over 300 miles.
has already been noted the ferry at the Salween was a serious bottleneck
and, although it was capable of carrying vehicles,
it was in fact quicker
to off-load the stores, ferry them across and reload.
As in southern Burma, an advanced base was in preparation at Taunggyi
to hold 30 days' reserves for two brigade groups.
Field depots were also
to be located with 10 days' reserves for two brigade groups at Nammawngawn
and a further 10 days' for one brigade group each at Takaw and Kengtung.
The L. of C. for the Northern Shan States presented little difficulty; it
was based on the main supply route to China, by
rail or I.W.T. to
Mandalay and Lashio and thence via the "China Road" to the frontier.
Mandalay itself served as a secondary base to Rangoon, and although in
most cases only in the preparatory stage, it held considerable stocks.
A permanent supply depot was in operation there, and a second was formed
shortly before operations began.
The Administrative Services in Burmarmy
It will be seen from the foregoing that the most satisfactory aspect of the
administrative arrangements lay in the fact that at least a skeleton supply
organization was in existence at the outbreak of war. In order to achieve
this, however, a great strain was thrown upon the resources of the Burma
Army Service Corps.
recruitment of troops progressed slowly.
There was a serious shortage of officers, and local
Personnel to staff F.S.Ds. were
raised from existing units, and although able to carry out their duties in
emergency they had not anything like sufficient training.
that the only two British units in the country, the two infantry battalions,
had to be seriously milked to provide essential British personnel for the
services.
Some relief was afforded by the arrival of reinforcements from India,
especially 17 Indian Division
R.I.A.S.C. complement, since it then
which was of course
accompanied
became possible
" supply areas", each under a D.A.D.S.T., to be established.
for administrative
At the same
time supplies started arriving to build up stocks to 90 days plus 30 days'
working stocks.
In addition large consignments of stores from Australia
which had been ordered by the Burma Government at storeduring December,
1940, and January, 1941.
Local contracts were in force for fresh supplies,
and large local purchases of locally manufa wered articles toere made direct
from producing areas.
Steps were also taken to build up
stocks of rice
in the Shan States for the expected increase in th to buhle of Chinese troops.
314
WO277
1
Supply of P.O.L. was a matter of the utmost dificulty, especially in the
later stages of the campaign, and the source of unending anxiety, for not
only the requirements of Burmarmy but those of the civil administration and
later of the Chinese forces had to be met.
It was almost
impossible to
compute consumption because such transport as existed was primarily made
up of lend-lease
and requisitioned
vehicles ex " lend-lease"
vehicles.
The proportion of heavy
then ev wale, and all were worked to the limit.
was high, and of the requisitioned vehicles a large
It is considered that
their overall average consumption was probably in the region of 8 gallons
a day, while the Chinese forces estimated their daily consumption per
vehicle at 12 gallons, although due regard must be paid to the business
instincts of the Chinese when accepting this figure.
Large quantities of crude oil were pumped through the pipe-lines from
the oilfields at Yenangyaung to the Syriam refineries near Rangoon and
from these, petrol was despatched up-country chiefly by river.
Production
of petrol by improvised methods was started in the oilfields during the
campaign, and it was hoped to attain a monthly target of nearly 1,500,000
gallons.
Distribution was the vital problem; neither the oilfields nor the refineries
were on rail, transport was short and very few road tankers were available,
hence reliance was placed on I.W.T. as the main method of transportation.
The question of containers was acute and the vital necessity of return of
containers an added problem (few, if any, containers which passed over
the Chinese frontier were known to return).
Most of the petrol consigned
to China was sent in bulk by river to Bhamo and thence by road in the
larger drums.
P.O.L. dumps were established at all F.S.Ds. and all filling possible was
done ex bulk at Mandalay (fed by river). Formations and units drew from
dumps and themselves usually had to decant from 40 or 20-gallon drums
since there was always a shortage of smaller containers.
A target of 30 days'
reserves for the whole force was aimed at, and it was only during the
final stages that shortages occurred.
Ammunition was held in bulk at the ordnance depot at Mingladon, and
at ordnance field depots located all over the country.
Distribution was
mainly from ammunition points which could not he formed without con-
shortage
officers
experienced
in ammunition duties.
Shortages existed in most natures although they were not so pronounced
in those required for the weapons that were in greatest use during the
later stages of operations.
The same applied to the weapons themselves,
reasonable
stocks
being available
of such items as Thompson machine
guns and rifles.
Practically all units in Burma were short of modern weapons
and equipment at the outset of the campaign.
arrived before the loss of Rang the campaigld not use issued and some
Although a certain number
units had to take them into action without undergoing training in their
the U.S.
Some equipment and s action without und, with the agreement of
authorities, from
supplies
intended for China.
This caused a
serious controversy with the Chinese authorities.
315
