field, containing elements which were needed but did not exist in the War
Office.
There is nothing to show that these changes were in any way detri-
mental to those functions peculiar to a Ministry which the War Office must
also discharge.
In effect the war left the Quarter-Master-General's staff and
services a unique machine in the organization of the Army and one which
new entrants to the War Office encountered for the first time.
They had to
learn how this machine worked: and there was no school of instruction
which existed for this purpose.
Such a situation does not make for efficiency and does not make for
economy either in manpower or in effort.
Had there been anything in the
system operating in the field which made difficult or impossible the applica-
tion of that system to the War Office, there might have been a case for the
marked divergence in organization.
In fact there was none.
On the con-
trary, in some major overseas theatres, there existed relationships with other
bodies so closely analogous to those existing between the War Office and
other external non-military authorities as to make them indistinguishable.
We may
conclude, therefore, that the War of 1939-45 compelled the
department of the Quarter-Master-General to approach ever nearer to the
field organization, but with greater difficulty and with less economy than
if the approach had been planned.
It is unlikely that the department will
return to its 1939 form.
It devised for itself an organization which generally
reflected the field organization and at the same time avoided, as far as
possible, disturbance of War Office procedures.
The lay-out of the depart-
ment of the Quarter-Master-General, as at August,
Diagram 2.
24
WO217
CHAPTER II
THE B.E.F. IN FRANCE AND BELGIUM: 1939-1940
SECTION 1-MOVEMENT OF THE FORCE TO FRANCE
Embarkation
On 3rd September, 1939,
war was declared on Germany by Great
Britain and France, and on the same day the Commander-in-Chief of the
Field Force (subsequently known as the British Expeditionary Force) received
orders from the Secretary of State for War to move to the Continent the forces
placed under his command.
The deterioration of the international situation
caused by the " Munich Crisis" of September, 1938, and the events in Czecho-
slovakia during March, 1939, had resulted in discussions taking place between
the United Kingdom and France under conditions of secrecy with the result
that plans were ready for the despatch and reception of an expeditionary
force in the event of war.
The task of the Q.M.G.'s staff at General Headquarters was to maintain
in the field a force initially comprising two corps each of two divisions
together with the normal G.H.Q., L. of C. and corps troops as well as a
Royal Air Force "component" of two bomber, four fighter and six army
co-operation squadrons.
In addition, a force known as the Advanced Air Striking Force (A.A.S.F.)
of the Royal Air Force was being despatched for which the Army had a
considerable maintenance commitment.
The move of the force to France was ordered in three major phases: —
Phase I
Advance
Parties.
Base and L. of C. Installations.
Anti-Aircraft Units.
R.A.F. Component (Fighter Wing).
A.A.S.F. (First Echelon).
Phase Il 1 Corps (including G.H.Q. and 1 Corps Troops).
R.A.F. Component (Main Body).
A.A.S.F. (Second Echelon-First Flight).
Phase III 2 Corps (including G.H.Q. and 2 Corps Troops).
R.A.F.
Component (Balance).
A.A.S.F. (Second Echelon-Second Flight).
The despatch of the force was dealt with in "Plan W4", a document
which had been prepared by the General Staff (Plans) branch of the War
Office.
The Q.M.G.
was represented , in G.S. (P) by a deputy assistant
quarter-master-general and,
in addition, two officers from Q.M.G. (2) and
Q.M.G. (13) were attached for movement and transportation duties respec-
tively.
The method whereby the forces were to be received overseas and
the system of maintenance during the initial stages were defined in the " First
Maintenance Project"
which was supplemented by first key plans of the
various ports of entry.
Mobilization of the British Army was ordered on Ist September, although
a limited call-up of reservists had been made during the middle of August.
Units were mobilized under arrangements of the home commands which were
responsible for their maintenance until embarkation.
25
12090
