After the loss of Greece the bulk of the force consisted of the attenuated
New Zealand Division and an Australian brigade H.Q. with a number of
Australian units of all arms, all evacuated from Greece (" W"
Force).
From the point of view of readiness for war in Crete the best of the " W"
Force troops were the Dominion infantry battalions, which had managed
to bring with them practically all their rifles and Bren guns, plus some anti-
tank rifles and a few machine guns, some without tripods.
The best equipped
of these men had a greatcoat and their personal equipment, the worst, nothing
but the clothing they stood up in. Above all, they possessed no unit equipment
or heavy weapons whatsoever, much less any transport.
even in the better equipped units many men,
having no mess tins, had to
cook their food in some kind of ration tin and eat it with their fingers until
they improvised or borrowed spoons or forks.
Morever, a large proportion
were gunners,
sappers, and members of the ancillary services, as well as
Cypriot and Palestinian pioneer elements.
Some of these were led by their
officers and
in some cases had more or less complete unit H.Qs., but a
considerable number were leaderless and remained so for a considerable time.
Some were armed with rifles, some had only a bandolier of ammunition.
Even many of the best formed of these "W" Force elements necessarily
arrived in small parties or as individuals. A few had even been shipwrecked
The reception of such troops would have taxed a well-equipped organiza-
mention an improvised one, but Crete Force H.Q. staff did the
best they could, considering that they had no transport available at all, no
stocks of unit equipment, only a few accommodation stores and no personnel
available to staff reception camps.
Areas had been selected where there
was water and olive-tree cover, to which all arrivals were directed to make
their way on foot.
The first of these was about two miles from Suda port,
where hot tea and tinned rations were available.
Thence, men were directed
on to separate areas for Australians, New Zealand and other troops.
rare to find formed bodies of men led along the road to their appropriate
camps by their own officers.
In general there was a stream of tired humans
wanting to rest and recuperate from the strain of the short campaign in
Greece with, in some cases, a tendency to slight " bomb-happiness"
result of frequent attacks by enemy aircraft.
Occasionally, amongst the
toughest, but least trained men, there was an active revulsion against military
discipline and advantage was taken of the opportunities offered to avoid being
brought under control.
In consequence, for the first ten days, at least, there
were a number of men at large, many armed with rifles, living as tramps
in the hills and olive groves.
At night there were frequent shots if any
lights were displayed.
There was little time to be lost and some sort of order had to be made
Camp staffs were improvised, some from
units of " W" Force for whom there were at first no guns.
All units originally
in Crete were ordered to hand in as much as they could of their cooking
equipment, etc., on the principal that all troops should have their share
The normal scale of blankets for troops in the island
was reduced from three to one for each man and in this way sufficient were
obtained for every man to have one.
204
WO277
1
The problem of bringing all the loose elements under control was much
more difficult, largely owing to the impossibility of giving the military police
any transport for rounding-up.
However, a curfew for troops at 1800 hours
daily was introduced in the Suda-Canea area, and it was promulgated that
all men not in formed units or not under camp control would be treated as
Moreover the gradual organization of some of the gunners into
artillery units and of others into improvised units armed with rifles only,
helped to clear things up.
Everything possible was done to simplify the
procedure for disposing of serious disciplinary cases.
Every effort was made by the C.-in-C., Middle East, to send stores and
materials from his limited resources to increase the means of defence and
a few infantry and light tanks, a number of captured Italian guns and a
certain amount of transport and other arms and equipment were shipped.
Inevitably, a considerable proportion was sunk on the voyage, for the scale
of the enemy attack on shipping was now rapidly increasing in intensity. The
equipment, etc., sunk included about half the Italian guns and more than
half the engineer stores required for constructing defences.
Every effort was also made, as much to ease the maintenance problem
as for any other reason, to get rid as soon as possible of all surplus British
and all prisoners of war of which there finally remained some
16,000 held on the island. A few had been despatched to Egypt but nothing
like enough, from the maintenance point of view, owing partly to lack of
escorted shipping and partly to it being found possible at a late stage to
equip a fair proportion of the surplus British personnel with captured Italian
guns, or to turn them into improvised rifle units.
When some measure of reorganization had been achieved it was found
that the total strength of British troops to be maintained was, as it remained
until the end, approximately 28,600, although the fighting strength was
actually less than that of a division, and equipment and transport for even
the operational portion of the force was woefully lacking. In addition, there
were also the following numbers to be maintained: —
Greek Army: 14,000.
Prisoners of war: 16,000.
Local population: 400,000.
It was apparent at the outset that the supplies needed for all these had to
be imported by one authority, and that "Q" at force H.Q. would have to
co-ordinate all requirements if there was to be any hope of G.H.Q., Middle
East, finding a successful solution of the problem.
The Greek Army units in Crete, being mostly recruit units, had no
organization, no transport, no arms or equipment and no resources of food.
It was therefore arranged that the Greek depots and ancillary services were
to be re-organized under the guidance of a small British staff, but the German
attack opened before the plans agreed upon could be put into operation.
British liaison officers were, of course, to act in respect of the needs of the
Greek civil population as well as the Greek Army. Unfortunately, as the
harvest was not yet gathered, the food situation of the civil population was
at its worst. To add to the difficulties, there was no effective civil govern-
ment and therefore no organization for clearance of food landed at Suda, nor
