Little more than a week after the start of the German attack it became
evident to the War Office that complete withdrawal from the Continent might
be forced on the B.E.F. and that it was necessary for plans to be prepared
to cover that eventuality.
A conference was therefore held at the War
Office, attended by representatives from the home commands, to discuss the
arrangements that would have to be made to receive, accommodate, clothe
and pay an unknown number from the B.E.F. and an equally nebulous Allied
contingent under conditions of great disorganization.
It was agreed that
should such an operation become necessary it would take place under the
following conditions and that they must then govern the "@" plan: —
It would only be possible to evacuate the personnel, and all equipment
not carried by hand would have to be abandoned.
The organization of formations and units could not be preserved,
but bodies of men would arrive haphazard, separated from their own
officers and non-commissioned officers and without any knowledge of
the whereabouts of others of the same unit.
The normal machinery for administering the men would have ceased
to exist; no reliance could be placed on cooks or on cooking equipment
and no transport of any kind would be available from B.E.F. resources.
The total number of men to be dealt with might run into a total of
300,000 and, in order to keep railway journeys from the ports as short
as possible, they would all have to be quartered in the southern half
No delay of any kind could be allowed at the ports, but the men must
be put into waiting trains and the trains must draw out as soon as they
The first thing the public would wish to know would be the names of
those who were safe, and of those who were missing.
It would be unlikely that the men would know to which formation
they belonged, particularly in so far as G.H.Q. and Corps Troops were
concerned.
Events proved that all the above conjectures were correct, and it is of
interest that they had all been foreseen by the War Office while the event
The numbers were also forecast with considerable
accuracy, and the only development which- had not been provided for on
an adequate scale was the arrival of a very large contingent of French,
Belgian and Polish troops.
The first was to get the men under cover somewhere and to provide them
with "mothers"
and clothing.
, who would look after them and give
them food, beds
necessary sorting out.
The second stage, which could follow later, would be the
Areas (called Reception
Areas) were therefore selected in Southern
England, in places where troops were already stationed, to hold the required
number of 300,000 and it was decided that each man in these areas would
of their guests until the sorting out process could begin.
take in a guest. The hosts would be responsible for the comfort and feeding
WO 277
The procedure after arrival was divided into three phases:
Phase
1-Reception Areas.
Phase Il-Re-distribution and Re-organization Areas.
(a) Divisions to be concentrated in new areas which had
been
arranged
for each division
Areas).
(Re-distribution
(b) G.H.Q., L. of C. and corps troops (who might not
know as individuals to which formation they belonged)
to be collected by arms in various areas called Re-
organization Areas.
Phase III-G.H.Q. etc., troops from Re-organization Areas to be sent to
their proper formation in G.H.Q. etc., troops areas.
Based on the existing strengths in each home command, preparations
were made to receive the following numbers: —
Aldershot Command—60,000.
Southern Command—150,000 (plus three divisional and one G.H.Q.
and corps troops area).
Northern Command —40,000 (plus two divisional and one G.H.Q. and
corps troops area.
Western Command—80,000 (plus two divisional and one G.H.Q. and
corps troops area.
Meanwhile events were moving rapidly in the movements world. Coaches
and locomotives were collected by the Southern Railway from all over the
country and the maximum number of trains of more or less standard compo-
sition were formed.
Regulating stations were chosen to which all loaded
trains were to be directed in the first instance and where they would receive
subsequent route and destination instructions.
Officers were attached from
both the Movements and Transportation Directorates of the War Office for
duty with Vice-Admiral, Dover who was in charge of the naval side of the
operation.
Railway transport officers were moved at a moment's notice from stations
etc., all over the country to assist in the vast movement problem, while
railway construction and maintenance troops were stationed at selected points
in Southern England so as to be able to assist the railway authorities during
the heavy air attacks which were expected but never materialized.
In order to augment the rail services and to assist in the disembarkation
of troops, arrangements were made by the War Office, in conjunction with
the Ministry of War Transport, for the provision of 200 motor coaches with
civilian drivers to be available at 12 hours' notice.
lance car company, R.A.S.C. were put at the disposal of Eastern Command
to assist the medical authorities, who were faced with a task of considerable
magnitude in rendering first aid to the wounded troops and evacuating them
for further treatment.
Great pressure was brought to bear on the War Office to allow each
man to despatch a free telegram on arrival in the country.
After a short
trial this was proved impracticable, and arrangements were made for a
free distribution of field service postcards at railway stations en route to
reception areas.
59
C 2
12090
