In addition it would be possible to discharge daily 1,550 tons of coal into
sailing craft which
would proceed to wharves in the Suez canal for dis-
charge.
The distribution of the coal thence would be by rail.
It was also
anticipated that 500 tons a day could be received at Port Sudan for move-
ment to Egypt via the Nile Valley Route,
i.e. by rail from Port Sudan via
Atbara to
Wadi Halfa, by river craft to Shellal and thence by rail to the
Delta.
Therefore, under these conditions the total port capacity would be
reduced to just over 6,000 tons a day leaving a deficiency of a further 6,000
tons based on expected maximum imports.
Clearly it was
vital to develop port capacity and by June, 1941, the
following work was put in hand:—
(a) Construction of an additional jetty at Abua Sultan to raise the total
capacity to 1,600 tons a day.
(b) Construction of an additional jetty near Fanara for the reception of
coal only at a rate of 800 tons a day.
term side work was started on a deep
water berth for
mechanical discharge of coal near Suez, the development of Ataka in Suez
Bay to 1,200 tons a day, a quay at Suez East to provide a daily capacity of
1,500 tons a day and development at Suez oil jetty to allow an off-take of
1,000 tons a day, together with schemes for deep water berths both at Suez
and Ataka. Development of Sofaga (in the Suez Gulf) and Quseir were
dependent on road transport but, with the provision of adequate 10-ton
an additional 1,000 tons a day might be counted upon.
Aqaba in Transjordan was surveyed with a view to stores being landed there
and transported to northern Palestine via the Ma'an Mafraq Railway. (Later
this L. of C. was to prove valuable.)
Closely bound up with the development and increase in port capacity was
rail construction.
It was useless to raise discharge capacity if facilities for
clearance were neglected.
The capacity of Ataka and the Suez oil wharf
depended on the doubling of the railway line from Suez to Ismalia, which
could not be completed before August.
Likewise the capacity of Suez East
waited upon the construction of the railway from there to Kantara East.
So much for straightforward tonnages of stores. The ports had, however,
special problems of handling for items such as personnel, cased M.T., wheeled
M.T., coal and finally oil.
In each case the problem was appreciated in the
light of the worst conditions, i.e., the closing of the Suez Canal.
loss of Crete there was a period when a serious attack on the Suez Canal
either by parachute troops and/or bombers was expected hourly.)
In so far as personnel were concerned the problem was one of preparing
to accept at the rate of 60,000 a month, using Suez only.
This entailed:—
The provision of personnel lighters in which to land them from troop-
ships in the Suez roads to specially selected landing places.
The establishment of a large transit camp at Suez.
The provision of sufficient M.T. to move personnel from the Suez
transit camp to the various destinations.
Movement by
road was
essential to avoid interference with the carriage of stores on the already
overburdened railways.
180
WORT
At this time all cased M.T. vehicles were landed at Ataka.
Here they
were assembled at an average rate of 200 a day, which was sufficient to deal
with the estimated U.S. imports at the time. In any event Port Sudan was
being organized to receive and assemble any single unit pack cased M.T.
which might arrive surplus to the capacity of Ataka.
At Port Tewfik there
was additional quay space sufficient to land 200 vehicles on wheels a day
without interfering with the capacity of the port. Rail clearance from the
port was, however, a serious bottleneck, and the great need was the provi-
sion of landing craft specially suited to the carriage of vehicles so that they
or stores could be landed straight on to selected beaches or quays at Suez
or the Bitter Lakes and thus avoid congestion of quay space.
In default of
the types of landing craft so familiar later in the war, a locally produced
craft known as "Z" craft was used.
early mark of L.C.T. though it was far less seaworthy.
This bore a slight resemblance to an
hampered by a shortage of trained artificers but over 100 were manufactured.
Steps taken for increasing the capacity of both Suez and Fanara to handle
coal have already been mentioned.
At the same time efforts were made
to reduce coal consumption, and therefore imports, by use of cotton seed
cake both by the Egyptian State Railways and the Army.
however, a conspicuous success and its use introduced a new and quite
efficacious excuse for the general inefficiency of the Egyptian manned rail
Provided the refineries at Suez and Haifa were undamaged and the Haifa
pipe-line from Iraq intact, there would be ample supplies of oil in Egypt
There were, however, the very real dangers of either one,
or both, of the refineries being knocked out by enemy action and/or the
In the event of the pipe-line being cut naval,
military and civil needs would all be seriously affected, especially if the
lay behind the decision to
construct a pipe-line between Suez and Port Said to meet the needs of the
Royal Navy in the Mediterranean.
Essential military and civilian needs
under such conditions would have to be met by road and rail transport
and would throw a serious strain on the system in addition to entailing the
provision of additional rolling stock.
The worst case would be, of course, if the Suez refinery were out of
This would entail the import into Suez and the Red Sea
of oil products in tins and drums at a rate which might be as great as
1,550 tons a day. If the Bagdad-Haifa route could be used and suitable
transport made available, it might be possible to import about 500 tons a
day from Iraq to Palestine,
thus reducing the tonnage of oil to be handled
Before concluding, the needs of Malta,
Cyprus and Tobruk must be
mentioned because they were at that time the only overseas commitments
of the Middle East Command.
Malta required 300 tons a day, Cyprus
These commitments involved both the Royal
and the Army, since the Army was responsible for the provision
and loading of the stores in accordance with the maintenance programme
and the Royal Navy for their delivery.
Later, of course,
of Malta under siege conditions was a major administrative problem both
for the staff at Middle East and at the War Ofice.
181
