No greater tribute can be
paid to their success than the fact that very shortly after their inception
it was necessary for G.H.Q. to issue instructions that formations and units
should be prepared to operate their own traffic control when on the march.
units had been
complete that formations and units were becoming quite content to be
It will be recalled that one of the earliest defence measures taken was
the immediate removal of all signposts and other objects which might indi-
cate the names of towns and villages.
In view of this and in order to
place on record all the main roads which might in the event of invasion
be used for military traffic, it was decided in the autumn of 1940 to produce
command traffic maps with numbered roads, and to erect signs on all these
roads corresponding to the numbers shown on the map.
Roads were shown
on the maps in various colours corresponding to the colour of the signs
Red-Home Forces main essential routes.
Blue Command main essential routes.
Green-Command local essential routes.
Yellow —Civilian (or refugee) routes.
Before 1940 there were very few heavy military
vehicles either on
wheels or on tracks and the question of classifying bridges according to
the maximum loads they could carry did not arise.
Upon the advent of
the heavier tanks and vehicles such as loaded transporters
whole complexion of road movement was altered,
because it became necessary to limit the movement of such heavy vehicles
capable of carrying these heavy loads.
and the Ministry of War Transport jointly undertook the immense task of
reclassifying all bridges in the country, and eventually a bridge classifica-
tion map was introduced.
At the same time bridges began to be distinguished
by the later ubiquitous yellow, numbered discs indicating their classification.
By the beginning of 1942 plans for the control of military road traffic in
Great Britain in the event of invasion had progressed to such an extent that
it was now possible to introduce a further class of traffic, i.e. administrative
In order that the movement of administrative traffic between War
Office and command depots and possible zones of operations might be properly
controlled and co-ordinated, certain routes were specified as being earmarked
for the main volume of this traffic.
to be protected corridors of movement and were
These routes were, as far as possible,
to contain, at or near
defended places, harbouring facilities for unarmoured or lightly armoured
Traffic control units would establish
inter-communication along the routes, and a main route regulating head-
quarters which would be linked to traffic posts.
During the period 1940-1942 very great emphasis was laid on march dis-
cipline in all formations and units of Home Forces.
initiated personally by the Commander-in-Chiet, and notwithstanding the
stated tendency of units to rely too much on traffic control assistance,
is no doubt that the standard of march discipline reached a very high level.
256
1 P
Units commanders were made responsible for the discipline within their units
with a threat of court martial proceedings for any gross neglect, and senior
commanders were encouraged to mount motor cycles in order to supervise
their formations personally while on the move.
The Danger Passes
In this chapter an attempt has been made to describe the major administra-
tive arrangements made for the maintenance of the forces in the United King-
dom during the years 1940-42.
Although these arrangements were made
against the background of possible invasion, it is important to keep the threat
of invasion in its proper perspective in relation to the maintenance policy.
The foremost requirement was, as has been stated, to modify or adapt the
original machinery to enable a large army to be satisfactorily maintained under
It cannot be denied that this object was achieved. It was
a task of the first magnitude and comparable to any administrative project
undertaken during the war.
During 1942 the whole aspect of planning changed from the defensive to
the offensive, and efforts were directed to training and building up the large
drafts of men and equipment for the Middle East and Far East and the
expeditionary forces required first for North Africa and ultimately for our
return to Europe.
It is a matter for satisfaction that the steps taken and plans
prepared in 1940 for the maintenance of Home Forces were fully adequate to
meet the even greater demands that were made on them in these happier cir-
For this reason subsequent chapters do not make any further
mention of maintenance arrangements in the United Kingdom, except where
special circumstances demanded modifications to the normal system.
also be observed that in this section only passing reference is made to the
Anti-Aircraft Command and none at all to the arrival of the U.S. Forces.
These matters, together with a short note on two important committees whose
far-reaching administrative repercussions, are dealt
with in the following sections.
THE HOME THEATRE
SECTION 2.- REORGANIZATION AND DECENTRALIZATION
The preceding section of this chapter has outlined the administrative
arrangements that were made during the years 1940-1942 to ensure the con-
gency
tinuity of the administration of the home army under either normal or emer-
conditions.
It cannot, of course, claim to be exhaustive.
administration at home at anv level hicher than corns or district could not.
be entirely divorced from the civilian departments with their accompanying
formalities, so that under these circumstances it is not really possible to
seas theatre.
compare the system adopted with circumstances ve been employed in an over-
Neither is it possible, as operation " Sealion"
(the German
invasion of England) never massile, as op state whether that aspect of the
plans was basically sound.
It must be borne in mind that they were for-
mulated at a critical hour, when must be boot the Army was at an arifcially
12090
257
