to accepting a preponderance of drafts.
Against 27,300 men arriving with
units in the summer of 1941, 17,000 were received in drafts.
However, one
half of the number arriving in drafts were in fact absorbed by new units
which it was found necessary to form in the Middle East.
A serious shortage of personnel and of administrative units had, therefore,
to be accepted as the inevitable consequence of this policy.
of personnel extended to every arm but the rearward services suffered most,
although in many cases there were insufficient men to make even units in
contact with the enemy up to full establishment.
deficit in personnel, i.e.,
the deficit compared to war establishments plus first
reinforcements, was 16 per cent.
Later the strain on reserves was increased
by the number of complete units received and the deficit was slightly larger.
Nevertheless it was possible to undertake much valuable work in this period,
in the re-organization of the fighting formations.
The armoured formations presented the best example of the extent to
which it was possible to carry out re-equipment and reorganization.
beginning of July only two armoured car regiments and 7 Armoured Division
could be put into the field, and the range and mobility of these were seriously
restricted by the fact that one brigade was equipped with infantry tanks owing
to the shortage of cruisers.
At the end of October there were 7 Armoured
Division, 22 Armoured Brigade, and 1 Army Tank Brigade complete, and
32 Army Tank Brigade complete except for one battalion. It was also
possible to re-equip a third British armoured car regiment and to complete
the equipment of two South African armoured car regiments.
Improvements also took place in the condition of infantry formations.
The intake of non-armoured vehicles was sufficient to allow the replacement
of the transport of 1 South African Division and to bring up to strength
that of 4 Indian Division, all of which had seen much hard service in East
Africa and was unsuited to desert warfare.
It was also possible to fulfil the
requirements of the New Zealand Division whose transport had been lost in
The equipping of 1 (S.A.) Division was particularly remarkable since
the whole process of issuing and delivering 1,300 vehicles from the base to
the desert occupied only six days.
7 Armoured Division, 1 Army Tank
Brigade, and 22 Armoured Brigade were as already mentioned, also brought
up to full establishment in their vehicles during the period.
of a number of divisional and non-divisional troops were
completed, while the losses in Greece were largely replaced.
Thus, by the end of October,
1941, it seemed that the programme of
reorganization and re-equipment had proceeded so satisfactorily that a new
offensive could be opened during November.
This new phase of the operations
in the Desert is described in Section i. As it is not possible to record the
activities of Middle East Command during 1941 in chronological order, it is
now necessary to leave the Desert and to return to the Spring of that year
when the German attack on Crete was launched.
202
WORT
1 P
THE MIDDLE EAST, 1939-1942
SECTION 9.-CRETE
Following closely upon our evacuation of Greece and our reverses in
the Western Desert came a further setback during May, 1941, in the loss
of Crete.
Crete was of importance to our Middle East strategy chiefly because Suda
Bay was a valuable refuelling base for the Royal Navy.
Originally there
was no prospect of the island becoming an air base, but later, the three
airfields, Heraklion, Retimo, and Maleme, were to make it desirable in
German eyes.
There was, also, a possibility of rapidly constructing further
landing grounds and strips south of Heraklion, and the defence of all these
against airborne attack became a vital consideration.
Other vital points
were Suda Bay port and base and certain potential landing beaches, notably
near Retimo and between Canea and Maleme.
British occupied Crete.
In November, 1940, the
itself is about 160 miles long, 40 miles wide and very
There was only one east—west road fit for mechanical transport
and this ran close to the north coast for almost its entire length, linking
Suda Bay, Canea, and Maleme.
Thence to
the south the only tracks which actually reached the shore were from
Heraklion to Tymbaki and from Maleme to Selinos. (See Map 19.)
Suda Bay was the only port which could take an ocean-going
ship
For shipping from Egypt this meant a circuitous route exposed to air attack
in the narrow waters at either end of the island and, unfortunately, Crete
was closer to the German airfields in Greece than to ours in Libya.
Suda
Bay was a very good shallow anchorage, but there was not a single crane
ashore and the value of the one jetty was greatly reduced by its having a
transit shed built in the middle, which restricted the turn-round of lorries.
Retimo on the north coast could take a small coaster and Heraklion could,
and did, take up to a destroyer.
On the south coast there were no ports,
but there were several places where off-loading to beaches, or to rapidly
constructed jetties, could have taken place had these been served by roads
fit for mechanical transport.
In particular, Sphakia was not road served :
the last five miles from the top of the coastal range to the little bay were
traversed by
goat-paths only.
Although it had always been intended to
develop landing places on the south coast there were neither time, sappers
nor equipment to carry this out between 1st May, 1941, when full preparation
for defence was ordered, and the opening of the German offensive on 18th
The original British garrison of one infantry brigade, plus some coast
defence and anti-aircraft troops and small ancillary services, was more or
Direct reinforcements from the Middle East
when the threat to Crete arose consisted of a mobile naval base
defence
organization (M.N.B.D.O.), which had been raised to improve the defence
of Suda Bay during the operations in Greece, and two regular battalions
and some commandos fully equipped but with little transport; the M.N.B.D.O.
was, in fact, the only formation which brought any vehicles at all, except
203
H+ 2
12000
