Division was located at Aroma. Ordnance stores were located at Vutana for
5 Indian Division and Aroma for 4 Indian Division. Medical evacuation was
by rail, ambulance trains for 5 Indian Division staging at Khartoum, Suki
and Gedaref, and being called forward as required to the medical rail-head at
4 Indian Division established their medical rail-head at Aroma
one ambulance carrier and
one ambulance train evacuated
Transport of casualties back to rail-heads was by motor
The inadequacy of rail communications greatly increased the general diffi-
4 Indian Division was in control of all rail movement south of Haiya
communication between Kassala or Aroma and divisional head-
seldom available, control could only be exercised by personal
visits to the R.T.Os. concerned.
Similarly 5 Indian Division controlled all
railway movement forward of Gedaref and developed the El Hagiz area into
what was later generally known as a divisional maintenance area.
transport resources of both divisions were increased by the allotment of
companies for third line duties.
These were manned by coloured
drivers and had been sent overland from South Africa with South African
Orders for the pursuit directed 4 Indian Division first on Sabderat, second
on Wachai, and then to exploit towards Keru up to the limit of administration,
while 5 Indian Division was directed first on Tessenei, second on Aicota and
was subsequently to be prepared to exploit either towards Barentu or Biscia.
The "I" tanks, after detraining at Aroma, were to follow 4 Indian Division.
4 Indian Division reached Kassala on 19th January.
5 Indian Division
crossed the Gash River near Tessenei and occupied Aicota on 21st January.
Kassala was found to be very little damaged, most fortunately.
water tanks were destroyed and some rails had been removed, but signal cables
Work on the railways was able to begin immediately
to such good effect that the first train was able to enter Kassala on 25th
The first check on 4 Indian Division's progress was in the defile at Keru,
through which they were not able to pass until 23rd January.
been very badly damaged and many mines sown and, indeed, the whole route
Little more than a track at best, it had to cross several khors
and constant work was needed to keep it passable.
The fact that the brigade
returning from 5 Indian Division was still moving up the L. of C. added further
difficulties and increased the traffic congestion.
On the other hand, 5 Indian
Division, once past Tessenei, was on the main strada which ran via Barentu
and Agordat to Asmara, and thence down to the sea at Massawa.
"strada" was a well-made motor road capable of taking two lines of traffic
and, though not tarmac, it had a good surface.
opened Malawiya, from which the railway was
5 Indian Division had now
later to be extended to
Tessenei as a rail-head and was in the process of establishing installations
divisions were rendering mutual assistance to each other, the
their two parallel axes facilitating this.
5 Indian Division lent
transport to 4 Indian Division to carry troops to Agordat, and it was generally
possible for one division to outflank a centre of resistance opposing the other.
130
WO2T7
5 Indian Division cut the Barentu— Agordat road and was closing in on
Barentu from the west. 4 Indian Division moved rapidly on to Agordat and,
by evening of 25th January, the town could be seen. Biscia was the terminus
of the Italian narrow gauge railway, and the road from Biscia to Agordat
was an improvement on anything 4 Indian Division had encountered as yet.
Agordat became ours after stiff fighting, in which the "I" tanks played
a valuable part, on Ist February, and in it was found much war material,
although many of the enemy were able to get away, some even by rail.
now, 4 Indian Division's signal communications were acutely stretched.
Indian Division made slower progress, but during the night 1/2nd February
the enemy evacuated Barentu and it was occupied the next morning. Imme-
diate pursuit was ordered and the enemy suffered heavy casualties, little
more than a disorganized rabble escaping.
During the pursuit, the enemy at Gallabat had been contained.
was ther proceeding on an extension of the railway from Gedaref towards
Gallabat, in case the main thrust should be made on this line. On 25th
January, however, the success of the advance on Asmara caused orders to be
issued for work on this extension to cease and for top priority to be given
to extend the railway from Kassala to Tessenei. In actual fact the spur
ran off from Malawiya a little south of Kassala.
By lst February it was quite clear that the enemy was making a general
withdrawal, though his retirement was now a great deal more leisurely than
earlier and he made full
Contact was, however, now being
made with the Abyssinian patriot forces, and the steady progress continued.
THE DRIVE ON KEREN
By evening of 2nd February, "Gazelle" force of 4 Indian Division with
six "I" tanks, and one Indian infantry brigade were only five miles from
For the last few miles before Keren itself the road runs through a
narrow valley (" Happy Valley") bounded on the left by an escarpment and
on the right by a great spur.
This was to be the scene of the battle of
Keren and nowhere were the enemy O.Ps. less than 500 ft. above the valley
often they were 2,000 feet up and throughout the hours of daylight no
movement of man, beast, or vehicle unseen from the enemy view points was
The valley itself was of sand and gravel, with sparse scrub and occasional
"tebeldi" trees which afforded some slight cover from direct observation.
It varied in width from half-a-mile to a mile-and-half. The road runs along
the south side until opposite Mt. Dologorodoc where it turns sharply north
over a bridge, and, after climbing the lower slopes of this hill, enters the
Dongolaas Gorge.
Up this narrow slit in the hills, nowhere more than
300 yards wide, the road climbs to the higher level of the plain of Keren.
The railway from Agordat to Keren runs along the north side of the valley
and by the time it reaches Dongolaas Gorge climbs a third of the way up
the lower slopes of Mt. Sanchil.
To one standing in the valley the railway
appears high up clinging to the hillsides above him.
This railway was to be
a valuable administrative asset later on.
131
E• 2
12090
