to destroy stores that might have been of value to the enemy.
Ships were sunk
at their moorings.
The whole city went up in flames—-and the last communi-
cation with China was cut.
Some time before the evacuation, a thousand
" lend-lease
" trucks for China, which would have been of inestimable value
to Burmarmy, were fired by U.S. officers without reference to Army head-
quarters.
The loss of Rangoon was obviously disastrous to the administrative
services since it was the only port of entry to Burma through which personnel
and supplies could be moved in large numbers.
Furthermore, Burmarmy was
now fighting facing its former base and with no L. of C.
In the absence of an
M.T. road to India it was virtually cut off from outside assistance and could
be supplied only with the very limited numbers of personnel and small
quantities of stores which it might be possible to bring in by air.
The majority of base and L. of C. installations and reserves, such as they
were, had already been moved north of Rangoon, but the civilian heavy
repair installations which could not be moved were lost altogether, and the
maintenance of vehicles and equipment now became a matter of great
difficulty.
The destruction of the refineries very much reduced the supply of
petrol and the forces were now dependent on such spirit as could be produced
by the improvised methods in the oilfields to which reference has already
been made.
Turning to the other side of the picture, the fall of Rangoon transferred
to the Japanese all the advantages in communications which the Allies had
lost.
Instead of having to supply their armies by difficult mountain roads,
they would soon be able, after repairing the port, to move very large forces
by sea to Burma.
fore to impose the maximum delay on the enemy, and make him expend
resources which he might have employed elsewhere, e.g., in the direct invasion
of India.
Re-grouping
The withdrawal from Rangoon was not made without difficulty. The road
to Pegu was still cut and the force there was still contained in the area, but on
7th March, aided by the maximum effort of 7 Armoured Brigade, it fought
its way out with considerable loss of transport. On the same day the troops
leaving Rangoon, including army headquarters and administrative units, ran
into an enemy road block at Taukkyan which their successive attacks failed
to dislodge.
The block was eventually cleared on 9th March and the move
back continued without further delays.
A period of comparative quiet now followed while the enemy again rested
and refitted and set to work exploiting his capture of Rangoon.
Division was reforming in the area Letpadan-
-Tharrawaddy where they were
to be joined by 1 Burma Division after being relieved at Toungoo by the
Chinese Sixth Army.
This concentration of the Imperial Forces rendered even more urgent the
formation of a corps headquarters, especially as the increasing Chinese armies
came under the command of Burmarmy on arrival in Burma, and so, on
19th March, 1 Burma Corps (Burmarmy on arrival in Burme command of
Lieutenant-General Slim.
324
WORT
The Chinese Expeditionary Force
Incidentally, although the Chinese armies came under the nominal com-
mand of General
Alexander they were actually commanded by the U.S.
General Stilwell, who was also Chiang Kai-Shek's chief of Staff. Originally
commanding a small mission which, it was believed, was to train Chinese
troops in the use of U.S. war equipment, General Stilwell was soon in as
peculiar a position as any general was ever placed. He had the following
official duties: —
(a) Chief of staff to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-Shek.
(b) Commander-in-chief of the Chinese Armies serving under General
Alexander in Burma.
(c) Commander-in-chief of all American armed forces in China, India
and Burma.
(d) In charge of all " lend-lease " material for China.
He was responsible under (a) to the Generalissimo, under (b) to General
Alexander, under (c) to the U.S. War Department, and under (d) to the
President.
more of his superiors he could always clarify the situation by writing a
minute to himself!) The presence of an American commander in a British
theatre at the head of Chinese troops was nevertheless a further complica-
tion in an already complicated situation.
As during the end of March the Generalissimo seems to have expressed
to General Alexander his satisfaction at the administrative arrangements
made for the increasing Chinese Expeditionary Force (C.E.F.) it may be
appropriate at this stage to digress from the campaign proper and describe
the maintenance system followed for the Chinese forces.
It will be recalled that Burmarmy assumed administrative responsibility
for Chinese troops upon entry into Burma.
This commitment grew from
the simple problem of providing a total of about 700 tons of rice at road-
head at Kengtung into setting up a very large and complicated supply
organization for which no machinery existed.
The Chinese had no supply
organization of their own and, what was more important, they had no trans-
port organization.
In these circumstances, the only answer was to form
dumps as follows:
MANDALAY (Main Reserves)
MEIKTILA
KYAUKSE
(Reserves for
Vth Army)
Reserves for
VIth Army)
TAUNGGYI
1 month's
tps. in area
LOILEM
I month's
tos. in area
KENGTUNG
PYAWBWE
month's reserves
for tps. in area
PYINMANA
(Main Provision Area)
325
Road communications.
Rail communications.
Dimo.
