Return by (22/11/21
O 171/625
29011
—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
nd to provide data upon
hich to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
NoTt.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he
details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 9.1
reparing a chary
ity so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued.
(i) Daily locations
sents de the ot tenty-fos horad present dispositions.
TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
\ Detailed account of operation:
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
perations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
f mobilisation or
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
rdinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks of
ffcers and the number
of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice. At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
is representatives.
Nar diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
he war aldry.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reterence.
(ini) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
in the text of the alary bald.
Sketches omn delay (p the to, *
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
o appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
, the first dav of the succe
nonth direct to the officer i/c 2nd
or transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
the SpENd the time entered secold be the time the storm it the tor e
Till
CHATTE
mode
Those i
That a 25 a
ro : 0.0.
Subject : A
Instructions regarding War Diaries and Intelligence
WAD NIADY
WAR DIARY
Army Form C. 2118.
Army Form G. 2118.
Linit.
27 ARAD BDE ORD FD PK.
Month and Year...
DECEMBER 1944•
Place
Date
Hour
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Commanding Officer MAJOR E.G. MATHIS.
References to Appendices
FIELD.
10
In response to a request from 0.C. 17 Vehicle Coy for A. Vehicle
equipment to be held by A.F.V. Servicing Unit as a pool, certain
quantities have been issued.
Commander 2 A.R.G. asked for availability Report on certain stores
that were in constant demand, he required this information for a
discussion with Ministry of supply Officials. ++++++++++
All AF 2626 completed and forwarded in respect of all personnel wishing
to avail themselves of this entitlement. 60% of Unit availed themselves.
P.R.I. of Unit arranged with NAAFT/ENI for the supply of Christmas.
fare for persomel of this Unit. w
Application received from Pte. Holley. T. 14273842 for permission to
marry a Belgian National. This is being dealt with under orders laid
down by 21 Army Group Standing Orders.
Posting Order received Prom A.D.O.S. 2 A.R.G. crossposting Lieut. Ker
of this HQ with Lieut, EH. Butler of Ord Stores Section "p" San 25.
+++++++ Appax "A"
**++++++ Appax "A"
WAR DIARIES SECTION
No.
1 8. FEB 1945.
G. H.Q, 2md" Echelan
2GHQPP/1095/125m.
