Return by (22/11/2025 1
WO 171/625
INSTRUCTIONS FOR GOMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(1V) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences. tactors atectino
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
and the number or other ranks or rollowers and or animais should de noted.
In addition in the case of units on the l. or . changes in stores, transport, etc
(ji) Unit commanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.-Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
occur. or come to nouce
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
NoTE A. -In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
(i) A copy of
each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009)
dhu o1 each operation oI
der or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
the war diary.
NOTE C.—Any
question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a
(ii) Copies
of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or sub-unit will be refer
through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.-A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide adid up
which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration
entere
each entry initialled by
the othcer detailed to keep it. of
It is to
noted that the
1 retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NorE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
(111) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up bv a subordinate formatior
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto
operation luchi an in ketches the delay (ate to, to supplemepthe ac
operations furnishe in tay a brit the chipy parad in maing the apper.
References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II)
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
De forwarued on the last day Ol lue stocceans mont treet to the oncer 1/c na Lcheloi
or trashusson to tie val Vuice, late bells lanch lual dil Ils dopenuices are allached
PARA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued
and decisions taken.
(ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
for transmission
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to record ofices at home for safe custody.
SPECIAL NOTE.-
-The time entered should be the time the information or orde
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if known
(in) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
WAR DIARY
Armv Form C. 2118.
Unit 27 ARMA. BOE DRO FLO. PiR
Army Form C. 2118.
Commanding Officer MAToR. M.F BARMARO..
Place
Month and Year
Date
houl
June 1944
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required)
Summary of Events and Information
References to Appendices
Petworth
1210
Normal duties of binning stores contimed.
Received warning order to move in 2 Seets.
No 1 Seot List Index No. 3555
14 vehs 24 personnel,
Nor 2 Sect., LIst Index No. 3471 39 Vehs 69 personnel.
A. 1 Marshalling Camp.
Pinal preparations for move commenced.
7. 2118
1210
1420
1600
1600
1705
Order gave incorrect details
Advance Party of 1 veh and 3 personnel moved to A. l Marshalling Camp.
VA" Echelon to A. 1 Marshall the
Camp.
en-route but rejoined
1930
2015
Main body arrived A. 1 Marshalling Camp.
remain with vehs in their standings.
All other personnel stationed
in the Camp.
TARIES SECTION
and Écholen
A. 1 Marsh.
TRowlands
Castle)
0800
0800
1000
tore at instructions
enced under RIME supervision
h REM
oncernier waterproofing of smal
detaipro is our five ba contonte continued by storeen and равзелотя.
Nominal roll of unit submitted to 2nd Echelon.
GS
Load transferred and waterproofing
1200
1400
checked.
state one to ten allowed to rest as much as possible,
erproofine
of vehs completed.
visits to Camp cinema and games arranged.
51-1541)
• 1U/3. 319м, 2/43. Wy.L.P. Gp.656
are being de water regent
ora lorry necessitates removal
at.
urgent move:
