Return by (22/11/2025 11:16:21)
WO 171/625
F.s.K., Vol. 1, Sec. 174
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
creation
.. A wal
diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation o
- particular command or appointment br
1) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
- died or sub-area of the L. of C
ii) Unit commanders
(ii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Offord/s GH.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 38), and
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives
formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first da
NOTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vii) Meteorological notes
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice
) - ente should be entered up, not in the order given boy, but e ho time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
tou time diary.
W.3008 and A.F. W.30
nstruction issued during the period covered by tof cuch operatine o
(* Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands it no longer required
and to
organisation and administration
on de a tear vich, to bade object is to trich a litera record pupatione,
al reencouraged to include in the war diaries o
be of benefit for short-teme te
ater for the History of the ear.
research in the Army, as well as material likely era biod which
a car diary tis to be noted the becar stion a nd re
officer detailed to keep it,
xtraction and retention of appendices, maps, et
or other person should be
made clear that the officer who initial. at
r person mentioned in para. 1, not the oficer he details to do the cies is the commander
TARA. 3.-Omittea
preparing diaty so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(1) Ind detaitos tars, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
March cate
Cables in the care on ta furing the of forenty
ours and present dispositions,
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the stafl.
ISco FR, Vol diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, ete
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES)
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :
arded on thered, the original copy of a
are attaclon for transmi
ting month, i for the preeting i ch
ii) The du
day to the War Olie, care being taken that all its appendic
rwarded withopy, clear
n to the Under Secretan
nd Echelon to be trin s
the unit conce NOT E
En The time need should be the time the information er order reach
9E
May 1944
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Unit 24 fund Ord Fd Re
commanding Office
Army Form C. 2118
RAOL
Petworth
Loading Looating and Posting of initial 0.F.P. Sealing continues.
260039 / 112/0/1641/a Post & to 2 Centre R. A0.0.
[WAR DIARIES SECTIOI
G. HQ. 2nd
halked
10/0
xperience of Field Parks. Inspector said he
50% Personnel Medically Examined. Standard very high.
Remainder of Personnel Medically Examined. Standard the same.
nference of all Technical and Q Staff of B
0.0. outlined
on 0. F.P. Procedure.
ties of O.C. O.F.P. and B.0.0. Also explain
method of demanding all types of stores.
96: 68 91 0002/20/60
2ZE/121 OM
E6228E
