WO 171/625
14628011
Return by (22/11/2025 11:16:21)
NoTE C.—Any question of doubt whether of not a war diary should be kept by a unit
unit will be referred,
through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Office, London, S.W. 1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
A.F. C.2118.
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
of mobilisation or
ordinate command
perations, topograpnical anu cumatie.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affeeting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE -
-Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
is representatives.
var diaries will be
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war aldly.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
i A copy of each many se or report on operations dravi, to by sentinate formation
• mans relating thereto, to subplement une account O1
r unit, including any sk
operations turnsieu 1u
the text of the diary (para
Aovenaices will De
brief descriptive heading naming the autor. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc
(See PAs.A., Volume In
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month w
seedino month direct to the oncer 1/c znd ecuen
•are being taken that all its appendices are attached.
r transmission to the War
PaRA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4. —In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
reparing a diary :—
Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issue
decisions can
i hate locations the
to emote the not toenty fourhours and present dispositions
iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each bran
The time co teed should be too time thc i
hon th
PLACE.
FIEL
Place
PLAID.
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Month and Year NOVaCOR 194%.
Date
(Erase heading not required)
Summary of Events and Information
Instructed to collect 30 Ram A.P.C. Kits fron 15 Veh Coy for Tanks which -re
nt present in /Shops but will be required by newly formed Carrier Regt on
4 Nov. These were collected and offloaded in this location for checking by
Regt Tech Storenen. It has been suggsted by ADOS that deficiencies of kit
will be made up from kits taken from C.D.L. Tonks ex l Tank 3de but these
re still at Carpiquet ,France.
H.Q. 30 Corps Ord Fa Pk want 500 batteries of the type used in American
Swan Necked Torches. The Officer did not low for what purpose. Could not
supply them since existing stock is held for issue with Torches in lieu of
Lamps Hellesen which are not availble.
Procedure for Issue and Receipt of Veh Tools and Equipt prepared and issued
to Army and Corps Sqns - see Appdx +++++
Advance copy of issue voucher for stores received from l4 1.0,D. The address
for stores has been changed to OFF/IZ. This question of address for stores
is ridiculous. All demands for stores are clearly marked c/o ADOS 2 1. RAG.
M3524/1218 1200M 10/11 H.B. & Co.Ltd. 51-1591)
Crum C 2118.
Army Form C. 2118.
Unit 27 Ard Bde Ord I Pk.
Commanding Officer Major 1.F. Baranza.
References to A dices
WAR DIARIES SECTION
20DLU1344
She 2nd Echelon
#tattt Apode "A"
austy weapons past tense for talk stores of which a stock
Is already held in detail in Bined Lorries.
Outside shed now clered of rubbish and stacking of stores commenced. Roof is
being reprired.
