,81 S
УЯАММИЙ ЗРИЗОНІЗТИЇ
noissanolal bas 2tuova to rommu?
A VIETNE SO E MOCRA
oteb tend tow tint aint to 10
CUTO DOC ETENS
- CoULD -
Appendix "A"' To War Diory July 44
Beplenishment of Stock
on 4 July 44 replenishment of OFP Stock will
16(a) Following AOD conference
omence immediately but the following procedure will be adopted until further
notice.
(b) М.I. эрагоз
P.A.F. will be decreased to 50% of the
authorised stock.
The quantity to be demanded for
replenishment of stock will be 1/3 of the
P.A.F. e.g•
Authorised Sto ok
- 24
Qty to be demanded - 4
(c) Lechnical spares
of 173. 112 bo as in (b) but aty to bo demandod will be 1/2 instead
Method of Demanding
Demands in duplicate will be smitted immediately to the appropriate
Sub pepot of the AlD and thereafter as required.
ii. Demands will be on A.F.G. 975 for replenishment of stock.
l'he tpe of veh will be shown against each item or where all items
on one demand are for the same veh or ept this need only be shown
ince on the demand,
it1. Where the tpe of veh or eapt is not known or where the part may be
commen to more than one, give all tpes of vehs or eapt
held by this
iv. Demands will be taken th the AOD by a clerk who will accept the
assistance of the AOD in showing the BMP Case No. against the items
kadead required.
V. The final demand submitted to AOD for tissue will be in accordance with
the examples shown in Appax "A" to this instruction.
When the clerk
locates each item at the
held in BMP, the indent
or the items will be enfaced
ADD and finds that some are not
"Not In BAP"
These items will be extracted by the Al and passed to Home Depot for Issan
2 Unit Normal Demands
(a) Normal demonds from units on which certain items are NA at Ord Fd Fl
will be passed to, ACD for issue in accordance with following procedure.
11. In the case of lakers Parts the tpo of veh must ber
The indents must be completed correctly in every respect
the part is
In the case of cormonality parts the tpe
shown
of vehs
read will be shown.
or eats will
one BIP or another.
where this is not possible,
of veh or eat for which
3. VOR Demands
be shown to ensure the issue of spares from either
several tps
of trying OBD and other Ord fmns inc Bde W/Shops Stores Sections.
VOR demands from units will be dealt with in accordance with present system
If not available at any of these
4. Major Assemblios & IVres
demanded
Demands will be made on AOD. Each assy or tyre and/or tube will be
on a separate indent,.
instructed.
spairable assys and tyres will be returned to STSD, A0D as already
WO 171/625
14628011
Return by (22/11/2025 11:16:21)
