APPENDIX
P.A.D. ORDERS.
nodi don 1
Coa don one toy, doido to) to ofdefinve don
Demolition And
following sections: -
(a) Four min Sections.
(o) ome e sootion.
Personnel will be detriled as per Appdx "A" to these Orders.
2. P.4.D. points will be established as in Appdx B. Equipment installed
at these points will not be used for ny unauthorised purpose and
severe disciplinary nation will be taken against any person found
disobeying this order.
3. A 15 owt truck will be standing by at all times for the purpose of
evacuating onsulties. It will contain the following equipment : -
1) 3 Stretchers rolled,plnced inside the Vehiole.
First Aid Kit.
Water Jerrican (full) To be changed anily by driver.
(a) 6 Bionikets.
The driver and co-driver will be detailed
The truck will be filled with Anti-Freeze compound. The driver will
start the engine and run for the minimun period of two minutes every
four hours during the working day.
4. The Orderly Room Corporal will make following report imnedirtely to
H.Q. 2 A.R.G. in the event of a serious incident : -
. Tho nipote aiutano of ho giridont.
C. Request 1.R.G. to call Local Pire Brigade to stand to
if there is danger of a serious fire.
This report will nor lly be made by tolephone but if the lines are
down a DoRe or runner will be detriled from the Reserve Party. Any
man detailed for this duty will make every offort to reach H.Q.
moiderea aerota ot
trombonico
Беконо в Ото рово пово на покроки об 19.
oritros sou tert Inidmoneo na da dad ebroneb frontalme fcon muor no
Dre aol..
Idono friw Hid? Deviooos aod ovra asine! eil doddy nost unord
ord ban scorte
20200 11 eroidood aerodl od beaced od triw ebrerob obord do noidoneidee re
«enDe ai beviedor ose oborti morta ofnde of totel orld cimpo od hollion o
edroneries ano ot cafosub
ed od bance on doirty dist do enodi sua
noidere lead tue of noidood deiw Do
001:100
OT cing od bonsidos od trio
Irmediately this has been done it will be recorded on the
special medioal form (a supply of which will be kept in each First Aid
Box) stating : -
2. Time morphir administered.
b. Dosage i.e, number of tablets or capsule injections.
the information on the cara to the notice of a compotent medical
authority 1.0. Medioni Officer R. 1.M.C. Mursing Orderly - but not to
a casual stretcher bearer.
an officer or the S. Q.M.S.
tmpped under more than one building
incident surficiently enough for
over by Set. Nowillinm.
replroed by Set. lynch whose section will be taken
16:21)
