Appendix "C" Io Var Diary July 41
BDE ORD ED PK ADM ORDER NO. 4_
Bde Ora Fa Pk is now responsible for issue of e1] Vote 9 Stores,
except Amn & Line Stores.
TOOLS & EQUIPMENT Vote 2
will be received from Units for replacement Tools & Fapt.
They will be passed to I/Cpl Harrison,
se demands will be received either as normal or VOR. They will be treated
as follows :-
(a) NORMAL Will be passed tp ACD for issue in the normal manner
after demands have been registered and controlled.
(b) V.O.R.
These d mands will be checked with the Battleworthy Scale:
to ensure that
only those items appear which prevent
the Tank from being Battleworthy. Demands will then be
checked with BMP location indices, and BIP case Nos
will be shown against each item
Where the item does not appear in the BMP this will be
indicated by writing "Not
in BMP"
against the item.
These demands will then be passed to O.C. or 2 i/c
who will forward them to D.D.O.S. 1 Corps for stamping
available items will be made.
val a to 17 to a 0 taken to 00 oh a 12000 11 11
be passed to Home Depot for issue.
(c) "Mixed" Demands for Too & & Eapt.
When Indents are received for Tools & Eapt and it is
found there are demands for Battleworthy Scale
Complete
mate out dor the battle worthy items and procedure
fresh indents will
as in 2 (bt will apply.
These items will be crossed off the original indent
which will be dealt with as in 2 (a)
3. WHITE HOT AND RED HOT DEMANDS
A separate file will be maintained for White Hot and Red Hot demands and a
record held of the date and time when demands
stores are received in satisfaction
of these demands.
are passed to AOD and when
DEMANDS FOR ARMAMENTS & SMALI, ARMS
All demands after control and registration will be passed to L/(pl Harrison
will be responsible for issue of these items.
Itema demanded under See IVI/USA will be cross checked and referenced with
British Equivalents to ensure issue where possible.
Demends passed to AOD for issue of items not available in Ord Fa Pk will
show the British Egiv where applicable.
WO 171/625
14628011
Return by (22/11/2025 11:16:21)
1682
