APPENDIN
Toll varr
+ N*
х5491 ++++
iervicing
y. Issues
Situation a little ensier and permission from 2 A.R.G to revert to
normal guards and picquets owing to this Unit's small number of
98
or
prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year. DECFACBER... 19440
Place
Date
InO H
FIELD.
25
main body at 0400 hrs but to sleep fully clothed, Double guards in
operation were continued and LoM.G- posts were manned,
Warning order still in force and all defences fully manned and prepared
for any incident.
Maming of defences still in operation owing to no change in.
general situation. Issues and Receipts or Ordnance Stores proceeds
normally
Situation unchanged, this causing Christmas celebrations arrangements.
to be curtailed to a large extent from the mens point of view this was
largely offset by the Draw for Privilege Leave to the U.K.
Army Form G. 2118.
Para. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should
tant orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued.
aa301S 241 10 460 +
YAIO RAW
ГОЛ ЯОТАМ тоПО заібавато
(borsuper for pribine stobal)
noitsarotal bas atnevil to YIemmua
Mant dua bio inT ear to lennonreg to araint alse serit to noteriono
lennoered saedt gridioeds ot welv a diw to beirus gried gaininit ent
trendaridated tell beeogong wett ai
BorOt? ErD D0 od boretent pH ailt to signerte and no bion eno tigta
TOO Betata beanS oll to tenalIdetel tal then besogeng ent rebau
.0.0.л,9
To anticidiaog guorte of gRivo .D.R.A S OH U benebro ot breta Laranos
noiterego ount yoteibermi dug
BeY dOAtte ONCOdILA JAlt D.I.AS EH nOT? bevieDer egrazen ess DE.LO tA
tue, egoost tastedmos as beyolane ed ot ton sew tint aint amigoleves
bluore asrot? bus noitebol tir bretes blow ti tact beviener enew erabso
mob brate of bezebro eaw tinU bas sets tint ai bebnel vene emodate onl
tial sidt to brommoo boneas bue vtub zo? betroger evertello a soon
•JoU eint to stagenta 210 dourte breed AM Totell eteS airt no
Part BooD fas noidosa gerate oli o nort bewrooen trongf
eI
