pg_0003.pdf:
PILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
NOTE A.—In the case of formatio
kept from the first day of embodimen
NOTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of
NOTE C.—Any question of doubt
or sub-unit will be referred, through th
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
and to provide data upon which to !
organisation and administration.
To effect this commanders of all
their formations or units any ideas, of
in regard to weapons, equipment, ta
may be of benefit for short-term resear
later for the History of the War.
A war diary will be entered up da
on A.F. C. 2118.
It is to be noted th
from a war diary is an offence under
NoTE.—It should be made clear
or other person mentioned in para. 1,
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are
preparing a diary :-
(i) Important orders, instructio,
and decisions taken.
(ii)
Daily locations.
Movements
March tables in the case of l
(iii) Important matters relating t
01029
eache
known
Instructions regarding War Diaries and Intelligence
Summaries are contained in F.S. Regs.,
Vol. I.
and the Staff Manual respectively.
Title pages
will be prepared in manuscript.
Month and YearJune
1944.
WAR DIARY
or
INTEMIGENCE SUMMARY.
(Erase heading not required).
ORIGINAL
SHEET 2
6th Bn. The
Uninteam
Creen
•Нонеждя
Lt-Col#
Commanding Officerlasti
Army Fo
References to App
this time, the Coys BHQ and the mjority of Support Coy were
firly established ashore and proceeding as fast as possible to the Bn re-
organising area in the area of Ft 52. (Mp Her 04 850)
The eneny were falling back quickly,
but many snipers were left behind hidd-
en in the houses,woods and hedgerous to delay our advance, IN's were plenti-
ful and these the Bn sent straight back to the beach.
By mid-day, the En had reported to Be the successful completion of Phase I
and were fast pushing on to the area of CRAPON. (Map Rel 900 83 5
Although strong eneny reistence was reported West of CRIPAN, the En proceed-
ed to advance along the in axis and the 00.
fud with the Coys, informed them
that any resistance encountered was to be by-passed unless absolutely un-
a house near CRIPON at 903845, a party of Germans were called upon by A Coy
to surrender. They refused
but when treated to a substantial dose of Bren
they came out under cover of a white flag.
the Bn were well South of CRITON and approaching VILLERS le SEC
(9980). BHQ passed through CREPON at 1530 hrs
which had previasly been report-
ed clear of the enery by 5BYR at 1510 his. The successful conletion of
Phase II was passed to Be at 1520 hrs.
Bde reported that pprox 100 enemy tanks and much MET were on the move West
of CAN. Meanwhile,
the RAF continued to bomb and strafe the eneny on all
sectors of the beachead. Although enery tanks were reported advancing NE from
the Bn continued its advance towards St,GABRIEL which was being
heavily shelled by the enemy.
The eneny armour moving from FUCQUEVIILE was reported to have reached BRECY,
and by 1900hrs 86 Id Rogt RA reported much enemy movement in the area of St
GABRIEL. At 1950 hrs the Brigadier ordered the Bn to halt its advance towards
St. GABRIEl as the enemy inf and atk opposition in front was too much. At
2030 hrs the En continued its advace
and at 2100hrs proceeded to occupy an
area West of St-G BRIll under cover of a heavy barrage laid down by 86 Fd Regt RA
17140
51-7171
.../2

