10 41610060
260
ASSAULT DIVISION
" The softening-up of Habenhausen
had been complete, and
those of the enemy who had not made off were only too glad
to give up without a fight... By 6 that evening it was all over,
and a few locals, headed by the village policeman, were filling
in bomb-craters
and working
the supervision of the
Pioneer Officer." The Germans who did not stay for the Norfolk'
barrage made for the great modern barracks that stood farther
back in the town amongst 9 Brigade's objectives. They intrude
unpleasantly in the story of g Brigade, of the K.O.S.B.s in
9 brigade's attack was in some respects similar to 185's. The
leading battalion, the Ulster Rifles, had most of the fighting
subsequent advance into the city in daylight on the 25th was
brisk and not seriously opposed, although that day and the 2oth
brought one or two nasty situations.
But, altogether, the fighting
bore out the general appreciation that the main battle of Bremen
would be fought outside the city.
Like the K.S.L.I., the Ulster Rifles went first: like the
Warwicks, they had to go in Buffaloes over 2,000 yards of water
into the attack. They would move at midnight, capture Katten-
turm, and seize the road bridge that they knew to be already
prepared for demolition.
The 4th Royal Tanks, who had helped
to drive the Highland Division across the Rhine and the Canadians
across the Ijssel, reckoned that this was technically their most
difficult task, as it was the longest.
One of the obstacles they
had to navigate was a dummy airfield that had been
bombed
Ny the M.A.f. and was cratered accordingly. Another snag was
likely to be the cattle-fencing : in normal times this was pasture
land
and there was abundant wire to get caught up
sufaloes driving sprockets. but amongst all the « pepper" that
was being scattered across the sky from the now quite regular
Middiesex and Ack-Ack pepperpot, a single Bofors of gand Light
ACk-Ack Regiment migrag senseen to be firing a three-round
burst of tracer every minute, an invaluable navigational aid !
writes.
" At last the word was passed down the line,"
Ken Bradshaw
"Everybody clambered aboard, and a great roar rose
up as forty-seven Buffaloes sprang into life.
Just as the convoy
was moving, off the Brigade Commander, with a clutch of press
reporters, arrived and wished the Battalion good luck."
BREMEN AND GERMAN SURRENDER
261
barrage played crescendo to muffle the Buffalo bellow.
mysterious tracers sailed
periodically,
and " seemed so
endently fired for a purpose that we thought the Boches might
tumble to it, until we realised that the trace was in the base of
the round... The moonlight was so vivid, so luminous, that the
ihouettes of these monstrous amphibians could be seen at seven
hundred yards distance
... One could not help thinking
H. G. Wells ... The Ulster Rifles were full of admiration for
the 4th Royal Tanks. Not a Bufalo was either lost or permanently
they touched
com exactly afte a igned yardo kin the sid - the bend in
the bank of the Ochtum which the leading company (G) were
to take and consolidate.
This was done promptly, though the company came under
small-arms and bazooka
fire when
they
were still fifty yards
trom the shore. They rushed from their Buffaloes as soon as they
landed, and found German gunners just bringing into action
two Flak guns.
The gunners were dealt with and the
turned and fired into Arsten, the Warwicks' objective, until the
ammunition ran out. The bank was defended stubbornly against
A Company, who cleared the rest of it.
Opposition was based
principally on a large house set about twenty yards back from the
Lieutenant Songest's platoon settled this, though he and
several N.C.O.s and men were hit.
The position was eventually
carried by a very gallant rush by a section under
Corporal
Lambourn, who was awarded the M.M. for his great courage.
There
were
other
manifestations of this spirit
Major
Tighe-Wood's company
were
done,
and when
D Company
passed through, their advance was not opposed.
Through them
B Company dashed for the great prize: the Kattenturm bridge.
The leading
section,
under Corporal Holt, rushed the first
position
and eliminated it.
commander,
had been ordered by Major Cummins to
McCranor, the leading ply-pons
any opposition that was not serious enough to detain him.
he was able to do when resisted at the cross-roads near the bridge :
they " slipped round the enemy and seized the
bridge before it
could be blown." Then " the enemy at the cross-roads and along
the bund were liquidated at leisure.
Altogether,
four
officers,
twenty or thirty other ranks and one camp follower were found
