ASSAULT DIVISION
the rest of his Company, made a very skilful reconnaissance
under fire, and led a successful attack. For this he won the M.C,
and Sergeant Gillett, who led a charge into the house, won the
Nine Germans were killed and the tenth taken prisoner.
Meerlo had a few houses on either side of another Molen Beek-
this time the Groote Molen Beek.
The beek, running south-north,
also divided the village of Wanssum in two before entering the
flooded Maas ; and running as it did directly across 185 Brigades
front, it had been given to them as the limit of their advance.
Just here the inter-divisional boundary was
A glance at the map facing p. 147 shows the Maas flowing up
from the south-east and a wedge of land between its left bank
and the right bank of the beek. Towards the tip of this wedge was
Wanssum wood, the scene of a later exasperating episode.
the side of the wedge that flanked the Maas stood the village of
bitterswak. for te moment it is suthcient to notice that the
mer-bivisional pounuary was so arrangea that unis weage a
tront of 185 Brigade was left to be cleared by the I5th (Scottis)
Division sweeping up from the south.
That day, as the K.S.L. Iheoccupied the part of Meerlo that
lay west of the beek, D Company of the Norfolks patrolled to the
western half of Wanssum village, dealing with the slight opposition
they encountered. On the left of the Norfolks, the Suffolks had
closed right up to the river and found, with one notable exception,
their area clear.
winter months, was at this point critical.
The civilian problem, difficult throughout the
In the fairly quiet
northern sector, where the 2nd Royals had taken over from the
Household Cavalry, civilians were flocking back
belongings and their cipamor live in the line rather than in
crowded areas farther back.
They appeared to think that,
non-combatants, they were immune from bullets and shells and
they yue talled to understand that they could not be
allowed to wander backwards and forwards to the verv brink O
infiltration.
the river if there was to be any sort of security against German
In fact here it was now reckoned harder to ward
off civilian infiltrations from the rear than German patrols from
the front.
river the situation was pathetic.
In the southern sector as the Division closed to the
The Germans had taken many
of the inhabitants of Overloon and Venraij back across the Maas
WINTER: THE MAAS RIVER LINE
187
with them to dig defence works.
Several escaped and were
In addition there were refugees from the river-
ime and others who had been deported from Northern Holland.
The scene in the slush and pouring rain was unbearable. Within
twenty-four hours of the
advance from Venraij hundreds of
exnausted civilians had arrived in the Monastery of St. Servatius.
From there the R.A.S.C. Companies
transported them back
iventy miles ne so to a dispersal point where a civilian organisation
One of the dispossessed was the Baron Weichs de Wennee,
Chamberlain of Queen Wilhelmina.
He reported to the Suffolks
that the Castle on the river-bank close to the village of Geisteren,
a summer residence of the Queen, was now occupied by some
sixty German officer cadets.-
Colonel Goodwin, now recovered
trom his Normandy wound and back in command of the Suffolks,
decided to storm the Kasteel (as it was generally called) the next
day, after it had been
"prepared"
by Typhoons and the
Divisional Artillery. That night a patrol approaching the castle
tom the village found the road covered by the floods, and it was
suspected that in the middle of the floods the road passed over
a bridge that was now demolished! The other road approaching
the Castle along the bank from the north was not itself flooded,
though everything on either verge was, and in any case it was
in view from than ther side of the river.
Early next morning a Suffolk standing patrol spotted ten of
the Germans making off towards the village, and
immediately
opened fire on them.
Castle, sending stretcher-bearers out to collect four.
Some fell and the rest ran back into the
attack was timed for 2.30 p.m. and the Artillery
liminary concentration.
At the last moment a sudden hailstorm
prevented the
Typhoons from attacking.
Advancing down the
road from the north, D Company, under Captain
Thomas, soon
came under
enemy shell-fire, and,
about 600 yards from
Castle entrance,
were held up by very heavy machine-gun fire.
They could not deploy because of the deep floods on either side
of the road; nor could they move forward.
called off at 4.30 and Thomas skilfully extricated his Company
from an extremely difficult situation.
Then for four days
Castle was bombarded by Typhoons, by Heavy, Medium,
