NI NOSESAS
ASSAULT DIVISION
The other platoon
was keeping very quiet, and
Meredith, not realising that it was still close-by, withdrew to
the last house south of the cross-roads, now in flames. Meanwhile
B Company had advanced to reach the lateral road well to the
left of the
cross-roads, and their Commander, Major A. H.
Claxton, M.C., was killed when they came under heavy fire from
Rogers' platoon were still in the house beyond the
cross-roads, where they had lain low since the arrival of the
German reinforcements, who were now dug in all round them.
They were about to attempt their withdrawal when a German
came up to the house and rang the bell. Someone inside moved
his foot, and a grenade was thrown in.
"There was a little
more noise and the enemy came from all directions and began
to throw grenades in through the windows." Rogers and Sergeant
Foreman rallied the platoon as best they could and fought their
way out. With the remnant of the platoon they got back to their
Company area. The following morning several enemy posts were
silenced, while a patrol from the Carrier Platoon encountered
no enemy along the lateral road. But that night an A Company
patrol established that the cross-roads were still strongly hela, so
at noon next day, the 15th, a two-Brigade attack was
on Brinkum.
It was a lovely warm day :
scarcely a breeze was wafted
across the marshes to the villages and farmsteads amongst which
8 and 185 Brigades fought.
allotted tanks of 4th/7th Dragoon
To support their attacks they were
Guards (the rest
Armoured brigade-the stafford Yeomanry and I2th A.K.K.u.
came under command of the Division next day), and they
also had the terrinc ald of the fame-throwing crocodiles of B
Squadron, 7th R.T.R.
• Two Medium Regiments were added to
the normal artillery support of the Middlesex mortars,
Anti-Tank Regiment, and the three Field Regiments:
Warwicks and Norfolks of 185 Brigade drove on Brinkum from
the right, the Suffolks of 8 Brigade would drive forward from the
unfortunate cross-roads.
The main defences were held by 18 Ss
Training Battalion, with four companies, each of between 15°
and 200 promising young so maniacs, the most unreasonable
and unreliable type of opponents: one company held the cross-
roads, one held the rambling village of Leeste, another held the
BREMEN AND GERMAN SURRENDER
249
equally scattered hamlet of Erichshof, and the fourth remained
with Battalion H.Q. back in Brinkum.
The Warwicks would
take Leeste and Erichshof, the Suffolks would clear their cross-
roads, and then the Norfolks would pass through the Warwicks
to capture Brinkum.
First of all, soon after dawn, a platoon of the Norfolks under
Lieutenant Loynes was sent forward to cover the left flank of the
Warwicks' start line.
They brushed an enemy outpost and, after
a fierce skirmish, the enemy withdrew.
This was what the War-
wicks afterwards recognised as " a real service to us." Lieutenant-
Colonel D. L. A. Gibbs, the
Warwick Commander since the
Caen days, who had won a bar to his D.S.O. in the Venraij
battles, had left them just before the Rhine was crossed. His
successor, Lieutenant-Colonel R. C.
Macdonald,
manded the K.O.S.B.s in the Rhineland, then came back to his
old Battalion. The Battalion was now in its Assembly Area, and
a drink of tea was issued all round. By It.45 they were ready to
The barrage began at 11.50, to drown
lanks and S-Ps as they got into position. At midday they moved
into the attack.
Now the K.S.L.I. had been demonstrating away on the east
lank that morning: threer arwicks attacked trom
The SS troops were very surprised at this, as they
expected an
attack from the east. The Warwicks moved fast and the prisoners
were soon " rolling in."
B Company roped in seventy without
very much trouble.
A Company, under Major H. C. Illing, M.C.,
had most of the fighting to do, and illing won a bar to his M.C.
Having fought their way on to their objectives in Leestl
at once started exploiting forward to some farms which lay to
the north, and which obviously had to be cleared before
Norfolks could really get going."
Before they reached the first
objective, Sergeant W. Frost, commanding a platoon, was blown
into the air by a close shell-burst.
Although his right arm
side were incapacitated and he was in great pain,
he fought his
Platoon on to their position, killing 12
Germans and capturing
fighting patrol under Lieutenant Genever
went off to deal with the outlying farms,
and at one moment,
when they were pinned down by Spandau fire, Private Hathaway
(shades of Shakespeare !) got up, under heavy fire at about 20
