196
ASSAULT DIVISION
having to jump. Meanwhile the enemy just over the ver
were busily preparing a crossing in force,
which they called
Operation Snowman, though no snow fell till the day of the
withdrawal, a week later.
They had been able to send patrols
over without great difficulty as the Divisional line was so
thin.
After dark on New Year's Day a whole
Company
This
crossed from Well to the wood north-east of Wanssum.
village, where the Ulster Rifles had had so much trouble, was
now in the keeping of D Company of the South Lancs.
Company in the wood, and another force
that landed west of
the beek,
then
attacked Wanssum from the north,
south and
east.
With the
Wanssum
garrison were
Lieutenant
Ken
Baxter and his mortar O.P. Party and a machine-gun platoon
of the Middlesex.
Shortly after midnight ale Infantry Corporal ran into Baxter's
O.P., a small house, with the news that a suspicious party of
nen were coming up the road. As they approached, " Baxter's
party opened fire from the doorway and the Germans scattered.
The whole Infantry platoon which normally defended the aren
of the O.P. had gone out on patrol. Baxter therefore posted two
men on the tirst floor wisod dren (which jammed after the hrst
few bursts), collected the other three and his batman and took
up position at his O.P. They were seven, armed with rifles and
a pistol, against twenty-five, armed with bazookas,
carbines and grenades.
The enemy tried to rush the house,
Baxter shot one of them through the head with his pistol, at
point-blank range.
I any wen were tap tro
floor to pieces with bazooka fire. It was impossible to get to the
telephone on the ground floor, which had probably been put
out of action anyway.
"Oxo,' the theatoon dog, was the only ally
on the ground floor.
He thoroughly disapproved of the whole
succcuing, all out or the door, and was not seen lor two day"
The fire-fight continued for twenty minutes, and the party were
nearly out of ammunition when the enemy withdrew."
and the M.C. for " great coolness, gallantry and leadership,
and Private Orme won the GOC's certificate for gallantry.
other parts of the garrison there were similar incidents, and aftes
a while the enemy withdrew.
All seemed quiet next day, and extensive sweeps of their area
MAAS RIVER
by the South Lancs revealed no sign of the enemy on their side
dite river until a patrol at dusk went to the jetty opposite Well
and was fired upon from the neighbouring wood.
This was the
tist indication that the enemy had established positions,
tre pin-pointed by later patrols, but an attempt by C Company
cuing the night of the and to clear the wood was unsuccessful
owing to enemy defensive shelling.
Later the German Artillery
rac was captured : that it was prepared by their Corps H.Q.
gave some idea of their deliberate intentions.
A fighting patrol
from A Company found the wood still occupied on the night of
It was left undisturbed the next night, but at first
agat on the 6th, supported by a diversionary attack
compally, a company began an operation to wear tie wood.
Under cover of artillery smoke they reached the edge of the
wood, to be met by such a concentration
of machine-gun and
shell-fire that they
were forced to
withdraw with
morning C Company
relieved the
depleted A Company in sleet and Arctic conditions,
the wood under observation.
snow began to fall on the 7th,
and twenty-four armoured
troop-carriers (Kangaroos) arrived.
(Kangaroos had first been used
on the yth August to take the Canadians right in among the
positions before Falaise.
the Americans could
pare no more 105 mm. ammunition the S-P guns of the Divisional
Artillery had been converted to this use, and several of them were
later found knocked out near Falaise still bearing their triangles
and R.A. signs.)
Early on the morning of the
8th, while the
Suffolks were boarding the kangaroos, Lieutenant J. b.
Anti-Tank Regiment
operation with his troops.
carrying out a
He and his men were well aware that
their armour was not proof against a direct hit from
over the river, but they manœuvred in full view of the enemy,
drawing the weight of their fire.
The enemy gave
Whereabouts of many of his gun and mortar positions,
were duly neutralised when the Suffolks advanced.
That morning the snow was freezing on the roads and the
Kangaroos were skidding badly.
This delayed the attack,
when it went in, was effectively screened from the German bank
