Chapter Nine
BEYOND THE RHINE AND THE EMS
"In planning our forthcoming spring and
I envisaged the operations that would lead to
Germany's collapse as falling into three phases: first, the
destruction of the enemy forces west of the Rhine and closing
to that river; second, the seizure of bridgeheads over the Rhine
from which to develop operations into Germany ;
the destruction of the remaining enemy east of the Rhine and
the advance into the heart of the Reich.
This was the same
purpose that had guided all our actions since early 1944"
GENERAL EISENHOWER.
how ta we sping, and in spring mens thousall are mu
naturally turned towards killing one another.
But it is true that,
despite the new sunshine and almost summer warmth
that
suddenly filled the countryside, the end of the war was the fore-
most thought with the men of the Division.
Their main purpose
they shared with the Supreme Commander :
Germans admit their defeat, and the sooner the better; it was
already obvious to everytor agelt the most fanatical followers of
the Führer, who were open to only one method of persuasion.
To continue the application of that method, the Rhine,
water barrier after the Channel, would now be crossed.
Knowing that another Division had been nominated to assault
across from the bank they held, the Division found themselves
able for once to indulge in the genuine pleasure of wishing they
had been chosen to lead the way! here was no doudt now who
was dominating whom, and the Division had not lost any confi-
fidence in themselves since the day they set eyes on the
beach from their craft rolling in the channel.
But they had an
important part to play mentae preparations for the crossing :
an unspectacular,
Being used as a spring-
board off which two Divisions dived into mid-Germany one after
and then plunging in after them, implied hard and
rapid work from everyone, and much resource.
440
BEYOND THE RHINE AND THE EMS
The first task was to deny the enemy all access to the west bank,
where the preparations for the assault proceeded at incredible
That only a fortnight elapsed between the end of the
struggle for the Rhineland and the establishment of two Army
bridgeheads north of the Ruhr is a superlative tribute to the
supreme planners; it is a tribute, too, to those whose job it was
to see that there was no enemy interference with the plans and
preparations, and that was the first of the Division's responsibilities
in the area of the west bank opposite to Emmerich and Rees.
The job naturally went to the three Infantry Brigades.
was not the slightest enemy interference with the mass of troops,
guns and R.E. equipment packed into the area, nor is there any
reason to suppose that any enemy patrol or agent who succeeded
in penetrating the Division's river-line escaped death or capture.
The three Brigades were also pledged, and so were the Gunner
', parties, to keep close watch on all enemy acuivity cast of the
river, to mark down every movement.
The Divisional Engineers
undertook all R.E. responsibilities on the near side of the river.
Thus the development, signing and lighting of all routes, for tanks,
Bufaloes, and wheels, the filling-in of craters, the blowing of holes
to provide " entries" into the river, all came under the super-
vision of the C.R.E.
The Divisional Signals had
preparing the " beach" Communications on the west bank of the
Rhine for the whole of the assaulting Corps.
They had to bury
tity miles of heavy cable and a hundred mues of quad cabie,
and the Brigade,
skilled in handling cable
Field Regiment and Cable sections all became
bulldozers,
Meanwhile, to spare the assaulting formations as much road
congestion as possible and leave them as much accommodation,
it was decided to despatch all A echelons and 700 vehicles of
the Division fifty miles
back to an overflow area
This was C.R.E.M.E.'s cue to suggest that
requiring engine exchanges or overhauls should be
185 Brigade Workshops attended to them in the friendly
neighbourhood of St. Anthonis,
Ordnance Field Park and Mobile Laundry were also sent back,
and there Ordnance established a dump for all winter stores and
for the assorted junk (notably coke stoves and stove-pipes) that
