124
ASSAULT DIVISION
The obvious symptom of increased rot in the state of Germany
was the attempt by the Generals to kill Hitler : it was made on
2oth July, the day the rains descended, stuck our troops in the
mud, and grounded our aircraft, and so perhaps it is under-
standable that the younger fanatics opposing us
should have
regarded the miscarriage of the attempt as just another demonstra-
tion that Providence was with the divine Führer.
heard much about it, with no wireless or newspapers.
prisoner interrogated at Divisional H.Q. had been told con-
fidentially and in a whisper on July z2nd that Hitler had been
wounded and that the circumstances were not known.
It was clear that the Division was in need of a change of air
and scenery. On the Headquarters staff the " G boys" had been
the Command Post continuously through the whole
period of tense operations.
In addition they had sustained
casualties, and, on the Q staff, the DAQMG, Major Rog.
Brennan, had been killed on D plus 3. After Goodwood the GI,
two G Ills, and the L.O.s were changed and given a well-
deserved rest.
And now good news came from the American
front. General Bradley had started his advance on the 25th and
by the 28th had sealed off the enemy's escape route from the
north of the peninsula by capturing Coutances.
the Canadian
At this point
Ist Army and United States grd Army were
The first was to take
over those
in the slogging match down the Falaise road, while the latter
was to drive south from Coutances and break through Avranches
into Brittany. British 2nd Army, meanwhile, was to concentrate
on a central thrust in the Caumont area, side by side with that
of the American ist Army on Vire.
to operate at the adjunction of these two armies.
The Division was destined
The unexpected good news of the move was received on
All ranks, from the sanitary orderly up to the General,
must have been cheered to hear that the Division was to be used
as Monty's mobile strategic reserve.
was particularly pleased :
Perhaps General Whistler
coming to the Division
Armoured Division, he had been used to " getting a move on,"
but so far the Division had been checked at every step (indeed,
so had the 7th Armoured since they came to Normandy on the
Villers Bocage sector). Anyway, the next fortnight suited everyone
BREAKING OUT OF
THE BRIDGEHEAD
excepting the Germans.
For them it was probably the most
disastrous fortnight of their lives.
The move back across the Orne to the old familiar area took
It was August ist, roses were obtained for
"the Minden Boys," and the Suffolks and K.O.S.B.s were able
to commemorate that earlier summer's day (when " a single line
ofinfantry broke through three lines of cavalry and tumbled them
to ruin!") modestly but better than they had hoped. That day
the Division was placed at the disposal of the British 2nd Army
and came under command of VIII Corps.
The next day the
move began away over to the right of the British line. No one was
anything but relieved to leave behind the mosquitoes, the stench,
and the pervading sense of peril that characterised Troarn, but
when it came to travelling westwards along the Periers ridge
and men looked down at the white landing-craft unloading in
the anchorage they had secured one morning, they naturally felt
that they were leaving behind something that was theirs. The
hot weather was beginning, and the roads and constructed tracks
across country, packed with moving columns of every type of
war transport, were hidden under clouds of choking dust, through
which the Division passed.
Dust infiltrated through eye-shields
and clothes, masked the perspiring faces, and was particularly
bad for the motor-cycles.
The Division went into " hides" north of
It was quite different country from the campagne :
this was the bocage that stretches south and west from Bayeux.
trom above it appears almost continuous forest, but on entering
it you discover a labyrinth through small fields and orchards
surrounded by high-banked hedges and trees.
Apart from a few
main roads, these innumerable, narrow, mud (now dust) tracks
run like tunnels through tall thicket hedges,
farms and hamlets.
Farther south it all opens up
Pleasant open pasture and corn land, with occasional forests and
It would have taken more than the densest cloud of dust to
smother the irrepressible spirits of the men on that journey :
they felt it was good to be alive.
And a temporary Divisional
Headquarters had not long been established at La Belle Epine
before a message was received from I Corps, under whom they
had fought till now, saying : " Your last vehicle passed the Start
