168
ASSAULT DIVISION
that of the Suffolks on to Overloon. By midday their A Company
were established in Brabander.
8 Brigade's attempt to get tanks over the beek were even
more steadily frustrated than 185's were. The Suffolks and East
Yorks had marched out from Overloon at about 3.30 a.m.
7.30 the Suffolks were approaching the beek with their kapok,
and A.V.R.E.s were Flailing the approach for tanks.
where, the banks were boggy and Flailing was slow.
came under heavy machine-gun fire and were held up.
tank-crossing three A.V.R.E.s were available, each carrying, no
a box girder bridge, but a fascine-an enormous bundle oi
chespaling that in this case would be dumped bodily in the
stream to form a solid bridge, but which had the additional use,
when unrolled, of a firm carpet that could be laid in a mu-
Unfortunately one of these tanks became stuck before it
could get into position to drop its fascine into the beek.
other two went up the track cleared by the flails, but the second
A. V.R.E. became immovably bogged in the beek itself.
third fascine alone was not adequate to bridge the obstacle.
was no course but to send back to the Armoured Brigade H.Q;
for the box sirder priage that was held in reserve. It would take
B Company were already in difficulties, their Company
Commander wounded. The rain was descending
" Steady as the sand in an hour glass on this day,".
and the cold soaked into the bone.
Despite the fact that for somed ours they would have to do
without the support of the Churchills or of their own carriers
and anti-tank guns, Colonel Craddock decided to pass Ci and D
Companies through B Company and over the beek.
at to o'clock, but their progress was slow, with intense enemy fire
coming at them from the right.
C Company, Colonel Craddock was crossing the corner of a field
when he had a foot blown off by a schu mine. In his comparatively
nort time as their commander he had endeared himselt to
officers and men of the Battalion, and his appearance
the forward troops at difficult times had proved a main factor in
OVERLOON AND
VENRAIJ
169
Once again Major Allen found himself in
command at a critical time.
Cand D Companies continued to press forward, though both
lost their Company Commanders.
New thrusts were planned by
the Brigadier to start at 3 p.m., when the new bridge would be in
position and the Churchills streaming
At 3 the new
badge was in position, but the first two tanks to cross were bogged
down in the soft ground on the far side, so was a third, and there
were no more attempts at that point.
But the East Yorks now
crossed over the Suffolks' kapoks and moved out to the left flank.
Their Commanding Officer was suffering from a wound received
carlier, and Major J. D. W. Renison,
mand, which he was to hold for
T.D., took over the com-
the rest of the campaign.
"Banger" King succeeded him as Second-in-Command.
nightfall the Suffolks had reached Hiept, a hamlet three-quarters
of a mile to the west of Venraij.
On their left flank the East
Yorks were level with them.
Farther along, on the extreme left, the Norfolks had advanced
a thousand yards, to reach the woods outside Brabander. Since
wey joined the battle two days earher they had been hard hit,
losing 211
casualties,
five Company Commanders.
The Warwicks, in Brabander since their
advance
behind the barrage, found themselves in a salient that was con-
inually counter-attacked, shelled and mortared.
their ground and later managed to push on another 200. yards
towards Venraij.
In the evening C Company fought their way
into the grounds of St.
Hospital on the
prisoners were taken.
Shortly after dark the East Yorks arrived
on the right and the two Brigades were linked up.
That night the Sappers were working at full pressure.
the Suffolks crossing-place, 246 field company constructea a
10-foot Trestle Bridge with a firm track approach
and impro-
vised an additional brushwood and steel crib causeway.
Platoon of 253 Field Company built a similar trestle bridge
the break in the Overloon-Venraij road, to be known as
Forth Crossing.
No. 2 Platoon,
together with all other
available, laid down culverting to fill the gaps, working furiously.
Bulldozers scoured the
Tanks tugged away at bogged Churchills, while everyone else
