I72
ASSAULT DIVISION
drawn to defend the line from Smakt down through ostrum
to Veulen and Amerika, villages on the edge of the
Peel. 8 Brigade now adjusted Company positions to face due
east, while 185 Brigade went back out of the line for a seven-day
period of rest and training.
To the left of 8 Brigade that night,
9 Brigade and the Household Cavalry Group,
Recce Regiment, were holding the river line right up to Guys
together they were disposed against the enemy on a front of
sixteen miles.
A week of fighting that will not be easily forgotten
by members of the 3rd Division had come to an end.
At the end units received a Special Order of the Day by
Lieutenant-General Sir Richard N. O'Connor, K.C.B., D.S.O,
M.C., Commander of VIII Corps. It reads :
3rd BRITISH DIVISION
I would like to congratulate you all on the very fine per-
formance you have put up during the recent operations against
All of you have taken your share in this success,
perso particularly congratulate 185 Brigade on the magnificent
performance of bridging the Beek north of Venraij with all the
elements against them.
In this fighting you have shown grit and determination,
and you nave gained the knowleage that you are a better las
than the enemy.
it probably the list action ola good many o you, and
I feel that you have made a great start and have
gained my full confidence.
(Signed) R. N. O'CONNOR,
Lieutenant-General,
Commander,
16 Oct 44-
VIII Corps.
& Brigade were the first to admire this feather in 185 Brigade's
a, but at that time they telt that their own advance on enrall
against all the elements had not been the less magnificent for
having been made without Churchill support such as the Warwicks
OVERLOON AND VENRAIJ
had, The Suffolks were left with 12 officers present, about a
third of their proper strength.
Indeed it is small wonder that
al tre Brigades and all nine Battalions felt particularly jealous
of their own honour just then.
To discriminate was perhaps
generous but unwise: the order was dated the 16th, and the
attle had yet two days to run before Venraij fell.
But now it was the Corps Commander's turn to feel hurt. It
ras at this point in the Corps plan (Constellation) that the three
cher Divisions in the Corps were to have driven due east to
Venlo and Roermond, cutting off the escape of the German
tormations facing the 3rd Division.
At this critical moment a
Dision was urgently needed on the's Hertogenbosch sector,
and it had to come from VIII Corps!
This departure of the
Ith (Scottish) Division meant that the whole Corps plan came
it is reasonable to suppose that had it been fully
prated then it would have succeeded, and with four Divisions
nicad of the seven that were required before Venlo was reached
It was a great pity, because, as General O'Connor
wrote in his comments to the Army Commander, " The first
part of the plan worked very well. The clearing of Overloon and
Venraij by 3rd British Div. was a fine achievement, as the enemy
held strong positions, heavily mined, and frequently behind an
anti-tank obstacle. He fought well to start with, but was gradually
rom down by the dogged fighting qualities of 3rd
eventually considerable numbers began
to surrender. . .
This was an Infantry battle.
As a demonstration of the way
a British Infantry Division fights in adverse conditions
In cold and wet and mire
dunes and dark pine-woods and minefields that were a perpetual
nightmare, but with the
fullest possible support from
supporting arms,
Infantrymen
and took every
That was all that mattered to
necessarily
interested to learn how Germans defended woods, how they sited
their spandaus, how to detect and disarm mines,
and how to
live in the ground. And they were very thankful for what assist-
ance they got from the Sappers, the tank crews,.
the mortarmen
particular admiration
battle for the Typhoon Wing of 83 Group of the
