RUE DU
SUFFOLK REGIMENT
Colleville Montgomery Hillman, rue du Suffolk Regiment.
Hillman taken! The author at Colleville Montgomery, of
which he is a Citoyen d'Honneur.
DEVELOPMENT: THE CAPTURE OF CAEN
from which we could give some sort of support.
The forward
companies were having a bad time and we suffered quite a
number of casualties; enemy tanks were also reported and
atogether it was most unhealthy. At this point a big decision
had to be made and the unfortunate C.O. had been authorised
by the General to make it.
Were we to withdraw at last light to
the other side of the anti-tank obstacle,
or were we to hang on
where we were and hope for help at first light? To judge from
future events this decision could not have been otherwise. We
pulled out, and with us what was left of the Warwicks.
chosen was just before last light,
and this choice made all the
for as soon as the last troops left the area the enemy
shelled it and mortared it severely,
fortunately
hitting the air
where we had been." Just before midnight the 3rd Recce Contact
detachment informed Division that the " Norfolks and family"
had got back to Norfolk House.
On the right that same day what was
intended to be the
great German counter-attack was scarcely noticed.
It had been
co-ordinated soon after
midnight by Feuchtinger and Kurt
Meyer, Commander of Panzer Grenadier Regiment 25, the right
regiment of 12 SS Panzer Division.
Meyer looked at the map
and said to Feuchtinger: " Little fish! We'll throw them back
into the sea in the morning."
But first they had to catch their
atter all.
And when they tried, they found them not so undersized
" We decided to
Feuchtinger, " and 12 SS was
drive towards
Douvres,"
stated
to take up assembly positions
during the night.
Artillery
fire was so great
that a proper
co-ordination of this attack was impossible:
Meyer did make a
short spurt with some 50 t vils but was driven back.
He never
reached the start line from which our combined attack was to
In the late afternoon the K.O.S.B.s were suffering neavy sheil
and mortar fire in Le Mesnil wood when the Ulster Rifles passed
wrough them to attack Cambes, a small, thickly wooded villag
on the right of the Divisional front.
John Aldworth,
D Company, commanded by
, quadron of the East Riding Yeomanry were in support oths
were the vanguard of the battalion,
vas known of the enemy's dispositions as the Cambes wood and
park were surrounded by stone walls some ten feet high.
