ASSAULT DIVISION
clusion he said: " I can promise you a big party in Berlin when
it's all over, and that party will be on me!" How much was
in fact contributed to that party by this great American was
perhaps best summed up by the Public Orator in Oxford on
St. Crispin's Day, 1945, who described him simply as "leader
of 5,000,000 men in a war conducted with a wisdom and
concluded with a decisiveness never before surpassed."
"It can't be far off now," was one of the most gratifying
conclusions drawn from General Eisenhower's visit, and a further
portent was the visit on May 22nd of the King.
As they lined
the Hampshire lanes, the King walked slowly past each one of
his representatives upon so great an undertaking.
This formality
which our Sovereign goes through with men proceeding overseas
on active service must have seemed to him more than ever
poignant as he, and they, contemplated the imminent event,
very soon, now, it would resolve itself as the most glorious or
most disastrous passage of arms ever attempted by the nation or
by humanity.
On Friday, May 26th, French francs were issued, and a book-
let with a few French
and summary generalisations
about French habits. A little more of the terrible secret was out,
and one or two were rash enough to say: " I told you so all
along!" "Briefing" began, and camps were sealed : no one
was allowed to go outside the barbed wire.
This final briefing
was carried out down to the last detail and the last man. Each
unit organised the briefing of all sub-units over the next two or
three days, and any man could spend as long as he liked studying
the contents of the " briefing tent," which held more excitement
than any circus-booth or museum exhibition.
Here was the
fascination of an exhibition, only whereas a museum usually
exhibits the past, this was designed to show men into what was
There was a specially-drawn wall-map of the whole
beach-head on the scale of about 21 inches to the mile.
were larger scale-maps, some with defence overprints. Then there
were models of selected sections of the Divisional Assault Area,
ground photographs collected from tourists and special agents,
and air photographs high and oblique (wave-top) photographs,
with stereoscopes, anaglyphs and an epidiascope to aid realism
PREPARATION
Men also heard encouraging details about their combined
support; the programme of Naval and aerial bombardment
was unprecedented, almost unlimited and quite unimaginable.
There were two security
precautions: all maps,
models and
photographs were specially prepared for the occasion and still
bore the familiar code names: and no one who had been in one
of those tents was allowed to converse with anyone who was not
in the Assault Group.
As part of the last precaution all out-
going mail was held up at this stage until after the landing had
On Tuesday, May 3oth, the heat was sweltering, almost
insufferable, and men were doing the only thing they could do
in the circumstances-basking in the sun and remarking com-
Placently that it had " turned out nice again. In the course of
the day similar groups, gathered all over the Divisional Con-
with a quiet familiar order such as: " O.K., get your Kits on."
were approached by their officer or N.C.O.
It was an order they had longed to hear, and had seemed so
long coming.
Marshalling had begun.
The immense machine was in motion.
Lane after lane of
closely-parked vehicles seemed to come alive and move gradually
from now on it was up to Fate and Movement Control.
Movement Control worked magnificently. Fate was less reliable.
The ist day of June,
Thursday, dawned dull and grey: this
after two months of unbroken sunshine ! It was no use recrimi-
That day Eisenhower, Ramsay and the others met, cond
sulted the meteorological experts, shook their heads and hoped
The same thing happened on Saturday atternoon.
The troops went aboard, their eyes on the sky.
Early on Sunday morning, at 4.15,
the Commanders again
assembled in the operations-room at Southwick
hearing the views of the meteorological team, and then that of
his Commanders-in-Chief, General Isenhower made the heavy
decision; D-day was postponed 24 hours.
It was worst for those who had already sailed out into the
pitching Channel, units of " U" Force from Devon and "O"
Force from Portland, for example.
It was quite bad enough for
the men of "S" Force, still at anchor in Portsmouth harbour,
who could only skulk on the decks and scowl at the traitor sky.
