ASSAULT DIVISION
in Exercise Anchor. Planning could now be completed to the last
detail. This final stage of the planning was referred to as Exercise
Aberlour House was carefully prepared and set apart for the
Divisional planning.
At this country house on the Spey, near
Rothes, the Divisional Planning Staff arrived from London on
February 26th.
And here in March came the Intelligence Staffs
of the three Brigades to "read themselves into" the outline
Divisional plan.
This took ten days.
Then the Commander of
8 Brigade, Brigadier E. E. E. Cass, C.B.E., D.S.O., M.C., came
to Aberlour House with his staff, and produced an appreciation
of the task of the Assault Brigade.
Finally 8 Brigade " Order
came and were given full information regarding the
operation, down to the newly completed Brigade plan.
O Group included Commanding Officers of all units under
8 Brigade for the landing.
Until one has read through the exhaustive details of the
Planning Memoranda, the innumerable tables of craft-capacity
and the allotment of men and vehicles for each tide,
bids for more loading-space, the inevitable succession of amend-
ments, and the Divisional Commander's official correspondence
with higher authority, it is impossible to appreciate the accom-
plishment of the Divisional Planning Staff.
Exercise Baron was
probably the most gruelling exercise of all.
There was one factor that might have upset the whole plan
even at this late stage. In February the enemy put into operation
his scheme to obstruct beaches
with under-water
starting at high-water mark and working down to low-water
mark, thickening them up in depth as the
months went by.
Apparently Rommel, the German Army Group Commander,
was not satisfied that with concrete defence
batteries, an armoured mobile reserve, we should be sufficiently
Most of the obstacles were known to have Teller
mines or fused shells fixed on to them, whilst there were
mines attached to floating rafts. And most of the obstacles would
1 Neither, for that matter, was Rundstedt satisfied.
Both he and Rommel
agreed that the Allies must never be allowed to secure a firm foothold on the main-
Where they disagreed so fatally was in the matter of the armoured reserve.
Rommel wanted his tanks right forward: Rundstedt wanted to hold them back
PREPARATION
be submerged at high tide. The effect on the plan of their last-
minute appearance was less than it might have been.
they dictated that the landing must be in daylight and must be
made as far as possible below them, if they were to be cleared.
We shall see soon how this affected the fixing of H-hour.
fact that a daylight landing had been practised all along was
indeed fortunate and cause for satisfaction. At the earliest plan-
ning conferences the military representatives had hankered after
a night landing to ensure tactical surprise.
The Navy, however,
preferred daylight for infallibly arriving at the right beach: what
was more, daylight would facilitate aimed air and sea bombard-
ment. Daylight prevailed.
Though the Sicilian sea-landing had
been successfully made in darkness, the best results in the latest
Pacific Operations confirmed the decision to land after dawn.
The outline plan, as Brigade staffs were now aware, was,
Army Group language, " to secure a lodgement on the Continent
trom which further offensive operations could be developed."
The intention of the Commander-in-Chief of 21 Army Group
was to assault immediately north of the Carentan (Vire) estuary,
and between the rivers Vire and Orne, with the object of securing
a lodgment area that would include airfield sites and the port
of Cherbourg. The Second British Army was to assault on the
left and protect the flank of the First United States Army while
it captured Cherbourg and the Brittany ports.
Second Army
was to assault with XXX Corps on the right and I Corps on the
left. I Corps was to assault with grd Canadian Division on the
right and grd British Division on the left.
The grd British Division, then, was going to land on the left
Rank, The honour that lay in that commission was not so
apparent then as it is now, when we can see in retrospect how
the "further offensive operations" were planned: how " the
build-up for the break-through was to take place on the RIGHT
while the enemy was to batter himself against a strongly-held
pivot in the Caen area on the LEFT."1
The pivot in the Caen
area on the LEFT was, indeed, strongly held by the grd Division.
But even in March
the prospect
honourable
formidable enough to those who knew the plan.
*Notes on the Operations of at Army Group compiled by G (Ops) Records (Restricted),
