48F00
APPENDIX B
273
cupped with modern weapons, to fight with you for the final
crushing of tyranny and the restoration of peace and freedom all
over the world.
Welcome to you all !!
Long Live England ! ! !
Long Live France ! !!
APPENDIX B
An Address read to the 3rd Recce Regiment at an official
Reception by the Mayor and Parish Priest of St. Paul,
near Flers, Normandy, 21 August, 1944•
Officers and Men of the British Army,
I have been asked by the Civil Authorities, by the Parish
Priest, a Chevalier of the Legion of Honour, and by the whole
population to welcome you to this small village. Our first feeling
Is one of gratitude and happiness.
You can be sure it has been
a rare joy for us all to see the British troops arrive and drive
the Germans away before them.
This minute is a very stirring
one, chiefly for those, and I think they are many, who,
of everybody and everything, have remained the faithful friends
of England and her allies.
This gathering seems to be like the
meeting of old friends in the open air and sunshine, on going out
of a dark and damp dungeon.
For this ceremony no place could be fitter than this one.
Here we stand near the grave of the valiant sons of this village
who laid down their lives for their fatherland and the freedom of
the world, side by side with the gallant British and American
soldiers. How happy they must be to see that their own children,
brothers and sisters, can breathe freely again.
For the last four years there have been many misunder-
standings between our two nations. Of course the whole responsi-
willy does not rest with you alone; we have had our own share
of it, and it is a large one.
But your sacrifices for the common
your present victories and the return of your armies on
the French soil, open a new era of comradeship and good under-
Though you are a peace-loving people, you
war to liberate France and Europe, and to secure the freedom
of the whole world.
We feel sure that before long the sons of
Normandy and Brittany, as well as those of the rest of France,
will be proud to join in this crusade, and, when they have been
