ASSAULT DIVISION
Finally, the first of the sixty-five vehicles, due to be landed
with bridging equipment that evening, arrived the next day,
Ib hours late. The command of the units concerned with this
work devolved on Major Upton, who must have felt very thankful
that night that at least the original bridges were still held intact.
forward with the K.S.L.I., Colonel Maurice had to decide
whether to reinforce Y Company up in Lebisey Wood, or whether
to consolidate in Biéville village, which in any case had not yet
been thoroughly cleared.
In view of the fact that enemy tanks
were likely to attack across the open country to the right, and
our own tanks, disposed to meet them, were unable to give any
further close support, and since reserve Infantry was all employed
in consolidation, the Colonel reluctantly ordered Y Company to
withdraw to the Biéville position after dark.
During this period
Captain Dane, who took over command of Y Company when
Steel was killed, was directing most effectively the fire of the
7th Field Regiment on to the enemy troops in front of his company.
They returned after dark without further loss.
The adventures of the Division that long day in the early
summer of 1944, and the achievements of so many individuals,
would, but for one consideration, prolong
this chapter till it
occupied the rest of the book ; the close of D-day was not like
the close of a book that could be snapped shut, its story put from
mind.
When the light in the sky went out that night, the men
who had survived could not jump into bed, turn over, and go to
sleep.
They had only completed Chapter Two: there would be
no relaxation, no easy oblivion, until the war ended and the
Germans surrendered.
Drake knew before he sailed against the
galleons " that it is not the beginning, but the continuing of any
great matter, until it be thoroughly finished, which yieldeth the
true glory."
in the dusk of D-day.
The significance of this only dawned on the Division
for a year now all their thoughts and
energies had been directed to this day, and now the day was
done.
The landing, the object of so much training, yesterday the
source of so much agonising personal speculation, was to-day all
accomplished fact.
By now the world
would know.
To have
1 If, as it is, it seems long and complicated, D-day seemed very long, and the mounting
of the assault most complicated.
INVASION: THE FOLLOW- THROUGH
come through history's greatest amphibious assault alive was
slightly unexpected. There is a revealing remark in the account
of the landing by the Second-in-Command of the 7th Field
Regiment, who wrote at the time: " In Hermanville, I was
extremely relieved to meet my C.O.
I suppose, in my fancy, I
had never expected to see him again."
But though the worst was over, the breathtaking moment of
landing and crossing the beach, and though men now knew where
they stood, the prospects were no less grim for being more apparent.
"Assaults were far from easy being and unopposed, an impression
which has not perhaps been fully dispelled," wrote Admiral
Ramsay to General Eisenhower, going on to express " the greatest
admiration of both Navies for the magnificent bearing
asaulting troops they put ashore. In short," he concluded, " the
assaults proceeded according to plan because every
individual taking part had confidence in it.". Men fight best
who have confidence in their leaders. This obviously still applied
to the Germans, as well as to our own men, the difference being
the degree of fanaticism with which so many young Germans were
to subordinate themselves
battalions did not exult in the number of casualties they sustained
iS nothing to be ashamed of.
"Not that casualties were slight
as the journalists gave the public to believe."
This day the
and Battalion of the K.S.L.I. lost a hundred and thirteen officers
and men killed and wounded, and one of the two assaulting
battalions, the South Lancs, lost a hundred and seven ; the other
assault battalion, the East Yorks, lost five officers and sixty men
killed, and four officers and a hundred and thirty-seven wounded.
This was on the first day.
The Battalion history of the 2nd Middlesex has the point:
"3 Platoon, in support of the Suffolks,
had their first casualties
in Colleville, when a mortar bomb killed one and wounded six.
In the life of every platoon it is a crucial moment when they get
their first casualties.
Most of the men had not seen active service
before and had been caught up in the excitement of the landing.
It was at moments like these that the calmness and experience of
the platoon sergeants (in this case Sergeant Robinson) made all the
difference."
Going into action is the crucial test of a man's faith
'Admiral Ramsay, in the course of his report to General Eisenhower.
