94
ASSAULT DIVISION
village right of the road. Colonel Herdon decided to postpone
H-hour till g•45 and just got the message through to H.Q.R.A. in
time to stop the guns.
It was then discovered that B and C
Companies on the Start Line were out of communication, unable
to receive the message.
Adhering to the original plan, they moved forward at 8.45.
With not a shell fired in support, they advanced a thousand yards
up over the convex slope, their only cover the corn through which
they strode.
Colonel Herdon, seeing their unopposed advance,
decided to dispense with the fire-plan, and commit the other two
companies. I25th Panzer Grenadiers, waiting in the woods, held
their fire until the forward companies were within two hundred
yards, then they opened up with all their rifles and spandaus.
Lieutenant Docherty's platoon managed to get to close quarters
with the Germans.
Later his body,.
with several others,
found no more than ten yards from the enemy position he had
charged.
The rest of the battalion were pinned down in de-
pressions in the ground and a sunken lane.
Lieutenant-Colonel
ferdon, attempting to move along the front, was shot through
the head and killed instantaneously.
So far the enemy had maintained a wedge of defences between.
the Division and the Canadians on the right, the tip still touching
the coast. It was left to 8 Brigade to blunt the tip of this wedge
and also clean up the bridgehead area, kicking out those Germans
that remained in isolated posts, while g Brigade was ordered to
march against the thick end of the wedge.
During the morning 8 Brigade despatched two companies
from the South Lancs to secure Plumetot and Cresserons, which
were duly taken soon after midday.
The battalion consolidated
round these two villages and one company was established in
La Délivrande. This company was later sent to assist 41 R.M.
Commando in clearing Luc-sur-Mer, and when this had been
successfully completed, the same company was sent to mop up
the remaining strong-point in Lion-sur-Mer.
village of Periers clear,
The Ulster Rifles, leading 9 Brigade's advance, reported the
advance on Cazelle.
the K.O.S.B.s formed up for the
They entered Cazelle without opposition,
1 Loosely translated by the least pious members of the Division as " She who delivers
DEVELOPMENT: THE CAPTURE OF CAEN
and at about i2.3o they pushed on down the road to form a firm
base in Le Mesnil wood.
The wood was occupied without
difficulty, but there they were heavily shelled and mortared.
The chief pleasure that morning was when Spitfires of the
Royal Air Force dived out of the clouds upon four Junkers 88s
and destroyed the lot—to the accompaniment of encouraging
epithets from the watching troops.
A gunner of one of the Field
Regiments fired his Browning as one of the bombers passed low
overhead, and who shall dispute his spirited declaration that he
had bagged the thing? It fell with the others in flames.
"Fox" Troop of the gand L.A.A. Regiment reached the
bridge at Bénouville the previous evening, and for five days they
defended it alone against air attacks.
They beat off eight
determined enemy formations as well as single fighter-bomber
Their claim of 17 German planes shot down in that period
isconfirmed and must be unrivalled. Reid, the Troop Commander,
was awarded the M.C. for the magnificent example he set his
Troop in five days of great strain and great opportunity.
day before they were relieved, the Commanding Officer, Lieut-
chant-Colonel H. C. Bazeley, D.S.O., arrived with news that the
remainder of their battery, which should have joined them, were
aboard the Liberty Ship Sambut at midday on D-day, some three
miles off Dover,
and as the troops were lining up for dinner
they were struck by what were thought to be two i6-inch shells
from the Calais batteries.
Before the ship was
abandoned it
burned fiercely and there were four large explosions, but losses
to the Regiment were less than might have been : eight dead and
fourteen wounded.
On D plus i the 7oth Field Regiment were engaged almost
continuously in direct support of the oth Airborne Division, who
were parrying and repelling blow after blow from the German
In the afternoon it was reported that Tiger tanks and
On June g. Colonel Foster, commanding ,6th Field Regiment, received Regimene
trom General Gale,
for support
thanking the Regiment
should have been unable to
hold our position
de Ufficial Keport on the operations of the ot store drea
"without which we
commanding 6th Airborne Division,
states that the R.A. link with i Corps
"worked excellently while we were sharing
3 Division Artillery, and calls for fire were answered most generously and rapidly.
There is no doubt
whatsoever that the fire-power
within 6 Airborne
vision resources was insufficient to break up a really wer supported dua.
that enabled the
anks and infantry; vision to carry out its task. . . ""
It was in fact the Artillery of I Corps and 3 British Division
