150
ASSAULT DIVISION
seriously had they not been deserted by their officers and all but
three of their N.C.O.s. Hamont then fell to the undignifed
business of the indictment, unavoidably summary, of its col.
laborators, and women were publicly shamed with their heads
shaven. A touching feature of the freeing of Hamont was the ay
the entire population paid homage to Private Hollis of the Sulks.
the only soldier killed in the advance that morning, who was
buried with full civic honours, his coffin draped with the Began
flag, covered with flowers, and followed by several hundred people
to his grave.
That morning IIth Armoured Division passed through 9
gaue, as worth and reaching seenue by 14g the g
necce regiment were protecung the hank at villages With the
remarkable names of Dorpleen and Groot Schoot. The weather
nad been unsettled for two days now, and at Arnhem the postu
of the troops at the bridge was critical. At Nijmegen that evening
a small force, including tanks and infantry of the ist Grenadiers,
the U.S. paratroops.
pushed the bridge and crossed the 6o0 yards span to join up with
The commander of that force,
Lieutenant-
Colonel t. H. (Eddie) Goulburn, came to command 8 Brigade
the following month.
Un the morning of the 21%, & Brigade were directed to cross
the Dutch frontier and advance due east to occupy the town of
76th Field Regiment.
the suttolks led, tollonadid by the cast lorks and the
The Gunners had a day of drill-order
"tire and movement" such as they thought only possibie a
Larkhill, and
ons they leap-frogged forward with the
they derived considerable amusement from the looks on the faces
of the marching sections on either side of the road.
f.U.O.s wore the most pained expressions as they plodded along,
Io-set on back, passing and repassing their own guns as gun
position after gun position was prepared and occupied.
The road soon petered out altoether and the way led east,
st through villages and tarm-tracks, then over a waste of sand-
dunes, the Boshover Heide, stretching five miles to Weert.
We not the normal approach to the town, but the most direct.
Weert lay on the main Eindhoven-Venlo road at the intersection
of railway and canal, but the main road ran in from the north-
west and the tow-path from the south-west.
The first enemy
THE ADVANCE INTO THE LIMBURG LOWLANDS
151
spandaus opened up on the Suffolks as they approached the
railay from the dunes late in the evening. As the attack went in
on these positions the sight of Colonel Craddock striding down
the track wearing his S.D. cap in preference to a helmet greatly
heartened the men.
they were establishing themselves
astride the railway, their objective for the night, they heard a
series of loud explosions and knew that the Boche was destroying
the canal bridges.
At 3.15 a.m. the C.O. ordered the Battalion forward to the
canal at Weert. Despite the rather early hour, a terrific reception
was waiting, with the leaders of the local resistance movement
and all the townsfolk, and everywhere the colour orange, on
lavours and frocks and flags, in memory of an earlier War of
Liberation, when Spanish troops had trampled across the Nether-
The Dutch patriots
had now organised an efficient
dephone service to the south and east of the town, and infor-
mation poured in to the effect that the enemy was establishing
himself along the line of the canal that ran almost due north
through Nederweert to Helmond.
This information was confirmed later in the day by 3rd Recce
Regiment, who had exploited to Nederweert, and by the Gunners,
who found that the great belfry of Weert church had already been
converted for use as an A.R.P. fire-watchers'
post and domin-
died the country for miles around-an unusually comfortable
O.P. until the Germans decided that it was a suitable target for
an 88 mm. It was soon learned that IIth Armoured Division
had a bridgehead over this canal at Asten and were operating in
the area of Helmond and Deurne.
In the afternoon the
mander-in-Chief
visited Div.
montgomery outlined the trend oi the future operatons or 41
Army Group to the Divisional Commander before
was while he was at Div. H.Q. that the news was received that
enemy infantry and tanks had cut the axis of XXX Corps between
Uden and the Maas bridge at Grave.
That night 185
was ordered to relieve the lIth Armoured Division
The Division now faced east,
had their backs to
XXX Corps axis, and were committed to a front that widened
daily. They were determined that there should be no severing
