38
ASSAULT DIVISION
weapon, with only slightly less penetrating power than the
I7-pounder) and two troops of towed 6-pounders in each of
their four batteries.
The 20th Anti-Tank Regiment soon dis-
covered that" travelling on a rough or even quite smooth sea in
an L CT or L C A was no joke.
Land-bound soldiers,
customed in any case to travel by sea, rolled in the agony of sea-
sickness; and when eventually put ashore, merely requested
from their officers permission to lie down and die. This was not
good enough. It was not improved by the assertion of the Admiral
that sea-sickness was merely a question of morale.
It was only
slightly improved by the issue of sea-sickness tablets and vomit-
bags.
It must be said that many soldiers were not helped to
have faith in the tablets when at the same time they were
issued with vomiting-bags."
It might also be remarked that
the prescription for taking the Hyoscene Hydrobromide tablets
was not helpful: they were originally prescribed to be taken
hour before feelings
of sickness were
experienced-a
lificult time to predict! Danger was sensed and then it was al
too late.
The Field Regiments sailed in turn from
Wemyss Bay to
Rothesay on the Isle of Bute. All three Batteries of each Regiment
had eight American self-propelled M. 7 Priests- 105 mm. howitzers
mounted on Sherman tank chassis— and at Rothesay they passed
the days sailing round Bute, through the Kyles, and firing over
the bows of the L CT on to Inchmarnock, a smaller island to
the south on which Saint Ninian once lived and, more recently,
Rothesay dypsomaniacs were cured.
Sometimes the guns would
anchor for the night off Tighnabruaich preparatory to a dawn-
run-in on Inchmarnock. This shooting from the deck was strange
at first, but soon senior officers were invited to watch demonstra-
tion shoots on to Strone Point.
The temperature was steadily
dropping as the winter drew on, but severe cold did not prevent
the Gunners from enjoying their experiments in this unorthodox
gunnery, from being well content with their Combined Operations
soldiers, sailors and marines
At night there was a cheerful, bright atmosphere ashore as
holiday resort: the sound of singing on the
that Clydeside
waterfront,
the
shouts of the seamen out in the bay, and the twinkling red, yellow
and green lights of all the craft at anchor were a gay contrast
PREPARATION
39
with the accustomed nightly gloom over the rest of blacked-out
Britain.
One of the special tasks for which the Royal Engineers of the
Division were training was bridging.
It was not long before the
planners knew they must prepare for the bridging of the tidal
Orne and the Caen Canal.
Like another great advance in con-
structional engineering, the Mulberry prefabricated harbour, the
Bailey Bridge was a product of the tremendous inventiveness and
creativeness inspired by the nation's emergency.
This Bailey
Bridge over the Orne was the first to be constructed in France.
71 Field Company, who were under command of the 3rd Division
in Normandy, did their training for this task on the Humber at
Goole, while
the Divisional Field Companies
trained on the
Irvine at Irvine in Ayrshire.
Wall.
Units were split up for the move and parties were detailed to
travel, some in lorried road convoys, some by rail, and regiments
with heavy armoured equipment had some parties accompanying
their armour by rail and some on the R.A.S.C. tank-transporter
convoys. These last had the most eventful journey, "staging" four
nights and arriving in Inverness in the wintry dusk at the end
of their fifth day.
They had come by many tales since leaving
the Lowlands: how they changed transporters in the dark in the
Shieldhall district of Glasgow, how squads of Glasgow police on
motor-bikes had escorted them straight through the
amazed
crowds queueing up for their evening entertainment, who had
not expected to see such great monsters charging by night up
Sauchiehall Street: how their tanks had to dismount as they
approached the Grampians, and tow the transporters over the
trozen roads and through passes where the snow had drifted :
how they had come on and on, north through Dunkeld, Pitlochry,
rose's men
reflected the low sun.
The stations round the edge of the Firth were not luxurious :
Inverness had never expected to see so many troops and members
