122
ASSAULT DIVISION
The moment of discharge was signalled by a loud noise that has
been likened to the sudden rending of six strips of canvas (one
for each barrel), then followed the familiar moan, swelling as it
grew nearer. It did not take a man long to decide whether or
not to go to earth.1
The Lincolns in their brave feint to the south of Troarn, to
the position—in the middle of the German Defensive Fire tasks
-known to them as Black Orchard, lost the most heavily to
German guns and mortars.
In the course of Wednesday and
Thursday, the igth and 2oth July, alone they lost 210 officers
and men
killed and wounded.
Their Commanding Officer,
Lieutenant-Colonel C. E. Welby-Everard, was wounded in the
shelling and had to be evacuated.
Their Second-in-Command,
Major D. R. Wilson,
tound himself commanding a battalion
that was ig officers and nearly 400 men below strength.
Lieuten-
ant-Colonel C. G. Renny of the K.O.S.B.s was wounded, and
they were commanded by their Second-in-Command until
Lieutenant-Colonel J. F. M. Macdonald arrived on the 26th.
In 185 Brigade, the K.S.L.I. were now commanded by Lieut.-
Colonel C. G. Millett, O.B.E. ; Colonel Maurice, their dis-
tinguished commander on D-day, had been killed by a stray
German shell two nights before Lebisey wood was finally taken
and Caen entered.
Major Dane,
They now lost two other D-day leaders in
wounds.
killed, and Major
Wheelock, who died of his
The position of the K.S.L.I. in the chateau grounds
at Manneville was cramped by stone walls,
houses and trees,
and made more nerve-racking by wounded horses charging in
all directions at intervals all through the day and night.
Norfolks were also haunted by the sight of lacerated horses
from the Le Quai racing establishment.
" Here we had to stay
nine days, subject to shells, mortars, and, most of all, Nebel-
Towards the end they had us fairly well pin-pointed,
and there was a steady flow through the R.A.P.
At this time
the weather was frightful, water poured into the Command Post,
and things got so uncomfortable that there was nothing for it
but to laugh." Here the Norfolks had their first case of exhaustion.
1 The Germans had a taste of their
Panzerwerfer, had it
immediate fierce retaliation on the Ulster Rifles,
repaired by R.E.M.E., and fired it into Troarn.
own medicine when the Middlesex found a
they admired it, but would they please, please stop firing it at once.
It provoked
who rang up to say how much
BREAKING OUT OF THE BRIDGEHEAD
123
"It was the red light, and immediately everyone set himself to
find a solution. The best answer was to keep men's minds fully
occupied, so the Slit-trench Quiz was started.
This proved most
popular, and with the occasional firm word from leaders, what
mignt have been an epidemic was stopped. Everyone had a
narrow shave here, and the orchard was reduced to a collection
of broken trees."
It was on the evening of the 2oth, as the front stabilised and
the rain fell, that the Germans put in a local counter-attack at
Cullerville, with infantry supported by two Tigers.
They had
torced a decimated B Company to withdraw from its position,
viten Major Bundock, commanding D Company, went forward
himself with a PIAT and drove off the enemy.
B Company
reoccupied the position. Major Bundock was awarded the D.S.O.
During this period east of the Orne, the Warwicks lost 8 officers
and 23g men killed and wounded.
The position was once more one of frustration and stalemate.
There was some satisfaction to be got from reading the captured
files of 14 Nebelwerfer Regiment;
or those of the equivalent of
our H.Q.R.A. of 16 G.A.F.
Division which had been overrun
in Manneville, and from contemplating all the enemy armour
lying derelict among the bomb-craters ;
there were four Tigers
one of them upside
down), one Panther,
twelve Mark
IVs,
three Mark IIIs, seven 20-mm. Ack-Ack S-Ps, and four anti-tank
guns counted in the woods round Cuillerville.
But it was a
melancholy sort of satisfaction, and chiefly pleased our Counter-
Battery staff.
For the rest, the only condition that would have
made their losses bearable and cheered their troglodyte existence
in wet holes in the earth would have been a
break-through.
After all the high hapes of Goodwood, this still seemed no mond
likely on the Division's front than it had done six weeks ago, and
battalions were now at half-strength.
But the casualties were
not in vain; though in ten un loue the losses were irreparabie,
their effect on the survivors was to strengthen them
to see the
business through and give stold sacrince some meanino:
And
certainly the
Germans
paid heavily in
proportion :
700
prisoners taken by
Division
Goodwood may by normal
estimates be said to have represented a good 2,000 casualties all
told.
