ASSAULT DIVISION
down," dropped into their slit-trenches and pulled out a photo-
graph or a fag.
Major " Bob " Moberly, the Middlesex historian,
notes the tendency for a man to become " more and more like
a vegetable" if he is planted for long periods in a one- or two-
man slit-trench. This vegetable mentality was best uprooted in
the Infantry by vigorous patrolling; paradoxically, enemy
shelling, the other major event in Infantry life,
encouraged Its
For the Field Gunners and the Middlesex,
actions" and harassing shoots in a forward area (and subsequent
speedy withdrawals) helped to dispel the feeling that they were
" held" by the enemy. The people who were least affected were
the Services who drove lorry- and DUKW-loads of supplies all
over the place; Major Cuthbertson, R.A.S.C., for example,
regularly leading convoys over into the Airborne area,
winning an M.C.
And the Services always had another job as
soon as one was finished, though it is said that whenever they
had a break they were quite prepared to dig or die! But seriously,
they were treated to some heavy shelling and bombing,
little ase it was inevitable that they should reflect more than a
little the mood of the Infantry.
In turn, the humour of the Infantry depended upon
Services, who supplied most of the things that made life tolerable.
After the first month the Mobile Bath-Unit and Laundry arrived,
the Div Club set up bravely in Luc-sur-Mer, and there were
cinema shows in the schoolroom in Plumetot. But until then the
regimental Quartermasters had to make what bathing arrange-
ments they could in their echelons, and most troops managed to
get at least one bath in the month.
the R.A.M.C.
They were supplemented by
Section that landed early and found
little to do : it founded some showers in Colleville not far from
Divisional H.Q.
The Divisional gun-area (in the line of the
Periers gully from Mathieu round to Bieville) was just far enough
back for the gunners to be able to bath on the spot-though
occasionally they were caught by importunate shelling and driven
to earth naked.
With perhaps a couple of tar-barrels and an old
petrol-pump, Battery Fitters improvised baths that would have
done credit to Mr. Heath Robinson as well as to the Swiss Family
Robinson and to Robinson Crusoe in a similar state of nature.
The important supplies of food and mail were wonderfully
DEVELOPMENT: THE CAPTURE OF CAEN 109
regar. Nobody went hungry, except the forward Infantry in
certan stages of later battles, and they knew that could not be
heed. Mail was received nearly every day, though the Channel
gales held it up.
Its importance may be indicated by the fact
that well-tried friendships could be temporarily broken by a
fiend's failure for a mere five minutes to inform you that mail
was" up" and that there was " one for you." The time-lag in
mail was incomprehensible.
No mail posted in
Normandy was delivered at home until over a fortnight after
the assault. The food, the mail and the condition of the weather
in the Straits were made much of by the journalists in English
papers that also began to arrive regularly.
One of the
senous factors affecting the morale of the Division was the failure
of both the B.B.C. and press to mention it.
They would have
hated glowing passages of journalese : that was not what they
wanted. It was just that they felt a keen injustice in the fact that
the Canadians and 6th Airborne
and 50th (Northumbrian)
Division were almost immediately named and given credit for
the operation in which the grd Division had played such a proud
On the tIth June the Divisional Intelligence Summary
read: " Disappointment pres aq aturally been felt over the BBC'S
failure to mention this division as being in the forefront of the
The policy is
announced until the
thought to
be that divisions are
Germans
have identified and mentioned
them in their communiqués."
The position must have been put
lo Montgomery, who visited Div. H.Q. that day, for, two days
later, certain papers, including the Telegraph, allotted a paragraph
to an interview in which Montgomery revealed the
Division's
resence among the British troops in Normandy.
But it must
be said that the accot wong the interview was so unfortunately
phrased that it made those members of the Division who saw it
furious and rather depressed.
In The Good Soldier, Viscount
Wavell writes:
"An entirely exaggerated idea of security has
too often been allowed to prevent individual units being named
and their exploits told when they occur."
That puts it quite
plainly.
There was no deep depression of spirits within the Division
until 8 Brigade's battles for the chateau de la Londe, of sombre
memory.
That deadly, desperate
fighting imbued
the whole
