ASSAULT
DIVISION
Division with the feeling that any slight advance in future would
only be made at a high price in lives.
This feeling was thrown
off, because brooding did no good, and because, with preparations
for the next operations across the Orne from which there were
great expectations, the Division saw how highly its spirit and
experience were rated, and were soon laughing again.
The terrible irony of the chateau de la Londe was that it
was taken quite easily on the night of June 22nd. As part of a
limited I Corps Operation "to hold the enemy in strength
while VIII Corps break out in a right pincer movement on
3 Canadian Division's front," the South Lancs put in a silent
attack on the chateau and walked in.
But something seems to
have gone wrong with their anti-tank defence,
for at 4.40 next
morning, as dawn broke, the Germans counter-attacked with
tanks and drove them out.
Then the Germans set about tighten-
te acence, and we know that 5 company 01 194 1amu
renadiers were severely reprimanded for the " disgraceful'
loss ot the chateau on the urst occasion, and told that wey would
now " fight to the death" for it.
They were reinforced by
between 30 and 40 tanks, a platoon of Sappers and the H.Q•
Company of 22 Panzer Regiment, both fighting as infantry.
That day Major-General L. G. Whistler, D.S.O., arrived to
command the Division.1
As Commander of 131 Brigade, the
Infantry Brigade of the 7th Armoured Division, in the desert and
up to the Volturno in Italy, he had won Montgomery's public
tribute of" probably the finest fighting Brigadier in the British
Army to-day," and since then he has only increased his reputation.
His jeep was quickly recognised by the Division, and so was the
cheery grin or wave that invariably answered a salute.
embers the british Commander before Agincourt, who visited
his men " with cheerful semblance
That every wretch, pining and pale before,
Beholding him plucks comfort from his looks ..."
The next day or two saw good advances on XXX and VIII
1 Major-General Rennie's condition was worse than was at first diagnosed.
Division.
When
he was fit once more he was given command of 51st (Highland) Division-his old
DEVELOPMENT: THE CAPTURE OF CAEN III
Corp fronts, though by June 29th reactions to the VIII Corps
thrust became most violent. Along the front from Juvigny to
Caen eight Panzer Divisions were concentrated.
The weather
was as bad as could be.
On the night of the 26th, after 15th
(Scottish) Division's big drive across the Odon, for the height
south of Caen, the guns were in tune with a thunderstorm.
was impossible
to secure good aerial
reconnaissance of the
chateau, and our patrols never succeeded in getting close enough
to ascertain the true enemy situation there.
Our intelligence
was therefore faulty, and this in part accounts for the grimness of
Operation Mitten, the 8 Brigade assault upon the chateau on
June 27th.
Supported by the Divisional Artillery, the South Lancs led
in the attack in the evening.
There was great carnage.
end they were beaten off from the chateau, but clung to the wood
at La Londe. The Suffolks and East Yorks would have to do it.
Rations were brought round to them between I and 2 o'clock
in the morning and they were ready to move by 4.
minutes past the barrage came down as arranged, and eight
minutes later in they went.
It was still fairly dark.
Dense clouds
thrown up by the bursting shells added to the already terrifying
The memory must accompany those who
present to the grave. It cannot be described.
The one incident
of light relief that occurred towards the end of the engagement
13 evidence of the confusion of the struggle.
C Company com-
mander of the Suffolks,
trying to arrange consolidation,
harassed by a spandau that kept interrupting him.
" Suddenly
seeing two tanks, he crossed to one of them to ask for fire support
on to the intruder.
A head rose from the turret and each stared
at the other in silence.
The gun began to swing
British officer bolted, and though chased back on to the position,
managed to reach a slit-trench before being fired at.
Woodward with a PIAT disabled one of the Mark IVs and the
other was knocked out by Private Crick, who was killed almost
immediately by shell-fire."
The position was consolidated by
four that afternoon.
Casualties to that one battalion on 28th June were 7 officers
and 154 other ranks
killed, wounded and missing.
of June battle casualties sustained by and Army were :
