ASSAULT DIVISION
to be familiar, who properly provide the chief characters in this
book, and who were the central ngures in the act of invasion as
in the ensuing acts.
In addition, for the special task of assault,
the Division took under command the 27th Armoured Brigade,
one unit of which (the 13th/18th Royal Hussars) would take the
plunge from Tank Landing-Craft five thousand yards out at sea
and strike out for the shore in
its Dual-Drive (amphibious)
Sherman tanks.
Under command also came all the various units
administered as 101 Beach Sub-Area.
That included the two
Beach Groups under the 5th Battalion of the King's Regiment
and the ist (Buckinghamshire) Battalion of the Oxford and
Buckinghamshire Light Infantry respectively, with Field Com-
panies of R.E., Stores Sections, Field Dressing Stations, Pioneer
Companies, R.A.F. Beach Sections,
Forward Supply Units,
Beach Recovery Sections, R.E.M.E., and R.N. Commandos. It
also included the Port Operating Group, with its companies of
specialists, the Field Squadron, R.E., which would clear under-
Water obstacles, the Beach Sub-Area Signals, and the Heavy and
Light Anti-Aircraft Regiments, R.A., in support of the Sub-Area.
Besides all this there were gathered under command of the
Division many G.h.L., Army and Corps troops, and borrowed
units, such as 4 Commando from i Special Service Brigade,
the
53rd Medium Regiment, R.A., 5 (Independent) Royal Marine
Armoured Support Battery, two detachments of L.C.O.C.U.s,
R.M. (" Frogmen"), 5 Assault Regiment, R.E. (less two squad-
detachments of 22nd Dragoons (equipped with tanks to
"Hail " mines), 71 Field Company, R.E. (who worked with rob
Bridging Company, R.A.S.C., and the Divisional Engineers on
the Orne Bridges) and 263 Field Company,
Corps Troops, who would
R.E., from XII
glider-landing strips for 6 Airborne Division.
assist 62g Field Squadron to clear
Finally the main
body of i SS Brigade and a R.M. Commando of 4 SS Brigade
were placed
under command until
the
landing was made,
when they would be deployed to either flank, I SS Brigade
coming under command
certain report-line (Mallet).
6 Airborne Division on crossing a
The story of these additional units only coincides with that of
the Division during the training and opening stages of the cam-
paign, though 101 Beach Sub-Area were to be responsible for the
PREPARATION
landing of all men, vehicles and stores for the Division (along with
those belonging to 6 Airborne Division and a proportion of those
for i Corps Troops) long after the Assault; until D plus 55 days
in fact. And units like 53 Medium Regiment, R.A., and 71 Field
Company, R.E., were, as it turned out, to renew their connection
with the Division deeper in Europe.
What is most remarkable
is that, with all these units under command, a specially incre-
mented but normal-sized Divisional H.Q. Staff were efficiently
administering a formation twice the strength of a normal Division,
and at the most crucial stage in its history.
The permanent
members of Divisional Headquarters were devoting most of their
time to questions of planning.
The Beach Sub-Area had joined the Division from its training
areas at Dundonald and Gullane in November.
They began
their " wetshod exercises with the Division in the Moray Firth.
The first two large-scale exercises took place in December:
had been decided that a fair reproduction of the actual tides,
beach, ridges and lateral roads likely to be encountered on the
great D-day could be obtained by substituting Caithness for Kent
and Morayshire for Calvados.
The course south across the Firth
from Lybster was approximately go miles, the same length as the
final course south
the English Channel.
The town of
Burghead was subjected to a shadow of the distress awaiting
Ouistreham. In its honour these December exercises were called
Burger 1 and Burger 2:
Now, for the first time, the whole process of the invasion was
practised. Marshalling camps were established on the Black Isle,
in the damp pinewoods and on the moors beside the Munlochy-
Rosemarkie road,
"hards" were constructed on Chanonry
Point to ensure vehicles at least a solid beach from which to
embark-it was certain there would be trouble enough driving
ashore at the other end—and conditions " at the other end " in
burghead Bay were made to contorm as nearly as possible with
what was known of the Todt fortifications.
Now all units met
the Naval units with whom they.
would finally approach the
Remy beach, and a great friendship developed between the two
To begin with, of course, a few mistakes and misunder-
standings befell. The 2oth Anti-Tank Regiment tell the tale of
a battery Captain G who asked the rating at the wheel of his
