194
ASSAULT
DIVISION
Infantry Battalions who have to take ground and hold it. In
spite of heavy casualties, they have never failed to take their
objective and retain it.
Their determination and steadiness
under fire had been beyond all praise.
All of you will be thinking of your homes and families on
Christmas Day, and regretting the fate which has placed you
so tar from them.
But your families would not have it other-
wise until this job is finished.
They are rightly proud of you.
We must all draw spiritual inspiration from this Christmas
season for the great effort which will be required from us in
the Spring.
Good luck, and God bless you all.
(Signed) L. G. WHISTLER,
Major-General,
Commander,
3 Brit Inf Div.
24 Dec 44-
The Germans said all that it was unnecessary to say in a
papiet Picked up and suitably asped of the divisi
neighbours :
HELLO, BOYS!
Did you have a merry Christmas eve in Blerick and Baarlo?
A little uncomfortable, cold and humide?
And then-the
longing to your family, to all your loves at home and further-
more the bad news from the First American Army! And you
was thinking in the last months : " Christmas at home"
You may believe that we had a merry
Christmas —with the
good news from the great " winter battle" from Belgium.
We
dare say, that you are arep le disappoint, and therefore we had
the only wish to give you a little Christmas-box.
But may be,
that you don't know
nothing from our great attack?
No
wonder, General Eisenhower has stopped all the news from
the Western front ... (Then a garbled German version of the
NEW YEAR !
That's all for today, SO LONG, AND A HAPPY
During the usual time-lag between Christmas and the New
Year very little happened in the Division, but " the good news
THE MAAS
tom the great winter battle " was that the Germans had been
the Germans
"didn't know nothing."
There were a few raw, foggy days in which the roads iced over,
making driving as difficult as it had been in the mud, and much
more dangerous.
in Inverness, was " a bra
New Year's Eve, like Hogmanay a year earlier
bricht moonlicht nicht,"
cold, and
acting. "Just before midnight the last shell of the old year fell
noted Bob Moberly, and a few minutes later the far
bank of the river blazed up
lares, coloured lights and tracer
fantastic firework display :
up, and the noise
augies was added. The Germans were saluting the year of their
They were determined to keep it up,
and shortly after break-
is the air above the Division was full of Messerschmidt rog's and
Pocke-Wulf 1g0's, flying very low
and very fast.
g2nd Light
hok:Ack Regiment, who since June had despaired of ever seeing
te Luftwaffe again, and had been practising shooting at ground
portions across the Maas, engaged the enemy enthusiastically.
That morning some 800 planes raided Allied airhields in Belgium
and Holland in their last great extravagant sortie.
The first wave
lo pass over the Division made for Helmond.
0 be met by British fighters and there were
These they appeared
all over
the sky.
Enemy aircraft-some of which bore R.A.F. roundels
and markings - kept breaking off from the air-fights and flying
back towards the German lines at a height of about go feet.
paid a fair toll to the g2nd Light Ack-Ack Regiment,
who
aestroyed eleven and damaged three. A single gun of Dog Troop,
318 Battery, destroyed three planes outright and had a share
in a fourth.
On this day their Regimental Commander,
Colonel
Bazeley, left them to command the 7th Field Regiment, in place
of Colonel Tapp, who was going out to the Far East :
it was at
this time that troops in the B.L..A. got the feeling that " Burma
Looms Ahead."
The Division was comparatively busy on January Ist, shooting
down enemy aircratt and rounding up the crews who baled out
The same morning one of the Field Regiments received the entire
Australian crew of one of our own bombers.
Their plane had
been crippled over the Dortmund-Ems Canal, and they had just
managed to get back to the right side of the front line
