ASSAULT DIVISION
he wanted. There is now no question that Eisenhower's most
momentous decision was right,
though we shall see
was precisely this condition of the Channel that contributed
most to the detriment of the operation of the grd Division's
The Division, we see, was not alone as it made its uneasy
way south into the grey night.
There was comfort in the sight
and thought of so much aerial and naval support. And the dread-
ful plunge and shudder of the craft was bound to come to an end.
One after another the great buffeting waves were breasted, and,
though in distance it was not a long voyage, the length of time
for most of the Division was between seventeen and twenty hours.
I nose hours grew to resemble eternity, and to the men watching
through the night it was like a voyage into another world.
a sense, that is what it was.
In mid-Channel the waves were between five and six feet
high, and a force 5 wind (16 to 20 knots) was blowing from the
west.
Still there was no resistance from the enemy, and it was
gradually becoming clear that we had achieved the tactical and
strategic surprise that had seemed too much to hope for ; it was
still unbelievable. Shortly after midnight six gliders passed over-
head on their way to secure the bridges over the Caen Canal
and Orne (Rugger and Cricket). Half an hour later they were
followed over by the grd and 5th Parachute Brigades of the 6th
Airborne Division who were going to land in the close strip of
country between the Orne and the Dives to protect the left flank
of I Corps.
observed ahead. But it was all strangely quiet.
Flak was
Sometimes each
landing-craft seemed to be on its own, then suddenly the stern.
of the preceding craft would appear almost under the bows.
A quiet order from the bridge, a change in the engine tempo,
and the craft drifted apart again.
Another three hours passed before the desultory discharge of
tracer from the enemy coast ahead developed into something
like fireworks, with considerable bomb-flashes. In the darkness
overhead a steady roar was developing.
Assault. (The " softening-up" of the assault area prior to D-day
was Phase I.) This morning the Allied Air Force estimated that
they had 31,000 airmen over France between midnight and
INVASION: THE ASSAULT
breakfast-time. The weight of bombs dropped defies imagining.
It was fairly distributed.'
At last the day broke beneath low clouds. The Naval bom-
barment forces joined in the good work of the Air Forces with
alres varying from the 15-inch guns of battleships and monitors
to the 4-inch guns of Hunt class destroyers.
This was no indis-
aminate blasting, but a concerted attack on known enemy
batteries and strong-points.
It was the beginning. The elements
themselves had failed to deflect these relentless forces.
Nary were showing the Division what they could do with odds
ganst them, and the Division, no less stricken by the elements,
waited undaunted to show the Navy what they could do. What
the elements could not achieve it was perhaps unreasonable to
expect of the Germans. Reports from Germany go to show that
they shared our relief, and welcomed the end of the agony of
In Berlin that day there were excited cries of :
commen, sie kommen !" But altogether there was little indication
that our arrival was welcomed. And though the enemy manning
the coastal defences must have spent a night of extreme dis-
comfort, and while it is unlikely that their apprehensions of the
night equalled in unpleasantness
revelations of
daylight, they were not dismayed into inaction.
Bombarding Force "D" was on the flank to port of "ยง"
Force, preparing to engage end anopatteries between Dustreham
Ind Villeville, and screened by smoke from the observation of
Le Havre gunners.
At 5.15 a.m. the enemy made a half-hearted
attack upon this Bombarding Force.
Three torpedo boats sud-
denly emerged trom the smoke-screen, fred a number of torpeaoes
and hurried back into the cover of the smoke. One torpedo could
just be seen approaching H.M.S. Largs.
The Divisional Com-
mander's ship was saved by putting her engines to full Aster,
jad the torpedo passed a few feet ahead of her. A second torpedo
hit the destroyer Svenner of the Royal Norwegian Navy;
suenner, salling but two hundred yards astern of the Lars, sank
almost immediately.
Seven miles from the shore the first Infantry Landing Ships,
Without the intervention of Bomber commat ate ott
Sir Arthur Harris,
"the invasion of Europe would certainly have gone
we bloodiest campaign in history, unless, indeed, it had failed outright-as it
