ASSAULT DIVISION
approach was costly on account of mortaring and sniping trom
the woods. Aldworth led two platoons into the left side of the
woods and Captain Montgomery took the other two platoons into
the right. They immediately encountered cross-fire from machine-
"When his Company was forced to withdraw, John did
not return with them. When the battalion took the wood two
days later, he was found lying at the head of his men,
penetrated deeper into the wood than anyone else.
yard or two of him were a number of SS Stormtroopers lying
dead." Owing to the high walls and thickness of the wood, the
tanks were unable to give any effective support, and the Battalion
was ordered to withdraw to Le Mesnil until its attack could be
supported by a much greater weight of artillery.
The next day the 2nd Battalion of the Royal Ulster Rifles
and the ist Battalion of Panzer Grenadier Regiment 25 sent
fighting patrols into each other's positions, while Colonel Harms
of the Ulsters, with Colonel Hussey of the 33rd Field Regiment,
carried out a reconnaissance for the attack on the morrow.
25 P.G.R. were the right battalion of 12
Panzer Division
which had been escorted from the Seine by the Allied Air Force
on D-day, but which was
nevertheless a formidable division,
with officers and senior N.C.O.s all recruited from the Hitler
Youth reserves: their dead were found to be wearing an acorn
sign and the name Adolf Hitler on their sleeves.
In the attack on June gth the Ulster Rifles conducted them-
selves with great gallantry.
Officer was simple and direct :
The intention of the Commanding
Rifles will capture and consolidate Cambes."
The Royal Ulster
This time the
attack was to be launched from Anisy, a village further over to
i cowest ol camoes, will which
it was connected by a dusty borderless track over completely
exposed ground.
At 3.I5 p.m., preceded by a series of concen-
trations from the Divisional Artillery and a Cruiser of the Royal
A and B Companies crossed the Start-line, with the
O Group behind A Company.
The men were well
spaced out and advanced in good order, direction being steadied
the Colonel from the left.
" As the Companies reached the
ridge some i, too yards from the objective, whence they could be
permanently observed by the enemy, they came under a heavy
DEVELOPMENT: THE CAPTURE OF GAEN 99
barage of mortar and shell-fire accompanied by machine-gun
The Commanding Officer of the East Riding Yeomanry,
who had fought with the Guards, observing the advance from the
Start-line, said to himself: ' This is where
they get to ground,
and the attack is held up.'
To his astonishment, the Battalion
continued to advance in open order, keeping perfect distance.
"Certainly the companies advanced through what appeared to be
an impassable barrage showing about as much concern as they
did on a field-firing exercise."
Men were falling all round, but the advance continued.
A Company under Major Tighe-Wood were particularly hard
hit, losing all three platoon commanders and a platoon sergeant.
But Tighe-Wood succeeded in establishing his company on their
objective and inspired everybody with his cool determination.
Corporal O' Reilly, finding himself the senior person in his
platoon, took command in the difficult period that followed. In
the same company, Rifleman Miller, finding his section leaderless,
led them with great initiative. Examples of the admirable temper
of these men are countless.
Lance-Sergeant McCann, though
badly wounded in the face, refused to drop out until his platoon
were on their objective. When B Company under Major Hyde
ame under heavy fire from the flank,
Sergeant Kavanagh
engaged the enemy machine-guns, and effectively drew the
attention of one of our tanks to them. In such assaults, bravery
seems to have been unbounded.
B Company quickly reached
their final objective, which
included the once fine Norman church in the village,
Company, depleted in the attack two days earlier, went through
under Captain Montgomery.
was severely wounded
leading his platoon, though not betore he had earned the Military
Montgomery, wounded twice,
carried on with the one
other offcer remaining and secured his objecure, which nad it
remained in enemy hands would have been a salient most useful
to them for launching a counter-attack.
C Company, under
Major de Longueull, tought through the wood on to their objec
ive with great dash, and Bobby Diserens, a young officer known
throughout the Battalion for
his enthusiasm,
was mortally
wounded as he ran about, regardless of the enemy's fire, putting
his platoon in position. Under Command of C Company were
