96
ASSAULT DIVISION
a battalion of infantry had broken through and were approaching
the Orne bridge. Two Squadrons of the 13th/ 18th Hussars were
immediately sent to reinforce the Airborne Division, and the S-P
troop of 67 Anti-Tank Battery, after supporting the South Lancs
to flumetot and uresserons, also moved down to cover the
bridges. The Lincolns, whose place in 9 Brigade was temporarily
taken by the Suffolks, moved to St. Aubin d'Arquenay as " long-
stop." Progress on the rafts and bridges was subject to these
periodic alarms, that called the Sappers off their primary tasks
to man defences and provide patrols.
Major Robin Kreyer, the Second-in-Command, took com-
mand of the Warwicks when his Colonel was killed. He had a
further disaster to face. The carriers and anti-tank guns of the
battalion, unable to get over the obstacle from Blainville, had
been sent round by road through Beuville and Biéville : as they
were late, they thought the battalion would be on its objective and
drove straight up the road into the wood.
There they were
ambushed and fired on from all sides. It was impossible to turn
round, as there were walls and houses where the banks ended.
Some vehicles managed to get through into the open country,
where they were knocked out by anti-tank guns. Quite a number
of men who got through the village took to the cornfields and
managed to filter back during the night.
But all the officers
were kilea or captured. M arous vehicle party was the F.O.b.
observing for the cruiser, whose support was now unobtainable.
At 4 o'clock three companies of the Warwicks were reported to be
surrounded, at 5 o'clock they were being attacked by tanks,
and al ten pase seven under heavy tre and almost out oi
ammunition.
The conclusion of this melancholy episode for 185 Brigade is
best told by the battalion historian of the Royal Norfolks : it has
the authentic reserve of the Norfolk man.
Warwick attack went off at half-cock," he comments,
" Cofortunately the
they found themselves in a very difficult position, being unable
to move." He goes on: "There was nothing for it, and we had
to go and restore the situation.
4 p.m. was our H-hour and up
we went, through the sniped village, across the anti-tank obstacle
and up through the corn to the wood. It was not easy going?
but
we managed to get out anti-tank guns and mortars to a position
ret landing: men of the Intermediate Brigade wade ashore from an Infantry Landing Craft.
