126
ASSAULT
DIVISION
Point at 2300 hours, 10 minutes late. Very many congratulations
on your staff work and march discipline. For a divisional move
On one road starting at 0800 hours, to lose only ten minutes was
Already the brief hour of relief was over ; the Division was
being committed to the battle, and once more the Infantry faced
the apprehensions that sicken most men
attack, that diminish mercifully once the action starts.
Brigade moved under command of iIth Armoured Division on
the morning of the grd, then the rest of the Division with 4th
IIth Armoured Division on the left and the Americans.
had come south through the remains of Caumont, and across the
main Caen Avranches road at st. Martin des desaces. Here Ilt
Armoured Division had just captured Le Bény Bocage.
been entered only to
Panzer Divisions.
be temporarily recaptured
Meanwhile General Patton on the extreme
right had entered the interior of Brittany and was
south for the Loire, " his flying columns meeting negligible
opposition." 1
It was the
precarious nature of General Patton's supply
toute that now governed the enenths strategy ana encourage
them in their attempt to drive westward to Avranches and the
coast, cutting off the United States Third Army from its main-
tenance beaches in the north.
The enemy had at last resolved
to bring reinforcing Infantry Divisions from his Fifteenth Army
across the Seine, using them to replace his armour in the Caen
This armour came to the aid of Seventh Army troops
struggling to prevent a collapse of the front in the Vire sector,
and was now massed near Mortain, a formidable striking force.
Their drive for the coast, only twenty miles over the level plain
of which they had full, tantalising view from the hills at Mortall,
was launched on August 7th, and Mortain was not many miles
to the south of the Division's front.,
great
To protect the flank of the
panzer thrust, Seventh Army counter-attacked on
Divisional front late on August 6th.
the
That day g Brigade were advancing, and gra Recce Regiment
were out in front, able to do their proper job for the first time
1 Supreme Commander's Report, p. 52.
BREAKING OUT OF THE BRIDGEHEAD
127
since they came ashore. The advance through the bocage on a
tront about five miles broad just missed the town of Vire, which
was included in the left
American boundary.
On the main
Caen-Vire road, about six kilometres north-east of Vire, the
Infantry dismounted from their lorries and cut off on foot to the
let. Before them on the left was Montishanger, a wooded hamlet
on a hill, then the sparkling river Allière, a small tributary of
the river Vire, ran all across the front.
rose again behind Vaudry village on the right, and this slope was
crossed first by the railway from Vire that ran east and later
tumed south to Flers, then by the dead straight road running
due east from Vire to Vassy.
next road, just over the
Vaudry height, ran
from Vire south-eastwards to Tinchebray
and Flers, and this road, once gained, became the Divisional
Montishanger was
morning without opposition.
Le Pissot and reported the bridges blown.
altack across the river was ordered, to start at 6 p.m. At 6 over
they went, with shells exploding along the line of the river and
small-arms fire from enemy paratroops waiting beyond.
K.O.S.B.s met very heavy opposition, and owing to the speed
with which the attack was mounted and the fact that the bridge
at La Houardière was blown, they were almost completely without
Brigade) reached them late in the evening, and their very gallant
attack on C Company's front saved the situation.
pany one complete platoon was missing, and before the K.O.S.B.s
consolidated that night they had lost a great many of their best
officers and men, killed or wounded.
Meanwhile B and C Squadrons of the 3rd Recce
Regiment
had been pushed ahead of g Brigade to seize and hold the high
ground if possible. Their A Squadron was keeping in touch with
Americans on thehe ght, directed upon Vire.
B Squadron were
heavily and consistently shelled at ti crosing, and those
who
got across
were pinned
down on the
C Squadron
looked as if they might have better luck.
They managed to work
a Carrier Troop
under
Lieutenant
an
Armoured Car Troop under Lieutenant Snelling probed round
