48760114115.
230
ASSAULT DIVISION
separate Brigade Groups, prepared to move at short notice any.
where behind the Guards Division.
In theory 8 Brigade had
three, and 185 Brigade six, hours' notice to move.
Meanwhile
admin. orders were being issued and final preparations made for
the great jaunt into Germany : the last break-through had begun.
It was March goth, Good Friday, and later that morning
General Whistler went round Brigades and addressed all the
officers. From one Brigade the officers were assembled in Haldern
Church—a strange Good Friday congregation! It was noticed
that the General declined the pulpit, despite the obvious advantag.
of addressing a large audience from beneath a sounding-board.
He briefly reviewed
the recent battles,
then turned to the
task ahead, outlining the plan for the XXX Corps advance,
north into the eastern borderlands of the Dutch provinces of
Gelderland and Overijssel, and east again into
German plain.
He then electrified his audience with a remark about the
latest progress of the 3rd Recce Regiment.
They had not moved
to the shine bank at the end of UP feather, but had remaine
with 6th Guards Tank Brigade.
The rest of the Division had
heard that they were up to something.
All they themselves knew to begin with was that they would
Apparently they were.
provide the
reconnaissance for the 6th Guards Tank Brigade
Group (including a field and a Medium Regiment of Artillery,
which was to pass through the Commando Brigade Bridgehead
at Wesel and link up beyond with the Airborne Force.
task itself sounded
"the key to the Rhine crossing was the important communi-
exciting
enough.
The C-in-C reckoned
cating centre of Wesel."1
. On the morning of the 24th they
Watched in the warm haze the approach or the great air force
with feelings akin to those with which the Division had witnessed
the arrival of the Air Landing Brigade on the evening of 6th
This was an overwhelming force.
The troops came in
1,572 planes and 1,326 gliders, with 88g fighters escorting and
another goo proviaing cover over the target area, Wale 1,255
more put up a screen east of the river.
The dropping began
before ten that morning and went on till one o'clock.
Positions
*Crin-C's Despatch, Supplement to the London Gazette for grd September,
1946,
P. 4447.
BEYOND THE RHINE AND THE EMS
231
nte son consolidated, and 6th Airborne Division under General
Bos began a swift advance
eastwards with 15th (Scottish)
The 17th U.S. Airborne Division,
after linking with
the main force of Ninth Army and being joined by the 6th Guards
Tank Brigade Group, followed suit.
It was at the head of this
ice that the grd Recce Regiment found themselves.
Through Wesel, which was
damaged beyond any hope of
repair, they concentrated with the tanks and airborne troops near
Pedenberg at 3 a.m. on 27th March.
There they heard that
their objective was now Münster, fifty miles to the east.
After
much furious map-folding they led off at two that afternoon.
Minster was a vital road-centre, and had been visited two days
deire by the Allied Air Force.''
The main Wesel-Münster road,
runing just north of the River Lippe, was contested all the way,
but they had covered thirty-tive miles of it by the goth, the day
General Whistler was addressing the officers of the Division back
at Haldern in the Bocholt area.
They were working closely with
ne Americans of 17th U.s. Airbornt
8 down the road in a varied collection of jeeps, saloon cars,
aptured 3-tonners, horses and carts, with one original soul in
a mechanical invalid chair.
Others were travelling on
the
Guards'
tanks,
and, denied variety in transport, had satisfied
their egos with top-hats, umbrellas and other tasterul items of
civilian dress.
They were all in high spirits, following their suc-
cessful air-landing. As they passed through our harbour to
attack we had the first of many opportunities to watch them in
action.
Top-hats or no top-hats, their fighting ability was of a
very high standard."
At Buldern on the goth they were slowed up,
and therefore
cut across country to the north-east, so as to come
at
Münster
from the north on the Greven road.
The Guards continued the
attack from the west along the Wesel road.
A Squadron of the
Recce Regiment reached some high ground at Nottuln and got
Involved in a battle at Schapdetten.
B Squadron
therefore
another detour of fifteen miles to the north, getting round behind
this hill,
and entering a village where " the civilians
were
SO
1 The nature of this visit may be gathered from the Report compiled by the Monu-
ments, Fine Arts and Archives
Branch of the Control Commission,
which remarks
that :
" the aerial bombardment of 25 March, '45, has destroyed the whole ancient
character of this once fine city."
