ASSAULT DIVISION
"Without such men as Harry Worthington D-day would
have been impossible." And underneath is printed the tribute
of one of his fellow Sappers :
" Generous, fearless, respected,
He had but to ask-we'd obey.
His memory lives on to guide us
And strengthen us on our way."
The landing in Burghead would be made, men remembered
what they had been told to do at the " briefing,"
usually after not more than twenty-four hours-of varied but
invariably wet and severely cold conditions- ashore in the beach-
head area, units dispersed to barracks, arranged hot baths
a hot meal, and prepared for the next exercise.
While valuable experience was thus being gained by the gra
Division and the flotillas of the Naval Force "S," planning was
proceeding at a higher level. Burger i and 2 were over. Christmas
was celebrated in Inverness in the traditional way by the three
arms of the Service, who were combined as never before, together
and also with their auxiiaries, who were all " in on" the Cona-
bined Operation :
for example, might have been
seen driving 3-ton lorries out of the Cameron Barracks Gates at
daybreak, or deciphering Most Secret signals, or typing, or tele-
printing or operating the Naval exchange.
Over Christmas the
announcement was received that Montgomery would command
21 Army Group.
He arrived in London on January grd, and at
once examined the COSSAC plan and the available intelligence
of German strength in the West. He was in emphatic agreement
with Eisenhower, who decided that assault on a three-divisional
front " was in insufficient strength, and that to attain success in
this critical operation a minimum of five Divisions should assault
in the initial wave."]
It is not very hard to imagine the effect of this on the Navy
and on the two new assault Divisions, the 50th (Northumbrian)
Division and the 4th U.S. Infantry Division, who immediately
required ships and training areas and a thousand other lesser
things that are no less important in terms of success.
It affected
the grd Division in so far as the operation had to be postponed
1 Supreme Commander's Report, pp. 3 and 4.
PREPARATION
a month (it had been tentatively timed for the first days of May)
to allow for the provision of more ships and training.
effect of that additional burden on
shipping was
Division was restricted to 2,500 vehicles in place of the 3,200
originally planned. Otherwise exercises went on as usual. Grab
followed Smash, and details of loads and timings were gradually
worked out and improved upon. The decision taken by Admiral
Talbot and General Rennie on Exercise Grab to Land the Assault
Group at all costs, in weather conditions of sea and temperature
far worse than anything encountered on D-day, gave immense
confidence to the whole Force when the 6th of June turned out
grey and rough.
There was still one major change to be made
in the 3rd Division's plan.
It was revealed (to the few) that the 3rd Division had been
honoured with the task of landing north of Poland (code name
for Caen) on the extreme left of the seaborne
forces, and of
linking up with the 6th Airborne Division inland at Rugger and
Cricket (code-names for two bridges: remark the ever-present
sporting touch).
The landing was to have been effected by
two Infantry Brigades, 8 and 185, with the gth Brigade in reserve.
On February 4th Montgomery arrived in the north to inspect
and address units of the Division, a member of which he had
been, and afterwards to watch an assault exercise.
From the
bonnet of his jeep he
gave his word that there would be no
assault until he was satisfied that a lodgment could be guaranteéd,
that the Germans would have cause to remember the Division
they pushed back into the Straits of Dover in 1940.
There was
a gale warning and Exercise Crown was twice postponed 24
hours.
Embarkation eventually proceeded on the 8th and D-day
was the gth. Lieutenant-Colonel J. E. Shearer, M.C., who had
come to the grd Division from the Regular Reserve of Officers
as Chief Umpire to the Division, was killed that day umpiring
It is not a formality to state that the Division lost
an officer who had quickly won the deepest respect of everyone
who knew him.
After Exercise Crown it was decided to assault
with & Brigade on a single brigade tront, 185 Brigade coming in
two hours later as Intermediate Brigade.
This was the last
ange of plan, and it was given its first try out on February z2nd
* In fact 2,60g vehicles landed with the Division on June 6th.
PROPERTY OF
RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY
