30 41630066
ASSAULT DIVISION
It looked like being a fine night: in the western sky the sun
set red and splendid to delight proverbial shepherds and sailors:
our soldiers were no less elated, waiting with the usual excitement
and anxiety, making last-minute adjustments, rehearsing their
own parts in their own minds, whistling, singing, perhaps more
confident than ever before, but impatient to begin.
K.S.L.I. were to lead 185 Brigade, attacking at Il
o'clock: on the left the 9 Brigade attack would be led by the
Ulster Rifles at midnight. The K.S.L.I. knew a good deal
about the village of Dreye, their objective, which was heavily
defended, and which they had to take swiftly, preventing the
enemy from falling back to re-form.
The main Osnabrück-
Bremen railway line ran north through their positions : it was
raised above the swamped land, and passed to the west of Dreye,
crossing a bridge over the road that led back from Dreye to
Arsten and Bremen.
Already Z. Company of the K.S.L.I had
done some valuable patrolling down this railway embankment.
lan Rae, the Battery Commander with the Battalion,
how on one occasion Major Read, the Company Commander,
with two men, went down towards an enemy signal-box strong-
point, after an artillery bombardment but in full daylight,
SS corporal out of the bottom of his slit-trench,
returning to their own lines without incident and with a very
angry prisoner." A deserter gave the K.S.L.I. evidence that the
German Company H. L. had been hit by shell-tire and the Com-
any commanaer killed. He gave away the poston of the new
H.Q., and confirmed platoon positions.
That night Y Company
were to go straight for the main position, a lactory, while W
Company on the right cleared up to the Weser, and Z, Company
to their relish, had the job of advancing along their rallway bank
and flanking Dreye and
cutting off German retreat from the
At ten minutes to eleven the artillery we plan began, drench-
ing the German positions with heavy concentrations.
I and W Companies moved off Close to the road and & Company
worked their way along the embankment.
Dragoons and A.V.R.E.s set off along the road.
Tanks of the 4th/yth
din was terrific.
Y Company found
As usual, the
and lost their Commander,
the factory an ugly pro-
Captain Heatley, in the
BREMEN AND GERMAN SURRENDER
fist few minutes. Their Adjutant writes: " Captain Clapham,
trom the reserve company, at once reorganised them in the most
gallant manner under intense fire,
and succeeded in capturing
Both companies quickly cleared the village."
crocodile flame-throwers were putting up a terrying perormance,
and were invaluable at the factory.
Just beyond it, A.V.R.E.s
came to the rescue by lobbing their Petards at a road-block.
"Two or three of these missiles were sufficient."
Major Read was
now leading
Z Company in a bayonet
charge along the railway embankment, firing from the hip and
clearing the
first platoon position and an Ack-Ack gun-post.
Charging one weapon-post,
his ammunition spent, he used his
machine carbine as a club.
At that point he was wounded in
the leg, having both bones broken.
" He refused to be evacuated,
cheering on his men, shouting to the Germans to come out and
This officer was awarded a bar to his M.C. " The success
of the company was due in no small extent to Private Wood of
the Intelligence section, who went ahead of the charge in the
most dauntless manner,
yelling at the Germans in their own
language to come out and surrender."
By now the K.S.L.I. had carried out their plan with complete
success, and taken more than two hundred prisoners.
of the Brigade attack was a " walk-over."
At least they had first
to plod across the floods in Buffaloes,
but then both
and Norfolks walked straight into their respective
and Habenhausen.
Warwicks dismiss
skilful, complex operation with a paragraph :
"One could
on writing for a long time about the detail of this operation, but
it is enough to say that the whole thing went exactly as planned.
Our objectives were captured, and at 4 a.m. the Battalion was
in position,
prisoners, and no casualties."
are stigmatised as
a spineless lot: the barrage drove them all into their shelters,
took them completely by surprise.
think we fired a single shot.
Great credit must go to the Buffalo
Regiment, who successfully completed the ferry-service just as it
was getting light,
in spite of the difficult landing.
passed through
Warwicks at 1.30
and their great array of tanks and SP's moved steadily forward.
