ASSAULT DIVISION
and Anti-Tank guns, by tanks and by mortars, until it was a
total ruin. And by day the watchful Battalion snipers claimed
several victims. On the night of the 28th a patrol from D Com-
pany again approached and was again kept at bay by heavy
small-arms fire.
So the next night the Divisional Artillery fired
to cover the noise of the bringing up of assault boats.
tunately this drew Defensive Fire from the enemy's guns which
holed every craft just as C Company were about to embark.
After a three hours' wait fresh craft arrived, and C Company
crossed the flood waters in the early hours of the last morning in
Not a sound came from the enemy as the Company
approached the Castle.
They touched down in silence.
enemy had vanished.
. They left behind them only bloodstains,
a few weapons, signs in the wine-cellar of extensive junketings,
and the sad shambles that symbolised the German
At Div. M.L. it was noted on November 25th in the Generas
Staff War Diary that " the Kasteel receives press and radio
publicity out of all proportion to its military significance." It
corresponding lack of proportion that had
Division's principal grouse in the bridgehead days when,
5tst (Highland) Division's arrival had been
announced by the b.B.u. within a few hours of that event and
several days later came the news that " the 3rd British Intanu)
Division are now
fighting in Normandy"-as if it was they
who had followed in the wake of the 5ist instead of the other
way round.
This proportion is fairly adjusted in the Cin-Cis
act where the pace devoted to the military acheroe
their news-claim if not of their news-value.
of the respective Divisions may be taken as the proper scale of
more to the Geisteren affair than has been stated.
There was nothing
it might make a good story if the German version could be
obtained, though their explanation might equally well spoil it.
isn November goth the grd Recce Regiment went back into
Divisional reserve and 185 Brigade
moved north to assume
responsibility for the vast northern sector of the Division's river
185 Brigade,
8 and g Brigades each took a share of the area vacated by
but a much
heavier responsibility had
wet allotted to 9 ongaue. the I5th (scottish) Division had
WINTER:
THE
MAAS
RIVER LINE
189
discovered a strong pocket of resistance in the Wanssum-Helling-
Bitterswijk wedge between the beek and the river,
and before
they had time to eliminate it they were sent south to attack
Berick, opposite Venlo. The task fell to g Brigade, who deputed
Their attack was carefully prepared, with reconnaissance on
the ground and recent air-photographs studied by the Company
and Platoon Commanders concerned.
It was timed for 5 a.m.
on the 3oth. Darkness was essential, as
was no covered
approach over the marsh.
But at 5 a full moon showed up every
novement at a distance of 200 yards, while a keen wind cleared
the clouds away. C Company on the left ran into heavy opposition
in the hamlet of Helling and suffered several casualties.
Bird's Company, advancing from Blitterswijk along the Wanssum
road, soon came under machine-gun fire,
but by rushing in and
trowing grenades the first three objectives-two windmills and
a thick wood-were taken before daylight.
During the day the
33ra rield Regiment engage, wil targets in the telling area,
while D Company's snipers accounted for eight Germans.
by the moon. A number of machine-guns opened up on the leit,
next attack began at I a.m.
December ist,
again betrayed
low and accurate, and including captured Bren-guns that were
thing happened when
crossed the road to clear a wood to the north.
Here, under heavy
and sustained fire, Lance-Corporal Rossiter ran forward into the
open to pick up Corporal Carroll, the wounded commander of
another section that was pinned to the ground.
over his shoulder, he called to the others to follow, and ran back
The Germans seemed determined to hold on
their bridgehead, and by this time the Ulster Rifles were being
badly shelled from over the river.
in Wanssum were well repaid in kind,
During that day the
and Henry Taylor,
F.O.O. of the 33rd Field Regiment with D Company,
never ceased trying to silence the enemy's guns or to neutralise
his ground defence, and who
was outstanding
assistance," was awarded the
So, also, was
In the early hours
D Company held his fire as a German patrol approached, until
