ASSAULT DIVISION
Atter searching two houses, about a thousand yards back from
the Maas, voices were heard, and twelve Germans, including an
officer, were seen carrying a rubber boat. Fire was opened up at
them by the patrol at ten yards range, and all fell. No fire was
returned, and they were probably nearly all killed. Returning
to the river the patrol ran into a position containing at least two
machine-guns manned by eight men.
They were engaged at
five yards range, and five of the occupants were killed or wounded.
After this it was found that Cray was missing.
Harris and Private
Spendlow stayed to look for him while the others returned to the
boat. After waiting half an hour —none of the three had returned
—the others reluctantly recrossed.
At 5 a.m. another patro.
crossed to look for the missing men. No trace was found, and
though careful watch was kept the following night, nothing
emerged either then or later concerning their fate.
the last palitocross in the a mission we need
by the Ulster Rifles. They had already made a most satisfactory
reconnaissance with a patrol under Lieutenant Hancock of five
enemy-occupied houses near Lomm. On the night of February
4th Lieutenant Beavan took a patrol across to
bring back a
prisoner from here. Across the swollen river they were amazed to
anot man carrying a shovel of blazing coal from one house to
another while three men walked down to a position
patrol had told them about.
An ambush was prepared for these
three, but, not two minutes later, two more Germans
proved very informative.
they were disarmed, hurried away to the river, and
These patrols were in all cases given the closest artillery
support, and every
emergency.
possible precaution
was taken against an
The Field Regiments were kept in action
more than about ten days' rest throughout the period.
Counter-Battery and Harassing shoots were tred off
daily, and in that respect the enemy was effectively dominated. At
the end of the period the Artillery O.P.s had an intimate know-
ledge of the habits of the Germans across the river, and this, with
Lowland Division.
results of the Infantry's patrols, was handed over to the
Before the relief took place, the South Lancs and the Middlesex
played off the final in the Divisional Football Competition on
WINTER: THE MAAS
RIVER LINE
February 5th, on the De Valk ground, Venraij. " The Middle-
ex goal had some narrow shaves, but Phipps played an outstand-
ng game, carrying their side on
his broad shoulders : then
Mason and Howey scored, and the final result was a win for the
Middlesex, 3-1."
That day the Lowland Division's Advance
Parties arrived, after a journey
over terrible roads,
Gelenkirchen sector.
The relief was greatly complicated by
the fact that there were only two routes open to the Division :
Horst-Venraij-Deurne
Overloon-Oploo-Deurne.
despite everything the Sappers and Pioneers could do,
practically impassable.
selves out of the mud on the 6th,
However, they began to pull them-
Sith they had all left the area.
and by the afternoon of the
The South Lancs record that
i took them seven and a half hours to cover the twelve miles
from Deurne the road was well known : through Helmond
and along
It was the way they had taken for the brief pleasures
48-hours' Brussels leave.
Veritable was February 8th, and that
target date
for Operation
day, " despite weather
conditions that could hardly have been more unfavourable," it
was duly launched as the Division left the line.
They had the
feling that war had released them only for a few moments, and
would soon reclaim them.
They were not wrong.
When they first arrived in Flanders the previous September,
the Divisional Artillery had noticed the number of Artillery Ranges
marked on their maps in the neighbourhood of Bourg-Leopold,
Belgium's Aldershot: the Gunners had commented rudely then,
as they did now that
brigade) billeted near Louvain and Brussels while they remained
within easy reach of the ranges of Lommel.
But, wherever they
vere, the Division were quick to win the friendship of the local
while they cleaned the Maas mud off their vehicles
and started training again.
with a will in the production of landing-tables and schemes for
marshalling and bank control: these, with hardly any alteration,
were used with manifest success in getting the assaulting Divisions
across the Rhine a month later.
1 Supreme Commander's Report, p. 107.
