212
ASSAULT DIVISION
Company had been ordered up to Bussenhof, a cluster of
buildings 500 yards short of the main road, from there to get
through to the relief of C Company. But to begin with they got too
tar over to the right, and meanwhile the enemy had crossed the
Fleuth and occupied the copse on the road. To make quite sure
that B Company got through,
Colonel Renison went over to the
Bussenhof himself, placed the carrier platoon under their com-
mand, and told them to steer clear of the copse, which D Company
and the troop of tanks of the Grenadiers would deal with. G
Company had now been forced to pull into the tight perimeter
round Schaddenhof, and Rutherford had asked Ford
the S.O.S. down about their own ears: enemy,
penetrating right up to the walls of the house, while their infantry
got a foothold in the outbuildings.
About 9.30, as soon
of ammunition had
as it was learned that the carrier load
never arrived, the
Second-in-Command,
"Banger" King, collected another carrier from Bussenhof and
loaded it with ammunition and spare wireless batteries.
the Colonel on the way to Tac. H.Q., who told him the enemy
in the copse would make it difficult for him to get through.
Banger said he was quite willing to take the chance.
asked before leaving how long it would take him to get to the
desperate company
(as they wanted to know).
"About ten minutes good going on the main road. It Was nive
min/ees later that Bombardier White, himself fatally wounded
soon afterwards, reported from Ford's O.P. the brief message:
" Banger's here."™
more minutes. At that point
C Company could not have held out many
Banger undoubtedly saved the
bridgehead, and was awarded a bar to the D.S.O. Soon after-
wards B Company crossed to join Ce and the Germans desisted
for a while.
B Company took over the defence of the right flank,
wireless was added to the Gunner communications, and Maclean,
who was acting F.O.O. with them,
took over the duties of
2 It is a notable coincidence that (as the Fifteenth of Foot) the East Yorks earned
their Regimental nickname " The Snappers" at Brandywine under the conditio:
ot a shortage of ball ammunition.
1.O., learning of the acute shortage, cried :
Snap and be damned," whereupon all avd lable ammunition was handed to the
best shots, the rest running from tree to tree, snapping blank charges.
THE RHINELAND OFFENSIVE
Infantry Officer. About this time D Company got into the copse :
the Company Commander found he had fifteen men left when
he came to consolidate.
Meanwhile a recce party from the 6th
Royal Welch Fusiliers of 53rd Division had come forward to
make arrangements to relieve the East Yorks during that night.
This did not appear practicable : indeed, the R.W.F. recce party
lost two officers killed and three wounded.
Soon after midnight the enemy struck again for the bridge,
this time with a battalion of paratroops. Now they pressed in
trom all sides and tanks overran one section position in the sandy
bank in front of the house,
Company H.Q. dugout.
one track actually passing over the
The Battalion anti-tank section were
surrounded, but eventually succeeded in
getting back into the
farm, the walls of which were being subjected to bazooka fire.
The artillery support was maintained, the guts ming as much as
five rounds a minute for long periods.
The entire Corps Artillery
And again
counter-attack slackened.
intensified again about 3 a.m., and back over the bridge the copse
was retaken, yet the Germans never tried to rush the bridge
trom this side, a suprising reflection in view of the terrific shelling
with which their onslaught from the south was constantly met.
The bridge was held, and at last,
about 4.30 on the morning
of the 28th, the attacks began to die down and the rate of gun-
fire was reduced.
Yorks' Signals
" 0440-0510- Brig and C.O." suggests that brigadier Goulburn
and Colonel Renison discussed at length the situation and the
possibilities of relief.
This began at 5-50, when a company of the
R.W.F. supported by
the copse and
East Yorkshiremen were found still in their positions-with four
that morning
three Welsh Companies got
forward over the bridge and permission was given for B and C
to move back.
Even then C Company were held
down by increased enemy shelling, including close
S-P on the west bank of the Niers.
By midday the relief was
That night the 76th Field Regiment fired 450 rounds per gun,
and the other two
Regiments must have fired almost
while all the available guns. of the Corps contributed some 100
Baglin, the Staff Captain R.A., acknowledges that
