ASSAULT DIVISION
of a modern house at the end of Red Beach. Then that must be
the strong-point Cod !
In one of the craft making for Red Beach was " A " Company
Commander of the East Yorks, Major C. K. King, known widely
in the Division as " Banger."
He held the attention of the men
who were lucky enough to be in his craft by reading them the
famous passages from King Henry V. Minds that would otherwise
have been was with natural apprenensions were niled with
the encouragement of King Harry :
" On, on, you noble English!
Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof,
Fathers that, like so many Alexanders,
Have in these parts from morn till even fought,
And sheath'd their swords for lack of argument :
Be copy now to men of grosser blood
And teach them how to war !
The game's afoot :
Follow your spirit. ..."
Major King's action was akin to Wolfe's at Quebec almost 200
years before, and worthy to be remembered with it.I
Advancing in front of the four Infantry Companies, the crews
of the D-D Shermans, A and B Squadrons of the 13th/18th
Hussars, had reached a position 5,000 yards off-shore where
they thought their tanks stood a chance of swimming for it. (in
less heavy seas they would have been launched 7,000 yards out.)
All fifteen tanks of A Squadron and nine tanks of B Squadron
struck out for the shore.
Rear-Admiral Talbot has paid a just
tribute to " the determination of these gallant men to use their
amphibious tanks in the manner for which they had
designed."
Forward with this group was an F.O.O. from each of the
Field Regiments.
The job of these F.O.O.s was to observe the
fire of their regiments upon the selected part of the beach strong
point Cod on the East Yorks' beach, and make any necessary
1 That "Banger" had in mind the image of Wolfe reading Gray's Elegy seems
certain, since
Quebec is first
among the
battle honours of the East
Regiment, and September 13th is always celebrated by its members.
Yorkshire
INVASION: THE ASSAULT
corrections. The L C Ps of 33rd and 76th Field Regiments were
sunk, but the F.O.O. of 33rd Field Regiment was picked up by
the L CP of the 7th Field Regiment, and the fire of the Divisional
Artillery was observed from that
The other F.O.O.,
Captain "Jo" Daniel, R.A., was killed.
Close behind the swimming tanks were the assaulting infantry
and also L C Ts containing the flails,
bulldozers and armoured
vehicles, R.E., of the eight gapping teams and four obstacle-
clearing teams. Behind them were the Rocket Craft and then
the Divisional Artillery.
It was now past seven o'clock and
H-hour was 7.25. Steadily they drove on together.
Captain Lyon, of A Squadron,
" The seaworthy
quality of the Sherman D-D astonished me,
but it was necessary
to adopt a zigzag course to avoid getting beam on to the tide;
the Squadron appearea to me to be keeping acerent station."
Nevertheless they were retarded some live minutes by the rough
sea. This may have been the reason for the A.V.R.E. flotilla's
altempt to overtake, driving right across the port bows of A
The beach was now obscured by bombing and
arillery concentrations, and about ten per cent of the drenching
rocket-fire from the L CT (R) -whose decks grew red-hot-was
observed to fall short.
It caused the A.V.R.E.
flotilla to go full
astern together, and, when they overtook the shermans a second
time, led to the ramming of two A Squadron D-Ds. One of the
victims, Captain Denny, reported :
" At about 800 yards I was
rammed by an L CT
, and we sank immediately, the tank going
ver on its beam and sinking for about 25 leet,
ending upside
Although the crews were wearing
A.T.E.A. and Mae
wests, they never appeared again, as 1 did not see them during
we 3o minutes I was in the water. his same oncer, describins
the short range of some of the unmistakable rocket concentrations
which fell among them, says :
" The Squadron kept good station
in spite of these intrusions."
The moment the squadrons beached
the enemy opened fire, and four tanks were disabled. Five more
were swamped in the breakers.
Thus there were only five effective
Shermans on the East Yorks' beach and eight on White Beach,
the one "eye" left open to spot for the Artillery worked admirably considering
that" cramped conditions are aggravated by the tact that neary everyone, includins
and myself,
Captain H. W. Bruce, M.C., R.A.
is being violently sick," according to the log kept by
