DIVISION
enemy-manned weapon-pits and with anti-personnel mines on
the way, but by il a.m. were fighting in
Touffreville,
Touffreville had missed some of the bombs intended
for it, and the Germans determined to hold it.
had a great deal of mortaring and sniping to put up with before
opposition was finally overcome at 6 that evening,
was much mortaring to follow. Touffreville was still being con-
tested when the Suffolks had set out for Sannerville at 10.15 ..
But theirs was a different experience.
They took Sannerville at
20 minutes past 12 and Banneville la Campagne at 4 o'clock,
villages that were battered beyond description.
Those Germans
left conscious were far too dazed to offer any resistance.
185 Brigade's objectives were farther south. At g.30 on the
same morning the K.S.L.I. mounted the Shermans of the Stafford
Yeomanry and drove down,
through considerable hostile fire,
At 1o o'clock there was heavy mortaring at the
railway line, but Lirose was taken after a sharp fight.
Battalion pushed on against heavy opposition north of Manne-
At 8 p.m. the Brigade attacked Manneville with the
Warwicks right and the Norfolks left. At last light they were
still 200 yards short of the village.
Meanwhile g Brigade, with the K.O.S.B.s right and Ulster
Killes left and the cast Kiding reomanry in support, aavanced
eastwards on Troarn. On the left a "scissors » bridge was erected
over the Cours de Janville, and crossed soon after 3 p.m. by the
Ulster Rifles. They were heavily shelled, but gained their brick-
works objective, and pushed on to the I-junction a mile from
Troarn, consolidating there after three-quarters of an hour's stif
The K.O.S.B.s had trouble bridging the stream on the
main Banneville-Troamn road, and eventually at 7 p.m. crossed
by the Ulsters' bridge to attack La Croix de Pierre, which they
took at last light, consolidating in an orchard.
Shelling that
night was at random and as indiscriminating as ever, but seemed
to fall particularly heavily on 9 Brigade.
Early the next morning 9 Brigade renewed the attack on
Troar, while 8 Brigade consolidated, and 185 Brigade, con-
Manneville and Cuillerville abandoned,
occupied them, and beat off a counter-attack by two companies
of infantry and six tanks launched from Emieville at 4 p.m.
BREAKING OUT OF THE BRIDGEHEAD II9
Posed up to Troar, the K.O.S.B.s on the right were hard
The Ulster Rifles were being bled from a church that
was held by the Germans on the left flank.
At 10 a.m. the
K.O.S.B.s and East Riding Yeomanry attacked along the road
to the railway station and were violently repulsed. A German
counter-attack on La Croix de Pierre was beaten off, and at 10.45
the Ulster Rifles attacked the church from which their left flank
was harassed. By midday they had taken the church, but saw
fi to consolidate 300 yards to the west,' whereupon the Germans
re-entered the church and two further attacks failed to dislodge
At 6 p.m., while the Lincolns,
unsupported, executed a
very courageous diversion
south of Troarn,
the Ulster Rifles
attacked from the north, but they were still 800 yards from the
When the Ulster Rifles dug their positions that night, they
imagined they would be going forward again at first light.
the Division had done all that was required of it,
even though
Troarn had not been taken. The eastern wall of the corridor for
the armoured drive had been held, and the armour itself, though
checked by the enemy's anti-tank screen,
the next day,
immobilised by mud, had achieved " a decisive effect.
Panzer Division and 9 and 1o SS Panzer Divisions were brought
castwards across the Orne."? This was a fatal move.
it was up to the United States Ist Army, who had been
attack the day after Goodwood, but who were held in suspense
till the 25th July by the miserable weather.
Though there was no call for further advance eastwards for
the time being, the Division was left holding a nasty position od
the corner of this most sensitive front. The Germans made good
their heavy losses in troops with heavy shelling and mortarine
and casualties in the Division mounted daily in proportion.
first day in static positions saw the descent of a delug
poured all over everything, and trenches were flooded out.
• The immediate vicinity of the church was anywalt was
y untenable to begin with, owing
to fierce heat engendered by a
here that, aged nineteen
Lieutenant Brian Burges was killed while trying to rescue a wounded wisen
the E. Riding Yeomanry who was stranded in the open.
Brian Burges
led that first fighting patrol of the Ulster Rifles insist
Caen only ten
days earlier ;
he bad been wounded then in the shoulder, but insisted on carrying on.
"Notes on the Operations of 21st Army Group, p. 14-
