330336
of the axis on that front. The plight of the men at Arnhem became
more hopeless as the weather grew blustery and bleak.
cursed the weather and remembered their own feelings in mid-
And when some huge supplies of German rations were
captured up at Oss, and distributed in place of the
compo rations, they were cursed too, though it was obvious that
were saving some hundreds of trucks journeys
hundreds of miles back and forth to Normandy.
The German pork
and beans and cheese were palatable and you would have
thought they would have been acceptable, if only for the change:
they were emphatically not. It cannot be denied that the
Knackebrot was intolerable.
In cold wet weather,
8 and 185 Brigades and 3rd Recce
Regiment patrolled the front; the friendliness and enthusiasm
of the Dutch continued in an almost embarrassing degree: at
this time the G Ops Signals log bears constant witness to the
assistance they gave the forward troops.
Moves and rumours of moves were continual. The K.O.S.B.s
group moved out in front of 185 Brigade to Liesel. In the Weert
area the South Lancs crossed the canal, while grd Recce Regiment
patrolled the canal right up to Helmond and beyond. Then, oll
the 25th at last light, the East Yorks were ordered to Gemert, still
farther north, and the rest of 8 Brigade were relieved by 4th
Armoured Brigade, while they followed the
to Bakel and De Mortel.
East Yorks north
On the 26th a very rare incident
(because their appearance was rare) was the shooting down of a
Messerschmidt iog near Zomeren, which was in the middle of a
Divisional front extending 35,000 metres north and south.
next day it was to be extended north and also east another 16,000
metres to St. Anthonis and held
as a firm base while i1th
Armoured Division advanced to the river Maas. Arrangements
were made and the GOC had given out his orders when, in the
middle of the night, VIII Corps rang up to say the lith Armoured
Div. operation was postponed forty-eight hours.
This involved a
rapid readjustment of Brigade plans, but the result was a quieter
day for the whole Division than it had known for some time • •
until 5.45 that evening, when Corps rang up to say that all
elements of the grd Division must be clear of Deurne, Liesel and
Asten by 8.30 the next morning This was to make way for the
THE ADVANCE INTO THE LIMBURG LOWLANDS 153
United States yth Armoured Division, who announced their
intention of sweeping down through Overloon and Venray to
Venlo, "Elements of the grd Division" were clear by 8.30, all
excepting the covering troops, who stayed to furnish the Americans
with details of tank "going," bridge and canal reconnaissance
and certain facts they had noted about the enemy.
The 2gth was passed in ominous quiet at Div. H.Q., and, sure
nough, an L.O. arrived at midnight with a note from the Corps
Commander to the GOC, inviting him to a reconnaissance the
first thing next morning.
At 6.30 a.m. General Whistler set off
on reconnaissance north of the Maas in the Nijmegen area with
the Commanders of VIII Corps and 1 Airborne Corps and General
Gavin, the Commander of 82nd U.S. Airborne Division, who had
made the descent near Nijmegen. That day, the last of September,
plans were made for the preliminary moves of two
Groups over the Maas on the ist October, to be ready for an
operation on the 2nd/3rd. Three O Groups were held as details
of the complex traffic and concentrations plans successively
became known. Allowances had to be made for the full operational
scope required by U.S. 7th Armoured Division, for the move of
231 Brigade across the river and for the heavy demands of XXX
the 4th Tank Battalion of the Coldstream Guards, which came
Corps maintenance.
8 and 185 Brigades would cross,
under command from 6th Guards Tank Brigade :
operated and trained with the Division at Vire and Flers.
On ist October they crossed the Maas bridge at Grave and
turned east along the bank.
The road was extremely narrow
and the sides gave way into deep dykes on either side.
to Over Asselt and then Heumen, where they crossed the southern
end of the Maas-Waal Canal.
Nijmegen was five miles to the
north beside the Waal River, and most of the narrow neck of
country between the two waterways was in our hands,
violent Panzer counter-attacks. A mile ahead to the east a pine-
forested ridge rose to 70 metres (a Dutch mountain range) and
sloped down, then rose again into the massed pine-trees of the
great Reichswald whose edges marked the German frontier.
the southern end of the first forest ridge, next to the Maas, the
line was held by the 82nd U.S. Airborne Division, who had landed
from the air exactly a fortnight ago.
In this wood, near the Mook
