ASSAULT DIVISION
Group were about to run in from the Lowering Position, " assault
on Queen Red and White beaches and secure the beach-head to
include the high ground about Periers-sur-le-Dan and St. Aubin
d'Arquenay." Under command 8 Brigade were the 13th/ 18th
Royal Hussars, 5 Assault Regiment, R.E., and 4 and 4I Com-
mandos, as well as the Machine-Gunners, Gunners, Sappers and
Field Ambulance " habitually affiliated" to that Brigade.
Wireless silence had already bee» broken by the Gunners of
the three Field Regiments.
All the sets had been netted before
sailing, and now came the anxious moment of test,
were switched on and the net checked.
The great fear was not
so much that out-stations might have drifted off net,
Germans might be jamming them effectively.
communications are indispensable in battle ; without them they
are powerless to provide artillery support, but that is not all;
Gunner representatives with the
forward Infantry are
better equipped than the Infantry themselves with the means of
communication,
and their signals are correspondingly more
dependable channels of information from the front. Afloat, with
parties distributed over so many craft,
here was the supreme
need for wireless perfection.
No less than that was achieved.?
in the naval " free for all" which was
Closely linked, then, anch, chronised, in full fling.
the Gunners joined
" touched off the devilish cannon" a mile outside the Lowering
Position, loosing over two hundred shells a minute as steadily
they closed in on the target and dropped the range accordingly.
The remainder of the East Yorks and South Lancs cheered
their Assault Companies as they sailed away from the Lowering
Position, then themselves stood by to be loaded.
As Battalion
H.Q. of the East Yorkshires moved off in their L C A past the
Largs, one of the East Yorkshiremen sounded the General Salute
2 Royal Signals (and the R.A. signallers) won gratitude all round on D-day.
The
distinction of fitting seventy-six out-stations into a workable group was achieved by
Lieutenant Whiteman of the Royal Signals, though he was appropriated by 9 Brigade
H.Q. before he could see the practical success of his efforts.
remarked that, as an additional stand-by for
It has already been
the 3rd Recce Regiment supplied twelve wireless
the first fortnight of this operation,
Infantry communications.
Contact Detachments to aid
The Assault Brigade Signal Instructions drawn up by
appendixes, thirty-nine pages of foolscap!
Captain Macbay, R. Signals, and issued with the Operation Order, occupied, with
INVASION: THE
ASSAULT
on his bugle.
The Admiral and General acknowledged it; it
was a stirring gesture.
Meanwhile the Assault Companies were making hard for
their beaches. Shells were noticed to be falling among the waves
and the craft, and there was no point in hanging back now where
one hit meant writing off a whole crowded craft. It was a tense
journey, that first bold approach to the shore.
The general
teing, one that marked everything to do with D-day, was that
nothing was impossible for a force that could be mounted in the
might that was evident all around. But though this seemed to
bode well for a successful battle it did not go so far towards
removing the purely personal sense of mortality. However, most
minds were occupied by the scene ahead, where, apart from
dits of smoke and flashes and great clouds of dirt as the full
weight of our shells and rockets landed, the Calvados coast was
From the sea there was nothing much to be seen except a
diary row of boarding-houses along the featureless flat front,
thickening up on the left into Riva Bella and the little port of
Oustreham with its church-tower and lighthouse, at the mouth
of the Orne, and on the right into the small seaside resorts of
Lion and Luc-sur-Mer.
(Was it Burghead lighthouse after all,
or the Sussex shore, and the whole thing a bad joke— just a stage
nearer the actual invasion ?
The situation was so familiar that
this thought must have crossed every mind, to be quickly rejected.)
The houses joining Riva Beloal Lion-sur-Mer were marked
on the map as La Brèche.
It was appropriate that Queen Red
and White Beaches should have been opposite La Brèche ;
French it means the breach!
Those houses were built along
to lateral roads, the first narrow and backing the beach, the
second broad, two hundred yards inland.
They were connected
all along the front by a series of narrow roads, which, once cleared,
would serve as beach exits.
Queen White was on the rifht, the first objective of the Sputh
That looked like
the house with the turret
nown on the photograph just to the right of White Beach, Detween
adis 10 and II. And that was surely the lat-rooled sun-trap "
, The common expression of this in plain English was : " This'll shake the bastards ! »
it was spoken with a cheerful note of confidence.
