ASSAULT DIVISION
to register it, a white flag was hoisted and the sixty-seven German
gunners emerged with their hands up. The advance began on
Hillman. Captain Ryley, commanding the company which was
to attack Hillman, received an unpleasant shock as he crawled
forward on his reconnaissance. It had not been clear from air
photographs that there
were deep concrete shelters
position, although the pillboxes, steel cupolas and emplacemens
were easily recognisable. Fire from a cruiser was never brought
down, as the F.O.B. had been knocked out earlier.
Nor was there
any sign that the position had ever been attacked from the air.
The breaching platoon, under Mike Russell of D Company,
and Lieutenant Heal, R.E., crawled forward through the corn
under cover of H.E. and smoke from the Artillery, breached the
two belts of wire and cleared a track through the enemy mine-
field, " working just as if they were on training and yet within
50 yards of the enemy,"
wrote their commanding
Lieutenant-Colonel R. E. Goodwin. One section crossed the gap
and immediately came under heavy machine-gun fire from one
of the cupolas.
The section commander, Corporal Jones, was
killed as he tried to work his section forward.
The Platoon
Commander, Lieutenant Powell, came forward with a PIAI
team to deal with the cupola. A message was sent back to inform
maplain mytey that they were pinned down, but the first runner
on the way.
Another Artillery concentration was
brought down, and Ryley led the rest of the Company in attack,
but only he, Lieutenants Tooley and Powell and Corporal Stares
got through the gap. They took a few prisoners, but most of the
enemy had withdrawn into the concrete shelters.
Lankester went forward to join Powell and found Tooley and
Corporal Stares mortally wounded.
Moving back to report the
situation, Captain Ryley was killed, and Powell took command
of the Company.
The Divisional Commander came to see what progress had
"I explained the
situation,"
wrote
Colonel
1 General Rennie was ashore by 10.30 a.m.; unlike the situation at Suvla with
Mahon, Stopford and Hammersley, the difficulty lay in restraining him from risking
the dangers of the front-line.
seen walking in Hermanville.
Later in the morning the Corps Commander was
Neither wore a steel helmet.
noon General Rennie was able to inform Brigadier Smith that he supposed St. Aubin
to be clear since he had just driven through it in his jeep!
At 5 o'clock that after-
INVASION: THE FOLLOW-THROUGH
Goodwin, " and he said we must capture the strong-point before
dark, so that we should be dug-in on our consolidation positions
before the enemy armour, that was reported to be in the neigh-
bourhood, could attack at first light."
185 Brigade had en-
countered the 2nd Battalion of 192 Panzer Grenadier Regiment
supported by self-propelled guns on the Periers ridge. Already
the Division was face to face with the 2ist Panzer Division,
thought to have been from 1o to 30 miles south of Caen.'
An additional squadron from the Stafford Yeomanry were
now going in with the Suffolks to clean up Hillman.
The mine-
field gap was widened and safely crossed after another five
artillery bombardment.
Fifty prisoners were taken,
though there was a grisly business in the deep shelters
galleries; some Germans fought on to the bitter end, and had
to be blown out of their emplacements by heavy explosive charges
laid by the battalion pioneers. Gradually resistance decreased
and the success signal was given at a quarter-past eight in the
6.45 the next morning
commander of 736 Coastal Defence Regiment, a full colonel,
emerged with three of his officers and seventy other ranks
trom a concealed shelter that had been overlooked the previous
The East Yorks, supported by B Squadron of the 13th/18th
Hussars, the 76th Field Regiment and the Self-Propelled troop
ơ: 67 Anti-Tank Battery, R.A. (which had been ashore since 8.15
that morning), had captured the 75-mm.
battery Daimler by
seventy prisoners from the coastal artillery battalion
were taken, with several 40-mm. anti-aircraft guns.
This battalion had moved into Buron three weeks before the assault, and, meriers
i accordance with Rommel's general policy, came right forward to thee coers
ridge on the evening of 5 June.
Lieutenant-General Edgar Feuchtinger, the Com-
mander of 21 Panzer Div, came directly under Von Rundstedt's command.
Rundstedi passed the buck am the chly c firer in his interview with Major Shit-
man in October, 1945, it remains true that Feuchtinger got not a word froded im
till 7 a.m. on D-day, and no operational order till 1o a one
higher authority to commit 21 Panzer Div.
Rundstedt needed no
It was the one Division in immediate
eve Capable of affecting the battle, having about 170 armoured agnuns vendies.
At 10 a.m. Feuchtinger had decided
troops immediately, but at 10 a.m.
to wait no longer, and attack the airborne
" I was ordered to stop the move of my tanks
(gainst the Allied Airborne troops, and to turn west and aid the forces protecting
Caen" —ie. against the grd Division.
" With that, 716 Infantry
Division,
practically dissolved as a fighting unit.
of which 736 was the right-hand Regiment,
