ASSAULT DIVISION
of the other fighting forces. But everyone got some sort of accom
modation, and those who were fortunate enough to begin this
period in what comfort Fort George offered,
the regular home of
the Seaforths (who had never before been " out of residence")
gave way to people less fortunate and based themselves for the
latter half of the period on a dismal site like the four-times con-
demned Nissen camp out at Muir of Ord.
The Headquarters
of the Division were established in Inverness in the Cameron
Barracks, grim as any Scottish baronial hall, its grey. granite
dominating the Moray Firth out to the North-east and the town
sprawling below its west wall. The Planning Staff were already
cut off from their fello yo no. were working in London at Ashley
Under the expert, discerning eye of Major-General W. H. C
C.B.E., D.S.O., M.C.,
who had commanded 50th
Northumbrian) Division with distinction in the desert, the
players had learned their parts in the drama, and were assembling
here for rehearsal, getting together for the first time.
be an Angio-American production under the supreme airection
of General Dwight D. Eisenhower.
appointment of General Eisenhower as the Supreme
Allied Commander was not made until January, 1944•
plan of COSSAC (Chief of Staff to Supreme Allied Commander)
had been completed the previous July, accepted by Churchill,
Roosevelt and the Staffs at Quebec, and had already begun to
aflect, airectly or indirectly, the lives of every man, woman and
child in the United Kingdom. Its tremendous material require-
ments, for example in Landing-Craft, many of which had to be
, onstructed in the streets outside the workers' houses, so great
was the pressure of work in shipbuilding and other engineerins
yaras, are material for anothnsuosk on the social implications of
the D-day preparations, and have in fact already been lightly
treated elsewhere. It is sufficient here to notice that the intensifica-
tion of activity in the grd Division at this time was symptomatic
of the whole country's concentrated striving.
All that most members of the Invasion Division knew was
confined to what they saw : it was enough to widen the eyes of
most hardened
American-film
known to the Planning Staffs since last June that the landings
would take place on the Normandy coast between the Rivers
Orne and Vire. That coastline had been selected chiefly because
of the shelter afforded by the Cotentin peninsula against pre-
vailing westerly winds, and of the possibility of insulating the
wedge of France between the Seine and the Loire by destroying
all the bridges over those two rivers.
Naturally this was not
general knowledge,
but its early selection enabled the few who
did know to collect the most intimate details of the landscape and
enemy defence and reproduce them in such a way as to provide
pertect training for all concerned: and it left no one the wiser
about the exact location
in Europe-though doubtless many
protested they were ! This method involved everyone in the use
of code words, such as Queen Red Beach, and Marris,
(known enemy strong-points), so that they
familiar to every unit and passed into common speech.
In October, 1943, Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay, who had
been at grips with the formidable complications of the Naval side
of Combined Ops since May, 1942, was appointed Allied Naval
Commander-in-Chief of the Expeditionary Force and took over
the "X Staff" from the Commander-in-Chief Portsmouth.
November,
Air-Marshal Sir
Trafford Leigh-Mallory
was
appointed Commander of the British air component. On Christ-
mas Day, General Sir Bernard Montgomery was appointed to
command 21 Army Group.
At the same time Major-General
I. G. Rennie, D.S.O., M.B.E., the Black Watch (R.H.R.), was
appointed to command the 3rd Division.
Major-General Tom Rennie had seen all his previous action
with the 5Ist Division.
As a major on their Divisional Staff he
had been taken prisoner at St. Valéry-en-Caux in June, 1940,
and within ten days had made an astounding escape.
Alamein he commanded a battalion of the Black Watch, and
won the D.S.O. He was proud to take command of a Division
as keen and fit to fight as the 3rd Division were-to a man—at
the close of 1943-
To him was entrusted the responsibility of
combining all the units and groups of fighting men into the
irresistible
Force which would
break into Normandy on the
extreme left of the seaborne invasion.
That Force, the Assault Group of the grd British Infantry
Division, comprised not only units whose names already begin
