AVERSON
ASSAULT
DIVISION
or huddling in ill-lit dug-outs were a great test of morale.
annoying to read of the way front-line troops
The nearest mobile cinema show involved a
journey back through the mud that took about an hour on foot
or half an hour in a truck, while regular cinemas and shows were
back at Deurne,
Helmond and Eindhoven-involving
journeys of one and a half or two hours in the back of a lorry
over awful roads—not to be undertaken unless very browned of.
As reserve battalion life was better.
Even then the main enter-
tainment amenities were nearly as far away, though we did have
one adventurous
ENSA team who visited us and were nearly
shelled. The Mobile Bath was available once a week in the line,
but not all men could be spared from Companies to bath in thai
Fortunately units changed round once every week or ten
days. ney naturally grumbled at being thus always mucked
about," but it stopped them from growing too despondent.
rearward units were actually no better off.
There was hardly a
habitable dwelling in the whole of the Divisional gun area.
one time the sight of all the C.V.s, caravans and bivouacs of Diy.
Headquarters in a hopelessly waterlogged field beside the Optoo-
Overloon roda could be relled on to prompt derisive and ve
disrespectful comment from men returning from the front.
vide Decemuer was interrupted by bf important aroun
ments and an anniversary.
The news that U.K. leave would
start in January concerned everybody The Daily Telegraph and
topic of conversation
and provided the main
and thought.
Dary Mirror hastened to assure D-day men and their familie
that they could expect to be reunited not later than Februa
and it was therefore no surprise to several members
Division who had landed on D-day to find that they would not
he guns nome on cave Delore May. Jack Harrod, Adjutant of
the Lincolns, recorded: " The fact
that L-of-C troops were
placed on an equal footing with themselves raised no more than
the typical soldiers' grumble, especially when it was made known
to them that the GOC and even the Corps Commander had
taken up the cudgels on their behalf, though unsuccessfully." It
need not be assumed that even Lincolnshire men felt at home in
Nord Brabant and Limburg, though Harrod does say that the
THE MAAS RIVER LINE
mr ine "from Vierlingsbeek to Lottum became as familiar to
honshire men as any reach of Witham or Welland!", The
sona piece of news only directly concerned 185 Brigade.
as at their Brigadier Eric Bols was leaving them on being
promoted to command the 6th Airborne Division.
They were
wing an admired and well-trusted Commander. As their G Ops
un puts it, it was " unexpected and upsetting. A farewell party
was hastily organised."
The anniversary of Christmas Day was quiet.
Most Logs
are thing to Report but a Happy Christmas.
It was a fine
day, crisp with a hard, sparkling frost.
There were special extra
ations of pork and turkey and auckistmas puading and fruit,
and cooks excelled themselves.
day arrangements they could.
Troops in the line made what
Those who knew they were due
for relief in a day or two held their rations and celebrated out of
On Christmas Eve there had been several reports of
frey on the far bank, reaching a drunken pitch, and next door
n the right the lIth Armoured Division reportea sounas of
It was wondered if the enemy were getting
herr celebrations over on the 24th in order to be able to spoil
the 25th, but Christmas Day was quiet.
General Whistler said
i that it is necessary lo say of the occasion
A CHRISTMAS MESSAGE TO ALL RANKS
OF THE DIVISION
1 wish to sena you my vest wishes lot we sat were
During the last six months the Division has fought splendidly,
and has added to its high
when you first touched French soil as the
spearhead of the
Invasion you have been almost constantly in action.
Very
largely due to your efforts during those first critical days,
of German-held Europe had been
Since then you have been in the forefront of many
hard battles.
I wish to say a special word to the Infantry.
Splendid as
has been the support given by all arms of the
it is
Rifle Companies of
the
that small number of
