ASSAULT
DIVISION
had reached Fontainebleau, while the U.S. XV Corps establised
the first bridgehead, and within ten days bridgeheads were linkeri
up across the length of the Seine.
The Division, at its training,
was consoled by the thought that " there's always the Rhine"
They were glad of their training long before the Rhine vas
reached. But perhaps a certain feeling of impatience was under-
standable. The fact remained that the Division now had a large
proportion of new reinforcements who could only benefit by
practice with seasoned warriors.
The change after two and a
half months of the wantonness of war was hardly unwelcome.
indeed the Lincolns have placed on record the admission that
" without warning we found ourselves settled in a small peaci.
French village, surrounded by friendly and admiring inhabitants
As soon as we realised the implications of this strange turn oi
untune we began to take advantage of It. We turned our vu
kits and spruced ourselves up.
the approved smart and soldierlike manner, and so great has
We marched down the street in
the transtormation that no earthquake occurred when somebody
mentioned Blanco."
And though the weather — for a time the only enemy — became
wet and spoiled life for those who had no barn-roof over them,
Flanagan and Allen, Florence Desmond, Kay Cavendish and
to compensate for the cheerlessness of the rain. 17,000 soldiers
had some form of organised entertainment during the. week,
ough the A &complained of the usual administrative dithculties
in entertains the entertainers, which in practice could only o
done by turning over to them the entire resources of an others
mess: never grudged, but inconvenient.
isin 3o August came a warning order from VIII Corps : the
Division was to move within the next four days.
The move from
Caen to the Vire front had seemed a wonderful journey, but it
was
a mere step, compared with the
Limburg, which was the next achievement of the Division.
was true of the Division as of the rest of the
Expeditionary force, that its most remarkable achievement in
the period between the break-through and the consolidation alons
the German frontier was administrative, logistical, & instead of G.
From Flers till the battle for Overloon in mid-October the only
THE ADVANCE INTO THE LIMBURG LOWLANDS 141
real fight the Division had was in the assault-crossing of the Meuse-
ecaut Canal. Not but what the G staff had their hands full
aler the crossing, with the advance on Weert and all the subse-
quent daily moves and redispositions.
But naturally at a time of
such prodigious advances, the most vital problems were those of
transport and supply. The spotlight was turned on to R.E.M.E.
and R.A.O.Ci. and especially on to the R.A.S.C.
For the drivers
ti was an effort comparable with D-day, in fact it was their great
The first move was to take the Division 150 miles. It began
on 3 September. On Divisional moves,
Provost would work
dread blazing the trail with triangular signs for the rest to follow.
On this occasion others had been before and the route was
labelled EYE, with occasional triangles for reassurance.
must have been thousands of these signs left beside the roads of
Europe, on trees,
hedges, derelict tanks and even on
haunches of dead horses where a German gun-team had been
caught at a cross-roads. The most famous sign, 240 UP, marked
the main L of C from Arromanches to the coastal plain of N.
Germany: the triangles extended to Bremen.
One wonders if
day remain, and if they serve to remind people of the men whose
Prom Flers the route by-passed to the south the worst of the
Argentan-Falaise shambles, leading to l'Aigle by way of Ecouche,
Médavy and Nonant les Pins.
From then on the roads were
better, through Verneuil, Breteuil, Conches, Louviers and over
the Same to Les Andelys above which town the units were to
disperse among the prosperous villages.
At every fourth hour of
the day and night the whole crumn, stretching for mies,
would
pull in to the side of the road for half an hour's rest and " brew-
up." There was no restriction on vehicle lighting, and all through
the night the rumble and clatter and bright lights kept the people
of the towns and villages at their bedroom windows,
watching
the sight that seemed too good to them to be true.
By day they
ined the streets waving and watching and throwing at me fruit
they could lay their hands on.
The moment a truck halted the
children
would crowd
round demanding
"Cigarettes
pour
Papa,"
and then, if they were boys,
would as often as not light
up for themselves.
In this respect
U.S. troops had
all
unfair
