ASSAULT DIVISION
to Churchill) ' like lions' for over five years cannot be so very
rotten that we could be lured into surrender through mere ham
Hoping that we can rely on your sagacity to con-
prehend, we remain as of old with Heil Hitler! Hard times,
At least this served to demonstrate that the Germans were
grown concerned with the numbers of desertions from
Another tallpiece of tals week was well worthy of
Charivaria.
It reprinted the following extract from 21 Army
Group Local Electrical and Mechanical Engineers Instructon
No. I (General G. 953), under the heading Change of Lubricans
—Tracked and Wheeled Vehicles and Static Engines :
Following a study of meteorological reports
evidence to indicate that low temperatures will be encountered
during the winter months.." and added brightly : " Investiga-
tions at this H.Q. by much less highly qualified experts suggest
that it may also be wet."
Finally, through these Summaries it could be seen how, on
the one hand Brandenberger,
General der Panzer Truppen, was
having to write: " To the Officers of Seventh Army.
are fighting directly under the eyes of our people. ... All habits
which may have been understandable in enemy territory must
alsappear. • • • De an example More than Ever. • • .
Eisenhower was calling for
on the other hand, as or the evening of zIst November, General
"an all-out effort,"
with Allied
armies pressing down all three of history's great routes into
Germany-Belfort, Metz and the Ruhr.
It was now apparent
that the Germans were ready to fight it out west of the
This suited the
Supreme Commander well.
Any large-scale
penetraton of Germany beyond the Khine would obviously be
and smashed the German forces west of the river.
a much easter proposition once we had closed up to the left bank
was now to close to the Rhine.
So the intention
Cologne was making relentless progress.
The advance from Aachen on to
For the present nothing
could be done in the north. We have seen how the grd Division
wero extended almost to the point of insecurity. A direct advance
across the Maas to the Rhine or a drive south-east from Nijmegen
would have been impossible without
Aachen attack and switching them to the north.
taking troops from the
Rather than
WINTER: THE MAAS
RIVER LINE
185
do this, the Supreme Commander continued for the time being
to stretch the formations in the Low Countries, so that 21 Army
Group extended as far south as Maeseyck, where their line crossed
the Meuse and turned east to join the Ü.S. Ninth Army in the
Geilenkirchen sector.
So far from being in a position to concentrate to cross the
Mas, the ard Division had not yet reached it on the southern
quarter of their tront.
They were to reach it with less trouble
than they anticipated, though a few score of perverse Germans
gave them trouble enough. As part of the Second Army plan for
the final elimination of the Maas pocket, the Division was to
attack eastwards to the river in line with other formations farther
south which were now advancing on Venlo.
By the middle of
November battalions were on their legs again
if not actually
spoiling for the next fight.
The three
Brigades were all fitted
into the line (which now ran as far south as Veulen), and ready for
the word " Go," when on the night of November zist the Germans
made a very noisy demonstration in the smakt area, and also in
front of o Brigade, with machine-guns and mortars and fighting
Next morning
a civilian reported to 8 Brigade that the enemy had retired
across the Maas, and patrolling throughout the day seemed to
confirm his statement.
During the day 15th (Scottish) and I1th
Armoured Divisions reached Maasbree, Sevenum and Horst in
the south, and the grd Division was ordered to advance, with due
caution, next day.
The weather on the 23rd, the first day of this advance, was
A week earlier the ground had been visited by the
first heavy frost of winter and had since been softened by a cease-
less fall of rain.
Deep mud was everywhere and under it lay the
the Germans had planted.
trees to block the roads and booby-trapped the trees.
were cratered.
The bridges were
The sickening scent
of dead cattle filled the air as usual. The Germans appeared to
have left.
Next morning,
however, as the probing forward continued,
Major Read,
commanding Z Company of the
informed by a runner from one of his patrols that the enemy had
fortified a house in the village of Meerlo. He at once took up
