ASSAULT DIVISION
Division (185 Brigade had just joined 8 and g) saw C.T.C. in
the spring of 1943 there was a remarkable change.
ot obstacle bestrewed the shore of Loch Fyne, and the hills wer
infested with strongpoints.
Field artillery and Vickers machine
guns supported the assaults, and day after day men returned to
camp tired and mudstained but with heightened confidence and
spirts. This was the stage from which the training for the biggest
Combined Operation was developed : the training for Operation
All the time the courses, demonstrations, competitions wer
going on at Moffat the individual Battalions, Gunner Regiment
and Sapper
various assault roles.
Companies were perfecting themselves in
When Moffat closed down, units and
Brigades had their last chance to become complete amphibians:
before the gathering together of the whole Division
They
Christmas period for the combined assault exercises.
appreciated and made good use of that time between the first
news of the task and the " gathering of the
clans"
around
Inverness and the Moray Firth.
It was the time when units were
still scattered fairly widels over Scotland, preserving their dearly
cherished independence; when Platoon and Troop Commanders
were satisfying themselves that theirs was the best platoon of
troop in the company or battery ;
When Company and Battery
Commanders Were satisfying themselves that theirs was the best
company or battery in the Regiment ;
when Regimental Com-
manding Officers were satisfying themselves that theirs was the
best regiment in the Brigade; when the Infantry Brigade
sweriord, the whole topic was at that
time avoided by common consent.
Now that Commander Kenneth Edwards, R....
nas published his book, peration Neptune, we had better accept the popular usage of
Operation Overlord and "
its naval component "
Neptune.
in the fitting fog of secrecy in which the degrees of security were enveloped.
The confusion originated
Neptune
in clear the
in clear security grading given to operational orders and documents that revealed
time
and place of the
orders and documents in which time
operations, Overlord was the code word for the
and place were in code.
special procedure for the handling of Neptune documents, to ensure that they were not
seen by those not entitled to see them.
Bigot indicated the
nouncement on
such
Neptune referred to the Navy's
delicate matters the
en the natural absence of a general pro-
" natural'
assumption was made
that
hard to see why the Army should therefore accept the role of Bigot !
part in the total operation Overlord, though it is
PREPARATION
37
manders were each assuring the others that theirs was the best
brigade and was the obvious choice when it came to leading the
Division in the Assault.
The C.R.A., Brigadier G. G.
M.C., R.A., had not so much to lose when this choice of Assault
and Follow-up Brigades was made.
Gunners would anyway be
landing with the first troops ashore, and guns would at all events
have to be ashore within about an hour of H-hour.
Units always prefer to be well away from higher formations,
Divisional Headquarters in particular, to feel completely inde-
pendent. At certain stages of training this is good for the unit
and serves to create exactly the spirit needed later for integration
into the pattern of the Division.
Now they were on their own
until they had found their sea-legs and got the feel of the Navy.
All this experience was on the West Coast of Scotland at Inveraray,
Dorlin and Kilbride successively. At C.T.C., Inveraray, men
were getting hard and continuous practice in embarking and
disembarking themselves, their equipment and vehicles, day and
night, first in platoons,
finally in brigades.
At Dorlin there
were
wilder, harder conditions and thoroughly wet landings
on the isles of Eigg and Rhum in emphatically foul weather.
There
was plenty of wind and rain and mud, too, in Kilbride
Bay, and a 200-yards wade ashore only made the troops feel the
more satisfied that this was realistic training for the day they
began to look forward to, believing now that they were equal to
the job for which they had been chosen.
It may be seen that units were much on the move, and these
moves in themselves were a valuable break from routine.
that all moves were made with men enjoying
the changing
scenery from the comparative comfort of Army transport.
example, when the East Yorkshires left Inveraray the rifle com-
panies marched over a hundred miles carrying full equipment
for a further month's hardening on the Ardnamurchan peninsula,
scrambling and firing over the hills and practising the Company
Landings in Kentra Bay.
The 20th Anti-Tank Regiment, meanwhile, had practised at
Inveraray the ways of loading
and beaching towed guns and
ailing with them on L G 1.
They were finally equipped with
one troop of American self-propelled M. 10's (the Model 10 is a
3-inch gun on the chassis of a Sherman tank, a fine anti-tank
