ASSAULT DIVISION
Main Residues from D-day plus 7 onwards; and First Reinforce-
As the normal reconnaissance role had to be carried out
by various specialist units during the assault phase, the grd Recce
Regiment suffered the mortification of standing by during the
invasion until they could come into action, and make up for lost
time, on the igth June.
One hundred of the officers and men
of the Regiment were fortunate: they were formed into either
Contact Detachments (for the provision of an additional com-
municating link between
the assaulting units), or a
Control Group, both parties landing on D-day. To the remainder
of the Regiment went the main task of operating Handsup : that
is to say, they were given control of both lots of Residues.
It is wrong to suppose that no one had anything to
the hour approached. Divisional Ordnance were working harder
than ever before, supplying last-minute
indispensable needs.
R.E.M.E. teams and unit drivers worked like Trojans, or rather
like Britons, to ensure that waterproofing was 100 per cent sound.
R.A.S.C. drivers were at the wheel all day, fetching Ordnance
stores, taking men who were not in the Main Body of Assault
Group to camps farther inland situated according to whether
they were to rejoin their units " over there" on D plus 2, D plus
7, D plus I4, or whatever date they would be needed. Members
of units with armoured equipment were fully employed up till
the last minute on their maintenance and waterproofing pre-
parations.
It was the foot-soldier who had hours on his hands
at this time, and he was the man who least wanted to think.
His
uppermost thought was: "Why can't they get on with it?"
There were 24-hour passes for a time: that helped the man
who lived in London or the south.
was lucky.
Perhaps he got two, if he
The electric trains were crowded. Otherwise the day
was filled with routine that was so obviously designed to kill
time that it only succeeded in maiming it.
After that, there
were marquees fitted out as cinemas, canteens and rest-rooms.
Fastened to trees all over the camp were loud-speakers that
issued sepulchral over-amplified summonses
for somebody or
other to report to the Camp Commandant's tent, or disturbed
the quiet dusk with : "Look to your black-out. Black out now!"
—a nightly warning; if only they would call forward the first
craft-load ! Most books were boring and newspapers unreadable.
PREPARATION
The beer was restricted and was hardly beer. The weather was
lawless; there had been no such weather since the summer of
1940. It was ideal for a camping holiday: it was tormenting.
Hot spring sunshine filled every lane and every wood, and even
caught the air as if under a magnifying-glass, so that it seemed
to be scorching, on the point of breaking into flame.
After Fabius it quickly became clear that—well, now for it !
Wiring round camps was doubled and tents were set aside in each
for "briefing" with strong guards posted outside and C.O.s and
IOs and staffs working long hours at the preparations within.
On May 8th General Eisenhower,
Admiral Ramsay, General
Montgomery, Air-Marshal Leigh-Mallory and others met to
decide the hour and day. The original idea had been to land
three or four hours before high tide and about forty minutes
alter nautical (dawn) twilight. The Navy wanted as many hours
as possible of rising tide, and the Army wanted the shortest
possible run over the exposed beach.
Both wanted adequate
daylight for observing shoots and as many hours of daylight as
possible for the build-up, in fact a second high water before
nightfall. Then the under-water obstacles had been reported,
and were the most considerable factor.
They varied in depth on
the different beaches. It was therefore decided that there should
be individual H-hours, according to the depth of the obstacles.
The earliest was fixed at o6.3o hours,
the latest (Group G J2)
đt 07.55. Three days in every fortnight produced suitable con-
The first timing of H-hour depended on which of those
days the assault was made.
The day was fixed at June 5th.
There could be postponement till the 6th, or, if the worst came
to the worst, till the 7th.
Commanders on May 23rd.
This decision was signalled to
Meanwhile, on May 13th General Eisenhower visited and
spoke to the Division.
His sincerity was impressive.
Everyone
laughed when he said he knew what some of them thought of
the Americans, and that he had the advantage of knowing what
some of the Americans thought of them.
And everyone knew
we truth in his remark about thinking ourselves not Allies, but
one indivisible team.
such good spirits.
" It is good to see you looking so fit and in
I had heard so much about you from General
Montgomery: and he it ctainly did not exaggerate.»
In con-
