ASSAULT DIVISION
by an S-P gun, a brilliant day being spoilt by the death of
Lieutenant Ferguson, whose troop throughout played a prominent
Their count of prisoners for the day topped the hundred
mark, while one young member of the Officer Corps, very anxious
for his luggage, even thumbed the Colonel for a lift."
The road from Wetten to Kapellen led due east. This was the
point at which XXX Corps wheeled left around II Canadian
Corps, for that day the 53rd Division met the U.S. 35th Division
in Geldern, three miles south of Wetten.
The Americans had
come up from the south at a good pace and all that was needed
was for both Armies to face east : in the northern sector the para-
oops were clinging bitterly to the Rhine corner opposite Wese.
the Recce Squadron was held up it appeared unlike
that any further advance would be made that evening,
Guaras annoured Division, culus deross alrect Irom winnesen
donk to Kapellen, were not far past Winnekendonk when they
found their way barred by an obstacle too wide for their own
bridge-layers.
But half an hour before midnight XXX Corps
directed that the grd Division would capture Kapellen that night.
At 1 a.m. Brigadier Matthews said his leading battalion was
moving forward steadily and hoped to be.in Kapellen soon.
the Warwicks were advancing, a patrol from the A.s.u.l. under
Lieutenant Wright penetrated the town and reported it lighty
At 5.20 the Warwicks were entering Kapellen, while on
the left the Norfolks had completed a night infiltration by the
whole battalion through a two-mile belt of the Siegfried Line-
a big anti-tank ditch, well-laid wire, and a series of deep trenches
"cover all approachesto take their objecuves, Haus Winkel,
and a smaller hunting lodge in a wood, for the loss of one carrier
The Division was now at the foot of the Bonninghardt ridge.
The bridges in Kapellen were all found badly damaged.
meant a further delay for the Guards Division, but eventually they
got away though the Norfolks' position in the Winkelscher Busch
i the morning of the 5th, and General Whistler ordered 8
Brigade to screen their left flank from Sonsbeck with a strong
As the Guards advanced over the Bonninghardt ridge,
& Brigade stood ready to follow under their command to hold
ground for them while the other two Brigades rested and the
RHINELAND OFFENSIVE
guns went on firing into the Wesel pocket. On the 8th II Canadian
Corps warned the Division that they " might be required to pass
through the Guards and the Lowland Division, as the latter were
sil tubbornly opposed." But the last opposition broke. On the
lot the Division was ordered to take over from the 43rd Division
a stretch of the West Bank of the Rhine opposite Rees. They
moved into position on the 12th. Fourteen days after the begin-
ning of Op Heather the Division was watching the survivors of the
Para Army across the River Rhine.
