ASSAULT DIVISION
opposition. Here, as late as the early hours of Thursday, May
3rd, the guns of a troop of the gand Light Ack-Ack Regiment
engaged and destroyed two boats on the river and silenced a
persistent signal station on the far bank.
But by the evening of April 26th a change had begun to take
place in Bremen.
The German civilians had begun to emerge,
and regard, with cow-like expressions,
their conquerors.
the liberated slave-workers-Poles,
Czechs, Dutch,
French, even Italians—had begun to " make merry at anybody's
Staff cars appeared, representatives of the Navy, of
an American Task Force (Bremen was to be their occupation
port), engineers and military policemen had all arrived.
day 9 Brigade were ordered out to relieve a Brigade of the 515t
Division in the neighbouring town of Delmenhorst.
dulled the Ulster Rifles' triumph of the previous day, when,
setting off in a carrier towards Huchting, Major Bird, Lieutenant
Tony Hancock and a section,
drove over a magnetic sea-mine
concealed under the road.
There were no survivors. After a day
of pouring rain, 185 Brigade were also ordered out : they settled
in the country west or Delmenhorst on the 2oth " to protect the
open right flank of the Canadian Army."
But though the
Gunners had some excellent shooting at odd bands of soldiers
fleeing irom the Canadians across the coastal plain, there was no
further fighting.
Thus the Division waited for the German High Command to
recognise the inevitable.
It was not the way they had imagined
they had expected it to come as it came, for example,
to the United States 3rd Division,1
Berchtesgaden !
who on May 4th cleared
On that day all the German armed forces in
North-West Germany, Folland, Schlele ig-Holstein and Denmark
the Division received the order :
surrendered unconditionally through Admiral Friedeburg, and
RESTRICTED (.) Cancel ALL offensive. Ops forthwith
and CEASE FIRE
0800 hrs 5 May 45 (•) further details
1 This famous American
Division,
the extreme left of the Sicily landings, took Palermo,
under General Truscott, distinguished itself op
fighting a parallel campaign.
and fought all the way up
It may be remembered how near the British gra Division came, in 1943, t0
BREMEN AND
GERMAN SURRENDER
In a few days the Division was moved south into the middle
of Germany in accordance with the regrouping for the Occupation.
They were then ordered to prepare to move to Berlin as the
Bitish element of the garrison for the German capital. This was
cancelled, and the Division was withdrawn to Belgium and pre-
pared to be flown to America, to take part in the seaborne assault
on the mainland of Japan.
was cancelled as the Japs
surendered. Early in October the Division left Europe for duty
in Egypt and Palestine.
General Eisenhower,
his summing-up of the campaign,
stresses the importance of " three episodes as being the most
decisive in ensuring victory.
The first of these," he goes on to
say, " was the battle of the Normandy beaches.
We sailed for
France, possessed of all the tactical information that an efficient
intelligence service could provide, but we had yet to take the
measure of the foe we were to meet ..•
The second vital battle
was that of the Falaise pocket,
the enemy showed that
fatal tendency
to stand and fight when all the logic of war
demanded a strategic withdrawal... The third decisive phase
in the campaign consisted of the battles west of the Rhine during
February and March, where once again the enemy played into
our hands by his insistence upon fighting the battle
While the grd Division was on the mainland of Europe it
fought in all three of these decisive
battles, which led swiftly to
Germany's defeat: no other British Division had the distinction
Of fighting in all three of them.
In the eleven months from the
invasion of Normandy to the surrender of the enemy,.
hundred and seventy-nine members of the Division were killed in
They are mourned by the survivors, whose minds had
turned away from the war some days before the
instrument of
surrender was signed, and who instinctively looked forward into
the days of peace.
But sometimes they will still feel inclined to
glance back
along the road they helped to open up
Brèche, in Calvados, to Bremen.
