ASSAULT DIVISION
in himself and his fellows.
Unless he is naturally bloodthirsty
and how many civilian, or for that matter military, Britons are !)
the Infantryman's personal acceptance of the terms of " action"
Is probably the greatest call that will be made on his character
in the whole course of his life.
And on D-day it was not only
the Infantryman who found himself in action,
but the whole
Divisional Assault Group, every man. That so many thousands
of ordinary men should in our time have performed this supreme
act of faith is the most encouraging basis for the immediate
alue, when a common strength or character may succeed in
averting fresh economic crises and wars.
The grd Division had done more than all that was expected
of them once details of enemy dispositions were known.
Rennie wrote after he had been wounded :
"Tell them how
magnificent they were ... They exceeded my highest expec-
tations." From an idyllic life in sunlit woods and warm Hampshire
lanes they were carried overnight across the Channel with half a
gale blowing, and proceeded in one day to disprove the Teutonic
theory of the Atlantic Wall and to form a bridgehead from which,
by nightfall, they were in no immediate danger of being dis-
lodged. That was the achievement. No wonder " morale was
high" that night, and as men dug themselves a hole in the French
earth, or lit the fuse of a tin of self-heating soup and took some
biscuits from the 24-hour pack-the first acceptable meal for
most since that early breakfast on board —they chuckled together
at the thought of the look on Jerry's face as they gave him the
surprise of his life that morning.
1 There was still the danger that the weather might prevent the naval plan for the
build-up from being carried out.
Without
quantities of ammunition, supplies,
the continuous arrival of
enormous
might conceivably have been lost.
and the
reserve
formations,
bridgehead
It was not till 24 hours later that Admiral Ramsay
felt sure that the necessary build-up could be accomplished, as he wrote to General
Eisenhower.
Chapter Three
DEVELOPMENT: THE CAPTURE OF
It HAD always been impossible to imagine D plus I. Try as you
would during the days of preparation, you could never project
your mind beyond the great assault.
The Warwicks were
probably the first to succeed in doing so.
They were warned in
the night that after mopping up Blainville they would have to
attack through Lebisey Wood (it was half orchard, half wood)
and take and hold Lebisey village.
So they knew what to expect
of D plus 1. For everybody sleeping was rationed and fitful :
through the night there were odd German bombers overhead.
Few bombs fell on the Division, but there was incessant gunfire,
and the Navy and Beach Ack-Ack kept the sky alight, their tracer
draping itself across like strings of coloured beads, hanging a
moment, vanishing. Then more hullabaloo.
It was a cold dawn, but welcome as the signal to scramble out
ol the grave-like hole, stamp the feet to get rid of the stiffness and
the earth that had crept down between the shirt and the back.
The Warwicks moved into Blainville, which gave little trouble.
There Brigadier Smith, Colonel Tapp of the 7th Field Regi-
ment, and Colonel Herdon of the Warwicks met and prepared
a simple fire-plan for the attack.
he Warwicks would greatly advance the Corps plan, which read :
" Should the enemy forestall us in aen, 3rd British Division will
contain the enemy in Caen and retain the bulk of its own forces
disposed for mobile ops inside the covering
Warwicks would attack at 8.45 a.m.
misfortunes attended their gallant effort and looked like reducing
this to a chapter of accidents.
The leading companies set off for the Start Line at 8 o'clock,
but nirst A Company was delayed oy snipers, then the battallon
carriers and anti-tank guns were completely held up at the brook
and marshy ground in the gully. H-hour for the attack was 8.45,
when all three Field Regiments would be firing on targets in the
wood to the left of the road, while a cruiser engaged the wood and
