86
ASSAULT DIVISION
6-pounder anti-tank guns of the K.S.L.I. and the S-P Troop of
4I Anti-Tank Battery, R.A.
The German tanks came straight on and were engaged when
they reached the western edge of the Port obstacle.
There were
about forty of them.
Two were knocked out by the Yeomanry
and two more by the K.S.L.I. 6-pounders.
The remainder
moved west over towards the thickly hedged fields round Le
Landel, followed over to our right flank by two troops of
A Squadron. As soon as they emerged, No. I Troop engaged and
destroyed four, and No. 4 gun of the Self-Propelled Troop of
4I Battery knocked out two, though one of their own S-Ps was
hit and a sergeant and gunner killed. Other enemy tanks swung
still more to the west and made for the high ground above
Periers, where B Squadron were waiting patiently:
Three more
German tanks were destroyed and the rest quickly withdrew.
No more left the cover of the trees and hedges. They had lost
thirteen Mark IV (Special) tanks in the encounter.! In retur
they had hit one M.Io S-P Anti-Tank gun and two Shermans,
none of which was put out of action, though there were
fatal casualties.2
Men who were wounded near-by were carried to the house
in Biéville, where Mme. Barrett and her invalid daughter lived.
The house was under heavy shellfire, but Mme Barrett was
utterly fearless and tireless in her efforts to tend our men, and,
being a trained nurse, she undoubtedly saved the lives of the
more serious casualties.
During the German counter-attack on the right, Major Steel's
men had reached the northern outskirts of Lebisey.
Here they
were held up by machine-guns firing from the houses, and a party
of about forty Germans was seen making its way round the right
flank. Major Steel was killed by a machine-gun bullet; at this
1 3 Br Inf Div Int Summary No. 1 : Period to 2359 hrs 7 June.
3 This was the main outcome of the ders received by General Feuchtinger at rome
Feuchtinger afterwards stated to Major Shulman :
drove north to the coast.
By this time the enemy, consisting of
Once over the River Orne I
Canadian Infantry Divisions had made astonishing progress and had occupied a
strip of high ground about ten kilometres from the
ca..
From here the excellent
anti-tank gunfire of the Allies knocked out eleven of my tanks before I had hardly
started.
However, one battle group did manage to by-pass these guns and actually
reached the coast at Lion-sur-Mer at about seven in
: I retired to
take up a line just north of Caen. By the end of that first day my division had lost
almost 25 per cent of its tanks.'
INVASION: THE FOLLOW - THROUGH
critical moment his Company lost " a man of more than normal
intelligence and culture, a fine swimmer and athlete, a com-
mander they greatly respected."
Norfolks, who had been assembled near
Colleville, saw that Hillman was an altogether more formidable
obstacle than had been expected, and Lieutenant-Colonel R. H.
Bellamy planned to slip his battalion past it to the left.
could not, however, go too far over to the left in case they became
involved with the possible enemy-defended locality of St. Aubin
Brigadier Smith arrived with the news that the
K.S.L.I had identified a unit of 21 Panzer Division in Biéville,
and that the General's order was that the Norfolks would reach
Rover before last light. Rover stood between Beuville and the Orne
bridge, a wooded area on the top of a gentle rise, with the ground
talling away more sharply beyond. There the Norfolks were firmly
established by 7 p.m., though that thorn-in-the-side Hillman cost
them about 150 casualties on the way.
A single house stood on
Rover, thereafter to be known as Norfolk House; one would never
have mistaken it for the Norfolk House in the corner of St. James's
square where Eisenhower's early planning took place.
The evening was warm and there was
sunshine to cheer
things up; at about 9 p.m., while the Norfolks were preparing
to withstand the impact of a probable enemy tank attack,
most heartening, splendid spectacle of that great day slowly
came across the sky for all to see.
Our men looked over their
shoulders and gasped as their eyes brightened: for a minute the
eyes of the Germans narrowed with fear.
The gliders of the 6th
Airlanding Brigade were towed on gracefully, majestically.
a certain point the big aircrait released them, turned, and few
back to England, disdaintul of the fak the Germans were pelting
It was a superb manifestation of power, precision
and planning.
The Warwicks had the most reason to be delighted at this
latest landing•
So that they should not get mixed up in a tank
battle that seemed likely to develop on
the right flank,
they
had been directed down to the
left and along the
canal
road, St. Aubin d'Arquenay, Bénouville, Blainville.
Although
several parties had by now passed along on their way down to
