DIVISION
no effort to give " their " troops a "dry" landing. German
gunners knew the range and hit several of those craft before
they were able to unload and sail back to England, their crews
supremely proud of the triangular sign their craft bore.
The whole of the Ist Battalion of the Suffolks (8 Brigade's
Reserve Battalion) landed in one flight from twenty-five LA
and quickly formed up. By nine o'clock the South Lancs had
taken Hermanville from the Germans and established their
Battalion H.Q. there.
(Their A Company had continued
their advance along the coast into Lion,
and it was not until
late in the day that they were extricated from street fighting )
By 9.30 the Suffolks had assembled near Hermanville, and were
advancing left into Colleville.
Meanwhile the 76th Field Regiment, R.A., and Commandos
of 1 SS Brigade had landed on the tail of the Suffolks; 4 Com-
mando moved east along the sea-front to
destroy an enemy
coastal defence battery in Ouistreham and rid the town of the
enemy, while the rest of the SS Brigade, under Brigadier Lora
Lovat, M.C., made off for the bridges at Bénouville to join the
6th Airborne Division.
The signal that those bridges were taken
intact had already been intercepted and set everyone's spirits
On completion of the " run-in" shoot by the Divisional
Artillery, their flotillas had to cruise off-shore until the guns
could be landed. The 76th Field Regiment were first ashore and
immediately went into action on Red Beach.
One of their craft
was hit five times, struck two mines and caught fire while still
But the rest of the regiment got on to the beach,
where they were in action five hours before moving to a gun-
position inland. Their quick response to calls for fire were to the
credit of the Gunners in a position that was not designed for
easy gun control ;
enough calls for fire!
yet they only complained that there weren't
vehicles amongst the
Craft continued to deposit men and
guns as they fired. Loud-speaker wires
would have been cut into small pieces, and as fire-orders came
1 The craft was out of control and the skipper was obliged to order " Abandon ship."
was unable to abandon them.
Three of the troop's guns were still serviceable, however, and Lieutenant Morrall
The gunners remained with the guns and luckily the
but a goodly prize of naval rum.
They succeeded in running off not merely the undamaged guns,
INVASION: THE ASSAULT
down from the F.O.O.s now advancing inland they were
relayed to each gun by wireless, though owing to the general
din and confusion all round, runners
from each detachment
were being used. At the same time the tide was running in
swilly over the flat sand and the guns were soon standing in
some feet of surf. Craft were still beaching all round, and one,
with fires aboard and steering-gear knocked out,
was swept
along the beach, hitting two guns and destroying their water-
They continued firing, but the engines were
All the time the F.O.O.s were reporting good
This was the position when the Mayor of Colleville himself
arrived on the beach to welcome the invaders.
He judged it a
suitable occasion to wear a gleaming fireman's helmet, not unlike
an inverted brass coal-scuttle.
In such circumstances (as in a
nothing seemed incongruous.
the 76th Field Regiment landed primarily in support of
8 Brigade. Until they landed the Infantry depended for support
upon the Navy and 5 (Independent) R.M. Armoured Support
Battery, whose 16 Centaurs with 95-mm. guns would have been
arable at H plus five minutes, but only 50 per cent managed
TO get ashore and they could not get in touch with the F.O.O.s.
They and the 33rd Field Regiment were grouped under command
f Lieutenant-Colonel Mervyn roster, N.A., the Commanding
Officer of the 76th Field Regiment.
33rd Field Regiment nor-
mally supported 9 Brigade, the Reserve Brigade.
They were
excretore able to join first 76th Field Regiment, then, for 105
ongades advance, the 7th Field Kegiment, until hnally g brigade
At that time one battery of the 76th Field Regiment
would be in direct support of the oth Airborne Division, with the
Of the regiment " on call" to protect the
bridges against enemy counter-attack.
The 33rd Field Regiment
landed half an hour after they papuand joined them in action on
the beach. Then 185 Brigade came ashore.
