ASSAULT
to the left and got across to Burcy.
These two troops pushed
boldly forward but ran into strongly-held positions, and wan
they
returned to the
firm base Carrier Troop, Turner was
amongst those missing. Another Carrier Troop and an Armoured
Car Troop made some ground on the left flank, but met the
same impenetrable opposition and had to withdraw.
won the M.C. for his exploit.
Near Burcy 9 Brigade adjoined 185 Brigade, on whose front
that evening 10th SS Panzer Division counter-attacked.
attack came
in at Sourdevalle,
a scattered hamlet midway
between Burcy and Chenedolle.
By great good fortune it was
launched just as the Norfolks were in the act of relieving the
3rd Monmouths of
lIth Armoured Division,
Battalions were on the ground together.
They formed a com-
posite force, the Normons, and beat off the enemy:
The hero of
the Sourdevalle epic was Corporal Sidney Bates, whose V.C. was
the first to be awarded to a member of the Division during the
compaign; but, alas, it was posthumous. It would be impossible
to imagine a worthier, finer " descendant" of John Bates, Shake
the re's typical young soldier with Henry at Agincourt, who in
the end says of his King, after the usual misgivings and appie:
hensions as they wait for the trumpet to sound in the cold dawn:
" and yet I determine to fight lustily for him." The citation of
Sidney Dates supreme gallantry and self-sacrifice, submitted to
and approved by the King, reads thus: the attack in strengt
Panzer Division near Sourdevalle " started with a
accurate artillery and mortar programme on
position which the enemy had, by this time, pin-pointed.
an hour later the main attack developed and heavy machine-gun
and mortar fire was concentrated on the point of junction of the
two forward companies.
Corporal Bates was commanding the
right forward section of the left forward company which suffered
some casualties, so he decided to move the remnants of his section
to an alternative position whence he appreciated he could better
counter the enemy thrust.
still deeper, until there were about 5o to 6o Germans, supported
by
the enemy wedge grew
section.
machine-guns and mortars, in the area occupied by the
"Seeing at the situation wasa ecoming desperate, corporal
BREAKING OUT OF THE BRIDGEHEAD I3I
Bates then seized a light machine-gun and charged the enemy,
moving forward through a hail of bullets and splinters and
fing the gun from his hip. He was almost immediately wounded
by machine-gun fire and fell to the ground, but recovering him-
sei quickly, he got up and continued advancing towards
enemy, spraying bullets from his gun as he went.
His action
as now having an effect on the enemy riflemen and machine-
gunners, but mortar bombs continued to fall around him.
"He was then hit a second time, and much more seriously
and painfully wounded.
Undaunted,
he staggered once more to
his feet and continued towards the enemy,
who were now seem-
ingly nonplussed at their inability to check him.
His constant
fing continued until the enemy started to withdraw before him.
At this moment he was hit for the third time by mortar-bomb
splinters and sustained a wound that was to prove fatal.
il to the ground but continued to fire his weapon until his
strength failed him.
had withdrawn and the situation in this
This was not, however, until the enemy
locality had been
He died of his wounds two days later.
His memory is not
likely to fade from the minds of the men who knew him;
indeed
that is true of all men who die fighting.
The Normons had won
the day, the two battalions re-formed and the relief was com-
It is an interesting coincidence that the Norfolks were
similarly involved in the composition of the Norsets in Meso
potamia in 19I7, though that was a much less temporary com-
In the Sourdevalle counter-attack the Norfolks lost
32 killed and 144 wounded.
The next day Von Rundstedt struck for Avranches, and so it
Is perhaps not surprising that g Brigade's attempt to push south
di the railway was repulsed.
They were joined that day
Lieutenant-Colonel G. L. Firbank, who took over comman oi
the Lincolns, as Colonel Wilson had been wounded during the
night, and by Lieutenant-Colonel Dominic
appointed Brigade Commander, both coming from Div. H.Q.
one of the G ills was ill, the remainder of the G Staff were par-
ticularly hard pressed that day.
They preserved sufficient sense
of humour to record : " Liaison with United States V and XIX
corps on right very good, though rarely successiul in discovering
