ASSAULT
DIVISION
the bridge— the Commandos of I SS Brigade, " Fox" Troop of
the gand Light Ack-Ack Regiment, Sappers of 17 and 7I Field
Companies who were at work on the bridges, and five tanks from
B Squadron of 13th/18th Hussars-there were still numbers of
enemy, chiefly snipers, in the area of Le Port just outside of
Bénouville to the north, and they hotly engaged the Warwicks.
At the very moment the Warwicks were going in to clean up
this area the gliders descended upon it.! Jeeps and airborne
troops were seen in the target area.
They were able to push
straight through into Bénouville and along the canal road. Major
T. G. Bundock's Company were left behind in Bénouville to
relieve the 6th Airborne Division of the defence of the Canal
Bridge, which ceased to be called Rugger and took the name
Pegasus Bridge? The rest of the Warwicks continued to advance,
with Captain Barrett's Company leading.
There was opposition
all the way from a mobile delaying force of infantry with 88-mm.
The F.O.O., Gregory, was knocked out in his tank, and so our
guns were no longer replying to these dos.
The Battalion halted
at midnight in the outskirts of Blainville and dug in.
It was not g Brigade's day.
They landed as Reserve Brigade,
and were to have concentrated in the area of Plumetot, ready
to move rapidly down through Cazelle and Cambes to St. Contest,
to hold the ground between 185 Brigade and g Canadian Infantry
Brigade H.Q. landed together at 1 p.m. and were
almost immediately struck down by a mortar bomb.
J. C. Cunningham, M.C.,3
with his G.III, Intelligence Officer
and a Liaison Officer, were seriously wounded, and the Intelligence
Sergeant was killed.
The rest of the Brigade got ashore through
deep water and reached the Assembly Area with few casualties.
Lieutenant-Colonel I. C. Harris of the Ulster Rifles
command of the Brigade until Lieutenant-Colonel A. D. G. Orr,
1 Poles and stakes erected by the
snapped like matches by the gliders.
Germans to prevent just such an occurrence were
tection in England were not similarly tested !
as well that our similar means of pro-
2 The French Government has agreed to perpetuate the name in tribute to the men
who first seized it and held it against several determined attacks throughout that day.
3 The loss of a Brigade Staff and two Battalion Commanders in the first hours of the
landing cannot have been without consequence, but though there were soon further
casualties among senior
officers,
disastrous landing on V Beach at Gallipoli,
this crippling in no way approached that in the
when the
29th
brigadiers, two brigade majors, and more than half the battalion commanders.
Division lost all the
INVASION: THE FOLLOW- THROUGH
D.S.O., returned from liaison duty with 6th Airborne Division.
Colonel Orr had been Second-in-Command of the Brigade and
was now promoted Brigadier.
Over on this right flank it was early apparent that the enemy
was far stronger and more active than he was expected to be.
4 (R.M.) Commando had fought their way along to the right
through Lion and Luc-sur-Mer, but they were unable to overcome
As soon as one locality was mopped up, fierce
fighting broke out elsewhere, if it had not been going on simul-
taneously. A strong-point in Lion was held by eighty Germans
Lincolns were in contact with the enemy
holding Cresserons.
front it was known that one Panzer
Division was holding Caen.
(Another arrived on the right of
the Divisional front next day.).
And over the Orne the Germans
were reacting violently, particularly in the Bas de Ranville, where
tanks and S-P guns attacked again and again.
At 1 p.m. a
critical situation was saved there by diverting to Ranville the
leading Commando of 1 SS Brigade, whose own operations at
Franceville Plage were thus delayed.
In these circumstances the 9 Brigade plan was changed and
they moved to consolidate the left of the bridgehead, covering
the bridges, The Lincolns, therefore, remained where they were,
the K.O.S.B.s relieved the East Yorks in St. Aubin d'Arquetook
on the main road down to the bridges, and the Ulster Rifles took
a position near Point 61 on the road over the Periers ridge.
During the evening a squadron of 5 Assault Regiment, R.E..,
undertook an independent operation to capture the lock-gates at
The Squadron Commander with ten A.V.R.E.s
destroyed the concrete defences near the gates, forestalling the
demolition of one of the bridges.
They captured the garrison of
live officers and fifty-one other ranks.
down on the
bridges at Bénouville, the Divisional Sappers had sustained " a
series of casualties that went far towards upsetting the carefully
Prepared rafting and bridging plans for Class 40 relief Bailey
By midnight 17 Field Company had lost their O.C.
and both reconnaissance
officers concerned with getting the
bridging material forward. The C.R.E. was blown up on k
tellermine that night, but escaped with minor wounds and shock.
The O.C. 15 Field Park Company was landed 24 hours late.
