ASSAULT DIVISION
patrol leaders were Sergeants Murphy and Martin; the latter
was killed on patrol.
Soon or late every fighting soldier goes out on a patrol. The
Lincolns claim that every one of their men had
experience during that first month. One gallant fighting patrol!
of the Lincolns went out,
like the one described above,
Cambes to Galmanche. There was a fierce fight, hand to hand,
in which Lieutenant Pacey, one of the leaders, was wounded in
the thigh, and the other, Sergeant Ward, finding himself sur-
rounded, fought his way out with bayonet and grenades, and
contrived to bring two wounded men away with him. In another
raid on Galmanche on 4th July, this time by the K.O.S.B.s, one
ot the patrol commanders, Lieutenant Raines, was killed as they
overran the enemy position, whereupon the patrol rallied and
was brought back under the very able command of Corporal
Johnnie Beck, with the 3rd Recce's Contact Detachment in
Cambes, describes in his log his visit with one of the K.O.S.B.
to a forward Gunner O.P.:
" Twenty-seven enemy
sanks were seen dug-in in the la Bijude area, but artillery cannot
Infantry of 12 SS seen digging in front of la Bijude.
It seems shovels and picks well to the fore on both sides. O.P.
receives direct hit and F.O.O. slightly wounded. Rest of us O.R.
enemy artillery and mortaring now stepped up." That was D
plus 5. D plus 6 was " rather a stay-at-home day.
including M.G. fire.
Plenty of hate,
latrines perilous."
Ricochets off trees make a journey to the
On D plus 7 he records: " General Rennie
arrives into Cambes from the hostile end, and his jeep blows up
on a mine. Short cuts suggested by Officers Commanding Field
Ambulances are definitely out."
the time.1
The Commander was much harder hit than he thought at
On the i4th he went aboard the Largs to recuperate
and on the 18th he was flown to England for two weeks' complete
rest. It was with deep, sincere regret that the Division heard of his
1 On the
Panzer Division, was killed.
same day, Major-General Fritz Witt, commanding the opposing
12 SS
Feuchtinger a week
earlier to
He was succeeded by the man who had planned with
throw the little
thirty-three, Kurt Meyer became the youngest divisional commander in the German
Army.
fish back into the water.
At
Tall and handsome, with searching blue eyes,
Shulman as" the perfect product of Nazi fanaticism.
he is described by Major
for inciting his troops to murder Canadian prisoners-of-war.
He now serves a life sentence
THE CAPTURE
OF CAEN
il luck, They wanted him back quickly. In the meantime
Bigadier Cass took command of the Division, and Colonel Foster
of the y6th Field Regiment commanded 8 Brigade.
Down on the left from Biéville to the canal the front was held
by 185 Brigade. Here, as all along the front, men were confident
and eager to press forward, but compelled to sit and hold.
agan it was a period in which patrolling was the only variation
trom the cramped life under acute shell-fire.
The Norfolks had a
curious disposition with the main part of the Battalion at Norfolk
House, and three platoons and a carrier section strung out in a
line two thousand yards forward, acting as a sort of screen from
the canal bank westwards. This was " Duffers' Drift," and thence
the Norfolk patrols set out.
"On the second day of Duffers'
chronicler,
obviously did not understand, motored down the road and so
tel nicely into the trap prepared by b company
Within a week
he bag was one marine offcer,
thirty-five other ranks, five
vehicles and two motor-cyclists.
Then someone in the enemy
lines must have put up a notice to the effect that no one came back
trom that particular road."
In the middle, the line was held by 8 Brigade. They were
wel forward of Periers and held all of Le Mesnil wood to the left
of the main road. But here the enemy held a salient, consisting
of two farms -Le Landel and La Londe-and the chateau de la
londe. On the night of June loth D Company of the South
Jancs established itself in Le Landel: the absence of enemy
opposition was uncanny.
The next evening enemy tanks
milantry were forming up at La Bijude for a counter-attack.
wight of our artillery effectively discouraged them.
On the 12th,
the day after Montgomery had visited Divisional H.Q. to con-
fatulate the Division and presumably to discuss future ops with
General Rennie (it was the day before the Divisional Commander
was blown up), General Rennie told the H.Q. Staff and the Heads
of Services of the
Periers. If so, tanks might break through.
probability of counter-attack up through
Provided that every-
one stood firm, the situation could be coped with. All troops were
to be informed so that nobody should be surprised.
minefields were sown across the Divisional front by the Sappers
a conjunction with the Infantry. They were covered by the
