132
ASSAULT DIVISION
where U.S. forward troops really are!" A Squadron of the
Household Cavalry Regiment was under
command of the
Division, and one troop was used as a private " Phantom"
with U.S. troops—forward !
The next day, 8th August, Lieutenant-Colonel W. F. H
Kempster assumed the appointment of G.S.O. I, and Operation
Walter (named after him) was planned. Already the Americans
reported substantial German forces cut off at Mortain,
counter-attack persisted, so that a voluntary enemy withdrawa
considered highly improbable.
Remnants of 3 and 5 German
Para Divisions were
to be opposing, and it was
presumed that the
Panzer Division that counter-attacked
Brigade were still there. Immediately south of Vire 363 Infantry
Division was opposing the U.S. troops.
The Division
would
advance on to Vaudry and astride the straight Vire-Vassy road,
with a view to
reorienting
and advancing south-eastwards
down the Tinchebray road, with the Americans abreast on the
right.
Op Walter on the gth was comyletely successful. 185 Brigade
were back under command and with g Brigade got their objectives
It was now quite customary for 9 Brigade to advance
on the gth of the month; sue yolt day they had entered Caen in
July and Cambes in June.
Tinchebray, was
Op Wallop, a two-brigade attack On
while offensive
immediately planned at Div. Headquarters,
afternoon and evening.
kept up by battalions
Persistent probing by the K.O.S.B.s and
Uister ines discovered the enemy in strength at Point 202, and
Brigadier Browne warned his battalions that night that patrols
must literally sleep with the enemy, so that quick action could
follow any withdrawal.
It was estimated that a battle group of
10 SS Panzer Division occupied Chenedolle, and that elements
of 3 German Para Division were in Roullours and Viessoix as
8 and 185 Brigades were concentrating for Wallop the next day,
which was one of tremendous heat.
The tith dawned with a dense ground mist so that the air-
a progree had to be scrapped, but the brigades movea
off and made steady progress. It was the closest country entered
1 A battle at Tinchebray in 1106 won Normandy for England.
BREAKING OUT OF THE BRIDGEHEAD 133
so tar and difficult to work through. To begin with, there was
ite or no enemy opposition —just isolated groups that sometimes
lought and sometimes tried to make off. The 3rd Recce Regiment
that did not
worry them unduly. From the Lincolns, now in the southern
wourbs of Vire, an enemy strong-point was skilfully stalked by
Lieutenant Bush, whose patrol inflicted heavy casualties on the
enemy. Bush's right arm was broken by machine-gun fire, but he
refused to withdraw. He was awarded the M.C.
The advance
continued slowly and surely on the 12th, the South Lancs astride
the main road and the East Yorks moving round to the left, 185
angade consolidating Hill 3I2 to give the Gunners the best
possible O.P.s. There was some opposition at a rise in the main
road and Major Neville Chance took some carriers forward. His
.,S.M., Coombes, was killed after a gallant action,
but soon the
Such Lancs reported all companies on their objective with signs
that the enemy had pulled out in a hurry.
The Gunners were
engaging transport moving down the road.
All the time the bag
That afternoon
came the startling news that General Patton's 3 Army had turned
norwards from Le Mans and had recce elements in Argentan ;
meanwhile the Canadians were pressing south down the Falaise
toad against iron resistance. The mouth of the bag began to
At half-past six that evening General Whistler spoke on the
line to 8 Brigade Commander,
the Boches are leaving.
Brigadier Cass :
"It looks as
Coquard, Point 279) with the Suffolks.
You will get on to Pepper (X-roads at
Thereafter go forward
with a Squadron of 3rd Recce as escort to give them a good
kick-off in the morning."
On the right the
Americans were
thrusting down on to Le Loudray and truttemer le lam, ana
if the Division was going for Point 279 they offered to help by
Putting something on to Point 275•
was giving out his orders at Brigade H.Q.,
when a stray shell
landed beside
nearly every
member of the
0. Group but the
The calmness of his reaction—
"Send for the
Seconds-in-Command "—is reported by eye-
witnesses to have excited some admiration.
