214
ASSAULT DIVISION
the Division could never have produced sufficient ammunition
without the great co-operation of the S.C.R.A. of 15th (Scottish)
Division. But all who helped with the supply and dumping and
firing of ammunition were sufficiently gratified by the though.
that Yorkshire Bridget had held, and without their efforts those
two East Yorkshire Companies must have been wiped out.
the woods over the bridge eighty-three dead
counted on the left of the road alone.
These first twenty-four
hours of Op Heather cost the East Yorks 8 officers and 150 otners
in killed and wounded.
come and len them as soon as possiury can now moved i nave
been by their very gallant actions . . ." wrote General Whistler
that day, the last of February,
as the battle for Kervenheim
From the Udem-Weeze road the
Warwicks and
K.S.L.I. advanced across difficult country-woods, waterlogged
clay fields, scattered houses, no roads to speak of—with at first
little, and later considerable, resistance.
When it grew dark,
at about 6 o'clock, they were not far off their objective.
that night penetrated right up
to the outskirts of Kervenheim,
and next morning, the first of March, the Norfolks also took part
in the 185 Brigade attack.
Colonel Bellamy had gone to bin
Airborne Division as a brigadier under General Bols,
Norfolks were now commanded by
Lieutenant-Colonel F. P.
Barclay, D.S.O., M.C.
Brigadier F. R. C. Matthews, D.S.O.,
185 Brigade were now commanded by
"with new commal Hers came new ideas, always a good
The morning began badly with
an enemy counter-attack,
what b Company on the Warwicks with a troop or the coldstream
Guards only repulsed
heavy fighting, and with the
mortaring of the K.S.I.I., in which Lieutenant Aldridge, who " was
1 Bill Renison writes :
" It gave the greatest pleasure to all ranks when
Commander ordered the Sappers to place a nameboard on the bridge with the east
Yorkshire's crest and name.
with Reg reconstructing the battle,
A week later when I went back over the ground
itself, a structure so insignificant that,
the thing that most of all struck us
as a newspaper correspondent later
pobridd out, you could drive over it any day without realising you had gone over
who will never forget it.'
What more fitting corerent could there be on the folly of war!
intact as it was, it had soon ceased to have any meaning, but there are many oi us
THE
RHINELAND
OFFENSIVE
215
quite the greatest character who served with us,"1 was
killed.
The attack began and made good progress on the left,
but the
right, the more direct approach to
Kervenheim,
was
bitterly
coniested. Here Private J. Stokes won the Victoria Cross but died
Patoon, Z Company, of the K.S.L.1.
He yao the K. of the During he tid of 1.
runs the citation,
Platoon came
under intense rifle
medium machine-gun fire from a farm building and was pinned
The Platoon Commander began to reorganise the Platoon
wien Private Stokes, without waiting for any orders, got up and,
tring from the hip, dashed through the enemy fire and was seen
to disappear inside the farm building.
enemy fire stopped
and Private Stokes reappeared with twelve prisoners. During this
operation he was wounded in the neck.
"This action enabled the Platoon to continue the advance to
the next objective, and loggivate stokes was orderea back
Regimental Aid Post.
with his Platoon.
He refused to go and continued the advance
"On approaching
the second objective the Platoon again
Came under heavy fire from a house on the left.
Again, without
waiting for orders, Private
Stokes rushed the house
by himself,
fring from the hip.
He was seen to drop his rifle and fall to the
a moment later he got to
again, picked up his rifle and continued to
most intense fire which covered not only himself but the rest of
He entered the house and all firing from it ceased.
He subsequenuy rejoined his flatoon-wao, due to no gallanty
had been able to advance-bringing five more prisoners.
"At this stage the Company
was forming
for its final
assault on the objective, which was a group of buildings, forming
strong-point.
Private Stokes, although now severely wounded and suffering
from loss of blood, dashed on
the remaining sixty yards
firing from the hip
as he struggled through
He finally fell twenty yards from the enemy poshim in the
his rifle until the last,
Company passed him
final charge he raised his hand and shouted good-bye."
During the K.S.L.I. advance, Lieutenant Banks and Company
1 Guy Radcliffe's account.
