Chapter Four
BREAKING OUT OF THE BRIDGEHEAD
" Well have we done, thrice-valiant countrymen :
But all's not done. ..."
Henry V, during Agincourt
THE DIvIsIoN had two leading roles in the operations that routed
the German Army in Normandy.
The first, in Operation Good-
wood, across the Orne on the extreme left flank of the bridgehead,
Was no run at all. The second, in step with an American division
on the extreme right flank of the british and Army, was as near
great fun as men can expect to get in battle; going down the
Vire-Tinchebray-Flers road at fairly full tilt was exhilarating.
The loss of lives takes the fun out of fighting ; though for some
more than for others.
The fall of Caen meant much more to the Division than was
really warranted by the tactical gain.
And when, on July iith,
the Infantry were brought back out of the line in the transport
of the Divisional R.A.S.C. Companies, there was a general feeling
of relaxation.
Even the Gunners felt it, though the guns had to
remain in action. The amenities of the Div Club at Luc-sur-Mer
were in great demand ;
so were such footballs,
darts, or any
other sports gear as could be obtained from Army Welfare Services.
The supreme pleasure was to have a bath and a long, undis-
turbed sleep. So far there had only been biscuits to eat with the
tinned food in the compo packs.
On the 13th of July the
Biscuit-Eaters were given their first half-slice of bread.
only half a slice, but it was eaten with greater relish than can
be imagined even by
rationing of bread most keenly.
two years later, feel the
three days of rest and reorganisation, the Division®
Then, on the 14th, after only
learnt that a move into action across the Orne was imminent,
that though Caen had been taken, the plan for July was still
that " Second Army would continue to contain the main enemy
BREAKING OUT OF THE BRIDGEHEAD II5
force between Villers Bocage and Caen, and draw to itself its
main strength." (The American First Army,
working its way
down to a position in the area of Le Mans-Alençon, would
"seriously threaten the enemy's concentration in the Caen area,
or, since the Seine bridges were down, his retreat."),
The possibilities of Goodwood were breath-taking. VIII Corps,
consisting of the Guards,
the 7th and the
11th Armoured
Divisions, were to pass through the Orne bridgehead,
break
trough the enemy defences, " advance down the general axis
Ranville-Démouville and seize the high ground on the general
line Bourguebus-Argences."1 II Canadian Corps were operating
o dear the Colombelles factory area and cover the right flank,
while I Corps had the task of "
Corps, using the grd Division. tecting the left flank of VIII
If VIII Corps succeeded in
breaking right through, the German rout would be complete.
If they were held, if Goodwood proved an inappropriate code-word,
they would still realise
the main intention,
and continue
attract the mass of German armour eastward away from the
American forces, who after the end of June were building up at
a much greater rate than we were (until then we had been
The broad prospect, then, was exciting. On that account the
Division accepted the abrupt curtailment of its hard-won rest in
the best possible spirit.
Digging parties were sent
bridges forthwith to prepar neharbour areas, and the main
of the Division was across and in harbour within a couple of
The main movement had to be made by night over the
canal and river, where there was always a great deal of anti-
aircraft commotion, especially about midnight,
number
of Junkers were brought down.
"hides "
The lanes and tracks
into
the
had been carefully reconnoitred by unit guides,
but
once in the bridgehead troops were never more than a couple
of thousand yards from the nearest enemy, and the journey was
accomplished in an atmosphere
tendency was to speak in a whisper,
of great suspense.
The natural
for fear lest the
Germans
should hear and detect such a great concentration
of forces in
a confined space, and act accordingly.
The area in which the Division found itself had nothing at all
1 3 Div. Operation Order for Operation Goodwood.
