ASSAULT DIVISION
to recommend it. There was a wedge of fairly open country
typical of the campagne, running up from the south past Caen
and alongside the river, but to the east this strip was dominated
by the Bois de Bavent ridge. This began at the foot with small
fields more typical of the bocage of central Normandy, completely
boxed in by thick hedges and great leafy trees, and was crowned
by the denser woods of Bavent and Bures, which the Germans
held. Just over the ridge, it descended into the swamps through
which the River Dives meandered north into the sea.
swamps must have been the breeding-ground of the swarms of
mosquitoes that pounced on the Division the moment it entered
the bridgehead, and left off only when it recrossed the bridges,
displaying all the time a warm inhospitality, indeed an open
hostility, as active as that of the German gunners and mortar-
They were insatiable, and made life in a slit-trench almost
intolerable. Every night they were reinforced by single German
sombers wi circiea overhead and aroppea scores of " anti-
personnel " bombs. These could hardly miss in such a cramped
yet the number of casualties they caused was surprisingly
small, owing to good camouflage and still more to good digging.
Most members of the Division had by now learnt to roof thei
slit-trenches for protection against splinters from shells bursting
above, either in the trees or Airburst, and against anti-personnel
Goodwood began on the morning of the 18th.
The Division's
task was " to attack and hold the area of Touffreville, Sannerville,
Banneville la Campagne, Manneville,
Cuillerville, Le Quai and
Troarn," villages that formed a rough triangle, with the town of
Troarn as the eastern tip.
It was six weeks—-to the day-since
the assault on the beach and the airborne landings, and this had
always
been the most sensitive front, over here on the left.
Facing east, it is true, they
were only confronting 346 and 7II
Infantry Divisions, both of a fairly placid disposition: holding
the ridge and backed by the Dives inundations, they could afford
to be.
But facing south the front was hypersensitive.
now that, owing to the continued success of our deception plan,
1 To a few men in the Division there was nothing new in the
Anti-Tank
had fought with 6th
area; for example,
on June loth and iith against heavy counter-attacks.
Airborne
Division
Jate K Troop playing a brave part in the defence of Le Mariquet
BREAKING OUT OF THE BRIDGEHEAD II7
the German High Command still feared another landing in the
Pas de Calais and were determined that the present bridgehead
should never spread left and link up.
This accounted for the
devotion of 21 Panzer Division to the Caen front; they had
been relieved at the end of June by the fresh and equally vigorous
16 G.A.F. Division, and now waited in reserve just in rear of
that formation. 1 SS Division and the remains of 12 SS Division
vere also in the line, alongside 16 G.A.F. Division.
accided that Goodwood should begin with the dropping of a good
8,000 tons of bombs upon these formations.
It was a pleasant sunny morning, and difficult to grasp the
meaning of the roaring and vibration that grew in the sky.
usual on such excursions, the bombers flew in a mass rather than
a formation, in a pack,
as they turned again for England it was possible to feel the warm
blast from the enemy's positions and his gun-areas distant three
thousand yards or more. During this heaviest bombing of for-
ward positions ever attempted, our artillery and the naval guns
ired anti-lak Counter-Battery, and later a full Counter-Battery
programme;
Regiments joined in.
the three Field Regiments of the grd Division had collected and
dumped 750 shells and cartridges for each gun, a fair indication
of the scale of the shooting.
tanks of the IIth Armoured Division in the middle,
mantry of the grd British Division on the leit, were off to a
The whole of the grd Division was committed. The fighting
lasted thirty-six hours.
It was succeeded by a few days of the
most acute enemy shelling and mortaring ever experienced, and
by torrents of rain.
In outline,
the action was as follows :
8 Brigade, supported by 13th/ 18th Hussars and their habitual
Gunner, Sapper and Middlesex teams, were first off the mark.
The South Lancs, advancing upon Le Pré Baron,
farm buildings in the close country already described,
were held
up at some sandpits defended by the enemy:
These were cleared
carly in the afternoon, and by 8 p.m. the South Lancs had con-
solidated their objective.
The East Yorks had some trouble with
