32
ASSAULT DIVISION
tion is to refer to the assault on N.W. Europe in terms of entering
the ring for the last round.
Was "I" right when he wrote:
"The British are incurably given to mistaking war for a form ol
sport, and might find their tribal emblem of victory in a statue
of Picton fighting the Battle of Quatre Bras (as he did) in a tau
hat " ? "Q" went on to complain that Kinglake, in his history
of the Invasion of the Crimea, could never get out of the habit
of regarding a battle as a sort of glorified steeplechase or fox-
hunt and in the crisis of the fight usually had to fall back on
these noble sports for a criticism or simile.
In Moffat, and equally during any of the periods of Con-
bined Operations training,
"Q"
would have found full cor-
roboration of his choice of a tribal emblem. Original dress is a
form of self-expression understandable in men who on parade
easty day must be models of uniformity, though perhaps les
easily explained in staff officers exempt from the flatness of the
Battle School, Combined Ops training, and battle itsel
provided opportunities for " experiments," and of all the weird
garbs that were seen, those reported by 3rd Recce
Regiment
after their dash to Munster with 17 U.S. Airborne Division seem
to have
much later?
the most extraordinary-but
that story
Preparing for battle now means
an automatic
adjustment of the soldier to his natural background, pernaps by
daubing his skin with mud, decorating his headgear,
the outline of his shoulders.
In Combined Ops the additional
discomforts at sea and ashore can be partly compensated by
casing dress and equipment, adopting sweaters, cap-comforters,
The Lincolns were practising Combined Ops in Kilbride Bay
in September, and Lieutenant Bush is recorded as having tried the
not-to-be-repeated experiment of wearing a gas-cape next the
skin during a wet landing.
The most expressive soul in Moffat
in September '43 was Johnnie Bywaters of the and Middlesex.
Completely regardless of danger on the Battle Course,
eccentricities, not merely of dress, would come up for discussion
1 The reference is, of course, to the late Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch :
readers will attribute this dictum and
Army parlance does convey that implication.
complaint to a Quartermaster,
that might cause discomfort to Quartermasters.
although fem
It is expedient to avoid any confusion
PREPARATION
in the course of the evening in the Star and the Buccleuch
An unfortunate shooting accident deprived the Division
of an individual who would have wrought notable havoc amongst
the Germans.
This form of individualism and the apparent confusion of
sport with war are something superficial.
imminence of
grimmer business is to be recognised in the fact
that two days
atter Quatre Bras-with a great artillery " stonk "—the French
began to advance at Waterloo, and General Picton's Division
volleyed and charged forward against them: Picton was killed.
On the staff of the Divisional Battle School at that time,
September '43, were
three officers who were to be killed in
action with the South Lancs, to take only one Battalion : Peter
Beecroft and Ian Bell, who were actually Forward Observing
Officers of 303 Battery which supported that battalion,
Major Carse commanding a Rifle Company. In Moffat,
Beecroft's ability to direct the fire of a troop of guns, Ian Bell's
hardy example as an instructor on the bleakest days wearing
only a shirt and a battledress with the cuffs turned up, and
(temp.) Lieutenant-Colonel
Carse's command
School had begun to suggest things far more serious even than
Pill-boxes and obstacles of concrete and steel appeared (by
courtesy of the Divisional Field Companies, R.E.—17, 246, 253)
the valley.
Groups of senior officers
watched their
"Bangalore Torpedoes," " Beehive"
" General Wade" charges, as the Infantry companies assaulted
Security assumed greater importance daily as more
men saw the remarkable results of increasing output of war
equipment and transport from the factories and of the infernal
machines devised by 79th Armoured Division in their experi-
mental areas on the Suffolk heathlands, and in their secret lake
and cisterns in Norfolk. The campaign against careless talk was
as successful as the subsequent military campaign which careless
talk could conceivably have doomed to disaster.
Most people
saw the film Next of Kin, which was valuable security propaganda,
from its other merits.
greatest secret of
success was
that everyone knew enough to feel the sense of
privilege already remarked, and knowing
the issues at stake,
