ASSAULT DIVISION
R.A.M.C. But there were two factors that did suggest a definite
course of action.
One was the marked shortage of officers-
particularly Company Commanders, but Battalion Commanders
and Junior Leaders as well; this coupled with a high proportion
of reinforcements in the ranks. It has to be remembered that the
total number of men lost to the Division between D-day and the
start of the Overloon battle was 10,000, and that as the great
majority of these were Infantrymen in the Rifle Companies who
only represent one-quarter of the 17,000 men in the Division, the
loss of 10,000 men probably represented two complete turnovers
in the strengths of each Rifle Company : that there were men in
the Rifle Companies who had survived since D-day is explained
by the fact that many of the casualties occurred among the rein-
forcements themselves.
It was this factor that the Corps Com-
mander had recognised in his Special Order of the Day to the
Division when he said :
"It is probably the first action of a
good many of you..." The second factor that led to a line of
action lay in the relation of obvious battle success and ground
gained to the various exhaustion figures.
During the
seven days the
Exhausted to Wounded was I to 3.
average ratio in battalions of
In the case of the Lincolns,
where the ratio was 1 to 22, a probable explanation is that the
sals of the casualues were sustalned auring their one magnincent
allack, when satistactory progress was made. The Ulster Killes,
on the other hand, though in the same Brigade, endured a long
at o inactivity during which, though casualties were low,
the nervous tension was high owing to intense enemy shelling
and mortaring and the nech as sent patrol meet the
who yielded no ground.
congratulated on their figures, which showed against the highest
number of casualties one of the lowest proportions of exhaustion
cases (I to 10).
These and other similarly revealing points were
talked over by General Whistler with the Brigade and battalion
Commanders and with the senior medical officers, and the plan
adopted probably owes most of its success to the wholehearted
in which Commanders and everyone else who recognised
the importance of this psychological problem co-operated at
once to solve it.
Many of the
measures themselves were not new :
WINTER: THE MAAS RIVER LINE
179
designed to "keep men's minds occupied" were inevitably
quizzes and talks concerning the war, on other fronts as well as
theirs, and it would have been hard to draw other than optimistic
Too much talk about demobilisation,
details of
which had (unhappily in this respect) recently been announced
in Parliament, was not encouraged : men who thought all the
time in terms of demobilisation would not be inclined to take a
chance in battle. Out of the line, after a period of rest of not
more than two days, hard physical and battle training was to be
resumed. The most important measures related to " making the
reinforcement feel at home !"
The men who went ashore on
D-day started off roughly equal.
Reinforcements were now
arring at units with the feeling that they were inferior to the
older members of the battalions.
To overcome this a seasoned
sodier was picked to keep an eye on the newly-joined reinforce-
ment, to give him what tips he could during training and in the
line, and to help him over the difficult time of his first battle.
uncers and N.C.O.s got to know them and their capabilties as
quickly as possible, though officers and N.C.O.s were often new
The value of regimental discipline was appreciated
The results of this well-conducted " battle" were very soon
apparent, and the indications were more positive than pinnacles
drawn on medical graphs.
It should be clear that, though the
R.A.M.C. made an accurate diagnosis and helped to prescribe
the remedy, everyone had a part in the rapid recovery and
immunisation for the future-not least the " patients" them-
And before we return to life in the line we may note
Colonel Hinton's observation: that in the winter months only
about 15 per cent of Q work is operational, while the rest must
be devoted to the questions of Ordnance stores,
NAAFI and
accommodation, " comforts never mentioned in training
lishments or text-books."
He reckoned the feeding of forward
troops the worst of all winter problems, and welcomed an increase
in the rations of oatmeal and cooking fats.
As an attempt to
solve the difficulty of keeping food hot,
a small petrol cooker
was created by the Div. Catering Adviser from empty 25-pounder
2,000 of these
mass-produced
R.E.M.E. workshops by Christmas-time. During November, the
