ASSAULT DIVISION
call for the very fullest support. The fire power of the 25th field
Regiment and all the guns of the lith Armoured and 15th
(Scottish) Divisions and 8 A.G.R.A. was added to that of the
Division's three Field Regiments.
The Divisional Sappers, with
the heavy responsibilities of developing the forward routes and
the crossings over the Molen Beek and gapping the minefielas,
were joined for these tasks by the Flails of A and C Squadrons
ot the Westminster Dragoons and by A.V.R.E.s of 617 Assault
Squadron of 42 A.R.E. The 4th Tank Battalions of the Grenader
and Coldstream Guards came to join the Infantry, and durg
the afternoon Wing-Commander Tollemache, G.C., reported to
Div. H.Q. to set up his Forward Control Post :
would have the close support of two Typhoon Wings as well as a
preliminary destructive programme for Medium Bombers.
At II.20 on the morning of the 12th, thirty-six Marauders
of XIX U.S. A.A.F. attacked Venraij, while Typhoons of 03
Group, R.A.F., were going for known enemy positions.
Type a a mom an her to me me in packs
of four, rockets bristling from the leading edges of their wings.
Over the target they pounced down one alter the other, rocketing
out of existence anything in their line of fire. Bombing attacks
on the bridges at Venlo and Roermond were called off at the last
moment, and to this is attributed much increased resistance as
reinforcements arrived.
The guns, massed in the flat fields south of Oploo, were now
splitting the sky and making the earth tremble. First, 8 A.G.R.A.
(Jour Medium Kegiments, one heavy, and one heavy A.A.)
opened up at ii o'clock,
and the three Divisional Artilleries
joined in at II.30. The din grew indescribable as hundreds of
shells a minute were slammed into the breaches and trajected
volleying through the sky towards Overloon.
One unfortunate
observer flying an Air Ó.P. above the forward assembly area
was hit by a medium shell and disintegrated in mid-air.
At the moment of midday the guns switched to the Opening
Line of a barrage, and after 15 minutes the guns lifted as the
Infantry of the Suffolks and East Yorks, supported by Churchills
of the 4th Tank Coldstream Guards, advanced over the Start-
Line. They had to cross half a mile of desolate land to reach the
village, the Suffolks on the right making for the western and
FORWARD
ASSEMBLY AREA
Overloon
Brickworks
TO VIERLINGSBEEK/
Jog-shaped
Wooe
Smakt
Bee
Loog Heide.
Keindorp
Meerselo
-Brabander
Hiept:
St Anna's Hospital
VENRAIJ,
Lubn
TO DOSTRUM
St Servatius
Monastery
• Brukske
Veltum
a Leunen
i Heide
+ TO DEURNE
Yoolen se
Scale in Yards
• 500 1000
2000
OVERLOON
AND VENRAIJ
