ASSAULT DIVISION
pletes the 8 Brigade background to the advance of 185 Brigade
that afternoon.
The K.S.L.I. had begun their thrust for Caen, advancing
over the Periers ridge in order of Companies X, W, Y, Z, and
with C Squadron of the Stafford Yeomanry and F.O.O.s of both
the 7th and 33rd Field Regiments in support.
commander with Colonel Maurice was Major Ian Rae, wIO
was with the battalion throughout the campaign, earning their
tribute: " of the greatest ability, courage and cheerfulness, he
was to be a tower of strength to each successive Commanding
The first crest was reached despite heavy enemy
shelling, mortaring and sniping from Germans concealed in the
corn. An officer of the K.S.L.I. described how at one point they
were driven to take cover, and how, looking round and extremely
frightened, he saw colonel Maurice walking up the middle of
the road, "playing with the chin-strap of his helmet as he
always did . . . I got up.
The example spread, and in a few
minutes the men were moving forward steadily."
The route now led down into the gully across the brook at
Pont du Ponchel and along to the hamlet Le Homme, past
Deuville village on the lett to biéville on the green slope to the
right, then on up to Lebisey.
On the Periers crest you had a fine
view of the country up to Lebisey, and you knew that Caen lay
only a couple of miles beyond in the Orne dip.
from the Periers crest was not unopposed.
But the descent
The rear slope was
sited anded by a battery of six Russian 12•2 cm. howitzers, well
sited on that same reverse slope over on the right just north of
It was hoped that the heavy bombers before H-hour
and the fighter bombers shortly after H-hour would have dealt
with this known battery: "but it was not only alive, it was
kicking hard."
up at the ridge.
Tanks and Support Company vehicles were held
Already one of the F.O.O.s, Captain Gower,
with the Stafford Yeomanry, had been killed when his Sherman
was
knocked out.
Immediately (it was
2.25 p.m.) Colonel
Maurice ordered Major Wheelock with Z. Company to attack
this battery over on the right flank. And the advancing force was
further depleted at this point when Lieutenant-Colonel J. A.
Eadie,
commanding the
Stafford Yeomanry, had to divert A
Squadron to aid the Suffolks in the reduction of Hillman.
But
INVASION:
THE FOLLOW-THROUGH
B Squadron and also B (Self-Propelled) Troop of 41 Anti-Tank
Battery, caught up with C Squadron and the remaining com-
panies of K.S.L.I.
Colonel Eadie then ordered B Squadron to
take up battle positions here in readiness for an outflanking
attack by enemy armour.
The rest pushed on swiftly as Z Com-
pany closed on the howitzers ; the German battery was encircled
Major Wheelock's company managed to drive the German
gunners from their emplacements,
but they went to ground and
covered the wire with dense machine-gun fire.
The Yeomanry
Colonel directed a Regimental Shoot of the 7th Field Regiment
on to them, but several times the Germans got back to their guns
and continued to shell the road until stopped again by the small-
arms fire of Z. Company. Eventually a Pole was captured who
knew the way through the wire at the back of the battery.
gunners fled into the woods, harried for some hundreds of yards
by the Company. The guns were then blown up by an unnamed
N.C.O. of the Divisional R. Es, who, though badly wounded,
succeded in " spiking" them all. It was late that evening when
Major Wheelock consolidated the Company.
He was awarded
the M.C. for his great courage during this action.
Lieutenant
Dixon of the Middlesex,
machine-gun platoon was
protecting Major Wheelock's exposed right flank, was mortally
wounded, and his platoon was taken over by Sergeant Rawling,
who on the morrow won the D.C.M.
Progress for the main body had become easier, though there
were casualties from sniping in Beuville and Biéville; the latter
village was reached by 4 p.m.
Y Company, under Major Steel,
with a troop of tanks, was immediately sent on into
Lebisey
Food, but one tank was bogged in a natura ant-lans unstacle
known as fort, and only three Posis reached the wooa.
pany reached the front edge of the wood without loss.
The Reconnaissance Troop of the Stafford Yeomanry now
reported that a squadron of about twenty-four German tanks was
advancing north from Caen, moving very fast.
The Yeomanry
Colonel immediately asked for the release of A Squadron from
Hillman, who arrived just in time to take up battle positions to
the west of Biéville.
to meet such a threat as this.
He had left B Squadron on the Periers ridge
There were also in position the
