134
ASSAULT DIVISION
It was getting dark when the Suffolks began to advance,
commanded now by Major Allen.
Without much trouble they
reached the cross-roads shortly after midnight.
was then ordered to patrol as far forward down the road as
possible. They were stopped a few hundred yards farther on by
a machine-gun, and attempts to outflank it drew fire from the
left. At the same time a body of paratroopers tried to outflank
the company.
After a clash in which D Company took three
prisoners for the loss of two dead, they returned from their patrol;
it was obvious that the road was held in fair strength.
the night and following day the Suffolks were accurately mortared
and casualties mounted.
"The highlight of g Brigade's day"
was the discovery of 13 German dead, with among them a woman
aressed as a paratroop 1.C.O. At 3•15 P.m. the General held an
O Group at g Brigade H.Q. and ordered 8 and 185 Brigades to
continue the advance with limited objectives.
Ahead and on the flanks the Division was overlooked by high
trothe the watershed from which the river Vire flowed down
to the north-west and the Noireau flowed east into the Ome.
ine attack was to start at 8.30 that evening. The plan was com-
prehensive and included the support of a squadron of Churchils
or cacn attacking battalion and the fire of an A.G.K.A. as W
as the Divisional Artillery.
The moment the barrage started the
enemy answered with a very heavy counter-barrage that pinned
down 105 brigade and in 8 brigade " caught B Company of the
Suffolks fair and square, killing all three Platoon Commanders,
ne u.s.. and une Platoon sergeant. However, they re-formed
and advanced in the face of the enemy Defensive fire, and in the
failing light C and D Companies went through on to their
objectives.
returned to harbour.
The tanks, whose co-operation had been excellent,
previous two nights and after twenty-four
D Company, having had no sleep the
shelling, pushed on alone.
hours' continuous
A patrol of four Germans (one an
officer) approached the leading section, who allowed them to
pass and took them prisoner from the rear.
Farther on, more
to challenge each other.
vermans were neard as they approached from two directions
dived for a ditch.
A section of suffolks opened tre and
their own men, and the section withdrew.
Grenades were thrown by the
Germans at
By this time the
BREAKING OUT OF THE BRIDGEHEAD
135
Ranking formations had been outstripped and the Suffolks
had a wedge a mile deep in the
defences of the enemy, who,
according to prisoners, had received 200 reinforcements a few
hours before.
It was now 4 a.m. on August I4th and D Company had been
withdrawn at least half a mile to form a firm base,
while
Company were ordered forward to take up a position this time
on the left of the road.
This they did, silencing machine-guns
and taking prisoners, including a motor-cyclist.
The escort was
surprised to come under fire on the way back with the prisoners;
it was long after daylight, when the mist had cleared, that it
davned on A Company that in the dark they had come two or
three hundred yards too tar.
Which accounted for the orchard
that they failed to find on the map, and that contained between
thirty and fifty Germans to their fifteen (including three wounded).
hey withdrew smartly, finding more enemy in their rear, taking
proners and clearing the enemy from positions in the hedge-
toys well away to the east of the main road.
Here a raw re-
inforcement is alleged to have remarked: " There's a German
walking down the lane ahead.
What do I do ?"
The Battalion now consolidated. News of B Company began
to come from the R.A.P.
Those who had survived that first
Darrage had gone in to clear ossaro, but no intelligible account
oị this action was obtained, as those who survived were wounded,
mcluding Vaughan, who had assumed command, who was tat
and was severely wounded in the head.
night the Suffolks took two hundred and fifty prisoners.
were shelled and mortared all the next day.
But 14th August was a beautiful summer's day, with the sky
full of the sound of aeroplanes, and already the
mander had rung up to say that a general terman eu cat was
on and that at Flers VIII Corps would be pinched out of the
battle.
During the afternoon a hot and dusty 76th Field Regi-
ment rejoined
Bayeux ;
the Division
and 8 Brigade
there they had spent a week
hastily refitting
25-pounders in place of the cherished Self-Propelled 105
with which they had landed on Queen Red Beach.
Field Regiments had to make this deeply regretted exchange in
turn as the Americans were experiencing a shortage of 105 mm.
