ASSAULT DIVISION
previous two days of fighting had been in tiring intense heat, dust
and mosquitoes,
fantastic wreckage where the earth was so
densely cratered that it looked " more like the landscape of the
moon," as several people remarked.
And though the Divisional
Intelligence Summary has it that "through the bulk of the
opposing 16 G.A.F. and 21 Panzer Division (less 192 Panzer
Grenadier Regiment) the air and artillery bombardment made
a rough path that was quickly trodden down by our assaulting
troops," the fact is that the craters were so close together in
places that it was hard to thread a way through them and quite
impossible to get carriers or even jeeps forward.
While there is
no doubt that the bombardment did greatly simplify 8 Brigades
attack and save them many lives, there is an important qualifica-
tion concerning the advance of the other two Brigades.
By July the Germans were
sufficiently conversant with our
tactics to know that our attacks were invariably preceded by a
drenching bombardment of one sort or another.
Nobody can
milite the Germans in general of failing to grasp the obvious in
military tactics; it is in the realm of strategy (as well as of the
peaceful pursuits,
make such hopeless
In this case they had been quick to form a conclusion,
and further along the front the Commander of the Panzer Lehr
Division, reporting on Junenoged to 1 So Corps, recommended
as his first point that " (a) The main line of resistance is to be
occupied only thinly (with O.P.s at the most important vantage
Losses through enemy artillery bombardment
thereby minimised. (b) Behind every sector a local reserve must
be held close at hand and must be supported by tanks.
reserves advance the moment the enemy bombardment lifts from
the main line of resistance."
This is precisely what happened at Troarn and Manneville
on the 9 and 185 Brigade fronts, and on our armoured front at
Bourguebus, where by
nightfall on the
enemy tanks, chiefly Panthers, but also
18th small groups of
all round our thrust.
Tigers, were reported
It has to be remembered that both these
tanks were more heavily armoured than ours, and mounted a
in the case of Panthers, equalled our 17-pounder,
with the added advantage that it could fire H.E. as well as A.P.,
case of the Tiger, was superior to any tank or anti-
BREAKING OUT OF THE BRIDGEHEAD I2I
tank gun we possessed. But it must also be remembered that,
German armour
was just what was wanted in
Normandy, their lack of speed and lower technical reliability
told against them in the great advance.
Starting on the afternoon of the 18th from ground that had
just been taken with comparative ease by 8 Brigade, 9 Brigade
tound themselves up against stiff opposition almost immediately.
The Ulster Rifles sustained 4 Officer and
98 Other Rank
casualties between the i8th and 2oth July. On the first afternoon
their B Company came under direct fire from two 75-mm. guns.
Lieutenant Lyttle gathered some men and together they success-
Guly attacked each gun, killing some of the gunners, giving chase
to the remainder, and capturing both guns intact; Lyttle won
the M.C. One of the most notable individual deeds was per-
formed the next day by Sergeant Sharkey when the Ulster Rifles
She dealing with the pestering church on their left flank.
Sharkey, using what cover he could, dashed to within 20 yards
ol an active machine-gun, and, darting into the open, personally
killed the crew with his Sten.
Nearby enemy,
demoralised,
withdrew. Later, when his depleted platoon pushed on, Sharkey
was again prominent, dashing from trench to trench, killing those
who tailed to give themselves up.
But Troarn, like Caen before,
was no ordinary objective.
It was not only a focal point, a key
junction in the enemy supply route for troops west of the Dives,
but also a very defensible bulwark.
Later on the 18th, the 3rd
Battalion of 731 Grenadier Regiment, arrived on bicycles to
reinforce the defenders. Tigers moved back into the town, and
nose of their guns they could not get back the Gunners of 16
G.A.F. Division destroyed.
Even so, there were far too many German guns and mortars
firing all along the Divisional front at this time.
Men walked
about with one eye on the nearest slit-trench or crater (there was
no scarcity of the latter), or were unable to waik abou at all
for long periods. The Nebelwerfer, multi-barrelled mortars, it
Moaning Minnies, were a special nuisance.
In their favour it
should be said that they gave plenty of warning of their approach.
'It must be recorded that in this
Germat be recorete duds and failed to explode;
particular period, a remarkable number of the
probably the response of the slave
