ASSAULT DIVISION
had already been carried out despite all the elements : it was
decided that the best benefit would be derived this time by
waiting for better weather.
So the day was spent idly at anchor
off Invergordon and the Sands of Nigg.
In intervals between
showers of snow and sleet the sun would burst out from the clouds
and silver Sunderlands of Coastal Command would resume their
target practice with " flour-bags" in Cromarty Bay.
The night was quieter, and in the early morning the Force
sailed proudly out over the swell, past Tarbat Ness,
and cliffs of " the
Scottish Riviera," deserted save
gulls, and across to the Lowering Position.
The run-in began.
The guns thundered and the landing was made.
There was more
snow and sunshine as the bridgehead was consolidated and units
went chasing off on an extended exercise through Darnaway
Forest and up the valley of the Findhorn.
Leapyear was a success, and the Division was ordered to the
concentration area in the South of England.
The move took
place immediately. Everyone knew what the move meant and
As the craft of S Force sailed down the whole length of the
Cest coast to Portsmouth, the Division was migrating the whole
length of the land.
This mass migration coincided with Easter
and warm weather, and while there is nothing likelier than that
the holiday-makers out hiking and cycling had earned their
holiday that year, their presence on the roads and apparent
indifference to the infinite procession of convoys making their
way southwards from
all over the island strengthened the
soldier's suspicion that for the time being he was apart. Normally
it is hard to find men to ride motor-bikes in convoy: there
were plenty of volunteers
on this journey, particularly from
north-countrymen; inevitably the thought came to mind that
this would be their last chance to look on their wives and sons,
their parents, their countryside. They never failed to rejoin the
convoy, which eventually stopped at one of the hundreds of
tented camps raised among the trees in the south of England.
The whole southern coast was converted, as in the time when
we feared invasion, into an armed camp; this time men felt the
very opposite of fear.
It was a pity that invasion could not commence at once. But
PREPARATION
55
we have remarked how an additional month was required to
provide training and ships
for two more Divisions.
For the
Assault Group of the grd British Division this meant a period of
waiting comparable with the period before the doors are opened
for the first paper of a vital examination (not to take another
simile from the sports field). The period was
made easier by
the embarking, after the first month, on the last of the amphibious
exercises, in which three of the five Forces took part.
Fabius (its name recalling Quintus Fabius, the General who was
styled Cunctator after his classic delaying actions fought against
hannibal; recalling, too, the mood of more modern Fabians,
"the inevitability of gradualness") helped to occupy the minds
of the men who were ready to plunge into battle, into what was
despite the most
excellent Intelligence service-ultimately
unpredictable, unknown.
Fabius took place on May 3rd and 4th. At this time security
was so good that most of those on the exercise were not sure that it
might not be the operation itself. On the other side the Germans
were apprehensive.
On all sides the newspapers were getting
worked up in anticipation almost to the point of hysteria.
cover and deception achieved with wireless and dummy-craft was
remarkably successful.
sailing before a freshening south-westerly breeze from the Isle of
Wight area turned to starboard in a feint towards the coast of
Prance.! Apart from one enemy aircraft attack upon a destroyer
there was no enemy reaction :
Force.
The Forces
inoffensive beaches between Littlehampton and Bognor.
an encouraging experience. But the waiting was resumed and
the suspense heightened.
txercise Handsup is the name that was given to
south and all
subsequent administration of the moving into
position for embarkation.
The Division was divided into
blocks: Main Bodies,
which would land on D-day and D-day
Plus 1 ; First Residues, landing between D plus 2 and D plus 6;
This particular piece of deception was apparently wasted on the Germans :
February, 1946,
Blumentritt, von Rundstedt's Chief of Staff, ruefully admitted in
an interview with Major Milton Shulman of the Canadian Army Intelligence of the
that the sailing of these Forces was never even reported at the Headquarters of the
German Western Chose Forde
