ASSAULT DIVISION
the alternatives of supreme triumph or a tragedy too terrible to
comprehend, kept constant guard over the tongue. So far as is
known there was not the slightest leakage of information' : that
was indeed a triumph in itself.
Dy the autumn or 1943muote Division had come as close to
perfection in its battle drills as a Division could or ever will.
Every soldier knew what to do on coming to grips with the
enemy on the occupied land of Europe. If they had never been
in action before, they had had adequate "battle inoculation."
At Mortat the " students way Young Officers' Course did well
to survive as rough a fortnight as was ever inflicted by a real
enemy, and at the end they staggered to the top of a hill at three
o'clock in the morning and were told to " dig in" in a certain
Before dark the troop of guns had ranged on this hilltop
and they remained laid on their target. Before dawn they opened
up with 100 rounds gunfire (i.e. from each gun), first on one side
of the trenches, then, while Sappers exploded charges
upon the trenches to represent the passage of the enemy barrage
overhead, the guns laid on a point to the other side of the trenches
and went on.
In daylight the nearest shell-crater was found
eighteen yards from a slit-trench:
near enough!
Demonstrations were then required of the Gunners,
carried out a model " crash action" below Wee Queensberry,
engaging targets visible from the gun-position and later allowing
the Infantry to lay and fire off a round themselves. The Middlesex,
at that time organised in three Brigade Support Groups, held a
Support Battalion Day at Moffat on November 13th. Spectators
• In the Sunday Express of g1 March, 1946, Captain Harry Butcher, U.S.N.R., Naval
Aide to General Eisenhower (1942-45), cites three detected American leaks :
were plugged before they could
Captain Butcher's diary has ItS
as it appeared in the Sunday Express it did much
Examples of his judgment are the entries under 1o and a Tuly, opp
evening Tedder called Ike and said that Monty had, in effect, stopped his armour
administrative tail," and "Tedder phoned Ike and reflecting the disappointmen
of the air at the slowness on the ground, said that the British Chiefs of Staff would
support any recommendation Ike might care to make with respect to Monty for
not succeeding in going places.
over Monty's slowdown.
Ike appeared quiet and rested,
but blue as indigo
of the appalling weather or
of
General Bradley's failure to start his attack on the igth, recorded in Eisenhower's
scheduled for 19 July."
"This break in the weather also delayed the First Army attack
of those days see pp. 117-23 below.
(Supreme Commander's Report, p. 46.) For the events
PREPARATION
35
from the whole Division witnessed the fire-power and accuracy
of their
Medium Machine-guns and 42-inch Mortars.
Moffat courses were brought to an end. Now the
problem to
be mastered was how to get ashore and put these lessons into
So far the Division had been through as much Combined
Operations Training as anyone but the Commandos: 8 and g
Brigades especially thought themselves old hands at the game.
They had been up at the Combined Training Centre,
in the spring and summer of 1942 while the possibility of a
landing that summer on the French coast was being considered.
The plan was rejected as unsound by General Freyberg and
Admiral Ramsay, and replaced by the North Africa and Sicily
projects.' That early training seemed elementary in the light of
what followed, but the canvas-and-plywood craft with outboard
motors and the lightly defended beaches at least gave troops an
idea of what was in store for them. (It might well have been all
the training they were to get before recrossing the perilous Straits
of Dover : but General Freyberg perceived the unlikelihood of
our being able to maintain a bridgehead while our shipping was
restricted by a closed Mediterranean.) In 8 Brigade the Suffolks
say they found the training " not particularly popular," but the
East Yorks " all entered into it with the zest and high spirits it.
demanded." It cannot be denied that the change from ordinary
field training was welcome.
In 9 Brigade the Lincolns claim
that their first spell at C.T.C. Inveraray, was the one that will
live longest in their memories, and when the time came for them
to leave they " waved good-bye to the Wrens in the Signal Tower
and watched the
height known as the Airmen's NAAPI tading
into the distance feeling that Combined Ops were a good thing.
That was in 1942.
On August 19th,
1942, the Dieppe reconnaissance in force
was made and costly but invaluable lessons were learnt.
were applied to the preparations for Sicily. So that when t
1 There is now a hot and unprofitable controversy in which foolish men are sayo
that we should never have been bustled into the N. Africa and Sicily operatio.
by an impatient public, but should have remained inactive in 1942 and early '43
building up sufficient landing-craft and troops for a
"Second Front
that year.
Of course the people who argue thus were
the loudest section of that impatient
public in 1942.
