PROPERTY OF
ASSAULT DIVISION
at Münster, sent a patrol south to meet the Recce Regiment of
the Highland Division approaching Lingen from Elberge. g and
185 Brigades were pushing out south-east from Lingen.
Brigade the Lincolns had the first phase, and C Company on
Kangaroos were on the Battalion objective within 30 minutes of
The Ulster Rifles advanced next, and then the K.O.S.B.s
passed through the Ulster Rifles, just after midday, directed on
to Bramsche. A thousand yards short of the objective the advance
guard under Major F. Holden was held up by very intense fire
trom the little village of Polle Estringen Rottum. The following
account is given by a subaltern who joined the K.O.S.B.s just
before the Rhine crossing, and who was at first commanding a
platoon with Holden's advance guard. It is a vivid illustration
of the sudden swiftness of events in an action of this sort, and of
the decisions that confront a junior Infantry Officer at every
" Reports did not seem to suggest anything much in our
way. We all felt that nothing much would happen.
As we moved slowly down the road there was a sudden
burst of fire ahead and then a long silence.
We jumped off
the tanks and ran to cover at the side of the road, and as we did
So we heard the crack of enemy guns (it sounded like the usual
Flak gun in
ground role), and the sound of our own tanks
We advanced as quickly as possible up the road,
half crawling, to reach O Group. Plans were swiftly formulated,
and M. was to send his platoon in to attack while the lal
gave covering hire.
I ran off to bring up the men of my platoon ,
Enemy position only roughly located.
we were to be
was suspected from that side too.
1 lined the other side of the road, for some fire
A few streaks of red tracer
whistled past and something seemed to burst in the trees over-
Two of the men were hit.
I went forward with F.
(Company Commander) to have another look at the enemy
down the road, leaving us.
tanks, having given support, withdrew back
I saw F. coming down the road again and he seemed to
be bent slightly ... He spoke in a hoarse voice and I knew he
BEYOND THE RHINE AND THE EMS
had been wounded.
He was worried about some tank firing
too late. He swayed forward into the open and I went after
him to try to get him back.
He proved very persistent and
wanted to make sure that there was no tank left out in front.
After frantic argument I persuaded him that there were no
tanks near us which could possibly fire and endanger M.?'s
attack, and he left us on his way back to the R.A.P. I had
to take over the remainder of the Company.
F. had given me a pretty good picture before he left but
it was difficult to decide what to do, as M. was off into the
blue and could not be seen. I decided to remove the remainder
across the road into a hedge roughly facing the enemy position,
try to locate M. and help him by fire. In order to do this I
crawled forward with Sergeant G. to get a better view, leaving
the two Platoons in the shelter of a ditch.
Immediately we got
out in front fire came down on to us, and the dust flicked up
in front of my face. No doubt now about the enemy location !
The most imperative thing, however, was to get back, for we
had been spotted.
" Let's get back," I said.
carefully and at every undue movement we heard the ping of
a rifle bullet. G. got back all right,
but as soon as I tried to
go over the same little mound a bullet rushed just past my
Even the text-books taught that sort of
elementary mistake !
Back in the ditch again I decided on a plan, for by then
a runner from M. had reached us.
He told us that the opposi-
There were four or more enemy AA
ported by small-arms fire.
passed information
decided to join M. to shoot him out or in as the case might be.
However, as we were moving off another message reached me
from the Battalion H.Q. telling me to withdraw and put in
an attack on some houses on another flank.
would attack the
present enemy
position under an
I sent the runner back to M. telling him to get out.
We moved back across the road and formed up behind a
small copse for the new attack.
This time it would probably
be all right, for there did not seem any possibility that there
would be enemy in the group of farm-houses in the fields.
hurriedly put down a fire platoon and advanced across a field
A.D.
