ASSAULT DIVISION
helped with the training period in Scotland, and so did my friend
Peter Lloyd of the KOSBs.
Bill Renison was very generous in
letting me see and quote from his unpublished reminiscences of
his command of the East Yorkshire battalion.
My pride in
serving with the 3rd Division is only matched by my gratitude
to Michael Howard for the generosity of his appreciation of its
Time and Tide first published the lines at the head of
Unless otherwise acknowledged, photographs wer
producea Dy permission of the controller, notos apnic
Division, Central Office of Information.
For further reading I want to commend:
Sir John Smyth,
VC, MG,.
Lashmer Whistler, GCB, KBE, DSO, 1967.
Bolo Whistler: The Life of General Sir
Carlo d'Este, Decision in Normandy, 1983
Max Hastings, Overlord: D-Day and the Battle for Normandy, 1984
Patrick Delaforce, Monty's Ironsides: From the Normandy Beaches to
Bremen with the 3rd Division, 1995
Tim Kilvert-Jones, Sword Beach: 3rd British Infantry Division's Battle
for the Normandy Beachhead, 6-10 June 1944, 2001.
And, in French, Eddy Florentin's Guide des plages du Débarquement
et de la Bataille de Normandie: 6 juin-12 septembre 1944, Perrin,
Mémorial de Caen, 2003, describes very usefully not only the
topography of the different D-Day landings, but also that of the
whole Normandy campaign.
It takes the form of seventeen
itineraries, followed by a fully detailed bibliography, a list of the
various War Cemeteries, useful addresses for visitors,
committees,
Colleville Montgomery, etc.
bus routes, tours, Les Amis du Ist Suffolk in
Preface
DUrIng aLL our military training we used to try to keep in mind
" the object of the exercise," though it sometimes seemed very
The object of this exercise is clear and simple. It is to
express and record and commemorate
achievements of an
Infantry Division in the last two years of the Six Years' War
against the Axis Powers.
These are achievements of which fifty
thousand men feel proud (for so many are estimated to have
belonged to the Division when
postings and casualties and
replacements are counted), but of which hardly anyone else has
even heard, for the identities of most Divisions-to say nothing
of the identities of their members-are in wartime sacrificed to
But when war ends and censorship relaxes, the identity of a
Division, always subject to gradual change,
is completely trans-
formed by the demobilisation scheme. When I saw this happening
in the 3rd Division, it seemed to me a matter of the keenest regret.
Not that I felt that the Division ought to have been kept together :
I, too, was an ardent believer in the civilian way of life, and have
since adopted it. But I think it meant something to every
us to belong to the 3rd British Infantry Division.
always prouder of the Divisional Triangle on our sleeves t
the campaign ribbons we used to wear, and I felt that wha
it was we were so proud of was worth preserving if possible.
Our pride was principally in the steadiness in b
Field-Marshal Lord Montgomery has remarked in his
we thought we could be relied on.
That other Div
thought we could be relied on
testified in such
as, for example, Martin Lindsay's So Few Got Through.
on ourselves, then, and we could be relied on to co-ope
cannot think of any two qualities that better
whether their business is war or peace.
This history of the grd Division in the last great campaig
the west is further evidence that in the men
of Britain the
qualities abound. It has little to do with heroics,
