F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.-1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
i1) Unit commanders.
lil) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NorE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
cept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
r suh-om i he requesti, tho do he whether an eis, to the dider sherl by ost be ( s i.
he War Office, London, S.W.1.
referred, through the usual channels,
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
their formations or units any
- To tit is contan ere a, all grades are omeged to include in the war experience
based on factual experience
non and inte
lar her of be heft ry oh the tear research in the Army, as well as material ikely tratien which
on A war diary Will be entered up daily, cach entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
be noted that the
extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details:
to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4. —In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:—
"*) Indoreant os tars, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
1) Dare locations.
in Need ta due nith opat torent, fouate or and present dispositions,
iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
hould be noted.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NoTE.— Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W. 3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
the war diary.
tine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. E anne the aptor Reterence
ParA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
the unit concerned.
spot No T tie it in cret record be shoe dim the iven in thorody
Liace
Walton-on-
The -Naze.
Hawthorn.
Month and Year...
AFRII. 1944.
Date
lour
Ist.
2nd.
3ra.
WAR DIARY
INTELIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
4th.
5th..
6th.
7 tho
8th.
2th
10tho
1lthe
Weather Fine and. Cola.
eather, Wet,Cold, Strong Wind.
Weather, Showery, Cold. l Officer and 40 O.Rs. despatched to Clacton on
Bren Hose Pipe Firing Course. l Seotion sent on Detachment to 246
Petrol Depot, Lenham, Kent.
Weather, Fine, Dry.
Weather, Showery, Warm. Movement Order Received. All Leave cancelled.
Weather, Fine, Dry.
Advance Party of 1 Officer and 12 0.R$. despatched
to Corshan, Wilts.
Weather, Fine, DIJ..
Weather, Tine, Dry. Main Body naved to No.d. Hostel Site HAWORI No.
COPSILM, Wilts.
-Weather, Finoy Dry. Postings Ins- 3 Veh/flechs, 12 Drivers I.C.
Weather, Warm, Showery, 411 Detachmente rojoined Moin Party.
Postings In,- 1 Opl, Driver..-
Army Form C. 2118.
Unit...635 Company Roi-S.C.(BulkBPet
trans.)
Commanding Officer....
Major L.Hall.
References to Appendices
Wt.45374/177 85,000 1/44 T.B.H.Ltd.K. Gp.38
ocuments in your Bulk Or
te you have requested,
more of your doc
ments - Enquire al
lore documents are in us
on Desk for full details
