F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. 1.-A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
reation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
fi) Unit commanders.
iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
tal.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
OTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
ept from the first day of embodiment
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE. —Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time the
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:-
(i*) Actre of car felt retion ise during ane perie
. W.3009) and of each operation or
the war der or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
Its object is to femen a in arica racord o pirations,
re improvements in army training, equipment,
ToTE.—It should he made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para.
not tre ouncer he
details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
reparing a diary :—
(*) Imp deist osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
ji) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
SPECIAL NOTE —The time entered should be the time the information or order aches
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if
nstructions recardina W.. no.
preligence Sunscripies,
Month and Year..
jour
1st...
2nđ.
3rd.
4 tho
5th.
6th.
7th.
9th
10th
12th
and Intelligen
FEBRUARY 1944•
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required.
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form C. 2128.
Unit..
635 Bulk Petrol Transport Coy•
.A.S.C.
* Commanding Officer Major. LHall. R.
References to Appendices
Weather: Unsettled Showery.
Weather: Mild & Dry.
Weather: Rain Strong Wind. 'B' Platoon carried out Exeroise 'Balkan' (No.1.
M.C. Exercise)
Weather: Dry & Freezing. 60 Men fired Rifle and Bren at Oxenhope Ranges.
Weather: Dry Cold. 2/Lt. Barker J.R. taken on strength of Company.
Weather: Fine.
Weather: Unsettled. Weekly Strength variation - Postings In le S/Sjt Supply.
Clerk. 1.Cpl. Veh/Mech. 1.Driver 1/c Postings Out. l.Driver 1/c
Weather: Clear & Fine. W/S Lieut.T.F.MoKeever Posted to this Unit for Duty •
Weather Dull Strong Wind.
Weather: Fine Sunny Cold. 'A' Platoon carried out Exercise 'Bradford' (Company
Exercise)
Weather: Dry Cold. 10 Men attended Hunters Hill Grenade Range and threw Live
Grenades.
V6.9((29/398 2,000,000 3/48 W. H. & S. 51/6375
iments in your Bulk O
ou have requested.
lore of your doc
documents are in
10S 450
