F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
I. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
reation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
nd area or sub-area of the L. of C.
11) Unit commanders
(ti) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i /c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 38), and
personal staff.
v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NotE A.— In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NorE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NOTE C.-
Any question of doubt whether or not a war ‹
will be referred, thr
ough the usual channels, to the Unary.
ly should he or ta te a nit,
PARA. 2- A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
provide data upon
organisation and administration
al to Dase.
• Muprovement
in army training, equipment,
their formations or units any ideas, all t
nay be of te net pons, ec
-term research in the Army, as well as material lie-operation whi
"y lo be or val
a A.F. C diary will be entered up dai
each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
is to be noted tha
nd retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
or other person 1
Nor pe on healt be in dete Bot the oficer he is to do the derie he commander
nentioned in para.
PaRA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA, 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points shoald be recorded when
reparing a diary :—
() In deant oster, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
ii) Daily locations.
arch tables in the
Meet during to pat treaty our he or and present dispations.
tii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the
number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
n addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vi) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
he war diary.
(il) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
an of A.F. C.2118.
(iv) Copies or important and relevant aemi-official letters by commanders of formations,
ncluding al
hey should bewhich ma
•tricruden
, have been marked * personal" (provided the writer considers
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 6.-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
Astructions regarding the iris. Host i
into lige
don Ya in to not to col
Month and Year....
JUNE 1944•
2nd Echelon units
the unit concerned.
Scone NOT The on entered secold be the time the tven in thor
ve tial the formation te or, ir reac
SHEET 1•
Unit. 635 Coy RASC (Bulk Petrol Trans
Major. J.Diggle. RASC
Date
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Weather : Clear Fine.
Post In : 1. T.M.T. Clerk.
Commanding Officer
References to Appendic
"A" Marshalling
1st
2nđ.
3rd.
4 th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
ington Camp.
10th
11th
12th
Heather : Clear Fine.
Weather : Dull.
Weather
: Clear Fine.
Post Out : 1. Cpl. Butcher. 2. Carpenters. 1 .Veh/Mewh
WAR DIARIES SECTION
Weather : Showery•
Weather : Clear.
6 JUL 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Weather : Clear Fine. Post Out. 1. Driver.
Weather : Clear Fine.
Weat her : Showery •
Wasther : Cloudy. Unit moved from Special Duties in "A" Marshalling Area
to Lavington Camp Nr. Devizes. Post In: 6.D/Mechs.
Post In : 1. D/Mech.
Weather : Sun Slight Wind. Post In: 19 Drivers.
Weather : Sunny• Post In: Major J.Diggle from 503
B.P.T.C. Command of Coy
assumed by Major J. Diggle.
Vt.47724/998 2,000,000 3/48 W. H. & S. 51/6375
cuments in your Bulk Ol
te you have requested.
more of your doc
lore documents are in us
on Desk for full details
for full de
