kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.- See also A.C.I. 2014 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
of mobilisation or
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
i action the number of other take of followers sin st as, transport, e be
and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viji) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.— Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
ents (Sec. 36), and
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Apperdices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
war duties will be
(* pop ofter it reton e Wing the per core ay he cuch pration of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
lor reference.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
ARA 6.-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
see F.S.R., Volume II)
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :
VoTE. -It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work
PARA. 3.- Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
() Imp dears os eat, instruetions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
i) Daily locations. Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions
farch tables in the case of large units
or of formations are of assistance.
(ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
•Deration
topographical and climatic.
limatic hear smelts shoes poss, last or opting
clear sketches
SPECIAL NOTE.
the unit concerned.
The tie or entered told be the time the strem in here der k
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Summary of Events and Information
Unit.
Army Form C. 211
CommandinG missing 63S Bilk Petrol Trans COY. RA,S.C.
22 Sept 194L..
0.0., 635 Coy. 2. 5.6., (Bulk Pet Ipt).
DTSARTBUTTON overleaf.
Month and Year.
верв 444.
Place
Putal En Sur 1.
2.
Pures 100200
Delurier 95600 fall pict A R.M.A. Last leaus
Reced nes location
Paul f compoit Platoon mover
up as advans party, remaniela
as , ear party
eather Key canily, thoray.
Pol in 1 PL. DeS.
eleel 107000 gall spirit A 1MB Earl - Prepare A
WAR DIARIES SECTION
5 - CT 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
boissy
4..
hiniked 0830 horn.
Свину.
LeHIRON
Vebuile maintane
ablo
Tanation
uments in your Bulk Oi
e you have requested.
more of your doc
pents - Enquire at
ore documents are in
Desk for full details
