pg_0063.pdf:
Page No..
Appendices
SECRET.
Summary of Events
Time
DEFADE 1A' (0262)
Tuck ch too envelope.
my cropsiences.
mist be improssed.
In addition letters will contain no
indicution
serving personnel.
In other rospoets oxisting
regulations will be oiserved.
¿ Envelopes cannot bo registered and vill not be unca for the
(0) ото от
P ronoy on valuables
Corespondence with tudividule not porsonally lom to the miter may
be dangerous and is recordingly forbicion.
in addition it is forbieden co
swer cavertisenents or letters in any public, tion inviting corrospundence
with strangers.
No lotter noy be mrition dircot to tue Prods.
Carmicutions intended for publioction slould be pout through the
Telegruns will not be pormitted
civil Post Officos
They will be Unit consored, impresued with Wait Couscr Stup und
henced in to Orcerly Roct.
No Fost Orderly vill collect to e
maintel
larges fron tho sendera one personally tile the tologne to buc civil
Post Office for dompatch.
(b)
The use of civil telogragh feollition will not to forbidion to fins,
mits und establishments using an open adiep..
such telegrona vill bo
taken in cases of breach of security.
Telophone culls cre being sonitored end sovore discirlinery action
oa cy subject listed in pura 7(b) above, or where any other breach of
Security discinline is observed.
In the evont of the Unit moving to a lershalling or Irborkation
Regulnting Ares the following regulation will aroly in liou of toge in
Telegrans will not be permittod to bo despatcled by persomol. of
An Is chi
its uoing an Arty Post 0Sfi00 Or Cloned aduzens direct
through Civil Post Office.
hey will be U it consored, impressed with Unit Consor Stamp on
handod. in to Orderly Room.
Civil Pont Of/'ice for despatch.
Ta tie evont of the Whit i oving oversoas tio folloving ailbionl
rogulations will coly :
(a)
with lines cenceltin th sentences not required,
In the event
be destroyed.
(b).
Uneratorod minte lottong wall be postage troo.
(e)
Lone will to canted cue Unit Censorshup and stanging vit
1t Censor stero bobo a dormatan trough Picla Post Office
If the to before rosy in a Kershalling or Imbarkation Regulating
Area pena 1l, should be onitted.

