14627962
WO 171/421
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation o
creation of the particular command or appomment y
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the s. Or
i1) Unit commanders.
i11) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(ty) tatter 1/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
(*) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
kept from the st the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
(IV) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
perations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops a
"portant Phases
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political
occur, or Events should be entered up, not in the order as given ai ve hut he the time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
C ail be ents to be did thach
entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, or
and retention of appendices, maps, etc
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
of other per it sheul be nape de, that the offer who initiate the entries is the commander
PARA. 3.—Omitter.
preparing a diaty so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(*) Imp decisit os dare, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
during the at trenty-four hour ass resent dispositions
(il) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff
(See F.S.., olm diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES)
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :-
B. L. A.
HDS/REW.
ADOS, 3 Br Inf Div.
lect:-
WAR DIARI'S in respect of
ADOS 3 BR INE DIV....
SECRE
3D/OS/44
24 Aug 44
The Under-Secretary of State (G7),
The War Office,
through CHQ 2 Echelon (ND Dept).
(A 7. C. 2118) Fos the month
I enclose original copy of War Diary
of Jul 194.
appendices (A, B & C) are also enclosed.
