0002
som: Docume
ay 09 October 2025
sert Duan
Advanced Doi
WO 171/567
R219-176-06156V
Comp We
LATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
of mobilisation or
mportant phases.
lear sketches showing positions of troops at
v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
bordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
aces and the
number of other
ranks or followers and of animals
As retards asalties the names and ra not of
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vil) Meteorological notes.
ments (Sec. 36), and
vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE. —Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
ccur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
d his representatives.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
ay, war duties will be
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
* U inscruction
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
the war diary.
issued during the period covered by the current volume of
r stunt bey guestion of doubt whether of not a war diary should be kept by a uni
he War Office, London, S. W.Ough the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (3. i
(i) Copier ot orders or instructions, received from higher commands it no longer required
PARA. 2—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
organisation and administration to base future improvements in army training, epiratin,
may be of to weapons, equipment, tactice
(iv) Copies or important and relevant aemi-official letters by commanders of formations,
they should be includedy have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers,
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc
See F.S.R., Volume II
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
i her person ment he in e diet, that the officer Who i to die entries is tv ommander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4. In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
"paring a diary
(1) In deant osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
1) Daily locations
lylocation cement due thora twenty four hour and present dispositions,
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the wore No. the in ator tour a to tint le for one to a roches
DENT
Monin and Year.. June 19440
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE-SUMMARY
Delete nenair not required.
522. Goy R. A.S.C. (Inf Bde)
Commanding Officer Major H.S. Bu
Reterences to Appendices
Summary of Events and Information
Jun 1 ou0t
Marshalling
vouchamocon
At Sea,
so 30 Big
as for operati
All vehicles are loaded and ready to
roceed to Marshalling Areas for embarkation as ner. Apox. B"...
0700
1200.
Varshal state ten AFf from Camp Co 14 to respective marshalling areas, kus
Unit remains dispersed in M.A's. lif
3 1900
Personnel and vehicles embarked from SOUTHAMPTON Hards.
Convoy pulled out
onwards into SOLINT and anchored.
Remained embarked.
affs
affx
1700
6 0900
1600
now we are off has
Nearly across Channel. IST's rolling badly. No one seasick owing to tablets
issued before embarkation being taken....
BBC announced first troops ashore.
WAR DIARIES SECTION
7.0900
FRANCE.
1330.
1530
1535
MRAVAINES
1830
1.930..
aerences on Franke.
ineffective. his
Still on board.
Weather bad - rolling and rough..
Hear that if Rhino
mable to get us ashore by 1430 hrs - ISTs will beach on ebb tide. A
Major H.S. F
Butterworth proceeded ashore via Rhino to contact CRASG at....
MRAVA INES. PHA
Majority of vehicles now coming ashore.
ISTs beached. AS
Major H.S. Butterworth contacted CRASC and found location of 1st tide vehicles.
Imn and Pet Pt already functioning at MCAVAINS. fl.
2nd tide vehicles started arriving in Coy location.
Lindon arrived
back from delivering ammunition to 47 Commando at PORT EN BESSIN in spite of
nemy omnosition As
Coy concentration complete, HD
16 JUL 1044
G. H.O. 2nd Echelon
