WO 171/322
14625856
Return by (21/11/2025 07:00:03)
(Albert Duan)
39:36
4670
AR Duan
lents (Sec. 36), and
d his representatives.
ot formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
cept from the first day of embodiment.
NOTE B. See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
LATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or ster ranks
As tolords saalis the is ho an dranoe of
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
1. e tons should be chred up not in the order is are h i, but at the time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(1) cope of art melt return it, sang an er. .30 any of each up ation or
the war diarv
See PASA 6 All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.- FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES)
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
or other pe it should be in pedes, that the for who aits the untier is the commander
PARA 3.- Omitted.
preparing day so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when.
i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
Inties of each branch of the staff.
RIGINAL
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required)
Unit... P.D.0.S. 12 Carpa.
Commanding Officer Col.H. P.Mack enzi
Summary of Events and Informatior
Prom the time that 12 Corps moved into the line, the order of battle
i formations fluctuated constantly. Corps Troops, i.0. Corps Ord Fd Fk,
P.M.S.Ss, were concentrated in the area Ruequeville.
When 12 Corps HQ
loved to the area Putot-en-Bessin an F.M.C. was opened and A.D.O.S. Corps
roops and the F.M.S.Ss moved into it. P.M.A. Ss also opened the first-
Corps Ammunition Dump.
In connection with ammunition the rate of expenditure of Field and Medium
Arty was very high and the staffs of the P.M.A.Se were found to be
Inadequate to deal with this problem.
They were reinforced by Headquarters
Second Army with an ammunition section from an O.B.D.
Corps Ord Fd Fk moved to the area of Loucelles.
Throughout this first month of the campaion the replacement of warlike
stores and vehicles has been excellent and apart from the replacement of
5.5" guns there has been no grounds for complaint. 5.5" gun supply was
WAR DIARIES SECTION
3 AUG 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelen
