pg_0002.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA.-1. A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(ini) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and
personal staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.-In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NOTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NoTE C.—-Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.l),
The War Office, London, S.W.l.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
their formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factual experience
in regard to weapons,
equipment, tactics, organisation and inter-service co-operation which
may be of benefit for short-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
later for the History of the War.
A war diary will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it
on A.F. C. 2118.
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(ii)
Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
iii) Important matters relating to he duties of each branch of the staff.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(11)
Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
Tor Tererenice
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above)
Appendices will be
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
(iv) Copies of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
including any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
they should be included).
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume I1).
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month wil
ve forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c G.H.C
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
(її)
The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a brigade or higher formation will be
forwarded within a period of two months to the officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon for
transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.
he diaries of units will be sent within a period of three months to the officer i
nd Echelon to be transmitted to records offices at home. for safe custody.
SPECIAL NOTE.—The time entered should be the time the information or order reaches
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if known.
Serial.
1.
2.
3.
4•
in l
7*
Instructions regarding War
Diarie
and Intelligence
contained in F.S
and the
Ctaff Manual respecuvely
Ron h Wat
viaries
will be enclosed in A.F. C.2119.
If this is
not available,
and for Intelligence Summaries, the
cover will be prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year. JUNE W.
Place
Date
Hour
PEI WORTH
DENMEND..
DENNEAD.
..3.
SIOKAS BAY.
.......n....
SOUTHAMPTON. 5
.FRANCE....
COLLEVTITE 57
15.
1909
Staff's Yeo
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
5/5'Almy Form c. arra
Unit.HO 27 Arma Bae
Commanding Officer BRIG CE ERTOR-D TA
References to
First Tide parties of all unito noved to narshallins arens. Staff Offus of this
HQ moved to HQ 3 Br Inf Div at DENVEAD. BM visited Staffs Yeo
in their marshalling
dred, and Bde Cond retumed from LONDON.
Bde HQ remained at DENVELD all day. Final preparations (incl watermofing Stage 2
were carried out in readiness
for embarkation. Certain unit parties loaded or
IST today.
WAR DIARIES SECTION
11 JUL 1944
Bde IQ moved out from DANED und embarked on COSPORT hards at 1500 hrs. Bde Comd
and BM remained ashore for one additional night. Imbarkation was rather slow owing
G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon
tothe grounding of IOts and me or two vehicle friluces at the foot of the rip.
Made fast all dey off SPOKES BY. Operation postomed 21 hrs. Weather deteriorating.
Sailed fron SOUMHANPION at 1750 hrs in a fresh hreeze which increased as darkness fell...
crived off the louering posn at 1100 hrs after a cough hut otherwise undisturbed.
voyage. Touched down at 1200 hrs - an hour early. The beach was very much congested,
but was neither hanhed or shelled at that time, Moved to RV at 072802 where the Bde
Cond and BM who had landed earlier were witing. A rather sticky battle followed,
progress we difficult nd the day drew to a close with the ide boned in with their
backs to the sea and the cane] and no contact with the Canadions on the right. Bde HQ
Expected counter abbeck by amour did not meterialize, so at 1000 aparox the s
was resumed towards CAr, 185 Inf Bae supported by C San Staffs Yeo reached the line
with a Bn of Inf were reported as approaching
Lond there not stiffenine anottione sentu
Hasty rei
shade and two Sens of 13/18 H were despatched to held the crossing. By 1900 hre
M3524/1218 1200M 10/41 H.B. & Co.Ltd. 61-1541)
Sitrey -
at 029736 seems to be holdingrup inf - A Sgn neve
brewed up another tk.

