pg_0010.pdf:
Sorlouo! Bna (a) Tou a ni qira OH art tial pli eisgirid conahi am 21eo tA
now dousd odd ecola add forlosotage (a)Ial ord ue anit Sat Ja
•and 000f die moE
9.19
1. The
(a)
• mob sedatos
Lattadmoai5 onotod asiafanado to sedana flana a fasoltua
250v1
a and Jácal da bno oscat gaison has flara oibotoga
artogeow artisubon one.
and esta
ard no cortis
00
Froze o saisaltua md 090l 7d saze viamsaaa tions
040 Myd coma, idaaaas miro
болотів. Лі ав подбаноів олs
rout
The
ACAZAAA
Noc do a
In irbome Div as 8 Be had been unable to do so.
As 1 NORFOLK receivto be
heavy casualties in by-passing HITIMAN Brigade Cormander
decided after refel
to Div Cond that 2 WARVICK should move up axis of canal road.
No oppositiontion
coming from MORRIS.
and
On approaching BINOUVITIE, heavy small arms fire directed on leading 2 WANICK
company and 2 WARNICK were ordered to put in an attack at about 1900 hrs.
Attack
was successful several eneuy being killed and about ten PV being token.
2 WAR/ICK
then advanced towards BLAIVITIN meeting some opposition from an enemy mob coln
fighting a delaying action,
suffering some casualties and having their FC0s tank
nocked out.
2 WARVICK halted for the night on NE outskirts of BLAINVITE.
Meanwhile 2 KSLI made good progress until they reached BHUVIIIE where
leading company came under heavy fire from snipers
in the village.
the
The Co decided.
to by-pass BEUVILIE and to attack as his next objective the
enemy strong point and
HQ in BIEVILLE.
This was completed by 1600 hrs.
About 1615 hrs about 20 enemy tanks were seen approaching on the right flank.
At 1630 hrs 8 of them attacked,
four and possibly six,
were knocked out by STAFFS
YH0 and anti
tank guns of 2 KSII.
This actionwas
over by 1730 hrs, meanwhile a
company of 2 KSLI which was out of communication with
the CO had pushed on towards
TEBISEY,
the outskirts of which they reached about 1730 hrs. One company was
consolidating the right flank of BIIVIIIE against further
tank attacks,
one company
was moving forward to BIVITLE and the fourth company was still engaged
in stiff
fighting with the battery at PERIERS
SUR IE DAN.
This they finally captured
putting all the guns out of action and destroying aRR capturing most of the garrison
by about 2100 hrs.
About 1800 hrs CO 2 KSII re-established communication with company which had
reached out skirts of LEBISFY.
He was informed that
casualties were heavy,
that the
company commander was killed and that they were unable to pentrate
the wood owing
its thick nature, concealed its and snipers and that a party of the enemy were
in process of encircling them.
The
Co considered that to
commit his two available
companies (already considerably depleted by casualties) into this extensive and
obscure objective and without a firm base behind him would be ruming the risk of
defeat in detail,
This was passed back to the Brigade
Cormander who agreed to
the
withdrawal of the company from INBISHY and ordered 2 KSII to establish a firm
base SOUTH of BIEVIITE.
This withdrawal was carried out after dark without undue
loss.
Situation at nightfall
therefore was three companies 2 KSLI digging in at
BIEVITTE. 2 WARWICK on outskirts of BLAINVITE and 1 NORFOIK on the high ground
EAST Of BEUVIITE.
1 NORFOLK had some difficulty in disengaging two companies pinned down by
HILTIMAN
but finally consolidated on the high ground EAST Of BEUVIlLE by 1900 hrs.
A number of eneny snipers were mopped up on this feature.
Brigade Commander warned. CO 2 VARWICK that night that he would have to carry
oat an attack on IMBIStY as early as possible on D + 1 and that orders for the
track would be issued at 0730 hrs on D + 1.
2 WARWICK secured BLAINVITE at first
ight and carried out the necessary recces of routes forward, all routes then being
reported clear of enemy.
*2+1
to mack
Brigade Commander issued orders at 0730 hrs.
Zero to be at 0945 hrs. The
attackpto be supported by three field regiments (less one battery and one cruiser.
CO 2 WARVICK completed his orders by
about 0830 hrs and companies moved towards
their assembly positions.
During this nove A Company (left forward company 2 WARNICK)
came under heavy fire fron houses on the canal road towards BEUREGARD which had appar-
ently been clear of enemy during previous recces.
This caused considerable
delay.
CO 2 WARTICK requested postponement of H hour.
Bde Comd referred the matter
to Div Cond who, in view of he importance of capturing I BISHY as quickly as
possible, ordered that delay should not be more than half an hour.
This
information passed by Brigade Commander to CO 2 WARWICK and supporting arms.
Meanwhile, right forward company (B company 2 WARWICK) and reserve company
(c Company proceeded to assembly area and owing to breakdown of communications
did not receive orders for postponement.
They then proceeded to attack at the
original hour, unsupported, reached the forward edge of the wood with few
casualties, and reported that they were in the wood.
Fourth Company (D Coyoany)
was still on the bridge at BIVOUVITIE.
......./Acting on this.

