pg_0011.pdf:
RUN CAN
-03 05: 0đ 0.E.
boбl09b 00 all
egoshiv ord ni asagine noct gilt vyar sobnu
Ena datog anonda viors out evidoptoo ison airl aa doside ot 5
absuod no borane, Darl 00-odd did noidastramoo to duo
gow precioo ond •aul OET/ duade
anto ,alonato saed corturit fariona
Sata as
yard air!
tam gutsudano the anacontent
notion 2o diso
WtI.110
CHO HUNGRO
474
00rs divadie
to 30910
Acting on this information and taking advantage of what he thought to be
a favourable situation, the CO put in A Company on its
original objective.
A
Company likewise reached the forward edge of the objective with little opposition
but came under intense fire as soon as it got into the woods. CO went forward and
was killed shortly afterwards.
Owing to the lack of crossing places over the
natural anti tank obstacle CO 2 WARWICK was compelled to direct all his own
supporting weapons up
the BEUVILLE - LEBISHY asis.
Acting on the assumption that
2 WARWICK were on the
objective these support arms went bolaly forward and were
ambushed by tanks, an 88 mn and several MGs, and entirely destroyed.
Meanwhile at 1150 Brigade +Commander received a message that touch had been
lost with A Company,
that B Company were fighting in the centre of the wood and that
C Company were following up.
Brigade Comander asked Div Cormander for immediate
release of D Company from bridge at BENOUVILLE, which was agreed to.
At 1340 hrs
Brigade Commander received a message that A, B and C Companies were on VERMOUTH and
that D Company was following up.
On this Brigade Commander ordered 1 NORROIK to be
prepared to move through VERMOUTH and secure high ground beyond. At 1400 hrs an indirect
report was received that VERMOUTH was captured.
At 1545 hrs 1 NORFOLK left the high ground with the intention of exploiting
the kiggut favourable situation referred to and forming up on IBISTY for an
attack on the high ground beyond.
On the way up the battalion was heavily shelled
and suffered several casualties.
Soon afterwards unconfirmed reports were received that the situation in the
wood was far from satisfactory.
At 1605 hrs the Brigade Commander received information that two companies
of 2 WARWICK were surrounded in the wood and were holding on.
That the situation
was critical was confirmed by wounded men coming back.
The Brigade Conmander was
faced with the following courses:-
1.
To order 2 WARVICK to withdraw under cover of darkness under their own
arrangements.
2.
To use 1 NORFOLK to restore the situation in the wood with the object of:-
Covering the withdrawal of 2 WARICK.
Consolidating as much of the wood as possible with a view to
subsequent exploitation by the Brigade.
Brigade Comander decided on course liunber 2 and ondered/l NORTOIK to use
his own judgement as to whether consolidation was practicable. This was referred
to Div Coma who approved.
A Son STAFTS YEO, who had previously not been allowed
by higher authority to cross the tank obstacle was ordered to support this operation.
Meanwhile the battalion were assembled in BIEVITIE. CO then ordered the
battalion into a FUP in the dead ground on the left of the road beyond the anti
bank obstecle.
"Several casualties were suffered during the move to the FUP. I Hour
for the attack 1830 hrs. First Objective the Eastern end of IMBIBY wood up to
the first lateral.
1 NORFOLK arrived in the wood in good order and eventually reached the line
of the first lateral in the wood where they came under heavy lIG and sniper fire
which it was impossible to locate.
One company was caught in a mine field.
Casualties were mounting up. No targets could be indicated to his artillery.
About 2200 hrs 2 WARWICK started to withdraw, and CO 1 NORFOIX aypreciating
that by remaining isolated in this extremely thick he vould leave himseh f open
to defeat with very severe casualties, decided to withdraw.

