plants were met by sending out the plants from satellite factories in the
United Kingdom, and valuable experience was gained in the crating, trans-
port, handling and re-erection of this equipment.
As it was possible to reduce materially the immediate requirements of
non-returnable tins, manpower economy was effected by putting some factories
in the United Kingdom on a care and maintenance basis, and reducing others
Considerable assistance was given to the Ministry
to single shift working.
of Food by using these factories to produce food tins.
The following table shows the figures of production of returnable con-
tainers by home contractors during 1943 (all in thousands): —
Other
40-gal.
Jerricans
Americans
returnables
barrels
828
1,882
206
Ist Quarter
1,445
184
4,700
2nd Quarter
5,583
65
783
170
3rd Quarter
5,598
257
51
208
4th Quarter
By June, 1943, the production of jerricans had been built up sufficiently
to justify that of 4-gallon returnable drums being stopped, as it was pre-
ferable to standardize with one type
of container only.
Throughout 1944
continuous effort was made to increase the production of returnable con-
tainers, and good results were obtained; but increased demands from all
Services came in faster than production could be speeded up.
Since United Kingdom and U.S.A. production of returnable containers
had reached its maximum without curtailing output of other essential war
equipment, attention was turned to the potentialities of other theatres.
India
and Australia were producing less than their own requirements.
Middle
East, with very reduced local commitments, was able not only to contribute
to the needs of Italy and India but to send to the United Kingdom a
considerable quantity of locally-made jerricans and light steel barrels.
Even
the Azores helped by returning containers rendered surplus by the reduction
of the garrison.
Availability of shipping was the main limiting factor.
The difference between the demand for containers and the availability of
returnable containers had to be met by manufacture of non-returnable tins.
It was against such a contingency that a large manufacturing potential for
this type had been retained in the W.D. factories.
Output was increased
from an average in the first half of the year of 315,000 tins a week, to a
record output of 465.345 in one November
week.
bad weather,
reduction of demands by 21 Army Group and congestion at the docks due
to shortage of the petrol coasters specially fitted for the carriage of non-
returnable tins, slowed down production to a rate of under 350,000 tins a
Since it was undesirable to use returnable containers in the United King-
dom while non-returnable tins were shipped overseas, every effort was made
to increase supply at home in bulk, or to meet home requirements in non-
returnable tins where bulk was not practicable.
motor spirit for training purposes, and petroleum spirit for domestic purposes.
This applied particularly to
Large quantities of lubricating oil were packed in non-returnable rins
home consumption, so as to conserve the more robust S-gallon drum for
260
Another problem was the provision of cartons and "no-nail" boxes.
in which to pack the non-returnable tins.
The year 1944 had started with
all available storage spuce full of these articles, but it became necessary later
both to increase production and
to find other sources
of supply.
million
came from P.A.I.C., half a million from the Air Ministry; and
the situation was eased.
Repair and Maintenance of Containers
The need for conserving returnable containers by the establishment of a
repair organization was not overlooked.
In the United Kingdom the repair of
barrels and small containers was carried out by Ministry of Supply contractors
Statistics showed that up to August, 1944, six per cent. of
jerricans and
americans and 1•3 per cent. of barrels had suffered repairable damage.
active theatres of operations percentages were far higher and increased as
the containers
became
older.
Wherever
possible, local resources
Were
developed to effect repairs.
In addition, in 1943 repair sections had been
added to Mobile Petrol Filling Centres.
These were intended to carry out
repairs as far forward as possible, and so to obviate the use of transport and
the delay involved in returning containers to base repair installations.
They
were designed to work alongside their parent units,
and to repair the con-
tainers discarded as unserviceable by the filling sections.
When several
M.P.F.Cs. were combined in one large filling organization, e.g., at pipe-head,
the repair sections operated together as a forward repair unit.
In practice,
the sections had to concentrate on minor repairs such as
straightening of filler neck assemblies and closures, whilst cans requiring
welding were sent to the base.
This was because of the difficulties met in
supplying the oxygen and acetylene to several forward points, in providing
covered accommodation for the sections to operate efficiently, and in moving
and reinstalling their equipment to keep pace with
the advance of the
formations they served.
Technical P.O.L. Equipment
S.T.2 were responsible for the design, provision, and issue of equipment
to be used by P.O.L. units in theatres of operations.
Equipment was designed
by officers with knowledge of the various types of similar equipment used in
the petroleum industry.
The designs for equipment of base installations
were therefore based on experience gained in civil installations, and adapted
to suit military requirements.
Examples of this sort of design were filling
units for Base Petrol Filling Centres, and can and barrel washing machines.
In addition, there were a number of original designs evolved for equipment
to be used in L. of C. units such as Mobile Petrol Filling Centres
played a very large part in the distribution of packed P.O.L. on the continent.
These units required a type of equipment without parallel in any civil installa-
The equipment provided was the invention of necessity, and much
of it, designed in S.T.2, gave excellent service.
Examples are the 800-gallon
and 2,500-gallon fabric tanks, and the 620-gallon portable steel tank.
261
7
WO 277/21
27
