of the equipment to India fell behind schedule, and equipment was only
beginning to arrive in the theatre in July,
1945.
Even then some of it
was damaged, owing to severe handling en route.
In later consignments,
assemblies were stripped of parts liable to damage, and these were either
lashed to the main unit, or shipped separate.
Petrol fitters and welders were
also added to the establishment of the Petroleum Technical Stores
Depot
to provide for the repair and renovation of equipment arriving damaged or
India wanted all P.O.L. technical equip-
returned by units for replacement.
ment tropically packed, but the manufacturers could not undertake this before
1945, and in the meantime it was liberally protected with grease and examined
immediately on arrival.
R.A.S.C. in India
The total strength of the R.A.S.C. in India was comparatively
small,
consisting only of the following: -
R.A.S.C., 2 Division.
R.A.S.C., 70 Division.
panies and one G.T. company).
One M.A.C.
Tragic Companies formed from two artillery com.
Three D.I.Ds., one Field Bakery, one Field Butchery.
4 Corps headquarters transport.
The Amphibian School at Coconada.
Two Petrol Depots.
These units were at first in a rather ill-defined position, as they were not
the particular responsibility of any branch at G.H.Q., India.
The S. and T.
Directorate regarded the personnel as being the business of the
General's Branch,
but the latter was pre-occupied with the affairs of the
Indian Army, and in any case was unfamiliar with the peculiar problems of
Later, R.A.S.C. officers were posted to the branch.
From the technical point of view, supervision by S.T.3, India, was not
made easier by the fact that an Inspectorate of Mechanical Transport on
the usual R.A.S.C. lines was refused on the grounds that there could not
be an organization separate from the existing I.E.M.E. inspecting arrange-
As there were then over 20 R.A.S.C., W.A.A.S.C., and E.A.A.S.C.
transport companies in India, and when distances to be travelled were
allowed for, there seemed to be a good case for two inspection teams.
arrived at which provided that the
B.R.I.A.S.C. of a
command could, if he had reason to think that a R.A.S.C. unit was not
in a satisfactory condition of mechanical efficiency, call upon the B.I.E.M.E.
of the command to arrange for an inspection.
kept a very high standard, and there was no case of failure.
Actually, the units fortunately
The supply and P.O.L. units were sent from Middle East with 70
Division, as the quota necessary for maintaining that formation,
fact they were redundant.
The Petrol Depots and one D.I.D. did excellent
work in Assam and Arakan (see Chapter XI, but the other units were not
The Tank Transporter Companies were mixed units,
they were partly British and partly Indian as far as the drivers were con-
cerned, the workshops being entirely British.
Three of these companies
eventually did excellent work in Burma, and one was employed on heavy
dock lifts in Calcutta and Bombay.
A section of one company's workshops
maintenance duties in Calcutta.
was mainly employed in East Bengal, on work which could have been done
equally well by Indian units.
R.A.S.C., 2 Division, did much training for beach and amphibian opera-
tions, and eventually took part in the operations at Kohima and after; while
R.A.S.C., 70 Division, maintained the
There was also a considerable number of individuals serving under
India, who either belonged to the R:A.S.C., or had done so
were officers who had come out to
India with British formations and then passed to other employment, and
" middle piece" (majors and captains) R.A.S.C. officers who had been sent
out to provide a stiffening of experienced officers for the greatly expanding
A number of potential officers from the ranks of the R.A.S.C
were also sent out for commissioning to the R.I.A.S.C
These categories
provided a very valuable element in the R.I.A.S.C., which otherwise had to
draw its officers mainly from surplus subalterns of fighting troops, compul-
sorily attached, and from Indian sources.
The sound basic training
R.A.S.C. personnel was particularly apparent in transport companies,
regard to maintenance and operation.
On the other side of the account, it has to be recorded that, early in
1940, the War Office asked for as
many R.I.A.S.C. officers as could
spared to be sent to help the R.A.S.C.
Nearly 100 accordingly sailed for
Most of the Main Supply Depots in the United Kingdom were
raised by R.I.A.S.C. officers, and eventually all were commanded by them.
With the evacuation of the B.E.F. and the expansion of the R.A.S.C., most
of these officers returned to India.
The special importance of Ceylon lay in the fact that, after the loss
Eastern
during 1944, the location of the
headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander, South East Asia Command;
and it was a base for the operations against the Japanese in South East
Pre-war R.A.S.C. Organization
There was only a small garrison in the island before the war, and the
R.A.S.C. detachment consisted only of two officers and seven other ranks.
Of these, one officer also acted as D.A.A. and Q.M.G. at Command Head-
quarters, and the other as adjutant to the Ceylon Army Service Corps.
Three other ranks provided the clerical establishment of Command Head-
quarters, one warrant officer acted as Officer i/c
Barracks, and a staff-
serjeant and a serjeant were the R.A.S.C. representatives at out-stations.
The normal peace-time system of messing was in force, and this continued
until Japan entered the war.
Petrol and lubricants were obtained by local
Transport requirements were hired,
as the only W.D. vehicles
on the island were three motor ambulances.
Barrack services for regular
WO 277/21
27
