any W.D. ambulances from this employment, even though the civil defence
vehicles were being used to the best advantage.
became essential to release military ambulance drivers for
commitments, and some slight reduction was achieved in the numbers
in C.(M.)T. Companies and in those of voluntary organizations operating
on military behalf.
The chief factor militating against reductions was the
insistence of the medical authorities on there being always an ambulance
available at short call for every body of troops, which involved uneconomical
dispersion of ambulances from the purely transport point of view.
Employment of Women in the R.A.S.C. Transport Organization-
In peace-time, the R.A.S.C. had maintained a constant liaison with the
Women's Transport Corps (First Aid Nursing
Yeomanry), usually known
as F.A.N.Y., which was an officially recognized
affiliated to the R.A.S.C.
women's volunteer body,
Its members received no pay, but carried out
training in driving and maintenance under R.A.S.C. instruction and super-
They brought their own cars and used their own petrol.
On the formation of the Auxiliary Territorial Service, members of the
F.A.N.Y. were, for the most part, absorbed into that service in accordance
with the terms of the corps'
original recognition by the
and formed M.T. companies in each command.
separate from the A.T.S., and outside
The F.A.N.Y., however,
control, and a number of its members drove B.R.C.S. ambulances.
The M.T. units of the A.T.S. were called up for service on the 25th
August, 1939, and at once provided a number of skilled drivers for home
Many of them brought their own cars, which they
ran on a mileage allowance basis. An unsatisfactory feature of this arrange-
ment was that the insurance policies for these cars became invalid as soon
as the vehicles were used on government service during, or in anticipation
of, hostilities. The cars were therefore running without insurance cover, an
obviously unsatisfactory state of affairs. In the agreements for the hire of
lorries for emergency services on or before mobilization, this point was
covered by the insertion of a clause clearly stating that, where an insurance
policy was invalidated, War Office accepted the insurance risk.
this precedent, however, the War Office was not prepared to apply the same
condition to private cars used on W.D. service, and stated that the matter
would be considered if and when an accident occurred.
This attitude did
not encourage the drivers to go on using their own cars in the black-out,
with the risk of heavy claims for damages to third parties.
Duties Performed
The work done at that time and enhseament. t ala A me MT driver
personnel was a major and very valuable
transport services.
The women
contribution to
the R.A.S.C.
trucks,
not only
but also
ambulances, vans, and lorries up to 3-ton.
Very extensive use
made of their services as clerks, storekeepers, artificers, and domestic staff
in R.A.S.C. transport units and M.T. depots.
The initial training of the A.T.S. drivers, enlisted after the outbreak
of war, was not in all cases very satisfactory, and the standard of driving was
at first indiflerent; but later it reached a high standard, and the employment
of the A.T.S. afforded considerable relief to the strain on R.A.S.C. man-
power resources caused by the ever-increasing demands on it for transport
The A.T.S. (M.T.) companies were, in the early part of the war, some-
what independent of R.A.S.C.
organization was introduced in July, 1940, under which the personnel of
these companies were to take over and operate such vehicles of R.A.S.C.
responsibility, not forming part of Station Transport Companies, as were
conveniently located in relation to the headquarters of the A.T.S. companies.
The A.T.S. companies were to accept the same responsibility for vehicle
accountancy, inspection, and first line repair as was placed on a Station
Transport Company, in order to reduce, to some extent, the load on the
vehicle sections of Station Maintenance Companies, hitherto charged with
the responsibility for the R.A.S.C. vehicles of static formation headquarters
and other establishments. The A.T.S. (M.T.) companies were not, however,
to be accounting units for all vehicles driven by A.T.S. personnel,
those cases where the A.T.S. drivers were found from Motor Driver Com-
panies or General Duty Companies, A.T.S.
The Station Maintenance Companies and workshop sections of Station
Transport Companies continued to be responsible for second line
and workshop inspections of all vehicles driven by personnel
At the same time, Os.C., R.A.S.C., areas, were instructed that they should
exercise full technical control over A.T.S. (M.T.) companies, and make their
advice and assistance freely available to these units.
In consequence of the increasing employment of A.T.S. personnel in
relief of R.A.S.C. drivers, a junior commander, A.T.S., was
S.T.3 as a staff captain in May, 1941, in order that closer collaboration might
be achieved with the A.T.S. directorate.
The joint organization gradually settled down, and its satisfactory
may be judged from the fact that, when in May, 1941, the War Öffice was
considering the question of the administration of A.T.S. in military
S.T.3 was asked to advise on the methods adopted in the R.A.S.C. trans-
port services, and it was agreed that the R.A.S.C. system was a good model
on which to develop A.T.S. command and administration in other arms of
Types of Vehicle Driven
The types of vehicle considered to be within the capacity of A.T.S.
personnel to drive were laid down in July, 1941, as follows: -
30-cwt., 4-wheeled lorries; vans and trucks; ambulances; cars;
Unladen: 3-ton, 4-wheeled lorries.
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
