corps troops units.
Employment of Motor Coaches
The decision was taken in January, 1941, that motor-coaches used by
mobile columns in the home defence organization would not be operated
and maintained by the R.A.S.C., but driven by unit personnel and regarded
as first line transport.
In February, 1941, the question of the proper method of employment of
Motor Coach Companies came under review.
G.H.Q., Home Forces, applied
for the War Establishment of these units to be increased, so as to make
sections administratively independent.
War Office declined on the ground
that it had never been the intention that these companies should be organized
for tactical moves of sub-units of infantry battalion; they were meant to
provide for the movement of troops only in the event of invasion, and then
only to proper debussing points on roads in rear of the deployment area.
This policy had not in fact been adhered to, and the coaches had been
in use practically continuously conveying troops on all occasions,
with the
result that the coaches were rapidly deteriorating.
Their condition caused
adverse reflection on the R.A.S.C.
The standard of maintenance
and
general efficiency of these Motor Coach Companies as disclosed by C.I.M.T.
inspections was low; and it was suggested to D.Ds.S.T., Home Commands,
that they should try and have all coaches struck off duty in turn, for a
complete refit.
The Ministry of Transport rejected the proposal of the War Office that
400 of the old-type coaches in these units should be released to civil em-
ployment, an equal number of newer ones being acquired for the War
Department in their place.
Troop-carrying Vehicles Introduced
Alternative proposals were then considered with a view to substituting
W.D. troop-carrying lorries for coaches.
An experiment
was
tried
strengthening and lengthening the frame of the standard W.D. Bedford
3-ton lorry, to take the proposed new body.
By May, 1941, a prototype
had been produced by M.T. Depot, R.A.S.C., Feltham, and was accepted
by all concerned as a very good substitute for motor coaches.
could be carried, and they could embus in 24 seconds, and debus in 15.
Some further modification was necessary to enable loads to be carried,
instead of men, if required.
As a first step, 1,050 of these vehicles were produced, of which 800
went to the R.A.S.C., and were used to replace as many coaches, which
were then released to civil life.
This process of replacement went on steadily
thereafter, as troop-carrying lorries became available.
Home Service M.T. Companies
in January, 1941, consideration was given to the methods then practi-
defence organization.
cable of meeting the S.T. requirements of bean thermations in the home
124
It was decided that an R.A.S.C. transport unit would be required for each
beach brigade, such units to be known as County Companies, R.A.S.C.,
and organized to the sliding scale War Establishments of Station Transport
Companies.
Formation
They were to be under the operational control of the Beach
Commander, and not to be regarded as an asset to third line
services for Air Defence of Great Britain.
One or more additional R.A.S.C.
officers would be needed by the O.C., R.A.S.C., of the local district for
co-ordination of the operational requirements of R.A.S.C. servicess
ammunition,
supplies,
i.e.,
necessary for each Beach Brigade.
A brigade R.A.S.C. officer would be
These companies were not raised, however, but in their place, battalions
and field regiments, R.A. of the county divisions were given extra vehicles as
a second line link, to be manned by. unit personnel.
vehicles in each division was about 80.
The total of such
No provision was made for the co-
ordinated control of these vehicles in operational conditions,
apparently the intention that units should, for example, send their lorries
back to ammunition depots to refill as and when necessary.
In certain cases, Army Commanders of Home Commands did not accept
this rather haphazard method of maintenance, and insisted that the vehicles
In Northern Command, for instance, a com-
pany was formed in each County Division, the corporals and drivers being
personnel, and the officers, serjeants, and artificers
lent by various R.A.S.C. transport units.
These companies did useful work,
and were later used to form the nucleus of R.A.S.C. companies.
In April, 1941, G.H.Q., Home Forces, proposed that 1,200 3-ton lorries
should be transferred from R.A.S.C. to R.A.O.C. census for operation by
Home Forces as improvised troop-carrying transport in an emergency.
S.T.3 made an alternative proposal for raising 12 Home Service Companies,
R.A.S.C. to operate for this purpose.
This was accepted on the basis of
all officers, N.C.Os. and artificers being R.A.S.C., all drivers attached from
other arms, and the vehicles provided by S.T.
ingly raised on an emergency War Establishment in R.A.S.C. Mobilization
Centres, and allotted to commands as necessary.
Emergency M.T. Companies
In February, 1941, the means were considered of providing additional
transport units for Home Forces, for operation in the event of invasion.
It was decided to raise, from the three Driver Training Brigades, R.A.S.C.,
the three Mobilization Centres, R.A.S.C., and the R.A.S.C. Officer Cadet
Training Unit, a total of 63 special Emergency M.T. Companies, each of
These would be mobilized on issue of the order
Stations", in event of invasion, and 52 of the units were scheduled to be
raised within six days of the issue of the order.
This arrangement held good until February, 1942, when it had to be
ro-examined in ment hend go the strength of R.A.S.C. manpower approach-
training in R.A.S.C. Training Brigades and Mobilization Centres, with a
which would result in a decline in the number of units
consequent reduction in the number of personnel available to form the
(37477)
WO 27
7
