The interval before these arrangements could operate was to be covered
by, first, a haversack ration for one day, to be brought by the Home Guard
when he was called out; and second, a special 48-hours' emergency pack
(canned roll, biscuits, chocolate, milk, tea, sugar, and jam), provided by the
Ministry of Food, to cover 60 per cent. of total strength, and to be issued
through R.A.S.C. depots.
A seven days' reserve,
on a limited hard scale,
was also provided.
In addition, a Home Guard 10-men pack was designed
as a reserve, but this was not issued until 1943.
For its composition, see
Appendix IX.
In June, 1943, Home Guard reserves were fixed at seven million rations,
half held at a special ration scale, maintained entirely under command control
in C.S.Ds., and half, in Home Guard 10-men packs, held partly by
Home
Guard units, and partly in C.S.Ds. and War Office Controlled Depots.
On review in October, 1944, the reserve was reduced to 3½ million rations,
all in Home Guard 10-men packs, of which about 2½ million were to be
held by units and the balance in various supply depots.
SECTION 2.-ROAD TRANSPORT
Road transport in the United Kingdom from the R.A.S.C. point of view,
had, in war as in peace, two main divisions,
transport, and civilian transport hired or provided under Ministry of War
Transport arrangements to supplement the former.
War Department transport included that of arms other than the R.A.S.C.,
but it is the latter with which we are principally concerned here.
This chapter begins with a description of the
R.A.S.C., M.T. Depots
in the United Kingdom, on which all R.A.S.C., M.T. units at home, and to
a certain extent those overseas, depended for the provision of vehicles and
spare parts and for the heavy repairs of their vehicles until the responsibility
for these services was transferred to R.A.O.C.
described in Chapter III. An account is then given of the provision of
vehicles and spare parts under S.T.3 responsibility, and of the arrangements
for supplementing W.D. repair facilities by a Ministry of Supply Scheme.
A description of the R.A.S.C. organization for the inspection of transport,
including units, vehicles, and administrative offices, follows.
documentation in force in the R.A.S.C. in regard to vehicle and workhop
We then pass to the story of the R.A.S.C. Mobilization Centres responsible
for supervising the mobilization and training of new and converted units,
followed by an account of the Reserve
Divisional R.A.S.C., in which
R.A.S.C. personnel received continuation training before being posted over-
seas, Next comes an account of the Station Transport Companies, formed
at the outbreak of war for local transport work, and of the Station Main-
tenance Companies, which were complementary to them.
of the formation of Command Mixed Transport Companies follows.
units absorbed and replaced the Station Companies and certain other trans-
port units, notably those of the Auxiliary Territorial Service,
organization in the Army.
The part of this Service was an important one
in maintaining the R.A.S.C. transport services in the United Kingdom, and
Some unofficial
organizations offered their services, and these
were
Kingdom during the war.
Next comes a consideration of another aspect of the R.A.S.C. transport
services,
namely, the work of the R.A.S.C.
Transport Offices, which were
responsible for making the best use of all available transport resources,
both W.D. and civilian.
An important part of this work related to the
distribution of ordnance stores, for which special arrangements were made,
as also for the conveyance of tanks, other tracked vehicles, and various heavy
Officers in charge of transport, R.A.S.C., had an essential rôle to per-
form in achieving economy of transport.
This was a matter of constant
concern throughout the war, and many different expedients were adopted
These included stringent instructions for the control and
use of W.D. transport, aimed at bringing it more
direction of officers i/c transport, limitations on the use of vehicles, petrol
rationing, and speed limits.
They are described here.
On the other hand, there was a constant claim for the use of W.D.
transport for the conveyance of troops for recreational purposes, and various
concessions were made in this respect.
This question was linked with that
of the use of public service transport by members of the forces when off duty.
The policy as to the use of hired transport to supplement W.D. transport
resources varied from time to time during the war,
depending on the
availability of Army transport or on the importance of financial economy
from time to time in relation to other factors.
Civilian road transport was
also obtained for the performance of military administrative transport services
through the Road Haulage Organization controlled by the Ministry of War
Transport, and ultimately this took the place of casual hirings to a great
the other hand, the War Department afforded a great deal of
the civil authorities in the form of military transport,
was also given to the
Admiralty and
Air Ministry, to the
N.A.A.F.I., the U.S. Forces, and other Allies.
R.A.S.C. M.T. Depots at Home-Pre-War
At the outbreak of war there was in the United Kingdom only one
R.A.S.C. M.T. depot, located at Feltham (Middlesex) in
which
were
centralized:
(a) The collection and issue of R.A.S.C. vehicles for peace maintenance
purposes, and technically fitted vehicles as mobilization reserves.
workshop equipment.
(c) The major repair and overhaul of such vehicles.
The Depot also had a driver training centre.
The depot included three components for its functions in connection
with R.A.S.C.-operated vehicles,
namely, the Home M.T. Vehicle Reserve
Depot, the Home M.T.
Stores Depot, and the Home Heavy Repair Shop.
135
WO 277/21
27
