between the U.S. W.D.,
United Kingdom, Russia, and China, and the manufacturers, spares procure-
ment lists had been drawn up in respect of the principal makes of vehicles
the motor transport division of the Quarter-
Master Corps was absorbed into the U.S. Ordnance Corps
d been Corps pite to iner due into the provisionent by the bitted, and
spares the same procedure which was in force in respect of " A" vehicles
and other ordnance equipment.
It fell to S.T. to try and convince them that
the system of provision
of spares, as worked out by the Quarter-Master
Corps, must continue if we were not to find ourselves in the same position
in respect of spares for
"B" vehicles as was the case for "A"
that is to say, practically no spares accompanying the vehicles but shipments
following many months later.
1942, the transport section of S.T. was transferred to Ordnance.
the U.S. Ordnance adopted the Quarter-Master Corps policy, with the result
12 months' spare parts, and that, in many instances, second years' spares
had even then been ordered and were flowing into ordnance
stocks for
Supplies: Buffer Stocks
Before the passing of the Lend-Lease Act in March, 1941, foodstuffs
intended for British theatres of war were not exported from U.S.A. direct
During 1941, the War Office asked the Ministry of Food
to export small quantities of foodstuffs direct to the main theatres of war.
Such demands were procured in the States by the Department of Agriculture
at the request of the British Food Mission, Washington, and were exported
by the British Ministry of War Transport.
The placing of constant small
demands, frequently at short notice, caused much embarrassment to
Department of Agriculture and the British Food Mission.
had no military knowledge, and were not acquainted with active service
conditions of transport, and consequently the foodstuffs, packed in containers
suitable only for domestic use, seldom reached port at the right time, and
were almost invariably incorrectly marked.
It was evident, if the plans for the maintenance of the British forces were
not to be upset, that it would be necessary to hold buffer stocks in the
United States of the commodities affected.
Agreement was reached on the
necessity for establishing warehouse stocks of these foodstuffs to permit
of planned buying and to ensure that the requirements of the War Office and
N.A.A.F.I. were met by the due dates; and in April, 1942, a small ware-
house, called a Defence Aid Depot, was opened at Newark, New Jersey.
Procurement of Foodstuffs
While these discussions were proceeding, Japan entered the
war,
and
there was a serious threat to the supply lines from the southern Dominions
to India and the Midde East theatres of war.
To cover this threat, it was
292
decided at War Office to increase considerably the scope of the procure-
ment of military foodstuffs from
the U.S.A., and a 70 per cent. cover
of supplies hitherto obtained from those Dominions was agreed upon.
This decision naturally affected the size of the storage facilities originally
discussed, and increased the estimated demands on the U.S.A. tenfold.™
tremendous increase in demands, however, occasioned little difficulty, as
in small projects, but,
confronted by a big one, their enthusiasm is aroused; and, in this case, the
Department of Agriculture co-operated to the full.
By May, 1942, agreement had been reached on the detailed workings
of the procurement, depot holdings,
and exports of military foodstuffs.
War Office, placed demands for foodstuffs required for the Army
and R.A.F. on the Ministry of Food in the United Kingdom, who asked
the British Food Mission in Washington to arrange supply from U.S. sources.
The B.F.M. arranged with the Department of Agriculture for the procure-
A joint shipping programme (B.F.M. and B.A.S.),
was compiled by B.F.M., and sent weekly to the Ministry of War Transport.
This was the authority for the U.S.
War Forwarding Corporation to call
the goods forward to port, and for the M.O.W.T. to load and export as and
The stocks procured were placed in the warehouses
in the U.S.A., and it was the responsibility of B.A.S. to arrange withdrawal
from the warehouses, and subsequent movement to overseas commands on
instructions from War Office.
Occasionally certain items were unobtainable except from U.S. Army
The Department of Agriculture then asked the British Food Mis-
Army Quarter-Master Corps for the loan of the
required foodstuffs, as urgently required for shipment.
Under Lend-Lease, all commodities procured in the U.S.A. remained in
the possession of the U.S. authorities until they were delivered to the ship,
even though such supplies were lying in warehouses under control of the
British Food Mission.
One of the immediate results of Japan entering the war was that the
U.S. Government placed a general embargo on the shipment of all Lend-
Lease and contract material which had been made available to the British
and was at ports awaiting shipment.
The B.A.S. arranged for a compre-
hensive list of all such military stores, not only at ports but also in depots
and factories and on rail, in order that the full repercussion of the stand-
still order could be
estimated,
and the necessary
action taken to obtain
releases, or, where the U.S.W.D. would not release, to have the concerned
stores returned into U.S. custody.
Increase in American Reserve
In June, 1942, War Office directed that the stocks of foodstuffs held in
America were to be increased by a further 71,000 tons, which was intended
to cover the requirements of a force operating in Europe at a future date.
The addition requirement to be amassed by the end of March, 1943.
Accom -
modation onal stock wasnce, and stocks began to be moved in.
A R.A.S.C.
293
wO 277/
27
