drivers concerned. In order to give such men legal protection in the face
of the enemy, and to place them under military law and give them a military
status in the event of active operations, it was agreed that they could be
enrolled in the Home Guard (then the Local Defence Volunteers)
voluntary basis, by the units to which they were attached; they would not
be taken into the normal L.D.V. organization, and their enrolment would
be cancelled as and when their vehicles were released, or they themselves
were replaced.
Certain drivers so enrolled had done so under the incorrect assumption
that they would continue to receive civilian rates of pay if and when they
were called out for service.
It therefore became necessary later to inform
such men that they would in fact be on the same basis for pay, etc., as all
other Home Guard personnel.
This question is dealt with further in the
section of this chapter dealing with Home Guard transport companies.
Insurance Liability of W.D.
The War Department accepted liability for loss of, or damage to, hired
vehicles, employed on W.D. services, caused by war operations.
connection, see also earlier in this chapter the account of the situation re-
garding the insurance of cars belonging to A.T.S. drivers employed at the
beginning of the war.
Release of Continuous Hire Vehicles
By February, 1941, S.T.3 was able to inform the Ministry of War
Transport that large numbers of the vehicles hired for military services could
At the same time, it was made clear that if an emergency
arose, there would be considerable increases in continuous hirings, and the
Ministry was asked to arrange for Regional Transport Commissioners to
give all possible assistance in earmarking suitable civilian-operated vehicles
against such a contingency. This aspect of the matter is dealt with at greater
length elsewhere in this chapter.
Expedients to Reduce Hirings
At the same time, home commands were directed to review various means
of reducing hirings.
These included greater use of rail transport; speeding
up the acquisition of those continuous hire vehicles which were suitable;
ensuring that hired vehicles were released as soon as they were replaced by
W.D. vehicles; examining all permanent hirings in excess of establishment;
and reviewing all hirings at least once in every three months.
this, all hirings were terminated of vehicles held as first line transport of
tists in formations which had received 50 per cent. or more of their W.D.
first line vehicles. Nearly 1,300 vehicles were thus released.
Developments, 1941-1942
The original policy of employing W.D. transport to the maximum extent
194all administrative services at home was pursued consistently duris.
With increasing availability and pooling of W.D. transport.
and the control of hired wansport and other economy measures, the us
198
of hired road transport for W.D. services gradually
decreased, until the
monthly expenditure on this account had been reduced to the comparatively
small sum of £38,000 for August, 1942.
In order to achieve this result, it had been necessary to employ Station
Transport Companies, General Transport Companies, and all other available
W.D. transport, to the fullest extent; in fact, so much so, that the vehicles
of the Station Transport and G.T. companies had been considerably over-
a consequent deterioration of vehicle life.
transport was employed on duties which could be more properly or economi-
cally performed by rail, i.e., the use of road transport was unavoidable.
By October, 1942, the transport situation in the United Kingdom had
changed its complexion.
There was difficulty in raising the ancillary units
for future operational commitments, and it was going to be necessary to draw
heavily on all the transport and other R.A.S.C. resources to enable these to
As the demand grew for units and transport to complete formations for
overseas, so it was expected that the operational necessity for having military
units to carry out transport work at home would diminish.
hand, major operations, involving the move of field force formations from
the United Kingdom, would lead to an increased load on the transport services
of the country, due to increased movement of stores through ammunition
depots, central ordnance depots, petrol depots, etc.: and a proportion of this
work must for military reasons be carried out by W.D. vehicles and military
In addition, the responsibility for third line transport for A.D.G.B
remained with commands, and these also would normally require, for
ammunition purposes at least, the use of military vehicles manned by soldier
In certain other classes of transport work in the United Kingdom, however,
it was more economical, in both manpower and vehicles, to carry them out
by hired rather than military transport.
Owing to limitations of manpower and vehicles, it had not till then been
possible to sanction the raising of the necessary home service transport units
for the maintenance of essential services for depots and static installations.
In the event of increased load on the latter, there was little likelihood of
W.D. transport being made available to cover it, under existing conditions.
Sufficient W.D. vehicles had now become available, but it was impossible
to provide military drivers.
This bottleneck was causing an extremely
difficult situation, as, in addition to the shortage of drivers required for units
serving, or to serve, in theatres overseas, a number of Station
Companies were well below entitlement.
The transport of field formations had consequently to be used to carry
out, to a certain extent, the duties of station transport companies, which was
a misapplication of their function, and consequently, objectionable.
in September, 1942, it became necessary to withdraw 21 G.T.
which were field force units, from static services in commands at home;
there were no military transport units to make good the deficiency, and there
was no alternative but to sanction the expansion of local hirings to enable
essential services to be maintained.
The field force asset might be expected
1o diminish further as time went on.
w91787/17
WO 277/21
