between airheads, to obviate the delays due to supply dropping.
concludine codes of the advance and until the port of Rangoon was opened
on half rations for
for maintenance,
was owing to the increased demands for ammunition and P.O.L., and later to
thes monsoon breaking a fortnight earlier than usual, with the result that all
airfields south of Meiktila became unserviceable.
The latter factor entailed
the whole corps living on a supply drop of 175 tons a day, instead of the
normal 450 tons. Fortunately, during this period the expenditure of P.O.L
and ammunition was negligible.
During the advance, air dropping was reduced to a minimum, for the
following reasons: —
(a) It was expensive in tonnage, as one-third of the weight was supply
dropping equipment, and the percentage of breakages and losses rose
to as much as 25 per cent.
(b) It was expensive in aircraft, owing to the time spent circling over the
dropping zone and the fatigue of pilots.
(c) It required a very high standard of training and co-operation from
(d) It took a long time to collect a large drop.
(e) Troops were required to protect the personnel collecting the drop,
and also possibly as labour.
In practice, when drops were necessary, it was found advisable to carry
with the formation the maximum amount of those items which were difficult
to drop, and to balance these with an airdrop of the commodities least likely
to suffer loss or damage.
When speed of issue at a new airhead was of paramount importance,
Compo rations were found preferable to bulk rations, as their use avoided the
unbalanced rations caused by odd aircraft being delayed.
The ruthless pooling at Corps level of the transport of all formations not
in the lead was found necessary to give the maximum mobility to the fore-
most formations.
When one formation leap-frogged through another, the
transfer of their transport required very careful co-ordination to prevent
delay.
Operations, 6th May to 15th August
With Rangoon in our hands, and virtual control of all road and river
communications in Burma, west of the Sittang River, the subsequent fighting
was largely confined to " mopping up".
These operations were under the
control of the newly formed Twelfth Army, and were mainly the concern of
of Toungoo to Hlegu.
The latter formation was first redeploved along the main road from north
The next phase included sporadic fighting to the
east of the road. The third and final phase began on 20th July, when the
large Japanese forces which had remained in the Pegu Yomas broke out
eastwards, about midway between Toungoo and Pegu.
The administrative aspects of these operations had a number of interesting
102
Initial
Administrative Situation
On the capture of Rangoon, the general plan for the maintenance of the
forces in Burma was for a gradual reduction in the airlift and in the water
transport lift on the Northern L. of C., and to replace these by maintenance
from Rangoon as the capacity of that port increased and road, rail and water
transport facilities to the north became available.
The known administrative risk inherent in the plan to capture Rangoon
from the north did not exact its penalty until the operation had been achieved.
The trouble then was that the capture of Rangoon did not in fact provide
maintenance for 4 Corps through that port for a considerable period.
port itself had to be repaired and stocked, installations brought from the
other lines of communication, and the land lines of communication north-
wards rehabilitated and developed.
In the meantime the situation was as
(a) There were no reserves owing to the rapidity of the advance, and the
limited airlift during it.
(b) There were no all-weather airfields nearer than Meiktila, 300 miles
away, and the fair-weather airfields were unserviceable most of the
time owing to early rain.
(c) The airlift was further reduced, owing to the diversion of aircraft to
tasks connected with the next phase of A.L.F.S.E.A. operations.
(d) Land maintenance from Myingyan as far south as Toungoo only was
available only for rather more than a division.
(e) The monsoon had caused damage to the Tamu-Kalewa road, and
convoys were held up.
Maintenance Plan, Phase I
The plan for the maintenance of 4 Corps in these circumstances was
broadly as follows:
(a) 19 Division, in the Toungoo area, was supplied by land L. of C. from
(b) 5 and 17 Divisions, in and north of the Pegu area, were supplied by
airdrop from Arakan,
supplemented by air landings on
were serviceable, and at Mingaladon
(Rangoon) airfield as this was rebuilt, and by occasional convoys
from Myingyan as transport and extra maintenance were available.
This plan, owing to the limitations of aircraft, loss of tonnage on airdrops.
and bad weather, could not produce the requisite tonnage and was barely
sufficient to keep the corps alive.
Rations were at less than half scale, and
even then little tonnage was available for other stores.
Fortunately, petrol and
ammunition, except for 19 Division, were not required in quantities, as active
operations had practically ceased.
But the shortage of rations, fresh supplies,
canteen and amenity stores, clothing, etc., was acutely felt. It was a particu-
larly inopportune moment psychologically, as victory had been won in Burope
and the force in Burma had captured the port of Rangoon, the prize which
had been so long dangling before their eyes, while on short rations.
The
adverse effect on morale was natural.
103
we
WO 277/21
27
