3. Army:
(a) Second line
(b) Roadhead
Maintenance
Area, designed to hold
2 to 5 days.
(c) Each Transhipment Area
forward of R.H.M.A.
Two Army Transport Companies
(3-ton).
One G.T. Company for each Tank
Brigade.
Two Composite Platoons for Army
Troops.
Composite Platoon for each
One Supply Platoon for each Corps.
One Petrol Platoon for each Corps;
one equipped as M.P.F.C.
One Railhead Supply Detachment.
One Railhead Supply Detachment.
Army
(3-ton)
Transport Company
for
each
Corps,
each
Division, and each Tank Brigade.
One Tank Transporter Company for
each Tank Brigade.
Independent Section, Indian
Bakery,
for • each Tank
Brigade.
Four sections, Indian Field Bakery.
A.L.F.S.E.A. Transport Units
Transport units sub-allotted to formations, etc., remained A.L.F.S.E.A.
troops, temporarily under the command of those formations, etc.
The M.T. companies included in the A.L.F.S.E.A. pool were of the follow-
ing types: —G.T. Companies, 3-ton, 5-ton and 10-ton; Bulk Petrol Trans-
port Companies; Amphibian Companies; Tipper Companies; and Motor
Ambulance Convoys.
We Atten Brine. rOl C. Copany su had 27 2-ton companies and one
One Amphibian Company was allotted to Fourteenth Army, and one to
There were 24 Tipper Companies, all of which were sub-allotted to Chief
Engineer as a pool of engineer transport. C.E. sub-allotted to formations
according to requirements; in conjunction with sub=s te formations he
adjusted the allocation of the pool in accordance with the operational
situation and with the requirements of the L. of C.
Companies sub-allotted
to a formation were controlled by the C.E. of the formation, and the necessary
orders to imnlement thie control were passed hu the latter through the
appropriate S. and T. staff. A similar arrangement obtained on lower levels.
88
A.L.F.S.E.A. M.T. companies.
The above sub-allotments accounted for the whole of the available
Apart from the basic allotment of three animal transport companies to
each division organized on an animal and M.T. footing, all other A.T. com-
panies were A.L.F.S.E.A. troops; but it was normal for Fourteenth Army,
with two corps, to have six A.T. companies placed under temporary com-
There was a total of forty A.T. companies in A.L.F.S.E.A., or at
call in India.
Organization of Transport Companies
All M.T. companies, except tank transporter companies and the R.A.S.C.
DUKW company, were organized on the standard platoon basis of thirty
task and three spare vehicles.
special War Establishment of three platoons of 22 transporters each.
DUKW company had two platoons of 20 DUKWs each.
The Tipper Companies each consisted of three platoons of tippers and
one platoon of 3-ton or 5-ton lorries.
General Transport (which term in
A.L.F.S.E.A. included General Purpose Transport, R.I.A.S.C.) Companies,
except those equipped with 10-ton lorries, were organized as in other theatres,
with four transport platoons apiece.
The 10-ton companies and the Bulk
Petrol Transport Companies were of three platoons each.
Each Animal Transport Company consisted of four troops of 88 working
animals each, giving a total of working animals for the company of 352. At
a payload of 160 lb. for each animal, this gives a lift of 25 tons a company.
Supply and P.O.L. Units
The organization of R.A.S.C. supply and P.O.L. units intended for em-
ployment in A.L.F.S.E.A. differed from that in other theatres.
H.Q., supply
companies, and supply platoons took the place of D.I.Ds.; H.Q., field bakery
companies, and field bakery platoons replaced mobile field bakeries. B.S.Ds.
were normal, as were also bulk petrol storage companies and petroleum stores
depots. Instead of petrol depots, types "A", "B"
petrol filling centres, there were H.Q., petrol companies, and petrol platoons.
Special units were a pest destruction advisory unit, and mobile petrol and
lubricants laboratories, and petrol repair platoons. Further particulars of the
composition and numbers of these units are contained in Appendices IH
R.A.S.C. P.O.L. units were actually operating in A.L.F.S.E.A. before the
end of the war with Japan, but at that date the supply units being sent out
from the United Kingdom were only just beginning to arrive.
few stray R.A.S.C. supply units already in India and A.L.F.S.E.A.
When the question arose of sending R.A.S.C. supply units out to India to
support the mounting of operations from that country as a base, it was decided
that rather than employ
British units on base duties in India (such as
Buropeans were not usually called upon to perform in that country) the
requisite number of units should be sent to A.L.F.S.E.A. who would then
return to India the equivalent in Indian supply units.
eight Supply Companies, each of four supply platoons, were involved.
11717
WO 277/21
27
