in the scheme, and complications thus arose whenever a centra..
essed
battery had to change stations and to feed itself without qualified cooks.
The effects were particularly disastrous in the case of batteries sent over-
Secondly, it was not found possible, owing to the acute shortage of
trained personnel, to maintain the high standard of cooking essential when
food had to be reheated on the following day
untrained
personnel.
Thirdly, the amount of cooking required on the site was under-estimated,
and in fact there was enough to make a whole-time duty for one man, who
could not however be paid as a cook, even if he qualified.
The economies effected by the abandonment of the scheme included
three vehicles from each of 39 cookhouses running four days a week instead
A further reduction in vehicles and mileage was made through
an extended use of the C.S.D. " milk-round " service, where it was operating.
There was the saving of fuel at 39 large cookhouses; and a reduction of
some 400 cooks.
As the detachments messed from the central cookhouses were by then
cooking possibly half the ration at first hand, and reheating the remainder,
very little additional accommodation or equipment was required to make
them entirely self-supporting, while a large proportion of
the equipment
from the central cookhouses was used elsewhere.
An experiment was carried out under the supervision of the Command
Catering Adviser, A.A. Command, and of course with the concurrence of the
medical authorities, of feeding a large number of troops entirely on canned
food.
This met with varying degrees of success.
To begin with, the canned
food was received favourably by the majority of the men, but as time went on
there was some considerable falling off in the satisfaction.
There were two
main objections; the unsuitable type of food provided for the time of year,
bearing in mind the fact that during the last three weeks of the experiment
the weather was abnormally hot; and prejudice against tinned food.
It is
an interesting fact that, since this early experiment of feeding troops entirely
on tinned food, the 14-men composite pack proved to be an excellent method
of providing variety by the sole use of canned food, and although in North
Africa this ration was used in some cases for as long as four months, it
was always received enthusiastically.
Chapter VI.
See also on the preserved ration in
Catering Advisers
Il, Section I.
The organization of the Army Catering Services is described in Chapter
The introduction of catering experts at first received little encourage-
ment in many quarters, but under their suidance better messing was possible
and waste was avoided.
the appoint mental specialist messing officers to
units with strengths of 1,000 and over carried the condition that in units to
which these officers were appointed rations would be underdrawn to
extent of 24 per cent., subject to centralized conditions of messing and cook-
ing being in operation.
Altho centralize conditions e were objections to
these officers being carried against regimental establishment, this attitude was
quickly changed when the specialists were withdrawn, officers commanding
then complaining that their messing could not be carried on properly without
286
Inspectors of Cooking Equipment
done to cooking equipment,
In 1940, it was found that considerable preventable damage was being
equipment of high value.
particularly the modernized cookhouse with
With the agreement of the Director of Fortifica-
tions and Works, Inspectors of Cooking Equipment were appointed on the
staff of Chief Engineers of commands, selection being made jointly by the
D.F.W. and the Catering Branch.
between the Chief Engineer and the Command Catering Adviser on
These officers acted as liaison officers
all
matters relating to the installation and servicing of kitchen apparatus, and
had to report wanton damage, to inspect new equipment, to advise and
instruct units, etc.
Responsibilities of Os.C. Units
The formation of the A.C.C. in no way altered the responsibility of a
commanding officer for the satisfactory messing arrangements for the troops
under his command.
In units of over 400 but under 1,000, a regimental
messing officer who had attended a suitable course was required to be
appointed.
" Men's Messing Committee"
He had to keep in close touch with the catering adviser.
was set up in each unit,
which drew
up
the bill of fare each week, suggested alternative dishes, indicated unpopular
dishes,
and offered suggestions
and
cooking and serving of meals.
proposals for improvements in the
The O.C. unit was responsible for selecting
personnel for employment in unit cookhouses before transfer to the A.C.C.,
and for local training in simple field cookery, which would enable cooking to
be carried out on a platoon or section basis in case of necessity.
Assistance to Civil Authorities
Help was given, whenever required by the civil authorities, in feeding
the civilian population in areas which had been subjected to severe enemy
air attack.
In such cases, arrangements were made by catering advisers,
who used Army instructors and cooks
from cookery training
Emergency cooking arrangements were made, improvised cooking apparatus
was erected, and large numbers of meals were served at community feeding
centres.
Cookery tests and experiments
were carried out for the Ministry of
Food, in connection with dehydrated foodstuffs, boneless meat, etc.
Assistance to U.S. Army
When the American Army first arrived in the United Kingdom in antici-
pation of the invasion of N.W. Europe, it drew British Army rations.
"heca
were strange to American personnel, and, in order to assist the latter to make
the best of a ration which was also limited in composition by their standards,
instructors and emergency cookery training centres were placed at their
disposal for several months.
In addition, an officer of S.T.4 toured American units for two months
in company with U,S. officers to observe messing conditions in the field,
to formulate recommendations for corrective measures where necessary, to
establish unity of purpose and method of enforcement of policies, and to
establish closer liaison between the procurement, issuing, and using, agencies,
to their mutual advantage.
287
(37477)
U 2
WO 277/21
27
