It would be provided in the following forms: -
(a) Complete units or sub-units for the carriage of bulk commodities
from one point to another, or for local work within a limited radius
from a point at which the unit was or could be based.
(b) Individual vehicles, to a maximum of ten, found from local resources,
at the disposal of the officer i/c transport to meet local requirements
within a 20-mile radius of the normal base of the vehicles.
(c) In exceptional circumstances, vehicles of establishments employed
in training drivers, limited to a 20-mile radius.
The provision of complete units was a matter for arrangement between
War Office and M.O.W.T.
For local services, the R.T.C. asked the M.T.L.O.
That officer obtained authority from the D.D.S.T. of the
command, and arranged with the officer i/c transport, or with the area
commander in the case of training vehicles.
No consequential hirings were allowed to be incurred to meet W.D.
services because W.D. transport had been allocated for civil use.
the responsibility of the R.T.C. to ensure that adequate arrangements were
made for speedy loading and unloading of vehicles.
W.D. drivers were not
to be used for loading and unloading vehicles.
Industrial Disputes
In October, 1944, a directive was issued by the Ministry of Labour setting
out the procedure agreed with Supply Departments and the War Office for the
use of the military to maintain essential services affected by industrial disputes.
It was laid down that military assistance might only be requested with the
personal approval of the Ministers of Labour and National Defence and of
the Minister in charge of the Supply Department concerned.
SECTION 3.-WATER TRANSPORT
Water Transport Companies
The state of the War Department Fleet as it was before the outbreak
oi war in 1939 is described in Chapter II, together with the plans for its
Those plans were duly implemented, and five
water transport companies began to operate in January, 1940, four of them
in the United Kingdom, and one in Malaya.
The very heavy demands by home commands for more craft necessitated
Two distinctive types of company were
developed, to allow for frequent inter-command sailings, and for fluctuating
Individual units were formed and determined in accord-
ance with the nominal vessel strength in a command.
A Higher Establishment Company
31 to 71 vessels and a Lower Establishment Company from 12 to 31. To
was designed to administer from
meet the sliding scale in vessel strengths, officers were allowed at one fo
evis, aight vessels, covering all but the O.C., as w in higher establishmen
There was also a small military shore stafi,
but otherwise the crews, administrative and workshop personnel, were civilians.
A master superintendent in each company acted as adviser to the O.C. on
navigational matters and on the administration of crews.
Owing to the severe restrictions in manpower during the war years, it
was necessary to man the majority of craft with civilians, and it was not
until after the war that approval was obtained for the militarization of units
in the United Kingdom to the extent of 25 per cent.
At first, these companies in the United Kingdom were War Office
Later, they were placed under the command of the O.C.
R.A.S.C., of the area concerned,
Who was responsible to the D.D.S.T. of
the command, who was in turn responsible to War Office.
In all, five additional Water Transport Companies were formed for duty
in the United Kingdom.
New Commitments
The work of the water transport service of the R.A.S.C. steadily increased
in consequence of various new commitments which it was called upon to
undertake. These included the following, some of which are described at
The manning, operation and maintenance, of Motor Boat Companies,
Fire Boat Sections, Fast Launch Companies, and military oil barges, all
became the responsibility of the R.A.S.C.; and, as the vessels in these units
were necessarily manned by military crews, a training school had to be
established for the instruction of military personnel
See further for these units in Chapter III, Section 5,
and Chapter VIII. Responsibility for the provision of towing targets, and
of equipment for coast artillery practice, was taken over from Ordnance.
The maintenance and provision of "Queen Gulls"
targets for artillery practice seawards, also became a R.A.S.C. responsibility.
The wireless equipment was maintained with the assistance of R.E.M.E.,
other work being done by water transport personnel.
With the expansion of the water transport services, it became necessary
to set up an Inspectorate of these services, for which, see further below.
In February, 1945, the R.A.S.C. Fleet, as it had been then renamed,
took over 15 Naval Auxiliary Boats (L.C.Vs.) for work with the Royal
Engineers in the task of beach mine clearance in the United Kingdom.
conversion of the vessels was carried out under S.T.1 arrangements, and
they were then manned by R.A.S.C. personnel. In April, 1945, the disposal
by dumping at sea of unserviceable ammunition was arranged; the Admiralty
provided two L.C.Ts., Mark IV, for the purpose, and the R.A.S.C. the crews.
Two civilian crews accordingly took over the first two vessels, and others
Both these duties continued for a considerable time after the
Growth of the W.D. Fleet
The growth of the Fleet by requisition, purchase and charter may be
gauged from the fact that the number of craft had increased to over 200 by
the end of 1941.
The necessity for this increase in the number of vessels
209
WO 277/21
27
