The driver of a W.D. vehicle was invariably to accompany his or her
vehicle whenever it was in use.
By inspection and supervision, it was to be ensured that abnormal con-
sumption of petrol and oil by an individual vehicle was at once remedied.
The strictest supervision would be exercised to prevent waste of petrol
by spilling when filling vehicle tanks, by keeping engines running while
vehicles were stationary, etc.
W.D. vehicles were not to be used for conveyance of personnel between
quarters and place of duty, except where the distance exceeded two miles,
or one and a half for A.T.S., for journeys outside a 40-mile radius, except
on the authority of the G.O.C., when other W.D. transport was going to
the same destination, by military personnel not on duty, or by civilians other
than W.D. employees, or for recreational, social or sporting purposes, except
as authorized by War Office.
Certain peace-time concessions were placed in abeyance.
While steps were thus taken to effect economy of petrol by the indirect
method of controlling the use of transport, direct methods of imposing some
form of check on the excessive consumption of this commodity were introduced
by means of various forms of rationing.
It is a difficult matter to find a satisfactory system for petrol rationing,
owing to the almost infinite variations between units and
(even those which are similarly organized) in respect of the types of vehicle on
charge, the age and condition of their vehicles, the amount of work done,
and the conditions of terrain, traffic, etc., in which the vehicles have to run.
At the same time, a system which threatens to put a brake on training
by cutting units short of the fuel claimed to be necessary at once meets
opposition in war-time from those responsible for training troops, and this
attitude is difficult to withstand, even though it may not be really justified.
Again, while it is possible to devise a system on the lines of the pre-war
fuel account which would work satisfactorily in peace with personnel trained
to operate it, it proved necessary in the course of the war to simplity
accounting systems of all kinds to the utmost if any practical result was
to be achieved, or units were not to be burdened with paper work to be done
by inexperienced personnel.
Some of the methods adopted in the United Kingdom to limit petrol
consumption in the Army are described below.
The " Fuel Unit" System
The difficully of building up reserves of liquid fuel in the United King-
don, owing to the acute shortage of tankers led, in April, 1941, to a review
by the Oịl Control Board and the Service Departments of all possible means
of effecting economy in consumption.
of ten per cent, in consumption was imposed immediately.
In the Army, an arbitrary reduction
Since, however, additions were constantly being made to the number of
vehicles of all types on charge to units, it was to be expected that the
176
over-all consumption would increase; and there was consequently no way of
establishing whether actual consumption, in relation to vehicle strengths,
had in fact been cut as directed.
A method of determining the result of the cut was worked out on the
It was known as the " Fuel Unit"
In order that the various types of vehicles, and their wide divergencies of
mileage a gallon of petrol, should bear some relation to the petrol consump-
tion as a whole, and that increases or decreases in vehicle strengths by
types should be reflected by a figure having some meaning, a "fuel unit
figure" was allotted to each type, throughout the whole range of mechanical
This figure was based on the average consumption in
miles a gallon of the type of vehicle, and ranged from ten fuel units in the
case of cruiser and infantry tanks, to 1/10th of a fuel unit for motor-cycles.
From the total vehicle strength by types, the number of fuel units is calculated,
and the resultant total number of fuel units is divided into the number of
gallons of fuel consumed weekly, the resultant " Index Figure"
indication of the number of gallons consumed weekly by a given number
The rise or fall of the Index Figure shows, within
limits, whether or not a given standard of petrol
economy is being maintained
or improved, irrespective of the number or type of vehicles actually in
For example, if the total fuel unit figure were 150,000, and the gallonage
consumed three million, the Index Figure would be 20.
the fuel unit figure had increased by 50,000, and consumption remained con-
stant, the Index Figure would drop, indicating improved economy.
other hand, the fuel unit figure remained constant, but the gallons consumed
increased, the Index Figure would rise, indicating perhaps that economy was
not being maintained.
The deductions to be drawn from the rise or fall of the Index Figure
are not, however, wholly reliable, as they assume that the amount of work
done, and the conditions in which it was done, remained constant.
it takes no account of mileage, which might vary considerably from month
to month, e.g., according to the nature of training being carried out.
one month might be warm, and the next extremely cold, producing a wide
difference in petrol consumption.
The system cannot be applied to units
such as R.A.S.C. transport companies, which work at the direction of the
officer i/c transport, and cannot therefore control the number of vehicles
M.T. Vehicle Rest-day Instituted
In May, 1941, it was decided, in the interests of general economy both
in consumption of petrol and in the wear and tear of vehicles, that one
day a week was to be set aside for the inspection and maintenance of M.T.
vehicles.
On that day, all W.D. motor transport, other than that required
for the performance of essential services, was to be taken off the road,
the day being devoted to unit inspection and maintenance of vehicles, which
it was hoped would result in improving the then low standards of vehicle
maintenance.
The term, essential services, was to be strictly interpreted,
and was intended to cover the drawing of supplies, despatch rider runs, the
evacuation of casualties, unavoidable journeys of personnel on duty, and
road-testing of vehicles.
177
202907/17
WO 277/21
27
