were eventually sited at Market Bosworth and Bottesford, in Leicestershire,
and at Royston, Herts.
The first two of these had filling facilities fed by
rail-tank wagon from the western installations.
in that the filling and storage of the containers was the responsibility of the
civilian company owning the installations, acting as W.D. agents,
the labour employed was military Pioneers under the control of the R.A.S.C.
Petrol Reserve Depot attached to each.
This system of working presented
many difficulties, but was inevitable.
As they were sited and laid out without
primary regard to the danger of air attack, they proved to be much more
easily controlled.
Build-up for " Overlord "
The expansion of packed reserves continued throughout 1943.
the position in December, 1942, when the first six depots actually reached
their planned capacity, a steady increase went on, until a year later there
were i2 depots with a planned capacity of 274,000 tons, an actual capacity
of 232,000 tons, and an actual holding of 148,000 tons.
Bulk reserve stocks increased from 262,000 tons to 486,000 tons in the
year 1943, and W.D. tankage from 342,000 tons to 555,000 tons,
clusive of half a million tons held by the Petroleum Board on W.D. account.
The build-up of packed stocks continued during the early months of
1944. After the invasion of the Continent, the tonnage of packed P.O.L.
shipped to the Continent on British and U.S. account exceeded production,
and, by the end of the year, packed stocks in the United Kingdom had
fallen by some 220,000 tons.
Stocks had by then been built up on the
Continent, and the fall was therefore not serious.
Post_" Overlord" Policy
The future administrative policy in the United Kingdom was reviewed
in August, 1944, in the light of the general situation.
Invasion
was now
impracticable without ample warning, but arrangements were still necessary
to deal with raids.
It was considered that depots and installations pro-
vided for normal administrative purposes would generally suffice for opera-
tional requirements.
Command reserves of P.O.L., specially for operational
purposes, were no longer necessary except for isolated troops in Scotland.
Stocks were held in requisitioned pumps for Home Guard units not near
Regular Army sources of supply.
Container Policy, 1939-1940
When it was planned to develon hull supply of petrol to the B.E.F.
in France, there was no intention of setting up factories for
filling non-returnable tins on the Continent.
making and
The method of distributing
container system.
bulk imports to consumers was intended to be the use of a returnable
Mass production of a satisfactory returnable container
and breakdown of machinery.
encountered many difficulties, due to shortage of sheet steel. labour troubles
Nevertheless, some 1-3 million cans of the
4 gallon rectangular type were shipped to France before the B.E.F. withdrew
and great use was made of them; but it was clear that the problem of a
satisfactory design had not been solved.
by demands due to developments in the Middle East.
Supply to the B.E.F. was affected
in the story of the container
Further developments
problems were, at this stage, mainly in the
Middle East, and are described in Chapter VI.
Effect of Tin Shortage
The Japanese successes in Malaya led to the consideration, early in 1942,
of the situation which would arise if a shortage of tin resulted.
The British
and U.S. stocks of tin then totalled only 110,000 tons, of which only 10,000
were held by United Kingdom.
Since the estimated requirement for 1942 for
petrol cans alone was 8,000 tons, it was obvious not only that the strictest
economy was necessary, but that as a long-term policy some alternative had
to be found to the use of tin-plate.
The choice was between adopting a new material for the manufacture
of non-returnable cans, or to case the majority of packed M.T. fuels in
all-steel returnable containers.
Eventually, both methods were adopted.
Terne or black plate was used
as a substitute for tin plate, and an all-steel returnable container was intro-
(Terne plate is steel plate coated with 25 per cent. tin and 75 per
cent. lead: tin plate is steel plate coated with 75 per cent. tin and 25 per cent.
Returnable Containers
At this time the only returnable containers available in quantity to the
Army were the 4-gallon rectangular cans, as had been supplied to the B.E.F.;
but the shortcomings of this type did not recommend it for introduction as
It had rolled seams, which did not stand up well to rough
usage; it was awkward to carry; and it was difficult and wasteful to pour
Middle East then recommended the adoption of an all-welded 4-gallon
cylindrical drum of a type suggested by a civilian oil company.
a cylindrical container is not generally desirable, owing to the waste of space
in stacking, etc., this pattern was accepted and went into large-scale production.
When double-seamed, it could be produced on normal drum plants, and
about four million of this type were manufactured.
They proved very satis-
factory until, sound as they were, the jerricans supplanted them.
Early in 1943, it became clear
that as there was every advantage in
replacing non-returnable containers with jerricans or other returnable types,
it was essential to step up production of the latter.
was increased to the maximum in home factories, contracts were placed
in America, and factories started in Middle East.
Production of Containers
At the same time a large non-returnable tin manufacturing potential
had to be retained intact, to ensure that full production would be available
for eventual operations in Europe in the likely event of jerrican production
being behind requirements.
North African requirements of can-making
259
WO 277/21
27
