Colombo, and subsequently Base Provision Officer (Supplies).
This system
of central accounting for all B.S.Ds. and payment of bills worked well and
continued in operation.
Eventually, after two island-wide stock-takings, accounts were
put on a
satisfactory footing during 1943.
Supply Reserves
Until February, 1941, Ceylon held 90 days' stock of the items of the
It was then decided that a 76 days' reserve of all items in
the field service ration scale should be held, and the Q.M.G. reserve, or
working margin, was fixed at 111 days.
The reserve was increased to 90 days
in May, 1941, and to 120 in December, 1941, while the working margin was
raised to 150 days in August that year.
Subsequently, these levels were
reduced, and, at the end of the war with Japan, a reserve of 60 days, plus
30 days' working margin, was held for all items, with the exception of
flour and atta, of which, owing to limited keeping qualities, only 30 days'
reserve, plus 30 days' working margin, was kept.
Provision and Demands
In spite of numerous requests made from March, 1942, onwards, G.H.Q.
India, refused to allow Ceylon to be responsible for its own provision of food
supplies from outside the island.
As a result, shiploads of supplies, which
could have been unloaded in good condition in Ceylon, went on to India,
where they were unloaded, stored, moved by road and rail to bulk installa-
tions, and eventually moved to ports again and shipped to Ceylon.
This
resulted in a waste of transport, manpower and time, as well as lowering the
condition of the supplies by the time they were taken into store in Ceylon.
Local Resources
The resources of the island proved inadequate to supply the needs of
the Services in respect of fresh meat, potatoes, and vegetables, and these
had to be imported from India, though many difficulties were encountered.
The Royal Navy assumed responsibility for the supply of potatoes
A W.D. vegetable farm was also started,
an area of 100 acres being
cut out of the jungle, and cultivated by Cochin State labour from India.
proved valuable as a source of supply, but was not a profitable undertaking,
although it had great possibilities if sufficient capital had been made available
for its development, particularly in respect of irrigation as a
against droughts.
safeguard
A pig farm was also acquired to assist in meeting the fresh meat require-
ments of the garrison, though the actual
pig-meat products
could only be
used for hospitals, etc., in hill stations, owing to bad keeping qualities.
As
time went on, cows, poultry and rabbits were added to the stock, and the
farm, which was run by a few R.A.S.C. personnel, was named the
Stock Farm.
ment the animal food ration.
Condemned fodstuffs and troops swill were used to supple-
The monthly yield was 2,500 lb. of pork,
500 gallons of milk. and 400 eggs, from 20 cows 476 pigs, and on noultry.
22
P.O.L.—Initial Situation
Before the war, and until the loss of the Dutch East Indies, most of the
island's requirements of petroleum products came from that source, with
about 25 per cent. from the Persian Gulf, and all lubricants from the U.S.A.
Imports were in bulk, except for lubricants.
The bulk storage, located
at Trincomalee,
Colombo, and China Bay,
was all owned and operated
by the civilian oil companies, totalling over a million liquid tons capacity.
Distribution from the ports was made in road tank lorries, barrels, drums,
and 4-gallon non-returnable tins.
A plant for the manufacture of the latter
type of container with a capacity of 225,000 tins a month, was operated by
and the local manufacture of 4-gallon returnable
drums reached 20,000 a month.
Developments in 1942
After the loss of the Dutch East Indies, all petroleum products except
lubricants came from the Persian Gulf.
S.T. was made responsible for the
provision, storage,
and distribution,
of M.T. fuel and lubricants, for the
Navy, Army, and R.A.F., but not for aviation or marine P.O.L.
The arrival of the reinforcements in March, 1942, swamped the existing
P.O.L. arrangements.
The new formations, in order to get the island ready
for defence, had to work fast, and units drew petrol indiscriminately from
civil petrol installations, as the military detail issue organization was unequal
to the demand.
During April and May, a Petrol Depot,
R.A.S.C., was
established and gradually restored order.
The first steps were taken for
the creation of a reserve of packed petrol.
In the initial stage this was
delayed by the absence of tin plate,
but when supplies were received the
creation of a reserve in non-returnable 4-gallon tins was begun.
Later, the Petrol Depot was expanded into a "B" type and two "C"
type depots, an advanced Base Petrol Depot was opened, and this and
As they became available, bulk underground storage
tanks were installed to hold part of the reserve, the oil companies holding
a further reserve, and a quantity continuing to be held in packed form.
Provision
The Shell Oil Company demanded,
provided and stored all Service
requirements of petrol, kerosine and diesel oils to an agreed scale of reserves,
and this arrangement worked throughout without a hitch.
large percentage of their main storage which
was monopolized by aviation
fuel, there was no delay in supplying the ever increasing Service requirement.
Consumption
The extent of the commitment will be seen from the fact that the
The total number of Service vehicles on the road
westerf
7
WO 277/21
27
