allotted intake, which was then available for reallotment by the Ministry.
I, however, a command required an increase, this was met by the Ministry
without demur.
Queries were settled on the spot, and future prospects
The conferences saved much correspondence, and formed the
basis of cordial relations and mutual trust between the Ministry and the
Other Developments,
1943-1944
In the summer of 1943, at the request of the Ministry, the War Office
agreed to substitute for house coal, whenever possible, coke, briquettes and
anthracite cobbles.
It was also agreed to accept a minimum of 25 per cent.
of the normal house coal programme in the form of coke, in response to a
request by the coke controller for as much coke as possible to be taken so
as to relieve congestion at producing plants.
The U.S. troops were accustomed to a higher standard of warmth than
our own, and it was therefore necessary to allow a higher winter allowance
per capita in those commands in which they were stationed.
This was fixed
at 70 ib. a head a week; other commands based their requirements on 66 1b.
In 1944, these figures were amended to 66 lb. and 56 lb. respectively.
in 1943.
Most commands had adhered to the reserve dump system,
but
Western Command had none in reserve dumps, and all fuel was held by
units.
It was claimed that this had the advantage of avoiding the double
handling which was entailed when the coal went first to a dump, and then
was moved to the unit.
Disintegration was reduced, and petrol and rubber
saved, and there was less likelihood of pilfering.
Further,
when coal was
held by units scattered over the command, the requirements of a new unit
could be met by a nearby unit, instead of having to be hauled a long distance
from a reserve dump.
It was of course difficult when a unit moved without
replacement, when rear parties or caretakers were necessary.
Eventually, a compromise was effected, static or semi-static units holding
all the coal themselves, and field force units working stocks only, the reserve
being with the Officer i/c Barracks.
It was early recognized that fuel supply during the winter of 1943-1944
would be much more difficult than in past years.
Commands were there-
tore instructed in July, 1943, to take in all the stocks they could as soon as
they could.
War July, Rail va a Branch pressed strongly that as much fuel
as possible should be stocked during the long summer days.
In spite of
this winter conditions, and the shortage of rail wagons and of shipping
resulted in many short deliveries, and in some cases reserves fell to a
dangerously low level. Belated appeals for assistance, which foresight and
coordination with Movement Control of commands would have made un-
necessary, were made by commands to War Office.
To remedy this,
com-
mands were told in February, man, hat Wction should be taken when it was
anticipated that there would be a shortage, not when it occurred; and that
reference to War Office should only be made when Command Movement
Control could not assist by accelerating ships or trains, or by switching con-
signments, en route to well-stocked areas, to those threatened with a shortage
It was primarily a Movement problem, and reference was to be made to Q
(Mnvemente) War Office hu A /Movementel of command. giving narticulars
274
of the situation.
Q (Movements), War Office, then
if necessary the Ministry of Fuel and Power and the
consulted S.T.7, and
Transport were asked to help.
Ministry of
War
occurred of there being "only one day's fuel left".
This system worked well, and no further cases
Supplies of coke began to fall in February, 1944, and War Office agreed
to the request of the Ministry that the Army should use less of this fuel,
decrease its reserves, and take large anthracite in lieu.
The position steadily
worsened, and, from the end of October, the supply of coke was programmed.
A weekly allotment was made to each command by agreement with the
Ministry, and commands then informed their District Coke Representatives,
the local officials of the Ministry, how this allotment should be distributed.
As far as possible, supply was arranged through the normal contractors, but
supply to the latter was controlled by the D.C.Rs.
In view of the transport and fuel shortages, and of the impracticability
of estimating strengths owing to the prospect of the invasion of Ñ.W. Europe,
it was decided early in 1944 not to plan for a year ahead, but to plan month
by month for May, June, and July.
In July, a meeting was held to discuss
the requirements from lst August, 1944, to 30th April, 1945; and monthly
meetings were held thereafter to amend estimates and revise allotments.
Commands' estimates were submitted on a revised pro-forma, which has since
continued in use.
Situation, 1944-1945
As the war went on, the supply of solid fuel grew less, and the demand
increased.
Supply diminished through falling output and lack of transport;
the latter was due in its turn to bombing, non-repair of wagons, shortage of
staffs, rail priority for troop
movements and operational equipment, etc.
Demand was increased by swelling armaments production, and on the military
side by the growing British Army plus the big influx of Allied troops.
In
May, 1944, 37 million troops, including over a million Americans, were being
supplied with fuel in the United Kingdom.
Short deliveries were sometimes
serious.
Thus, in February, 1945, Aldershot District was reduced to six
days' supply of coal and coke for this cause.
1,500 tons of fuel were rushed
from adjoining areas of Eastern Command, and 1,300 tons were railed
specially from Durham and London.
In March, 1945, the Ministry of Fuel and Power were unable to meet
the War Office demands for coal, and, in April, the Army was obliged to
accept unscreened open-cast coal as part of its house coal requirements.
Factors Assisting Fuel Supply
The scales of fuel in force during the war were no doubt austere, but
they were conditioned by circumstances outside the control of the Army.
Within those limo, the supply of fuel was maintained to the forces in the
United Kingdom, and commands on the whole did not go short.
That this was achieved has been attributed to the following factors: -
(a) Effective and cordial co-operation of S.T.6/7 with the Ministry of
Fuel and Power, supplemented on the side of the former by full
appreciation of the latter's difficulties.
275
WO 277/21
27
