complement of cooks from such experienced, partly trained, or volun
personnel, as were in the unit.
For these,
vacancies
were provided at
emergency cookery training centres, the date for despatch of formations
overseas determining the priority.
The absence of a plan for a proportion of the general intake into the
Army to be allocated for training as cooks meant that there was a shortage
of cooks throughout the war.
Until the A.C.C. was formed and cooks were
definitely enrolled in it, it was impossible for supply to catch up with
demand, because as fast as cooks were trained for other arms of the Service
they went to other employments.
A more fundamental shortage which persisted throughout the war was
that of instructors in cookery, which affected the output of trained cooks.
There were two sources of instructor-the Regular Army tradesmen and
the catering trade.
Those from the Army would not have all the technical
skill of the civilian, but they were soldiers trained in military methods, with
an exact knowledge of military requirements.
Those from the catering
trade were excellent cooks, but were entirely ignorant of the conditions under
which their students worked in units, and, not being soldiers, did not speak
the same language as the soldier, and were not conversant with his daily
rountle.
It was found that the two types were complementary to each other,
and had to be teamed to get the best results.
The policy frequently followed of allocating as cooks personnel of low
mental category proved to be bad. The standard of messing has been shown
to depend on two important points: the careful selection of personnel, and
their continual training and employment as cooks throughout their service.
It is bound to suffer if the unwanted soldier is put in the cookhouse and
the smart man in the cookhouse removed for other duty or for promotion.
Continual training and employment ensures a high standard of craftsman-
The main difficulty met in connection with the employment of A.T.S.
as cooks was that low-grade personnel were selected for cooking duties,
while women who were cooks in civil life were directed to operational
A natural aptitude for cooking was not found to be more marked
as a rule among A.T.S. than among men.
The period between the outbreak of war and the formation of the
A.C.C. was marked by the uneconomical use
of manpower under the
"regimental cook" system, when thousands trained as cooks drifted away
to other employment.
Os.C. units, realizing that there was no outside source
of replacement, often trained an unnecessarily large reserve of cooks, who
seldom went back to the cookhouse.
Cookery Training Establishments
At the outbreak of war, proposals were put forward for a number
of
emergency cookery training centres.
24, and to increase eventually to 100, divided between
It was the intention to start with
allotted to arms of the Service.
commands,
was slow, and by April, 1940, only 26 were functioning.
The rate of progress of opening these centres
siderable difficulty in filling vacancies, as commanding
There was con-
officers
were not
284
convinced of the value of the courses and were loath to part with their men.
Good men were often unwilling to go, and if sent against their will did
not always make good cooks.
The centres had to be attached to units large
enough to give each centre from four to six hundred rations to cook.
Inspector of E.C.T.Cs. and an assistant were appointed at the War Office,
and a supervising officer was allowed for every nine schools in a command.
The Inspector later became a Chief Inspector of Training.
From July, 1940, to July, 1941, it was necessary to reduce the length of
the course from eight to six weeks, in order to train more cooks.
meant a higher proportion of testing and less inspection, and the super-
This
vising officers were increased to one for every six schools.
Types of Training
The type of training to be given to cooks was difficult to forecast.
Different theatres of war presented different problems.
Thus the provision of
wood for fuel, which was comparatively easy in France, became impossible
when fighting moved to the Western Desert, where cooking by means of oil
and water
was also impracticable owing to lack of water.
Methods of
cooking using petrol or waste oil alone for fuel had to be evolved. Bricks
had to be discarded for improvisation in favour of petrol tins, and these
in turn became unobtainable and were replaced by turf, stones, etc.
All
these changes were reflected in the training of cooks.
Another difficulty was that commodities came into short supply; thus
flour had to be replaced with potatoes, and fat by the use of yeast.
Anti-Aircraft Command Problems
One problem which was foreseen before the war was that of messing
in A.A. Command, when the A.A. batteries deployed on to gun and search-
light sites, many manned by only ten men.
There were not enough cooks
in the country to provide one for each site, and the alternative was to cook
centrally at the battery headquarters and send out the food cold in con-
tainers, to be reheated at the sites.
The fact that they were static, and
that it therefore appeared possible to make better provision for their feeding
than was the case for mobile units in the field, was an added complication.
Centralized cooking was adopted, but it did not prove a success, and was
abandoned in 1942 in view of the vital need for the conservation of petrol,
rubber, fuel, and personnel, and because the conditions which prompted
the scheme had altered beyond recognition.
The arguments in favour of centralized cooking were, apart from the
question of the provision of cooks, first, that the system was based on
the methods employed in civil life by the firm of J. Lyons and Co. (the
accepted authorities on communal catering), and that it was believed that
in this way the searchlight service could be better and more economically
messed than with a system of small individual messes; and, second, that
had the conditions of service remained similar to those prevailing in civilian
catering, centralized messing would probably have been a success.
actual practice, it did not fulfil expectations, for the following reasons.
was only found possible to erect about 40 out of 200 cookhouses scheduled
285
(37477)
WO 277/
27
