intments (Sec. 38), and
and his representatives.
ny, war duties will be
NoTE B.- See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 1.
NOTE C. -Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by
or sub.
nit will be referred,
through the usual chanels, to the Under Secretary of State (S.D.),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
ParA. 2. A war diary is Secret.
and to provide data
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
pon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
later for the History of the War.
on A war dia i be entered te daily, each entry in anale by the fier detailed to keep it.
ction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
VoTE. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.- Omitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
i pay ate can due the a ren an our and pren dipatin.
(111) Important matters relating to the duties
To but not reive to ato
PILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
lay of mobilisation or
subordinate command
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
officers and the number of other
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L.. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE. - Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vil) might be added.
PARA. 5. —Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
1) A cop of at al em A an in a sed i i can rain of
the war diary.
(i) Cor refer orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(i) A coit, ireluch ng at sketche or on o relating reto, by a subordinate formation
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
PARA. 6.-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
be forwarded on the first day of the
Month and Year..June 1944•
Date
Hour
WAR DIARY
#EXIGENCE SUMIKANX
Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form U. 25
Unit 44. Port Ord. Det. RoA.0.E.
Commanding Officer Ideut. E. Reynolds. R.A.0.C.
References to Appendices
Peterborough 1-L4
4-16
17
18-30.
Unit employed in No.1, Sub-Depot R.A.0.C. Walton in general Ordnance work.
Movement order (Exfor (Buco)G.14) of 041830 move by rail to R.A.0.C. Training
Est. Idecester No.2 Special P.O.D. Course (which proved of value to the
unit) thence to Turlington Camp, Town Green, Aughton, Laterpool for
practical experience in liverpool Docks. W.O.l. and 10.R, remaining behina
in charge of G. 1098 stores and unit equipment.
Unit returned to Peterborough on completion of course.
Pecsaid Personnel of unit employed in No.1. Sub-Depot Walton despatching
B.M.P. by road to dispersal points.
cuments in your Bulk Or
e you have requested
more of your doc
nents - Enquire at
e documents are in use
Desk for full details
