N.C.O.s, adequate in quality as well as in quantity.
Before the war, service with
the East and West African forces had attracted the best type of regular officer and
N.C.O., but they were few in number, and by no means all of them could be made
available to return to Africa when the great expansion began.
A limited number
of good officers and N.C.O.s could be found from among the Civil Seryants and
other Government employees and from among the resident Europeans. These
were valuable because they knew the African languages and understood African
ways of life and thought, but the Colonial Governments could not risk too great a
lowering in the standard of administration by releasing too many of their Civil
Servants, and except perhaps in Tanganyika and Kenya the number of resident
Europeans, apart from Government servants, was extremely few.
The majority of
the officers and N.C.O.s had, therefore, to be supplied from the United Kingdom,
and they counted against the total maximum manpower allowed; every officer and
N.C.O. allotted to African units meant one less available for a British unit. It took
a long time to accustom an officer or N.C.O. to deal with Africans and to learn their
language, and however carefully they were selected some inevitably turned out to be
quite unsuitable, and did much harm by their overbearing behaviour to the African
Thirdly, there were great difficulties in transporting units from the Colonies,
where they were raised, to Egypt. The internal communications of Africa before
the war were not designed for the movement of large bodies of troops and the
only practical route was by sea. Shipping was always short and there were at times
considerable delays in moving units, which had completed training, from West
Africa or South Africa to Egypt. Units were thus lost to useful work when they
were badly needed and some harm was done to recruiting by this delay. If a unit
remained inactive in a Colony, it made it hard to impress upon other potential
recruits that their services also were very much needed.
Despite these difficulties a great success was achieved and a very valuable supply
of most useful manpower was added to our slender resources.
Emphasis has been
laid on the supply obtained within the African continent because it was thence that
the largest numbers were drawn, but Middle East Command threw their net even
Some idea of the cosmopolitan mixture of races serving in the
command is given by the fact that at one time there were some 40 different ration
scales in force and censorship of letters was provided in some 3o languages.
Outside the Empire there were a number of British subjects living more or less
permanently in foreign countries. Many were eager to serve their mother country
and from the earliest days of the war, and more especially after Dunkirk, there was
a steady stream of those who returned to the United Kingdom, often with great
difficulty and with much personal risk. There was at first no official scheme for
Some came at their own expense; in other cases British
communities in foreign countries raised funds to pay the passages of volunteers,
while the shipping companies often accepted much reduced fares.
trouble arose and much disappointment and heartburning was caused because men
and women, having arrived in the United Kingdom, found themselves rejected on
medical grounds by the service they wished to join or because there were no
vacancies in which their qualifications could be used. To prevent this disappoint-
ment and waste of effort a comprehensive scheme was devised by which full instruc-
tions were sent to British Consular Authorities abroad notifying them of the
vacancies in the Armed Forces and in industry and laying down the medical standards
for each. Consular authorities were authorized to pay for medical examinations of
applicants and to arrange passages at public expense to the United Kingdom for
those men and women who appeared suitable for some form of service.
But since
the local medical examinations were not always completely reliable, every applicant
wO 217/=2
was required to sign an undertaking that if he was ultimately rejected by the Service
of his choice, he would serve in whatever capacity he might be required to by the
Ministry of Labour and National Service. Instructions were sent as necessary to
the consular authorities by the Foreign Office and they in turn notified by signal
to the Foreign Office the names of those whom they despatched and the probable
dates of their arrival in the United Kingdom. By far the greatest numbers came
from the South American Republics. A fair number came from the United States
during 1941, but the entry of the United States into the war as a belligerent changed
the situation in that country, and it was then agreed that a citizen of either country
residing in the other country must either return to his own country or submit
himself to the conscription laws of the country in which he was residing.
The scheme, when once it was properly understood, worked very well and a
valuable contribution was made not only to the Services but to industry also.
Moreover, it was often important that certain men should stay where they were in
order to further British commercial interests abroad, and consular authorities were
in many cases able to explain convincingly to applicants that their duty really called
upon them to remain in their present posts. In general, the scheme tended to ensure
that men and women were used where they could best serve the nation's interests
at large, and was valuable in preventing waste of effort and waste of qualifications
in the wrong place.
It remains to speak of the Indian Army with which the British Army stood in
a close and peculiar relation. From the earliest days of the East India Company
these Indian troops were commanded by British officers, and from the assumption
of Government by the Crown down to the ig2o's the officers holding the Queen's
or King's commission were all British, while Indian officers held only the Viceroy's
commission.
In the 192o's Indians began to be appointed to King's Commissions,
and the number of these increased steadily up to the outbreak of war in 1939.
The
number was not by that time at all great and when the expansion of the Indian
Army began the supply of Indians coming forward as candidates for King's Com-
missions was quite inadequate for the increased needs. Indian formations were
early in the Middle East and won new laurels in all the fighting in Africa, in Sicily
and in Italy; and the entry of Japan into the war threw a new and very heavy burden
on the Indian Army. It was clearly of vital interest to the British Amy to supply
to the Indian Army an adequate number of officers of the right quality.
difficulties are obvious: the Indian Army wanted exactly the best type of regimental
officer which the British Army needed so badly itself and failures inevitably did
more harm with Indian than with British troops. The drain on United Kingdom
resources was very heavy, but the investment was a sound one; without an efficient
Indian Army we could not possibly have thwarted the Japanese attack in Asia.
Almost all the countries in which military conscription was a long standing and
permanent arrangement applied their conscription laws to their nationals residing
in foreign countries.
Their citizens were expected to carry out their military
obligations by returning to their mother country when summoned, and failure to
obey at once might be attended with serious penalties even with loss of citizen-
ship-if the offender ever did return to his country. No such penalties awaited the
British subjects residing abroad. The United Kingdom National Service Acts
made liable to registration only persons residing in the United Kingdom, and the
British subject in a foreign country was under no legal obligation to serve in any way.
In 1942 there was much criticism by allied representatives in Egypt that Great
E Augur, allowith Nator he sention al there to cares nice a pater, boy
Parliament authorizing the conscription of British subjects residing in foreign
The Act was to be applied to particular countries by Order in Council,
