WO27
12
easy to get rid of a man who is difficult to teach or control, then the tendency is to
cease trying to teach or control any but those who readily respond, and men will be
lost who needed only a little care and trouble to turn them into first-class soldiers.
Thirdly, if the wastage is excessive, public confidence is undermined.
Industrial
firms will inevitably resent what they consider to be a useless disturbance of their
economy, if men are called up from them, only to be discharged from the Army
after a few months.
More and more does it seem likely that the available manpower resources will
always be insufficient to satisfy every need in war, and more and more will it be
incumbent on the Army to use every kind of human material that possibly can be
used and to ensure that avoidable wastage is really avoided as far as is humanly
possible.
CHAPTER VIII
DEMOBILIZATION
On 8th May, 1945, hostilities ceased in Germany, and on that same afternoon
a signal was sent by the War Office to all commands at home and abroad, informing
them confidentially that releases would begin on 18th June.
On the appointed
day releases began without any difficulty and the organization continued to carry
out its purpose effectively.
long and careful preliminary planning.
That such an achievement was possible was due to
It is not intended here to describe in detail the release machinery and an outline
only will be given, sufficient to make intelligible references to the various parts
of the organization.
Here it is more the purpose to enquire why this particular
plan was adopted and how it worked in its execution.
Planning for demobilization began in January, 1941, with the appointment of a
Committee under the chairmanship of Sir George Chrystal-later succeeded by
Sir Alfred Hurst-on which were represented the three Service Departments, the
Treasury and the Ministry of Labour and National Service.
This Committee
issued two reports which were later reviewed by a Committee of Junior Ministers
under the chairmanship of Viscount-then Sir William-Jowitt, which made
further recommendations, and the detailed scheme, which was presented to Parlia-
ment in October, 1944, was finally worked out by the Ministry of Labour and
National Service and the Service Departments. It is unnecessary to follow in
detail the several steps by which the scheme was evolved and it will suffice to
survey the major problems and to review the considerations on which decisions
were founded. It is, however, interesting to record that the first Committee in
their two reports laid down the main principles on which the final scheme was
based and it is proper to pay just tribute to their wisdom and foresight.
It became
at once apparent that in planning demobilization three distinct, and to a large extent
conflicting, interests demanded attention; the interest of the individual soldier, the
interest of national reconstruction and the interest of the Service.
The interest of
the individual soldier demanded a plan which would do justice between man and
man, and ensure that the order of release was decided on factors that are common
to all.
The interests of national reconstruction, on the other hand, demanded the
release of men in the order in which they were needed for the many activities which
reconstruction involved.
It was evident that when the war ended there would be
urgent need for the release of directing staff and skilled workers in some industries,
while in others, perhaps less immediately important for reconstruction, shortage of
materials would certainly forbid any rapid revival.
It could well be argued, there-
fore, that the only sound plan was to release men in the order in which they were
needed for reconstruction, even though this involved the early release of some
whose call-up had been delayed because of their importance in industry and who
would, therefore, have served a comparatively short time with the Colours.
With
both these interests, the interests of the Service conflicted.
From the strict Service
point of view, it would patently be desirable to reduce the Army by getting rid of
those who could best be spared.
It could be argued with some force that when the
Army must be reduced in numbers, the first to go should be those whose services
were of little use, the dullards, the inefficient, the ill disciplined, and that the whole
programme of releases should be drawn up to ensure that at any moment the Army
should be left as a properly balanced force.
65
