women were sent direct from their military units to the appropriate dispersal centre.
Men arriving from overseas went from the port to a military disembarkation camp
which in effect performed the duties of a collecting unit and despatched men to the
appropriate dispersal centre.
The organization was quite elastic and new units
were set up or existing ones abolished according to the flow of traffic.
Each officer and man was provided with a Release Book which contained all the
documents necessary to effect his release.
Owing to differences in documentation
there were separate prints for male officers, male other ranks, female officers and
female other ranks.
Personal particulars were entered by the unit before despatch-
ing the individual and pages were eventually detached which gave the necessary
information to Paymasters, Officers-in-Charge of Records, the War Office, the
Ministry of Labour and the Ministry of Health.
It is regrettable that much
unnecessary trouble was caused by careless documentation, especially on the part
of units in entering personal particulars.
An elaborate system was evolved by
which Release Books could be dealt with at great speed at dispersal centres and it
became quite a common achievement, in times of stress, to complete the men's
documentation at the rate of more than sixty an hour.
Associated with each dispersal centre was a civilian clothing depot where, as
part of the release benefits, each man was supplied free of charge with an excellent
outfit of civilian clothing, in addition to the articles of Service clothing which he
was allowed to keep.
The supply of this clothing was in itself a major undertaking involving the setting
up of what was virtually a retail clothing organization on a scale never before
attempted. Since the object was to give every man a choice of style and colour
as well as a perfect fit the provision of the necessary clothing, which was arranged
by the War Office with the Ministry of Supply on behalf of all three Services, had
to be made well in advance, and began at the same time that the planning for the
Normandy landing was at its height.
The clothing depots were severely strained by the accelerated rates of release
due to the unexpectedly early end of the Japanese war, and later to a lesser extent
by the failure of manufacturers to maintain sufficient supplies.
Despite these
difficulties they won universal esteem among the men who passed through them,
who expressed high appreciation of the excellence of the outfit and the speed and
courtesy of the staffs.
Clothing in kind was not provided for women, who received instead coupons and
a cash grant.
At the dispersal centre the man was paid in cash a round sum roughly equivalent
to three weeks' pay, and was granted 56 days' release leave.
On receiving notifica-
tion of release, the record offices calculated any entitlement to additional leave on
account of overseas service and notified the paymaster of this and of the details of
service and rank required for assessing war gratuity.
The paymaster then closed
the man's account, forwarded to him a book of warrants for the amount due to
him and notified to the Post Office the amount of war gratuity to be credited.
A number of men wished to be released where, they were serving overseas, and
local releases were permitted provided that the Government of the country in
which the man wished to be released gave their consent and that the local command
was satisfied that the man was not seeking to evade his domestic responsibilities at
Furthermore, a generous measure of repatriation was allowed to those
whose usual place of residence was outside the United Kingdom.
It may quite fairly be claimed that the organization for effecting Class "A"
releases worked admirably.
Once a man got into the release machine he was
dealt with quickly and efficiently and at no point was he kept waiting unnecessarily.
The only real difficulties were caused by ships carrying large release drafts from
72
WO2T7
12
overseas arriving too close together or not keeping to their original schedule.
Bitter complaints were on one occasion received from a number of officers arriving
from India that they had travelled from Southampton to the Disembarkation Camp
at Carlisle and thence to the dispersal centre in London for release. It seemed an
extremely foolish arrangement, but this ship arrived two days ahead of schedule:
the disembarkation camps at Oxford and Reading were already full with men from
other ships and the only available space was at Carlisle.
scheduled day the camp at Reading would have been empty for them.
Had they arrived on the
Class "B"
releases were dealt with somewhat differently.
The Government
fixed the rate of Class "B" release at Io per cent of the total Class "A" releases, a
atio subsequently raised to 15 per cent, and the first figure for Class "B" wa
elated to the first million Class "A" releases, that is, in the period covered by the
first million Class "A" releases from all the Services, 100,000 men were to be
released in Class "B".
The allotment of this quota among the various industries
was the duty of the Ministry of Labour and National Service, and no requests for
Class "B" releases were entertained by the Services unless they came through that
Ministry. Requests reached the War Office in two forms, either for the release of
certain specified individuals or for the release of a given number of some specified
occupation.
All requests came to one particular branch in the War Office.
When the application for individual release concerned an officer, his location was
obtainable within the War Office, and the offer of release was sent direct to the
unit if he was serving at home or to the command if he was overseas.
In the case
of other ranks, the request was sent to the record office, who dealt with it thereafter.
In the case of bulk releases, the demand was simply for the release of so many
men of some specified occupation, for example, 5,000 bricklayers. The Central
Card Index then supplied the names of the required number of men, identified on
their cards as being of the occupation, beginning at a group which was not likely
to be released in Class "A" within the next few months and going down the groups
successively until the required numbers were found.
The names were then
transmitted to record offices and were thereafter dealt with in the same manner as
individuals.
Experience soon showed that a high percentage of the men so notified
proved in the end not to be available for Class "B" release and to cover this a
number of additional names were obtained in the first instance from the Card Index.
A third kind of Class "B" release was gradually introduced, which came to be
known as "Nominated Bulk".
The Ministry of Labour and National Service
would allot to some Ministry a quota of, say, 2,000 Class "B" releases.
That
Ministry often wished to ensure, as far as possible, that the industrial firms in
which they were interested obtained the actual men they really wanted, probably
their former employees, and not merely 2,000 men taken from the Central Card
Index.
Fundamentally the idea was sound, but difficulties almost always arose
because the particulars of the men supplied to the War Office were inaccurate and
the men could not be found.
Lists very often contained the names of men who
were found to be dead or discharged long ago or already released in Class "A" or
completely unidentifiable, and much fruitless work was thrown upon War Office
branches and record offices in searching for them.
Release in Class "B" was always voluntary and the man was free to accept or
reject the offer as he pleased.
Equally, the War Office had the right to refuse
release if the individual's services could not be spared.
Releases of men in certain
military trades of which there was an acute shortage, such as Armament Artificers
and Foremen of Signals, were wholly banned and in no case was Class "B" release
permitted if it would involve the compulsory retention beyond his proper date of
some other man due for release in Class "A".
Owing to differences in docu-
mentation, Class "B" releases were not dealt with at dispersal centres.
They were
