WO 277/22
the general or vitiated by ignorance of factors which could not then be made
public; but it would be absurd to claim that no mistakes were made or that no
criticism was justified.
No claim is made that what was done was necessarily
right or that what seemed right in the circumstances of the moment will necessarily
be right again in the different circumstances of the future.
The aim of the book
is to show what was done and why and whether the consequences were good or
bad, not to advocate any particular course as bound to be right "next time".
Finally, the reader is asked to remember that those who had to deal with instant
and pressing problems of manpower had not the wisdom which comes after the
CHAPTER I
BEFORE THE WAR
In setting out to compile a survey of the manpower problems which arose during
the war, an initial difficulty is to decide exactly what period this survey should
cover.
Obviously one cannot begin abruptly on the day of mobilization in 1939
nor end abruptly on V.E. Day or V.J. Day in 1945, since the problems which were
encountered on mobilization had their causes in the events of former years, and
the reduction of the Army by demobilization after victory had been won brought
new problems which have a peculiar interest of their own.
It is easier to find a suitable point at which to end than it is to find one from
which to begin. Many considerations suggest the end of 1946 as a convenient
stopping-place.
The end of 1945 is too close to V.E. and V.J. Days, and although
the release scheme had by then been in operation for about six months, the
numbers actually released were not large, nor was it until the early months of
1946 that the rate of release reached its peak. In the course of 1946 the Govern-
ment decided that all men who entered the Service on or after ist January, 1947,
should serve for a fixed period, in the first instance for two years; their release is
therefore governed by conditions wholly different from those which determined
the earlier releases.
Moreover, in 1947 all manpower questions were more and
more decided by circumstances affecting the reconstruction of the nation's economy
than by the military considerations which had formerly prevailed. The end of 1946
does seem to mark the transition from the manpower problems of war to those of
peace, as far as any precise moment can be said to mark what was in reality a gradual
progress, and may well serve as a convenient point at which to close this survey.
It is more difficult to find a suitable starting-point. The Munich crisis of 1938
stands out prominently, but that is too close to the actual outbreak of war: much
was done in those few months to remedy some of the worst defects of our position,
but those defects were themselves due to the policies of successive Governments
since 1918.
It would be tedious to go right back to 1918, and one is driven to
choose some date, rather arbitrarily, which will be sufficiently far back from the
outbreak of war; the General Election of 1935 seems as convenient as any.
Although Earl Baldwin had himself retired from office before the war began, it
was the political party returned to power in 1935 which guided the affairs of the
nation until the storm actually burst.
At the beginning of 1936, the Armed Forces in general and the Army in par-
ticular were at a very low ebb. For many years there had been a natural reluctance
on the part of successive Governments to spend large sums on defence, a reluctance
which had recently been strengthened by the economic crisis of 1931.
Britain had
played a leading part in the abortive Disarmament Conférence at Geneva and there
had been a sincere desire to let our actions match our professions and to reduce
our armaments as an earnest of our desire for general disarmament.
The con-
sequence was that in 1936 the British Army was short in numbers and equipment
and wholly inadequate in the menacing international situation which was rapidly
developing.
In 1933 Japan had quitted the League of Nations and had embarked
on operations in China.
The rise of the Nazi power in Germany in 1934, her
unconcealed rearmament, the reoccupation of the Rhineland and the aggressive
attitude of Italy made it all too plain that another war might well begin at any
moment.
