A ridge pole to be provided 6 ft. above floor of vehicle.
This is to be fixed
at back end to a steel frame which is independent of the tail or side boards,
and which if necessary can be detached.
38. Driver's Seat.—Driver to be adequately protected from weather.
Seat
to be wide enough to carry two men comfortably on the driver's left.
Minimum
width of seat to centre of line through steering column to be 4 ft. 2 in. Dash-
boards and footboards to be approximately the same width as driver's seat.
Wood canopy to be provided and to extend about 4 ft. 3 in. beyond the body.
Front of canopy to be fitted with an adjustable waterproof flap to protect the
crew from rain.
Canopy to be strong enough to carry light articles of kit and
petrol cans, etc., and to be fitted with a rail.
Seats to be fitted with cushions in
which springs are employed in addition to hair or other suitable material.
Panel or side door to be fitted on driver's right.
Side door on left not required.
A space of 1} in. clear to be left between body itself and driver's seat.
Driver's
seat and canopy to be separate from body.
Locker to be fitted under driver's
seat on left of petrol tank.
Body Fixing. —Bodies to be interchangeable.
To prevent movement along the lorry, three pairs of angles, preferably
forgings, are to be provided.
To prevent movement across the lorry, angles are to be secured by bolts
passing through the bolsters to the underside of the bolsters at a fixed distance
apart, and to butt up against the side of the forgings mentioned above.
To bolt the body down to the frame six bolts, at fixed distances apart, are
As the springs may limit the space available for the centre brackets, these
will be of a different shape to the others, and shorter holding-down bolts will
For dimensions, see Drawing No. 102b.
Should it be desired to use more than three bolsters, intermediate ones can
be provided to rest on the frame, so that if the body were transferred to another
chassis these extra bolsters would rest on a flat frame.
The centres of fixed bolsters are the following distances from back of driver's
Class " A." -6 ft., 11 ft. 6 in.
Class " B." -6 ft., 4 ft. 6 in., 8 ft. 6 in.
40. Sprags. —Sprags of the road spike type are to be fitted and there must be
two independent sprags to prevent the vehicle from slewing round.
be pivoted on the back axle.
They should
Rachet type sprags will not be permitted.
Handle
for operating sprag to be on dashboard, as shown in Drawing 103g.
connection may be used.
Wire rope
41. Tests and Requirements. —Before any vehicles can be subsidized one of the
type must successfully pass through the War Office tests for type vehicles.
The full particulars of these are contained in a separate document.
28
WO 27 7/2
42. Materials.—To be up to the standard of quality specified by the makers
when submitting the full particulars of their vehicles.
the War Department as to the quality of the materials used throughout.
Manufacturers to satisfy
43. Cylinder Castings.—It is suggested that cylinder castings be submitted
to the following hydraulic tests :-
Inside of cylinder, 500 lb. per sq. in.
Water jacket, 50 lb. per sq. in.
• The cylinder castings should be sound and show no weeping under test.
44. Engines.—Engines must be capable of giving a horse-power on the
brake of not less than that given by the R.A.C. rating when run for 3 hours at
normal full speed.
45. Workmanship.—The workmanship throughout is to be first class and
at least as good as that of the type vehicles submitted for trial and passed.
46 Petrol Consumption:
-Petrol consumption to be not greater than
1 gallon per 40 gross ton miles at ordinary road speeds for both classes.
47. Hill Climbing.—All vehicles to be capable of ascending a gradient of
1 in 6 on the road fully loaded or light.
48. Tools.—The undermentioned list of tools is to be supplied as part of the
free outfit for every vehicle and will be checked on each inspection and must be
found complete and in good order :—1 complete set of spanners and keys to
fit all bolts and nuts on chassis, including wheel spanner and hub cap spanner ;
large shifting spanner, similar to Billings and Spencer, 14-in., automobile type ;
small shifting spanner, similar to Billings and Spencer, 8-in., automobile type ;
1 magneto spanner; 1 box spanner for sparking plug;
1 screwdriver with handle; 1 pair
gas pliers; 1 pair universal pliers; 1
hammer; 1 cold chisel; 1 petrol filler with wire gauze strainer; 1 oil tin;
1 grease tin; 1 pressure greaser.
49. Accessories. —The following must be carried on all vehicles : —2 paraffin
side lamps; paraffin tail lamp; 1 acetylene lamp; 1 generator for above ;
brackets for 3 acetylene head lamps, vide Clause No. 33; 1 horn; 1 set of
instructions regarding the care and maintenance of the vehicle.
50. Spare Parts.—Manufacturers to agree to keep an adequate supply of
spare parts for subsidized vehicles.
Detail lists to be settled for each type of
machine submitted.
The undermentioned list of spare parts is to be supplied as part of the free
outfit for every vehicle and will be checked on each inspection and must be
found complete and in good order : 4 sparking plugs with washers; 1 set of
bolts, washers, pins ; 1 set of washers for valve cups ; 1 dozen washers for
sparking plugs; 1 set of washers for engine and water circulation joints and
inlet and exhaust pipe joints; 1 of each type of grease or oil cup used ; 1 of
each type of valve complete with spring, cotter and washer (if inlet and exhaust
valves are interchangeable, two complete valves must be carried) ; 1 fan belt (if
used) and spare connectors ; 1 length of each class of rubber tubing used in the
water circulation; clips for making joints in the above ; 1 set of brake blocks,
or one brake liner for each brake on the vehicle ; any other part which may be
settled on for any particular type of vehicle.
29
