Such an ideal, admirable in theory, was unobtainable, since all nations were too
far committed in their production of existing types.
Furthermore a change
of this sort would have involved extensive and far-reaching alterations in
organization tables which could not be entertained during preparations for the
second front."
Nevertheless a survey of the methods adopted by the U.S.A.,
Canada and Great Britain was carried out on the instructions of the C.P.R.B.
to ascertain what degree of national standardization had been achieved. From
this survey it appeared that progress was reasonably satisfactory, and the some-
what surprising admission from that home of mass production, the U.S.A., that
" The U.S. Army policy on standardization of motor vehicles generally
coincides with that ... in Great Britain."1
Papers prepared by the three countries considered standardization in two
aspects :—
(a) Standardization of materials and components supplied to manufacturers
with the object of simplifying production programmes.
(b) Standardization of the equipment supplied to the fighting forces in
order to simplify maintenance and the supply of spare parts.
In comparing the results achieved, it is necessary to remember that of the three
Great Britain alone was actively and physically affected by war-
in the form of heavy air onslaughts, blackouts, etc.
U.S. approval of British
methods is therefore all the more satisfactory.
Of the three the Canadian
statement was the most striking.
With regard to materials, Canadian manufacturers relied mainly on S.A.E.
specifications as a basic control of their design before the war and had therefore
started war production with a very reasonable degree of standardization in this
With regard to vehicle specifications, all vehicles, with the exception
of three,? produced by G.M.C. used the same engine assemblies, including the
All Ford vehicles, except the Universal carrier, used the same
All Chrysler vehicles used a standard Dodge engine.
A high degree of interchangeability existed, not only among the products of one
company but between companies as well.3
In addition, all changes of design
were controlled by the Department of Munitions and Supply, which exercised
great care in ensuring that improved components could be fitted to vehicles
already in service as well as to new models.
The United States worked on the same general lines as Great Britain,
which will be described later.
In addition, strict limitations were imposed upon
the number of types of vehicle for which contracts could be placed. For load-
carriers of six tons capacity or less the following eight chassis only were per-
(a) 4-ton, 4 × 4, Willys and Ford, which were identical chassis.
(b) }-ton, 4 × 4, Dodge, in three wheelbase lengths.
(c) 1}-ton, 4 x 4, substantially identical with (d).
(d) 22-ton, 6 x 6, G.M.C., in two wheelbase lengths.
20 Aрr., 1943.
(e) C.P.R.B. Truck Committee Report on Production and Distribution of Vehicles,
(* The exceptions were : G.M.C. armoured cars, reconnaissance cars and 3-ton 6 x b
(9) on interchangeability was not always reciprocalong. ise Ford transfer case could be
For vei de a Chevrolet vehicle, but a way recipral e a sh could to be mounted on 3.
WO277/
(e) 4-ton, 6 x 6, Diamond T, in two wheelbase lengths.
(f) 45-ton, 4 x 4, tractor, substantially identical with (e).
(s) 5-6-ton, 4 × 4, substantially identical with (f), but using axles of (h).
(h) 6-ton, 6 x 6, White, Corbitt and Brockway, identical chassis.
Similar limitations were placed on trailers, all of which had wheels and, when
possible, brake gear, interchangeable with those of their towing vehicles.
The British statement' showed that considerable progress had been made
in the United Kingdom in both aspects of standardization.
were eliminated and the whole output was standardized, as were nuts and bolts
both in dimensions and materials.
Hubs and brake assemblies of trailers were
made interchangeable with those of towing vehicles, and wheels were stan-
The number of types of such component parts as
batteries, carburettors and electrical equipment was drastically reduced.? The
total effect of these measures was to standardize more than 37,000 spare parts
held as " common stores " in army depots.
This is perhaps a suitable point at which to note that a most useful lever with
which to enforce standardization was found in the various special requirements
of war which involved adaptation of existing equipment.
Such requirements
were, for example, adaptations of electrical equipment for wireless suppression,
cold starting and wading.
Few manufacturers were in a position to design the
equipment required, and certain of them were unable to produce it.
Those who
were not competent were discarded, and to some extent standardization there-
fore became automatic, either by the imposition of stringent specifications by
the War Office and Ministry of Supply or by the fact that in some cases only one
manufacturer was capable of producing what was required.
To take concrete
examples, cold starting requirements were responsible for the introduction of a
standard 12-volt control board for petrol engines and a standard 24-volt board
for compression-ignition engines, as also for a standard temperature compensa-
tion device for voltage control instruments.
With regard to the second aspect of standardization-that of the equipment
supplied to the fighting forces-
-the pressure of circumstances was too great for
any marked success.
Had shadow factories been established before 1939, sub-
stantial progress might have been made, but to make any factory produce a
vehicle of a type for which it was not equipped would have involved stopping
production for a number of months, the provision of new machine tools and the
loss, probably permanent, of labour to other war industries.
This price was
too heavy to pay.
Another serious difficulty, not encountered by the U.S.A. or
Canada, was the necessity of having more than one source of supply for any one
type of vehicle.
As an insurance against the risks of air raid damage, at least
two sources of supply for all essential vehicles and components were required.
Yet another difficulty to be faced was shortage of critical materials, which
() C.P.R.B. Truck Committee Report, 20 Apr., 1943.
Ministry of Supply, on Chich this Rion o. 10 report was The in a, however, dided by the
