that a design already existed for a very heavy tracked trailer intended for
transport of trench
digging equipment sponsored by Mr.
Churchill at the
beginning of the war.'
As has been mentioned, extensive comparative trials
were conducted, which included the employment of A.R. V.s, wheeled tractors
and wheeled and tracked trailers.
The tactical value of the A.R.V., and its
practical efficiency, were proved beyond doubt for front-line recovery, but
maintenance problems of the tracked trailer used on roads proved insoluble?
There was the added difficulty that manufacture of tracks for this purpose would
have interfered with A.F.V. production.
Attention was therefore concentrated upon the adaption of existing trans-
porters for the carriage of greater loads, and upon convincing the U.S.A. of
the value of this type of vehicle.?
The British story is one of makeshift and com-
promise, for production never reached quantities even remotely meeting require-
ments, and the efficiency of many of the vehicles produced was open to con-
siderable question.
An example of the vacillations in policy and design is
provided by the history of the 20-ton Albion transporter.
This vehicle was produced in 1942 to a General Staff specification to the
order of the Ministry of Supply.
It was designed originally as a heavy gun
tractor but was adapted as a semi-articulated vehicle to carry the " Honey"
tank, and to travel at comparatively high speeds on good roads.
The engine
was the largest standard commercial type at that time produced in this country.
Considerable numbers, some 350, were despatched to North Africa, and some
450 were employed in the United Kingdom.
From the moment of their intro-
duction they proved mechanically unreliable, and their performance, especially
in North Africa, was lamentable.
Engine speeds had to be reduced from 2,100
r.p.m. to 1,850 r.p.m. to eliminate serious engine defects, and crankshaft
breakages occurred when vehicles were running downhill as it was necessary to
use the engine to assist inadequate brakes.
The War Office and user view was
that the Albion was not and never would be a suitable vehicle for use as a 20-ton
transporter, yet it had to be accepted, as no other vehicle could be made available.
No higher powered engines were available in this country, and it was impractic-
able to rely on U.S. production of a type not yet listed on the Army Supply
Programme. It is only just to the manufacturers to record that they protested,
ultimately to the C.I.G.S., that the vehicle which they had designed for roads
was being improperly employed for cross-country work, and that they undertook
to remedy defects.
It was also by no means certain whether tests of the
vehicle as a transporter were ever satisfactorily completed before production
started.6
The fact remained, however, that some 750 inefficient vehicles were
employed in North Africa and in Great Britain for want of better types, and were
ultimately reduced in rate to a load capacity of 15 tons.
The Sammell and the Albion cobi los were the only transporters produced
with Pritich prime movers but a considerable number of cotisfactory British
See Part I, Chapter 2.
(2) 57/Tanks/3127 May. 1943.
O.W.P.C. Paper "BV."
(3) A fleet of no less than 250 vehicles was required at British ports alone for the carriage
of Sherman tanks, the dimensions of chic was require great for transport by rail.
(1) 57/Vehs A/1206.
(*) See Chapter V.
(*) D.M.E. 57/Vehs A/1206.
98
WO 27 1/h
28
9
trailers were coupled to U.S. tractors such as the Diamond " T" and Federal
6 × 4.
in existence in 1942.
Appendix E gives the carrying capacity of British and U.S. transporters
From 1942 onwards the Army was entirely dependent upon
IS production for 40-ton transporters and for almost all smaller vehicles of
Section 4.— Air-Portable and Airborne Vehicles
against Japan.
The vital importance of air transport was quickly emphasized in the war
The vast roadless and mountainous territories overrun by the
Japanese would have been the scene of years of fighting had orthodox methods
of supply been adopted.
The first example of the carriage of vehicles by air
was in operations in New Guinea, where Australian forces loaded 3-ton lorries
of standard design into the C.47 Dakota by the simple but drastic method of
cutting the chassis in half and re-assembling with fishplates after delivery.
The
broken down vehicle comprised two aircraft loads and had some logistic advan-
tages over the smaller car 5-cwt., as the normal payload' of the Dakota was
approximately that of a 3-ton lorry.
The Dakota was throughout the war the
standard allied transport aircraft.
Gliders of greater capacity were produced by
the U.S.A. and the United Kingdom for specific operations such as the invasion
of Sicily and of Normandy, but the Dakota remained the yardstick for maximum
vehicle dimensions and weights.
Although considerable attention was given to the subject, no military vehicles
were produced during the war which could be loaded into the Dakota without
dismantling or modification except the obsolete car, 2-seater, 8 h.p., and the
car 5-cwt., 4 x 4 (the Jeep).
For use with the jeep, the trailer, G.S. 10-cwt.,
airborne, was produced, and the entire operational and carrying capacity of the
Airborne Division was therefore based on the combination of these two vehicles.
The Jeep was also used for towing for short distances 40 mm. Bofors, 6-pdr.
A/t gun, 3 • 7 howitzer, and 20 mm. Hispano A.A. and A/tk gun.
Airborne
forces used these vehicles for a very considerable number of other purposes, as,
for example, ambulances, and no less than 29 different modifications were
evolved.
For their special use a standard car 5-cwt. was prepared which was
capable of accepting any or all of these modifications, in the form of a kit which
could be fitted by units as required.
This was known as " the basic Jeep."? It
is here perhaps necessary to note the distinction between the airborne and the
air-portable vehicle.
The former had to travel ready for operational use : the
latter could be carried dismantled and, if necessary, as a load for more than one
Although no larger airborne vehicle than the car 5 evt, was produced,
very great ingenuity was displayed in the design and development of smaller
self-propelled forms of transport, notably by Polish and Czechoslovak forces in
the United Kingdom.
These included :3
A 3-wheeled vehicle with a small motor-cycle engine. The useful load
was 396 lb., the tare 115 lb.
Its speed was 3-5 m.p.h., and it could be
driven by one man.
(1) 5,500 Ib., including 200 lb. of lashings.
(3) D.S.W.V. Liaison Letter, No. 27.
(*) Paper by D.D. Air lot 213d Meeting O.W.P.C., 15 April, 1943.
99
