WO2776
78
9
APPENDIX F
AIR-PORTABILITY OF 3-TON VEHICLES
The data given below by the Army Air Training and Development Centre
were provisional, but provide some indication of the labour problem involved.
addition to the
work described, it was necessary to remove the rear
14-16 inches of the offside mainframe of every vehicle except the Austin to allow
for manœuvring into position.
The Austin chassis, which was longer, could be
made air-portable only by cutting the frame in half.
Re-assembly in each case
was by fish-plates.
A 5,000-mile vehicle life was accepted after modifications
had been carried out.
All dismantling and re-assembly times assumed a team
of four men, two of whom were vehicle mechanies, R.E.M.E., Class I or Il, the
remainder driver-mechanics.
Bedford, QL, 3-ton, 4 x 4 G.S.
Dismantling includes removing from the chassis the complete driver's
cab, the body, both axle and spring assemblies, petrol tank and spare wheel
assembly, etc.
division of body longitudinally.
Approximate Times.-
Dismantling :
30 man-hours.
Modifications : 60 fitter-hours.
Re-assembly :
40-man-hours.
Ford, WOT6, 3-ton, 4 x 4 G.S.
Dismantling includes removing from the chassis the complete driver's cab,
body, axle and spring assemblies, rear torque tubes, petrol tank and spare wheel
assembly, exhaust system, steering gear, etc.
Modifications.—As for Bedford QL.
Estimated Times.—
Dismantling :
60 man-hours.
Modifications : 60 fitter-hours.
Re-assembly :
80 man-hours.
Karrier K6, 3-ton, 4 x 4, with Winch.
Modifications.—None to chassis.
Estimated Times.—
Dismantling:
16 man-hours.
18 man-hours.
Division of body.
108
CHAPTER XII
THE FINAL ACHIEVEMENT
Section 1.—The Divorce of Military from Commercial Design
The war made it very clear that shortcomings in the quality of military
vehicles of British manufacture were due in a very large measure to reliance
upon engines and chassis designed for commercial purposes with the object of
avoiding penal taxation.
In Chapter VIII it has been shown that there were a
few—a very few-people who had grasped this fact soon after the 1914-18 war.
By 1944, the fact had become an accepted principle within the War Office and
the Ministry of Supply, but was perhaps not so apparent to the motor industry.
To the Army, however, the divorce between military and commercial require-
ments had become absolute.
A paper' prepared by the A.C.I.G.S.(W) and
D.S. W.V. for the O.W.P.C. in 1944 puts the War Office attitude very clearly :—
• " In the British Army as it exists to-day there are some 55 different
types of " B" vehicles within the Infantry division and some 600 different
types, makes and contracts within the Army as a whole, thus putting an
almost impossible load upon the maintenance and spares organizations
both in the field and at home.
Great credit is due to the R.A.O.C. and
the R.E.M.E. for their ability to provide and maintain all the various
" B" vehicles all over the world during the present war.
The existing unsatisfactory state of affairs was forced upon the
Army by pre-war policy whereby, for reasons of economy, it was compelled
to rely upon British automobile manufacturers to supply its needs on a
voluntary basis.
In consequence, when war did break out, the most that
could be done was to produce makeshift military vehicles from current
components used for the manufacture of commercial vehicles.
•.. Experience gained since 1939 has proved conclusively not only
that commercial vehicles are quite unsuitable for the use of the Army in
the field, but also that the tendency has been for the Army to require vehicles
which depart more and more from commercial design.
The result is that
the true Army vehicle now has little commercial value, and vice versa.
The
commercial vehicle must be designed for economical use on good roads,
clearance is of little importance and only sufficient power is required to
enable it to operate on average roads.
Military needs so differ from civil
requirements that vehicles for Army use
nowadays must be specially
designed and built."
The statement could not be more clearly put. It is only necessary to add
that it is not possible to rely on any foreign country for the production of any
equipments for service use and that, in consequence, the military vehicle must be
capable of manufacture in the United Kingdom or the Dominions.
Start Policy P.C./P(4)46, 23 Sept., 1944.
"Post-war design of 'B' vehicles: General
109
(C31438)
