26. Ball Bearings.—In order to reduce to a minimum the stock of spares to
be carried in the field, ball bearings, when used on any parts of the vehicles, are
to be of the sizes described below, and to the dimensions given in the catalogue
of the Hoffman Manufacturing Company, Limited.
Parallel Hole.
Medium Type Ball Bearings.
Hoffman's type.
No.
Diameter of hole, inches
Other dimensions as per table in catalogue.
Roller bearings not to be used.
The standard ball bearings supplied in magnetos are not included in the
27. Thrust Washers.—Corresponding to each of the above sizes there will
be standardized a light type single thrust washer.
2 in. and 2} in. medium
type single thrust washers may also be used.
Dimensions as per standards in Hoffman's catalogue.
It should be noted that whereas the dimensions are fixed on as being to one
particular maker's sizes, the War Department does not wish to prevent other
makes being used so long as they conform to the sizes given and could be
replaced in case of failure by bearings to Hoffman's standard.
28. Screw Threads.—British standard screw threads to be used throughout
the vehicles, vide Publications Nos. 21, 39 (which includes 20, 28 and 38), 34,
45 and 54 of the Engineering Standards Committee.
29. Universal Joints.—Universal joints (where exposed) and steering joints
must be protected with leather covers.
30. Knuckle Joints.—Knuckle joints must be made with hardened steel
removable bushes and hard steel pins with Thackeray spring washers to take up
side play or rattle. Pin is to be fitted with a dowel and to be of the size shown
in drawing so that the renewable parts of these joints may be interchangeable,
vide Drawing No. 104, which shows two sizes of joint.
31. Brakes.—Two brakes must be fitted, one hand and the other a foot
pedal brake, the latter operating on propeller shaft.
The brake operating on
brake drums fixed to the driving wheels should be compensated. The brakes
should be readily adjustable by hand without the use of tools.
adjustment must be in accessible positions.
The brakes must hold equally well in either direction and must each
independently be capable of stopping and holding the vehicle when fully loaded
on an incline of 1 in 5.
In case of Class " A" vehicles, water tank, capacity about 1 gallon, to be
fitted on dash, with a visible drip to lead to propeller shaft, for the purpose of
cooling it-cock to be opened automatically when foot brake is applied.
WO277/56
78
32. Towing Hooks.—Four towing hooks of standard pattern to be fitted,
two in front and two in rear, vide Drawings Nos. 105 and 106. Those at back
to be fixed to frame with two g-in. rivets or bolts. Those in front to swivel in
the dumb irons, and to be fitted with standard bolt and with No. 2 Rotherham
indicator.
If necessary, frame to be strengthened at rear end to prevent any damage
being done to it should the towing hooks be used even at an angle of i5 degrees
from the longitudinal axis of the vehicle.
33. Undershield.-Undershield to be fitted with spring clips so as to be
readily removable without the use of tools. Shield to extend as far back as
gear box.
34. Lamps and Lamp Brackets.—All vehicles to be fitted with side and tail
lamp brackets suitable for taking Lucas "King of the Road" lamps, vide
Drawing No. 115.
Provision to be made for carrying three 7-in. Rushmore headlamps, vide
The position of these will be, two low down, one on each side of the vehicle
in the usual positions, and one high up on canopy on left of vehicle, mounted
in such a way as to prevent stray rays of light going into the driver's eyes.
An acetylene generator of approved type is to be carried and tubing is to be
fitted, including any necessary cocks, for connecting it to the three lamps,
although these latter need not necessarily be carried, and only one need be
maintained by the owner for the purposes of the subsidy scheme.
35. Wheel Base.—To be not less than 13 ft. in the case of Class "A"
vehicles and 10 ft. 6 in. for Class " B" vehicles.
36. Platform Area.—To be not less than 12 ft. by 6 ft. in the case of
Class " A " vehicles, and not less than 9 ft. by 5 ft. 6 in. in the case of Class " B"
Larger sizes will, however, be preferred.
37. Body. —Types of body to be accepted by the War Department should
have detachable sides and ends at least 2 ft. high, with frame for complete
A certain number of box bodies will, however, be accepted.
Wheel races should preferably not be used.
Should owners require to use in commercial working other types of bodies
which are not acceptable for the purposes of the subsidy scheme, they must
also keep in store a body which has been passed by the War Department.
Longitudinal runners to be fitted on floor of body.
The specification to which the War Department is now purchasing bodies
is given below for guidance, but other bodies will be accepted if considered
suitable. Present specification reads as under :-
Bodies are to have fixed fronts about 5 ft. high.
Movable sides, 2 ft. 6 in.
Hinged tail boards, 2 ft. 6 in. high.
and fit into steel sockets, stanchions to be taper and steel shod.
tail board to be of approved design.
(C31499)
