The impressment scheme, although it worked well as a means of obtaining
vehicles quickly, could obviously have no influence whatever upon the design
of vehicles suitable for the Army.
All hope of such influence upon commercial
development disappeared on the death of subsidies, and until the beginning of
the rearmament programme, which was in any case too late, the War Office
could do little more than keep military production alive by placing small orders
for special purposes, such as gun-tractors and workshops, recovery and break-
Such small orders naturally appealed most to comparatively
small firms specializing in high quality vehicles and not easily able to increase
production materially in the event of war.
The situation regarding special
vehicles changed very little when rearmament began, as the demand was largely
for the type of vehicle most suitable provided by mass-production.
one reason why production capacity in this country for heavy vehicles such as
tank transporters was throughout the war infinitesimal in comparison to
Another reason was, of course, the surrender of appropriate factories
to production of other munitions, which has been described in the preceding
During this same period when the production of purely military
vehicles was at its lowest, the whole trend of commercial design was towards
vehicles of low weight, low power and low road clearance-all characteristics
directly in contradiction to military requirements, and especially to military
requirements in the Middle East.
However, as has been said before, this state
of affairs was regarded with comparative equanimity in the first year of the war
when " time was on our side" and any temporary shortages of vehicles could be
made up from the normal production of commercial vehicles.
recorded that the Ministry of Supply did not take so benign a view, protesting
strongly against the size and the unexpectedness of the demands of the enlarged
expeditionary force. However, demands for the B.E.F. were met in some form
or another, and to such a degree that there was at one time a proposal to reduce
the excessive quantities of R.A.S.C. vehicles in France and to rely more upon
that country's excellent railway services.! The day was soon to come when the
demands which appeared so vast and impossible of execution were to pale into
Section 2.—The Position after the Evacuation of France and the
Problem to be Solved
Tables are shown at Appendices A and B to this chapter which provide
figures of vehicle holdings of the B.E.F. before and after the evacuation of
France. These tables also indicate statistically the importance of the contribution
made to the Army's resources by impressment.
The losses in the evacuation,
which amounted to nearly 90,000 vehicles, represented in effect the whole of
the transport of the B.E.F. In retrospect the magnitude of the loss may
possibly
have been slightly alleviated by the corresponding loss of any
lingering traces of self-satisfaction over the country's productive capabilie,
There was no consolation in this thought at the time, and the problem of
replacement was only complicated by the growing realization of the ineficieng
of the transport which had been lost. Not only had even greater quantities of
vehicles to be produced than at the beginning of the war, but at the same time
it was essential that there should be a great improvement in design, at least ol
(1) See Part I, Chapter I.
42
WO 277/26
78
those intended for operational use in the Western Desert. The first requirement
in improvement of quality was the introduction of 4-wheel drive, on the
development of which some work had fortunately been carried out before the
war.l Reliable designs and at least one reliable vehicle, the Morris-Commercial
field artillery tractor, had been produced. It was not possible at such a moment,
when any vehicle was better than none, to manufacture all vehicles to this
design, but the Ministry of Supply did succeed in pressing forward development
work upon re-designing the more satisfactory commercial 4 x 2 types and
arranging for future production in quantity, without disturbing the flow of
vehicles of orthodox design.?
This was a very remarkable achievement, as
although as many standard components as possible were used, it was necessary
to design front axles, transfer boxes, many engine details, and the general
layout of the chassis to obtain correct weight distribution. It was, however,
like all design and development work, a slow process, in which delays were
caused by a number of circumstances.
shortage of factories capable of producing axle forgings.
There was a natural
reluctance on the part of manufacturers to depart, in this hour of emergency,
from the production of the vehicles to which they were accustomed, and which
in their opinion were quite adequate for the Army's needs.
The greatest
obstacles to re-equipment were of course the total absence of any priority of
labour or materials and the loss of much potential production capacity to the
manufacture of A.F.V.s and aircraft.
It was at once apparent that however great the ingenuity of the Ministry of
Supply, the resources of Great Britain were not equal to the task of re-equipment,
can that th in hope of achieving i lay in sproducion by the some what
optimistic but inspiring cry.
The ways in which North America did in fact
produce the tools has been described already in some detail, but it may be
permitted to recall two salient facts. First, the Canadian automobile industry
was already familiar with British requirements, and as the result of far-sighted
negotiations before the war had at least one factory equipped for the production
of vehicles to General Staff specifications.
Second, the United States industry,
although capable of a gigantic and sustained effort, was not prepared for British
requirements and was in fact sceptical of their value.
standardization were no strangers to the U.S.A., but it was naturally repugnant
to American feeling to contemplate adjustment of their factories to the standards
of another country. However, in general it was ultimately possible to persuade
both the U.S. War Department and manufacturers of the value of the most
important of British special requirements, 4 the need for which had been learnt
from bitter practical experience, and in the meantime the general mechanical
superiority of the U.S. vehicle over its British commercial counterpart helped
to close the gap between the ideal and the obtainable. In any case, this was
not the time to insist upon production of advanced designs. The needs was for
the greatest quantity of equipment of reasonable efficiency in the shortest
• D.D.G.Mech., Ministry of Supply, for 43rd meeting, Wheeled Vehicles
(3) Part I, Chapter V.
(*) e.g., the single wheel for back axles fitted with low pressure tyres for desert work.
43
