18. Transmission.—The power must not be transmitted through the rear
springs.
Preferably an enclosed propeller shaft should be used with a combined
radius and torque member ending in a universal joint.
When the propeller shaft is not enclosed, guards are to be fixed in suitable
positions round it, in order to prevent accidents occurring in case the shaft
becomes detached or broken at either end.
19. Front Axle.—The bearings of the front wheels are standardized so as to
make the wheels interchangeable.
The stub arm is to be of the dimensions shown.
Steering arms, etc., must come inside the lines indicated, vide Drawing No. 100c.
Design of front axle arms is the same for both classes of vehicle.
20. Ground Clearance.—The minimum ground clearance using hind road
wheels of 1,050 mm. and 1,020 mm. diameter respectively in the cases of
Class "A" and Class "B" vehicles to be 12 in. measured with new tyres.
A greater clearance than 12 in. would be preferred.
21. Wheels and Tyres.—Wheels to be fitted with solid rubber tyres of the
band type and of the following sizes :—
Class "A"
Hind wheels .
Front wheels
1,050 mm. by 120 mm. twin.
900 mm. by 120 mm. single.
Class " B"
Hind wheels.
1,020 mm. by 90 mm. twin.
Front wheels
860 mm. by 90 mm. single.
Wheels are to be made entirely of steel and of the following diameters :—
Diameter.
Circumference.
For 1,020 mm. and 1,050 mm. tyres
9 ft. 11 in.
For 860 mm. by 900 mm. tyres
7 ft. 51 in.
the object being to have two sizes only of wheel centres for the various sizes and
sections of tyres.
Should purchasers desire to have wider section tyres fitted, they may fit
1,030 by 100 mm., or 870 by 100 mm. tyres on the smaller vehicles, and 1,070 by
140 mm. or 910 by 140 mm. tyres on the larger vehicles, provided the diameter
of the steel centres remains the same, but no increased subsidy can be given in
chassis.
Front wheel stops must be provided to prevent the tyres from fouling the
In order to ensure that tyres can be easily removed from any wheel centres
with presses that may be used on the field, the flanges on the steel centres must
not exceed 3 • 32 in. in height.
22. Non-skids for Use in Snow. - Supplies of these will be borne by the
War Department.
To allow of their being fitted, there must be a minimum
clearance of 1z in., under all conditions, between the driving wheels and frame
or body, to allow of chains or ropes being fitted over the tyres.
WO 27 1/26
28
23. Control.—Shown on Prints Nos. 103d and 103g. Clutch pedal on left,
brake pedal on right.
Distance between centres, etc., shown on Print No. 103g.
Pedals to be marked " C" and " B" respectively.
Travel of pedals to be about 3z in.
Accelerator pedal may be fitted if required.
right of the brake pedal.
If provided, it is to be on the
An efficient clutch-stop to be provided.
Clutch and brake pedals to be provided with flanges, 4 in. high, to prevent
the foot from slipping off them.
should be provided.
Means of adjusting slope of the top of pedal
Clutch and brake pedals are to work independently of
each other, and to be fitted with springs of such a strength that the drivers can
keep their feet on them continuously if desired.
Other dimensions as per drawing.
103d shows the position of the handle of change-speed lever in various gears.
The maximum variation allowed from these is 1 in. neutral, first, second, third,
and fourth speeds ; but in reverse position greater latitude will be allowed.
(Note.—The above allows of considerable difference in the position of pivot
of change-speed lever.)
Brake lever to be well away from change-speed lever, and to the right of it.
Change-speed lever to be 6 in. shorter than brake lever, and to be finished off
Brake lever to have plain cylindrical handle, in order to
prevent any confusion arising as to which is which of the two levers.
of levers with reference to driver are shown in drawing referred to.
Gate Change-speed.—Two slots and two selectors only are to be fitted, the
reverse being a continuation of the first speed slot.
change-speed lever to be fitted for reverse.
24. Levers for Throttle and Ignition.—Both to have their movement inde-
pendent of that of the steering column, and to be placed underneath and to the
right of it, as shown in Print No. 103g.
Both levers to move forward to increase speed of engine.
move on a rack and to have plate marked so as to show what their movements
Movement of each lever to be 90 degrees, the handles being at
right angles to the main axis of the vehicle when in the centre of their travel.
Throttle may be operated by hand lever only, or by hand lever combined
with foot accelerator, in such a way that on releasing the foot accelerator the
throttle returns to the position set by the hand lever.
(Note.—Arrangements for control are illustrated by means of a working
model, which is available for inspection by appointment, in the office of
Secretary, Mechanical Transport Committee, War Office.)
25. Steering. —To be so arranged as to give 76 degrees of movement to the
front wheels, i.e., 38 degrees from normal position to maximum lock on
either side.
To give this lock, two complete turns of steering wheel are to be made.
(Relative movement of hand wheel and road wheel will be as 9½: 1.)
(C31438)
