to carry about double the load of the rear axles of the other two types.
The
range of artillery towers appeared to him to be extravagant, as it involved six
basic types for two artillery roles-the " Light" and " Medium" (with which
" Heavy
"was now combined).
The three-quarter tracked 180 B.H.P. vehicle
seemed under-powered if it was to carry armour.
His final recommendations
were that the 6 x 6, 30-cwt. and the 4 x 4, 3-ton chassis should be abandoned,
and that the types of artillery tractor should be reduced to four, which would
leave six basic types for design, development, spare parts provision and main-
tenance.
The revised policy paper, which had been prepared both to clear the air within
the War Office and to provide the Ministry of Supply, which was anxious to
start work upon designs and the production of prototypes, with a firm indication
of the types of chassis to be adopted, was considered by the O.W.P.C. on 22nd
January
1945.
Arms directors had already approved the proposals in principle,
and A.C.I.G.S.(W) suggested that the main questions to be considered were : —
(a) Was there a requirement either for the 15-cwt. or the 30-cwt. or for
both ?
(b) Should the armoured division be equipped on a three-quarter tracked or
fully tracked basis?
(c) Was the statement too specific at that stage of the war ?
The first question was answered by a broad decision that there was a require-
ment for a light load carrier on a 6 x 6 chassis, which should also be capable
of employment as a light artillery tractor.
The other two questions were
virtually answered by the S.A./A.C. and D.T.I., who pointed out that one of the
major advances in military technology was likely to lie in the development of
improved methods of movement independent of roads.
A policy based upon
existing knowledge would thus have limitations and should not exclude provision
for the development and adoption of radically new ideas when the necessary
investigations had been carried out.
Such investigations could not be carried
out in war.
D.C.I.G.S. summed up the general opinion by saying that it would
be premature to issue a formal statement of General Staff policy at this stage.
Experience of fighting in Europe and in the Far East had still to be analysed.
The possibilities of air transport had not been fully investigated, and final policy
would obviously be affected by the fundamental study proposed by S.A./A.C.
and D.T.I.
It was, however, essential to authorize forthwith the production of
prototype vehicles and to state an order for priority of development.
The
statement prepared by the A.C.I.G.S. (W) and D.S.W.V. made this possible and
also furnished a valuable guide to the "B" Vehicle Committee, a joint War
Office and Ministry of Supply body shortly to come into existence.
The Ministry of Supply was therefore provided with a table showing the
prototype chassis, engines and bodies which the War Office required to be
designed and produced as soon as possible, listed in the order of priority in
which they were to be developed.
(1) 49th Meeting, O.W.P.C., 22 Jan., 1945.
(3) Considered later in this chapter.
(3) 86/Research/36, 15 Feb., 1945.
116
28
9
The table was as follows :—
Serial
Chassis
(a).
B.H.P.
Types of Body(a).
Priority.
2(b)
10
4 × 4
4 × 4
British light car
90
Staff car; scout car; 3-ton, including some tech
nical bodies
light artillery tractor (d).
6 × 6
ight load-carrier G.S. (c) ; light artillery tractor
ight ambulanc
6 × 6
135
3-ton,
including some technical bodies; heavy
ambulance.
6 × 6
180
3-10mg in
including some
technical bodies; 10-ton
field and anti-tank artillery tractors.
6 × 6
350
ank transporters
medium
artillery
tractors;
termediate and heavs
A.A. tractors; heavy
breakdowns ; heavy tractors.
tracked.
180
Field and anti-tank artillery
tractors; load and
passenger carrying vehicles;
some
technica
sodies
tracked.
350
Medium
heavy
breakdown,
artillery
intermediate and heavy A.A. tractors.
180
Field and anti-tank artillery tractors; load and
1(e)
technical
vehicles;
some
Huly
tracked
passenger
carrying
bodies.
350
Medium artillery
heavy breakdown,
2(e)
Fully
tracked.
(a) Wheeled and -tracked chassis and associated bodies to be considered for transport
intermediate and heavy A.A. tractors.
by air.
(b) A chassis was already being designed for carriage in the Dakota.
(c)
30-cwt. payload most desirable, but the vehicle must not be greater in silhouette than
the obsolete !
6 vehicle in Serial 3, plus the new light artillery gur
Minise orials -8 and 9m0 inclusive were at that if the responsibility of tivo separate
of Supply departments-hence the duplication of priorities.
These steps towards a firm policy for future design of " B" vehicles were the
last to be taken while the war was still in progress, and are therefore also the
last which can be discussed in detail in this book, the terms of reference of which
It may be permissible to add,
are bounded by the conclusion of the war.
however, that General Staff Policy Statement No. 35, published in November,
1945, upon which all the later recommendations described were based, remained
official doctrine until as late as 1947, when a revised statement was issued - much
less ambitious in which the pre-war policies of subsidy and employment of
commercial vehicles were recommended as part of the scheme for post-war
equipment.
This melancholy return to the status quo was, of course, owing to
what is known as " financial stringency.
117
