difficult country.
The report began by stating that the Terrain possessed few
advantages
and many disadvantages over the
comparable wheeled
amphibian, the DUKW.
Its advantages lay in the simplicity of its construction.
Since there was no suspension proper, the whole of the power train lay within
the hull and was only exposed to salt water shipped during operation.
was consequently little opportunity for corrosion.
There
As there was no normal
steering or suspension the components of the vehicle were considerably reduced.
and were easily accessible for maintenance.
With its eight large driving wheels
its cross-country performance was superior to that of the DUKW.
disadvantages afloat were instability, inability to negotiate surf greater than
3 ft., and bad " manœuvrability."
On land it was slow, clumsy to handle and
tiring to drive.
General criticisms were that its additional load capacity of
1 ton was of no great value as it was divided into two holds, that it had no
winch, that it was unsuitable for the carriage of artillery or casualties,' and that
the deck height from the ground was too great.
As a result the considered
opinion of C.O.X.E., which was accepted by C.O.H.Q. and the War Office,
was that
"... no attempt to modify
this amphibian
be undertaken.
Complete re-design would be the only possible remedy and it is doubtful
even then if any re-design in its present form would sufficiently improve
its performance to make it comparable to that of the DUKW."
A meeting had been held as early as 10th August, 1943, by the V.Q.M.G.
to consider the situation likely to be caused by the prospective failure of
Terrapin, Mark I, from which several general conclusions emerged.? Among
these were the following :—
(a) that the DUKW was acceptable as the amphibian vehicle to tranship
assault stores from ship to shore and from shore to dump ;
(b) that in spite of its drawbacks the order for 500 Terrapin, Mark I,
should stand as an insurance against a U.S. failure to meet full
British requirements for DUKWs ;
(c) that due to its size and weight the Argosy was unlikely to be of value
to the Army in its present form and that in any case it was very unlikely
to be available for operations in 1944 but that its development would
however continue;
(d) that
there was
requirement for a wheeled
amphibian
vehicle
manufactured in Great Britian or Canada, for the transportation
ashore of stores other than assault stores ;
(e) that a re-design of the Terrapin should be considered so as to provide
large holds in order to carry more bulky items of equipment and to
facilitate loading and discharge.
A new specification for a British wheeled amphibian was therefore prepared,
in which some of the severe limitations of weight and dimensions imposed on
Terrapin, Mark I, were removed.
(2) 57/ Vehs A/1499.
(* Neither of these requirements were included in the specification.
72
WO277
28
The major alterations in design were an increase in length and breadth to
31 ft. and 8 ft., in unladen weight to 10 tons, and in hold dimensions to a
minimum of 12 ft. x 7 ft. x 3 ft.
Development of the new design, known as
Terrapin, Mark II, was carried out while the Mark I was still being manufactured
and prototypes were expected to be available in September, 1944, soon after
the completion of the original order for 500.
Sanction for the production of
three prototypes had been given on 28th August, 1943, but considerable delays
were experienced in the manufacture of components as no priority had been
stated by the Ministry of Supply, in spite of the fact that the vehicle was placed
third in the War Office Development Priority List?
Further delays were
caused by the inability of the War Office to obtain from C.O.H.Q. details vital
to construction such as the position of lifting eyes.
The Ministry of Supply
complained that lack of information on this point alone held up construction
for many weeks.
In January, 1944, the Ministry of Supply became anxious to know what were
likely to be the minimum quantity requirements for Terrapin, Mark II, so that
production capacity could be allocated and preparations made for production.
The requirement was stated by the War Office to be 4,000,3 this figure being
originally based on the demand of S.A.C.S.E.A. for 8,000 wheeled amphibians
in 1944 45, against which existed a tentative A.S.P. provision of 3,500 DUK Ws
and the 500 Terrapins, Mark I, in the course of production.
These requirements
for the Far East were drastically curtailed as the result of the Sextant Conference,
and financial approval for production of 4,000 vehicles was ultimately obtained
by D.S.W.V. on grounds of general expediency.* His first argument was based
on personal knowledge, and on interviews with commanders of amphibian
operations in the Pacific, in which it was generally accepted that larger quantities
of amphibious vehicles would have resulted in easier success, fewer casualties,
or, at the least, avoidance of failure.
He also pointed out that even if there was
no paper justification for such an order there was an ever present danger of
United Kingdom production being delayed or even stopped by enemy action,
and that there was no guarantee that A.S.P. provision would be confirmed or
met in full.
The order was in fact later reduced to 2,000, when it was found
that Canada, which was to have undertaken half the contract, could not begin
production until November, 1945.
The Canadian share of the order was
therefore cancelled.
By August, 1944, the first prototype of Terrapin, Mark II, was undergoing
Ministry of Supply trials at Hayling Island. Liaison between the Ministry and
C.O.H.Q. was arranged at an early stage in the hope that all necessary tests,
including any to be made by the Director of Naval Construction, might be
carried out in the first instance with the prototype and subsequently with a
production model, in order to avoid a repetition of the unfortunate situation
which arose in the case of Terrapin, Mark I.5 A demonstration of the per-
formance
the
re-designed
vehicle
was arranged by the Ministry on
20th September, 1944, but the War Office cautiously refused to accept it as
(*) A.C.I.G.S. to D. of M. 57/Vehs A/1499.
(3) A.C.I.G.S. to C.G.M.P. 57/Vehs A/1499, 27 Nov., 1943.
(3) D.D.V. to D.D.G. Mech.
57/Vehs A/1449, 26 Jan., 1944.
(4) 57/Vehs A/1499.
Minute 74, dated 28 Mar., 1944.
(*) 57/ Vehs A/1499 D.S. W.V. to C.O.H.Q., 5 Aug, 1944.
73
