iii) half-tracked, based on an improved British version of U.S. types,
for use as a field gun tower, and to replace all types of 15-cwt.
vehicles and light ambulances.
All vehicles of this type were
to be fitted with light armour sufficient to provide bullet-proof
protection on front and sides and under-belly protection
against mines;
(d) Heavy.—Based on a 350 B.H.P. engine.
This was to be a 6 x 6 type
to replace the existing range of medium and heavy tractors, heavy
breakdown vehicles and tank transporters.
Wheeled and tracked
amphibians were also to use this engine.
The main type of bodies necessary for this new range of vehicles were
considered to be—
Medium Class : G.S. load carrier ; -
house type for Signals, R.A., R.E., R.E.M.E., R.A.O.C.,
R.A.M.C., H.Q. offices, etc., where trailers were not
operationally suitable ;
armoured personnel carriers ;
tractors
for
R.A.
equipments
(armoured
and
unarmoured);
tractors for semi-trailers.
Heavy Class :
tractors (R.A.) ;
breakdown;
transporters;
amphibians.
The introduction of trailers was regarded as of major importance in future
vehicle policy, for by their use an essential reduction could be made in the
existing vast numbers of different bodies fitted to powered vehicles.
In addition,
trailers, whether G.S. or of special type, could materially reduce the numbers of
prime movers required and also increase the basic loads transported by each
prime mover.
Types of trailers envisaged were :—
(a) G.S. load carriers ;
(b) house types for specialist vehicles ;
(c) semi-trailers for G.S. and transporter work ;
(d) specialist trailers.
These recommendations were not intended to replace detailed G.S. specifica-
tions, which would continue to lay down the requirements and characteristics of
individual types of vehicles, but to provide a framework within which all such
specifications must fit, and to set a standard of performance and quality appro-
priate to the intended employment of the vehicle.
In addition to essential class
requirements already considered, there were certain other qualities demanded
of all " B" vehicles, such as rugged construction, reliability and ease of mainte-
nance, a good turning circle and simplicity in manœuvring. Further, all vehicles
were to be waterproofed in manufacture to the greatest possible degree, and
attention was to be paid to air-portability. For this latter requirement, the
possihility of constructing certain vehicles either wholly or partially of licht alloy
required investigation.
Standardized draw-bar gear was essential, and a con-
siderable numher of vahinlae including all towers. would require to be fitted
with winches working fore and aft.
112
W027;
28
9
These proposals, which
were set forth by the A.C.I.G.S.(W) and the
D.S.W.V. in a memorandum for the consideration of the O.W.P.C.I may best be
summed up in the authors' own words :—
" The M.T. of the post-war Army should be based upon the minimum
number of engines and transmissions, and as many components as possible
within this range of engines and transmissions should be interchangeable,
so easing the repair and maintenance problems.
The types which appear most
useful for Army use are wheeled vehicles with four or six-wheeled drive
and half-tracks.' Bodies must also be standardized and reduced to the
minimum compatible with efficiency, while the use of trailers should be
greatly extended.
Empire.
All types must be manufactured within the British
A clear-cut G.S. policy regarding the post-war requirements of "B"
vehicles from the design aspect is required now in order that early steps
may be taken to investigate the ways and means of implementing such [a]
policy."
This outline of policy for the future design of " B" vehicles was accepted in
principle by the O.W.P.C. and promulgated, with a very few amendments,
as General Staff Policy Statement No. 35, on 15th November, 1944.
The state-
ment was written in broad terms and after it was issued the whole question was.
reviewed with the object of providing the Ministry of Supply with fuller details:
of the Army's requirements.
A further paper? was therefore prepared by the
A.C.I.G.S. (W) and D.S.W.V. for the consideration of the Committee, clarifying
the original proposals and incorporating certain amendments.
It appeared
shortly after the opening of discussions" between the Ministry of Supply and
representatives of the motor industry on the subject of vehicle provision for the
Army, but before the final conclusions reached at these discussions had been
published.
Sufficient was known, however, of the probable outcome for the
paper to record that it was generally agreed, and not merely a War Office opinion,
that army types of vehicles now differed so widely from civilian requirements
that the major part of the Army's requirements could not be met from normal
types in civilian production; but that, in order, in time of war, to make the best
use of the existing productive capacity of the motor industry, the range of
smaller types of army vehicles should, when practicable, be within the capacity
of existing tooling.
Some amendments to the number of classes of vehicles were proposed, it
being pointed out, for example, that the earlier proposals had contained no
provision for a vehicle of the 15-cwt. type.
Such vehicles comprised a large
class in the Army, particularly in infantry formations, but it was generally
accepted that the load was uneconomical.
In the form of a 4 x 4, it was.
possible that cross country performance might not be sufficient for use in for-
ward areas, but it was considered both difficult and uneconomical to design a
15-cwt. 6 x 6 vehicle.
On the other hand the 3-ton lorry was too large and too
unwieldy for forward company areas.
It was therefore suggested that it might
be necessary to produce a 30-cwt. 6 x 6 load and passenger carrying vehicle to
(*) O.W.P.C./P(44)46, 23 Sept., 1944, for consideration at 46th Meeting, O.W.P.C.
(2) O. W.P.C./P(45)44, 18 Jan., 1945.
(3) Considered later in this chapter.
113
