pg_0001.pdf:
* Formations and units belonging to the Canadian, Army will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate.
9. GENERAL.
Assignment of copies of the war diary.
When an operation order, appreciation, letter laying, down policy
or other important document is prepared, two copies will be made at the time specifically for the war diary.
command is esperson that copies of all important documents should be placed in the wat
diary,
including
and demi-official messages which contain instructions of operational importance.
Grouping of the Appendices. The appendices will be assembled in the GROUPS shown on the cover,
NOT in simple chronological order. This is intended to make assembly and reference easy.
Where there are no documents to be included in the appendices the word "NIL" should be entered in
the appropriate space in the index.
units the resea i pread dina a pendices a see ale for the braced of entain hind wine or for certain.
10. NOTES.
Appendix " A."
The forms which constitute this appendix are intended for use by operational units and
headquarters of divisions and
DelOw.
The form will be completed whether the unit or formation is engaged in
active operations or not.
Month & Year
JU. 44
Place
COLTEVILLE
Date
COLLEVITTE
COLLEVILLE
COLLEVILLE
COLLEVILTE
COLLEVILLE
5
• COLIVELE
APPENDICES.
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted.
(b)
Intermediate movements of unit or formation.
8, pa go and of the an or the ty on derand genior sai odies. It is equaly
Appendix letter and folio number; and, only if necessary, a very brief note of the contents.
f) Brief notes of the time of receipt and issue of orders and important messages and a reference to the
e) Note of how time not accounted for above was spent. The type of training, etc., should be specified
(d) Note of any administrative difficulties encountered and action taken to overcome them.
Nature and description of field engineering works constructed.
Notes of how orders were carried out.
a precis to a pera ton with shol copporaphical and climatic factors affecting them.
8. The narrative should be written up daily.
It should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give
NARRATIVE (AF C 2118)
routine. The narrative is intended to supply information not given in the appendices.
will be conveyed in appendices consisting, with one exception, of copies of documents issued and received in normal
7. In order to ensure accuracy and completeness and to save work, as much important information as possible
offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
officer.
It is a secret document.
The extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a war diary is an
6. The war diary will be signed once, as a report, by the commander of a unit, head of a branch, or senior staff
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
covered and folio numbers of appendices will be shown on the cover.
All details of the unit and formation (if a detachment is concerned, the name of the parent unit), period
(d) Appendices.
c) Narrative;
Index as printed on cover;
(a) Cover;
4. Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of; —
combined war diary as is found convenient.
(e) Heads of Services and their representatives.
(d) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(o) Cont cameras ders,
Commanders of a headquarters or unit on detachment.
on the L. of C.
(a) Each branch of the staff at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and area or sub-area
3. A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: —
GENERAL.
importance that completed diaries should be submitted promptly in accordance with the terms of para. 11 below.
Kingdom in order to extract all possible information of value under ordan above,
It is therefore of the utmost
A section of the War Office has been established to scrutinise war diaries as soon as they arrive in the United
(b) To furnish an historical record of the war.
The views and constructive recommendations of commanders are welcomed for this purpose.
1. The objects of a war diary are two-fold: —
(a) Toon which no mat lure improve en in in sucien deaf pa in sure a from and admovide data
OBJECT.
(F.S.R., VOL. I., 174.)
WAR DIARY
MAR OR
DIARY
Unit: HQ 27 ARMD BDE
In Lieu of AF O 2118.
INTELLIGENGE SUNMARY
Cond Offr. BRIG GE PRIOR-PALMER
Somma ry. of Events and Information
References to Appendices
Very
little happened on the 3 DIV front during the day.
A conference was held at
Bde HQ to discuss the use of Flails AViEs and
CROCODILES and to tie up things for
Operation SHERTOOD.
& Corps were counter-attacked
earlyin the mornin' and success-
fully
"beat-up' the enemy.
30 Corps had a battle in the afternoon and claim to
have KO'a 45 eneny tks.
Bde Cond attended conference at 3 DIV to discuss future plans. No change in the
front ofany note.
13/18 H relieved by U,8 RAC and returned to LUC-SUR-MER for a rest.
27 Arma Bde
had now come under coma 1 Corps.
Nothing to report on the British Sector.
The
Canadians attacked at CARPIQUET early this moming; and took the village and air-
field, they were however forced to withdraw out of part of the airfiad during the
afternoon.
1,8 RAC was put under cond for adm.
Bde Cond visted 13/18 H in the noming. BM and I0 visited HQ 1 Corps and 59 Div
in the evening. Preparation for Operation "CHARNWOOD" continued.
There was a certain
anount of sporadic shelling in the vicinity of Bde HQ at midday.
WAR DIARIES SECTION
No....
G. H.e. 2nd Echelon
Bde Comd attended an "0" Gp at HQ 3 Br Inf Div at 1000 hrs. At 1430 hrs Bde Cond gave
a lecture to all crew conds
on the employment of AVREs, Flails eto.
Bde Cond and BM
attended an "0" Gp at HQ 59 Div at 1800 hrs.
177 Bde today relieved 9 Bde who moved
back to the area BENOUVILTE. Goneral readjustment is taking place prior to "CHARNWOOD" .
Bae Cand held a Co-ordinating conference at 1000 hrs at which all COs (incl 22 Dgns)
attended.
Bde Cond BM and SLO moved out to 59 Div Cond Post at 2300 hrs.
For Oper-
ation "CHAPNWOOD" units of this fmn are placed in sp as follows : - 13/18 H to 175 Bde,
Staffs Yeo to 185 Bde, ERY to 197 Be.
In addition we have u/c 22 Dgns, B San 141
RAC and under control 5 ARE.
The Operation is an attack by 3 Cdn Div,
59 Div and •
3 Br Inf Div to eliminate the enemy pocket NORTH of GAEN. Opposed to this assault
are 25 and 25 PGR sp by ties of 12 Pz Rogt,
2 Bns of 31
CAF Rifle Regt the remonts of
192 PGR and a coy from 22 Pz Regt.
At 2150 hrs Approx 300 Lancasters attacked the
NORTHERN approaches to CAEN with HE and incendiaries.
The results as viewed from
this location were nost specactular.
I Hour for Operation "OJARNOOD" was at 0420 hrs. The advance wes proceeded by a tre-
mendous barrage. Initially, rapid progross vas made and by 1000 hrs 197 Bde within
sp ERY were in GALMANCHE 0173 and woze clausting forward towards ST CONTEST 0072.
175 Bae and 13/18 H had capturod LA BIJUDE 0273 and were fighting in EPRON 0372.
_On the loft 185 Bdo and Steats Ind Coken LEBPY 0472 citer a temporaxy chock.

