pg_0015.pdf:
27 Ari 3de Maintenance
Project
- 2nd 221tion.
Section Ho
FRANEBORT
OVERLORD
TOP SECRET.
64
Copy No......
POLICY
I. Until sufficient tot is available for replenishment on a unit basis all
3-ton G.S. lorries will operate as a Bde pool.
2. Beach Sub Area vehicles landing pre-loaded will either be discharged into
Sector Stores Dumps or Beach Maintenance Area; or in certain cases carry
stores forward to unit location (See Sections
10 and 11).
3. If Beach Sub Area vehicles are used for fwd delivery to units, they must
be off-loaded and returned to Beach Sub Area at once.
Any delay to tpt
by misappropriation will render offenders liable to trial by Court Martial.
LOADS
40
(a)
Appx "C" shows loads of vehicles landing on D and D + 1,
ะช)
Appx "D" shows details of vehicles landing after D + 1, with their
principal loads.
(o)
Natures of amn in G.S. load carriers will be in accordance with table
at Appx "3".
When a partial load only is carried,
reduced as unifornly as practicable in proportion to the overall
reduction in weighte
(a)
Gs Torries will carry 50% petrol and 50% derv, plus normal 6% of
Iubricants and greases.
Petrol and derv should NOT be loaded in the same lorry when this can
be avoided
On D day each ARV will carry as mary jerricans as
possible filled
with derv; jerricans on other vehicles will be filled with petrol.
5. After D + l a proportion of vehicles will be landed from MI coasters.
This will entail restriction of loads as follows:
Vehicles whose unladen weight is less than 5 tons - 5 tons gross weight.
Vehicles whose unladen weight is more than 5 tons
and. less than 10 tons - 10 tons gross weight.
3 ton G.S. lorries loaded on MI Coasters will therefore only be able to
carry a pre-load of 12 tons.
It is doubtful whether information will be
available prior to D day as to which lorries will be loaded on coasters
6. In addition to loads shown, every vehicle landing D to D + ll will carry
a tow-rope attached to front and looped ready for use,
shovel, wirecutters,
and where possible pick.
As many vehicles as possible landing after D + 1]
will also carry the foregoing.
Every B vehicle will carry personnel first-aid box.
up batteries. This will be rofilled as opportunity occurs.
7. All vehicles will have portly filled sandbags placed on the floor beneath
avr and normal passengers.
REPLENISIMINT FROM BMA
8. Replenishment from BMA will be in unit tpt, After D day the following
clock times are allotted to this Bao.
Petrol 1200/1500 hrs.
Supplies 1400/1700 hrs.
Amn may be drawn at any time.

