pg_0088.pdf:
V07794 (87) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Secs. 29 and 30.]
59
Battalion and company headquarters will always be
distributed between several aircraft, so that in the event of a
forced landing of one aeroplane the whole of a headquarters
will not be separated from its command.
4. The orders for a move by air should include instructions
for precautions against fire, for the control of movement
during flight, for action in the event of a forced landing and
for the provision of rations, water, and medical aid. Where
moves by air are frequently undertaken, many of these
instructions will form part of standing orders.
5. The senior army officer will be responsible for the pro-
tection of the place of emplanement and deplanement.
senior officer, whether army or air force, will be responsible for
all other matters affecting the two Services on the ground at
the place of emplanement or deplanment, including the safe-
guarding and issue of rations and water.
He will, however,
consult the senior representative of the other Service before
issuing orders. The responsible air force officer will give orders
to emplane or deplane to the officer or non-commissioned
officer in charge of each party. During the flight troops will
be under the orders of the
senior pilot in charge of the
aeroplane and the air force will be responsible for protection
in the air; but should a landing be made, the senior army
officer or non-commissioned officer will be responsible for
protection from the time that the aeroplane is safely on the
ground.
30. Quarters in the field
(See also Field Service Regulations, Volume I, 1930,
Chapter XVI)
1. Quarters in the field are either billets, close billets,
camps, huts or bivouacs; in position warfare, also dug-outs
and trench shelters.
best shelter and rest and also provide concealment from air
observation. Their chief disadvantage is that they cause
dispersion, so that rapid action in an emergency
may be
difficult, and that discipline is not so easy to maintain.
This
disadvantage of dispersion may be overcome by close billeting,
when as many men and animals as possible are placed under
cover in buildings, while the remainder bivouac close at
hand.
V07794 (87) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

