pg_0163.pdf:
V07794 (162) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
134
[Chap. VII. Sec. 68.
2. He must first consider well his object, which may be
to cover some particular area or feature of strategical or
tactical importance, e.g. a railway, a town, a road junction,
a river crossing; he must arrange to fight his battle at a
sufficient distance in front of the locality which he has to cover
as to ensure its security for the purposes for which it is required,
and to give himself any space which he considers necessary for
manœuvre. If he has no particular feature to secure, e.g. if
his mission is merely to gain time, or if he wishes to induce
the enemy to attack him on ground suitable for a counter-
offensive, he will choose the ground which will best suit his
purpose.
He must also advise himself of the time for which it is
likely that he will have to hold the position, since this will
influence the selection of the position and the depth to which
it is organized.
3. The position must be chosen to suit the size of the force,
having regard to the security of the flanks and to the depth
which is considered necessary in view of the armament and
tactics of the enemy and the time for which the position is
to be held. This demands a well-balanced judgment; if the
force is too widely extended in seeking security for the flanks,
it will lack depth and may be easily broken; on the other
hand, a force disposed in great depth with weak flanks may
be driven or manœuvred out of position by a flank attack.
The armament of the enemy must be borne in mind; for
instance, an anti-tank obstacle may be of great importance
if the enemy is strong in armoured fighting vehicles.
Having determined approximately the area in which his
force must be disposed in order to fulfl its mission and the
frontage which it will cover, the defender must next consider
the factors given in the succeeding paragraphs.
4. In forces of all arms the question of observation for the
artillery (and to a lesser degree, for the machine guns) must
have a considerable influence on the selection of a position,
since it is essential, if the artillery is to exercise its full power,
that it should be possible to observe the enemy's preparations
and the ground over which he must advance during the earlier
stages of the attack. This will usually mean that the line of
the foremost defences must be at least sufficiently far in
advance of the localities selected for artillery observation
to ensure that these localities are not captured and the
defence blinded as the result of a local success by the enemy.
V07794 (162) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

