pg_0192.pdf:
V07794 (191) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IX. Sec. 83.]
163
4. In position warfare, as in open warfare, success will
depend largely on the factor of surprise. For the attacker,
surprise in the matter of place and time is difficult to achieve
owing to the extensive nature of the preparations required
(Sec. 85), but is still possible and must always be sought:
surprise in method-by the introduction of a new procedure
of a new weapon— is the principal hope and must be the chief
aim of the attacker in this type of warfare, where the defence
has so many advantages. In the defence, similarly, new
methods will be required to meet, or rather to anticipate, new
forms of attack. The stagnation of movement which position
warfare brings must never be allowed to induce a stagnancy
of ideas: ten years of inconclusive position warfare were once
ended in a single night by a new idea the wooden horse of
Troy•
5. The air forces will play a most important, possibly a
decisive, part in protracted operations.
The
large and
numerous camps, depots, workshops and installations of all
kinds which are necessitated by the amount of material
required in position warfare are likely to be the targets of
intensive air attack, unless effectively protected by anti-
aircraft guns and other means of air defence. Air photo-
graphy also will be of the greatest importance in enabling the
enemy's defensive dispositions or preparations for attack to
be detected and recorded; the deception of the air camera
by camouflage and other means, and the rival art of inter-
preting air photographs in spite of such deception, will assume
considerable prominence. The struggle for air superiority
is likely to lead to intensive air fighting.
6. A wide development of the intelligence system is a feature
of position warfare (see also Manual of Military Intelligence
in the Field, 1930, Chapter XV). To supplement the infor-
mation obtained by air photography and reconnaissance,
ground observation will be systematically organized and
recorded, and the enemy's lines will be kept under constant
and minute scrutiny. Raids may have to be undertaken if
important information cannot be otherwise obtained (Sec. 85,
4). It is of special importance to locate enemy machine-gun
or mortar emplacements, and to watch for any new work
that may give indication of the enemy's intentions. The
sound-ranging and flash-spotting groups of the survey com-
panies will be installed to locate the hostile battery positions.
Personal reconnaissance by all grades of commanders and
V07794 (191) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
ICKERSMC

