pg_0084.pdf:
V07794 (83) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Sec. 27.]
55
Mechanical transport which already has a definite purpose,
such as the divisional baggage company, should only be
employed for the carriage of troops in circumstances of
extreme urgency, since the normal functioning of the adminis-
trative services is thereby upset and great discomfort may be
caused to the troops. If special bus units are not available,
reserve transport companies may be used.
If infantry is to form part of a mechanized force, or is
frequently to be moved by mechanical transport, its first-line
transport must be mechanized and must be capable of
accompanying a column of lorries or buses. Small cars must
be provided for mounted officers, or their chargers must be
carried in motor horse-boxes.
5. Points for embussing and debussing require careful
selection, and should,
whenever possible, be previously
reconnoitred. A long straight stretch of road with room at
the sides for troops to form-up, is the ideal from the point
of view of convenience in embussing and debussing. Con-
cealment from air observation will, however, usually be of
first importance, and may require the use of several places
widely separated.
6. The formation to be embussed will be divided into unit
groups and the vehicles will be divided accordingly, each
vehicle (except spare vehicles) being numbered. The leading
vehicle of each group will be marked by a distinctive flag
and a similar flag will mark the point where it is to draw up.
Vehicles will be drawn up in blocks of five (occupying 60 to
70 yards) with 20 yards between blocks.
The forming up of
the vehicles will probably take from 15 to 20 minutes.
Unit groups will be told off into parties for each vehicle,
each party being given the number of the vehicle in which
it is to embus. A suitable table on which this may be
done is given in Appendix VII.
Troops should, if possible,
reach the embussing point and be told off into parties before.
the vehicles arrive.
Orders will be issued whether the troops
are to remove their equipment or not.
7. The actual embussing may be done by one of two
methods, depending on the facilities for concealment and the
length of road suitable. In one method the unit or formation
is deployed along the road, in the correct groups and parties,
suitably fagged; the vehicles draw up accordingly, and
simultaneous embussing of the whole unit or formation can
take place. This is the quickest method, but requires a long
V07794 (83) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

