pg_0040.pdf:
V07794 (39) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. I. Sec. 5.]
11
deny observation to the enemy and to screen the movements
of our own troops (see also Sec. 9).
Shrapnel, with a time fuze, is fired by guns of anti-aircraft,
field, medium and heavy artillery, and by howitzers of horse
and mountain artillery. It is effective against troops in the
open, particularly so when fired in enfilade, owing to its forward
effect. To burst time shrapnel correctly requires, however,
good observation and a high standard of training. Shrapnel
bursting on percussion is also effective against armoured
fighting vehicles.
The proportion of each form of shell carried in the field
by the various types of artillery is given in Appendix III.
6. The methods by which artillery support the action of
the other arms may be summarized as follows :—
In the attack—
i. Artillery preparation—i.e., fire which is intended to
damage the enemy's defensive organization, to
inflict losses on him and to impair his morale,
prior to assault by our own troops: its duration
and intensity will depend upon the strength of the
enemy's position and the importance attached to
surprise.
ii. Covering fire-i.e., fire which is put down while our
troops are moving to the assault: it may take the
form of a " barrage," or belt of fire, moving ahead
of the advancing troops; or of " concentrations"
in which the fire of a number of guns is concentrated
on particular targets or localities in succession ;
or of smoke screens; or of a combination of any or
all of the above (their advantages and disadvan-
tages are discussed in Sec. 63). A proportion of
the supporting artillery may sometimes be placed
directly under the commanders of the leading units,
in order to enable them to deal quickly with opposi-
tion which the pre-arranged covering fire has failed to
overcome; or with special targets, such as a build-
ing, against which their own weapons have proved
ineffective.
ili. Counter-battery fire—i.e., fire which is intended to
neutralize or destroy enemy artillery; it is usually
carried out by medium or heavy artillery with air
observation.
V07794 (39) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

