pg_0196.pdf:
V07794 (195) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IX. Sec. 85.]
167
necessitate a series of operations, separated by several days
of careful preparation, before the organized defences can be
finally pierced and the enemy driven into the open.
All this militates against secrecy and surprise, which should
be the attacker's chief weapon. It will demand considerable
ingenuity and extremely detailed staff work to carry out the
necessary preliminary arrangements (such as concentration
of the troops, the formation of ammunition dumps, the
improvement of communications, the preparation of the
forward area without making the intention to attack too
obvious. Much will depend on the nature and strength of
the obstacle covering the enemy position; a wire obstacle
may be broken by tanks without preliminary bombardment
and surprise thus secured; but if the wire obstacle is so sited
as to be unassailable by tanks, or if the position has been
covered by minefields or tank obstacles, it may be necessary
to cut the wire by artillery or mortar fire, which is a longer
and more difficult process and makes surprise harder to
achieve.
2. The attacker in making his plan has to decide on place,
method and time, the considerations being much the same
as in open warfare (Sec. 55, 4).
The following problems will,
however, need special
attention: how to deal with the
hostile obstacle, i.e. cut gaps through it by artillery and
mortar fire, destroy it by mining or other means, crush it
with tanks or cross it by some specially devised method;
whether or not to subject the enemy defences to artillery
preparation, and, if so, for how long; whether to attempt a
complete break-through of the enemy system in one opera-
tion or to proceed by stages, i.e. a number of successive
operations with a limited objective, with a pause for prepara-
tion between them; and, most important, how to effect
surprise.
3. The conduct of the attack in position warfare differs
only in degree from that in open warfare (Sec. 57). The
artillery preparation, if undertaken, will be heavier and more
prolonged in accordance with the strength of the hostile
position; the attacking troops will be covered by a more
intense and deeper barrage; the objectives of each successive
body of troops are likely to be closer to each other owing to
the probable greater severity of the fighting and higher
percentage of casualties; special parties for clearing up each
line of enemy trenches (" mopping-up " was an official term
V07794 (195) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

