pg_0182.pdf:
V07794 (181) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VIII. Sec. 78.J
153
must have a fixed place in the column where he should
remain. Liaison personnel should be used to convey
instructions from headquarters to subordinate commanders.
3. It is not safe to calculate on a large force averaging
more than two miles an hour; the darker the night, the
slower will be the pace.
4. The above instructions apply generally to all marches
by night, whether or not the column is protected by the
dispositions of other troops. If it is not, and there is any
possibility of the enemy being encountered, advanced, fank
and rear guards will be detailed. These protective bodies
will normally consist, except in columns of mobile troops, of
infantry only. Their size and their distance from the column
will vary according to the ground and to the darkness of
the night. They need usually only to be large enough and
at a sufficient distance to prevent small bodies of hostile
troops from interfering with the march; if the enemy is
likely to be met in any strength, movements should not be
undertaken in column of route, from which it is difficult to
deploy quickly in the dark without confusion. In enclosed
country, the flanks are best protected by posts placed in
position by the advanced guard and withdrawn by the rear
guard; in open country, flanking patrols may sometimes be
used instead of stationary posts, but they are liable to lose
direction unless accustomed to night work.
The advanced guard will usually be responsible for blocking
all branch roads which are not to be used, either by posting
men or by placing some pre-arranged block across them
(e.g. a line of stones or the branches of trees) ; if men are
posted, they will be withdrawn by the rear guard.
If obstacles are likely to be encountered, a party of
engineers with the necessary tools should accompany the
advanced guard. After crossing an obstacle
or defile,
where opening out is likely to occur, the column will advance
about its own length and then halt until the rear has
closed up.
Mounted troops and artillery should be given the least
exposed places in the column.
No more transport should
accompany the column than is absolutely essential.
5. If the march is being made to an assembly position as a
prelude to a night advance or night attack, this position
must be carefully reconnoitred and must be so selected (at
or near some well defined natural feature) or so marked as to
V07794 (181) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

