pg_0123.pdf:
V07794 (122) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
94
[Chap. V. Secs. 44, 45 and 46.
areas may be provided by laying down gas-proof capes, or
by using any other available material such as assault bridging
equipment, earth, corrugated iron, wood. Men engaged
in making a passage must wear protective equipment, which
the engineers with the advanced guard should have with
them; the protective equipment carried by other engineer
units should also be readily available if there is a likelihood
of other troops being required to assist the engineers. Billets,
before occupation, should be carefully examined for con-
tamination by blister gas, and troops should be warned of
the danger of " booby traps" (gas or explosive).
If the enemy is hard pressed, he may use low-flying spray
attack by aircraft against the pursuing troops; the danger
of this threat can be lessened by moving on a broad front,
by good anti-aircraft measures and by the use, when halted,
of the cover provided by woods and buildings.
45. Rear guard to a force advancing
1. An advancing force will detail a small protective
detachment to cover the rear of the column. If there is
little danger of attack from the rear, its principal duty will be
to collect stragglers, and it should have with it a detachment
of the provost corps and a portion of a field ambulance.
Where there is any danger of attack by armoured cars or
mobile troops, the rear guard should include mobile troops
for reconnaissance and anti-tank weapons.
2. If the main body and the transport march without any
considerable distance between them, the rear guard will
follow the transport and will protect the rear of the whole
column; if there is a long distance between them, the rear
guard will follow the main body and separate arrangements
will be made for the protection of the transport.
FLANK PROTECTION
46. Flank guards
1. If there is a possibility of a column being attacked from
the flank, a flank guard will be detailed by the commander
of the force. If both flanks are vulnerable, two separate
flank guards may be necessary. Flank guards are known as
right flank guard or left flank guard according to the flank
of the column which they protect. A commander for a
flank guard will be appointed by name. (Sec. 14, 4.)
V07794 (122) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

