pg_0106.pdf:
V07794 (105) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Sec. 37.]
77
are also always required, although good information will
enable the numbers employed for protective resistance to be
economized.
whether it de a tobile force of all arms cont dorward by on
army or a patrol sent out by a platoon) cannot be relied on
for protective duties also. (Sec. 33, 2.)
3. The general system of protection against ground
attack is the same in principle, whatever the circumstances ;
the commander of the body to be protected throws out
detached forces of mounted or dismounted troops, or of all
arms, in every direction from which attack is possible;
these detached forces in turn provide for their own safety by
pushing out smaller protective detachments, and so on.
protective detachment has two duties: firstly, observation
and reconnaissance by means of patrols and observation
posts within the limits for which it is responsible; and
secondly, resistance sufficient at least to give the superior
commander time to prepare for action. The actions of a
protective detachment must be regulated solely in the
interests of the main body.
4. A commander is named for the larger protective de-
tachments (Sec. 14, 4), and will normally be the commander
of the unit or formation providing the bulk of the detachment.
The commander who makes the detachment is responsible
that it has an adequate staff and means of intercommunica-
tion.
5. A force given a protective role must continue to carry
out that role until relieved or given other orders. Thus at
the end of a march the troops which have covered the march
remain responsible for the protection of the main body when
it halts, until other arrangements are made by the com-
mander of the force.
Similarly,
when the march recom-
mences, outposts will not be withdrawn until the troops
detailed for the protection of the march are in position.
6. Protection against ground attack may be considered
under the headings of protection when on the move and
protection while at rest. Detachments for protection on
the move are usually referred to as advanced, flank or rear
guards, and detachments for protection while at rest as
outposts.
No general rules for the strength and composition
of protective detachments can be laid down, except that,
like all other detachments, they should be no larger than is
SMC
V07794 (105) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

