pg_0049.pdf:
V07794 (48) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
20
[Chap. I. Sec. 10.
thrown by projectors, or from grenades thrown by hand;
or may be released from cylinders in the form of a cloud;
or the enemy may apply blister gas direct to an area which he
desires to contaminate, by means of hand generators, of
contact or delay-action mines, of containers fired by time
fuze or of vehicles specially fitted for spraying. Of the
above, gas attack by aircraft is the form most likely to be
met in mobile warfare; area contamination may also be
employed by an enemy, especially in a retirement (see
Sec. 44, 3). Gas shelling by artillery, and attacks by means
of projectors or cylinders, belong to the more deliberate
types of warfare, but an attack by cylinders carried in
vehicles, for the production of a choking gas cloud, is possible :
this form is known as a beam attack, and can only be delivered
when conditions as to wind, concealment, etc., favour the
enemy: the vehicles may have to be brought up and the
attack delivered under cover of darkness.
The enemy may provide his mobile troops with small
containers or grenades of blister or tear gas, to contaminate
billets, cross-roads, approaches to watering places, etc.
5. The gas used in spraying by aircraft is likely to be
blister gas.
This will be an especially dangerous form of
attack, since the range and speed of aircraft will often enable
them to produce surprise, a most potent factor in the use of
gas.
In attacks by air bombing, the enemy may drop gas
bombs in the same way, and possibly at the same time,
as H.E. bombs. Blister gas is likely to be the most usual
3 Bi way and pisto de
filling, but any type of gas may be used. Since air. bombs
do not have to withstand the shock of discharge from a
gun, their construction is lighter, and their gas content
greater, than that of a shell of similar size fired from an
artillery weapon.
The base and lines of communication may at any time be
subjected to gas attacks from enemy aircraft (see Field
Service Regulations, Volume III, 1935, Chapter III).
6. Since the gas content of shells fired by artillery is com-
paratively small (see above), the enemy will require a large
number of shells to produce an effective concentration, and
difficulties of ammunition supply will therefore restrict gas
shelling in mobile warfare.
Attacks by projector or by cylinder require considerable
transport and long preparation, and can be delivered only
V07794 (48) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

