pg_0145.pdf:
V07794 (144) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
116
[Chap. VI. Sec. 57.
surprise and fire power and the enemy is confused and dis-
organized. Since the penetration will probably be on a
comparatively narrow front, it will be necessary to extend
the frontage on which the enemy's defences have been pierced
before, or simultaneously with, any deeper penetration into
the enemy's
ind themselves sin a are swie the attacking troops may
3. It is in this stage of extension of the original success
th pt the attacker's hief ticulties bone. The programme
to overcome the enemy's opposition, so that portions of his
original front are still holding out. These points are usually
best dealt with from the flanks or rear by a part of the troops
which have pushed on past them; such co-operation requires
good team-work and initiative on the part of subordinate
commanders.
The further progress of the attack depends on the ability
of the superior commanders to employ their reserves of tanks,
of men and of other fire power so as to maintain the forward
impetus, and on the skill and determination of subordinate
commanders in finding and exploiting the enemy's weak
Artillery support of the leading troops should now
he direct and rapid and the problera is mainly one of good
liaison and intercommunication. The chief difficulty of com-
manders with reserves at their disposal will be to get a clear
picture of the situation in front; it is the imperative duty of
the forward troops to assist them by sending back frequent
reports of the progress of the attack, without which the
superior commander is unable to influence the battle in the
right way. The use of reserves is further discussed in Field
Service Regulations, Volume III, 1935, Chapter V.
4. When the advanced troops have reached the objectives
allotted to them, and the enemy is still holding a further
position, or when they are definitely held up before reaching
their final objective, it will usually be necessary to prepare a
new attack with fresh troops; the procedure will be as
outlined in Sec. 56, and time will be of the utmost importance.
5. Woods and villages will often require special consideration
in the planning and execution of an attack.
The chief factors
which they introduce are the same as those of fighting in very
enclosed country, i.e. increased difficulties of observation, of
control, of maintaining direction and of co-operation between
the arms; the moral effect of these factors is considerable
V07794 (144) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

