pg_0125.pdf:
V07794 (124) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
96
[Chap. V. Secs. 46 and 47.
be unable to regain its original position relative to the main
body. It may then be necessary for the commander of the
main body to detail a fresh flank guard, while the original
one joins the rear guard when the main body has passed.
A careful calculation of time and space is an essential element
in all flank guard operations.
Should a commander anticipate the possibility of a dan-
gerous attack from a flank during a march, as for instance
when making a march across the enemy's front, he should
so arrange the order of march of the main body as to facilitate
rapid deployment to a flank in support of the flank guard.
He should give the flank guard commander clear instructions
as to his action if attacked and what support he may expect
from the main body.
5. A savage or irregular enemy will seek to gain success
by exploiting his mobility to concentrate against weak
points, such as the flanks of a long column. Special measures
of protection for the flanks in bush, desert and mountain
warfare are dealt with in Chapter X.
PROTECTION WHEN RETIRING
47. Rear guards- general
1. The conditions in which a force may withdraw in the
face of the enemy are dealt with in Field Service Regulations,
Volume III, 1935, Chapter VII.
A force retiring covers itself against enemy pursuit by a rear
guard.
The duty of the rear guard is to secure for the
main body an unmolested withdrawal and the time to put
into execution any plans of which the withdrawal is a part.
Since it will usually have to hold off the pressure of an enemy
advancing in superior strength, a rear guard is a fighting
force of all arms. It should be strong in mobile troops, which
can reconnoitre, can protect the flanks against wide turning
movements and can hold a position till the enemy is close,
using their mobility to retire in safety; and in artillery, the
long-range fire of wbich will compel the enemy to deploy
early and will thus gain time. The infantry allotted to a rear
guard should be strong in machine guns, since long-range
fire power rather than numbers of men are required; it will
facilitate the task of the rear guard if the infantry, or a part
of it, can be given additional mobility by the use of mechanical
transport. Tanks, if availabie, are of great value to a rear
guard, since their power to strike a swift blow at the enemy
V07794 (124) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

