pg_0191.pdf:
V07794 (190) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
162
[Chap. IX. Sec. 83.
resort to deliberate methods of warfare, the main character-
istics of which this chapter is intended to outline. It contains
no new principles, only the development and application to a
particular problem of the principles for attack and defence
already laid down in Chapters VI and VII.
3. Position warfare, which may begin with entrenchments
hastily dug by both sides in the course of open fighting, may
develop, as time goes on, into what is for all practical pur-
poses siege warfare, the history and principles of which are dealt
with in Military Engineering, Volume II. In this extreme
form, the defensive system will extend to a depth of several
thousands of yards, strengthened by concrete works and
shelters, by deep dug-outs, by wide obstacles or inundations;
artillery and mortars of the heaviest calibre, with an almost
unlimited supply of ammunition, will be used both in attack
and alien ten de a terman til take pace
kinds, together with a network of communications— by road,
water, ralway, tramlinewill be required to deal with the
masses of ammunition, and of the material, offensive and
defensive, which this
type of warfare necessitates.
The
control of such an organization will require a large expansion
of the telegraph and telephone systems.
Between the two extremes of hasty entrenchment and
regular siege process there will be several stages; varying
degrees of expansion and improvement in defence will meet
correspondingly intensifed
forms
of attack. Generally
speaking, what will distinguish position warfare from open
warfare will be that both sides will be continuously in close
a d that the roos
will be covered by continuous obstacles, artificial as well as
natural. The problems of this type of warfare are mainly
artillery and engineer problems. Armoured fighting vehicles
and infantry, continually halted or hampered by obstacles
and with small chance for manœuvie, are more than ever
dependent on the support of the artillery, the proportion of
which tends continuously to increase in numbers and
calibre; and of the help of the engineers, both for cover in
defence (deep dug-outs, concrete works, etc.) and for devices
to aid the attack (offensive mining, improvement of com-
munications, etc.). Mounted troops as such are of little
value so long as the conditions of position warfare obtain.
V07794 (190) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

