pg_0129.pdf:
V07794 (128) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
100
[Chap. V. Sec. 48.
only be held long enough to give the last troops, whose
retirement has often to be made at speed, time to collect
and reorganize before continuing the withdrawal; fighting on
an intermediate position should be avoided as far as possible.
The whole operation requires most careful control. The
withdrawal of the rear parties along the whole front must be
closely co-ordinated, in order that an intact front may be
maintained to the last and the formation of gaps, through
which the enemy may penetrate, be prevented.
To effect
this, the front for which the rear guard is responsible should
be divided into sectors, the commander of each sector
detailing his own rear party. The withdrawal of the rear
parties will be co-ordinated by the rear guard commander,
who will lay down the time at which the forward line of
defended localities will be finally abandoned, or will indicate
a line behind the forward line of defended localities which
the various rear parties are to cross at a given time. The
artillery will then know the situation and can apply fire
accordingly. It is important that the enemy should remain
in ignorance that a withdrawal is in progress for as long as
possible; by day, lines of withdrawal should be selected to
give cover from ground and air observation; and smoke may
sometimes be used to cover the withdrawal or to draw the
attention of the enemy elsewhere: by night, it is easier to
deceive the enemy, provided that discipline is good and
movements are made silently and without unnecessary lights.
(Sec. 81.)
6. It may sometimes be necessary for a rear guard to make
a counter-attack, either to disengage a portion of the rear
guard which has become seriously committed; or to re-
establish the situation at a place where the enemy has
broken through; or to take advantage of a favourable
opportunity to strike a blow at a portion of the enemy's
advanced troops and so to impose caution on him. The
objective of such a counter-attack must be limited, and the
attack should be supported by all artillery fire and other
means available; if well planned and suddenly delivered, it
will often have an easy success, which must not be pressed
too far or the counter-attacking troops may be cut off.
Tanks may be very effectively used for such a stroke. Skil-
fully laid ambushes may also, on occasions, be employed to
impose caution on the enemy.
7. The rapidity of fire, accuracy and long range of modern
V07794 (128) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

