pg_0161.pdf:
V07794 (160) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
132
[Chap. VII. Sec. 67.
CHAPTER VII
THE DEFENCE
67. General considerations
1. The considerations which will guide a commander in
deciding to adopt a defensive attitude are given in Field
Service Regulations, Volume III, 1935, Chapter III. The
selection of a position, the organization of the defence, the
employment of the outposts, the location and handling of the
reserves and the change to the counter-offensive are discussed
from the point of view of the higher commander in Field
Service Regulations, Volume III, 1935, Chapter VI.
The present chapter deals with the general principles and
the conduct of the defence, as they affect all commanders
down to the most junior.
It applies to defence intended to
resist a serious attack, not merely to temporary delaying
action, as by a rear guard, which is dealt with in Secs. 47 and
2. The adoption of the defensive does not necessarily imply
weakness or inferiority. It may be necessary to gain time
for the arrival of reinforcements or for the execution of a.
decisive manœuvre in some other part of the battlefield or of
the theatre of operations. It may also be desirable to induce
the enemy to commit himself to ground favourable to the
counter-offensive and to waste his strength in attacks on a
well-prepared position; just as some of the most effective
falls in wrestling are given by inducing the opponent first to
exert his strength in a certain desired direction.
3. The advantages which the defence confers on the defender
are the opportunity to choose ground so that the full fire
power of his weapons can be developed; to strengthen it as
time permits; and by concealment to avoid the fire of the
enemy's weapons and to gain surprise. The chief object of
the defender is to make the best use of these advantages in
order to reduce and exhaust the enemy's forces with the
minimum expenditure of his own. He may then eventually
V07794 (160) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

