pg_0099.pdf:
V07794 (98) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
70
[Chap. IV. Secs. 33 and 34.
sending duplicate messages to those commanders by other
means.
The commander to whom the report is addressed
should be informed, in either event, that the report has
already been communicated to those other commanders.
Information of the presence of hostile armoured units
should be reported to the nearest artillery with the least
possible delay.
6. Personal reconnaissance of the ground over which he
has to operate is the duty of every commander in his degree;
the smaller the formation or unit, the more detailed the
reconnaissance required, so far as time permits. The time
available for any operation of war is limited, and sufficient
time for detailed reconnaissance by the lower commanders can
only be made by foresight and anticipation on the part of
A commander, in making a plan,
must always take into his calculations the time necessary
for reconnaissance by his subordinates; if he decides that,
owing to the pressure of events and the need to forestall.
enemy action, the operation must be hurried on without due
allowance for reconnaissance, he must realize the risks
thereby incurred; good maps and good map-reading, how-
ever, will to some extent minimize these risks, and use can
sometimes be made of photographs from the air, particularly
of obliques.
34. Information from prisoners, captured
documents, etc.
1. The detailed examination of prisoners is the business
of the intelligence staff. It should take place as soon as
possible after capture, before the prisoners have had time
to recover from the strain of battle and to invent stories.
Preliminary interrogation by the unit which makes the
capture should be limited to identification of the enemy
unit or units and to questions of immediate concern to the
commander on the spot. Identifications are of great impor-
tance and urgency, since they usually give the most certain
must be reported
clue to the enemy's dispositions; the, emergency opera-
without delay to higher authority by*
tions " messages.
Prisoners of war must be searched for documents immedi-
ately after capture to prevent their destroying information
of value. No attempt should, however, usually be made
by the unit to examine documents; they should be placed
V07794 (98) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

