pg_0140.pdf:
V07794 (139) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VI. Sec. 55.]
111
unexpected time; to avoid stereotyped procedure and
tactics; and to keep thinking always a little ahead of his
opponent must be the aim of every commander.
4. The main problems which the attacker has to solve in
making his plan are :—
Firstly, choice of place; he has to consider which ground
best suits the characteristics of his force; which ground
offers the best opportunities for surprise; and which ground,
if captured, will bring the best opportunities for exploiting
success; and to decide to which of these considerations he
will give most weight, when, as is most usual, they are
conflicting.
Secondly, choice of method: this means how best to
deceive the enemy as to the place or places selected for
attack and how best to apply the troops and fire power at
his disposal to deal with the enemy's weapons and defences;
whether to attack with or without artillery preparation;
whether to place his armoured troops or his infantry in the
van; how to maintain the impetus of the attack to a sufficient
depth to overcome the enemy's resistance; and how to
exploit any success gained.
Thirdly, choice of time: is the attack to be launched by
daylight or under cover of darkness? how much time can be
given to preparation? at what hour is the enemy most
likely to be taken by surprise ?
5. The chief preoccupations of the attacker during the
attack may be summarized as follows :—
i. How to obtain timely information on which to base
his action.
ii. How to maintain communication, so as to control or
supervise his subordinates.
ii. How to use his reserves effectively and in time.
All these problems of the attacker are further discussed
in Field Service Regulations, Volume III, 1935, Chapters IV
and V.
6. The form and method of attack will vary according to
the nature of the ground (e.g. open or enclosed, flat or
mountainous), the armament, tactics and morale of the
enemy, the accessibility or otherwise of his flanks, and more
especially, according to the time and resources which the
enemy has had available for the organization of resistance.
V07794 (139) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

