pg_0148.pdf:
V07794 (147) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VI. Sec. 59.]
119
of troops has reached the objective allotted to it it is
apt to suffer from a reaction, to consider that its part
in that particular attack is over for the time being and
to become inactive. Leadership and energy are required
more than ever from subordinate commanders at this stage.
There is much to be done.
The first action should be to push out patrols to keep touch
with the enemy and to ascertain the situation in front and to
the flanks.
There is often a period after a successful attack
when ground beyond the allotted objective can be occupied
with little or no resistance, while the enemy is still surprised
and disorganized. Whether or not a subordinate commander
should push forward beyond the line given him as his final
objective must depend on the instructions which he has
received, his knowledge of the superior commander's intentions,
the situation to his right and left and his tactical judgment as
to the value of the ground in front. Generally speaking,*
bold decision should be taken, unless it will lead to dangerous
isolation.
In any event, information of the opportunity and
of his action should be sent back at once to the next higher
commander.
2. Consolidation has as its purpose to secure the objectives
which have been reached, or other important localities which
have been occupied, against counter-attack and as a base
for further advance.
The process includes the organization
of the position for defence; the reorganization of the troops ;
the replenishment of ammunition, etc.; the establishment of
communication both to the rear and to the flanks; provision
for observation and information; arrangements for support-
ing a further advance.
The defence should be established in depth on the principles
laid down in Secs. 69 and 73; the forward localities being
lightly held and as many troops as possible withdrawn into
local reserve.
If counter-attack by armoured fighting
vehicles is possible, anti-tank defence will be important and
it may be advisable to site sections of field artillery well
forward, especially to deal with a tank attack.
If the ground won is of tactical importance to the further
conduct of the battle, or is likely to be occupied for any
length of time, tools should be sent forward and entrenching
should be begun as early as possible. Engineers may be sent
forward to put some locality of particular importance into a
state of defence.
V07794 (147) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

