pg_0048.pdf:
V07794 (47) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. I. Secs. 9 and 10.]
19
parison sing a set dividual tantry espins,
weather conditions are of minor importance.
The thickness
of a smoke screen can be varied, and in certain conditions a
thin screen only may be desirable.
10. Gas
(See Manual of Defence against Gas)
1. Gas in its various forms has proved itself an effective
weapon.
Its use has been prohibited by an international
convention. But an enemy who uses it may do so to inflict
casualties; to reduce the efficiency of troops and to lower
their morale, by compelling them to wear anti-gas respirators,
and sometimes other protective equipment, for prolonged
periods; or as a means of delay, by rendering areas of ground
impassable without risk of casualties.
2. Gases used in war are classified as persistent or non-
persistent.
The non-persistent gases usually affect the lungs,
eyes, nose or throat, and can be countered by the wearing
of an efficient anti-gas respirator. The most dangerous of the
persistent gases has a blistering eftect on all parts of the body,
and can penetrate ordinary clothing and footwear. It there-
fore necessitates special measures of protection in addition to
the wearing of the anti-gas respirator. An area contaminated
by blister gas remains dangerous for a period which varies
according to the strength of the concentration, to weather
conditions and to the type of ground contaminated, but the
period may be prolonged for weeks. The effect of blister gas
is often not felt for some hours, and men may be unaware at
the time that
they have been affected, though they will
become casualties later.
3. The effective use of gas is largely dependent on weather
conditions. Light winds and moderate temperature favour
its use, also foggy or cloudy weather. Winds of over 12
miles an hour, warm sunny days, heavy rain or extreme
cold tend to reduce its effectiveness. Ground has also some
effect on gas, which tends to flow into valleys and gullies, and
persists longer in deep hollows, dug-outs, cellars and other
enclosed spaces.
or means obe do to discharge thron shelt prac
by artillery or mortars; or may be produced from drums
SMG
V07794 (47) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

