pg_0055.pdf:
V07794 (54) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
26
[Chap. II. Secs. 12 and 13.
vi. To place himself where he can best control the course of
the action, remembering that at the crisis personal
example and leadership are the best means to ensure
success.
2. The proper use of ground is a most important factor in
all tactical operations: constant study is required to appreci-
ate its influence on the varying phases of the battle. Thus
in the attack, good positions for supporting fire and for
observation, the approaches to the enemy which offer the best
cover from his fire, and features which will facilitate fire in
enflade or a flank attack are to be sought. For the defence,
facilities for concealment and resistance are essential, natural
cover being preferable to artificial; and good observation
confers a very considerable advantage. The suitability, or
otherwise, of the ground for the action of armoured troops,
or the existence of obstacles to their passage, may have a
decisive influence on a plan of action.
The use of natural
features to give concealment from hostile aircraft will usually
be of importance. Such are a few examples of the effect of
ground on operations: a so-called "eye for ground" can
be acquired only by constant thought and practice.
13. Orders and instructions
1. Command in the field is exercised by means of :-
i, standing orders and routine orders, which regulate the
general daily life of a force in the field, in accordance
with the conditions of the campaign;
II. operation orders, which deal with a particular strategi-
cal or tactical move or operation: they are sup-
plemented, when necessary, by operation instructions
and administrative orders.
2. The object of standing orders is to adapt existing
regulations to local conditions and to avoid repetitions in
routine and operation orders. Routine orders are used to
supplement standing orders, to facilitate the working of the
administrative services, and to reduce correspondence and
returns. Standing orders and routine orders are printed or
typewritten, and are given a
wide distribution. Further
rules for their issue are given in Field Service Regulations.
Volume I.
V07794 (54) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

