pg_0207.pdf:
V07794 (206) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
178
[Chap. X. Sec. 94.
2. The main problems and disabilities of the regular troops
lie in their dependence on a complex supply organization,
their comparative slowness, the difficulty of finding
objective that will force the enemy to collect and give battle,
the lack of reliable information and, very often, the difficulty
of distinguishing foe from peaceful inhabitant, since the
former may become the latter and the latter change into the
former with little more time or warning than is needed for
the hiding or disinterring of a rifle and ammunition. Since
savage foes usually give no quarter, it is essential that special
arrangements should be made for carrying off all wounded,
especially in a withdrawal; and sometimes the dead, if the
enemy has the unpleasant habit of mutilating corpses.
The advantages of the regular troops lie in their superior
discipline, organization and armament, in their possession of
air forces and armoured fighting vehicles, and on the moral
ascendancy which the civilized man feels over the uncivilized.
They must reduce the enemy's advantage in mobility by good
organization, good training and light equipment, and by
exploiting their air force, armoured fighting
vehicles,
mechanical transport and other resources of civilization and
science whenever conditions permit; they must, by a good
intelligence organization, lessen the handicap of the enemy's
better knowledge of the terrain and easier sources of informa-
tion; they must counter his attempts at surprise by the
vigilance and steadiness which discipline makes possible; and
must meet his stratagems and cunning by commonsense and
by counter-strategem.
Vigorous and bold action, even in the
face of greatly superior numbers, will maintain a moral
ascendancy and is usually the safest and surest road to success.
Hesitation and delay, withdrawal in face of the enemy or any
other sign of weakness will encourage the enemy, and may
double or treble his numbers in a short time by causing
waverers to reinforce the active fighters. A savage foe has
his opponent always under observation, even when his presence
is unsuspected; and any slackness or perfunctory performance
of protective duties, reconnaissance, etc., is not likely to pass
unpunished for long.
capital or chief village or wells may be the best means of
bringing him to action. Once the enemy has been induced
to give battle, every effort should be made to inflict a decisive
V07794 (206) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

