pg_0130.pdf:
V07794 (129) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Secs. 48 and 49.]
101
weapons, if skilfully used, makes it comparatively easy for
a rear guard to impose delay on an advancing force and to
keep it at a distance by the methods outlined above, so long
as the pursuit is direct. The danger to a retreating force
comes rather from flank attacks by mobile troops.
attack from the flank by mobile troops is probable, the main
body may put out a flank guard or flank guards in addition
to a rear guard. If so, close touch between the rear guard
and the flank guard must be maintained; should a flank
guard become engaged and be compelled to halt, it may be
necessary for the rear guard to come to its assistance or to
cover its withdrawal. The danger of air attack on a retiring
force, especially by low-flying spray attack, must be counter-
acted by our own air force and by the methods of air and gas
defence laid down in Secs. 38 and 40.
8. The conduct of a rear guard action against a savage
enemy is especially onerous, owing to the mobility of the
enemy, his usually intimate knowledge of the ground, his
partiality for attacking troops in retreat and the necessity
for bringing in all wounded men.
Withdrawal by well
regulated stages is required, each stage covered by the fire
of troops already in position. (See Chapter X.)
49. Expedients for delaying the advance of an
enemy
1. The methods by which an enemy advance may be
delayed and obstructed over a wide area by demolitions and
other expedients, designed with a strategical object, are
dealt with in Field Service Regulations, Volume III, 1935,.
Chapter ViI.
2. Demolitions, etc., may also be used with an immediate
tactical object, to enable a retiring force to extricate itself
and secure an unmolested withdrawal without fighting or to
relieve pressure on the rear guard. The following are some
of the expedients which may be adopted: the demolition
of bridges; the blocking of roads or of fords by craters.
or other means; the destruction of water supplies; the
making of inundations; the firing of woods, heather, villages,
etc. Effective demolitions take some time to prepare, and
responsibility for the plan should not be left to the rear guard
commander. The commander of the main body will nor-
mally draw up and put into execution the plan of work,
informing the rear guard commander of the details of the plan.
V07794 (129) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

