pg_0201.pdf:
V07794 (200) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
172
[Chap. IX. Secs. 89 and 90.
work necessary for the proper upkeep of trenches and
for sanitation must be planned so as to give the men a
proper proportion of rest, but so that the defences are
continually improved. No work should be done by night
that can be carried out by day. Active patrolling by night
should be carried out up to the enemy's forward defences so
as to obtain all possible information of their dispositions
and to prevent their obtaining information. By day,
close observation and sniping will fulfil a similar purpose
(Sec. 83, 6).
2. If a wire obstacle has to be cut by the artillery pre-
liminary to the infantry assault, it is for the infantry to
indicate where the gaps should be cut, and to prevent by
machine-gun fire the repair of the gaps once they have been
made.
In the actual assault, infantry has usually either to
follow in the wake of a tank attack to take over the ground
won by the tanks, or to advance behind an artillery barrage;
in the latter event the leading infantry must keep as close as
possible to the bursting shells and must realize that the risk
of casualties from a shell bursting short is much less than
that of being too far behind the barrage and thus giving the
enemy time to man his defences.
The " leap-frog
" method
of attack, whereby fresh bodies of infantry pass through those
which have captured the localities or trenches laid down as
their objective, will be normal. It is usually necessary for
special parties to be detailed to clear up each line of trenches,
where enemy troops may still be concealed in deep dug-outs
or shelters.
3. Both in attack and defence the frontages allotted to
units will be less than in mobile warfare, owing to the great
depth necessary in attack, and the continuous line of trenches
to be guarded and kept up in defence.
90. Signals in position warfare
1. The conditions of position warfare require an extensive
use of line telegraphy and of telephony; while the volume of
hostile artillery fire and air bombing will necessitate special
protection for signal offices and for cables. Signal offices
should, wherever possible, be placed in deep mined dug-outs ;
while cables in the forward area should be buried at a depth
sufficient to protect them from the shells of medium artillery.
If the nature of the soil makes it impracticable to bury them
to this depth, they should only be lightly buried-to make
V07794 (200) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

