pg_0063.pdf:
V07794 (62) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
34
[Chap. II. Sec. 16.
3. The means of intercommunication in the field are :-
i. Line telegraphy and telephony (L/T).
II. Wireless communication, either wireless telegraphy
(W/T) or radio telephony (R/T).
IIi. Visual telegraphy (V/T).
iv. Message carrying by any suitable agency, ranging from
a dismounted orderly to an aeroplane.
v. Liaison personnel.
vị. The postal service.
4. Line communication is rapid and accurate and has a
great traffic carrying capacity; discussion by telephone is
possible; and messages by line are less liable to interception
y. 0, 3. than those unit bion, her ears tale one e
lay, and is very vulnerable. Cables laid on the ground are
easily broken by shell fire or by moving troops and vehicles,
especially by tracked vehicles; it is in fact almost impossible
to maintain cable in front of brigade headquarters when
fire or traffic is heavy, unless time and labour is available
to bury it, as in position warfare.
Poled lines in rear of the
forward zone are easier to maintain and will normally form
the backbone of the signal system, but may be broken by
severe weather, by bombing or by the action of unfriendly
inhabitants.
5. The chief advantages of wireless communication are
that it can be established quickly and is invulnerable between
its terminals. Wireless sets can be rapidly set up and moved ;
many types can work while moving. The disadvantages
are that it can be overheard by the enemy, thus often
necessitating the use of cipher with consequent slowness and
delay bange 9) y desiable interruption atmo intric
ference by friendly stations, which limits the number of sets
that can be worked in a given area; also that it requires
skilled operators, who are not easy to train or replace. Radio
telephony conversations
require practice and are slow,
since speech is one-way only at a time; they must be phrased
so that they convey no useful information to the enemy.
(See Sec. 19, 4.)
6. The apparatus for visual signalling is simpler and more
easily portable than wireless equipment; it is equally
invulnerable between its terminals; and the operators
V07794 (62) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
• www.vickersmg.org

