pg_0158.pdf:
V07794 (157) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VI. Sec. 63.]
129
neutralizing fire (which is possible when the enemy, though
not accurately located, is known to be in a certain area
within the power of the artillery to cover); or screening
fire (e.g. smoke or dust), which will not prevent the enemy's
machine guns from firing on fixed lines through it. It is
generally advisable for artillery commanders to consult with
the infantry commander they are supporting as to the nature
of the fire they should apply.
4. Whatever forms of fire are used, it will be usual for the
fire plan in the initial stages of an attack to be based on a
"timed programme,
" dependent on the expected rate of
advance of the attacking troops.
The duration of the timed
programme will depend on the dispositions of the enemy, the
facilities for observation and the ammunition available:
the more deliberate the attack, the more prolonged may be
the timed programme; but when the enemy dispositions are
not definitely located and it is impracticable to estimate the
rate of advance of the attackers, a prolonged timed pro-
gramme is inadvisable. Covering
fire ceases to be of value
if it gets too far ahead of the attacking troops; to guard
against this, a timed programme may be fired with pauses on
certain pre-arranged lines, or the provisions for timing may
be supplemented by the use of light signals or other means of
communication. Caution in the use of light signals is,
however, necessary to ensure that they are available at the
place and time required, are recognizable and are
unmistakable.
5. The support provided by artillery in the later stages of
the attack, after the conclusion of the timed programme, will
depend on the initiative of subordinate artillery commanders
and on close co-operation between them and the attacking
units. Throughout the attack artillery observers must be
well forward; observation is essential not only of the results
advance progresses.
6. During the initial stages, the command of the artillery
should be centralized so far as the communications available
permit; in the later stages, a large measure of decentraliza-
tion wik be necessary, and artillery may be placed under
commanders of forward units to enable them to deal quickly
with unforeseen resistance or to meet counter-attacks by
armoured fighting vehicles or other troops.
V07794 (157) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

