pg_0031.pdf:
V07794 (30) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
2
[Chap. I. Secs. 1 and 2.
mounted or dismounted. Which of the arms, or what
combination of them, is employed to attain any particular
objective depends on a variety of considerations, of which
the principal are the ground, the quality of the enemy and
the time factor. The supporting arms artilery, engineers
and signals-can obtain decisive results in battle only in
combination with the other arms; while without their aid
armoured troops, cavalry and infantry have only a limited
power of action.
3. The importance of aircraft in land warfare is ever
increasing. The information to be obtained from air recon-
naissance is essential to any army in the field, while the
offensive action of air units against targets on the ground may
have far-reaching and often decisive results. But offensive
action from the air depends for success on the establishment
and safeguarding of suitable bases within striking distance
of the enemy.
An army may be required to secure bases
from which aircraft can operate, or to attack the bases from
wesponsible ya rate are rating tablishmen is a ate
ground.
The principles on which an air force co-operates with an
army in the field are outlined in Sec. 8, 1, and are given in
detail in the manual Employment of Air Forces with the
Army in the Field.
2. Armoured troops
1. The armoured fighting vehicles in the service consist of
tanks and armoured cars: tanks move by means of tracks,
armoured cars on wheels with tyres.
Details of the speed,
weight, armament, etc., of the principal types are given in
Appendix I. Since armour cannot give complete pro-
tection, all armoured troops will depend for success largely
on surprise and on their speed in action.
TAnKS
2. Tanks have a considerable cross-country capacity, car
break down or cross wire entanglements, and combine a
high degree of protection for their crews (against the fire of
rifles and machine guns) with great mobility and the power
to deliver a considerable volume of aimed fire while in
V07794 (30) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

