pg_0112.pdf:
V07794 (111) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Sec. 39.]
83
for the precautions necessary for the safety of our own
troops and for the measures necessary to prevent our own
vehicles being damaged.
Generally speaking, mines or other obstacles should, when
practicable, be used to block defiles, and so to economize
anti-tank weapons, which will be required to cover open
ground over which tanks are likely to attack. Minefields,
like other obstacles, should be covered by fire to prevent
their removal, machine guns or light machine guns being
suitable. It is important that mines and tank obstacles
should always be concealed. A dummy minefield can be
rapidly made and is sometimes of value. Surprise should
always be aimed at in measures of anti-tank defence.
3. Commanders must always co-ordinate the system of
anti-tank defence within their areas, so that all available
means of defence weapons, mines and obstacles, both
natural and artificial-may be used as effectively and econo-
mically as possible. Only by these means can full use be
made of the measures available, which will often be very
limited. The pooling of anti-tank resources must not, how-
ever, be allowed to expose any unit or formation without
means of anti-tank defence to the possibility of attack by
armoured fighting vehicles.
4. The radius and striking power of armoured fighting
vehicles, and the greater radius of action conferred on other
troops by the use of mechanical transport in a well-roaded
country, will, when the enemy disposes of such troops, raise
special problems of protection, particularly affecting a force
on the move.
Advanced and rear guards should be given a sufficient
allotment of anti-tank weapons to make them capable of
dealing with an attack of this nature; where there is a
definite threat of action against a flank by enemy armoured
fighting vehicles, a flank guard of suitable composition must
be detailed to meet it.
There will, however, be many occasions when, though no
immediate threat against a flank exists, actions by small
numbers of armoured fighting vehicles or troops in mechanical
transport may be expected. In such a situation the most
economical form of protection may be to establish piquets
covering the approaches on the threatened flank or flanks.
These piquets prevent the column being fired into at short
range and give warning of any attempt to break into the
V07794 (111) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association -
www.vickersmg.org

