pg_0137.pdf:
V07794 (136) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
108
[Chap. V. Secs. 53 and 54.
through the outposts either from within or without, except
with the authority of the commander who details the out-
posts. Inhabitants with information will be blindfolded
and detained at the nearest post pending instructions, and
their information sent to the outpost commander. No one is
allowed to enter into conversation with persons presenting
themselves at the outposts, except the commander of the
nearest platoon, company or detached post, who should
confine his conversation to what is essential. Prisoners and
deserters will be sent at once, under escort, to the authority
appointed to interrogate them.
Where there are large numbers of refugees it will be
impossible to prevent them crossing the outpost position.
Special arrangements will be necessary for their collection
and for their subsequent disposal.
OTHER PROTECTIVE DUTIES
54. Protection of convoys
1. Commanders of formations and units are responsible
for the protection of all transport and supply units whose
movements they regulate, and will make such arrangements
for their security as the situation may demand. The com-
mander of an area or sub-area on the line of communication
is similarly responsible for the security of transport and
supply columns in his area.
The route to be traversed by a convoy may be guarded by
permanent posts on the route or by troops sent out daily from
posts on the lines of communication or by the normal pro-
tective arrangements of the formation concerned. Otherwise
an escort will be provided to accompany the convoy.
Long columns of transport on a road are specially vulnerable
to attack from the air or to attack by armoured fighting
vehicles, and the arrangements for their defence must
always take into consideration these two dangers. The
measures for protection against air attack will be on the
lines laid down in Sec. 38, and against armoured fighting
vehicles on the lines laid down in Sec. 39. If lines of com-
munication are much exposed to attack by air, special
arrangements may be necessary, vehicles being run at wide
intervals by day or movement taking place at night.
2. When a convoy is being protected by an escort, the
commander who details the escort will appoint an officer who
V07794 (136) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

