pg_0162.pdf:
V07794 (161) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VII. Secs. 67 and 68.]
133
be able, either in the same part of the battlefield or elsewhere,
to pass to the oftensive and complete the defeat of the enemy ;
or it may, in certain situations, be sufficient if the enemy is
prevented from attaining his object.
4. The principal weakness and danger of the defence is
that freedom of action and manœuvre is temporarily sur-
rendered and allowed to pass to the enemy, who can choose
the time and place of his attack, or may be able to avoid and
outflank the position chosen and prepared by the defender.
Active reconnaissance is therefore of great importance, and
as large a proportion as possible of the defending force should
be held in hand until the enemy's line of advance has been
ascertained. The security of his flanks must always be one
of the most anxious considerations of the defender.
5. In the end, the strength of the defence lies, as in all
forms of fighting, in the spirit, skill and endurance of the
troops. The defence lacks the stimulus of forward movement
and the feeling of superiority which inspires attack, and it
therefore demands a high degree of discipline and of fortitude.
Troops allotted to the defence of a locality must defend it to
the end without a thought of withdrawal, whatever may
happen on their right or left, unless and until their com-
mander receives definite orders to retire.
6. A special feature of the defence imposed by modern
weapons is that it should be in some depth. The power of
modern weapons is such that the attacker, by concentrating
his fire, can almost always make a breach on a limited front
and to a limited depth in even an organized and prepared
defence. His success can be localized and prevented from
developing into a decisive break-through by the organiza-
tion of the defence, so that, when the attack has spent its initial
force, it will still be confronted by a prepared resistance, which
will halt it and give the defender time to take counter-
measures.
The considerations which determine the depth to
which a defensive position should be prepared in varying
circumstances are discussed in Secs. 68, 3 and 69, 5.
68. Choice of a defensive position
1. When a commander of any grade is at liberty to choose
the position on which he will await the enemy's attack, his
choice will be guided by the considerations set forth below,
which are of general application, whatever the size of the
force.
V07794 (161) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

