pg_0134.pdf:
V07794 (133) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Secs. 51 and 52.]
105
(Sec. 52, 2) will be facilitated if the general line of defence
can follow some well-defined natural feature, such as a line
of high ground, a road or a railway.
The outpost position need not be held in great strength,
since the enemy cannot hope in the face of modern firearms
to launch a major attack with much chance of success without
expending considerable time on reconnaissance and prepara-
tion.
The organization of the position and the methods of
defence will be the same as that of any other defensive
position (see Chapter VIl), except that, as the extent of front
held is likely to be large in proportion to the strength of the
outpost troops, some sacrifice of depth will be necessary.
5. Outpost troops must be always in a high state of
readiness for action. They must hold their ground, if attacked,
as resolutely as in any other defensive position.
They will
be withdrawn only by order of the commander of the force.
6. Artillery or engineers may be allotted to the outpost
commander for the support of the troops holding the outpost
position. If so, they will be handled on the same lines as
artillery and engineers in the defence. (Secs. 74 and 75.)
7. When opposing forces are in close contact on their
battle frontages, it will often occur that no orders as to
protective measures will be issued by higher authority.
Nothing can relieve commanders of the responsibility for
securing their commands against surprise; forward forma-
tions must bivouac on their battle positions, each unit pro-
tecting itself and patrolling to the front, and to the flanks
when not in touch with neighbouring units.
8. Detailed instructions for the occupation of outpost
positions will be found in the manuals of the various arms.
The measures to be taken by troops in quarters in case of
alarm are given in Field Service Regulations, Volume I,
1930, Chapter XVI.
Some guidance on the use of outposts
to break up an attack is given in Field Service Regulations,
Volume III, 1935, Chapter VI.
52. Command of outposts
1. At the end of a march, advanced, flank and rear guards
remain responsible for the protection of the main body until
the outposts are in position. It is more economical and
convenient if the samue formations as have furnished these
V07794 (133) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

