pg_0194.pdf:
V07794 (193) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IX. Sec. 84.1
165
cover and natural obstacles available (Sec. 68); and the
outpost system to cover it will be organized on the principles
laid down in Sec. 69. It will often happen that the forward
defended localities of a position originally chosen for tem-
porary defence will develop into the outpost system of a
protracted defence.
4. Rear systems will be sufficiently distant from those in
front to make it necessary for the enemy to organize a second
and distinct operation,
including the movement of his
artillery, in order to attack them.
It is often advisable to
construct only a nucleus of the system, preference being given
to work that takes time, e.g. concrete cover; and to complete
the system when it is likely to be required; trenches can be
dug and wired at short notice. This will save labour on
upkeep and will prevent the system being prematurely mapped
in detail by the enemy's air photography. Rear systems
should be reconnoitred by all units of the defence that may
be called on to occupy them.
5. One of the first steps in the improvement of a temporary
position will be the connection by continuous trenches of the
various posts and localities which form the framework of
a defensive position.
This facilitates control and reliefs and
makes it difficult for the enemy to discover the actual dis-
positions of the defenders and thus causes him to disperse
his fire. Continuous trenches also prevent a
feeling of
isolation among the troops and thus improve their morale;
they also enable additional posts to be established between
the main centres of resistance at night or in mist or fog; they
require, however, considerable labour for their construction
and upkeep.
Steps must be taken to provide cover for the garrison of
defensive systems, firstly, from the weather, and, secondly,
from hostile shelling.
The best defence against heavy
bombardment can be given only by mined dug-outs or con-
crete blockhouses, details of which are given in Military
Engineering, Volume II. Mined dug-outs must have sufficient
means of egress to allow the defenders time to man their fire
positions to meet an infantry assault.
The concealment of works by camoufiage will be of con-
siderable importance: the efficiency of camouflage schemes
will be tested by direct observation from the air and by air
photographs, not only during the construction of the work,
but at frequent intervals afterwards, in order to show how the
V07794 (193) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

