pg_0042.pdf:
V07794 (41) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. I. Secs. 5 and 6.]
13
posts for observation (O.Ps.) and the establishing of com-
munication between the O.Ps. and the guns is often the
determining factor in the time taken by artillery to open fire.
Observation by aeroplane is usual when ground observation
is not possible or is difficult, especially for counter-battery
work or long-range fire. Fire over open sights, when the
target is visible from the gun, is seldom used except against
an enemy who has overrun the forward troops.
8. The rates of artillery fire are given in Appendix III.
Since all the ammunition carried in forward echelons can be
very quickly expended by a rapid rate of fire, expenditure
must always be carefully considered in allotting tasks to
artillery. For example, barrages are usually fired at an
average rate of 3 to 4 rounds a gun a minute: thus a bar-
rage to support an infantry attack to a depth of 1,500 yards
might last 35 to 40 minutes and require an expenditure of
about 120 rounds by each 18-pr. gun. Concentrations or
defensive fire or counter-preparation, which do not last so
long as barrages, may be fired at a more rapid rate of fire for
a short time.
9. Anti-aircraft artillery is employed to protect important
points on lines of communication, in rear areas and in areas
occupied by the fighting troops (see Sec. 38), the immediate
protection of troops against low-flying aircraft being carried
out by the troops themselves, and by the anti-aircraft
machine-gun batteries, where available (see Sec. 38,3). Anti-
fighting vehicles.
6. Engineers
army. They are also trained to fight as infantry, but are
not
equipped with automatic weapons other
than for
anti-aircraft defence. They should only be employed as
infantry as a last resort, since casualties in skilled personnel
are difficult to replace.
2. Simple engineering work in the field is the duty of all
arms. This includes the siting and construction of simple
protective works and obstacles, the clearing of the field of
fire, elementary camouflage, assault bridging and the improve-
ment of communications. In such work, which is within the
V07794 (41) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

