pg_0054.pdf:
V07794 (53) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. II. Secs. 11 and 12.]
25
able security in other parts of the field with the necessity to
concentrate all possible strength on that part where a decision
is being sought by offensive action requires experience and
judgment. Further, in the course of any operation demands
for reinforcement or to meet some fresh emergency are
always being made on the commander, or doubts arise in his
own mind, which tend to divert his strength from the main
objective: he must learn how far to resist or satisfy these.
Concentration implies always a concentration of will-power,
of enthusiasm and of effort of all kinds towards the object in
hand; but it must not be interpreted necessarily to mean the
collection of the greatest number of troops at a given point,
it may often mean the concentration of fire, while the troops
applying the fire remain dispersed.
Security is dealt with in Chapter V, and the need for
co-operation in Chapter I. The necessity for offensive action
and the moral advantages which it confers are emphasized in
Chapter VI.
12. Command on the battlefield
1. A subordinate commander who is given a task in the
field has, as a rule, the following successive steps to take :—
i. To make certain that he understands his orders, is clear
as to his object and has grasped all the information
available which will assist him in his task.
ii. To study his map, think out with its help his most
promising line of action, and how he can amplify his
information by reconnaissance in the time available.
ini. To reconnoitre the ground, so far as time will permit: a
commander has often to make time for reconnais-
sance by hurrying on ahead, while ordering his
command to follow him to some selected rendezvous,
which should be under cover.
iv. After reconnaissance, to make a plan, remembering
that fire is the most potent factor in war, that sur-
prise is the most effective weapon and that the
simpler the plan the more likely it is to succeed: the
plan, whether offensive or defensive, should be made
in terms of fire power rather than of men; it should
make the best possible use of the ground and should
not look too far ahead.
v. To communicate his plan to his subordinates, in view of
the ground if possible, by clear and concise verbal
orders, allotting a definite task to each sub-unit.
SME
V07794 (53) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

