pg_0179.pdf:
V07794 (178) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
150
[Chap. VIII. Sec. 77.
CHAPTER VIII
NIGHT OPERATIONS
77. General considerations
1. The influence of the air arm, in its increased numbers,
its wide scope and range of reconnaissance and its power of
attack, has greatly enhanced the importance of movement
by night; it is, indeed, difficult by day for a force of any
size to outmanœuvre and surprise an enemy who possesses
aircraft, unless the weather prevents air observation. Night
marches will therefore be frequently undertaken by all
arms (see Sec. 32, 2, as regards the capacity of aeroplanes
for night reconnaissance). The great fire power of armies
has also increased the frequency of night operations in close
contact with the enemy (night attacks, night advances or
withdrawals), which are carried out to avoid hostile observa-
tion and aimed fire and to surprise the enemy.
Night operations have serious drawbacks and dangers;
the difficulties of control by officers and non-commissioned
officers are much increased; there is a liability to mis-
direction, confusion and even panic; the physical condition
of troops is apt to be impaired by loss of sleep. But these
dangers can be much lessened or overcome by discipline,
training and careful preparation: an army which by practice
has acquired skill and confidence in work by night will hold
a great advantage over less well trained enemies and will
often gain the moral and material benefits of a successful
surprise. Further, the expectation of night advances will
force the enemy to hold his front more strongly and will thus
lessen the extent of front which he can hold with a given force
(see Sec. 69, 4).
2. Apart from the discipline and training of the troops, the
chief requirements for success in night operations are that
the plan should be simple and that the reconnaissance and
preparation should be as thorough as possible. Recon-
naissance of the route or ground over which the operation is
V07794 (178) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

