pg_0101.pdf:
V07794 (100) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
72
[Chap. IV. Sec. 35.
III. He should decide in outline what form his report should
take, and whether a sketch or plan will be required
to supplement the map on any particular points.
iv. He should make sure that he has got all the imple-
and orders constantly in mind; and, so far as possible,
put himself in the position of the commander for
whom the reconnaissance is being made.
2. The essentials of a military report are clearness, con-
ciseness and accuracy. The information in it should be
precise and definite; vague or ambiguous expressions must
be avoided. Thus "
a fairly wide stream," " a large quantity
of forage" may mean anything; if exact figures cannot be
given, an approximation should at least be made, e.g;
a stream about 20 feet wide," " about ten tons of hay.
It is more important that the information in a report
should be relevant and accurate and that it should arrive
in time to be of use than that the report should be elaborate.
A report should contain no information already available
from other sources such as a map, but negative informa-
tion or information confirming something already obtained
is often of value.
Reconnoitring officers must remember that reports in
the field often form the basis of a plan or movement so that
inaccuracies may have serious military consequences.
3. The clearness of a report depends much on its form and
arrangement. A long rambling statement in narrative form
is difficult to grasp and inconvenient to refer to.
The following rules will assist to make a report easily
readable :—
i. The report should be headed with the subject of the
report and the name of the officer making it, e.g. :
" Report on the suitability for mechanical trans-
port of the route from X to Y, by Lieut. Z."
ii. A margin should be kept on the left-hand side of the
body of the report; the headings of the paragraphs
should be written in this margin, and underlined ;
all paragraphs should be headed and numbered.
iii Reports should be signed (giving rank and unit), dated
and, if necessary, timed.
V07794 (100) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

