pg_0041.pdf:
V07794 (40) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
12
[Chap. I. Sec. 5.
iv. Harassing fire, employed to hinder the conduct of the
defence, and to reduce the morale of the defenders
by preventing or hampering movements of reinforce-
ments, food and ammunition to the front.
In the defence—
v. Counter-preparation—i.e., fire directed on the enemy's
forming-up places and forward communications, so
as to disorganize and, if possible, break up an attack
which appears to be imminent.
vi. Defensive fire, used against troops actually attacking.
It is usually put down on pre-arranged areas in
co-ordination with the fire of other weapons, especi-
ally of machine guns, and is fired on a pre-arranged
signal. If the enemy can be actually seen attacking,
they will be engaged with defensive fire by all
batteries whose observers can see them, although
the pre-arranged signal may not have been given.
Vil. Antr-tank defence, to provide a second line of fire if
armoured fighting vehicles break through the front
line.
In certain circumstances field guns may be
placed in or near the front line with a primary role
of anti-tank defence.
viii. Counter-battery fire and harassing fire,
with similar
objects to those of such fire in the attack.
The artillery will also always be prepared to support
counter-attacks.
7. Artillery is normally dependent for fire effect on obser-
vation of the target; but targets once " registered " (i.e.
ranged on by actual shooting) can be engaged with a reason-
able degree of accuracy without further observation.
In
certain conditions, when the positions of the guns and of the
targets have been exactly determined by survey, or when
large scale maps are available, artillery can open accurate
fire without observation or previous registration, and can
thus obtain surprise effect; this is known as predicted
shooting. Since survey work takes time, the relative
importance of speed or secrecy must be taken into account
in deciding whether to open with registered or predicted fire.
In shooting either by previous registration or by prediction,
observation is desirable to enable errors to be corrected.
Since artillery is normally placed in indirect positions, i.e.
out of sight of its targets, observation must generally be
carried out at some distance from the guns. The selection of
V07794 (40) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

