pg_0185.pdf:
V07794 (184) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
156
[Chap. VIII. Secs. 80 and 81.
local reserves behind the flanks of the forward troops; they
will then be well placed to envelop the enemy's flank or to
deal with a counter-attack from the flank. The reserve,
with which may be machine guns and engineers for consolida-
won, may be in any formation suitable for movement and
control.
Connecting files to maintain touch from front to
rear and laterally should be freely used. The frontage
covered by a battalion in a night advance will be less than
by day, and will not normally exceed about 600 yards.
The commander of the force should be well forward so
that he can exercise control in the event of some unforeseen
obstacle or development.
5. If there are obstacles, known or suspected, to be cleared
away, small parties of engineers may be detailed to accom-
pany the forward troops. It there is delay in removing
obstacles, the troops will lie down till a passage is cleared.
All ranks must clearly understand what their action is to be
should the enemy open fire before the objective (or forming-up
place) is reached. Unless other orders are issued, the
advance will be continued steadily in the same formation
and at the same pace.
6. The rate of advance will depend on the ground and
on the darkness of the night. It is not usually safe to count
on troops in deployed formation moving in the dark faster
than 100 yards in three minutes or about one mile an hour.
81. Night withdrawals
1. When in close contact with the enemy, a withdrawal, if
necessary, can more easily be effected at night, but proper
preparations must be made and precautions taken to avoid
confusion. The enemy, owing to the dangers of operating
at night without preparation and reconnaissance, will find
difficulty in organizing a pursuit at short notice and is
likely to follow with caution or to await daylight before
pursuing. On the other hand, if he discovers the with-
drawal, he may cause considerable loss and confusion by
concentrating his artillery and machine guns on the lines of
withdrawal; so that secrecy is of great importance and
every means should be used to conceal retirement.
Normal
activity should be maintained as long as possible by the
forward troops and artillery, and fighting patrols should
be sent out to drive off the enemy's patrois or keep them at
a distance.
V07794 (184) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association
www.vickersmg.org

