pg_0164.pdf:
V07794 (163) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VII. Sec. 68.]
135
On the other hand, for the infantry of the defence conceal-
ment is the primary consideration, both in order to surprise
the enemy and to avoid his fire. The two requirements-
observation for the artillery and concealment for the infantry
—will often be conflicting, since protection of the high ground
required for artillery observation may entail the infantry
holding exposed positions on the forward slope. The ideal is
that minor slopes and accidents of the ground should protect
the infantry, while commanding ground in rear or to the
flank gives the necessary observation. If such conditions do
not obtain, the commander concerned must face the problem
and decide to which of the considerations- good observation
or good concealment— he attaches the most importance in
view of his general plan of battle.
5. When the enemy possesses tanks, the question of defence
against tanks will always require attention and may be the
principal consideration in the plan of defence. Full advan-
tage should be taken of natural obstacles, and mines or
artificial obstacles may be used to economize anti-tank
weapons. The plan of anti-tank defence should be co-
ordinated by higher commanders in the area for which they
are responsible (see Sec. 39). It may sometimes be necessary
to site a proportion of the field guns with the primary object
of dealing with enemy tank attacks.
6. The suitability of the rearward part of the position must
be considered equally with the facilities for the forward
defences. Ground should be sought giving good artillery
positions, ample room for free and concealed movement of
local and other reserves (especial regard being paid to
armoured fighting vehicles, if available) and ease of supply
to the troops engaged.
7. Few positions are without certain more or less pro-
nounced salients. Salients are valuable in that they enable
enfilade fire to be brought against any enemy attacking the
front of the position to right and left; for this same reason
they are likely to receive special attention from the enemy's
fire, which can the more easily be concentrated on them by
reason of their prominence. Salients therefore usually require
special measures of defence, as being more exposed; they
can be flanked by fire from other parts of the position.
Similar considerations apply in a greater degree to advanced
posts in front of the main position; such posts may be useful
in breaking up the attack, but are themselves likely to be
V07794 (163) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

