pg_0095.pdf:
V07794 (94) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
66
[Chap. IV. Sec. 32.
and distance and, therefore, the methods of control and
intercommunication which are best employed. As a very
general guide, the limit of close reconnaissance is usually
about 15 to 20 miles in advance of our forward troops,
medium reconnaissance may extend up to about 75 miles
and strategical reconnaissance up to the limit of the radius
of action of the aircraft employed.
During actual battle, continuous reconnaissance during
the hours of daylight is usually required, at any rate until the
situation has become stable and the enemy's general disposi-
tions are known; it must be remembered, however, that,
as the duration of such a reconnaissance flight is about
two hours, the observer changes every two hours. Aircraft
employed on close reconnaissance are equipped with R/T.,
efficient up to a range of about 50 miles, for communi-
cation with the headquarters of the formation controlling
them.
Another form of tactical reconnaissance is reconnaissance
carried out for the needs of the artillery. Artillery recon-
naissance is required from the moment when the enemy
comes within artillery range and throughout the battle
period; its object is the location of targets for the artillery
and the direction of fire on to them. The information
obtained by aeroplanes engaged on artillery reconnaissance
is also often of great value to the other arms, and supple-
ments or confirms the information from close reconnaissance
aircraft. Communication is by W/T. from the air and by
R/T. or ground strips from the ground.
2. Air reconnaissance has certain limitations. Firstly, as
to weather: fog and falling snow may prohibit reconnais-
sance altogether, while ground mist, haze or low cloud. may
greatly restrict visibility. Secondly, air observation cannot
be relied on for detailed information: the movements of
small bodies will escape attention; friend cannot usually be
distinguished from foe; villages, woods and other cover
cannot definitely be reported clear.
Aircraft can fly and reconnoitre by night, but visibility at
night varies greatly according to the weather and the phase
of the moon. Railway movement and large bodies of troops:
on main roads may be seen under favourable conditions,-
but little detailed information is likely to be obtained without
the use of parachute flares, of which an aeroplane can carry
only a small number. Flares will enable pilots to give
V07794 (94) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

