pg_0206.pdf:
V07794 (205) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. X.
Secs. 93 and 94.]
177
often be necessary to spend much time in improving or in
making communications. Sanitation and medical arrange-
ments will need special attention.
3. The successful conduct of operations will depend greatly
on good information, topographical, ethnographical and
tactical, which is often difficult to obtain. The organization
of a good intelligence service will be one of the principal cares
of a commander in this type of warfare. Accurate topo-
graphical information, of the routes, of the water supply, of
weather conditions,
etc., will be of special importance.
Intelligence of the various peoples and tribes, their religion,
their attitude, their armament, numbers of fighting men,
resources, etc., will also be required. Maps may be unavail-
able or unreliable, and mapping from air photography or
ground reconnaissance may be necessary.
94. Considerations as to the type of enemy
1. Although it will sometimes happen that our opponents
in the type of countries under consideration will be civilized
and highly trained troops or native troops trained and led by
Europeans (as, for instance, in East and West Africa during
the Great War), it is more likely that the enemy will consist
of unorganized tribesmen, whose armament, tactics and
fighting qualities will vary considerably. The advantages
enjoyed by this type of enemy are his mobility, his inde-
pendence of a supply organization or of lines of com-
munication, his intimate knowledge of the country and a
natural aptitude for guerilla warfare and for stratagems,
ambushes and surprises. His tactics will usually be to avoid
engagements on any large scale; to collect for some enter-
prise such as a raid on a camp or convoy and then rapidly to
disperse; to attack the flank or rear of a column or its trans-
port rather than oppose it directly; to watch for an oppor-
tunity and to take advantage of any carelessness or rashness
on the part of a detachment. He is unlikely to possess
artillery or aircraft, but is likely to be well armed with modern
rifles and possibly a few automatics: his supply of ammuni-
tion is, however, likely to be precarious and limited. His
desire for loot, in the shape of rifles, ammunition and other
stores, makes it necessary that all equipment and stores should
be carefully guarded and escorted at all times; it may some-
times, however, be turned to account in setting a trap or
ambush.
V07794 (205) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

