pg_0119.pdf:
V07794 (118) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
90
[Chap. V. Secs. 41 and 42.
commander's intentions, of which he must always be fully
informed. Action against the enemy's flanks will usually be
the quickest and most effective way of dealing with minor
opposition; while a wide deployment is usually required
when more serious resistance is encountered (Sec. 43, 3).
An advanced guard should therefore move on a broad front
when possible, and must be prepared to deploy rapidly when
the enemy is met. Similar considerations apply to the task
of the commander of the advanced guard mobile troops.
(Sec. 42).
42. Advanced guard mobile troops
1. When an army is advancing, the commander will usually
send ahead a mobile force with the object of reconnaissance
or with some other special mission (see Field Service Regula-
tions, Volume III, 1935, Chapter III). The action of this force
will afford to the main columns information and a degree of
protection which will vary according to the nature of its
mission; but since it may be operating at a considerable
distance from the main body, it cannot be relied on for
local protection. A cavalry regiment, the main duties of
which are reconnaissance and protection, is therefore a
permanent part of a division.
2. The commander of a marching force with mobile troops
at his disposal, such as the divisional cavalry regiment,
may use a portion of them for some special reconnaissance
or other mission to the front or flanks.
Such portion as he
intends to employ for the protection of his column or columns
he will normally allot to his advanced guard commander,
or, if advancing in more than one column, to the commanders.
Such portions of the divisional cavalry regiment or other
mobile troops as are placed under the orders of an advanced
guard commander are called advanced guard mobile troops.
An advanced guard commander will usually keep these
mobile troops under his own orders, but may, if the advanced
guard is a large one, sometimes sub-allot a proportion to the
vanguard commander.
3. The advanced guard mobile troops will usually be
employed to cover the advance of the column by recon-
noitring and giving early warning of the presence of the
enemy, by driving away minor opposition and by checking
any advance on the part of the enemy. When they en-
counter opposition which they cannot overcome, they will
V07794 (118) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

