pg_0072.pdf:
V07794 (71) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. III. Sec. 21.]
43
Large bodies of horsemen, such as a cavalry division, may
be expected to average 25 to 30 miles a day and retain their
efficiency; and can cover 40 miles a day as a special effort.
3. Good marching depends firstly on careful arrangements
by commanders and staff to consider the comfort of the troops
and to save them unnecessary fatigue by all possible means,
so far as the tactical situation permits; secondly, on the
strict enforcement by regimental officers of the rules of march
discipline during the march, and on their management and
care of the men before and after a march.
Staff arrangements which affect the comfort of the troops
are the hour of starting, the selection and marking of the
route, traffic control, the provision for halts, the regulation of
the movement of " B" echelon of the first-line transport and
of the supply and baggage companies, so that the troops
receive their food, baggage and blankets with the least
possible delay, and good quartering dispositions.
The duties
of regimental officers,
besides the maintenance of march
discipline (Sec. 22), include the care of the men's feet, good
feeding arrangements, and the contrivance of as many hours
of undisturbed rest as possible (especially of rest during the
day, if the marching is done at night).
4. In fixing the hour of starting, time should be allowed,
if the situation permits, for the men to have their breakfasts
without hurry.
It must be remembered that, with a force
of the size of a division, if a time is named for the division to
pass a starting point, a considerable proportion of the troops
will have to rouse and start preparations three hours before
that time.
It is, however, preferable to start before daylight
rather than to reach the destination late; the halting place
for the night should, if possible, be reached at least two hours
before sunset, to enable outposts to take up their positions
and administrative arrangements to be made before dark.
The desire to avoid observation from the air may, however,
lead to a march being prolonged after dusk.
5. The starting point, which the head of the main body is
to pass at a certain time, is fixed in operation orders. If
troops are not all quartered together, it may be necessary for
the commander to fix more than one starting point, so as to
enable subordinate commands to take their places in the
column of march punctually, without unnecessary fatigue to
the troops and without crossing the line of approach of other
commands.
Each subordinate commander must fix his own
V07794 (71) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

