pg_0245.pdf:
V07794 (244) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
216
[Appendix IX.
APPENDIX IX
HEADINGS FOR RECONNAISSANCE REPORTS
The following are given as a guide to the points to be con-
sidered in furnishing reports:—
Aerodrome (or Landing ground)-Concealment from the
air (e.g. proximity to rivers, roads or other prominent
features); surface (nature, whether sufficiently level and firm,
slope and drainage,
estimate of work required to level or
remove obstruction); area (clear run of 600 yards required
in principal landing direction, which should preferably be
that of the prevailing wind) shape (giving points of compass) ;
air approaches and obstructions to landing and taking off
(e.g. trees, telegraph wires, buildings); ground approaches
(i.e. accessibility for M.l., etc.) and communications;
accommodation for personnel; water supply; any special
local meteorological conditions (e.g. prevailing wind, liability
to mist or fog).
Armoured troops Nature of country (as affecting cross-
country movement), obstacles (woods, streams, marches,
hedges), defles including towns and villages), capacity of
bridges, gradients, nature of soil, effect of rain; lying-up
areas (capacity, concealment from air, protection); supplies
of petrol and oil.
Attack-Extent of enemy position, location, and strength
of flanks; topographical weaknesses (e.g. defective field of
fire, lack of depth, exposure to observation, etc.) ; enemy
dispositions (guns, machine guns, anti-tank weapons, facili-
ties for observation, cover for reserves, likely positions for
tanks etc.); entrenchments and wire, obstacles; lines of
attack most favourable to co-operation between the arms;
forming-up places; dead ground; observation posts; artillery
positions; suitability of ground for tanks; best positions for
headquarters and lines for signal communications; suit-
ability of ground and roads for administrative arrangements,
etc.
V07794 (244) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

