pg_0091.pdf:
V07794 (90) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
62
[Chap. IV. Sec. 31.
rear should make provision for obtaining information inde-
pendently of reports from the troops actually fighting-by
observation posts, by special reconnaissances, through
liaison officers or non-commissioned officers.
He should
in fact send forward to obtain information, not be content
to wait for it to come back from the fighting troops. This,
however, in no way absolves the fighting troops from making
every effort to obtain and send back information.
Commanders of forward units, such as platoons and com-
panies of infantry, should be trained to send back frequent
situation reports giving the location of their own commands
and of neighbouring troops and information of the enemy.
Artillery observing officers, who are well placed to acquire
information, must not confine their reports to matters con-
cerning the artillery, but must send back all information
which may be of value.
Commanders should be cautious in accepting the state-
ments of stragglers and wounded from the front line; they are
often exaggerated and unduly pessimistic.
Topographical information is obtained in the first instance
from maps, and the ability to read a map properly, i.e. to
visualize the ground and its tactical properties, is a great
saver of time and a quality which every commander must
cultivate by practice. An eye for a map is quite as valuable
as an eye for ground. But the information acquired from a
map must be supplemented whenever possible by personal
reconnaissance or from the reports of reconnoitring detach-
ments or from air photographs.
Forecasts of the weather are often of importance: the
possibility of fog or mist may determine the hour of an
attack or affect the arrangements for defence; the direction
and strength of the wind govern the use of smoke or the
possibility of the enemy employing gas. A meteorological
section is usually attached to the headquarters of a large
force in the field.
2. The principal sources of information in the field are:
air reconnaissance and photography; reconnaissance to a
distance by mobile troops; actual contact with the enemy
and identification of his units obtained by fighting; observa-
tion from the ground of the enemy's dispositions; intercep-
tion of enemy wireless messages; interrogation of prisoners
or of civilian inhabitants; captured documents, etc.
Of the above, air reconnaissance enables information of
the enemy's movements and of the topography of the country
V07794 (90) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

