pg_0205.pdf:
V07794 (204) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
176
[Chap. X. Sec. 93.
CHAPTER X
SPECIAL TYPES OF WARFARE
93. General considerations
1. In the preceding chapters warfare in a highly developed
country against a civilized enemy has been the type mainly
considered. The principles laid down in these chapters are
of general value, but the methods of their application to
ighting in certain types of undeveloped countries will need
modifications to meet the special problems created by the
topography and climate of the country and the character-
istics and tactics of the inhabitants. The present chapter
gives an outline of these special problems and of the methods
which experience has shown to be useful in dealing with them in
the past.
Although experience is a most valuable guide,
new problems not covered by past experience are always
likely to arise as conditions change in accordance with the
progress of civilization and science, and will demand for their
solution commonsense, imagination and a faculty for
improvisation.
2. The particular types of country considered in this
chapter are mountains, thick forest or bush and deserts.
tach has its own special difficulties, but poverty of com-
munications is common to all and has a chief influence on
the conduct of operations. In mountains or in bush, the
roads or tracks are usually few and narrow, and movement off
them is difficult or impossible; in deserts, deep sand or rocks
may in places make the use of wheeled transport imprac-
ticable, while scarcity of water will limit the number of troops
and animals that can be employed. In mountains, bush or
desert local resources are likely to be small, so that the bulk
of the supplies required for the troops must be carried, often
over long distances. Thus in all three types of country the
size of columns must be reduced as much as possible; small
detachments will be frequent; and much will depend on the
self-reliance, skill and initiative of junior officers.
It will
V07794 (204) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

