pg_0153.pdf:
V07794 (152) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
124
[Chap. VI. Secs. 61 and 62.
difficult; opportunities are fleeting and hard to perceive.
If it is intended to use mounted troops to pass through the
infantry and exploit success, the operation must be care-
fully prepared; it cannot be left to the inspiration of the
moment.
The commander of the mounted troops, who
should be well forward, must be given considerable latitude
in selecting the time at which to launch his attack, aud
arrangements must be made for him to obtain early in-
formation,
by ground and air reconnaissance, of the
progress of the fighting. Special air reconnaissance will
usually be required. Effective touch between the infantry
and the mounted troops must be maintained by special
reconnoitring detachments, by liaison officers and by the
establishment of headquarters in close communication. In
order to save time and to allow of an immediate start when
it is considered that the right moment has arrived, the general
plan of attack of the mounted troops and the probable lines
of advance and objectives will, so far as is practicable, be
decided beforehand and communicated to subordinate leaders.
The mounted force should be assembled as far forward as the
situation and cover available permits.
4. The use of cavalry in pursuit is dealt with in Field
Service Regulations, Volume III, 1935, Chapter V.
62. Infantry in the attack
1. Except in an engagement fought entirely between
mounted or mechanized forces, infantry will be required in
the attack, either to carry out the assault or to occupy the
ground won by the action of the other arms. Infantry has
of itself only a limited offensive power except against un-
organized opposition, and needs the greatest possible measure
of support from the other arms or the cover of darkness or
smoke; to take advantage of such support, it must be led
with skill and determination.
2. The main requisites of infantry leading in the attack
may be summarized as follows :—
i. The attack should be organized in depth, so that
reserves are at hand to support the action of the
leading troops, to take advantage of their success,
to replace them when exhausted and to carry forward
the advance without a check.
ii. Every portion of the attacking force must be given a
V07794 (152) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

