pg_0230.pdf:
V07794 (229) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Appendix IV.]
201
11. When it is desired to inform addressees that the message
has been sent to other addressees, it will be ended thus:
(Using code names) " Addsd BOLO NEPA KILU."
(In clear) " Addsd 1 and 3 divs RA 2 div" or
" Addsd List A."
When action is required by some addressees only and the
message is to be sent to others for information, the message
will be ended thus :-
(Using code names) " Addsd BOLO rept NEPA
KILU."
(In clear) " Addsd 1 div reptd 3 div RA 2 div."
If an acknowledgment is required from those who have to
take action on a message, ie. those to whom it is " addsdis
"ack" will precede "addsd." If an acknowledg reptd,"
also required trom those to whom the message is
" all ack" will precede " addsd." But in order to reduce the
volume of signal traffic to a minimum, an acknowledgment
will be asked for only when it is urgently necessary for the
sender to know that a particular message has been received.
12. The time at which the message is signed by the
originator will be entered in the " Time of Origin" space.
13. The "THI" (Time handed in) space is for use in
signal offices, and the time entered in it may be used for
calculating the time of transmission.
14. All reports and messages will be signed by the originator
with his rank and appointment and the formation or unit to
which he belongs.
15. The originator is responsible for warning the inter-
communication personnel of any precautions necessary in the
method of transmission of a signal message. This he does
normally by signing in the appropriate space at the foot of
A.F. C 2128. When neither space meets requirements he
will give his instructions as to method in the space marked
"Degree of priority and instructions by originator."
It is unnecessary for the originator to delete the space not
signed.
If a special degree of priority (see Sec. 18, 2) is required
for a message, the words (e.g. emergency operations, etc.)
will be written in full in the space marked " Degree of priority
and instructions by originator."
Abbreviations will not be used.
V07794 (229) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

