pg_0117.pdf:
V07794 (116) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
88
[Chap. V. Sec. 41.
Tody timete tels to rectinite the tames to me a an
entails movement at a considerable distance from the line
of march, an advanced guard will require the most mobile
troops
available (e.g. cavalry for an infantry column,
armoured cars or light tanks for a mechanized column) ; and
since it has to fight, it will require a due proportion of the
fighting troops (mounted or dismounted) of which the main
column is composed and of the supporting artillery and
engineers.
Its actual composition and strength cannot be
made subject to rules; it will vary according to circum-
stances. It is desirable that, for convenience of command
and administration, it should when possible, comprise a com-
plete sub-unit, unit or formation.
Owing to the small
number of tanks normally available, they are not usually
placed with an advanced guard unless the whole column is
mechanized,
or there is a likelihood of hostile armoured
fighting vehicles being met, or some special reason exists for
wishing to deal rapidly with the hostile covering forces.
It is desirable that the advanced guard should be strong
in artillery (Sec. 43, 2). The nature of the ground will
often make it desirable that a portion of the field artillery
allotted to an advanced guard should be howitzers, since
they can get into action almost anywhere without delay.
Owing to its long range and shell power, medium artillery is
often of great value with an advanced guard, if an artillery
reconnaissance aeroplane is available.
A proportion of engineers will usually be allotted to the
advanced guard, to clear away obstructions, to improve
communications or to bridge obstacles. Whether or not
engineers are allotted to the advanced guard, an engineer
reconnaissance party will, whenever engineers form part of
the main column, accompany the advanced guard; it should
usually work well forward, with the advanced guard mobile
troops or with the vanguard.
A field ambulance, or a portion of it, will be allotted to
an advanced guard, if likely to be required.
2. An advanced guard is disposed and acts on the general
principles stated in Sec. 37, 3. Its main body is called the
main guard; from it is pushed forward a protective detach-
ment called the vanguard, which in turn throws forward an
advanced point and any other protective patrols necessary.
Beyond the vanguard again are the mobile troops allotted to
the advanced guard, whose action is considered in Sec. 42.
V07794 (116) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

