pg_0053.pdf:
V07793 (52) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
40
[Chap. V. Sec. 19.
important: the plan should be made known to subordinates
only as far as their part in the preparations necessitates, and
the greatest care must be exercised by all concerned to avoid
leakage of information.
The matters to be dealt with in the preparation of the
attack will include :—
i. The arrangements for the assembly and concealment
of the force intended for the main attack.
ii. The preparation of the front of attack, e.g. the
selection and marking (if necessary) of the place
from which the assault will start.
iii. The artillery plan for the battle, the selection and
concealment of positions for reinforcing artillery,
the collection of the necessary ammunition, survey
arrangements.
iv. The tank plan, and arrangements for dealing with any
wire on the enemy front.
v. The engineer plan of work, e.g. improvements of
communications in the forward area (in position
warfare, this may include the extension of light
railways and tramlines, the construction of head-
quarters, observation posts, etc.).
vi. The provision of signal communications (in position
warfare, this may involve the burying of cables).
vii. Administrative arrangements, e.g. medical supply,
provost, etc.
viti. Plans for air reconnaissance, air bombardment and
for obtaining air superiority.
3. The arrangements to obtain surprise will fall under two
heads: concealment of movements and intentions, and
deception of the enemy. The former lies mainly in the
province of careful staff work-movements by night, con-
cealment of troops by day, hampering of air observation by
camouflage, prevention of leakage of information, and so
forth: and may be termed the negative side of the plan
for surprising the enemy. The positive side, i.e. the measures
hocted towards milang the ete , easie cos orable
altogether the preparations for attack, it may be advisable
to have preparations made at two or more places simul-
taneously, leaving the enemy in doubt as to which is the
real point of attack. The spreading of false information,
V07793 (52) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

