pg_0067.pdf:
V07793 (66) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
54
[Chap. VI. Secs. 25 and 26.
brigade, divisional or corps reserves) and the general reserve
in the hands of the commander of the whole force. Local
reserves are used to make local counter-strokes; to protect
a threatened flank; or, occasionally, to relieve an exhausted
unit or formation. The general reserve may be used to
extend a flank and prevent a hostile turning movement ;
to carry out a large scale counter-attack to restore the
situation where the enemy has gained a success; or, if
The size, composition and location of the general reserve
must depend on the time for which it is anticipated that
the position will be held, the extent to which the flanks
are vulnerable, the period that has been available for the
preparation of the position and the communications and
cover available. It is often better, especially if the flanks
are reasonably secure, to allot to subordinate formations a
comparatively restricted front that will allow them to dis-
pose of strong local reserves, so that they can fight their
action with their own resources, rather than to stretch their
frontages in order to keep in general reserve a complete
formation, which may then have to be split up to support
or reinforce various parts of the front.
7. Should the enemy gain a success and penetrate the
position, the first step is to fill the gap and check the hostile
advance, the next to re-establish and consolidate an un-
broken front: these measures are the role of the local reserves.
The general reserve, or a part of it, will then, if considered
advisable, undertake a deliberate counter-attack.
26. The counter-offensive
1. The only real difference between an entirely offensive
battle and a defensive battle in which a decisive counter-
offensive is part of the original plan lies in the way in which
the preparatory phase (see Sec. 18) is conducted. Whereas
a commander's aim in the entirely offensive battle is to fix
and exhaust the enemy in the preparatory stage by attack-
ing him with part of the force, the planner of a counter-
offensive battle hopes to induce the enemy to fix and exhaust
himself by making the first attack. In theory this promises
well, since defence especially in a prepared positionis
more economical than attack, and should therefore enable
a commander to assign a larger proportion of his force to
V07793 (66) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

