pg_0058.pdf:
V07793 (57) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Secs. 19 and 20.]
45
disposal for this difficult but essential business of feeding
the front with fresh troops, and of keeping up a forward
flow till the enemy's final reserves are overthrown and his
front broken.
20. The action of the reserves
1. The reserves are of two kinds: the local reserves in
the hands of commanders of formations engaged in the
original assault, e.g. brigade, divisional or corps reserves,
which are used to ensure the success of the original attack,
to overcome any unforeseen opposition and to enlarge the
breach made in the enemy's defences;
and the general
reserve in the hands of the commander of the whole force,
which usually consists of a complete formation and is intended
to deliver the decisive blow that will confirm the overthrow
of the enemy and compel his withdrawal from the field of
battle.
2. The engagement of the local reserves-which may
1935, Sec. 57, 3. The fighting at this stage of the battle
presents very great difficulties. No special rules for guidance,
beyond the general principles already laid down in the
above-quoted section, can be given. Success will depend
on the arrangements made for rapid intercommunication;
on the mobility of the reserves; and on the skill and initiative
of subordinate commanders.
Reserves should as far as
possible be fresh, fed and rested when committed to action.
3. The place and moment at which the general reserve
will be committed to battle may be pre-determined in the
original plan, or may be left for determination in accordance
with the progress of the attack. In the latter event, the
superior commander must decide with whom is to rest the
decision to launch the reserve: he may himself go forward
and take personal control at this crisis of the operation;
or he may leave the decision either to the commander of
the troops through which the reserve will pass or to the
commander of the reserve itself (see also Field Service Regu-
lations, Vol. II, 1935, Sec. 61, 3). The problem of giving
sufficient mobility to the general reserve may be solved by
the use of mobile troops with mechanized artillery, or by
bringing forward infantry in mechanical vehicles.
The launching of the general reserve should be the decisive
V07793 (57) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
/ICKER

