pg_0041.pdf:
V07793 (40) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
28
[Chap. III. Sec. 13.
both flanks of the enemy and threatening envelopment.
This method is simple, and, if successful, decisive: it is
likely to be effective against an enemy inferior in numbers,
armament and moral, and may succeed against an equal
or superior enemy: the dangers are that the whole force is
committed at once and loses its power of manœuvre.
The
commander can influence the battle only by his original
dispositions and directions; he has no reserves with which
to manœuvre, except those that he may succeed in con-
stituting during the battle.
The alternative method is to engage the enemy along his
whole front with part of the force while keeping in hand
the largest possible general reserve with which to strike
when the preparatory action has fixed the enemy's attention,
used up his reserves and disclosed his weak points. This
method aims at ensuring that the decisive blow, when
struck, shall be made at the right place and the right time :
the difficulties lie in ascertaining when the right time has
come and in moving the general reserve to the right place
without delay. The larger the forces engaged, the more
difficult this will be.
A compromise between the two
methods, in which the bulk of the forces are deployed early,
while a comparatively small proportion is kept in hand to
meet later developments, may be effective where large
forces are concerned.
The offensive battle is further discussed in Chapter V.
Deployment and preparations for the defensive battle are
dealt with in Chapter VI.
4. In any deployment and preparation for battle, the
organization in rear of the battle-front must receive careful
attention if congestion and confusion are to be avoided
Routes for various purposes-the forward movement of
reserve units or formations, of ammunition and of supplies;
the backward movement of casualties, of empty ammunition
and supply vehicles-must be allocated and must be carefully
controlled by the provost corps: posts to deal with refugees
and civilian traffic must be established: signal communi-
cations must be protected from damage.
Failure to organize
the area effectively may have serious results on the tactical
conduct of the battle,
since reinforcements in troops, in
munitions and in supplies will be delayed; messages
or
liaison personnel may fail to arrive; and traffic congestion
may have disastrous consequences if a withdrawal should
become necessary.
V07793 (40) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

