pg_0044.pdf:
V07793 (43) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. IV. Secs. 14 and 15.]
31
3. When a commander is absent from his headquarters
to visit his subordinate commanders or for any other purpose,
he must leave in charge a responsible officer, who must
know his commander's intended movements, so that urgent
messages can reach him, and also his plans, so as to be able
to deal with the situation if necessary.
15. Liaison officers
1. In addition to his own personal visits, and those of his
staff officers, a commander may keep himself informed of
the situation of his subordinate formations and convey
orders and information to them by means of liaison officers
(see Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Sec. 16, 8).
2. A liaison officer for each immediately subordinate for-
mation is included in the establishments of corps H.Qs.
and of G.H.Q. In divisions and in cavalry and infantry
brigades, officers or N.C.Os. selected from subordinate for-
mations and units, are attached to headquarters temporarily
during active operations.
The duties of liaison officers are to provide a closer touch
between the headquarters concerned than is possible by
other means; to convey the higher commander's orders, and,
intervals, generally at the end of definite phases of an opera-
tion; and to keep flank formations informed of the course
of events and of future intentions, and to obtain similar
information from them.
Whether they should be located at the headquarters of
the higher commander or at the subordinate headquarters
will depend on whether the conveyance of orders or of
information of the situation is more important for the time
being; the decision will rest with the higher commander.
3. The usefulness of liaison officers will depend to a great
extent on the provision of means of rapid transport.
higher formations, intercommunication aircraft, when avail-
able, will be most valuable; otherwise light cars should
normally be provided.
In smaller formations,
transport
will have to be improvised according to the means available.
Special arrangements for signal communication may some-
times be required.
V07793 (43) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

