pg_0070.pdf:
V07793 (69) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VII. Sec. 27.]
57
CHAPTER VII
THE WITHDRAWAL
(See also Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935, Secs. 45-50)
27. General considerations
1. The withdrawal of an army in the face of the enemy
may be forced on it in order to disengage from an unsuccessful
battle; or to avoid having to accept battle in a disadvan-
tageous strategical or tactical position. Or it may be under-
taken as part of a strategical manœuvre: to gain time for
the arrival of reinforcements; or to draw the enemy's
army on to more favourable ground for action;
or
until a lengthening line of communications, with the con-
sequent need for protective detachments and increasing
difficulties of supply, has reduced the strength of the opposing
force. Such manœuvre in retreat, if skilfully conducted,
may often provide a favourable opportunity to gain a
success: but the disadvantages and dangers must be realized.
Retreat has a depressing effect on the morale of one's own
force, while that of the pursuing enemy is correspondingly
raised. The effect on national opinion of giving up territory
(if in one's own or an allied country) and on neutral opinion
of the apparent inferiority of one's army in the field must be
Stragglers, vehicles and materials left
behind will be lost. In a friendly country the retreat may be
embarrassed by crowds of refugees, and in a hostile country
by the action of the inhabitants, who may be emboldened
by the apparent defeat of their foes. This last danger
arises particularly with the inhabitants of less civilized
countries. A commander is sometimes apt, for the above
reasons, to postpone giving orders for a withdrawal, although
he realizes that a withdrawal is the wisest policy: such
postponement may, however, increase his difficulties when
retirement is forced on him.
2. A withdrawal, forced or voluntary, requires the most
careful preparation, especially on the administrative side.
V07793 (69) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

