pg_0075.pdf:
V07793 (74) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
62
[Chap. VII. Sec. 29.
attention, especially against armoured fighting vehicles, which
may be sent ahead by the enemy to secure bridges, etc.,
before they can be demolished. The rules for the firing of
tactical demolitions are given in Field Service Regulations
Vol. II, 1935, Sec. 49.
4. A scheme of strategical demolitions is aimed principally
at the enemy's maintenance system, and has as its object
to make it impossible for him to supply a force of any size
in the area thus treated without very extensive repair and
construction. It thus requires the destruction of the railway
or railways in the area and of the main roads for mechanical
transport. Delay-action mines will be most effective in in-
creasing the enemy's difficulties and in delaying the forward
move of his railheads. A carefully worked out plan, plenty
The first stage should be to create a complete belt of de-
to allow the troops to disengage cleanly and to enable the
secondary belts of destruction to proceed unhampered.
5. Co-ordinated schemes of demolition, whether strategical
or tactical, will usually be initiated by G.H.Q., who will
retain the responsibility for ordering the preparation for de-
struction of the principal railways, waterways and road
communications, but may delegate to lower formations the
power to initiate and carry out demolitions of light railway
systems and of roads other than main roads. Similarly, the
issue of orders for the actual firing of the charges on im-
portant railway structures (bridges, tunnels, etc.), of water-
way structures (locks, aqueducts, etc.) and of
main road
bridges will generally be reserved for G.H.Q.; but in circum-
stances of urgency the responsibility may be delegated to
lower formations.
The preparation and execution of demolitions in the road
system will be carried out by the engineers of formations
or by engineer units acting directly under G.H.Q.; but the
responsibility for the design, preparation and execution of
the demolition of railways, waterways, telegraphs, etc., and
of depots of stores and installations of all kinds will rest
with the services or directorates concerned.
It is, however,
the duty oi corps headquarters to co-ordinate the whole of
the demolition operations within the corps sector, so as to
ensure that there is no hiatus and that the operations of one
V07793 (74) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

