pg_0066.pdf:
V07793 (65) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. VI. Sec. 25.J
53
manders. In the absence of orders to withdraw, outpost
troops will, like other troops in defence, hold their positions
to the end (see Field Service Regulations, Vol. II, 1935,
Sec. 67, 5).
5. In position warfare, the object of an outpost system is
to ensure that the main system cannot be subjected to a
sudden overwhelming attack without warning. The outpost
system should therefore be sufficiently far in advance to
ensure that preparations made for the attack on it will not
be immediately applicable to the attack of the main system
behind. No definite rules can be laid down; on
some
parts of the front the lie of the ground or the strength of the
main system may be such that an outpost system is not
possible or necessary; on other parts of the front that are
specially liable to attack the outpost system may be of
considerable extent. It will often happen that the forward
defended localities of a position originally chosen for tem-
porary defence will develop into the outpost system in
protracted defence.
The strength in which the outpost system will be garrisoned
in position warfare and the time for which it will be held
will depend on the plan of the higher commander for fighting
the defensive battle; it must be held in sufficient strength
to require organized attack by the enemy, but it may some-
times be advisable, in order to save losses, to withdraw the
outpost troops at a suitable time, when the enemy has fully
disclosed his intentions but before he actually delivers his
attack. The responsibility for ordering such withdrawal
and its co-ordination with neighbouring sectors must be
clearly defined.
6. In defence, even more than in attack, a commander
will find difficulty in maintaining an adequate reserve and
And dificulty.
in using it to the best advantage. The calls on his reserves
are apt to be more frequent, more urgent, more unforeseen
and more critical. In attack, when a commander has used up
his reserves, it may mean that the attack has failed of has
come to a stop for the time being; but a commander in the
defence who has no further reserve to meet a fresh enemy
effort is in danger of defeat and disorganization. He must
therefore always endeavour to reconstitute a fresh reserve,
by withdrawal from the front least severely pressed, when
his original reserve is exhausted
Reserves in the defence consist of local reserves (ie.
V07793 (65) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

