pg_0026.pdf:
V07793 (25) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. II. Secs. 6 and 7.]
13
2. Overseas expeditions present two very different pro-
blems according to whether the disembarkation of the force
is likely to be opposed or not. The problem when the
landing is likely to be opposed by land and possibly at sea,
as well as from the air, is discussed in Sec. 7. If disembarka-
tion is not liable to interference, except by hostile air action,
it will usually take place at a harbour or harbours, selected
for their capacity and general convenience, their defensi-
bility against air attack and their position as regards the
communications into the zone of operations (see Sec. 8).
3. Details of the officers and troops (including, when
necessary, a covering force) required to precede the army
to the theatre of war, and to make the preparatory arrange-
ments for its disembarkation, accommodation, protection
and movements to the theatre of operations, are laid down in
the Manual of Movement (War), 1933, Sec. 54. The officer
appointed to command, until the arrival of the commander-
in-chief, will take all necessary steps to secure the disembarka-
tion and concentration areas of the field force against
enemy action; will establish relations with the civil authori-
ties and assume such measure of civil control as is necessary;
and will organize an intelligence service and measures for
censorship.
4. It is essential to organize as early as possible the
measures of air defence for the protection of the disembarka-
tion and concentration of the force. This will include the
immediate organization of an air defence observer system to
give warning to the air force fighter squadrons and to the
anti-aircraft defences of the approach of enemy aircraft.
7. Opposed landings
1. The landing of a force on enemy territory in the face
of opposition is always a difficult and often a hazardous
undertaking, which requires elaborate preparation by all
three Services.
The details of such preparation are outside
the scope of this manual, in which only a general outline of
such an operation can be given. Owing to the time required
for the preparations and for the collection or manufacture
of the necessary material, a landing operation on a large
scale cannot usually be launched until some time after the
outbreak of war.
2. A force of any size can hardly keep the field without
V07793 (25) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

