pg_0032.pdf:
V07793 (31) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. Ill. Sec. 10.]
19
distribution and movements. Or it may be so important
to conceal one's own designs that the mobile troops will be
used as a protective force. Or they may be given a special
mission to delay the enemy, to attack his communications
or to mislead him and draw him in a desired direction.
Or,
if the information is reasonably complete and there is no
need or opportunity for a special mission, the commander
may decide to keep them intact for use in the main battle.
If mobile forces are employed on a special mission, it will
usually be advisable to allot aircraft for reconnaissance
duties to work directly under the commander of the mobile
troops.
5. Since the majority of the fighting troops still consist
of horsed artillery and infantry moving on foot, whose rate
of progress governs the pace of operations as a whole, the
considerations given in the following paragraphs have
reference mainly to marching columns: but they will apply
also to mechanized movement, which is likely to become
more general with progress in mechanization (e.g. of artillery
and of the first-line transport of infantry) and must therefore
receive increasing attention.
6. Generally speaking, a force may move in linear for-
mation, in depth or in echelon; or it may use some com-
bination of these. The advantages of a linear formation,
in which the army moves in a number of parallel columns
covering a wide front, are that it gives facilities for envelop-
ment of the enemy's forces, enables the whole army to be
put into action rapidly and makes maintenance relatively
easy. It is in fact the simplest form of movement for a large
force, provided that sufficient good roads are available.
Also it leaves the enemy uncertain as to where the main
strength lies.
Its chief disadvantage is that little manœuvre
or change of direction is possible, and, if the enemy's position
or intentions have been miscalculated, the columns may be
exposed to defeat in detail. An army disposed in depth,
on the other hand, can manœuvre more readily in any
direction, but requires more time to deploy: its maintenance
is more difficult than that of a similar force in line, since
more troops have to be supplied by the same route. A
movement in echelon is a compromise between movement
in line and movement in depth: it has more depth and
power of manœuvre than a formation in line, while possessing
similar advantages of rapid deployment and ease of main-
V07793 (31) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

