pg_0015.pdf:
V07793 (14) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
2
[Chap. I. Sec. 1.
one of several means employed to bring the struggle to a
successful conclusion and to overcome the will of the opposing
nation: the resources of diplomacy, economic pressure
and other methods are employed simultaneously and in
combination so as to assist allies and embarrass the
opponent.
2. The ultimate national aim in war is to force the
enemy to abandon the purpose for which he resorted to
arms and to conclude peace on satisfactory terms.
To
achieve this aim the will of the enemy nation to continue
the struggle must be overcome, by occupying the whole
or a part of his country; or by so interrupting his vital
lines of supply and commerce by sea or by land-as to
deny him the means of conducting his national life; or by
forcing him by these or any other means to realize that his
aim is impossible of attainment or beyond the effort that
he is prepared to make.
The navy, army and air force will act in combination to
break down the enemy's resistance and accomplish the
national aim. It will usually be necessary to defeat or
neutralize the enemy's armed forces and so to deprive him
of the power on which he chiefly relies to obtain a decision
in his favour.
The air force, which can strike rapidly and
directly at the vital centres of the enemy, will contribute
to the breakdown of the enemy's resistance by attack on
military objectives calculated to achieve the enemy's defeat,
as well as by direct co-operation with the navy and army.
The policy for the conduct of the war, the resources to be
employed and the distribution of the available man-power
and material are decided by, the Government in consultation
with the heads of the three services (see Sec. 2).
3. The sea is the principal highway between the widely
distributed portions of the British Empire which has interests
in every quarter of the globe; the control of sea communica-
tions is therefore its primary consideration in war: the army
may be required in the first instance to secure and to defend
bases for naval action. In conflicts in which sea power is
not at stake or is already sufficiently firmly established, the
command of the sea will enable the army to be transported
to any theatre where it can most effectively further the
attainment of the national aim, provided adequate protec-
tion from air attack can be assured. In an Empire with so
many interests to protect and so many calls on its resources,
V07793 (14) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

