pg_0060.pdf:
V07793 (59) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Chap. V. Secs. 21 and 22.]
47
that he till erate early rough which it o the situations.
4. The speed at which the operations of a mobile
and armoured force will develop will usually preclude any
co-ordinated plan for support by other troops. The co-
operation of aircraft will be of great value.
22. Pursuits
1. Only by effective pursuit can a victory be completed
and its tull fruits obtained, but to organize and carry out a
vigorous pursuit is one of the most difficult operations of
war. Besides the physical exhaustion and disorganization
of the troops at the end of a battle and the administrative
difficulties, such as repairing communications, replenishing
ammunition and bringing up supplies, there is a mental
reaction to be overcome, which tends to affect all who have
taken part in the battle from the superior commander
downwards, in proportion as the fighting has been severe
and drawn out. To overcome this reaction and the inertia
that it brings is the first duty of a commander who has won
a success.
The initiation and execution of an effective
pursuit will depend mainly on his will-power and energy.
2. The nature of the pursuit and the risks which can
be taken will depend on the extent of the victory and on
the strategic situation, e.g. the proximity of other hostile
forces in the theatre. Unless the enemy is completely
demoralized, a direct pursuit by itself is seldom effective:
the interception of the enemy's line of retreat at some
tenle, bridge or other favourable point by mobile troops
pushed past his flanks, combined with a direct pursui
by the main body, is the best means of obtaining decisive
results. Armoured troops, such as tank brigades, will, by
reason of their power and mobility, be especially effective
for interception in a pursuit; in this role a tank brigade
together with other mechanized formations will usually act
as part of a mobile division. The direct pursuit should be
on as wide a front as possible, so that, if the enemy makes a
stand and checks one portion of the pursuers, other portions
will be available at once to turn and attack his flanks.
wide front will also facilitate supply arrangements.
Bold
action by all arms and by the air force is essential in a pursuit
and considerable risks may be accepted.
V07793 (59) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

