pg_0063.pdf:
V07793 (62) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
50
[Chap. VI. Sec. 24.
designed to keep the defence intact and to meet contingencies
such as a threat to the flanks; as will also be the general
reserve of a commander who fights a defensive battle to
prevent the enemy gaining a decision—as, for instance,
When covering a siege, detending a frontier or holding a
base for naval or air force operations. Even in a battle
fought with a purely defensive object, there may, however,
be local and limited offensive strokes.
The counter-offensive battle is further considered in
Sec. 26. The remainder of this section and Sec. 25 deal
mainly with the purely defensive battle.
3. The considerations that guide a commander in choosing
and organizing a defensive position, when he has liberty
of choice, are set forth in Field Service Regulations, Vol. II,
1935, Secs. 68 and 69, and are applicable to forces of all
sizes. In selecting a defensive position, a commander
should, when possible, reconnoitre it from the enemy's
point of view, i.e. as if about to attack it.
This will often
suggest means of remedying weaknesses in the defence.
The principal matters to which the commander of a large
force acting defensively has to give attention may include
the influence of the strategical situation and of the time
factor on his choice of position and conduct of the battle;
the size of his general reserve; the security of his flanks;
his scheme for defence against armoured fighting vehicles ;
the use he may make of an outpost force to conceal his main
position and to hamper and break up the enemy's attack;
and the organization of his rear services. These problems,
in so far as they have not already been dealt with in Field
Service Regulations, Vol. II, are discussed in Sec. 26.
4. When a force is thrown on the defensive as a result of
a period of open fighting, and static conditions set in, it
may find itself on some portions of its front in a position
disadvantageous for defence. The commander will then
have to decide whether to carry out any local and limited
offensive operations to secure a more favourable position;
or to accept the disadvantages and build up his defensive
system from his existing front as best he can; or to with-
draw to an area better suited for defence.
His decision
will depend on his present means to undertake any local
offensive to improve his position and on his hopes and
intentions for the future; if he anticipates a protracted
defence, he will often save many casualties and much anxiety
V07793 (62) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

