pg_0043.pdf:
V07793 (42) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
30
[Chap. IV. Sec. 14.
CHAPTER IV
THE COMMAND AND CONTROL OF HIGHER
FORMATIONS
14. The commander
1. The amount of direct personal influence that a com-
mander exercises should always be as great as possible;
it will, however, vary with the size of his command. It is
the duty of every commander from the highest downwards
to see for himself the battlefield over which his command
is to fight, to ascertain the situation and the morale of his
troops by frequent personal visits to his formations anc
units, and to show himself to his troops whenever possible.
Aircraft enable a higher commander to get a general (but
not a detailed) view of the battlefield that is often valuable.
In addition, they allow him to pay frequent visits to lower
or flank formations without waste of time.
2. During the battle, all commanders in their degree
must keep in close and constant touch with the fighting
troops, and must be prepared to intervene personally in the
conduct of the battle, when necessary.
To obtain a clear
and accurate idea of the real situation is the most difficult
problem of a higher commander in battle, and the difficulty
increases with the distance of his headquarters from the
front. The timely collection and confirmation of information
will demand the full utilization of air reconnaissance, ground
intelligence, the service of liaison officers and the reports of
*subordinate commanders; rapid transmission must be facili-
tated by the organization of the signal service. These means
should be supplemented by personal visits of the commander
and officers of his staff. Such visits enable the higher com-
mander to see and gauge for himself the tactical situation
and the conditions and the morale of his troops, and to use
his personality to maintain the confidence of his subordinate
commanders and the fighting troops.
V07793 (42) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
/ICKERSM

