pg_0035.pdf:
V07793 (34) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
22
[Chap. MI. Sec. 11.
be composed and conveyed with skill, should not be hap-
hazard, but should fit in with the general impression that a
commander wishes the enemy to receive from movements
that he is bound to observe. Thus, information exaggerating
the size and misrepresenting the intentions of a detachment
sent to induce dispersion of the hostile forces may assist it
to accomplish its purpose: but to spread reports of which
the opposing commander can quickly ascertain the falsity is
of little value.
3. Manœuvre against an enemy's communications may
have as its aim actually to cut the enemy off from his
base and force him to surrender or fight at a disadvantage ;
or, by a threat to do so, to cause him to disperse his forces
for their protection. The manœuvre or threat may be
made by the whole army or by a detachment. The inter-
ception of an enemy's communications is usually decisive:
the danger is that an army can rarely approach its opponent's
communications without exposing its own. A threat by a
detachment at some other vulnerable point may also be used
to induce dispersion. The general aim of all strategical
manœuvre is, in fact, to upset the equilibrium of the enemy
commander; to cause him to disperse his forces so that
they can be beaten in detail; to take advantage of the
geographical features of a theatre of war; and to bring
about battle in the most favourable conditions. No formula
or set of principles can assure success: there are no recog-
nized openings or gambits in war, as there are in chess;
each strategical problem must be dealt with on its merits
as a problem in geography, in time and space calculations,
in organization, and above all in knowledge of human nature.
It is not sufficient that a commander should make no mis-
takes; he must cause his enemy to make mistakes.
A
commander's plans must always remain flexible and capable
of adaptation to changing circumstances and the enemy's
counter-moves.
4. Apart from purely protective detachments to guard
the communications and base, strategical manœuvre will
often require detachments at a distance from the main army.
The purposes for which such detachments may be made
have already been indicated-to induce separation of the
enemy's forces by threatening some point vital to him or
to prevent the junction of hostile forces that are already
separated are the two principal aims for which large
V07793 (34) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

