pg_0021.pdf:
V07793 (20) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
8
[Chap. I. Secs. 3 and 4.
the enemy, by an unexpected rapidity of movement or by
action in an unsuspected place. Surprise loses much of its
value, if means are not available to make full use of its effects
-as,
for example, when a surprise attack is made with
insufficient reserves for exploitation, or a new weapon is
prematurely disclosed by use before sufficient tests or before
a sufficient quantity or sufficient numbers are available.
vi. To cultivate by all means the power to move and to
act more rapidly than the opponent, i.e., mobility, is an
essential requirement in all strategical preparation and
execution, and may therefore be considered as a strategical
principle. The elements of mobility are good training, good
organization, good discipline, good staff work and especially
the skill and will-power of the commander.
Such are some of the chief principles or methods on which
successful strategy is based: to choose wisely an aim
within the means available; to concentrate all possible
resources on the attainment of that aim; by skilful
economy to provide reasonably adequate security for vital
and vulnerable points, so as to have a firm foundation on
which to base oftensive action; to seek always to surprise
the enemy by stratagem and by superior mobility. They
are guides also to tactical action (Field Service Regulations,
Vol. II, 1935, Sec. 11). They are in themselves simple:
but the factors that have to be taken into consideration in
applying them are numerous and complicated: for example,
calculations of time and space; the influence of topography
and climate; the condition of one's own troops;
the
numbers, morale and armament of the enemy, which are
often only imperfectly known; the enemy's
intentions,
which are practically always unknown and can only be
surmised; problems of supply; the means of movement,
and so forth. Such factors enter into the calculations of
all commanders: a commander-in-chief will often have to
deal, in addition, with two further uncertainties— political
requirements and the demands of allies.
4. The command of military forces
1. The essential qualities of leadership are defined and
explained in Training Regulations, 1933, Sec. 2. These
qualities are required of commanders of all grades: the
commander-in-chief of a force in the field and other superior
commanders and staff officers must possess, in addition, the
V07793 (20) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

