pg_0007.pdf:
-2 -
3. Drawings at Sector Stores Dumps will be under control of BRASCO.
Replenishment fwd of A Ech and formation of Bde A Ech dump will be the
responsibility of OC H.Q. Sqn of the senior regt present in the absence
Of DAA & QMG or Staff Captain.
4. Sector Stores Dumps will close and MA open for amn early on D + 1.
Div Pro will direct tpt accordingly.
5. At Appx 'F'is a forecast of build-up of amn.
REPLENISIMENT OF DD SONS
6. (a) Porpoises towed in by wading san 13/18 H will replenish DD tanks as
a priority commitment.
(b) In the event of DD tanks being still on the beach and requiring amn,
porpoises will be unshackled on the beach above hich water
(This is necessary as any porpoise subsequently left submerged may cause
serious danage to wading vehicles).
Ty Lars of DD tanks requiring replenishment on the beach will hoist a
red, white and blue flag (rally flag).
Tanks towing porpoises will make their way fron the water's edge across
the beach by tracks made by previous arrivals. Lateral movement will
Porpoises will be unhooked in area swept by flails
sufficiently clear of main beach exits to allow replenishment to proceed
without blocking the track.
After replenishment,
porpoises which have been opened on the beach will
lie. No tank or vehicle will be allowed to return
to the beach to draw further amn. Beach Gp have undertaken to clear
residue of amn into Sector Stores Dumps as and when towing vehicles
become available.
(c) In the event of DD tanks having moved inland, porpoises will be towed
inland and unshackled at a suitable site for clearance by M. 14's of 13/18 H.
CONTROL OF DUMPING
7. (a)Staff Captain will land with Staffs Yeo to recce site for Bde amn dump in
detail and to control dumping by M. 14's and 13/18 H. lorries.
b) If site chosen for Ide A Ech is still threatened by enemy at the time of
his arrival, he will form an intermediate Bde amn dump. As soon as tactical
conditions pernit,
Bde dump will be formed near bito' for Bie A Ech.
c)A meeting point will be fixed at which Staff Captain will leave a guide
to dirept M.14's and lorries to Bde amn dump.
CIBARANCE OF PORPOISES TOWED BY STAFNS YEO AND E.R.Y.
8. (a) Porpoises towed by Staffs Yeo and E.R.Y. will be unshackled either:
(i) In their concentration area, or
(il)at third lateral,
(iii) near site of Bde A Ech
in accordance with the tactical situation,
the intention being that
porpoises should be towed as close up to Be A Ech as the situation
allows. They will NOT be towed to a flank if Staffs Yeo or E.R.Y. are
diverted fron general direction of Bde A Ech.
If dumped at third lateral, porpoises will be unshackled atothe nearest
points on its further side where there is sufficient ground suitable
for manoeuvre by M.14'sand loading. Porpoises MUST be left clear of both

