pg_0022.pdf:
21. And Bde Mai
roject
MOST SECRET
Copy No.4.0.
Section 22
MEDICAL
POLICY
In the early stages,
it will not be possible to provide full scale medical
installations,
but sufficient medical personnel, equipment and transport
will be landed to collect and give skilled first aid to all wounded, and to
provide life-saving surgery for those unfit for evacuation.
All casualties fit to travel - estimated at over 90% of wounded - will be
evacuated to UK as soon as transport is available; remainder,
i.e. those
unfit for evacuation, will be retained for treatment in F.D.S. or C.C.S.
until fit to travel.
VOYAGE
3-
(a) Sea sicknoss tablets will be issued.
(b) Casualties occurring in ships will remain in the ships; casualties
occurring
parent ship or ship specially nominated.
This is
a navol responsibility.
PHASING IN
R.M.0. in M14 lands with each Armd Regt on first tide. Iwo more M14's per
Arma Regt will be available for collection of casualties after clearance
brought in by porpoises.
5.
One sec Fa Amb lands with each int bn, remainder of each Fa Amb with Inf
Bde Hodes.
6. Med units of 5 and 6 Beach Gps land first and second tides respectively.
Sec 11 It Fa Amb (18 personnel,
2 amb cars, 1 3-ton lorry) land D + 2;
11 Lt Fa Amb light scales on D + 6.
STREICHERS AND MEDICAL, STORMS
8.
Bde first line tpt lands 90 stretchers, each with 3 blankets,
on first tide.
These will be retained for own use and replaced as necessary from B.M.A.
9.
Medical stores will be available on D + 1 from ORD in B.M.A.
COLIBCTION AND EVACUATION OF CASUAINTES
Casualties on
landing
10.
Casualties on beaches up to the third lateral,
approximately 1 mile inland,
will be collected by stretcher bearers of Beach Gp. reinforeed by stretcher
bearers from Pioneer Company,
and taken to a Beach Dressing Station.
One Beach Dressing Station will be established on each Beach not later
than H + 2 hrs.
Casualties Inland
11.
Casualties beyond third lateral will be collected by stretcher bearers of
Armd Regts (spare crews) inf,
and RoA.M.O. They will be taken to R.A.Ps or
collected in nests on axis of advance for evacuation by M14's of Armd Regts
or tpt of Fa Ambs to F.D.S. of Beach Gp, set up by H + 5 hrs.
12.
When A.D.S. are stabilised, evacuation will be normal, i.e. R.A.P. - C.C.P.-
A.DoS. - F.D.S. At the F.D.S. cases unfit for evacuation overseas will be
retained; those fit for evacuation to UK will be sent to No. 1 Casualty
Evacuation Post, open by H + 4 hrs.

