pg_0011.pdf:
- -
FEPLENISHYENT ON D. DAY
6. (a) All vehicles other than tanks will replenish fran jerricans brought in
by "B" vehicles as set out in pera 5 above.
(b)
An officer and six N.C.O.s of 90 Coy R.A.S.C. will land with tanks of
E.R.Y. They will bring their own M.C.s.,
petrol tanks of which will be
filled from jerricans brought in by E.R.Y.
as described under para 1 (c)
above. This officer will coordinate
and control P.O.L. supply for the
Bde, and will be referred to as "POLO". Six N.C.O.s will act as guides
under his orders.
(o) After de-waterproofing, POLO and six guides will report to Staff Captain
and remain at his disposal until Be A Ech is formed. With this object they
will RV at inland extremity of Tracks Transit Area where they will be met
by a guide whom Staff Captain will detail. Should guide fail to meet them,
they will proceed to Bde A Ech as soon as the tactical situation permits.
(d) When Bãe A Ech is
established, POLO and six guides will be located there
(1) to manet contrat on of a and Rowater anace routes
to regtl RVs prior to arrival of tpt pl 47 Inf Bde Coy R,A.S.C.
pre-loaded with P.O.L. and derv. (due to land at H + 15).
(e) POLO and three guides will return to Vehicle Iransit Areas,
by H + 14. They will meet tpt pl. 47 Inf Bde Coy.
RoA.S.C. there and, after
vehicles have de-waterproofed,
will guide it to Be A Ech.
Sub sec Pro landing with R.A.S.C. tpt pl will be responsible for control
on route fwd and return,
under cond POLO. Remaining
three guides will recoe
routes to regtl RVs. returning to Bae A Ech by H + 16 in readiness for
arrival of tpt pl. Each of these guides will be allotted to a separate Arma
(f) Ipt pl 47 Inf Bde Coy R.A.S.C. lands at H + 15 pre-loaded with 56 tons
plus 6% lubricants and greases. Pl. will proceed
guided to Bde A Ech as provided in para 6 (e) above.
(g) On reaching Bde A Ech lorries of tpt pl will be detailed by POLO to replenish
sqns in accordance with demands received. Iwo R.A.S.C. guides will lead
each regt to regtl RV (previously recced as set out in para 6(e)
above). At regtl RVs san
guides will be waiting and will lead fwd lorries
each to his own sqn. R.A.S.C. guides will wait at regtI RV for lorries to
(h) Replenishment will be carried out as rapidly as possible,
to return for second load. To avoid congestion not more
replenished fran one lorry at the same time. Sgn guides will lead lorries
back to regtl RV as soon as their sgn has been replenished. From regtl RVs
R.A.S.C. guides will lead lorries back to Bde A Ech.
(i) On returning to Bde A Ich lorries will be routed back to B.M.A. under orders
POLO to collect a further load of 46 tons petrol and 34 tons derv, plus 6%
lubricants and preases.
in the same manner as
(j) R.A.S.C. lorries will be loaded so far as possible
of mixed tps are met without sending fwd an unnecessarily large number of
lorries to sqns.
(k) Any petrol,
derv, lubricants and grease NOT required for replenishment of
tanks,
either from pre-load or return load,
will be dumped at Bde A Ech.
(1) Replenishment of tanks of Bde HQ and Flail Sgn will proceed on the system
laid down above,
details to be fixed by D.A.A. & Q.M.G. with POLO in
acordance with their location at the time.
(m) After replenishing tanks and dumping balance of load as laid down above,
tpt pl 47 Ini Bde Coy R.A.S.C. will revert to C.R.A.S.C's control. POLO
and six R.A.S.C. guides will be attached HQ 27 Armd Bde until 90 Coy R.A.S.0.
lands.

