surplus owing to the troops returned from the B.E.F. being subsisted on
the Home Service Ration
Scale,
instead of the Field Service Scale; and
finally, to an arrangement whereby flour and sugar were held by the Ministry
of Food in Port Areas, thus saving transport, rail costs, and double handling.
The stock situation had been adjusted by February, 1941, and the total
tonnage held in S.R.Ds. and M.S.Ds. averaged 160,000 tons until June,
1942, when a fall began, largely due to the run-down of the S.R.Ds. at
Barry and Taunton before they were handed over to the U.S. Forces.
circumstance also resulted in a reduced intake into the S.R.Ds. until alternative
accommodation had been provided and prepared for the reception of supplies,
and intake did not begin to rise again till the end of the year.
Meantime, despatches overseas, which, after the evacuation of the B.E.F.,
had averaged 25,000 tons a month, had fallen to 15,000 by the end of 1941,
mainly due to Middle East being self-supporting at that stage of the war.
In the middle of 1942, they began to rise, reaching a peak of 40,000 tons
at the end of the year, due to shipments to North Africa.
By February, 1943, the build-up of reserves in that theatre had been
completed; but stocks at home had been considerably depleted in con-
sequence, and in December, 1942 fell to 108,000 tons the lowest figure since
the middle of 1940.
preparation for "Overlord", which continued until the absolute peak for
the war of 260,000 tons was reached in March, 1944.
This process was assisted by reduced shipments overseas during December,
1943, and January and February, 1944, which were made possible principally
by the development of the campaign in North Africa and the move of the
troops thence to Italy.
Force, which was supported direct from Middle East and through various
War Supply agencies of the Ministry of Food.
In January and February, 1944, the issues to home depots increased
from an average of 20,000 tons a month to a figure of 30,000 tons, owing
to the stocking-up described elsewhere in this volume to relieve the strain on
to the stocking in months immediately preceding the mounting of " Over-
lord", and during the subsequent initial stocking of the depots in France.
As might be expected, the despatches overseas in June and July, 1944,
were huge, 40,000 and 72,000 tons respectively; but, with an increased intake
at home to balance these outgoings during July, August, and September, the
stocks in the S.R.Ds. and M.S.Ds. were not ultimately greatly depleted for
some months.
By October, the build-up of reserves in France had been completed, and
this allowed for a considerable reduction in the reserve holdings at home.
The issue of stocks of Compo 14-men and special packs accounted for a
large part of the fall to a figure of 200,000 tons by the end of the year.
At the same time,
there were increased issues to home depots as part
of the strategic plan for the disposal ase stocks from the S.R.Ds. in the
London Dock Area in anticipation of the V.1 and V.2 attacks.
Despatches overseas rose to over 50.000 tons in January and March.
1945, and to 65,000 tons in April, principally on account of the develop-
ments of the campaign in North West Europe.
Owing to the rapid advance
and the opening up of the port of Antwerp, some maintenance shipments
and additional reserves were shipped there so 21 Army Group no longes
228
drew on stocks in the Caen area by way of a long line of communication.
In this way, also, transport and personnel in France were made available
for employment on other important operational duties.
and Base areas were cleared later, as described in Chapter VIII.
The stocks in Caen
In May, 1945, the despatches overseas had fallen to 25,000 tons.
time, the stocks in S.R.Ds. and M.S.Ds. had begun to build up again in
anticipation of the war in the Far East, and by the end of the war in
Europe had risen to 220,000 tons.
Command Supply Depots-Pre-War Situation
The detail issue of supplies to the forces in the United Kingdom was,
in 1938, effected through 32 R.A.S.C. depots and stores.
The depots were the forerunners of the later C.S.Ds., and regularly
received and issued a limited range of commodities; the stores were mere
dumps in which rations for T.A. camps, etc., were collected.
only in stations where there were both regular troops and a R.A.S.C.
officer i/c supplies.
In August, 1938, however, it was seen that this organization was in-
adequate to meet the rationing requirements of the newly-established Air
Defence of Great Britain, for the troops of A.A. Corps were widely dispersed
and in isolated locations.
Plans were therefore made to set up a complete
R.A.S.C. organization for A.D.G.B., so that R.A.S.C. depots
brought into existence to handle its supplies; and it was also agreed that
N.A.A.F.I. should set up, as far as they were able, a complementary organiza-
tion to deal with items covered by the messing cash allowance.
time they maintained only one warehouse, at Kennington in S.E. London,
otherwise relying on drawing from contractors as required.
course, a dangerous situation, as there was no dispersion of reserves.
depots were expanded, and further sites were acquired by hiring or new
construction, and plans were made for the opening of further depots after
In many cases these were to be in A.D.G.B. mobilization
stores, which would be quickly emptied of the equipment they contained.
As the result of this policy, there were by the time war broke out 50
R.A.S.C. supply depots, 28 N.A.A.F.I. depots and 270 N.A.A.F.I. messing
The expansion of R.A.S.C. depots had proceeded almost entirely under
Personnel for R.A.S.C. services in commands
were authorized by a comprehensive War Establishment; but, in fact, the
expansion took place with very little reference to the establishment.
29th August, 1939, provisional W.Es. were issued for each home command,
allocating personnel only by districts or sub-districts, detailed employment
being left to Os.C... R.A.S.C.
" Sliding Scale" Establishments
The rapid increase in the ration strength at home during the remainder
of 1939 and the early part of 1940 was such that the increases required in
R.A.S.C. depot establishments were always outpacing the alterations made
in the provisional War Establishments, and it was not until August, 1940,
that there was any attempt to restore order.
229
WO 277/21
27
