given number of "balanced rations", ie. complete according to the scale
The number of balanced rations provided for in a policy holding
would allow a B.S.D. to maintain for a given number of days, if required,
a certain force in its entirety with all R.A.S.C. supply items held in the
depot.
The supplies which arrived in a theatre in satisfaction of demands were
directed by the D.S.T. of the force to the B.S.Ds. which required them to
maintain their policy holdings.
Such bulk receipts might be received from
the United Kingdom, Empire or Colonial, Allied, foreign, or local resources.
For overseas requirements from North America, a complete year's pro-
gramme was sent to the British Food Mission in U.S.A., which made the
necessary arrangements for procurement of the supplies.
arrangements regarding movement, etc., see Chapter XIII, on British Army
Staff, Washington. Shipment of supplies from sources other than U.S.A. and
Canada was arranged direct with the Freight Division of the Ministry of
Food, the Commodity Divisions concerned being responsible for ensuring
that the supplies were available by the date required.
Home demands were submitted as required by C.P.O. (F.S.), who
notified tonnages required, the delivery periods, and
the depots to whom
delivery was to be made.
These demands were sent to the relevant com-
modity divisions, who arranged release from Ministry stocks.
requirements were dealt with in a similar manner, forward programmes being
received and agreed with the Ministry. N.A.A.F.I. then arranged its own
calling foward of supplies as required.
Stock Control in U.K.
Stock control and provisioning of the Supply Reserve Depots and Main
Supply Depots in the United Kingdom were co-ordinated and
by the C.P.O. (F.S.).
Each depot was given a "policy holding", and re-
plenishment to this holding was arranged monthly by the C.P.O., either
by direct delivery from contractors or through Ministry of Food channels.
All demand and contract action was initiated by the C.P.O. The depots
were more or less storeholders only, and their responsibilities were confined
(a) Correct receipt of supplies off contract, ensuring that they were in
accordance with specification.
(b) Correct storeholding, and that supplies were fit, as and when occasion
demanded, for shipment overseas.
(c) Passing bills for payment, on receipt of supplies.
General Staff reserves for main ration items, hospital supplies, disinfec-
tants and miscellaneous items, plus maintenance as considered necessary by
C.P.O, were divided among depots in proportion to their potential holding
based on the area available, so that each depot, in principle, held a
balanced selection of all commodities and special packs.
Maintenance of
dei policy holdings at each depot was regulated by monthly allocations of
deliveries from contractors and from M. of F. sources.
218
Provision Policy
At least until the middle of 1941, arrangements for the acquisition of
the food supplies required for Army and R.A.F. subsistence had not been the
subject of any uniform plan, but purchases had been made ad hoc for parti-
cular commitments, and generally in a somewhat hand to mouth fashion.
This system left much to be desired, and, in September, 1941, D.S.T. took
steps to ascertain the plans of the General Staff for 1942, with a view to
more orderly planning.
He pointed out that the danger of invasion might
well pass, and the question of an expeditionary force begin to be thought
In such an event, there might be a serious danger of an offensive
operation having to be postponed, in consequence of the time-lag which
would ensue in the production of foodstuffs in the right form and quantities
for a large number of troops as the result of insufficient warning having
been given of the requirement.
This representation resulted in the institution of a new method of determin-
A meeting was called of the War Office Branches
interested, at which information was forthcoming on provisional projects
for 1942 and the spring of 1943.
sequent meetings were to a very large extent concerned with the provisioning
of troops overseas, but their decisions included provisioning for the United
Kingdom and the reserves for all purposes to be held there.
Reserves in the United Kingdom
In 1938, reserves of supplies, as the term was later understood, did
not exist in the United Kingdom, apart from what was held in S.R.D. on
B.E.F. account and small local administrative reserves.
Reliance was placed
mainly on civilian resources for the additional military requirements on
The experience of the Munich crisis, however, showed the need for a
reserve in Army hands, not so much to meet commitments on mobilization
as to provide a precaution against breakdown in civil transport and local
non-availability of civil supplies.
Accordingly, a reserve of three
R.A.S.C. ration commodities (preserved meat, biscuits, tea, sugar, and salt)
was approved to be held in commands for the expected strength of Army
and R.A.F. personnel to be located there on mobilization.
iSe in emergency, and not to provide for the interval between mobilization
and the time when the normal supply system would be able to maintain
The initial allocation was based on an estimated
feeding strength of 650,000 raised to 1,000,000 in August, 1939.
who had hitherto held no reserves, agreed to hold 30 days' stock of certain
non-perishable items for the Army at peace strength, equivalent to seven
days for the estimated strength 30 days after mobilization.
In October, 1939, home reserves under command control were increased
to seven days for tea, sugar, salt, and flour (baking and culinary). Preserved
meat and biscuit holdings were on a fixed allotment for each command on
the scale of three days' preserved meat and two days' biscuit, totalling about
3,000,000 rations of each; cocoa, rum, sugar, and tinned milk, for issue
in inclement weather, were to be held as required up to 30 days.
219
WO 277/21
27
