MOBILE PETROL FILLING CENTRE- continued
Function and Composition
Essentially a mobile filling unit, designed to replace the B.P.F.C.
maintenance and repair section allowed for the repair of returnable
containers.
(See Chapter XII, Section 5).
Could fill up to about
8,000 containers a day.
PETROL TIN FACTORY OPERATING COMPANY
Personnel
5 Officers, 141 Other Ranks. Increment, 30 Other Ranks.
Technical Equipment
Equipment and tools for operation and maintenance of a petrol tin fac-
tory.
Function and Composition
Static unit to operate on a two-shift basis, a factory with single line plant
for the production, filling, sealing of non-returnable tins.
The incre-
ment provided for the operation of a double line plant.
The factory
could turn out 5,000-6,000 filled tins a shift for a single line of machines.
PETROLEUM (TECHNICAL) STORES DEPOT
Personnel
7 Officers, 107 Other Ranks.
Technical Equipment
Repair and maintenance section equipped with four 3-point testing, two
5-point gas-freeing, and three can-washing machines.
Vehicles included
one store and one workshops lorry.
Function and Composition
Supply of technical stores for petroleum units and maintenance of equip-
Consisted of :—
(a) Stores section, with advance stores sub-section for forward area;
(b) Maintenance and repair section,
for the repair of all types of
welded returnable containers, and emergency
maintenance and
repair of bulk installation equipment; had an advanced sub-
section for forward area.
MOTOR BOAT COMPANY (MILITARY OIL BARGES)
Personnel
14 Officers, 249 Other Ranks.
Technical Equipment
Unit designed to operate 25 powered military oil barges, in one flotilla of
five divisions, each of five craft.
Seven launches, one salvage tug, one
landing barge (engineer), three dumb barges (for fuel and water), 25
dinghies, one breakdown tractor, etc.
Function and Composition
The carriage of bulk petrol from tankers to shore installations and floating
storage.
334
APPENDIX IK
34.C.A.141311
(See Vol. I, pages 279 and 341 Vol. II, page 89)
PETROLEUM UNITS, MISCELLANEOUS
H.Q., C.R.A.S.C., PETROLEUM UNITS (LIGHT)
Personnel
7 Officers, 21 Other ranks.
Technical Equipment
Nil.
Function and Composition
To administer and control a group of petroleum units as directed. Estab-
lishment included one petroleum engineer (major) and one subaltern ;
subaltern at discretion of theatre commander.
H.Q., PETROLEUM BULK STORAGE COMPANY (LIGHT)
Personnel
5 Officers, 23 Other ranks.
Technical Equipment
Vehicles included one 3-ton lorry, machinery.
Equipment and tools for
operation and maintenance of bulk petrol installation.
Function and Composition
Capable of administering up to four Petroleum Bulk Storage Platoons, or
Petroleum Pipeline Platoons.
Included one petroleum engineer (cap-
PETROLEUM BULK STORAGE PLATOON (LIGHT)
Personnel
2 Officers, 40 Other ranks.
Technical Equipment
Equipment and tools for operation and maintenance of bulk petrol in-
stallation.
Function and Composition
This platoon was similar to a Bulk Petroleum Storage section, but was
organized into a platoon H.Q. and three sections, to permit of detach-
ments being formed as required.
H.Q., PETROLEUM COMPANY
Personnel
2 Officers, 8 Other ranks.
Technical Equipment
Function and Composition
To administer and control from two to five Petroleum Platoons, when
concentrated to operate a single large depot.
This provided the neces-
sary depot H.Q., and ensured a uniform working policy and adminis-
335
437477)
WO 277/21
27
