to September, and two winter, from October to January, and from February
to May, respectively.
The allowances for heating did not apply in the
summer period.
Fuel was delivered in bulk into unit coal-yards, and, generally speaking,
the actual way in which it was used was left to the discretion of the com-
manding officer, provided that consumption did not exceed total entitlement.
Overdrawal was charged against the unit unless special circumstances could
be pleaded in explanation,
such as abnormally cold weather.
used were A.Fs. F 727 and F 771, for which see Appendix XII.
The forms
With the influx of personnel into the Army who were inexpert in this
system,
desirability
of simplifying the account
was
Accordingly, in March, 1940, a scale of fuel was introduced in substitution,
which consisted of three steps (of 46, 56, and 66 lb. a man a week respectively),
applicable in different circumstances. (For full details see A.C.I. 217 of 1940)
In 1942, a further simplification was introduced, reducing the three steps to
a flat rate of 56 lb. (See A.C.I. 560 of 1942.)
In 1943, a revolutionary stage in fuel accounting was reached (see A.C.I.
1512 of 1943).
This was the simplest fuel account hitherto produced, amount-
ing merely to a record of receipts, issues, and remains.
Entitlement, in the
formerly accepted sense of the word, was abolished; but a target was printed
on the form, based on the scale of 56 lb. a man for a week, purely as a
guide to commanding officers when reviewing their consumption.
It was
hoped that the introduction of this form would mean that accounts would
be furnished to officers i/c barracks promptly at the end of each month,
which would, for one thing, give them earlier information of the stocks held
by units.
This hope was realized, and commands and Command Secretaries
reported that the new system had led to economy in fuel, thanks to the
closer watch on the accounts made possible by their prompt preparation at
the end of each month.
In 1944 the simplified system was extended to over-
seas stations where static conditions prevailed.
Supply of Solid Fuel in the United Kingdom
In peace, the Director of Army Contracts was responsible for making
contracts for the supply of coal and coke in the United Kingdom.
He issued
tenders hased on
the estimates furnished by commands, and notified the
commands of the approved contractors in due course.
When the war broke out, and fuel was urgently required for new camps,
etc. he the car broke out, ana fuel as is procedure on such a huge scale.
and the requirements of the Army were met to a great extent by means of
local contracts, formal or otherwise.
The abnormally severe weather conditions, which prevailed from abour
Christmas, 1939, It ate weather, Conditions, very serious repercussions on
the fuel situation and there was difficulty in obtaining adequate supplies of
coal and coke, and reserves were diminished.
The Service Departments were
asked in February, 1940, to assist the general fuel position by limiting their
demands for fuel to the amount sufficient for current consumption, and to
refrain from special efforts to build up reserves to any large extent.
was necessary, as the coal industry was fully occupied with the maintenance
of supplies to meet current needs.
268
As soon as output exceeded demand, however, it was the policy ot the
Department for all consumers, including the
build up stocks of solid fuel to the greatest practicable ex ep:
War Department,
to
The War
Office was asked to consider putting down central reserves at convenient
centres, so that the utmost use might be made of train-load working, at
least during the creation of the reserves.
is described below, in the section dealing with reserve dumps.
The implementation of this policy
The return of the B.E.F. and consequent increased requirements made it
inevitable that stocks of fuel which would otherwise have been available
for civilian use were diverted to military purposes. The position was parti-
cularly difficult in the south and south-east, where bombing was disrupting
rail traffic.
In order to direct coal to wherever it was most needed in the
national interest, therefore, the Mines Department (later the Ministry of
Fuel and Power) took over control of all coal output and directed supply
to factors and others, rather than allowing them to obtain their requirements
by demands on producing areas as was done in peace.
It was agreed in November, 1940, that Aldershot Command, Eastern
Command south of the Thames, and Southern Command, should have their
coal supplied on a programme by agreement between S.T.6, (Movements).
and the London and South Emergency Committee, a trade off-shoot of the
Mines Department.
Some coal would be delivered by ship to Dover, South-
ampton, and Plymouth, and then railed to destinations; the remainder would
be delivered in complete trainloads to convenient regulating stations.
The
rail programme from ports to consuming stations was made the responsi-
bility of the Rail Branch in the War Office, Movement Control watching traffic
from the ports and ensuring that it arrived safely at due destinations.
coal factor, appointed by the Mines Department, was to act for the War
Department at each of the coal-producing centres, handling all business,
being responsible for despatch, and allotting coal as necessary and practicable
among existing contractors.
In June, 1941, the paramount necessity for drawing coal from the most
appropriate district made it necessary to extend this system of programming
to all home commands, so far as house and ordinary large steam coal were
concerned.
No change was made in the system of supply of graded fuel and
specialized steam fuel.
The estimated requirements of commands for the year beginning Ist
July, 1941, were considered in conjunction with the Mines Department.
was decided that D.Ds.S.T. of commands should co-ordinate the demands
trom their Officers i/c Barracks, and, in concert with the Movement Branches
of the commands, notify the local representatives (area committees or coal
supplies officers) of the Mines Department of the list of railway stations at
which coal was required, approximate weekly tonnage, and names of current
contractors or local suppliers.
Except for very exceptional small and urgent
requirements necessitated by the unforeseen move of troops to a plan not
already covered by the programme, no direct demand would be made on local
officers, ir The Mines Departistricts the commands were to be supplied.
The Mines Department told their area committees or coal supplies
command got its coal from those mining areas which, by reason of the type
of coal and method of transport available, were most suitable in the national
interest.
269
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
