were to be passed through C.R.A.S.C. of the group of companies concerned,
who would decide which company was
to be used
The decision to adopt this policy was important, and may be compared
with the similar decision taken at the end of 1938, which established the
principle of the training of R.A.S.C. transport units being put before the
requirement to keep down hiring costs.
The matter was one which formed
a constant cause of difficulty during the war, largely due to pressure from
the civilian population, who saw military transport standing idle or running
empty, and could not understand why civilian transport was being hired at
the same time. They did not, of course, appreciate the fact that the drivers
of the vehicles standing idle might be engaged in some form of dismounted
or that vehicles running empty might be
engaged in an exercise, say, the supply of ammunition.
Local transport
duties of the " fetch and carry
" type, with vehicles working more or less
individually, afford a certain amount of practice to a driver, but cannot take
the place of organized training for the rôle of the transport unit in war.
In April, 1945, the restrictions on the use of the transport of field force
units were lifted, and the availability and employment of all W.D.
transport reverted to normal practice, with financial costs the ruling factor.
Road Haulage Organization
• The Ministry of War Transport decided in February, 1941, to set up
a separate branch, called the Road Haulage Organization, to deal with the
conveyance of long-distance road goods traffic on Government account.
control of this was placed under Regional Transport Commissioners, who
exercised it through Divisional Road Haulage
Officers (D.R.H.Os.) and
Area Road Haulage Officers (A.R.H.Os.). As will be seen, this organization
concerned the W.D. transport organization to a very considerable extent.
The initial scheme was intended to be confined to the movement of
selected regular blocks of traffic between the following places, and/or others
within a certain radius of them: London and Liverpool, Birmingham and
Manchester, London and Bristol.
The Ministry accordingly asked S.T.3 for information about any W.D.
traffic which might be available for inclusion in the scheme.
No War Ofice
branch, however, had any regular blocks of traffic operating on these routes.
It may be noted in this connection that Army traffic in the United Kingdom
was, at least during the war, almost always too irregular both with regard
to the timing of consignments and their volume; units were moved too often
to make it suitable for any such regular scheme on a large scale.
The "Charter Fleet" Scheme
Later, the Ministry put forward a scheme by which it proposed to under-
take the responsibility for the movement of at least part of the road-borne
the Minatic for Government departments by carrying it without charge in
the Ministry's " Charter Fleet" of vehicles on permanent hire.
The scheme
did not at the time affect W.D. trame, nowever, as all of it which was carried
202
in civil transport was conveyed either under contract or in hired vehicles;
and no War Office branch offered sufficient traffic to justify the use of the
scheme, except that Ordnance were prepared to use it from their depot
at Didcot to a considerable extent if vehicles could be made available at
Other large ordnance depots were instructed to use the
scheme whenever possible, but not to the detriment of existing rail facilities
or of the " milk-round" return-load scheme in operation at those depots (q.v.).
The scheme was put into operation in February, 1942.
of that year, the Ministry was once again trying to find ways and means
of increasing the use of the civilian road transport which came within the
scope of the Road Haulage Organization.
Representatives of the M.O.W.T.
were accordingly afforded facilities for visiting Central Ordnance
to investigate the possibility of the use of the services of the organization.
At the same time, the Ministry put forward revised proposals on the
control of all goods vehicles engaged in general haulage over distances of
This really amounted to an enlargement of the Charter
Fleet, on which the War Department was by now making considerable
It was now proposed that traffic to be carried by the Road Haulage
Organization (R.H.O.) should be divided into three classes, i.e.: —
Traffic to be moved over distances of 60 miles or more from
places other than dock centres was to be offered to unit controllers
(i.e., the local controllers of small groups of operators).
(b) Traffic from the principal docks, exclusive of London, was to be
controlled by the area office of the R.H.O.
(c) Short distance traffic, i.e., under 60 miles, was to be accepted by
the area office of the R.H.O.
Vehicles of abnormal construction, e.g., low-loaders, tippers, etc., were
excluded from the scheme.
The agreement between the War Office and the M.O.W.T., mentioned
earlier in this chapter in connection with the War Office policy of increased
hirings, did not come into force for many months, owing to the slow process
of negotiations with the road haulage industry by the Ministry. Meanwhile,
all the army's requirements of civilian load-carrying vehicles for casual
services, not obtainable on a tonnage basis, under existing contracts, were
to be obtained through Area Road Haulage Officers.
to assist M.T.L.Os. in arranging return loads.
It was eventually January,
1944, before the M.O.W.T. issued the instructions dealing with the pro-
cedure to be followed in the provision of civilian road transport for W.D.
administrative services through the R.H.O.
M.O.W.T. Responsible for Providing Civilian Transport
The agreement between the War Office and M.O.W.T. mentioned above
was to the effect that the latter should provide and control all requirements
of civil transport for W.D. administrative services on an agency
203
WO 277/21
27
