In March, 1942, the G.O.C.,
Bermuda,
had informed the War Office
that the arrangements were not satisfactory, owing to the uncertainty, delay
and cancellation of shipments of foodstufis from the United Kingdom, and
the shortage of foodstuffs for the civilian population.
It was
that foodstufis should be obtained under Lend-Lease terms from B.A.S.,
Washington, and this was agreed to.
Later in the year, there were difficulties over the supply of food for the
garrisons in the Bahamas, Trinidad, and British Guiana, and it became
evident that the arrangements generally were not satisfactory.
The D.Q.M.G.,
B.A.S., visited the stations concerned, and, as the result of his recommenda-
tions, War Office directed that Commander, B.A.S., should assume responsi-
bility for the administration of North and South Caribbean Areas and
Bermuda, in all "Q" matters.
Administrative Instructions
The Administrative Instructions issued to give effect to these orders
contained a number of items of interest, summarized as follows: —
No communications were to be addressed direct to War Office on "Q"
administrative matters, except in cases of extreme urgency.
When supplies
could be more advantageously procured from the U.S.A. than locally, a
monthly demand was to be cabled to B.A.S. for the articles required.
a demand had been placed it would stand until it was either completed or
cancelled.
The next demand placed would not in any circumstances in-
clude outstanding items from previous demands.
It was desirable that the
shipping space from U.S.A. required each month should remain constant,
and, whenever possible, demands should be arranged with that end in view.
It would have been highly inconvenient to make a large number
small purchases each month from U.S.A., so stations were to submit a
forecast of their requirements at three-monthly intervals,
however, to be considered as a firm demand.
Quantities for which receipts
had been given were to be taken on charge and reported by cable to War
Office,
repeated B.A.S.
Financial adjustment for foodstuffs obtained under
Lend-Lease was not carried out locally.
Receipts for all foodstuffs were
therefore to be sent to the War Office.
All stations were to maintain a
G.S. reserve of 45 days, and also to hold a further 135
perishable items, unprocurable locally, as a working margin.
Revision of Procedure, 1943
After the experience of the previous two years, this procedure was
revised in the spring of 1943; the system of maintenance for the Caribbean
areas and Bermuda was defined in the following terms.
i and Bermuda was defined in the following te U.S. Navy on request by
B.A.S. Washin requirements were met by thable through the U.S. Navy
were supplied by B.A.S. from warehouse stocks.
In such
circumstances.
covering demands were placed by B.A.S. on War Office, so that the latter
the Ministry of Food.
might arrange replenishment of the warehouse stocks in the U.S.A. through
296
Later, it was decided between War Office, Ministry of Food, and B.A.S.,
Washington, that the B.A.S., Washington should only report to War Office
when items required by the Commander concerned could not be covered
by bulk procurement ex warehouse stocks.
In such
circumstances, War
Office would make a request for procurement through the normal channels
between the United Kingdom and the British Food Mission.
Views of Inspector, R.A.S.C.
In September, 1944, the Inspector, R.A.S.C., visited Washington,
Caribbean Areas, and Bermuda, and examined their control from the S.T.
point of view.
the
He concluded that effective control of S.T. Services could
not be exercised by D.D.S.T., B.A.S., Washington, with his existing staff,
and that the Os.C., R.A.S.C., of the stations concerned should deal direct
on S.T. subjects with the appropriate branches of the
the War Office.
S.T. Directorate at
He considered that D.D.S.T., B.A.S., should not be expected
to do more for these stations than for any other overseas theatre, i.e., act
for them in the chain of procurement from the U.S.A. of any S.T. items
available in that country.
B.A.S.,
He did not think it practicable that D.D.S.T.,
should be expected to attempt detailed control, as he was then
doing, of the stocks held by these garrisons.
Greater reliance ought to be
placed on the O.C., R.A.S.C., of a station to carry out his own supply
service.
elaborate.
The existing system he considered to be over-centralized and over-
Primary Function of S.T., B.A.S.
In commenting on these views, D.D.S.T., B.A.S., emphasized that the
primary function of his branch was the procurement and despatch of S.T.
items to overseas theatres.
This was necessarily exercised on behalf of
S.T.6, War Office, since a very large proportion of all foodstuffs imported
to meet the needs of Commands both in the United Kingdom and overseas
was of U.S. origin.
This work involved him in ever-increasing responsibili-
ties relative to the expansion of the war effort.
S.T.6,
War Office, agreed
with this statement, considering it difficult
to see how the existing organization of D.D.S.T. could be adapted to cope
with the increasing responsibilities
As far
as
supplies for these garrisons were concerned, D.D.S.T.,
B.A.S. would be
doing all that was required of him if he received their demands, screened
them in the light of stock states and reported strengths, and then procured
and shipped what was necessary.
He could not concern himself with matters
of local administration.
War Office Policy
D.D.S.T., B.A.S., was informed that the War Office policy which he
should adopt was to place greater reliance on the Os.C., R.A.S.C., requiring
the minimum of explanation from them and interfering as little as possible
with the exercise of their responsibilities, but affording them the maximum
of assistance inse of mette of procurement and the shipment of supplies to
their areas.
297
wo 277/
27
