Fuel Technology
In 1942, owing to increased pressure from the Ministry for economy in
fuel, a fully qualified War Department Fuel Technologist was appointed to
His duties were mainly directed to ensuring the most economical use
of fuel, and the substitution where possible of inferior fuels so as to release
high-grade fuels for industry.
He started by inspecting all the larger heating plants in the home com-
mands.
As a result of this inspection, he collaborated with the Chief Engineer
ot the Ministry of Fuel and Power, and they degraded all the coal used in
these plants.
The regional engineers of the Ministry were then invited to
inspect all large plants in home commands, and to recommend any necessary
alterations or modifications for increased fuel efficiency.
had the added advantage of obtaining increased advisory assistance, and
of showing the Ministry that the War Department meant business.
Army personnel were introduced into the Ministry's educational pro-
gramme, e.g., courses for stokers; and the Ministry's propaganda material
was displayed in Army camps.
ments for Command Inspectors of R.E. Machinery.
A fuel technologist was added to the staff of each home command in
1943. R.A.S.C. officers with experience in the coal trade were given a short
elementary course in fuel efficiency and utilization by the War Office Fuel
Technologist before they were posted to these appointments.
An even
closer liaison between the Army and the Ministry's regional organization
was thus achieved.
An appreciation of the technical requirements of power stations, rail-
ways, etc., in the North Africa and N.W. Europe campaigns enabled the
correct fuel to be shipped in the early stages.
As these operations settled
down and the Army moved forward, the coal for the back areas was degraded
where practicable.
Economy Measures, 1942
In the spring of 1942 the greatest difficulty was foreseen in maintaining
the coal supplies of the country, on account of decreasing output from the
ocomotives and the
increasing demands by industry, shortage of coal wagons and of
greatly increased demands for the Army at home
(especially since the U.S. Forces began to arrive), and for shipment to theatres
overseas.
since the U.S. Forces began to arrive vet necessary to ensure that
no fuel should be wasted.
War Office to accept a ten per cent. cut in house coal.
In March, 1942, the Mines Department asked
This was achieved
by lengthening the summer fuel period, normally lst June to 30th September.
so as to run from 2nd May to 23rd October.
In June 1942, the Prime Minister sent a personal minute to the Secretary
of State for War. directing that the War Denartment in common with other
large users, must take its share of low-quality coal.
the Army received te fust concionment of onen-cast cool on the house coal
Accordingly, in October,
272
reviewed, and ameliorated where necessary.
Industrial Fuel
The supply of industrial fuel, i.e., that required for furnaces and large-
scale plants, deteriorated, and it became necessary to accept lower grade
fuels in order that the better grades might be available for factories employed
on work of high-priority national importance.
Much valuable work was done
by the Fuel Technologist in this connection in deciding which plants could
most suitably accept the lower grade fuels and how these could be most
efficiently utilized.
In the spring of 1943, it was decided to control the supply of industrial
fuel on a programme system similar to that for house coal.
The estimated
annual requirements of commands showed both the tonnage and the type
of fuel required, with a description of the plant in the various installations.
The W.D. Fuel Technologist and a technical expert of the Ministry of Fuel
and Power examined the estimates to see what substitution of fuels could
be made, and agreed on any amendments of types and tonnages, which were
then notified to commands.
As coke was in good supply at this period, it was not programmed, but
War Office informed the Ministry of Fuel and Power of the estimated re-
quirements of this fuel for the year beginning 1st April, 1943.
Control Arrangements
An agreement was made with the Ministry of Fuel and Power that, in
connection with the 1943-1944 coal programme, commands should have
meetings with their respective coal supplies officers or area committees, to
make local arrangements for supply and transport of coal. Q (Movements)
was also represented at these meetings.
The reserves to be held. and the
estimated total requirements submitted to the Ministry by the War Office,
had been previously agreed, and commands and the Ministry's local re-
presentative planned on these figures.
In August, 1943, commands were told to review their requirements monthly
at meetings of the majors (barracks) of districts.
These examined stocks,
distribution between districts, fluctuations in strengths, etc., and reported to
War Office then
the War Office any changes necessary in the programme.
informed the Ministry accordingly.
The first War Office monthly fuel conference was held in October, 1943,
being attended ar Difice mDA.Ds.S.T. (barracks) from commands but later
by the A.Ds.S.T. themselves.
Representatives of the Ministry of Fuel and
Power, War STe thomselves Branch and O (Movements) also attended,
"Thece
conferences proved very useful, serving both as an up-to-date revision of
fuel programmes in ernest with the Ministry, and for the discussion of
any other fuel questions.
Commands' estimates were examined and discussed
before the Ministes oncials arrived, and an agreed demand was then placed
before the latter.
Sometimes, commands were able to give up part of their
273
7
WO 277/21
27
