of 108 miles of road of fair weather standard only, and it would greatly in-
crease the dificulies of air supply, which in any case was essential to supple.
ment what came by land and river.
The capture of Rangoon before the
monsoon broke was therefore a vital necessity, so that Fourteenth Ar
transport aircraft, on which we very largely depended for air supply, Were
might be maintained through that port.
Another factor was that the American
due to be withdrawn to China in June.
It was therefore decided that, while
4 Corps should be ordered to capture Rangoon at all costs before the mon-
soon, a combined sea and air operation against the city should also be
carried out by 15 Corps from Arakan.
While 33 Corps cleared up the Japanese resistance in Yenangyaung oil.
fields area, and then advanced down the Irrawaddy 4 Corps, a smaller but
far more highly mechanized formation, started its thrust down the Toungoo
Leaving Meiktila on Sth April, it reached Pegu on Ist May; two days
later, 17 Division, delayed by mines, demolitions, and mud, was at Hlegu,
still 30 miles from Rangoon, which on that day was occupied by 15 Corps.
Nevertheless, the reconquest of Burma was in the main effected by Fourteenth
Army, and not least by 4 Corps and 17 Division, which had borne the heat
and burden of the campaign for three years and more almost without a break.
4 Corps had covered 300 miles in a month in its dash for Rangoon, and it
had been supplied throughout entirely by air; but this was really only the
culmination of a process which had been going on throughout the advance
Supply by air had become the main channel for the supply and
maintenance of the fighting forces in the field.
1945, 16,000 tons of P.O.L. were flown into Burma, the biggest tonnage for
any one day being 700 tons.
In fact, the results achieved in the final stages
of the campaign, during the rapid advance to Rangoon, exceeded in scale
anything done in any other theatre of war, as far as air supply was concerned.
It will, therefore, be of value to examine more clearly this, the first really large
scale and continuous practical employment of this form of maintenance.
the following sections are described the broad lines on which air supply was
organized, the limitations of the system, and the way in which it worked out
The Problem and the Means
The problem was the maintenance by air of a force consisting of an
armoured brigade, two mechanized divisions, and one standard division,
together with the usual Corps and Army troops, and attached R.A.F. Strengths
varied from 70,000 to 100,000 and there were about 250 tracked and 8,000
To carry out this task, there were only limited resources available.
airlift of 130 tons a day was allotted for each division and for Corps troops,
and of 70 tons for the tank brigade. This allotmsnot could not be exceeded,
and, if air supply fell short or was completely abortive, it could not be made
For maintenance bevond airhead. 4 Corns had four 3-ton and two 30-cwt.
general transport companies at its dinosal for all nurposes. while the divisions
had one 3-ton and one 15-cwt. company each, and the tank brigade had a
4-platoon transport company.
100
The General Maintenance System
The system was based on R.A.M.Os. located at airfields in India and
Stocks of supplies, P.O.L., and ammunition were held at
R.A.M.O., but other types of stores were held at the most accessible depot
were set up in succession as airfields were
constructed or captured by the forward troops as they advanced.
Troops were maintained, up to the range permitted by the M.T. available,
from the tonnage landed at these airfields, plus any reserves built up from
tained by air drop.
Troops not within M.T. range of an airfield were main-
This system was subject to the following limitations: -
(a) Short or abortive air lifts could not be made up as the air transport
in the whole theatre was working at the highest possible daily effort.
(b) Airfields, except at Meiktila, were fair weather only.
(c) The tonnage and time available at any one airfield was normally in-
sufficient to enable any appreciable reserves to be built up with the
This was achieved on a few occasions by
eating down the reserves at a rear airhead, and landing full mainten-
ance at the forward airhead.
As the speed of the advance increased,
this method became impossible.
(d) Except where it was possible to build up reserves of supplies and
P.O.L., the margin between the maximum daily allotted tonnage and
the requirements of normal maintenance was very small. The dump-
ing of large quantities of ammunition or R.E. stores, or the flying in
of personnel, were only achieved slowly, or by a reduction in the
lift of supplies and P.O.L.
(e) Only the equivalent of one division and one brigade could be main-
tained on supply drop at any one time, owing to the limitations
imposed by shortage of aircraft and equipment.
The dispositions
of troops had therefore to be such that the whole corps, less one
division and one brigade, had either to live on its accumulated stocks
or remain within M.T. range of an airhead.
The System in Practice
The flexibility of air supply proved phenomenal, and the operation would
have been impossible without it.
It was necessary for those concerned, how-
ever, to keep a sense of proportion, and to remember that aircraft were still
much more at the mercy of the elements than was surface transport.
latter if held up by broken bridges, etc. was at worst much nearer to the
troops awaiting the load, and this could usually be transhipped.
hand, when an aircraft could not land, it went back to an airfield from which
it was impossible to forward the load by other means.
Generally speaking, the advance was on no occasion delayed for adminis-
trative reasons; there were always enough ammunition and warlike stores
for battles.
During the advance. forward troops were on reduced rations, owing to the
necessity for carrying the maximum number of days subsistence in vehicles
101
WO 277/21
27
