45. Airborne Packs
(a) For use with the airborne pannier.—
-When the airborne pannier was used
for conveyance of supplies by air, either in gliders or powered aircraft, the
ordinary Composite (14-men) ration pack could be used, three cases (42 rations)
being packed in a pannier.
(6) For use with bomb-type container, supplies dropping apparatus. — 28 rations
to the precise scale of the Compo (14-men) ration, could be dropped in this type
of apparatus (Mark I or III).
The method of packing was as follows :—
(i) Fourteen rations (excluding biscuit) at the Compo scale packed into
a wooden keg.
(i) One 71-1b. tin of biscuits to complete the 14 rations.
(iti) Two kegs and two tins of biscuits (total 28 rations) packed into the
container.
While it was proved that supplies dropped by parachute from aircraft could,
in general, be landed without appreciable damage, it might sometimes be
necessary, owing to limitations of time and equipment, to subsist
isolated
groups of men from the air by free dropping.
Experience showed that free dropping of cased supplies packed in tins
could not be undertaken without a considerable loss, due to breakage of con-
tainers on impact with the ground.
Free dropping with minimum losses could,
however, be carried out if the rations so dropped were " dry" items, as opposed
to processed items, and were packed in large double hessian sacks of 80-1b.
capacity, provided the content did not exceed 40-1b.
Such items as flour, biscuit, salt, sugar, tea, milk powder, cheese (crated),
margarine (packet), bacon (mild cured),
would all drop successfully ; and,
provided quick consumption was assured, dehydrated meat and vegetables in
tins in sacks could likewise be dropped.
If it was essential to drop such items as tinned bacon, sausages, or preserved
meat, it had to be realized that there might be a high percentage of loss, although
experience showed that cases of preserved meat would stand up to free dropping
better than most processed items.
(c) Invalid Pack (Hospital Supplies).—200 men for one day.
For packing
into Mark III (or Mark D) bomb-type container, supplies dropping apparatus:-
Keg No. 1
Meat extract (2-oz.) tins
72
Arrowroot (1-lb.) tins
Condensed milk (141-oz.) tins
Sugar (1-1b.) tins
Cocoa (1-1b.) tin
Tea (2-1b.) tin
Boiled sweets (4-oz.), Bristol
Sweets, salt, and matches (4-oz.), Bristol
Cigarettes, Magnum (60)
Chocolate, 2-oz. bars
494
Keg No. 2
As No. 1, except that there were one tin of arrowroot, and two tins of
cocoa.
One box, containing two bottles of brandy.
One tin, containing 9-lb. service biscuits and 14 2-oz. bars chocolate.
Gross weight two kegs, each 43-1b.
Gross weight brandy in box
Gross weight tin of biscuits
86-1b.
Gross weight of contents, total
101-16.
Gross weight of cylinder, Mark li
101-1b.
107-1b.
Total all-up weight ..
93-1b.
200-1b.
The Mark III cylinder was 4-ft. 3-in. long, and 15-in. diameter, interior
dimensions ; the two keys were 162-in. high and 124-in. in diameter.
A locking
device held them in place, and the tin and brandy were packed round with straw.
46. Mountain (Arctic) Ration
The Mountain (Arctic) Ration Pack was a 48-hour ration (one man for two
days, or two men for one day), suitable only for use in arctic climates (i.e., where
snow conditions were present).
The very high proportion of fats in this ration
made it entirely unsuitable for temperate climates, and its use for training
purposes in the United Kingdom was restricted to mountainous regions during
the winter months, and then only during very severe weather.
See also under
A.F.V. packs for their use for mountain warfare where snow conditions were
absent.
Details of the pack were as follows :—
A leaflet giving details of contents, together with methods of preparation of the foodstuffs,
was contained in each pack)
CONTENTS
Item
Number and weight of
items in each pack
Approximate daily scale
each man a day
Pemmican
Biscuits, service, sweet
Tea, sugar and milk powder
ocolate, raisin
Boiled sweets
Bacon, chopped
oats
Ascorbic acid tablets
Fuel (starter) - for Primus stove
Latrine paper-
2 x 6-oz. slabs
2 x o-oz. packels
1 x 5-oz. tin
6 x 2-oz. bars
4-07 loose
1 x 9-oz. tin
i x 4-oz. tin
2 x 2-oz. placquettes
2 x 7-0z. packets
1 x 8-oz. tin
1x43-oz. tin
1 tablets in a tin
matches in a packet
4 tablets in carton
nieces
3 matches
6 pieces
Calorife value 5,100 each man a dạy (approximately.
(in Each ration pack consists of a circular tin weighing approximately 6.lb.1 1-oz.
(i) For bulk packing six ration packs are contained in a type 1 wooden case measurin
(iv) High Vitamin
(1 •82-cu. ft.).
Gross weight 474-1b.
Bi yeast- three tablets each man a day, will be issued separately.
KK 2
495
(37477)
+ 17
WO 277/21
27
