38. Prisoner of War Ration Scale, United Kingdom, May, 1945
For non-working Prisoners of War
Daily Scale
Remarks and equivalents
Item
= Meat (boneless), 1½-oz.
Meat (preserved), 13-oz.
Meat (bone-in) ..
Margarine
Cooking fat
Bacon
Bread
Flour
Oatmeal
Offal or sausage
Cheese
Preserves
Fruit, dried
Tea
4/7
3/1
10
Biscuit, service, 7}-oz.
1¾/
2/7
4/7
%/
Sugar
Milk powder,
skimmed
Potatoes (old) ..
10
Coffee, %-oz., may be issued in lieu if
stocks permit.
Fresh milk, 7}-oz. (fluid) may be
issued in lieu in N.I.D. only while
supplies of fresh milk are plentiful.
Where new potatoes are issued the
scale will be reduced to 7-oz.
Vegetables, fresh
Vegetables, dried
Salt
Ration cash allowance..
11
2. P.W. employed in working parties and all Italian co-operators will receive
the following daily supplement to the scale shown in para. 1 above :—
Bread
8-Oz.
Flour
s/-OZ.
Oatmeal
Potatoes (old)
10-0z. = new potatoes 7-0z.
3. Tinned or preserved foodstuffe quailable at R A S.C. depots for turnover
may he issued to P W from time to time at seales of equivalents proportionate
to those approved for British troops.
of 35 cigarettes or 1}-oz. tobacco a week.
4. Italian other rank P.W.. including co-operators, will receive a free issu
than eight hours a day. and their emplover certifies that their work has been
Where Italian P.W. work for more
satisfactory, a special issue of two cigarettes will be made to them for each
complete hour's work in excess of eight hours actual work (excluding meal o
ravelling times) on anu one day with a marimum of 30 cigarettee a week
These ci,
of 35 ciga
co-operators.
will be issued weekly, and will be in addition to the free issue
s a week authorized above ; they will not, however, be issued to
German P.W.
In no circumstances will free issues of cigarettes or tobacco be made to
39. Japanese Ration
bulky British ration.
This is included for purposes of comparison with the much more varied and
Japanese rations were divided into three types, e.g., Peace Time, Emergency
and Field.
The figures given below were taken from captured documents, and
represent a maximum issue. In very few theatres of war did the Japanese
soldier receive the amount shown in the Field Ration table, and he generally
supplemented the army issue with what he could find in the surrounding country.
(a) Peace Time
Ration.-Rice, 21•16-oz. barley, 6•6-oz. and a cash
allowance of about 42d. a day, which was spent on meat, fish, vegetables, and
sometimes for extra cooking and heating fuel.
(b) Emergency Ration.—Was of two classes, " A" Scale and " B" Scale.
In Burma each soldier carried rations for three days on the " A" Scale, and one
day on the " B" Scale.
(i) " A" Scale consisted of about 1-lb. 3-oz. rice, enough for two meals,
and one small can of mixed beef and vegetables a man.
(i) " B" Scale consisted of three paper bags of hard biscuits sufficient
(c) Field Ration.-Generally of two types, normal and special, but an
alternative ration might be substituted for either of these.
The Special Ration
was generally issued when the rations were carried on the soldier.
Composition
of the three types of Field Ration was as follows :—
(i) Normal.-Rice, 23•3-oz., Barley, 7•4-Oz., Raw Meat, 7•4-oz., Raw
vegetables, 21 • 16-oz.
(ii) Special.-Rice, 20•46-oz. ; Biscuit or compressed ration, 8•113-oz. ;
tinned meat, 5•3-oz., or dried meat, 8•1-oz. ;
dried vegetables,
4•23-oz.
(ii) Alternative.-Cereal, one of the following : Rice, 30 • 69-oz. ; bread,
36-oz. ; biscuit, 24-34-oz. ; other cereal, 31 - 75-oz. Meat : Smoked
salted meat, 31 - or or eggs, •35-oz.
ration.
Nore.- Rice was sometimes substituted by barley, as the basic food in each type of
40. Emergency Ration (Standard)
This was about 6-oz. of a solid mixture of the chocolate type, issued to all
It was considered redundant
men serving overseas for use in emergency only.
in concertence of the introduction of the varione snecial ration packs. and was
discontinued in 1944.
It was contained in a small metal box.
WO 277/21
27
