Supply Arrangements in an Emergency
At the same time, provision was made against the possibility that troops
at home might have to be organized in fighting formations and take their
part in active operations in the United Kingdom, when their supply could
nly be carried out by the issue of a Field Service, ration.
A provisional
scale was therefore drawn up (see Appendix IX).
This was reviewed in
the autumn of 1940 in the light of the current difficulties in the general food
situation.
N.A.A.F.I. tinned reserves could not at that time be replenished,
but the R.A.S.C. were in a better position to ensure a more complete ration.
The supply of margarine had already been taken over by the R.A.S.C.
from N.A.A.F.I, following the discovery that N.A.A.F.I's. price was higher
than that for the same thing supplied to hospitals under War Office contract.
A proposal had also been made that R.A.S.C. should also take over such
items as jam and cheese, and that N.A.A.F.I. should be left to provide fresh
fruit and variety items.
N.A.A.F.I. resisted this on the grounds that they
could handle the business more economically, and that the removal of part
of their commitment would upset their organization.
Long
discussions
followed, but it was then discovered that the state of N.A.A.F.I. reserves
left much to be desired, and this no doubt influenced the decision that the
R.A.S.C. should take over the supply of jam, cheese, tinned salmon and
tinned milk.
The difficulty in drawing up a suitable Field Service scale was to find
tinned variety items which
were neither in short supply
nor nationally
rationed. Eventually, the " Invasion" scale was issued as part of a com-
prehensive instruction on supply in an emergency (see Appendix IX).
will be observed that the scale consisted of simple staple items with the
addition of concentrated vegetable soups which could, if necessary, be eaten
cold in their concentrated form.
It was a complete, if rather monotonous,
subsistence.
Reliance on N.A.A.F.I. stocks was restricted to cereals, potatoes,
vegetables and dried fruits.
The "Invasion" scale was renamed the "Field Service (U.K.) Ration
Scale" in June, 1941, when the supply arrangements in Home Commands
under emergency conditions, e.g., invasion, were revised.
The scale was to
be used when it was impracticable to provide and use the home service
The decision to adopt the scale rested with Army commanders.
would be issued completely in kind by the R.A.S.C., items of N.A.A.F.I.
supply being taken over in bulk by the R.A.S.C. from local depots.
In
case of difficulties in the maintenance of supplies of potatoes and vegetables,
formation supply officers were to buy locally.
Formations would draw in
bulk from C.S.Ds., and units not belonging to formations would continue
to draw individually.
be made by neighbouring depots.
TE a CiS.D. became inoperative, supply would normally
were worked out.
Plans to ensure continuity on these lines
supply railheads might be set up.
In certain circumstances, temporary supply depots or
The F.S. (U.K.) ration scale continued, with minor modifications,
until
it was replaced by the « Comnlete United Vinodom Ration Scale» in July.
The latter is also shown in Appendix IX.
complete ration in kind, no cash allowance being admissible;
It was designed as a
but it was
rather developed from the H.S.R.S. by the addition of items in kind in lieu
of and of the type bought with the
cash allowance, than an operational
scale on thé lines of the superseded F.S. (U.K.) R.S. It was, in consequence,
240
of lower calorific value than the latter, 3,400 against 3,900, and directly com-
parable to the
H.S.R.S. in the reduced quantities of nationally rationed
commodities and in the extent of the variety offered.
In a revision of the supply arrangements in' emergency, issued in August,
1943, the main interest lay in certain modifications in the relations of R.A.S.C.
and N.A.A.F.I. in such circumstances.
The R.A.S.C. were to be responsible
for the issue of the F.S. (U.K.) scale, but this did not mean that stocks in
a N.A.A.F.I. depot would be taken over, or removed to an adjacent R.A.S.C.
supply depot.
The N.A.A.F.I. had no intention of closing down its supply
depots or dispersing its personnel unless the military situation called for
evacuation
Their
personnel would, as normally, continue to assist the
R.A.S.C. in handling, cutting-up, and distribution, of the limited range of
items which the corporation provided in the F.S. (U.K.) scale. N.A.A.F.I.
items might, therefore, continue to be issued under the normal procedure,
although, if it were found to be more convenient, R.A.S.C. supply officers
might draw their full requirements of these items in bulk daily for sub-
sequent re-issue to units.
Should there be
any danger
might have to be moved to
of N.A.A.F.I. stocks being lost, they
R.A.S.C. supply depot.
Circumstances
might make it necessary for the whole or part of certain N.A.A.F.I. stocks
to be removed to some convenient centre, such as a Main Supply Depot, in
the event of pack trains having to be filled.
It was not the intention to
lay down rigid rules.
Action to be taken in the event must depend on
local circumstances, geographical conditions, and the outcome of operations
in the various areas.
Stocks of messing commodities held in N.A.A.F.I. stores at R.A.F.
stations would not normally be released to the R.A.F. unit except when
authorized by the R.A.S.C.
as a component part of, and to complete, the
unit demand for the F.S. (U.K.) ration.
In the event of the complete evacua-
tion of a station by the R.A.F., all N.A.A.F.I. stocks would be withdrawn,
if necessary, under arrangements made between N.A.A.F.I. and the military
The N.A.A.F.I. would, as far as possible, ensure the provision of fresh
vegetables and potatoes through their normal channels of supply, and, if
this broke down, they would try and arrange supplies through the Divisional
It was evident that the close co-operation which normally existed between
the R.A.S.C. and N.A.A.F.I. must continue under invasion conditions; and,
for this reason, plans were to be discussed by D.Ds.S.T. with N.A.A.F.I.
command supervisors as far as security permitted. In certain circumstances,
NA.A.F.I. might require transport from W.D. sources for the purpose of
replenishing stocks locally.
Demands for such transport would be kept
to a minimum, and should only be used in cases of urgency. Every effort
would be made to keep the railways working throughout an invasion, and
replenishment by rail, though there might be delays, was therefore a reasonable
probability in non-Operational areas.
Home Service Scale Revised
The result of practical experience, coupled with the pressure of food
shortages and wit practical us watchfulness of the public over the possie ity
of the Services petting mare than their dus chore of whet was auntable den
241
WO 277/2k
27
