APPENDIX VIIIE
(See Vol. I, page 165)
EXPLOITATION OF LOCAL RESOURCES, MIDDLE EAST
Potato
Supply
A scheme for growing potatoes in Egypt under Army arrangements
was initiated in September,
1940, by which seed was provided to Egyptian
agents, who received, distributed and cultivated it, and sold the produce to
the Army at normal market prices.
6,500 tons were thus produced in 1941
trom seed sent from the United Kingdom, and this went far towards easing
a shortage of potatoes in Middle East that year.
The scheme was worked
under
R.A.S.C.
supervision.
Large local purchases
from the
ordinary
Egyptian crop were impossible, as Egypt already imported over 25,000 tons
a year for her own needs.
In 1942 and 1943, there was great difficulty in
getting seed potatoes.
Supply from India was dilatory, and failed to germinate
when it arrived.
South Africa and Australia had none available in 1943.
East Africa tried to increase production with the object of meeting Middle
East's requirements
for
consumption,
which
were
7,000 tons
month.
For the 1943 crop, 6,500 tons of seed potatoes were sent from the United
Kingdom in cool stowage.
Pig
Farms
These were established in Palestine and Syria under W.D.
control with
the triple object of eliminating swill contractors, who might prejudice security,
of using the swill so made available to advantage, and of producing good
quality pork and bacon for the troops.
The scheme received War Office
approval, subject to the provisos that it must be confined to military require.
ments and that Army funds must not be used to finance production for
civilian needs.
The five farms, with an initial accommodation for 1,600 pigs
in all, were under the control of the Veterinary and Remount Services, who
handed the stock over to the R.A.S.C. for slaughter and conversion to pork
and bacon.
Oil Mills
Derelict vil mills in Alexandria were brought into operation in 1942 10
produce cooking oil, oil cakes and soap, at first from cotton seeds, later
from ground nuts.
In 1944, 20,000 tons of nuts were processed,
producing
7,600 tons of oil, 11,200 tons of cakes, and 1,300 tons of soap.
They were
managed hu the five a shalf of the WD on the basis of ten ner cent
of costs incurred in operation, or about €30,000 a year in 1943-1944.
activity was not within the terms of reference of the corporation, but eithe
firms would not take it on, or asked too much.
considered
officer in charge and the civilian manager, neither of whom could be placed
impracticable, owing to the possibility
Direct military control was
of friction
under the other.
UK CC continued in charge until the end of the war.
424
Dairy Farms
These were operated in conjunction with fresh milk contracts, and proved
a great help in meeting canned milk requirements,
thus saving shipping
space.
In addition, only pasteurized milk was issued to troops.
The method
was to acquire a dairy plant to which the fresh milk was brought, and there
pasteurized under the supervision of R.A.S.C. milk inspectors.
cattle were produced at the right time and place by the milk contractors.
This was located at Port Said as a development of fishing which had taken
place in a flooded area in 1914-1918 and 1931.
but took over two years to arrange, owing to difficulties with the Egyptian
Government and to misgivings at the War Office.
land, flood it, and get contractors to fish it.
The gutted fish would be sold
to the W.D. at four piastres a lb., any surplus being sold on the open market.
The contractors would be paid a management fee of £1,000 a year, and any
profits, after amortising the capital expenditure, would be divided between
the Army and the contractor on a sliding scale, the Army getting a minimum
Losses would be shared in the same proportion.
The object of the scheme was to provide a fresh variant in lieu of tinned
fish, and an additional breakfast item to compensate for lack of eggs, and
also to avoid buying in the local market and so causing a sharp rise in prices.
33 tons of fish were required for a single issue.
that it was sometimes a good thing in the East to show that the Army could
and would take unusual steps to combat high prices, it was doubtful if the
scheme would be really economical; but a break clause in the contract and
lease at six months' notice afforded a way of escape if the scheme proved
In the first month of operation, 30,000 lb. of fish were issued and 9,000 lb.
sold; in the first half of the next month, 30,000 lb. issued, and 7,000 lb. sold.
The average market price was eight piastres, or double the contract rate.
Production of these in Middle East began in 1941 with an output of 300
which doubled in succeeding years.
The vegetables were grown from
seed supplied under War Office arrangements.
The principal difficulty was
in the supply of Lend-Lease material to the firms producing the dehydrated
vegetables in Egypt, as D.S.T., Middle East was called upon to certify that
the W.D. would take the whole output of the factory to which the materials
War Office, however, declined to agree to such a guarantee,
on the grounds that expansion of the dehydration industry was not the con-
cern of the Army.
Production was never therefore equal to requirements.
Owing to a serious shortage of fuel wood and coke in Middle East in 1940,
both Aldershot ovens and Perkins steam field ovens were converted to oil
firing.
The latter type were arranged for the purpose in batches of four.
A satisfactory substitute was also found in the residue from the crushing of
cotton seed and ground nuts.
WO 277/21
27
