RESTRICTED
Native carriers were allotted to a division at the beginning of operations.
From the number allotted, the supply plan could be worked out, and the
tactical plan was then based on the supplies available.
for maintenance,
meat, biscuit, tea and sugar.
points, each soldier carried reserve rations, consisting of three days'
emer-
gency and two days' hard; this made the commander free of ration deliveries
for five days.
The reserve rations could sometimes be supplemented with
edible fruits and vegetables found in the jungle.
The carriers' ration weighed
When fighting at the end of a carrier L. of C., all items of daily mainten-
ance were reduced to the absolute minimum.
The full ration was eventually
reduced until, including such essentials as mosquito lotion, soap, foot powder
and canned fuel, the weight was about 4}-lb. gross a man for a day.
nition came to about 31-lb., and medical stores to f-lb., a man for a day.
The Australian operation ration (type 02), a 24-hour one-man pack ration,
11-oz., and the A.3 emergency ration (see Appendix IX),
referred to by the Lethbridge Mission, 17}-oz.
Pack Transport in the Pacific
No extensive use of transport animals was found possible or desirable in
as the lavish use of track-clearing machinery and graders
enabled the jeep to replace the pack animal in most types of country.
Forward of jeep-head, it was usually found more economical to employ native
carriers, where available.
In that country they were excellent.
Pack animals had the disadvantages compared with native carriers that,
unless they were able to live off the country, which was unusual, forage for
them was bulky and inconvenient to transport, amounting to 13 per cent. of
the maximum animal load.
Tracks for their use had to be cleared of fallen
logs and undergrowth almost as thoroughly as for jeeps, while corduroy
needed more careful laying to prevent the animals' feet slipping between the
Bridges had to be wider and stronger to carry them than was necessary
They were uneconomical to transport by air.
animal could carry four native 40-1b. loads, it could only do one job, while
natives were invaluable for hut-building, unloading, and general labour, as
well as porterage,
and were also less vulnerable to enemy infiltration,
being more easily disposed for purposes of protection.
On the other hand, it was found in the Pacific theatre that a limited
number of pack animals were valuable when they could live off the country,
when natives were unreliable or not available. and for the transport of loads
up to 200-lb. which could not be broken down.
Two Australian nack comnaniee were used intermittently in New Guinea
for small-scale operations. They were organized as a Hi.O. and three platoons
Of Give sections of ten horses with three riders and one driver for each section
The animals in section went loose. One man riding in front and two behind
Sections as well as platoons were self-contained administratively, and each
sub-unit could carry forage, equipment (including tentage),
sufficient for four days on the march without additional supplies.
Mules were found more suitable than horses on account of their sure-
footedness, comparative immunity from foot-troubles caused by the mud, and
better condition on inferior forage.
and 2-oz. coarse salt.
The normal ration for pack-horses was 16-lb. chaff, 4-lb. oats, 2-lb. bran
Pacific 24-hour Ration
This ration, the improved successor of the jungle ration, mark II, does
not appear to have been issued to any considerable extent in A.L.F.S.B.A.,
owing to production difficulties in the United Kingdom.
It would have been
the pack ration used had the war in the Far East continued as anticipated.
The jungle ration had only been intended as a stop-gap until a pack could
be produced which was suitable in every way for its purpose, with due regard
recommendations of the Lethbridge Mission.
While the jungle
ration had successfully met an urgent need, the Pacific 24-hour ration sur-
passed any previous pack ration provided for the British soldier, and was
considered to have fully met the requirement.
The basic idea for the ration was that each of three palatable meals con-
tained in it must be separately packed in a waterproof, airtight container,
so as to avoid the man having to carry half-consumed packets of food through-
The problem was therefore to provide the three meals with
the items available and suitable; to ensure that the whole ration had the maxi-
mum possible calorific value, in any case not less than 4,000 calories; and
to fit the maximum amount of food, determined by these factors, into the
smallest and most suitably shaped aluminium container. It was in fact a
dietetic and arithmetical problem, combined with a jig-saw puzzle. These were
solved by S.T., War Office, and a civilian metal container company, between
The details of the contents are given in Appendix IX.
Pacific Composite (6 men) Ration Pack
The Pacific Compo pack came into being at the same time as the 24-hour
It was designed for use during the post-assault period and in condi-
was impracticable.
the second requirement formulated by the War Office Ration Committee in
1943 (see page 71) for a pack for use for unit feeding, and its
design was governed by the recommendations of the Lethbridge Mission. The
details of the pack are given in Appendix IX,
but some of the principal
features may be mentioned here.
The pack took the form of a sectionalized case, each tin in it being rhe
tected against damage by having its own cell, like those in egg boxes.
tin used was the A.l tall size (4l inches high), which, owing to ease of pro-
duction, was the most suitable container for the main items.
painted with a waterproof camouflage lacquer, a circumstance which seriously
impeded the output of the canners.
There were seven varieties of the ration, each containing six men-rations
One type, P.1, included a separately packed mid-day snack
for use where unit feeding might be possible for morning and evening meals,
but individunt feeding was essential in the middle of the day for operational
total.
This type was provided in the proportion of 40 per cent. of the
107
WO 277/21.
2
7
