Comparison with Other Services
When the concessions made in September, 1943, were being considered,
the D.S.T. placed on record the view that, should it be revealed that a wider
application for the use of transport in this way was being given to the R.N.
and R.A.F., such concessions should be extended to the Army,
that there should be complete uniformity as between the three services.
In May, 1944, it was in fact reported that, in Ceylon, the Admiralty
had waived the normal restrictions on distance and frequency of journeys,
while military personnel remained subject to a minimum of two miles, and
to a limit of one journey a week. Financial approval was accordingly ob-
tained bringing the Army into line with the Navy in this case.
Another anomaly was that Canadian and American troops were allowed
free use of service transport for recreational purposes in all overseas theatres,
and it was urged that it would be only equitable to remove all anomalies
which existed in relation to the concession allowed for British personnel in
Common Policy Agreed
Consequently, in July, 1944, a conference was held between representatives
of the War Office, Admiralty, and Air Ministry, to decide on a policy common
to the three Services in connection with the use of service transport for
recreational purposes in overseas stations.
The conditions proposed by the War Office, as prepared by S.T.3, were
accepted with minor amendments by the conference, and Treasury approval
The new rules were promulgated later
authorized commanders-in-chief to approve the use of W.D. transport for
the purpose, subject to the following conditions: -
(a) W.D. vehicles were not to be used without the prior sanction of
commanding officers, and then only if they were available without
interference with military training or their use for authorized duties.
(b) Vehicles were not to be used when suitable and adequate public
transport services were available, except if these were unduly ex-
(c) No individual was to be allowed more than one recreational journey
a week, and W.D. vehicles were not to be used for journeys to
places less than two, or more than 20, miles from the troops' accom-
(d) A minimum charge of one farthing a mile for the actual distance
travelled was to be made, with a maximum charge of sixpence a
person for each journey.
These instructions were framed to secure, in normal circumstances, a
reasonable balance between the measures required to sustain the well-being
and morale of the troops, and due regard for the economy in the use of
wD, vehicles and public money. In normal circumstances, they did noi
unduly restrict opportunities for recreation, and did not impose a strain upon
personal pockets of officers or men.
It was appreciated, however, that there
would be cases in which circumstances dictated special treatment, and, to
neet these, commanders-in-chief were empowered at their discretion to waive
conditions as to numbers of journeys, distance limitations, and charges.
In deciding the occasions on which conditions ought to be waived, various
conditions had to be borne in mind.
All or any of the specified conditions could properly be waived in
operational areas for formations recently engaged in battle, or about to go
The fact that active operations were taking place in a theatre
of war did not of itself justify any relaxation in favour of troops in a theatre
The financial charge should only be waived when this
course was justified by wholly exceptional circumstances. Climatic conditions
might often be a deciding factor.
In climates of tropical humidity, the
physical and mental benefit obtained from the recreation of bathing or
games would be undone if transport were not provided, and in such condi-
tions the waiver of the minimum limit of two miles was permissible.
An important consideration was the distance separating troops from the
This might not be within 20 miles of their
quarters, and a reasonable extension of the 20 mile limit was then permissible,
and more than one journey a week justifiable.
The conservation of petrol and rubber, and the need for economy in
public expenditure, were matters of extreme importance to the successful
prosecution of the war, and were to be borne in mind in the application
of the instructions.
Similar instructions were issued by the Admiralty and Air Ministry;
but while it was realized that exact uniformity of practice would not always
be attainable, local commanders of the three Services were enjoined to con-
sult each other in the matter, in order that procedure in their particular
area might be generally similar for all three.
Use by Troops of Public Road Transport Services
The Ministry of War Transport represented to War Office, in July, 1941,
that there was excessive use by the troops of public road transport services,
i.e., buses, etc., to the exclusion of the civilian community generally.
were at the same time attacks in the press on the same topic.
suggested a system of rationing journeys by the troops.
They also referred
to the possibility of increasing the recreational use of W.D. transport, to
relieve the situation; but this would also have led to public criticism.
could be no dispute as to the Servicemen's entitlement to use public transport,
but, in cases where both road and rail facilities existed, it might be practic-
able to forbid the use of public road transport to the troops.
Some 800 motor coaches were shortly to be released from W.D. service to
civil use, and War Office suggested that, until these got into civil operation,
it would ease the situation if the Ministry temporarily re-allotted some buses
to the more congested areas.
The use of W.D. transport for conveyance of
troops between camps and nearby towns could not be agreed to; but it was
pointed out that passes to troops, to enable them to travel outside their
garrison, were restricted.
The question was again raised by the M.O.W.T. in January, 1943, when
War Office was asked to extend the employment of W.D, transport for the
conveyance of military personnel, in order to alleviate the difficulties.
held, between representatives of War Office, Air
Ministry, Canadian Military H.O., and U.S. Forces, to discuss a common
N91747/57
WO 277/21
27
