the expansion of their existing resources of controlled undertakings.
would have the effect of preserving the existing control of civilian-owned
vehicles, and would avoid competition between government departments.
The Ministry agreed to accept all responsibility for the arrangements in
connection with hirings except the payment of bills, which must remain a
W.D. responsibility.
Commands were required to terminate contracts with civilian vehicle
operators, other than those for cars, passenger carrying vehicles, and special
All future contracts would be made between the M.O.W.T. and
operators; but settlement of the bills would be effected under the normal
In connection with loss of, or damage to, W.D. stores
carried under R.H.O, arrangements, the M.O.W.T. accepted responsibility
for pursuing claims in respect of traffic carried on a tonnage basis; but in all
other cases the W.D. had to pursue claims direct with
The use of Army Form F 756 (Requisition for Transport)
supported by a document to show times and mileage, etc., for completion
by the operator and countersignature of the user.
M.O.W.T. would deal with all disputes arising over rates and conditions
of hire, while the War Department would deal with discrepancies in accounts
as regards hours worked and mileage run.
Drivers of hired vehicles available under contract on a " continuous
stand-by" (24 hours) basis were, at this time, paid £l a day.
command, they were also being accommodated and fed as civilian facilities
were not available, although drivers were not normally employed for more
than ten hours a day.
For this practice was substituted the payment of drivers
at statutory rates, with the addition of subsistence allowance when necessary.
This arrangement accorded with the responsibility
of M.O.W.T. for rates
and conditions of work for civilian transport employed on W.D. service.
Return Loads Scheme
1941, for obtaining loads for the
return journeys of lorries delivering W.D. stores from Central Ordnance
This envisaged taking delivery of stores from manufacturers for
It was agreed to try the scheme on a modified
scale with R.A.S.C. transport at C.O.D., Donnington, and with hired vehicles
Later, as the result of discussions with M.O.W.T. regarding vehicles
hired for long-distance deliveries from ordnance depots in the London area,
arrangements were made for the Officer i/c Transport, Kensington, to notity
the Ministry particulars of the number of vehicles, their destinations, and
So that arrangements might be made, where possible, for
them to collect loads for their return journeys to the London area.
Reduction of " Dead" Mileage
There was, however, still a considerable volume of Army road transport
one oyed on journeys other than training, where vehicles travelled empty
W.D. transport.
return loads scheme was, therefore, extended to cover
204
Arrangements were made in War Office-controlled depots to obtain loads,
military or civil, for vehicles being delivered to units or to ports, from
V.R.Ds., R.A.S.C., or vehicle reserve sections, R.A.O.C, and for imported
vehicles being driven to Army assembly plants by W.D. personnel, and
return loads for unit vehicles, employed with M.T. stores depots or C.O.Ds..
on the delivery of stores to units.
Units of all arms were directed to notify the local R.A.S.C. officer i/c
transport of particulars of vehicles employed on all standing details, and of
their destinations, and other duty journeys where sufficient notice could be
given to arrange return loads.
The O. i/c transport would then either
arrange Army loads, or, in conjunction with the M.T.L.O, civil loads, on
that part of the journey which would otherwise have been performed without
a load. In arranging loads, the O. i/c transport also consulted the District
Movement Control Office of his area.
No work as assistance to civil resources was to be undertaken
caused a deviation of more than ten (20 in exceptional circumstances) miles
from the direct route, or interfered with operational moves or those which
had to be carried out to a strict time schedule.
W.D. drivers were not to be
employed on loading or unloading vehicles.
Where civil loads were con-
cerned, it was the responsibility of the Regional Transport Commissioner to
ensure that adequate preparations were made for the speedy loading and
Orders were to be given to the W.D. transport
through the officer i/c transport, and the officers and N.C.Os. of the unit, and
not by any civilian official, contractor, etc.
It was the responsibility of the Regional Transport Commissioner
decide if financial adjustment was necessary; and units were required to
keep records showing the vehicles employed and for whom the work was
The time factor and difficulty of control made it impracticable to apply
the scheme to vehicles under delivery to ports, as originally planned.
It was decided in May, 1942, to discontinue the scheme as far as civilian
vehicles operating from War Office-controlled depots was concerned.
perience had shown that its value as a means of economizing in transport,
petrol, etc., was outweighed by the difficulties encountered in arranging both
loads and rates of hire, and also the risk of contractors receiving dual pay-
ment in respect of a single service.
organizations for obtaining return loads.
In any case where
1/c transport discovered that a return load had not been arranged for a
contractor's vehicle, he was directed to notify that fact to the local repre-
sentative of the Hauliers' National Traffic Pool, which formed part of the
Road Haulage Organization under the M.O.W.T.
Misuse of Scheme
Some difficulty was caused in the operation of the scheme,
failure, on the part of those responsible for working it, to appreciate its
principles.
Vehicles were sometimes reloaded and sent on from one place
205
(37477)
4947/
WO 277/21
27
