involving double mileage.
The system of dumping and ferrying forward
was found to be unsuitable when movement was rapid; it imposed great strain
on the personnel and did not save transport, as loads had sometimes only
just been dumped when they had to be moved forward again.
Every avail-
able man was continually loading and unloading vehicles, and drivers were
often at the wheel for twenty-four hours at a stretch to complete one delivery.
The situation was, of course, inevitable as the Japanese had broken and
were withdrawing as fast as they could, and the pursuit had to be maintained
at all costs.
Our forces sought out the enemy and attacked him wherever he
could be found.
The defensive period had ended, and our offensive for the
reconquest of Burma had begun.
The Lethbridge Mission
With the object of ensuring that the special requirements of organization
and equipment for the peculiar conditions prevailing in the Far
Eastern
theatre of war should be met to the fullest possible extent, the Lethbridge
Mission was sent out to conduct an extensive and intensive examination of
the matter on the spot.
It began this task during 1943, and its report in
April, 1944, included a number of recommendations regarding supply and
transport matters, which are summarized below.
intended to apply to the prosecution of the war in South-East Asia beyond
Burma (e.g., Malaya and Indonesia), they were not less applicable in many
cases to the war in Burma.
All these recommendations were carefully considered by the War Office,
G.H.Q., India, and H.Q. 11 Army Group, and were given effect wherever they
were agreed and practicable. Some of the changes so introduced were actually
put to the test in the conditions anticipated, but others never got beyond the
planning or experimental stage before the end of the war with Japan.
Recommendations regarding A.S.C. Organization
Flexibility and simplicity were considered to be the essential keynotes
of all Army Service Corps organization. There should be as few different
types of unit as possible, and they should be interchangeable, in order to
permit the frequent withdrawal of units for rest and rehabilitation, so necessary
in the Far East.
These groups
measured on the map, and yet would be remote from it from the practical
point of view because of the difficulties of movement and communication in
the jungle.
Each of these independent groups would require an
element, probably transport and certainly supplv. either with it or on its
The organization of the Australian Army Service Corns was indicated as
a model of what was wanted. In the Jungle Divicion of the Australian Army,
the headquarters of a Supply Depot Company controlled up to twelve supply
depot platoons, each of which was capable of maintaining and holding
reserves for 8,000 men.
tion necessary to fit the administrative plan.
These platoons could be allocated in any combina-
always make it essential to hold some reserves forward.
Difficulties of transport would
The supply depot
platoon was therefore designed to be capable, not only of handling, breaking
bulk of, and issuing, all A.S.C. items of supply, including ammunition, but
also of holding small reserves of these.
The same platoon organization was
used on the L. of C., and with a Headquarters, Base Supply Depot, at the
base. All these platoons were interchangeable.
Recommendations regarding Transport
The report recommended that Divisional A.S.C. should be organized in
two companies, one heavy (i.e., consisting of 3-ton lorries), and one light
(i.e., consisting of jeeps).
An armoured transport platoon was considered to
be required for the purpose of maintaining units surrounding Japanese posi-
tions, since the transporting personnel were likely to come under enemy
small arms fire.
The vehicle must be armoured against such fire, and capable
of a considerable cross-country performance.
The platoon should be large
enough to maintain a brigade group by making only one journey.
Transport platoons must be capable of operating independently away
from their parent company.
It was consequently recommended that relief
driver increments should be eliminated, and a generous allowance of spare
drivers included in the platoon, to allow for sickness and long working hours.
For non-divisional transport units, the requirement was for a G.T. com-
pany headquarters, capable of handling up to six transport platoons, each
self-contained and able to operate the whole range of A.S.C. vehicles. Driver
training must include the full range of vehicles likely to be used by A.S.C.
units.
The vehicles required for any particular operation would be a matter for
decision in each case.
When planning, it should be decided for each division
what vehicles and how many supply and transport platoons would be required
in the opening phase, and whether larger vehicles, and an increased allotment
of supply and transport platoons, could be used to achieve the greatest
efficiency in later stages.
The only alteration thought to be required in the workshop platoon was
that it should be capable of throwing off sufficient sections to maintain the
platoons operating in independent roles.
In the Australian A.S.C., these
sections were equipped with light machinery and maintenance trailers, and
so were self-contained.
Recommendations regarding Water Transport
The principal recommendations in respect of water transport were as
follows:
(a) The Royal Engineers should be responsible for the operation of
watercraft engaged in bulk distribution, and the R.A.S.C. for those
engaged in detailed deliveries.
(b) For the R.A.S.C. water transport organization, a River Regiment
and a Coastal Regiment were recommended; the former to operate
WO 277/21
27
