entirely mobile, and their employment met the problems not only of the
ammunition lift during the raids of early 1944,
but of the deployment
necessary to cover " Overlord".
No sooner had the "Overlord" deployment been completed than that
for Operation "Diver" began.
This was for the purpose of meeting the
ying bomb attacks. It involved considerable transport commitments, which
were largely met from the resources of Ministry of War Transport Road
Organization; but the deployment and the great demand for
ammunition threw much extra work on the A.A. Command transport, and
two additional mixed transport companies were formed to supplement it.
Some idea of the extent of the commitment may be gathered from the
following particulars of the work done.
In the one week of the deployment,
the R.A.S.C. carried 23,000 troops, with all their kit and stores; 30,000
tons of stores were lifted by 8,000 lorries; and 30,000 tons of H.A.A. ammuni-
tion alone were moved into the gun belt.
Special transport arrangements
had also to be made for the
carriage into the Diver area of specially
constructed "Gunmats", or portable platforms, from workshops through-
out the country.
The " Diver" battle reopened in January, 1945, and a new redeployment
was necessary.
This involved moving from the south to the east coast,
crossing London en route, and the attempt to carry the movement out in
four days, as before, proved to be impossible.
In addition,
M.O.W.T.
provided 168 10-ton lorries to move 9,000 tons of gun-mats on a phased
programme of 14 days; but it was overlooked that this time these platforms
would have to be dug out of the gun sites, and the transport waited for a
week in some cases.
When the lorries got under way, the civilian drivers
could not be relied upon to keep to any set time-table, and there was
considerable transport confusion.
When it became evident that the war would last the winter, a huge
hutting and building programme was put in hand for the A.A. troops in
the "Diver" belt. This required a vast rail and road movement programme.
14 railheads, clearing 300 wagons a day, were established, and 900 lorries
a day were employed.
R.A.S.C. officers were placed at each railhead to
ensure that the best use was made of the transport.
Personnel Difficulties
While all this was going on, there had been a steady drain on all the
fitter older men from A.A. Command to meet overseas demands.
Four
whole companies, and four company headquarters and workshops, had gone
to 21 Army Group.
Two other companies passed to War Office control
for air despatch work. The remaining units had to depend on low medical
category men, or on very young soldiers.
The low medical category
men
were over-concerned with regular hours and leave, the young soldiers could
not be. trusted with a vehicle.
Artificers were a greater
problem.
period of army training was too short to create good vehicle mechanics
and other tradesmen, and low medical category artificers did not work well
in adverse conditions and if called unan for an aytra afart at a critical
time, often proved incapable of it. All this was, of course, equally true of
other home service transport units.
120
Home Defence, 1939
The administrative arrangements in connection with the plan prepared
lo meet the possible threat of an invasion of the United Kingdom were con-
sidered in October, 1939.
One armoured division and seven infantry divisions
were included in the plan, though actually these formations were neither
equipped nor trained.
The S.T. commitment was in respect of transport only.
All guns had
to be provided with a towing vehicle each, and unit first line transport was
to be made up to full strength.
In both
be supplied from Army sources were to be obtained by requisition.
cases, vehicles which could not
For
second line transport there was only sufficient transport available for the
Armoured Division and two Divisions, and this was to be allotted to these
formations on a scale to be decided by D.S.T.
For the other formations, it
was to be requisitioned.
would have to be impressed at the time.
If any troop-carrying transport were required, buses
On further examination of the legal position, however, it transpired that
requisitioning of civil transport for use as first line transport was not per-
missible; i.e.,
there must be no compulsory alienation of vehicles,
but they
must be hired voluntarily and held.
Consequently, to limit the permanent hiring of transport, hiring to
complete 50 per cent. of first line transport of units with a home defence
rôle was authorized on the condition that full use must first have been
made of W.D. transport available with units which had no active rôle in
those formations included in the home defence plan; and troop-carrying
transport was earmarked on a " no-cost " basis.
Anti-Invasion Measures, 1940
In view of the general military situation, the administrative arrangements
in the United Kingdom were examined on 8th May, 1940.
The action taken to organize the supply service to meet possible opera-
tional conditions in the United Kingdom is described later in this section,
including the initiation of main supply depots.
A War Office Mobile Petrol Reserve was formed at Aldershot, carried
in the vehicles of R.A.S.C. transport companies, so as to make it possible
to meet at once all urgent demands at home or at the ports.
S.T.2 made arrangements, in conjunction with S.T.6, to build up home
reserves of packed petrol in the petrol sections of ten main supply depots.
By mid-June, the first trains of packed petrol were going forward from the
two filling factories, and the process of building up P.O.L. stocks, including
an element of packed aviation spirit, was well under way.
These stocks
were expected to cover immediate operational needs in the United Kingdom.
The arrangements for the provision of transport were adequate, and
no difficulty was expected in this respect in an emergency, as they did not
clash with the requirements of Regional Transport Commissioners.
The dificulties expected were in respect of the provision of drivers,
and the organization to manage the transport when it was collected.
problem was to
" acquire" the civilian drivers as found possible from the
garages, etc., where the vehicles were requisitioned, offering them £3 a week,
and rations, etc., as provided for the soldiers.
121
WO 277/2k
27
