of these services, the only matter worth comment being the unusual arrange-
ment made at Tientsin in January, 1940, for the feeding of the troops, in
consequence of the reduced size of the garrison.
Tenders were called for
from local " Compradores" for the provision of cooked meals four times a
day to the British troops, in accordance with a bill of fare drawn up by the
O.C. troops, and not exceeding the items and standard of the normal ration
scale.
The contract was in fact awarded to a former British N.C.O., and the
troops were very well fed.
The following paragraphs deal only with Hong Kong.
Supply and Transport Accommodation
In Hong Kong, the town of Victoria is situated on the north side of the
island, facing the mainland, and is a very congested area.
In it were located
all the R.A.S.C. installations, Supply Depot, Bakery, M.T. Company,
work-
shops, stores, etc. A scheme had been drawn up several years before the war
for new barracks, R.A.S.C. installations, etc., and had been provisionally
approved; but, for financial reasons, nothing had been done.
The R.A.S.C.
were consequently working under the most primitive conditions.
Defence Scheme
From the supply point of view, the most important item in the local
defence scheme was that which fixed the period during which Hong Kong
would have to hold out before relief could be expected at 120 days. All
calculations were based on this figure.
In the early part of the war, with but small forces available, the scheme
provided for the defence of the island of Hong Kong only; but, with the
arrival of two Canadian battalions in November, 1941, the plan was altered
to a certain extent, and a force was placed on the mainland to meet a land
attack coming from the north.
daily from the supply depot to a number of delivery points, whence they
would be taken to the various blockhouses and defended localities.
supply depot was, however, iocated in a vulnerable and congested area in
that each fort and blockhouse should hold a reserve of hard rations.
At the outbreak of the European war in 1939, the dispersion of supplies
had not yet been effected, but other preparatory work had been carried out.
The supply of live goats as fresh meat for the Indian troops
garrison had become more and more difficult, and a scheme was put into
operation for the contractor to set up a breeding farm on one of the islands.
Fuel wood for the bakery was also imported from the mainland, but the
supply of this had also become precarious, and a shipload of wood was
accordingly brought up from Malaya and stored in the Supply Depot yard.
Plans to provide for an adequate transport service in the event of war were
As they stood, the R.A.S.C. M.T. company, as the nucleus, was
to be augmented by the personnel of the A.S.C. company of the Hong Kong
Defence Corps, comprising about 30 Europeans together with
Chinese civilian drivers and impressed vehicles.
The details for
lishment of two vehicle collecting centres had been worked out, and the
European personnel of the A.S.C. Company had been allotted their duties in
connection with them.
A scheme for the impressment of vehicles was agreed
with the civil authorities. Petrol was at that time obtained from the civilian
Situation 1939-1940
During the period from September, 1939, to March, 1940, the additional
storehouses for the dispersal of supplies were completed and the reserves
placed in them.
Otherwise, the R.A.S.C. were still working on a peace foot-
The supply situation was that the R.A.S.C. only dealt with the issue of
bread, meat, vegetables, forage, etc., while the N.A.A.F.I. was still
ing the troops with a large part of their rations and holding the
Only about sixty days' supply of food was in fact held for the
garrison of British troops; no provision of any sort had been made for the
feeding of the H.K.V.D.C., which formed a very considerable portion of the
small garrison; only a totally inadequate ration of biscuits and milk was held
for the Indian troops.
No reserve of forage was held for the horses and
mules, except a little by contractors, and no petrol or other fuels were held
except by contractors, i.e., petrol in civilian bulk petrol tanks, coal in con-
tractors' yards, etc.
The transport scheme had been drawn up on the basis of civilian motor
transport being requisitioned on the day or so before hostilities broke out.
The difficulty was the shortage of drivers.
There would be six hundred
vehicles; all the Regular R.A.S.C. were required to man their own vehicles,
and the Europeans of the H.K.V.D.C. were insufficient. The answer was
Chinese hired by the day.
This solution was obviously unsatisfactory,
they might be expected to disappear in times of danger.
This in fact actually
happened unless there was an armed guard seated by them.
augment the A.S.C. company,
H.K.V.D.C., by a Chinese drivers' section; but this was not well received by
the Europeans, of whom the Corps had always been entirely composed.
Eventually, a compromise was reached on the basis of a " Chinese Transport
Corps", as an independent unit, on Territorial Army lines.
Authority was
months before hostilities began, and the scheme was
therefore only in its infancy and was never tried out.
Improved Arrangements
There was a scare in July,
1940, when all women and children were
evacuated, and a number of R.A.S.C.
recommendations for supplies and
transport were adopted.
These included the taking over by the R.A.S.C. of
all stocks of supplies held by the N.A.A.F.I.,
the introduction of the full
war-time ration, the purchase of supplies by the H.K.V.D.C., and the laying
in of a stock of P.O.L.
The last item was not very satisfactory, as initial
purchases had to be in 4-gallon tins, resulting in considerable loss through
29
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
