It was agreed that it was not possible to vary existing regulations
as to the use of W.D. transport and the issue of passes.
were considered to have equal rights with civilians in the use of public
services, and restrictions on amenities could not be imposed only on one
It was not economical to use Service vehicles
in place of civil, as the seating capacity of the Service vehicles was much
less than that of the normal public service vehicles.
It was held that the
national economy could best be served by
extravagant form of transport, which was represented by the public service
vehicles under M.O.W.T. control.
The solution was thought to lie in local
and in the M.O.W.T. putting more passenger vehicles into
Against these views, the Ministry stated that the civil passenger services
as a whole were already overloaded, and that their available resources were
inadequate to meet the existing demand for movement.
to the increase in the numbers of factory workers, and the decrease
M.O.W.T. vehicle assets; and manpower problems were causing difficulties
in operating passenger services.
The Ministry agreed that Service personnel
had equal rights with civilians.
In the end, agreement was reached on the basis of a directive to com-
mands (which the Ministry would parallel with a notification to Regional
Transport Commissioners in order to ensure harmonious co-operation) to
the effect that it was not War Office policy to restrict the movement of
military personnel in off-duty hours,
except for military or civil necessity.
It was considered that off-duty travel by Service personnel should not make
travelling by public service difficult for civilians going to and from work.
The existing instructions, restricting the use of W.D.
veyance of troops off duty when public transport was available, were to be
interpreted as meaning that the capacity of the available public transport
was sufficient to meet the needs of the unit concerned.
The question of
capacity would be one for consultation between commands and Regional
No objection was raised to the use of W.D.
transport, within the authorized limits of mileage and frequency of journeys,
where the R.T.C. recorded that he could not provide the necessary facilities.
Troops should not, where possible, use public services during the peak hours.
The principal connection in which the Army was called upon to assist
the Admiralty with transport was that of the disposal of land mines.
first only small detachments were detailed as required; but in August, 1941,
a Mine Disposal Company (later redesignated a Land Incident Company),
R.A.S.C., was formed to be allocated specially for transport duty with the
Admiralty in the disposal of enemy parachute mines.
The vehicles were
transed to work in any part of the country, and it was impossible for the
transport company in London, which had till then provided the vehicles,
to exercise adequate control over them and the personnel.
The new unit
operated directly under Admiralty control, was regarded as a Bomb Disposal
unit, and carried out its duties very well, several men being decorated.
described in Chapter III, Section 1.
Second line transport was provided for the Koyal Marine Division, as
190
Assistance to the Air Ministry was principally in the form of the provision
of load-carriers from R.A.S.C. stocks.
Between April and August, 1940, the
total issues from R.A.S.C. and R.A.O.C. stocks amounted to over 2,000;
and S.T.3 represented that no further diversions of Army vehicles to other
departments should be made until the Army was in sight of completing its
be issued to the Air Ministry for the time being.
It was then decided that no more new vehicles should
The Ministry of Aircraft Production then began to make demands.
36 lorries were required for the salvage of crashed aircraft, and
most of these were taken from R.A.S.C. stocks.
wanted for delivery in two or three months. This was followed by a demand
for 200 tippers for a priority construction service, and it was then decided
that no more tippers should be handed over to the Air Ministry.
January, 1941, however, a request came in on a very high level for the loan
of 1,000 tippers for use on airfield construction work.
tippers were urgently needed for W.D. services, it was suggested that 1,000
impressed lorries from home service units, which were being replaced by
new production, might be given to the Air Ministry unconditionally; and
this was agreed, and carried out, another 400 surplus vehicles also being
No further large demands were made by the R.A.F. before
the R.A.S.C. ceased to be responsible for the provision of vehicles.
In December, 1943, the R.A.F. asked for the loan of two DUKWs, for
trial as to their suitability for use on R.A.F. inshore air/sea rescue services.
This raised the difficulty, from the Army point of view, that, if the R.A.F.
began to use DUKWs, it would mean another competitor for the already
limited supply of these vehicles.
The R.A.S.C. already had not enough
DUKWs to carry out completely the urgent operational training necessary
for numbers of R.A.S.C. units.
However, the vehicles were lent, with Army
crews on account of the care and experience required in the handling of these
They did in fact prove very successful for work inshore where
neither boats nor ordinary road vehicles could approach crashed aircraft.
N.A.A.F.I. Transport Services
The policy was that the provision and operation of vehicles employed on
N.A.A.F.I. services were the responsibility of that corporation.
personnel in uniform were permitted to travel in W.D. transport in certain
circumstances, e.g., when there was no suitable public service available.
The question of the extent to which the M.O.W.T. should control the
movement of N.A.A.F.I. transport was discussed in September 1943.
was agreed that rail transport and Road Haulage Organization transport
should be used for the movement of N.A.A.F.I. supplies to distributing
centres; but that N.A.A.F.I. should retain the right to use their own trans-
port for deliveries from the distributing centres to Command Supply Depots,
making full use of the Road Haulage Organization whenever possible.
N.A.A.F.I. asked, in March, 1944, for relaxation of the rules governing
the provision of transport facilities for their personnel.
to the concessions that uniformed N.A.A.F.I. staff might use W.D. transport,
and that powers to use W.D. transport for N.A.A.F.I. personnel were delegated
37477)
WO 277/21
27
