APPENDIX XI C
(See Vol. I, page 168)
DESCRIPTION OF AN IMPROVISED MOBILE KITCHEN USED IN
NORTH AFRICA, 1942
Early in the campaign in North Africa the provision of a mobile kitchen
became a matter of urgency for the feeding of tank regiments.
The improvised
example described below proved successful and invaluable for that purpose.
The original establishment was four for each regiment, but an additional one
was later found necessary, so that the H.Q. squadron could feed the " B"
Echelon transport.
As the result of experience in working, it was recommended
that these mobile kitchens would be a valuable piece of equipment for mechan-
ized infantry, but not for armoured car reconnaissance regiments, as such
units were usually very dispersed during action.
The mobile kitchen was a converted four-wheel-drive 3-ton lorry with metal
body.
It was equipped at one side with five hay-boxes clamped to the floor,
and on the other side with five stands and a No. 1 petrol cooker burner unit.
The stands had clamps attached to hold the 6-gallon food-containers.
Other
equipment consisted of a table for preparation of food; louvres in the side
of the lorry for ventilation, especially during the black-out periods ; and racks
for storing rations and other cooks' kit.
Units also added accessories, such
as cupboards, meat-safes, etc.
As a result of study of the working of these kitchens, the following points
(a) Containers had to have special lips under the splash plate, with rubber
mountings, in order to prevent liquid spilling over when cooking
was being done while travelling over open country.
(b) When the kitchen was in use, fumes and heat prevented the use of the
canopy, and there was, therefore, no protection against the weather
or the showing of lights at night.
(c) The lorries must travel in B. 1 Echelon, which was close up to the
regiment during action, and not in B. 2 Echelon, which was farther
(d) On account of battle conditions, it was not always possible to give a
hot meal at night and a breakfast the next morning.
540
APPENDIX XII
(See Vol. II, page 268)
BARRACK SERVICES
Forms Used in Accounting for Fuel and Light
• 1. Army Form F 727.—Account for fuel used by a unit in barracks. It
consisted of five parts :—
(a) Statement of receipts, issues, and stocks in hand, for each variety of
(b) Account of unit's entitlement (as in (d) below) and debits against it
(including electricity, gas, petrol, etc., used for cooking and heating
in lieu of coal, at equivalent rates).
(c) Numbers of occupied quarters (e.g., officers', married soldiers', etc.)
by types ; of barrack rooms and sitting rooms, with cubic contents :
of dining members, officers' and serjeants' messes; and average
daily strength for each week of period.
(d) Fuel entitlement for personnel and general scales, for the numbers
shown in (c), and also for the purposes shown in (e).
(e) Men's cooking
and wash-up ;
bath-houses and ablution basins ;
weekly average of numbers in mess, and of baths, etc., with appro-
2. Army Form F 727A.—Fuel, light, and paillasse straw account for units
under canvas, showing, for each type of fuel, candles, oil, and straw, the follow-
ing particulars :-
(a) Entitlement (officers, serjeants, soldiers, baths, etc.), showing rates,
numbers admissible, and quantities to which entitled.
(b) Debits against entitlement, i.e., consumption.
(d) Stock statement.
3. Army Form F 771.—Account of fuel and light used for the following
services : R.E. and R.E.M.E. machinery and workshops ; fire engines ; electric
light apparatus; magazines and defences; signalling service ; lighthouses ;
R.A.O.C.
workshops and laundries;
R.A.S.C. workshops,
bakeries, and
butcheries ; boiling water for cleaning rifles on ranges; War Department
vessels; veterinary pharmacies; preparation of hot feeds for animals, etc.
The account showed, for each type of fuel, candles, oils, etc. : Remains,
receipts, expenditure, and remains.
541
WO 299
