Difficulties in Use of M.T. 80 Spirit
When M.T. 80 was introduced as the standard grade of petrol for all
ground requirements, many problems arose.
The technical difficulties con-
nected with its use in all petrol-driven A.F.Vs. in place of M.T. 87 and M.T.
15 were overcome by engine modifications; but the elimination of M.T. 68.
MT. TO (Mideast) and M.T. 75 for "B" vehicles and other equipment pro.
duced problems not so easily solved.
The lead content of this petrol was said
to cause serious valve trouble, and vehicle manufacturers pressed for the
universal supply of a lead-free petrol in addition to the standard M.T. 80.
This would have resulted in the use in each theatre of separate tankage,
pipelines, road and rail tankers, filling facilities and containers for each type.
Had each thatre possessed storage and distribution facilities equal to or
in excess of its requirements, the provision of a lead-free petrol would have
been a problem solely of transport and production capacity; but this was
not the case.
Investigations were made to determine:•
(a) Whether it was practicable to reduce the tetraethyl lead content
of M.T. 80.
(b) To what extent the engine trouble complained of was attributable
to the high lead content of M.T. 80.
(c) To what extent legitimate complaints could be overcome by engine
modifications or additional maintenance.
(d) What were the minimum essential requirements of unleaded fuel,
so that if all else failed these could be shipped packed from the
United Kingdom.
It was established that a reduction of the lead content was not possible
without a serious and unacceptable reduction in the world production of
both motor spirit and aviation fuels.
In any event, it would have been many
months before a motor spirit, either unleaded or with a low lead content,
could have been produced to meet all requirements.
A body of British automobile engineers and petroleum scientists, working
in conjunction with American experts, introduced modifications in engine
design and recommended increased maintenance in the Field, measures which
helped to eliminate the valve-burning troubles which had been the chief
cause of complaint and could justifiably be attributed to leaded petrol.
The problem was, to a great extent, reduced to the fuel to be used in
small stationary I. engine of eerating and charging sets and other items
of R.E. and signal equipment.
The use of leaded petrol in these was reported
to have increased the consumption of spares to a very serious extent and
to have reduced the running life of the engines to a fraction of that possible
with unleaded petrol.
It is interesting
to note, however,
that Central
Mediterranean Force, after extensive experiments, considered that extra
maintenance could solve the problem, and stated that if unleaded fuel were
introduced into a theatre for specific endines it would be used. in spite
be achieved.
of orders to the contrary, in all engines where saving of maintenance could
This would result in a consequent lowering of general main-
consumption of this fuel
tenance standards, grave risk of damage to equipment, and an increase in
264
No satisfactory solution was reached,
and, finally, packed supplies of
unleaded petrol were made available in the United Kingdom and later in
N.W. Europe on a strictly controlled basis.
It was found in practice in
21 Army Group that when unleaded petrol was brought into the theatre
it was extremely difficult to control its consumption, thus confirming the views
of C.M.F.
The vexed question was brought to an end by the acceptance by 21 Army
Group from August, 1945, of 70/72 octane petrol (low lead content) in
bulk, for general vehicle use.
This grade had been introduced into the
United Kingdom to assist in conservation of world stocks of tetraethyl-lead
to be operational.
It became the standard motor spirit in all theatres as soon as they ceased
M.T. 80 was however still essential for A.F.Vs.
Flame Thrower Fuel
Flame thrower fuels became an R.A.S.C. article of supply after some
discussion as to the Service which was to be responsible for them.
It was
contended by S.T.2 that these special fuels should be regarded as ammunition,
as their use was analogous to that of ammunition, and so they should be
an Ordnance responsibility.
This view was supported by the fact that
the pressure gases used to expel the fuel from the flame throwers were already
an Ordnance responsibility, and it seemed logical that the two items should be
supplied through the same agent.
On the grounds that the item was a " fuel"
and therefore an S.T. responsibility, and that it was so highly inflammable
that its storage and transportation with ammunition could not be considered.
the provision, storage, supply and delivery of flame thrower fuel became an
R.A.S.C. responsibility.
The most suitable type of container for these fuels had then to be con-
sidered.
The 40-gallon barrel was unsuitable for operational conditions,
owing to its weight and bulk, the difficulty in handling it, and the fact that
it did not readily lend itself to the free pouring of high-viscosity fuels.
The
4-gallon non-returnable tin, in spite of the protection afforded by the single
tin carton, was too fragile.
These facts, coupled with the chemical actions
of flux and terne plate on the aluminium stearate contained in the fuels, led
to an 8-gallon black steel drum being adopted as the most suitable type of
container.
When responsibility for flame thrower fuel was taken over by S.T.2,
it was laid down that S.T.2 was not responsible for quality control and
specifications.
But many technical difficulties arose and had to be overcome,
and it was necessary to take a firm line to ensure that the supply of the fuels
was put on a sound administrative basis.
Flame thrower fuel manufactured
for European use was unsuitable for tropical use, and all stocks deteriorated
during long storage.
Technical discussion continued over the question of whether or not the
use of leaded petrol in the mixture caused quicker deterioration than when
unleaded spirit was used. In the end, unleaded petrol was used in spite of
its shortage.
A main provision difficulty was that as no General Staff ruling could
be obtained on the artant of the future onerotional use of flame throwing
equipment, it was impossible to budget accurately for future requirements
265
WO 277/
27
