A year later, the limitation to unladen 3-ton lorries was discussed with
the Air Ministry and the Army medical authorities.
The Air Ministry were
finding the same difficulty in this matter, with W.A.A.F. drivers.
It may be
remarked that the objections did not come from the women as a rule. Many
of them preferred driving lorries to other types of vehicle.
The medical
authorities were prepared to agree, subject to certain stipulations, to A.T.S.
personnel driving laden 3-ton lorries.
It was considered, however, that,
if A.T.S. drivers in general were not to be allowed to drive such vehicles
without
restrictive conditions, little reliance could be placed on the use
of A.T.S. lorry drivers as replacements for soldiers.
The matter became urgent, as A.A. command proposed to expand its
second line transport services by the widespread use of A.T.S. drivers
all 3-ton lorries, not specifically allotted to ammunition carrying duties.
It was eventually laid down that auxiliaries of the A.T.S. might drive
W.D. vehicles, laden or unladen, as follows : -
(a) Motor-cycles, up to and including 350 c.c. class.
(b) Cars, up to and including 6-seaters.
(c) Trucks, vans, ambulances, and 30-cwt. lorries, of all makes and
(d) 3-ton lorries of specific makes, owing to the peculiarity of construc-
tion of certain other makes.
(e) Special vehicles for internal depot transport, such as electric auto-
trucks and Lister Trucks.
Auxiliaries under 19 years of age were not allowed to drive loaded 3-ton
or 30-cwt lorries, and none were allowed to drive any vehicle with a trailer
Other Women's Organizations
There were various other women's organizations whose members were
prepared to drive vehicles in some form of Army transport service.
the same time, they retained an independent status, and did not join the
A.T.S., or come under military control. This situation raised a number
In April, 1940, certain conditions were stated by War Office under which
the drivers and motor vehicles of such voluntary organizations might be
employed. Where the services within a command required an addition to
War Establishments, or hiring in lieu would be necessary, and voluntary
help was available, the G.O.C.-in-C. of the command could use his discretion
as to the acceptance of offers of assistance without charge
Department. Where they were accepted, free petrol and lubricants might
This authority was withdrawn a year
later, in view of the necessity for stringent economy in the use of petrol.
The Mechanized Transport Corps asked for official recognition by the
War Office in April, 1941.
This was a civilian organization, whose members
and drove vehicles for civilian and Allied purposes.
wore a uniform and a distinguishing badge of quasi military appearance,
S.T.3 recommended that this corps should not be
recognized as it was
considered that, apart from the B.R.C.S. and B.V.A.C., whose voluntary
services were already recognized and accepted, voluntary bodies wishing
to give service should be encouraged to merge with either of those organiza-
tions, or, in the case of individuals who were eligible, to join the A.T.S.
The corps was not officially recognized by the War Office, but continued
no assistance to the War Office, which therefore
raised no objection to its disbandment when this was proposed in September,
1942 as a result of the procedure for the direction of women established by
the Ministry of Labour.
Before mobilization, the services of drivers, with or without cars, of
the Mechanical Transport Section of the Women's Legion, were offered to
the D.S.T. The organization had an arrangement to supply the Air Ministry
with drivers, but these were to be volunteers for overseas only, and a number
of members were therefore unemployed.
The D.S.T. pointed out that the
Army already had its own organization, the A.T.S., to provide its require-
ments of women for transport services, and the matter did not again arise,
as far as S.T., War Office, was concerned.
Ambulances Operated by Voluntary Organizations
The Joint War Organization of the British Red Cross Society and the
Order of St. John of Jerusalem expressed in November, 1939, its desire to
assist the War Office by providing complete ambulance units, and suggested
that to enable this to be done 50 motor ambulances, to War Office specifica-
tion, might be obtained for it through the War Office on payment, but to
remain the property of the Joint War Organization.
the ambulances should be of the standard War Office type was important,
as, in the war of 1914-1918, the B.R.C.S. and other similar bodies had fitted
themselves out with a mixed collection of non-standard vehicles, so that the
Army was obliged to refuse to try and keep them supplied with spares and
tyres, or to carry out repairs.
S.T. was under a misapprehension at first as to the conditions of employ-
ment of such units, and believed that they would be provided in substitution
of similar military units, and was therefore prepared to accept responsibility
for a number of the services involved in the upkeep of the units.
It then appeared that there were objections to the acceptance of the
offer, if it were regarded as being in substitution of, and not as in addition
to, W.D. resources.
On the one hand, the view was expressed that offers from charitable
organizations were intended to increase amenities beyond Army scales, and
not to relieve the W.D. of its responsibility for the provision of essential
equipment and stores. If ambulances were offered as gifts, they ought to
be placed at the disposal of the D.S.T. for use in any appropriate unit;
but B.R.C.S. funds should not be used to operate and maintain a unit which
was a proper and normal charge to public funds.
to operate a unit, this should be additional to the authorized provision of
military units, and should provide a useful reserve of medical transport in
WO 277/21
27
