area was very large, and the size of the rearward services in proportion to
that of the force maintained was indeed a very serious matter.
Thus, in the
case of troops forward of Imphal, it required 36,700 personnel, of whom
5,000 were supply and transport, to maintain a division 13,500 strong; and
50 per cent. of the tonnage which left Chittagong for Arakan was absorbed
for L. of C. personnel and services before the zone of corps responsibility was
reached.
L. of C. Road Transport
The transport situation on the Manipur Road had gone from bad to worse
during the second half of 1942. More companies had been sent up, but they
consisted largely of inexperienced drivers, sometimes with only a few weeks'
The Indian Army road transport organization was only beginning
to expand, and there was nothing better available.
Companies had to be
taken for operational rôles before they were really ready.
stances, the wastage of vehicles was high, due to accidents, poor driving, and
a low standard of maintenance.
The last of these was aggravated by the
inadequacy of the workshop organization for the load, and the chronic short-
It was apparent that something more than the ordinary platoon convoy
system, working on a daytime schedule, was required to enable the necessary
load to be delivered at the roadhead, then at Palel, 150 miles distant from
An alternative was found in a scheme put forward by a civilian
who had been operating transport on the Burma Road to China.
the system which he advocated the "L.G.O.C." system, as it was based on
the methods employed by the London General Omnibus Company.
" L.G.O.C." System
The basis of this system was that all the vehicles would be pooled, trans-
port companies having no responsibility for any particular vehicles, or for
maintenance of any sort, but only providing parties of drivers at given points
at given times, to take over vehicles from the previous shift. and drive them
to the next point of change. Running was to be free, and not in convoy. In
this way, vehicles would be operated continuously for 24 hours a day.
Maintenance was to be carried out entirely in workshops, which were to
be located at intervals along the road for this purpose.
carry discs of certain colours, according to whether they were due
Vehicles would
for
300-mile, 1,000-mile or 3,000-mile, maintenance; and, on reaching a workshop
appropriate for the particular degree of maintenance, they would be taken
in, serviced, and put on the road again with the minimum of delay.
It was claimed that this scheme applied business methods
which had
proved successful in such a big concern as the L.G.O.C., and that this would
overcome the dificulties due to the alleged faulty organization; that main-
tenance would thus be carried out by personnel with a more skilled knowledge
if the work; and that drivers would acquire in intonte knowledge of a
limited section of the road. which would mate for an immunuad atondard of
driving, and a reduction in the number of accidents.
52
The proposal was approved by G.H.Q., India, which had no alternative
to offer, and the " L.G.O.C." system came into force on 10th February, 1943.
It provides an exceptional instance of one method of operating transport
over a long L. of C.; and, as certain principles were in question, it is of
interest to notice the facts concerning its inception and development.
The question of principle is to be found in the opinion expressed on the
highest level at G.H.Q., India, when commenting on the scheme, to the effect
that the time had come when it was necessary to discard practices which had,
by long usage, come to be regarded as principles.
As the method of free
running of transport, as opposed to the convoy system, was one already
used in suitable circumstances, the statement can only be taken to apply to
the old-established Army Service Corps system of the responsibility of the
M.T. company for the operation and maintenance of its vehicles, both as a
whole under the O.C., and individually of the driver for his lorry.
that this system had been found wanting, at any rate for the present purpose,
and must be replaced by new methods.
It is only fair to say that the new system inherited the assets of the G.P.T.
companies employed on the run, poor as they were at that time in terms of
the inexperience of the drivers and the bad condition of the vehicles.
on the other hand, the originator of the scheme, who had become Com-
mander, L. of C. Road Transport, was given every possible facility to enable
He had practically unlimited powers to recruit
workshop personnel anywhere in India, to pay them special rates, and to buy
spare parts in the civilian market.
The establishment provided for more than
100 officers, exclusive of those of the G.P.T. and workshop companies,
and these were provided at the expense of other commitments.
At first, the new system appeared to be the answer.
In January, 1943,
there were 640 lorries on the road, of which less than one-third were runners,
and an average of 100 loads a day was being delivered.
By the end of
February, delivery had been raised to over 300 loads a day, and, of 700
lorries, over 400 were runners.
In spite of all that was done to bolster up the new system, however, and
of a continuous infusion of new vehicles, the proportion of vehicles off the
road for repair rose steadily, until early in May, 1943, it had reached more
than 50 per cent. of the total operated.
The drivers had no interest in vehicles
which were not their own, and the company officers were concerned only
with man-management.
The workshops merely dealt with an endless stream
of vehicles in which they had no individual interest.
The Commander, L. of C. Road Transport, proceeded to reorganize on
the basis of the rejected principle of company responsibility for vehicles.
May, 70 lorries were placed in the charge of one company, to operate
under its own arrangements on the continuous running basis, drivers of the
company relieving each other as necessary.
as may be judged from the fact that, of these 70 vehicles, 65 were still
running at the end of the year, and that the engine life had risen from 7,000
to 19,000 miles in the interval.
After a month, another 480 lorries were
handed over to companies, and the proportion of runners at once began to
improve.
53
WO 277/21
27
