recently been converted from a mechanical to an animal basis of transport
Units that had not been able to give sufficient attention to this essential part
of their training paid the price.
So also did the animals, which were sometimes
treated with a great lack of consideration, over-loaded, ill-loaded, and kept
under load unnecessarily long.
Each animal normally carried its own rations
for er day and its picketting gear, perhaps 10 or 15lb. in addition to its
standard payload of 160-1b.
This latter figure had been fixed as the result
st long experience, which had proved that it was the maximum that animals
out adverse effect on their condition and performance.
of the pack mule's size could be called upon to carry as a regular thing with-
Nevertheless there
the animals carry several days' forage, or a bigger payload.
were frequent attempts at a high level to increase the load carried, by makina
Owing to the shortage of mules, ponies and donkeys had to be used
instead, but they were not popular or altogether satisfactory substitutes.
The
donkeys proved stubborn under fire, and this was apt to be awkward for the
drivers.
Further notes relating to animal transport in this theatre are to be found
in Chapter X.
P.O.L. Supply
The problems of supply and distribution of P.O.L. in this campaign were
more complex and difficult of solution than those experienced in any other
Every known means of transportation was employed for the con-
veyance of this commodity.
The extension of pipelines was carried forward
as far as this was practicable. By the end of 1944, the American 6-inch line
from Calcutta to Dibrugarh had been completed; the line from Chittagong to
Chandranathpur had reached Comilla, and the final link was in progress; the
extension of the line from Manipur to Imphal was proceeding; the American
line from Calcutta to Kunming had reached Myitkyina in October; and the
construction of the second American 6-inch line from Chittagong to Tinsukia
This had assisted greatly with the improvement in the situation in respect
of the supply of P.O.L. which had been achieved during 1944. Other methods
were a decrease in consumption, and increasing bulk storage and means of
distribution. Storage at Chittagong was increased from i1 million to 20
The capacity of tankage at airfields and army depots was
increased by 32 million gallons, and that of rail tank wagons by
In spite of these measures, however, the position of A.L.F.S.E.A. in
respect of stocks of P.O.L. was never very secure throughout the campaign
for the re-occupation of Burma, During February, March and April, 1945,
stocks of most main grades represented only 15 days' consumption.
quantities handled by A.L.F.S.E.A. P.O.L. depots incyeased from 10 million
gallons in April, 1944, to 34 million in April, 1945.
The Lethbridge Mission did not make any specific recommendations as to
spereto P.O. L. equipment for jungle warfare, and the standard packages were
therefore used for packed P.O.L.
is dealt with in Chapter X. There was a great shortage of P.O.L. equipment
The question of the provision of containers
in A.L.F.S.E.A., the only P.O.L. units which had adequate equipment on
their War Equipment tables at the end of 1944 being the two R.A.S.C. Petrol
As described in Chapter X, the position in regard to P.O.L. equip-
ment was being rectified from the United Kingdom as fast and as far as cir-
installations, other items sent out included the following: —
Besides the normal equipment for P.O.L. units and
-800-gallon port-
able fabric tanks, 2.500-gallon fabric tanks; 620-gallon portable steel tanks:
single-skin petrol bags for free dropping from
The 800-gallon fabric tank folded up when empty into a small space, and
was immediately available for use without any constructional work.
It could
be used for a variety of purposes, such as temporary storage in conjunction
with mobile petrol filling centres, and at stations for refuelling vehicles.
could be erected in a 3-ton lorry to provide an emergency bulk road tank
lorry.
During 1944, when S.E.A.C.
was considering the best means of
developing air-transported P.O.L.
supply in bulk, the
tried, but did not prove a practical proposition for the purpose.
800-gallon tank was
Air Transport Command, U.S.A.A.F.
carried bulk spirit to China in
special tanker aircraft; but S.E.A.C. wished to avoid this method, no doubt
because it meant that such aircraft could not be switched to carry other loads.
As light metal tanks suitable for fitting in the commoner types of transport
aircraft could not be obtained, P.O.L. for transport by air for British forces
continued to be packed in jerricans and barrels.
Another method considered
was the use of solidified petrol, which is discussed in Appendix XM.
The 620-gallon tank, besides its normal uses, was considered to be suit-
able for use in all types of amphibian vehicle to meet a requirement for
amphibian bulk petrol carriers.
After the recapture of the oilfields in Central Burma, their exploitation
on a short-term basis was undertaken by the civilian oil company on behalf
of A.L.F.S.E.A. to ease the situation in that area until the supply of spirit
was possible from Rangoon.
This proved a most valuable asset in an area
most difficult and expensive to supply.
Using Japanese and other equip-
ment found on the spot, this expedient eventually produced up to 12,000
gallons of M.T. spirit a day.
Catering Services Re-organized
The catering services in S.E.A.C. were reorganized during the second
half of 1944, the main features of this process being the formation of a pool
of officers and N.C.Os., both British and Indian, to assist and advise in regard
to catering problems for both British and Indian troops; the formation of
three emergency cookery training centres; and the establishment of an Army
School of Cookery.
A team of Indian cooks also toured the command for
the purpose of demonstrating to Indian units the correct methods of preparing
and cooking dried goat meat and dehydrated vegetables.
The attention so paid to the feeding of Indian units was a new departure,
as until then it had been the general custom to leave Indians to cater for
themselves without interference from their officers.
As a result, that part of
the troops in this theatre which was Indian, amounting to 70 per cent., had
often been disregarded from the catering standpoint.
The school of thought
wets
77/17
WO 277/21
27
