for the month, and so to isolate any individual vehicle which was producing
results below average, and to enquire into the cause.
By comparison of
the results for each vehicle over a period of months, it was possible to
observe a gradual loss of efficiency calling for overhaul or other remedy,
seasonal effects of cold weather, etc.
Copies of these forms went in peace-
time to S.T., command, and to S.T.3, War Office respectively.
Vehicle Inspection Report and Inspection Chart
The R.A.S.C. system of vehicle maintenance provided for two inspec-
tions a month, at fortnightly intervals. One of these was carried out in
the platoon (formerly the section), by the platoon officer, platoon serjeant.
or other responsible individual, and the other in the company workshop.
These inspections were regarded as a vital element in the system, as in this
way incipient defects were observed at an early stage, when immediate
attention would often obviate the extensive repairs in workshops which might
become necessary if the trouble remained undetected and unremedied until
a breakdown occurred.
The records of both types of inspection were kept in the same book, the
Vehicle Inspection Report (A.B. 406).
In this were noted the condition of
every part of the vehicle, with an indication of whether any repair, adjust-
ment, etc., was to be carried out by the driver, by platoon mechanics, or
There were also spaces for recording the action taken
or pending, and for the comments of the O.C. platoon, O.C. company, and
To ensure that every vehicle was made available on the due date for
inspection, a record was maintained in the monthly vehicle inspection chart
of the dates on which each vehicle was due to undergo inspection, and these
dates were strictly adhered to unless the circumstances were exceptional.
The 10 per cent. spare vehicles in a R.A.S.C. transport company were
intended to cover the withdrawal of task vehicles for inspection, as well as
the days when they were not fit for the road.
Thus, in a platoon with 30 task
vehicles and three spares, two task vehicles a day would be undergoing
inspection, and the third spare vehicle allowed for an average of one vehicle
a day off the road (V.O.R.) because of mechanical defects, etc.
In fact, the figure of 10 per cent. spare was scarcely adequate, and the
average V.O.R. rate in C. (M) T. companies at home was 15 per cent., this
including workshop, but not platoon, inspections.
War-time Modifications
The system described above was maintained in operation throughout the
war by R.A.S.C., M.T. companies both at home and overseas as far as
operational conditions permitted.
In consequence of shortage and inex-
perience of unit clerks and other personnel and the necessity for economy of
paper amongst other causes, modifications were introduced from time to
In connection with the introduction of the 16-Task system of vehicle
maintenance as a standard throuchant the Army a farm of record of the
lue performance of the dailv task wae incornorated in the Vehicle Log
Book (A.B. 412), consisting of a sort of calendar with spaces in which the
driver and the N.C.O. i/c section could insert their initials to certify that
the task had been done. A record of changes of engine oil and of tyres was
The introduction of the 16-Task system is mentioned at greater length
The work ticket, instead of being renewed daily, became, for reasons of
paper economy, first a weekly, and then a monthly document, additional
sheets being used when necessary.
This resulted in making it difficult to
transfer the data from the work ticket to the daily work book, especially where
vehicles were on detachment, or working long hours; and the work book
consequently often ceased to provide the complete picture it should have
done, and contained only a record of the details performed by vehicles.
run platoons, however, found it possible, at least in the United Kingdom,
to maintain the work book as a complete and proper record.
Some information was no longer required to be entered in the Log Sheet
Summary; and, as the number of R.A.S.C. vehicles increased, it became
impossible to examine these documents at either War Office or Command
The copy for War Office was therefore abolished, and it
was made optional for D.Ds.S.T. of commands to decide whether they
Information was extracted from these forms by the
statistics branch in each command, which met a large part of the require-
ment of the S.T. staff, and the summaries could be examined by officers of
the latter paying visits of inspection to the unit.
The vehicle log book, the inspection chart, and the vehicle inspection
report, were not modified, and were kept up strictly as in peace-time, other
than in exceptional circumstances.
Inspections were, in fact, carried out
with exemplary regularity in the vast majority of cases, and it was probably
the exception, rather than the rule, for any vehicle to go more than a month
without at least one inspection; and, if the platoon inspection was sometimes
perfunctory, owing to lack of experience and technical in efficiency on the part
of officers and N.C.Os. or to failure to appreciate the importance of thorough
inspection, that carried out in workshops was normally adequate and effective.
Workshop Accounts
The pre-war system of workshop accounts maintained in R.A.S.C. work-
shops was subject to cost accounting, but when the latter
in 1940 a modified procedure was adopted by all R.A.S.C. workshop units
which were not required to produce formal accounts for audit. The records
maintained were linked with the vehicle records described above by means of
the vehicle inspection report and the vehicle log book, in which the appro-
priate entries were made by workshops in respect of inspections and repairs
There was thus a complete record of the
state of the vehicle in those books, which accompanied it if it was transferred
Each vehicle going into workshop was allotted a serial number in the
Workshop Job Book, and each item of repair, etc., necessary was given a
consecutive number, thus, 12/1, 12/2, and so on.
a complete record of the work carried out, the personnel employed, the
WO 277/21
