Initially, stocks of food for West Africans had been
previous change of plan.
placed at Akyab; but, as Ramree was now the base for Tamandu, supplies
for West and East Africans had to be hurriedly diverted there.
Tamandu closed at the end of April, as 82 Division had moved south and
become dependent on a new F.M.A. at Kindaunggyi for its supplies.
was established by way of a new line of maintenance through a place on the
south-east coast of Ramree Island, involving a long road run down the
length of the island.
Later maintenance was sent over daily to the mainland
from the A.B.S.D. which had been established at Kyaukpyu.
82 Division,
22 East African Brigade, and 26 Division, were all dependent on this line.
The Arakan campaign ended with the capture of Taungup on 28th April.
+ had achieved its object, and Fourteenth Army in Central Burma was being
maintained from the airfields at Akyab and Ramree before Mandalay fell
on 20th March.
It is doubtful if such administrative difficulties had to be
faced in any other campaign as were experienced here.
the normal problems of maintaining formations over wide distances and
uncompromising terrain, the task was severely complicated by one of the
worst climates in the world, with a rainfall of 250 inches a year during the
monsoon, and by lack of resources.
improvisation and elasticity were necessary to allow for sudden switches of
stocks as plans changed and operations developed.
Move of 4 Corps to Pakokku
Meanwhile, in North Burma,
with the object of effecting surprise in
Phase III of Operation "Capital", 4 Corps (comprising 7 and 17 Indian
Divisions and 255 Tank Brigade, and 28 East African Brigade) was, at the
end of December, switched from the left to the right flank of Fourteenth
Army.
It was to go down the Kabaw and Myittha (Gangaw) valleys, to
Pakokku; cross the Irrawaddy there; capture Meiktila; and go on to Rangoon.
The difficulties involved in carrying out the first stage of these operations
were considerable.
110, to Kalemyo, were over a fair-weather road deep in dust, already the main
L. of C. of 33 Corps.
weather road, which required rebuilding throughout its length to enable it
to take tank transporters. In one section of it, the dust was three feet deep,
and proved a barrier even to jeeps.
In particular, the difficulties encountered in the move of the tank brigade
from Kalemyo to Pakokku, without using too much track mileage,
were
immense.
The move of this formation from Imphal plain to the Irrawaddy,
400 miles, took eight weeks to complete, owing to the arduous nature of the
route and the shortage of transport.
Throughout this period, the tank trans-
porter company worked extremely hard under terrible conditions.
A trans-
potter shuttle service, in five stages, was the method employed. In one stretch
of 20 miles, south of Gangaw, the tanks had to me off-loaded 17 times:
and in some places the tanks had to tow the empty transporters.
company had litte opportunity and no facil the e mehicle maintenance; but
it finally accomplished a task described by the tank brigade as
well-nigh
impossible.
84
4 Corps Administrative Plan
4 Corps completed the second stage of its task when 7 Division established
a bridgehead across the Irrawaddy at Nyaungu between 13th and
February; and it was then poised for the third stage,
Meiktila airfields by a sudden armoured assault, reinforced by air-trans-
Ever since its formation, Fourteenth Army had been operating
It was now entering flat,
open country, where
mechanization would have full scope, and speed, mobility and dash would
have to replace the slow and cautious tactics hitherto necessary. The drive on
Meiktila was the first large-scale operation of the new type.
The administrative plan for it, and for the advance on Rangoon which
was to follow, had to ensure the administrative feasibility of a fast-moving
operation to a great distance with sufficient ammunition to ensure the delivery
of a smashing blow when necessary.
It was based on the establishment of a
series of corps air heads, where all forms of stores and supplies would be
landed and thence distributed by M.T. In addition, emergency supply drops
were kept " on tap" ready packed, of such vital items as artillery, tank, and
mortar ammunition, and P.O.L., especially for filling up the Tank Brigade.
To avoid air drop, which was wasteful, formations moved with the maximum
reserves of ammunition and petrol in their transport.
« Standard" Divisional Organization Unsuitable
For these mobile operations, 17 Division had been reorganized on an all
mechanized and air-transported basis.
brigades were made fully motorized by a reshuffle of transport within the
Division (involving the immobilization, as far as ground movement was con-
cerned, of 99 Brigade Group, the air-transported element), and by stripping
S and 11 Divisions of most of their transport when they were withdrawn to
The necessary degree of mobility was found to be altogether lacking in the
" Standard" Divisional organization, on to which formations, destined to take
part in the battles in Central Burma, were being re-organized. With units on
a pack basis, operations in the dry zone would have been very slow indeed.
If 5 and 17 Divisions had not been motorized, success would have been impos-
For 7 and 19 Divisions, which operated for the
enclosed country, the " Standard" Divisional organization proved basically
sound, except for the scale of transport, which was so limited that the speed
and range of operations were seriously curtailed.
Extensive ferrying became
necessary, resulting in loss of time, undue wear and tear on vehicles, and
much increased expenditure of P.O.L.
Operation "Capital", Phase III
While 4 Corps was thus getting into position, other crossings of the
Irrawaddy had already been effected.
19 Division crossed at Thaibeikkyin
on 9th January, DUKWs being used as second line transport and for the
evacuation
division then advanced
20 Division crossed near Myinmu on 12th February, using DUKWs for towing
rafts to ferry vehicles across.
85
WO 277/21
1158
27
