The Japanese did not add to the difficulties by making any attempt to
advance, but contented themselves with the air raid on Imphal, which caused
some damage there, but quite disproportionate dislocation of any services
which depended on civilian personnel.
In this connection, it is of interest to
observe that one of the R.A.S.C. petrol depots (see Chapter X) was sent up
do the Tinsukia oilfields in the extreme eastern corner of India, at the request
of the management, to be available to take over the work of handling the out-
put if the local staff decamped. This contingency did not arise, and the unit
later took over the bulk installation at Dimapur.
Situation, 5th June, 1942
The maintenance system was not helped by the breaking of a
between Imphal and Palel, which not only meant that everything had to be
carried by manpack across the river, but cut off a number of lorries which
could only be used for ferrying the stores forward of the break.
The transport situation had become so bad that it was necessary to
introduce desperate remedies.
mechanical breakdown, and misappropriation by units, was growing steadily
worse.
On 5th June, the state of the seven companies then on the road was
that, out of their total strength of some 900 lorries, they had only 540 runners;
240 of the remainder required first or second line repairs, while the balance
were missing, irrecoverable, or in need of third line repairs.
were quite unable to cope with the volume of vehicles requiring repair, and
there was a severe shortage of spare parts. It has to be remembered that, at
this time,
R.I.A.S.C. transport companies had
platoons, but only a light aid detachment each; consequently, any defect
beyond the capacity of the L.A.D. to repair necessitated the vehicle taking its
turn in the queue for entry to the overloaded workshops.
doubt that, if each company had had its own second line workshop, a great
number of vehicles with comparatively minor defects could have been kept
on the road.
A vicious circle had set in, as the fewer the vehicles on the road, the more
work fell on them.
Including the base, some 700 lorries a day were required,
and there was therefore a very large gap between this figure and the number
available.
It was decided, however, to initiate a new system of running on a
schedule in the hope that this would in the end increase the lift, and this
took effect on 5th June.
It allowed proper time for rest and maintenance,
and ensured the punctual return of lorries, as there was reason to believe that
drivers had been deliberately returning late to base in order to avoid having
to go out again next day.
The schedule allowed for a speed of 16 miles in the hour for fast convoys.
and only 74 miles in the hour for slow.
The system had not been in force
mady days before the first of a series of heavy landslides blocked the
By this time, however, and partly as heavy landslides troops in
Imphal area being kept on three-quarter rations, it had proved possible to
build up slender reserves forward.
These were at first balanced at three to
four days, then they were raised to seven days, and at last to ten, by a pro-
gressive system of arranging the despatches from the A.B.S.D. So as to balance
which were in excess.
the stocks in the forward depots to those levels, ignoring the commodities
both sides remained comparatively inactive.
The monsoon was now sin fulling te, and during it
50
SECTION 4.—THE DEFENSIVE PERIOD
Assam and North Burma, 1942-1943
In 4 Corps area, by the end of 1942, 17 Indian Division was moving down
the Tiddim Road, and 23 Division had reached the Tamu area.
continuous patrols in the hills overlooking the Chindwin, and the provision of
transport for these, and the maintenance of the forward troops, kept 15
R.I.A.S.C. pack transport companies fully occupied in very difficult conditions
The turnround was as much as a week, and marches
While the monsoon was the main reason why there were no large-scale
operations on this front during 1942, the heavy incidence of malaria, and the
political troubles in India, were also partly responsible.
besides whether it would have been possible to maintain any considerable
offensive, as the road L. of C. was far from satisfactory.
companies and replacement vehicles were gradually arriving on the line, but
the flow was impeded by the fact that there was no all-weather road from
India to the west bank of the Brahmaputra, and the only road from west to
east in Assam on the other side of the river was a second-class single road
running north-east from Gauhati.
All vehicles had to be brought in by
rail, which proportionately decreased the imports of supplies, etc.
struction of a through road from India to Assam was accordingly initiated,
both to avoid vehicles having to be conveyed by rail and to assist the supply
problem.
But though this eventually enabled wheeled vehicles to move in
under their own power, it had the objection that they covered anything up
to 2,000 miles by road before they reached their destination; and, while this
certainly gave the drivers much-needed experience, it also materially reduced
the useful life of the vehicle.
The principal operations carried out on this front during 1943 were those
of the Long Range Penetration Brigade under Brigadier Wingate, known as
the " Chindits ".
This force marched into Burma in February,
1943, and
remained there until June, being maintained throughout by air.
The trans-
port used was entirely animal, mainly mules, many of which were eaten.
The
special pack ration used by this force was the first produced by India (see
also Chapter X). and was known as the Indian Light Scale Ration.
It was
of two types, for British and Indian troops respectively; both were packed in
a cardboard container, for the contents of which see Appendix IX.
On the
whole, it was a failure, the chief reasons being a lack of robustness in the
pack itself, and the uninspiring and unbalanced nature of the actual ration.
It is mentioned as the first stage in the process of trial and error necessary
for the production of a reasonable pack ration for use in S.E.A.C. conditions.
The situation in the 17 and 23 Division areas remained substantially
A valuable transport reinforcement was the arrival
of seven Indian jeep companies.
One of the jobs they did was to carry guns
and ammunition up Kennedy Peak, a 9,000-foot peak south of Tiddim, over
tracks so steep that two jeeps had to be harnessed together to traverse them.
Although the operations on this front were on a comparatively small scale,
they required a very considerable
administrative effort to support them.
The number of personnel engaged in maintaining the troops in the forward
WO 277/11
27
