Supply Situation, 1942-1943
By the end of 1942, the supply of food grains in India was obviously
short of the country's needs, and there was great difficulty in obtaining
foodstuffs for the armed forces.
It was necessary to reduce the flour ration.
This tendency continued during 1943, and food scarcity in India was such
that the supply of indigenous foodstuffs to the Army was affected,
reserves could not be kept up to their normal level. In November, 1943,
the situation was serious, especially in Fourteenth Army area, in respect
of rice, atta, ghi, tinned milk, tinned vegetables, and tinned fruit.
this was owing to the difficulty in obtaining supplies of
the equivalent fresh commodities, resulting in a higher consumption of the
Attempts to produce cheese, jam, and dehydrated vege-
tables in India were not successful, owing to climatic conditions and to
a lack of machinery and packing materials.
The absence of the necessary packing material in India also handicapped
the production of light-scale and composite rations; and the problem was
complicated by the necessity for meeting religious prejudices regarding food.
the following ration packs were produced in the country: —
(a) A 24-hour ration designed for assault troops; each day's ration was
self-contained, packed in wax-paper in a carton.
(b) A light-scale ration for long-range penetration troops, etc., in a
pack sufficient for one day for one man.
(c) A complete non-cooking ration, of two types, for British and Indian
troops respectively.
For the very large quantities of special pack rations required for S.E.A.C.,
however, India was obliged to depend upon supplies from the United King-
dom.
in Chapter XI.
The story of the production and provision of these packs is told
Provision of S.E.A.C. Requirements of Supplies
Until the formation of South East Asia Command, War Office was not
directly concerned in the maintenance of the forces in that theatre
operations, which
was the responsibility of India.
Coincident with
institution of the new regime, India began to make urgent demands on
War Office, quite without warning, for considerable quantities of supplies.
Thus, in September, 1943, India asked for 430 tons each of jam, cheese,
and chocolate, 145 tons of dehydrated meat and vegetable
quantities of U.S.A. ration items, and special ration packs.
blocks, large
It was a first essential, from the War Office point of view, that,
if it
was to be concerned in this way in the
maintenance of forces based on
India, there must be a working arrangement governing the submission of
In order to settle this
priorities and substitutes,
question, and the related problems
D.S.T., India visited the War Office, and this
initiated a policy of co-operation between the S. and T. Directorates in
London and Delhi, one of the first effects being seen in the exchange of
senior liaison officers. India agreed that to simplity and expedite procedure,
demands for foodstuffs would in future be sent direct to War Office and
12
not through the India Office; and demand procedure was placed on the
same footing as other overseas theatres and made to conform with
the
existing War Office provision arrangements.
The position then was that demands for supplies, including those for
reserves and working margins, both for India and S.E.A.C., were channelled
through G.H.Q., India.
War Office in effect acted only as agents for the
supply of foodstuffs to India, and had no means of differentiating between the
respective requirements of India and S.E.A.C.
In the course of the next year, it appeared that India was not operating
the system in an altogether satisfactory manner, and War Office was con-
cerned in case S.E.A.C. might eventually go short of supplies in consequence.
It was observed in September, 1944, that there had been so far no call by
India for the provision of the considerably increased quantities of those
foodstuffs,
which India
would have to import in order to
support
the
additional forces which it was expected would be operating in South East
Asia after the end of the war in Europe.
It was not thought that there
would be any great difficulty in meeting the increased requirements,
but
there was the possibility that the phasing of provision might strain the pro-
duction capacity of supplier countries, apart from the possibility of India
not being able to receive, store, and distribute the tonnages involved in a
large
increase
in strength.
Also, while the War Office could
cover the
initial reserves and continued maintenance of new forces, it could not do
so for the items indigenous to India.
Another aspect of the problem of provision of the requirements of
S.E.A.C. was that of the channel for forwarding supplies from India.
There
had been complaints of poor feeding in S.E.A.C., and War Office considered
that these would not have occurred if the ration scale were being properly
issued; and the conclusion was drawn that supplies were not passing forward
from India to S.E.A.C. in the requisite quantities.
Doubt was
therefore
expressed
as lo
what might happen when increased forces
moved into
S.E.A.C., and when a new and more generous ration scale, involving larger
tonnages,
was brought into use.
In view of these factors, the conclusion
was reached that S.E.A.C. ought to make direct demands on War Office for
its requirements, have its own base installations under its own direct control,
and receive, direct shipments of imported supplies.
Revised Organization for Maintenance of A.L.F.S.E.A.
These views were largely given effect when A.L.F.S.E.A. assumed control.
A new system of demands was instituted, under which all demands for all
formations in S.E.A.C. for imported foodstuffs, hospital supplies, disinfectants,
and miscellaneous items of R.A.S.C. supply, required to be provided from
the United Kingdom or under
War Office arrangements, were channelled
and no longer through G.H.Q., India.
Copies of
demands on India, for items supplied by that country, were sent to War
A.L.F.S.E.A. was given A.B.S.Ds.
in the Calcutta area, which were re-
plenished from Reserve Supply Depots in India.
All forces, whether belonging to S.E.A.C. or not, which were located
geographical limits of India Command, were maintained by
13
127197
West 14
WO 277/21
27
