and trained.
It also recommended that units should train suitable
in the work of handing over and taking over buildings and stores, and that
there should be a greater measure of delegation of responsibility within units.
Thus, in a battalion, the quarter-master should obtain the signature of the
company commander for the stores handed over to the company; and the
company commander should, in turn, obtain receipts from his platoon com-
manders, the individuals who had given the receipts being made responsible
for handing over the stores at the marching out inspection.
In the course of the enquiry into the systems of accounting, the suggestion
was made that when the R.A.O.C. supplied accommodation stores direct to
units there might be a waste of stores, as the officer i/c barracks would
probably have some lying in vacant locations elsewhere in his district. The
Committee pointed out that this would be avoided by the universal adoption
of the barrack inventory book system, when all buildings would be equipped
by the barrack staff, and the officer i/c barracks would naturally use his
available stores to the best advantage.
An alternative method was recorded under which units' demands for
stores for the initial equipment of buildings would be submitted to Com-
mand Ordnance Depot, through the Officer i/c Barracks, who would either
arrange to supply the stores or endorse the indents that the articles were not
available in barrack stores.
This procedure would have the disadvantage
of delaying the receipt of the demand by the C.O.O.
Relations of R.A.S.C. and R.A.O.C. in respect of Accommodation Stores
In January, 1943, the Controller General of Economy recommended to the
Q.M.G. that the complete control of accommodation stores should be handed
over to the R.A.O.C., on the grounds that this would effect considerable
savings in material, manpower and possibly space.
His main argument was
that there would thus be no need for barrack expense stores, and consequently
the large stocks held therein would be released for issue or offset against
future replacements.
He admitted that there would be a number of matters
future repla solution would have to be found for example, the issue of fuel,
checking of meters, lodging lists,
exchanges of bedding and linen—that
certain barrack personnel would be transferred to Ordnance; and that some
of the barrack store accommodation would be required to house certain
items in certain localities.
in 1928 and 1941.
This was not a new proposal; it had already been considered and rejected
In commenting on the proposal, the Director of Quarter-
ing pointed out that the barrack expense stores and expense store accountants
existed for three purposes, namely:-
(a) To
provide an essential
the troops in respect of the
initial equipment of the accommodation, ready for occupation when
a unit arrived; the handing-over of the accommodation and stores
to the unit; the exchange of unserviceable stores, and the washing
of bedding, etc.; and the prompt replacement of articles lost, damaged,
or requiring repair.
(b) To ensure that charges were submitted for losses, or for damage due
to unfair wear.
278
(c) To maintain a record of the stores on charge to the unit, so that
they could be checked at marching-in and marching-out inspections,
and charges made for deficiencies, etc.
He thought it unlikely that any economy in manpower could result
merely by transferring some of these services to R.A.O.C. control.
division between two corps of duties then performed by one set of employees
might well result in increases to existing establishments.
The duties included in the first group mentioned above affected the welfare
and consequently the morale of the troops; those in the second and third
groups were probably more essential in war than in peace, in view of the
more urgent need for preventing losses and wilful damage so as to conserve
accommodation stores.
Another view was that the suggested changes would probably lead to
an increase in personnel and in the use of transport for handing in stores
and making small deliveries.
The Director General of Army Equipment stated that, from an economy
point of view, the existing system had this advantage over the R.A.O.C.,
that barrack stores were issued on the " over the counter" exchange system,
so that hoarding by units was practically impossible.
R.A.O.C. stores, on
the other hand, were issued to replace unserviceable items, which should be,
but frequently were not, returned at some future date.
To adopt the barrack
system in the R.A.O.C. in the United Kingdom would mean an increase in
R.A.O.C. personnel which could not be met at that time.
Alternatively, to
hand over the issue of all accommodation stores to Barracks would require
additional E.S.As., and again it was doubtful if they could be obtained.
Faced with this dilemma, he considered that the retention of the existing
system was forced on them.
The Q.M.G. decided in favour of continuation of the existing system.
Accounting for Accommodation Stores
From July, 1943, Officers i/c Barracks and Expense Store Accountants
became responsible for accounting for and maintenance of camp equipment
in those tented camps which were equipped in accordance with the scale for
standing camps, in the same way as for hutted camps, except that the
E.S.A. would not hold stocks of tentage or tent bottoms, with which the
R.A.O.C. would continue to deal.
It was finally decided in December, 1943, that accommodation stores,
including camp equipment, would in future be held on barrack inventory
charge, except a arpicles issued as part of a unit's war equipment, which
were to be taken with it wherever it moved, and (b) camp equipment issued
for manoeuvres and for Home Guard or Army Cadet Force camps.®
modation sures and for Hon accounted for on the barrack inventory book
system; totoses were to blease or on barrack inventory charge in expense
stores ledger were to be transferred to the appropriate barrack inventory books.
279
WO 277/21
27
