of troops being fed by means of an active service
The circumstances
system of supply would require the existence of centralized main depots
from which supplies could be sent out in bulk by rail or road transport
to depots or railheads for detailed distribution to units.
In addition it
was considered that the reserves, both R.A.S.C.
and N.A.A.F.I.,
C.S.Ds. must be increased and supported by reserves held in Main Supply
Depots, which could thus perform a dual rôle.
Main Supply Depots
established, not to serve any
command, but to form a general War Office reserve which could be drawn
upon in cases of interference with normal sources of supply and C.S.Ds.
Normally they would maintain the stocks of C.S.Ds., and,
operations they would feed formations,
when C.S.Ds. could not do so.
They were located, so as to have easy rail access to each other and to areas
in which fighting formations were
Manchester, Hereford, Newbury, Marston
(Beds.), Reigate, Derby, and York.
They were organized on the War Establishment for a Base Supply
, with an increment for P.O.L.
These depots were selected, partially stocked, and staffed, within three
By extraordinary efforts on the part of the two S.R.Ds., at a time
when they were inundated with the return of supplies which had been en
route to France, 37 million rations had been despatched to M.S.Ds. by mid-
June, and 11 million by mid-July.
Deptford handled a total of 2,000 tons
a day, and Barry 4,000, at the peak period.
M.S.Ds. then held about five
days' rations for the total feeding strength of the United Kingdom.
Some readiustments in their locations became necessary in 1941.
Reigate site was unsuitable, and new M.S.Ds. were necessary in Southern
and South-Eastern Commands for the proper distribution of the reserves.
They were consequently placed at Ascot, Westerham (Kent), and Shepton
Mallet (Somerset).
Control of M.S.Ds.
At the same time, it was decided to decentralize the administrative
control of M.S.Ds. to commands.
Central control of issue, replacement, and
accounting, was to be retained by D.D.S.(P), because reserves in the M.S.Ds.
formed part of the total reserve of foodstuffs for the troops in the United
Kingdom, and the dispersion of such reserves could not, for accommodation
reasons, be related to the fighting strength of commands.
stocks would therefore be uneven if it were left to commands.
Turnover of
This system proved unsatisfactory in practice, as there were
difficulties between War Office and commands.
constant
the administration and control of M.S.Ds. for all purposes,
Consequently,
in
1943,
administration of the depot as a unit, reverted to War Office, being vested
except local
in the C.P.O. (F.S.).
At the same time, they were reorganized on a variable
establishment. on the lines of that of the S.R.Ds.. and related to the
132
volume of supplies dealt with.
saving of 15 officers and 177 other ranks, besides the possible replacement
of 338 soldiers by A.T.S.
', in Northern Ireland District, which was for
all practical purposes a Main Supply Depot, was reorganized as stich
This reorganization was due to the shortage of manpower, and to the
fact that, the threat of invasion having receded.
to keep M.S.Ds. on a Field Force
War Establishment.
it was no longer necessary
the object of saving manpower.
Forces, proposed closing the M.S.Ds. altogether, with
If accepted, the proposal would simply have
meant that an additional 40,000 or 50,000 tons of storage space would have
found elsewhere to accommodate M.S.D. holdings, when there
was already little prospect of finding the space required in S.R.D. accommo-
dation for the 42,000 tons of additional reserves to be accumulated in
anticipation of " Overlord"
This difficulty, coupled with a very strong
objection raised by the Director of Movements to the closing of the M.S.Ds.,
resulted ultimately in the decision that they should continue, as being essential
for the holding of home reserves and the distribution of supplies for home
As a result of the reduction in the general load of reserves in the
autumn of 1944, and to free requisitioned premises and save manpower,
and readjustments in M.S.Ds. took place, the
being the disbandment of
and Shepton Mallet had been handed over to the U.S. Army in July, 1943,
The end of the war with Germany brought
progressive reductions in
these depots, and all were closed by the end of 1945, the function of main-
taining C.S.Ds. being assumed by S.R.Ds.
Home Guard Feeding Arrangements
The feeding of the Home Guard was not at any time a primary military,
i.e., R.A.S.C., responsibility, and the position of the D.S.T. in this respect
was therefore that of adviser and helper.
When this force was first raised
Volunteers in June, 1940, it was the intention that
they should normally
be employed without administrative service troops.
The general arrangement was therefore that they were to be fed from civil
resources unless they
were actually absorbed into the Army.
elementary instructions were developed to deal with contingencies as they
arose, chiefly by local improvisation.
Provision was, however, made of
Army stocks of food as reserves for detachments which might be employed
The following quantities of supplies for each isolated
section of the L.D.V. were authorized, to be drawn from the nearest C.S.D.,
and located at a suitable police station: one case of preserved meat (48-lb.),
cases of biscuits (100 lb.), two tins of tea (4 ib.), two tins of sugar
(14 lb.), three tins of cheese (6 lb.), seven tins of jam (14 lb.), and seven
tins of condensed milk.
This was estimated to cover about three days'
supplies for the section.
The proceduse for feeding the Home Guard was revised in June,
Subsistenre lure for felinected in one of three ways: by the individual
Home Guaraight now be efferistered as catering establishments; or by the
Army, where Home Guards were actively engaged in conjunction with troops.
WO 277/21
27
