SUPPLY PERSONNEL COMPANY
Composition
Company headquarters.
Function
To operate as administrative headquarters for up to 16 Supply Personnel
sections, or as H.Q. of an Advanced Supply Depot or of Field Supply
Depots as required.
FIELD BAKERY
Composition
H.Q. and three sections ; total strength, three officers and 327 other ranks.
Each section organized in four sub-sections.
Function
Each section capable of providing for 30,000 men.
FIELD BUTCHERY AND COLD STORAGE DEPOT
Composition
Two officers and 61 other ranks.
Handling the meat supply of the force.
Operating cold storage plants.
Capable of handling frozen meat for 85,000 men where optimum facilities
310
APPENDIX IIB
(See Vol. I, page 51)
SUPPLY UNITS RESULTING FROM REORGANIZATION, 1940
BASE SUPPLY DEPOT, TYPE "B."
Composition
Organized in four store sections of equal strength, the main ration items
being distributed equally between these, in order both to facilitate simul-
taneous receipt and issue of any one commodity, and to reduce the risk
of losing the complete stock of any one commodity in the event of fire
or air attack.
Owing to the large number of commodities handled, it
was not practicable to divide up all items in this way, and each of the
four sections, therefore, also held the full stock of certain commodities
not easily divisible between sections, e.g., fresh commodities, fuel, forage,
hospital supplies, and barrack items.
Each section had to be prepared
to handle an extremely large amount of supplies under varying and
difficult conditions, operating independently as required.
Function
Holding reserves of supplies to the authorized scale, and issuing in bulk to
Field Supply Depots, etc.
See also Chapter XII, Section 4, under heading " Implementation of
programmes ".
Capable of maintaining 25,000 troops.
DETAIL ISSUE DEPOT
Composition
Headquarters (captain, staff-serjeant clerk, carpenter, two cooks, batman,
driver) ; Supply Section (subaltern, 3 clerks, 2 butchers, 9 issuers) ;
P.O.L. Section (serjeant clerk, 2 clerks, 6 issuers).
Function
Supplying up to 8,000 troops, or acting as a Railhead Supply Depot.
FIELD BAKERY, TYPE "A"
Composition
H.Q. (1 captain, 1 quarter-master, 3 warrant officer bakers, 2 staff-serjeant
bakers, 1 clerk, 13 O.Rs. (including cooks, etc.)).
Four sections each
of 2 sub-sections.
Each sub-section composed of 1 serjeant and 10
R. and F. bakers, 3 issuers.
Total strength of unit, 133 all ranks.
Transport, 1 12-cwt. van.
Function
Each sub-section capable of operating two Perkins steam field ovens, and
producing 3,750-1b. of bread daily.
Total daily output of unit, 30,000-1b.
All work done by hand.
311
7717
WO 277/21
27
