APPENDIX VIIIG
(See Vol. II, pages 239 and 245)
COMMAND SUPPLY DEPOT ACCOUNTING: FORMS USED
IN SIMPLIFIED SYSTEM
In this system, the following forms were used: —
1. Army Form F 757—Indent for Rations
It included spaces for: —
(a) Indication of ration scale concerned.
(b) Consumption dates for which rations were required.
(c) Ration demand for those dates, allowing for percentage additions and
(d) R.A.S.C. and N.A.A.F.I. supplies not required (underdrawals).
(e) Actual numbers in mess one week prior to each consumption date.
(A) Number of rations of each type (standard, A.T.S., special).
(g) Quantity of each item issued.
(h) Signature of O.C. unit, and of unit representative receiving the
supplies.
2. Army Form F 758-Ration Issue Voucher
(a) One copy of the form was prepared for each unit drawing from the
C.S.D., for each ration period of 28 or 35 days.
(b) It included columns for the
following information, extracted from,
or calculated from, that contained in the indent: —
(i) Estimated and actual numbers in mess, each day.
(ii) Number of rations, including percentage allowance for small units
where applicable.
(iii) Extra issues.
(iv) Cutting up allowance for meat.
(v) Quantity of each commodity issued, each day of issue.
(c) It had spaces for the signature of the District Supply Officer, certi-
fying correctness; for the unit to record the remains of rations at the end of
the period, and of reserve rations held on inventory; and for the signature
of the O.C. unit, certifying correctness, and constituting a formal receipt for
the supplies issued during the period.
(d) The form was ruled horizontally in 35 lines, a line for each day of the
The side of the sheet had a series of perforations, one for each
fin, in diameter, to enable the form to be exactly superimposed on
A.F. F 759, as described below.
Each unit was allotted a code number. for each ration scale on which it
3. Army Form F 759-Summary of Depot Issues
were made.
(a) One of these was prepared for every day of a period on which issues
F 758.
The columns in this form were identical with those in AF.
numbers.
Each line was numbered serially. to correspond with unit code
430
(b) The sheet was perforated in the same manner as the Ration Issue
Voucher, and was of the same size.
When an entry of issue of supplies had
to be made, the Summary was placed on a metal sheet which had a series of
projections corresponding to, and engaging in, the perforations in the sheets.
The Ration Issue Voucher was then superimposed on the Summary, with a
carbon sheet between; and, by means of the perforations and projections, the
line for the day on the A.F. F 758 was brought exactly over that of the unit
code number on the A.F. F 759.
The Ration Issue Voucher was then com-
pleted with the particulars described in 2 (b) above, a duplicate entry being
made as a carbon copy on the Summary (A.F. F 759).
(c) When completed and totalled, the Summary thus contained a record
of all supplies issued from the C.S.D. on that day.
The total amount of each
commodity issued was then transferred to the Provision Supply Account
(A.F. F 754), and the remaining stock ascertained, which could then be verified
by physical check.
4. Army Form F 754-Provision Supply Account
This
was a simple account of receipts and issues by the C.S.D., and
was compiled at the end of the month.
Receipts were entered on the left-hand
page, and issues on the right-hand page,
and there was a column on both
receipt and issue side for each item issued.
Each entry was supported by a voucher.
For receipts, this might be the
voucher for supplies received from S.R.D. or M.S.D., a contractor's bill, etc.;
for issues, the Summaries of Depot Issues (A.F. F 759), receipts for supplies
otherwise issued, debit vouchers for recovery of sums due for issues on re-
payment, deficiencies, etc., authorities for the write-off of supplies condemned.
The remains shown in the account must agree with the actual ground
stocks at the end of the period, and this was certified by the officer i/c supplies
on the account, all surpluses found on stocktaking being brought on charge.
7777
WO 277/21
27
431
FF 2
(37477)
