(B) Supply of spare parts and marine boat stores.
(a) The Directorate of Transportation will be responsible for
making provision for: —
(i) Spare parts listed in the Vocabulary of Transportation
(i) Spare parts for craft provided by Services and by
Departments other than the War Office for I.W.T.,
R.E., use, from sources agreed from the appropriate
Services and Departments.
iii) Spare parts for
craft and for marine
included in the Vocabulary of Transportation stores,
but which have been provided through Transporta-
tion stores channels, whether operated by Transporta-
tion or S. and T. personnel.
(b) The Directorate of Supplies and Transport will be responsible
for making provision for: -
(i) Marine stores, paints, and other stores listed in the
of R.A.S.C.
Army Services.
These will be issued through the
various S. and T. Boat Stores Depots at home and
(ii) All machinery and spare parts required by S. and T.
vessels, whether operated by S. and T. or I.W.T.
personnel.
(iii) Fuels and lubricants for all Services as laid down.
410
APPENDIX VIIC
(See Vol. I, page 101)
CONTROL OF WATER TRANSPORT SERVICES, POST-WAR POLICY
When the policy regarding the control of water transport services in the
Army was reviewed after the war, the questions requiring decision were as
follows: -
1. Should all water transport be under one service?
2. If so, should this service be the Transportation Service or the
3. If not, how were the functions to be redefined?
4. In either case, should R.E.M.E. undertake the third and fourth
line overhaul and repair of all components of Port, I.W.T., and water
transport engines and equipment, which could be moved to a R.E.M.E.
workshop?
5. In either case, should Transportation units, such as Port Operating
Companies, have their own launches for domestic use and inter-com-
munication, as part of their war equipment?
The R.A.S.C. Case
In presenting the R.A.S.C. side of the story, it was submitted that the
R.A.S.C. Fleet had been in existence for 60 years, while the I.W.T., R.E.,
only started, as an adjunct to the railway system, in the war of 1914-1918,
and so was put under the Director-General of Transportation.
The R.A.S.C.
is, by its charter, the transport branch of the Army, and the exception to
this rule (railways), is a technical quasi-civilian branch of engineering and
operation.
The amphibians presented a further link between land and water, taking
the place of tug and lighter in certain cases.
The R.A.S.C. moves stores in bulk by road and air to areas of distribution
to augment the railway, and where railways do not exist or are broken.
The
same principle could be applied to movement of stores in bulk by inland
waterways.
The R.A.S.C. would provide craft as required by Transportation for port
working, as it did already for beach working by the provision of amphibians,
in the same way as it supplies lorries and tippers for the Works Service,
and bridging lorries for Field R.E. It could be argued that those responsible
for the operation of a port must have their own craft; but in civil practice
this is not so, as the Port Authorities call on tug and lighter companies.
As a major user service, the R.A.S.C. could take on the provision of
craft, marine engines and spares required by the R.E. for river-crossing
operations.
Specialist vessels for port construction, repair, and maintenance, such as
dredgers and floating cranes, could remain with
Transportation,
manned by their personnel, or they could belong to Transportation, and be
manned by the R.A.S.C.
411
wester
WO 277/21
27
