case of emergency, or in times of stress.
This view implied that, if such
a unit was required, then the official provision of ambulance
inadequate, and ought to be increased.
On the other hand, the B.R.C.S. made it clear that the object of the
society was not to help belligerent governments to wage war, but to mitigate
the suffering caused by their doing so.
It could not therefore provide vehicles,
etc., in substitution of a government's provision, but could only run a parallel
and supplementary organization, to work under the direction and control
of the Army Medical Services.
In these circumstances, the War Department could not accept liability to
the extent originally proposed, but only as follows: -
(a) Free issue of P.O.L. to B.R.C.S. vehicles in the B.E.F., employed in
(b) Free issue of rations to personnel employed on such duties.
(c) Provision of personal equipment.
(d) Workshop maintenance at a fixed charge for each vehicle.
(e) Provision of vehicles to be effected by S.T.3; these to remain the
The B.R.C.S. remained responsible as before, with the addition of the
This agreement was only reached in May, 1940, when a B.R.C.S. unit
of 25 ambulances had already been operating in France for a month past.
Arrangements were in hand to provide another 55 ambulances,
the end of May it was decided that this number could not be spared from
Army stocks, and, in view of the military situation, the matter rested there
as far as the B.E.F. was concerned.
Offers of Service in the U.K.
Up to 100 manned and equipped ambulances were offered by the B.R.C.S.
in June, 1940, for home defence duties, and this was accepted, on the under-
standing that they would not take the place of W.D. ambulances in any
military unit, and on the condition that their use would be governed by
the terms already laid down for the issue of free petrol, etc., to voluntary
organizations (see under " Other Women's Organizations", above).
It was made clear that the drivers were civilian volunteers and, as such,
not subject to military law, but they would nevertheless work under the
It was preferred that they should operate
Accommodation for personnel and their
rations were on repayment, and personal equipment was issued on loan.
A similar offer of service by the British Volunteer Ambulance Corps (oT
Anglo-French Ambulance Corps) was also accepted.
The numbers subsequently increased, but, by 1941, there was some
difficulty in finding drivers. A number of the ambulances
members of the F.A.N.Y. who had remained outside the Army organization,
and there were also a number of Canadian volunteer drivers.
The difficulties experienced in connection with the employment of voluntary
bodies of this nature were exemplified when, on 22nd May, 1945, the Joint War
Organization asked if the ambulance services performed hu their vehicles
and personnel could now be curtailed.
Their drivers were resigning in
increasing numbers, and, as they were unpaid volunteers, there was no
means of stopping them.
There had been, throughout the war, difficulty in
retaining them when they were employed on the transport of ordinary sick,
as opposed to wounded, and they would not stay if they were idle.
connection, it is of course necessary to remember that provision of am-
bulances has to be made to cover all reasonable contingencies; at periods
of low casualty rates, whether due to sickness or wounds, they must perforce
stand idle, as they cannot be switched to other tasks.
There were at this time about 300 B.R.C.S. and B.V.A.C. ambulances
working in England and Wales; 300 in Scotland, as well as
Andrew's Ambulance Association; and three platoons of B.R.C.S. ambulances
working in 21 Army Group.
B.V.A.C. and B.R.C.S. Offers for Overseas
In April, 1943, the B.V.A.C. asked that the use of its units should be
extended to overseas theatres.
It was decided that there were many objec-
tions to the employment of non-military organizations of the nature of the
B.V.A.C. in theatres of war.
The alternative was for female personnel of
the B.V.A.C. to join the A.T.S., as the recognized women's service of the
Army. This decision was confirmed in January, 1944.
In March, 1944, the B.R.C.S. offered an ambulance convoy of 22
with female B.R.C.S. drivers in charge of male supervisors, for service in an
The War Office did not consider it practicable to employ
volunteer female personnel in an overseas theatre, and pointed out that
B.R.C.S. ambulances and personnel were serving a most important rôle in
the United Kingdom, enabling the military commitment in manpower to be
materially reduced. In spite of this rejection, the society again offered various
units in May, 1944. A motor ambulance convoy of 100 ambulances, with
75 per cent. female and 25 per cent. male personnel, was accepted for use
in any part of the United Kingdom for the evacuation of casualties from
ports to hospitals.
Another convoy, of 25 ambulances and 36 other vehicles,
with one-third male and two-third female personnel, was offered for service
with 21 Army Group in N.W. Europe.
The medical authorities of 21 Army
Group agreed to this; and, although S.T., War Office, adhered to its
the offer was accepted, on the terms of provision by the W.D. of the following
services on repayment: transport of stores and personnel; provision of
P.O.L.; maintenance services for vehicles; rations for personnel; and accom-
modation for personnel and vehicles.
Animal Transport-Pre-War
The Horse Transport Branch of the R.A.S.C. practically ceased to exist
after the war of 1914-1918, when it was decided to mechanize all second
and third line transport.
One animal transport company, was, however, retained at Aldershot,
for the purpose of training junior officers in riding, horsemastership, and
pack transport duties, in order to ensure that they might be prepared in
some degree if they were called upon to operate pack transport.
was one school of thought, however, which regarded such a precaution as
WO 277/21
27
