On 24th February, 2 Division crossed at Ngazun,
Opposition was heavy, and very few of the light assault craft
were able to reach the far shore.
At dawn, only two companies of infantry
held the bridgehead.
The DUKW platoon was called upon to ferry troops
across; and, working under machine gun fire, succeeded by nightfall in setting
The remainder of the division, with supplies, tanks,
guns, and M.T., was taken over in rafts towed by DUKWs; 6,000 men and 200
vehicles being thus transported in 12 hours, at a point where the river was over
1,000 yards wide, and the channel to be followed one and a half miles long in
The action earned the unit a M.C. and five M.Ms.
Once the bridgehead had been secured, the platoon ferried over the
divisional reserves of ammunition, supplies, and P.O.L., and continued to
operate the ferry, as a link in 33 Corps L. of C., till the end of March, 1945.
operaverkshops of 2 Divisional R.A.S.C. were co-opted to build rafts for use
in the original crossing, and made eighteen from salvaged Japanese pontoons.
live to a raft, which had to be patched and welded. Each raft could carry a
The dash for Meiktila started on 21st February.
The Japanese defence of
this important centre was fanatical, but was practically over by 4th March.
A strong enemy force, however, cut the road from Nyaungu, and nearly
5,000 unarmoured vehicles, comprising the administrative
"tail" of the
formations in Meiktila, could not get through until the road was opened by
The enemy also counter-attacked vigorously at
Meiktila, and on 16th March succeeded in capturing the air strip on which
our supplies depended. This resulted in a severe curtailment of maintenance,
including ammunition, since it was necessary to fall back on air drop instead
The strip was not recovered for a week, and the area was
After very heavy fighting, Mandalay was finally captured on 20th March.
The Chinese had taken Lashio on 7th March, and thus reopened the Burma
road, to connect with the road built from Ledo by the Americans.
The third
phase of Operation "Capital" was thus complete; and this makes a con-
venient point at which to consider the system for the maintenance of Four-
teenth Army from the supply and transport point of view.
It had undergone
some important modifications in the preceding months.
Allotment and Control of S. and T. M.T. Units
In January, 1945, an important definition of policy was promulgated.
governing the responsibility of the D.S.T., A.L.F.S.E.A., for the control and
operational efficiency of S. and T. M.T. units in that theatre.
the following principles: -
was responsible to the C.-in-C., through M.G.A.,
control, and for the operational and mechanical efficiency, of all such
2. In order that D.S.T. might have the degree of command and con
trol of S. and T. M.T. units which was essential to enahle him efficiently
to assume this responsibility, it was necessary to lay down
allotment of such units to field formations.
This allotment is set out
86
3. All S. and T. M.T. units held on A.L.F.S.E.A. order of battle in
excess of this basic allotment were to be A.L.F.S.E.A. troops, irres-
pective of how they might be sub-allotted to meet operational require-
4. Sub-allotment from this A.L.F.S.E.A. pool would be made by
D.S.T. under the orders of "Q" Branch, A.L.F.S.E.A., to field forma-
tions (Army and Independent Corps) as an increase on basic allotment;
to Chief Engineer, A.L.F.S.E.A.; to L. of C. Transport Column; and to
L. of C. Command; to meet their requirements within the total availability
5. Responsibility for command and control, and for the operational
and mechanical efficiency, of all S. and T. M.T. units in A.L.F.S.E.A.
would be delegated by D.S.T. to D.Ds.S.T. of Fourteenth Army, 15 Indian
Corps, and L. of C. command through the medium of departmental
Basic Allotment of S. and T. Units
Under the new policy, the following basic allotment of S. and T. units was
made to formations, instead of the order of battle being changed to meet the
needs of the time as hitherto.
As far as possible, the same units were allotted
to the same formations, in order to preserve continuity of working. The basic
allotment was on the following scale : -
1. Each Division:
One Divisional Transport Company (heavy).
One
Divisional Transport Company (light).
Three Animal Transport Companies.
Four Composite Platoons.
2. Each Corps:
(a) Second line transport
(b) Corps Troops Administra-
tive Area.
(c) F.M.As., designed to hold
2-5 days.
(d) Pool
Two Corps Transport Companies
(3-ton).
Two Composite Platoons, for Corps
Troops second line.
One Supply Platoon.
One Petrol Platoon, equipped as a
mobile petrol filling centre.
H.Q. and four sections, Indian Field
Bakery for each British Division.
One Section, Indian Field Bakery for
each
Indian
Division,
and
for
Corps Troops.
One
Corps
Transport
Company
(3-ton).
One M.A.C.
87
w977e717
WO 277/21
27
