A number of the different books hitherto in use for accounting for bed-
ding, crockery,
etc., in barracks were abolished.
Accounting
standardized for accommodation stores in all forms of accommodation,
with the result of simplifying it to the utmost possible extent.
instructions for the transfer are contained in A.C.I. 1835 of 1943.
To prevent large stocks of stores being unnecessarily held in barrack
expense stores, it was directed that guide scales were to be prepared by
Command Ordnance Officers, in conjunction with Officers i/e Barracks,
to regulate the quantities of each article to be held by each Expense Store
Accountant to meet three months' maintenance requirements.
were to be based on the number of troops for whom the accommodation
was designed.
In order that the A.D.O.S. might know the nature and
qualities of accommodation stores held in barrack expense stores, and to
ensure that the stocks were not excessive, the stores were to be inspected
by Ordnance officers under arrangements between A.D.O.S. and O.C.,
R.A.S.C., concerned.
Barrack Services for A.T.S.
ACCOMMODATION STORES
At the outbreak of war, there were no special scales of accommodation
stores for the women of the Auxiliary Territorial Service, and they used
the same scales of furniture, utensils, etc., as were applicable to the men.
The same principle applied when war-time schedules, on an austerity scale,
came into force in November, 1939, for living, sleeping, and feeding accom-
modation.
After some time, these austere conditions began to be criticized by the
public, especially by relatives of serving A.T.S.
and of potential recruits,
who drew an unfavourable comparison between the living conditions of the
A.T.S., and those of the W.R.N.S. and the W.A.A.F.
A committee was
accordingly formed in September, 1941, to
standard of comfort was required for the A.T.S.
determine whether a higher
As a result of its recom-
mendations, a revised and higher
of accommodation
was
approved for issue to the A.T.S.
It included such items as pillows, sheets,
additional bolsters, bedside mats, curtains, linoleum, divans, easy
rugs, cups and saucers, and teapots.
The A.T.S. were also allowed to buy coloured curtains locally
to
accord with their own colour schemes for quarters,
until, in June, 1942,
the shortage of such material made it necessary to withdraw this privilege
and to arrange supply of material by the Ministry of Works and Buildings.
As was to be expected, the raising of the standard of comfort in accom-
modation occupied by A.T.S. had repercussions in mixed messes,
where,
for example, men siting at the sa repercussion IT.S. used drinking mugs,
but the women had cups and saucers.
It was considered invidious that
personnel using the same living and feeding accommodation should use
different standards of equipment; but as it was highly desirable from the
op rational point of view that the personnel of mixed units should mingle
practicable papasions instruations were iccuad thot in mired messes
the A.T.S. should use the same equipment as the men.
280
The issue of attractive items, such as sheets, pillows, mats, etc., in war-
time, was attended by considerable losses, especially of sheets.
One ex-
planation was
that, in consequence of rationing of textiles, pilferage of
such items was profitable, even if a charge for the deficiency was levied.
problem stresses the necessity for accurate accounting and frequent checking.
The special requirements of the A.T.S.
received further recognition
when hairdressing rooms, with their essential items of hairdressing equip-
ment,
were authorized.
Ironing boards and electric irons were
amenities provided.
other
FUEL AND LIGHT
The A.T.S. were not exempted from the necessity for practising the utmost
economy in the use of solid fuel.
targets, as the men, and asked for no concessions.
They had the same fuel scales and, later,
of those working in exposed
The particular needs
gun sites or similar hutted accommodation
were recognized, and instructions were issued for any unnecessary hardship
to be eliminated.
Free issues of electric current were authorized for use in
officially installed electric irons, and for operating electric hair-driers.
Barrack Services for U.S. Forces
When the U.S. Forces first arrived, it was decided that accommodation
handed over to them was to be equipped in accordance with War Accom-
modation Schedules, 1939.
Special schedules were laid down for their
but no serjeants' messes were required.
brought their own messing utensils and blankets.
Any articles not required
by the Americans were to be withdrawn.
British barrack stores and E.S.As.
were not required in connection with U.S. Forces, but Fuel and Light
Accountants were necessary, as the War Department had assumed responsi-
bility for these services in the U.S. Forces.
Accommodation and its ancillary services, barrack damages, etc., were
treated as a single service supplied from British sources to the U.S. Forces,
and the only record kept was in the War Office. No special records were
kept in commands of any individual issues and services.
This arrangement
covered both W.D., hired, and requisitioned, property, water, fuel, light,
conservancy, furniture, barrack stores, bedding and disinfectants.
It became necessary in June, 1944, to define the division of responsibility
between the
various agencies which had been providing furniture for
accommodation occupied be esS. Army around forces in the United King-
These agencies were the Ministry of Works (both on direct demands
by U.S. Forces, and on War Office authority); officers i/c barracks; U.S.
sources; and stocks at the dis ost of uns. Forces in their depots.
the new arrangements, for H.Q, E.T.O.U.S.A., and S.HA.., office furi-
ture was to be provided and maintained by the Ministry of Works, while
furniture for living accommodation
maintained by officers i/c barracks.
was
generally to be provided and
For lower formations, normal accom-
modation was furnished initially by Officer i/c Barracks and maintainec
from U.S. depots.
281
WO 277/
27
