This wound along the hillside, with a steep dift up on one side and down on
the other, and numerous hairpin bends.
The driving surface was narrow, a
tarred strip in the middle of the road, with soft edges.
After and during rain
it was very slippery, and to get of the hard surface probably meant that the
vehicle was bogged.
The dangerous aspect of the widening was that earth
was taken from the inside cliff and carried across to be thrown down as a
bank on the other side; some of it fell on the driving surface, which it obscured
and made very slippery.
The gradients were heavy; from a height of about
500 feet at Dimapur, the road climbed in about 40 miles to 4,500 feet at
Kohima, at the south of which it reached a point 5,500 feet high. From there,
it fell gradually until, some sixty miles farther south, it debouched into the
Imphal plain at a height of about 2,500 feet. Inexperienced drivers crawled
up in first or second gear; if a lorry stopped, it was rarely possible for it to
pull oft the road, or for those behind to pass, and the resultant block some-
times extended for miles.
One-way traffic was the rule.
This involved convoys leaving at first light,
faster vehicles having to leave first.
The turn-round was two days to Imphal
and back, and three to Palel and back. When the lorries got back to the base,
however late, all that could be made ready were sent off again on the next
morning's convoy.
The supply situation was very bad. It was impossible to build up any
reserve in the A.B.S.D. at Dimapur, because intake scarcely equalled out-
goings; and the stocks of atta, rice, barley, tea (strange paradox in a
tea-
growing province), sugar, and milk, were commonly shown as less than one
day in the daily stock return.
Lorries were often loaded direct from railway
wagons which had providentially arrived with some desperately needed com-
modity. It was impossible to discover, or to control, what was coming for-
ward by train, as the railway system was disorganized.
The air-raid on
Imphal stampeded, not only the people of the city, but also, amongst others,
the greater part of the civilian railway personnel.
Trains were simply left
standing, the crews vanishing into the jungle.
In addition, there was serious
congestion at the train-ferry across the Brahmaputra near Gauhati; and
neither there, nor farther back at the points where change of gauge made
transhipment necessary, was there any great attempt at sorting the commodi-
ties with the object of ensuring that those most needed at Dimapur were given
priority for forward despatch.
Even the supplies sent forward from Dimapur did not always reach the
depots to which they were consigned, and the task of those responsible for
stocking the depots was thus greatly complicated.
Seven days' rations for
British troops, and ten days' for Indian troops, were sent forward one day,
yet two days later there were frantic calls for supplies to be sent up.
was reason to believe that lorries were being waylaid, and their contents
commandeered, by troops who had long been subsisting on what they could
get by any means; in such circumstances, the food of course reached the
troops, but not on a properly rationed basis, and distribution was inequitable,
A further complication was that, until Burma Army officially ceased to exist,
its Staff and Heade nf Services and those of Rurma Care and Rurma T. nt C
intervened in the supply and transport arrangements,
diverting
authorizing issues of supplies, and so on, independently of Headquarters,
4 Corps, which was the responsible authority.
48
The question of co-ordination of, and responsibility for, S. and T. services
in Assam, also appeared in an acute form as between D.D.S.T., 4 Corps,
A.D.S.T.,
first located at Dimapur.
Base Area, and C.R.I.A.S.C., L. of C. Area, all of whom were at
by Headquarters,
Theoretically, they were supposed to be co-ordinated
Eastern Army; but as this was at Ranchi, some 600 miles
away (later at Calcutta, even farther), it was obvious that the many questions
cropping up from day to day could not be referred there for settlement,
particularly as the telephone service was poor and hopelessly overloaded.
The rigid system of control by the Staff was an added complication. D.D.S.T.,
4 Corps, consequently was obliged, de facto if not de jure, to co-ordinate S.T.
activities as between the three formations.
As an instance of the necessity
for this, the brigade operating south of Aijal would have starved without co-
ordinated
S.T.
action while the
remained unsettled.
question of whose responsibility it was
This brigade was maintained by native boats working
under a river supply detachment, R.I.A.S.C., over a river route, on which the
journey downstream took 20 to 30 hours, and that upstream as many days.
At first, D.D.S.T., Corps was made responsible for controlling all des-
patches forward from Dimapur, in accordance with priorities laid down by
Corps Staff.
The Rear Corps Headquarters was moved to Kohima, and it
was decided that Corps would only be responsible for transportation in
advance
of railhead, and that Base Area H.Q. was to be responsible for
despatches forward, including decisions as to the proportions of the various
commodities to be included in the available tonnage.
In accordance with the
Indian Army System (see Chapter X) the F.S.Ds. on the line in advance of
Dimapur, even as far away as at Palel, were under the command and technical
control of the O.C., A.B.S.D., at Dimapur, who already had more than
enough to do there.
A considerable amount of the available food and transport had to be
diverted for the purpose of feeding refugees; and another large commitment
was the feeding of the 6,000 men of the Chinese Army which had come out
via Tamu.
These services made heavy demands on the transport, which had
also, of course, to carry forward clothing, equipment, tentage, and amenities,
including quantities of mail, to Burma Army, besides taking forward troops
to reinforce the frontier line.
Another supply commitment was the feeding
of 8,000 to 10,000 local labour, which replaced the tea-garden men.
Local supplies were exploited as far as possible, but there were difficulties,
particularly about the supply of fresh meat.
The Hindus of Manipur State
had religious preiudices against the killing of cattle, and drove them away to
prevent our getting them.
Those which were collected were mostly diseased
and unfit for food.
Fresh fruit and vegetables were only forthcoming in small
quantities in Imphal, and those sent from down the line, from as far away as
Shillong, arrived in poor condition.
Sheep and goats were sent up by river
to a point near Jorhat; they were then driven to Dimapur, and carried for-
ward in lorries, which was extravagant in transport, even when the vehicles
were fitted with double decks.
Arrangements were later made for herds of
sheep and goats to be driven to Imphal from Silchar, 130 miles away, a
method costly in animals and money.
There were fortunately large stocks of
rice straw in the Imphal area, which served as fodder for the growing animal
strength, 7,000 early in June, and made it unnecessary to carry up this bulky
commodity by road.
49
WO 277/21
27
