Distribution
During the expansion in 1944-1945, no additional rail or road tankers
or static tankage were obtainable through
Army channels for use with
M.T. petrol.
This was probably due to the higher priority of operational
formations in Burma.
Local improvisations alone enabled commitments
to be met.
Water tankers recovered from a shipwrecked cargo were con-
verted for use for petrol, and tanks welded by local contractors were used
for both storage and transport.
At the same time, it was observed that both the Navy and R.A.F.
had adequate modern large-capacity tankers for the distribution of their
aviation petrol, and it was only after V-J day that the R.A.F. were discovered
to have a substantial fleet of reserve tankers standing by, which would have
been invaluable to the Army at the period of high pressure.
Inter-Service Co-ordination
Although the three Services were so inter-dependent for P.O.L. supply,
there was a lack of proper liaison over forward estimates, assistance with
equipment, and co-ordination of accounting.
It was considered that this
might have been overcome sooner if the key
provisioning personnel had
met at the outset, and agreed on their responsibilities to one another and
standardized procedure for estimating, demanding and accounting.
was, it was not until 1945 that there were manifestations of respect for each
other's rôle, and a readiness for full co-operation.
Catering Services
the
Command.
Ladies were employed in hospitals as kitchen supervisors.
The
School of Cookery, with a training capacity of six British and six
East
African or Ceylonese cooks, was under an English lady, a graduate
in
Domestic Science.
There were no Catering Advisers until it was realized
that a catering service was essential.
An organization was therefore set up
in 1944, including a Command Catering Adviser, two Catering
Advisers,
and the staff of an Emergency Cookery
Centre. Most cooks in
the Command were Indians or civilians.
Barracks Services-Reorganization
The complicated barrack procedure in force in the island was simplified
in May, 1942. Under the new system, accommodation stores for new camps,
requisitioned buildings, etc., were drawn from Ordnance and held on equip-
ment ledger charge; outgoing units handed over direct to incoming units,
or if no unit was incoming,
the stores were taken over by an E.S.A., who
then handed over to the new unit; unserviceable stores were replaced by
E.S.As.; Officer i/c Barracks was responsible for the allocation,
misappro-
priation, etc., of quarters, camps, etc.; local purchase was carried out by
Ordance; Os.C. camps were made responsible for checking bills for electric
light, water, and gas. with meters. and passino to Ofeer ile Barracke for
payment; hirings were taken over by the Command Land Agent.
24
In 1943, it became apparent that the existing barrack staff could not cope
with the increasing work,
establishment was prepared.
was submitted to G.H.Q., India, who said three
months later that they
could not approve, as they knew nothing about barrack services (the arrange-
ments for these being different in India), and that the establishment must
submitted to War Office.
reorganization was thus held up,
this being a typical instance of the difficulties experienced under Indian
Eventually, the necessary officers for barrack duties were sent out from
the United Kingdom.
Cocos Islands
Early in 1945, it was planned to develop the Cocos Islands as an air
staging post and advanced base for limited air operations against the enemy
in Malaya, Java, and Sumatra.
The force was to consist of 2,500 British and 4,000 Indians, for which
a D.I.D. and a field bakery were provided, the reserve being fixed at 60
days plus 30 days' working margin.
Maintenance supplies were to be the responsibility of G.H.Q., India.
After the original transports had left, it was discovered that the refrigera-
ting plant, which had been included in the planning, had not been sent, and,
although portable cold storage chambers were installed later, they did not
prove a success, as the supplies from India arrived in a state only fit for
condemnation.
Attempts to fly supplies from Ceylon proved unworkable,
owing to technical difficulties;
the lack of fresh supplies and the necessity
for living on tinned food had an adverse effect on the morale of the troops.
S.T. were responsible for the provision and storage of P.O.L. for M.T.
and aircraft, also for launches and landing craft.
By July, a bulk storage
installation
was built for aviation
spirit,
with a capacity of 6,000 tons.
Miscellaneous packed P.O.L. stocks amounted to a further
2,500.
The
force was treated with higher shipping priority because of its proposed
offensive rôle, and shipments of petroleum products from India were never
more than two months in arrears.
Bulk aviation stocks fell dangerously
low on one or two occasions owing to the breakdown of small ocean-going
tankers, but the P.O.L. Committee in Bombay always arranged cargoes in
time.
25
17
WO 277/21
27
