in the Middle East base are at this moment handling both R.A.S.C.
and "B" vehicles, while their output is going.
either to R.A.S.C. or other units.
Though.
without prejudice,
for the reasons
above.
it is
considered
sound to centralize
all
repair
given
in
R.A.O.C. so that the Directors of that service can co-operate pro-
vision and supply
with repair.
Senior
Ordnance
Mechanical Engineer
it will be desirable to give the
wider
powers
ordination and control of workshops and spare parts holdings.
Co-
3. Extended enquiries have been made into the question of whether Is
and 2nd line workshops, which at present exist in all R.A.S.C. transpon
companies, should have their 2nd line functions curtailed.
nere would appear to be no valid reason why
In strict logic,
R.A.S.C. should be in
a different situation from other mechanical units such as the Royal Tank
Corps-
"it has, however, been found that, during active operations in this
theatre, it bas often been necessary to allot R.A.S.C. companies to a Corps or
Army entirely out of proportion to the workshop capacity at their (ie, the
formations) disposal.
This allotment of R.A.SC. companies is, morcover,
a varying one, and, if the workshops were removed from the company estab
lishment, there would be a grave danger that workshop capacity with the
formation would be quite incapable of competing with the large and varying
amount of mechanical transport which is serving it or under its orders.
retention of the workshop in the R.A.S.C. transport company ensures tha
the workshop capacity controlled by the formation keeps step with the
amount of transport allotted to it.
For this reason, a change in the present
system of a workshop in each R.A.S.C. company is not recommended.
1. Consideration has been given to the possibility of carrying our e
bove changes in the Middle East during the war
It is thought that they
should be introduced in the following ways: —
(a) By the transfer of all RASC. personnel at present employed in
heavy repair shops and M.T. stores depot, who are serving an
a war engagement, to the R.A.O.C. in the same rank and at the
same rates of pay.
(6) By the secondment to the R.A.O.C. of any officers or other rais
of the R.A.SC. on a Regular engagement, serving in bare wid.
shops or M.T. stores depots, in the same rank and at the sam
rates of pay as they now cajoy, and without prejudice to dei
present corps seniority or future prospects.
(e) By holding seconded RA SC. personnel available at any time l
be recalled to fil positions in RA.SC. units or catablisha
(4) By couring that transfer in the theatre of war of R.A.O.C. persuad
to maintain company workshops, RASC
at the
strength are made as and when required.
This should only
nocenary & R.A.S.C. reinforcements are inadoquate.
i me he rped that the machail cogneting stil of to RAy,
al be tend and at me le set fed line maintenance Will salar
Jed fee shops in the Unind Kinadeen for training purposes and experime
7%6
6. There would naturally be some dissatisfaction on sentimental grounds
and possible loss of esprit de corps among the transferred personnel.
There
has been for many years some rivalry between the corps, and this matter
has been the subject of many enquiries.
These have resulted in the main-
tenance of the status quo, by which both have retained their separate responsi-
bilities for provision and repair of their own vehicles and provision of their
own spare parts.
It is considered, however, that officers and other ranks would
be ready to cast aside their
pride and prejudice
the interests of army
efficiency.
These factors bulk less largely in war than they do in peace, and
for this reason alone it is desirable that a change is made during a time when
any consequential troubles or friction can be smoothed out as a result of
practical trial in the field.
(37477)
397
WO 277/21
18
27
