Command (Mixed) Transport Companies
A new organization was, therefore, introduced, based on the standard
sub-unit principle already applied to field force transport companies, and
intended to replace Station Transport Companies,
Station Maintenance
Companies, and A.T.S. M.T. companies.
The new units were to include
both R.A.S.C. and A.T.S. personnel, and were therefore to be called Com-
also absorbed the
ambulance pool, and the headquarter, etc., vehicles.
They were built up
of a combination of the following standard components: -
H.O. Command (Mixed) Transport Company;
Command Transport Platoon, R.A.S.C.;
Command Driver Increment, R.A.S.C.;
Command Workshop Platoon, R.A.S.C.;
Command Transport Platoon, A.T.S.;
Command Driver Increment, A.T.S.
These components are described in greater detail in Appendix IIF.
The Company was commanded by a R.A.S.C. officer, and the head-
quarters included A.T.S. officers for the administration of the A.T.S. per-
sonnel. R.A.S.C. and A.T.S. platoons were commanded by subalterns of
The channels of A.T.S. supervision were defined as follows :
For technical matters, via the A.T.S. officer at company H.Q., through
R.A.S.C. technical channels; for
matters, from the A.T.S. officer at company H.Q., to the local General
Duty A.T.S. Group Commander, and thence through ordinary A.T.S.
The combination of sub-units, i.e., the proportion of R.A.S.C. and A.T.S.
platoons and C.D.Is., was that most appropriate to suit local requirements.
The transport and workshop platoons were similar in organization and
capacity to their field force counterparts, with certain exceptions,
i.e., they had no spare vehicles, they were not administratively mobile or
self-contained, and they were not provided with scales of weapons.
platoons were originally organized into five sections, each consisting of six
The saving of R.A.S.C. manpower which resulted from the formation of
these companies was over 1,000, while the
"pool" basis was expected to reduce demands for transport for static head-
51 companies were formed on the new establishment, which became
effective on 1st September, 1942.
" mixed"
organization proved very
successful in practice. The employment of women in the R.Á.S.C. trans-
port service is dealt with at greater length below.
Bulk Allotment
It was apparent, by April, 1943, that a greater degree of flexibility was
necessary in the organization of Command (Mixed) Transport Companies so
that sub-units or individual vehicles could be transferred from unit to unit
to meet fluctuating transport commitments.
War Establishments were accordingly made less rigid as regards the num-
ber of task vehicles allowed to transport sections, which might now consist of
given a "bulk allotment" of sub-units of C.(M.)T.
Companies which could be distributed between companies at the discretion
of the D.D.S.T. Thereafter, to meet changed personnel circumstances, arising
from the ever-increasing commitments placed upon these companies, piece-
meal additions were made to the bulk allotment, and other adjustments
authorized, such as changing R.A.S.C. platoons or sections for A.T.S.
The original allotment was of 127 R.A.S.C.,
and 69 A.T.S., platoons,
among 51 companies. By June, 1944, it was 128 R.A.S.C. and 102 A.T.S.
platoons, distributed among 53 companies, and representing the operation of
750 ambulances, 6,000 other vehicles, and 850 motor-cycles.
of A.T.S. to R.A.S.C. became even higher later.
Issues in Excess of Bulk Allotment
In April, 1944, to meet increased transport commitments resulting from
preparation for the mounting of
operation
" Overlord"
1,000 load-carriers
were issued to C.(M.)T. Companies in excess of their bulk allotment.
Drivers
for these additional vehicles were found from the existing resources, e.g.,
relief drivers; and the personnel and vehicles were organized into platoons,
so that authority existed for the grant of acting rank to supervisory personnel.
Three company headquarters were raised to command the additional platoons
where they could not be placed under command of existing companies.
These companies were allotted to the commands not directly responsible
for mounting " Overlord"
These commands then allocated a quota of
additional platoons to the companies, and made complete companies avail-
able to commands responsible for mounting the operation.
At the end of 1941, the progressive increase in the number of Motor
Ambulance Convoys and Ambulance Car Companies included in field force
formations in the United Kingdom, led to a review of the number of motor
ambulances allowed as a pool for use in home commands.
This pool was
intended for the conveyance of sick between static units and hospitals, as
distinct from the ambulance transport services which provided specifically for
the evacuation of casualties of field formations.
As there was a deficiency of 270 ambulances for home purposes which
could not be made good owing to manpower shortage, an agreement was
made with the Ministry of Health for the use of the ambulances of the
Civil Defence Service for moving military sick between static units and
hospitals, and the necessary local arrangements were made between the
military and civil authorities.
This use of civil defence ambulances had also the advantage of per-
mitting better concentration of the field force ambulances, and so improving
their training in their war rôle.
the Civil Defence Services were disbanded in 1945.
It was not, however, more than adequate to avoid expansion of the
ambulance pool, and at the end of 1942 it was found impossible to release
37477)
WO 277/21
27
