transport to Divisional Commanders entitled to give the initial warning of
Authority was also given for earmarked vehicles
expected invasion raids.
to be taken into use at once, leaving the completion and service of the
forms to be carried out at the earliest opportunity.
After the mounting of " Overlord", the administrative situation in the
United Kingdom was considered.
Raids were still possible,
and adequate
arrangements were necessary to deal with them.
The schemes for the forma-
tion on
" Action Stations'
of improvised transport units were cancelled.
but, since earmarked civilian transport might be required for purposes other
than land operations in the United Kingdom, the general system and procedure
that had been built up was retained.
Earmarkings were reviewed from time
to time, and eliminated where no longer necessary.
On the question of ear-
markings for Home Guard transport, the scale required as unit transport
had to be considered in each case on its merits.
Home Guard M.T. Columns
were kept up to full establishments.
The scheme was eventually cancelled in February, 1945, as being no
longer required.
Motor cars of Military personnel in an emergency
In November, 1941, instructions were issued regarding the procedure
to be followed for the use of privately owned motor vehicles and motor-
cycles of military personnel, including the Home Guard, on W.D. services
under invasion conditions.
It was laid down that the issue of motor mileage allowance to military
personnel using their own vehicles for military purposes in normal conditions
would cease at once on " Action Stations" being ordered.
All such privately
owned vehicles and motor-cycles that might be required for use in such an
emergency would be earmarked as to be requisitioned for hire under the
same conditions as other civilian vehicles so earmarked.
Tyres of Earmarked
Vehicles
S.T.3 took up with the Ministry of Supply in December, 1942, the question
of the possibility of the tyres of the 35,000 motor cars in civilian ownership,
and earmarked for W.D. services in emergency, being requisitioned under
a Ministry order by which the tyres of laid-up vehicles were liable to be
requisitioned.
The Ministry replied that, where civilian owners of such
vehicles could produce satisfactory evidence that their cars had been ear-
marked under the War Office scheme, the tyres were not to be requisitioned
or removed from the vehicle.
Petrol for Requisitioned Vehicles
The question was examined in the War Office in September, 1941, of the
issue of W.D, petrol to the very large number of additional vehicles to be
taken into military use on " Action Stations" being ordered, as well as to
vehicles used by other Government departments and the defence services.
It was considered that additional petrol tankage and pumps would have to
be requisitioned on " Action Stations", and S.T.2 took action accordingly.
Evacuation of Civilian Vehicles
A scheme was considered by the Ministry of War Transport, in April,
1942, for evacuating civilian M.T. vehicles from south-eastern coastal areas
in the event of invasion emergency.
A total of about 4,000 goods-carrying
vehicles and 250 public service (passenger-carrying) vehicles was involved.
It was suggested that these might be taken over by the War Department
in the precautionary period before the " Stand to" order for operation as
emergency transport, possibly as organized units with Home Guard drivers,
alternatively, that the vehicles already earmarked for military
purposes
in the particular areas concerned might be replaced by the vehicles under
consideration, in order to release the civilian earmarked vehicles, not in the
forward areas, for other services as required by the local Civil Regional
S.T.3 pointed out that the plans for earmarking civilian transport for
military services in emergency already covered the known commitments with
a margin for reserves and that to take over these evacuated vehicles as well
would be liable to upset the earmarking plans seriously.
scheme as a whole was delicately balanced in so far as easy accessibility of
vehicles in relation to drivers was concerned, and would be liable to fall into
chaos in the event of any such change-over.
was therefore agreed that any public service vehicles would be
evacuated under the private arrangements of their operators.
load-carriers might be required for Home Guard or Emergency M.T. com-
panies, and of the remainder only the minimum required as a pool to
form an insurance against a sudden emergency under the control of the
Regional Transport Commissioner were likely to be evacuated.
Supply System in Emergency
The feeding of forces at home in operational conditions, in case of inva-
sion, became a matter of practical politics in May, 1940.
At the time, the
troops were fed from 96 Command Supply Depots, located according to the
density of the military population, and not with any regard to possible opera-
tions.
These depots were stocked by S.R.Ds. and contractors, and units drew
from them daily.
A review of the supply situation contemplated that in case of invasion
the peace-time system of Army feeding would be maintained wherever
possible, except where troops were actually deployed for action.
The troops
would then come on to an active service system of supply, with a field
service
ration.
A provisional field service ration scale for use in such circumstances was
drawn up; for details concerning it, and its subsequent developments, see
Section 4 of this chapter.
It was the intention that in normal circumstances supply would continue
through R.A.S.C.
and N.A.A.F.I. at C.S.Ds.,
but that in emergency the
whole ration would be issued by the R.A.S.C. when necessary.
Normal
resources and commodities were to be made use of as far as possible, and
tinned items were only to be issued in case of absolute necessity.
instructions issued later on the subject of supply in case of invasion, or
other emergency, see Appendix VIIF.
131
WO 277/
27
