operated by the R.A.S.C. was due to the heavy demands from all commands
for the following main reasons,
in addition to those mentioned above.
Hitherto unprotected islands were being fortified, and thousands of tons
of R.E. stores had to be conveyed to them.
New seaward forts were estab-
New coastal artillery units were formed, creating an urgent need for
many more high-speed training craft, for target towing.
Security measures
necessitated the provision of many launches for security officers at ports.
Fast launches were needed to supplement the R.A.F. air/sea rescue craft.
Employment of No. 2 Motor Boat Company
The second Motor Boat Company referred to in Chapter III was called
upon to carry out an operational rôle quite different from the original con-
ception of the duties of these companies.
Owing to the manpower situation,
the security patrols hitherto carried
out by the Royal Navy on the Essex
coast and the Norfolk Broads could not be continued by
It was therefore decided that these duties
which consisted of spotting and locating parachute
mines, spotting enemy aircraft engaged in mine-dropping, etc., and general
security patrols, would be undertaken by the motor boat company.
Although under the administrative control of Eastern
unit was for operational purposes under the orders of the Naval Commander-
The work was successfully carried out for a year,
when the unit could no longer be spared for the work, as it was needed for
North Africa; and it was therefore withdrawn in spite of the strenuous
S.T.1 became responsible for the provision, equipping and maintenance
of all fire boats included in the establishment of Fire Boat Sections, which,
from the fire-fighting point of view, were the responsibility of the Army Fire
50 fire boats were required for service
at home and abroad, including 30 for 21 Army Group and nine for the
Mediterranean, besides a number for East Africa and the Far East.
provision of the two last commitments is dealt with in the relevant chapters.
The selection of suitable craft to equip these sections was difficult, owing
to the conditions in which they would probably have to operate overseas.
Care had therefore to be taken to select a design which would meet those
conditions, possess both the capacity for fire-fighting equipment and accom-
modation suitable for long sea voyages, and be easily manoeuvred in coastal
The standard Admiralty-designed motor fishing vessel
(M.F.V.), suitably converted, was the eventual choice.
At first, two main
types were used, a small and a large; but it was evident that only the latter
would meet the full requirements for operating in the Far East.
it MF. Vs. were accordingly taken over from the Admiralty for conversion,
IL Cadition, in order to complete the requirement for N.W. Europe, ten
L.C.Vs. were also taken over from the Admiralty.
Military Oil Barges
The manning, operation and maintenance of self-propelled oil barges
having been made a R.A.S.C. responsibility, this necessitated the training of
personnel in the navigation and handling of these craft and also,
Petroleum Technical Training Wing at Llandarcy, in the handling of petroleum
products on lighters, tankers, and barges, with instruction in the apparatus.
The two companies allotted for these duties were intended for
Group; one of them was, however, lent to the M.O.W.T. for water-carrying
duties to naval and other vessels in ports in the South of England in connec-
tion with mounting of " Overlord"
In this connection see also Chapter VIII.
Three companies were also allotted in the Order of Battle for the opera-
tions in the Far East, see Chapter XI, but they were not despatched, owing
to the end of the war with Japan.
They were then in process of equipment
with 20 100-ft. barges each, half Diesel and half steam powered, the 80-ft.
barge being unsuitable for employment in the Far East.
Apart from the oil barges, the requirements of water transport units for
the war in the Far East produced a special crop of problems, in connection
with types of units and craft, training of personnel, and provision of craft.
New units of special interest were the Ambulance Launch Company and the
Floating Workshops, the latter being designed to provide for the repair of
amphibians.
Further details will be found in Chapter XI, and Appendix VIID.
Provision of Craft
Considerable difficulties were met at first in obtaining financial agreement
to a small building programme for craft for administrative purposes; it was
assumed that sufficient vessels of a suitable type could be obtained by re-
Events proved this view to be incorrect, owing to the very
large increase in the size of the Fleet.
Subsequently, every assistance was
given in authorizing building programmes to meet long-term planning.
Forecasts of requirements of craft were not received from any arm of
the Service, and vessels had to be provided at very short notice, as contingen-
In such cases requisitioning was necessary of craft as near
possible to the specification.
They were given hurried refits in unfavourable
priority, and with
heterogeneous engines fitted.
Such procedure was obviously unsatisfactory
and undesirable.
Frequently it was not possible to provide craft entirely
Many of these difficulties could have been avoided had S.T.1 been in-
formed earlier of requirements.
Again, as the result of failure to consult
S.T.1 as to the type of vessel required for projects, specifications of the craft
required were usually incomplete or erroneous.
It was found that various units had commandeered vessels without
In order to regularize the illegal acquisition and requisi-
tioning of privately-owned craft, and to prevent irregularities in future,
instructions were published laying down the correct procedure for requisition-
ing or hiring vessels.
*7/77
WO 277/21
27
