this was further effected by transit direct from manufacturing country to
theatre rather than through the United Kingdom.
This was a policy matter,
decided by the Ministry of War Transport and the Ministry of Food, in
co-operation with the War Office.
S.T.6's provision responsibility fell into three main groups: foodstuffs,
including cigarettes, main ration items, hospital comforts;
water chemicals; miscellaneous items, e.g., candles, solid fuel cookers.
Before the war, these commodities were bought by the Director
Army Contracts; with the mobilization of manpower, however,
setting up of Government controls, various Ministries were established to
take over the production responsibility for primary supplies of national
Thus, the Ministry of Supply became responsible for most of
the non-foodstuff items, and the Ministry of Food
divided responsibility
with the Director of Army Contracts for the foodstuffs.
The Ministry of
Food took over the functions of the Board of Trade Food Defence Plans
Committee, formed before the outbreak of war to safeguard the national
supply of certain primary foodstuffs, e.g., meats, oils and fats, flour, etc.
Channels of Supply
It was essential, for purposes of control,
that all nationally rationed
foods should be obtained under official direction, and the following arrange-
ments were accordingly made for the supply of the Army's food in the
United Kingdom: -
(a) Meat, frozen or chilled, was provided by two of the big contractors,
who acted as the Service meat agents of the Ministry of Food.
(b) Preserved meat was supplied by firms nominated by the M. of F.
(c) Bacon was to continue to be supplied through N.A.A.F.I., acting
as War Department agents, supplies being obtained by them from the
(d) Butter and cheese were obtained by the Army and N.A.A.F.I. from
M. of F. Port and Area Oficers.
(e) Tinned Milk: firms were allocated to the Service.
(f) Flour and sugar came from firms nominated by the Cereal Control
Advisory Committee, respectively.
allocations of raw materials were made to the Services'
(h) Tea was obtained through the agency of a Central Tea Distribution
Committee, with the assistance of the W.D. adviser on tea.
(i) Manufactured foods: agreement as to capacity was reached with a
large number of firms, and details of supply were arranged between
The Director of Army Contracts remained responsible for the purchase
of all other manufactured foods.
The various items of the ration reached the troops in the United King-
dom through two channels, the R.A.S.C. supply depot, and the N.A.A.F..
dipot. The supply depot received its stocks from two sources, R.A.S.C.
direct supply, and Ministry of Food local agents.
R.A.S.C. direct supply
216
commodities were bread, obtained from W.D. bakeries or by local contract,
and preserved meat, biscuit, tea,
tinned salmon, and cocoa, from Main Supply Depots.
The Ministry of
Food commodities, frozen meat, margarine, sugar, and flour, came through
the agents appointed as described above.
The N.A.A.F.I. items were oatmeal, semolina, macaroni, bacon, offals,
sausages, cake, dried fruits, butter, fresh milk, potatoes, fresh vegetables,
dried peas, beans, etc.
In July, 1941, the Ministry of Food proposed to War Office that all
thermally processed (i.e., prepared
by cooking and canned or otherwise
preserved) foods should be bought through the Ministry.
the Minister proposed to nationalize the canning industry.
which had much to commend it, was strongly opposed by D.A.C. and the
Finance Branches on the grounds of cost but eventually some items were
taken over, and a compromise was reached on the others by which competitive
tenders were no longer employed, but the Ministry nominated firms able to
handle army contracts, leaving the D.A.C. to negotiate prices.
on examining all forecasts, to
source of supply, i.e., whether from United Kingdom manufacture or by
import, the Ministry being the sole authority for the import of foodstuffs.
For controlled commodities which the D.A.C. purchased, it was necessary
for S.T.6 to arrange for the supply of the raw material in advance.
(a) Timber for cases, dealt with by Timber Control.
(b) Steel for banding, tinplate and terneplate, Iron and Steel Control.
(c) Tobacco, Tobacco Control.
(d) Hexamine for Tommy cookers, Molasses and Alcohol Control.
Liaison between the War Office and the Ministry of Food was effected
through a branch of S.T.6, known as S.T.6 (d), which was set up in June,
1939, and located with the Ministry.
Implementation of Programmes
The programmes prepared by S.T.6(a) were passed to this branch, which
in turn forwarded them to the various commodity divisions of the Ministry,
which indicated their ability to meet the demands and also gave sources of
supply.
The programmes in general were then agreed with the Ministry,
and the information received from the commodity division was conveyed to
S.T.6(a) in respect of overseas programmes, and to the Chief Provision Officer
(Foodstuffs) in respect of home programmes.
The overseas programmes were based on demands placed on the War
Office by the force, in each theatre, in terms of the quantities required
lo complete its authorized reserves.
The level of the authorized reserves
was fixed in accordance with the many complex factors involved, such as
the future strength, movement, and operational rôle of the force.
reserves held were distributed among the Base Supply Depots in the theatre,
in accordance with the following system.
Each Base Supply
Depot was normally allotted a specific
"policy
holding"
in terms of commodities and tonnages required to make up a
217
17/77
WO 277/21
27
