Office to meet material changes in ration strengths between commands by
transfer of covering authority.
A.T.S. were excluded, as accommodation
and other local difficulties limited the extent to which their posts could be
transferred.
The C.S.D. system reached its peak in December, 1943, when
there were 169.
The C.S.Ds. were reorganized once again in the autumn of 1944, when
the invasion of the Continent had resulted in a reduction of the overall
ration strength at home from 21 to 2 million.
In addition, the special duty
sections, organized for the specific purpose of assisting in mounting operation
"Overlord", could now be dispensed with, and requirements of personnel
for P.O.L. duties were less heavy.
Accordingly, a new "Consolidated Guide Scale" was prepared, in con-
nection with which the following points may be noted.
Pool was now 15 per cent.
It was decided that the staff for central account-
ing, which in fact worked at H.Q., O.C., R.A.S.C., could only properly be
held on that officer's establishment; and that central accounting should be
regarded as an integral part of the District Supply Office organization.
inevitable variations between districts were met by laying down a standard
basic personnel allowance, and by making additions as necessary to the
command pool of R.A.S.C. and A.T.S. personnel for S.T. and B. services in
districts.
which could not be centralized, such as checking and conversion from rations
to commodities of indents on A.Fs. F 757, preparation of depot and N.A.A.F.I.
issue lists, returns of all kinds, pay, administration, and dealing with unit
and central accounts queries.
The economies effected in this way amounted to 34 officers and 548
O.Rs. by the end of 1944.
This represented a 12 per cent. reduction in
personnel, and there was a ten per cent. reduction in the number of C.S.Ds.
Even these reductions, however, did not satisfy the stringent need for economy
in manpower; and a further five per cent. dilution of C.S.D. staffs by A.T.S.
took place.
This was the final change before the end of the war, after which the run-
down proceeded by the progressive reduction of the number of depots.
points need to be stressed in considering such a process.
First, location,
rather than strength, is the governing factor, and the release programme
involved a thinning out of numbers rather than a reduction in the number
of units.
The work of depots was not therefore materially decreased except
cannot
reduction of supply installations
keep up with,
still less exceed,
commitment; but it ought properly to las behind, contracting gradually as the
load lightens.
See also Appendix VIIIH, for a consideration of the supply organization
in the United Kingdom, in relation to the load.
Supply and Petrol Depots Inspectorate
A Central Investigation Branch for supplies had formed part of the
establishment of the B.E.F. in France in 1914-1918, and again in the war
of 1939-1945.
accounting to ensure co-ordination and economy.
Its function was to keep a continuous watch
on supply
232
It fulfilled this function satistactorily, and in October, 1940, a similar
organization was approved for supplies at home.
in the United Kingdom four S.R.Ds., nine M.S.Ds., and 126 C.S.Ds. and
D.I.Ds., and it was for the last two types of depot that the proposed investi-
gation branch was really needed.
These depots were widely dispersed over
the country, and in most cases were of necessity commanded by officers who
lacked the experience of regular R.A.S.C. officers.
They had managed to
operate satisfactorily so far with the help and supervision of Os.C., R.A.S.C.;
but there were minor irregularities in working and a lack of uniformity which
it was considered could be set right by an experienced inspecting staff.
The head of the new inspectorate was a lieutenant-colonel, designated
the Inspector of Supply Depots, R.A.S.C., and he had seven assistants.
The specific duties of his inspectorate were to examine the following: —
(a) Operation of supply depots.
i Procedure in connection with the receipt, custody, and issue
(i) The routine methods of weighing and checking consignments.
(iii) Arrangements for examination of supplies during their period
of warranty.
(iv) Adequacy of the facilities and staff for handling supplies, avail-
ability of suitable storage, office accommodation, etc.
(v) The practicability of introducing economical and labour-saving
machinery.
(b) Accounting.
(i) Office organization and system of accounting, in various types
of supply depots.
(ii) Procedure
for
ensuring that supply accounts were promptly
rendered, and bills passed without delay.
(iii) Procedure for adjustment of surpluses and deficiencies.
(iv) Security of books and accounts.
(v) Causes of delay in the return of vouchers.
(vi) Procedure for adjustment of discrepancy reports.
The title of the inspectorate was later changed to " Supply Depot In-
In June, 1941, a petroleum products inspection section was added to the
inspectorate, and three more officers were added to the establishment:
consequence of this, the title of the organization was changed to that of the
"Supply and Petrol Depot Inspectorate, R.A.S.C.".
In August, 1942, three officers were added to the inspectorate as meat
inspectors, and two as vegetable inspectors.
These technical inspectors were
for general duty throughout the country for such purposes as inspection of
meat and vegetable shipments to overseas stations, and the inspection of
suspected consignments in home commands.
They had previously been
included in the establishments of Nos. 1 and 2 S.R.Ds., but as the establish-
ments of the latter
were then being revised it was thought advisable to
regularize the position, and place these officers more appropriately in the
WO 277/21
27
