road. farther east. led to Lashio. where it joined the famous Burma Road
through which, until the Japanese reached it, the Allies were sending aid to
From Mandalay, an all-weather road ran to Myitkyina, whence unmetalled
roads led to Sumprabum and Mogaung.
Apart from the last two, there were
only tracks in North Burma.
The motor roads in Burma were for the most
part only lightly metalled, with verges of thick dust or thick mud according to
Metalled side roads were few and far between and they usually
ran off into dust tracks.
Burma was connected with India by only one road and by no railway.
The project of a road between Assam and Upper Burma had been the subject
of discussion on various occasions before 1941; it was, indeed, first recom-
mended in 1887 after the third Burma War, when troops based in Assam
were operating in North Burma; but no action had been taken. As a military
necessity, the project began to take shape in the late autumn of 1941.
existing road, from Dimapur to Imphal (135 miles), required to be widened
as it could only take one-way traffic.
From Imphal to Tamu (65 miles) there
was only a bridle-track; and from Tamu to Kalewa (120 miles) and thence on
to Ye-u (70 miles) there was a cart track. These tracks were at best passable
for motor traffic only in dry weather.
The section from Tamu to Ye-u was
to be made an all-weather road by the Burma Government; but little was
actually done, though it was improved, and the subsequent withdrawal of the
Burma Army was so far facilitated.
An unmetalled motor-road reached
Tamu from the north in time for the withdrawal, but maintenance of this
road would have been impossible during the wet season, which began in May.
The subsequent development of these roads, and the improvements effected
in the communications between India and Eastern Assam, are dealt with later
In Arakan, a railway ran only as far as Chittagong, beyond which the only
land communication was the road that ran south to Maungdaw. Its quality
may be judged from the fact that during 1943-1944 it was developed to a
two-way, fair-weather standard as far as Maungdaw, and to a one-way, all-
weather standard as far as Tambru, at the head of the Naf Estuary, between
Ukhru and Bawli Bazar.
linked Maungdaw with Buthidaung by way of the tunnels which passed under
later.
the Mayu hills. Communications in Arakan are dealt with in greater detail
S. and T. Situation in Burma, before War with Japan
The military organization of Burma was quite inadequate for the defence
of the country; the S. and T. services in particular were sketchy in the extreme.
Expansion of the administrative services had not kent pace with the increase
in the fighting troops during 1940-1941, small though that had been.
S. and T. services were performed by the Burma Army Service Corps, still in
its infancy, supplemented by a few R TA SC units which had accompanied
15 Indian Infantry Prioade into Burma: and. un to Tuly 1041 they were still
war, and the S. and T. services passed to a war footing.
on a peace basis. It was then decided to prenare Burma more adequately for
The three infantry brigade groups in Burma were at the same time brought
under command of the newly raised H.Q., Burma Division, which included
a Commander, B.A.S.C
The division had few divisional troops, the S. and T.
units comprising only the brigade supply
units and an animal transport
company with each brigade, plus a few sections of B.A.S.C. M.T. and some
motor ambulances.
Behind this, there was almost no L. of C. organization,
and there was no comprehensive administrative order of battle, or scheme to
develop one from Burma's meagre resources in this respect.
The defence plan was based on the assumption that the Japanese would
attack Burma through the Southern Shan States, and aim at cutting the road
and rail communications between
Mandalay and Toungoo.
was
therefore taken to organize maintenance eastwards through the Southern Shan
Supplies were stocked forward by the available M.T., which was con-
centrated for the purpose, and overworked on an 800-mile turnround.
This
transport consisted of 30-cwt. lorries, manned by raw and ill-disciplined locally
The vehicles were in poor repair even when the campaign
opened, for the Burma Army Ordnance Corps had neither the organization
nor the workshop equipment to keep them roadworthy.
Tenasserim came second in order of consideration for administrative im-
provement, and little was done there.
The main problem was to maintain
a brigade on the Thai frontier east of Moulmein (where a F.S.D. was built
up) by roads hardly worthy of the name and interrupted by water obstacles.
When war with Japan broke out, the situation of Burma Division was as
follows: —1 Burma Brigade in Kengtung State, 13 I.I.B. at Taunggyi, and
2 Burma Brigade in Tenasserim.
With the division thus spread over a front
of 600 miles, divisional training had been impracticable, and the formation
had not been familiarized with the operation of S. and T. services in the field.
There was no organization in the division for ammunition supply, and there
were no R.I.A.S.C. or B.A.S.C. personnel trained in this work.
The S. and T. system, as operated in Burma division at the outset, was
control existed at Moulmein,
Toungoo: and a pool of M.T. (under divisional control though it was not
formation transport) for all purposes was located in the Southern Shan States
and in Tenasserim, and carried supplies and petrol forward to Brigade Supply
Issue Sections, from which either the same M.T., or unit first line transport,
carried them on to delivery points.
At this time, there were in Burma only the following troops, apart from
brigade (one British and one Burma Rifle battalion);
16 Indian Infantry Brigade; eighteen battalions of Burma Rifles, Burma
Auxiliary Force, and armed police; and some artillery units.
As the threat to Burma increased, reinforcement became essential, but
there was little reserve to draw on.
India had been exhausted of trained
troops for Middle East and Iraq and Persia; those nearly trained were sent to
Malaya, together with 18 British Division, which had been allotted for the
defence of India and Burma, and two Brigade Groups of 17 Indian Division.
WO 277/21
27
