regarded as of the utmost importance, bearing in mind the many diverse
types of such units required for the war against Japan, and the high degree
of knowledge called for.
To enable officers to obtain higher training in navigation, arrangements
were made for them to attend courses at the Watts Sea School at Southampton.
This applied particularly to the officers for the Ambulance Launch Com-
pany, formed for service in the Far East.
32 officers of navigator, class II,
standard were required for this unit alone, the majority being obtained by
diverting officers direct from the O.C.T.U. to the Waterborne Training Centre.
After an eight weeks' course there, they were given practical experience under
a C.R.A.S.C., water transport units, and those showing outstanding aptitude
went to the Sea School. The results were on the whole highly satisfactory.
Inspectorate of Water Transport Services
The development of static
waterborne services in overseas theatres
did not result in the formation of water transport companies until the second
half of 1943.
It would, indeed, have been more economical if this had
happened sooner,
and War Office was aware that units were needed to
administer and maintain the R.A.S.C. vessels in the various theatres.
In course of time, commanders-in-chief of overseas theatres began to
ask War Office to send out an officer, conversant with the operation of
these services, to advise on their regularization, owing to the difficulties
resulting from a general lack of knowledge about them and the peculiarities
of coastal areas and harbours.
To meet this requirement, a Chief Inspector of Water Transport Services
was appointed, with two inspectors who were employed to carry out inspec-
tions at home and overseas, and examine, report upon, and, where necessary,
make recommendations regarding, the maintenance of vessels, care of stores,
etc., held on charge by Motor Boat and Water Transport Companies. They
also gave guidance to the commanders of these companies.
Commands
The following were the principal points of the policy on Water Transport
Services in overseas commands.
They applied to all overseas commands: —
(a) The necessity for forming establishments with due reference to the
availability of British personnel,
personnel to meet the greater part of the requirement.
use of locally enlisted
(b) The use of requisitioned slipways and local facilities for proper
(c) The introduction of Boat Stores Depots where the number of craft
warranted local provision and distribution.
(d) The importance of acquiring vessels locally by requisition through
the M.O.W.T. and by building in local shipyards, in order to save
shipments from the United Kingdom.
The local application of this policy is described in the chapters dealing
with the various commands concerned.
214
SECTION 4.—SUPPLIES
The supply services in the United Kingdom had a dual rôle, that of
base, or home maintenance area, for the whole of the British Army and
R.A.F. at home and in overseas theatres, and that of the day-to-day main-
tenance of the Army and R.A.F. in the United Kingdom.
This part of the chapter describes the basic process of provision of
R.A.S.C. supplies, and connects it with the reserve holding organizations,
both at home and in overseas theatres.
The further story in connection with
the overseas theatres is told in the relevant chapters; in respect of the home
theatres, it is continued here, with an account of the reserves required to
be held at home; the organization through which the food reached the troops;
the Supply and Petrol Depot Inspectorate; the rationing system; and the
ration scales and their development.
Other special aspects of the supply services are also dealt with, including
bread production, embarkation and port duties, and the supply of the U.S.
Provision
The objects of provision were: -
(a) To provide the supply reserves laid down by the General Staff, and
necessary working margins (for a definition of these terms, see below,
under " Reserves").
(b) To provide for the maintenance of the Army and Air
(c) To devise and arrange production of such special packs as might
be required for particular operations.
The initiative and planning of provision of R.A.S.C. supplies (excluding
items obtained by local purchase) was the responsibility of S.T.6.
If supply failures were to be avoided, long term planning was essential.
Complicated arrangements were necessary for the provision of raw materials
and labour, and sometimes of machinery.
It was therefore eventually found
desirable to prepare forecasts for a 12 months' period, and to finalize figures
at least four months before the beginning of the period, because,
zation, much work had to be done before actual deliveries could begin, e.g.,
enquiries as to availability of raw materials, capacity of industry,
Such long notice was often impossible in practice, owing
to sudden and violent changes in operational outlook.
table had to stand, and special measures were taken to meet changes.
Two main budgets were prepared: the United Kingdom budget, for forces
in, or subsisted from, the United Kingdom; and the Overseas budget, for
forces subsisted other than from the United Kingdom.
In a war of such
magnitude, the resources of the United Kingdom proved insufficient for the
subsistence of all British forces, wherever they might be.
It was therefore
necessary to obtain supplies in overseas markets, either by purchase or under
Lend/Lease agreement.
economy of shipping was of paramount
importance, purchase in or near the theatre concerned saved shipping, and
215
WO 277/21
27
