This situation developed further when Lord Portal proposed that the
1942 requirements of vehicles manufactured in the United Kingdom should
be reduced by half, thereby effecting a saving of over 7,000 tons of crude
rubber.
The General Staft at the War Office considered that, from the
operational point of view, it was dangerous to reduce reserves in order to
effect a cut in production.
The Ministry of Supply explained that, once vehicle production was
slowed down, it would be more difficult, and perhaps impossible, to step it
up again, as the labour so released would be absorbed into other essential
industries.
Further, the 1942 allotment of crude rubber for the W.D. re-
quirement of new vehicles was sufficient to cover the 1942 production pro-
gramme, and the W.D. had already cut their requirements of rubber as
far as possible by reducing their maintenance requirements for tyres during
War Office therefore decided not to recommend any reduction in the
1942 programme for vehicles manufactured in the United Kingdom.
Transfer of Responsibility
From Ist June, 1942, the responsibility for provision of vehicles and
spare parts passed to the R.A.O.C., under the reorganization of the main-
tenance services, and S.T.3 consequently ceased to be directly concerned
in this business, except as representing the largest single user arm of the
Assembly of Imported Vehicles
It was decided in October, 1943, that action must be taken quickly to
assist the Ministry of Supply by assembling in a selected R.A.S.C. Mobiliza-
tion Centre, cased 6-ton and 10-ton vehicles imported from the U.S.A.
The
premises of Karrier Motors at Huddersfield were accordingly requisitioned,
as the work could best be done in such accommodation, and was to be
carried out under the control of the R.A.S.C. Mobilization
Centre at
The arrangements took a very long time, and the first vehicles were not
received until March, 1944.
Assembly up to the end of April was 76
In June, it became necessary to withdraw the R.A.S.C. transport
company which had been doing the work, as it was required for an opera-
tional rôle, and the scheme consequently lapsed after 170 vehicles in all
had been assembled
Spare Parts for Units Mobilizing
From the outbreak of war, it had been the practice to issue standard
packs, commonly known as " picnic baskets"
", and officially as First Aid
M.T. Outfits, or F.A.M.T.Os., containing the minimum initial supplies of
spare parts, to R.A.S.C. field force transport units in process of mobilizing.
This saved them the necessity for preparing detailed demands, and simplified
In January, 1941, however, it was decided to discontinue such issues to
such units while they were in the United Kingdom.
demand spare parts and stores in quantities just sufficient to
Instead, they were to
maintain
their vehicles.
When units' vehicles were shipped overseas in bulk, any
balance of the spare parts and stores so obtained would not accompany the
unit, but be returned to a M.T.S.D. in the United Kingdom.
The base
M.T.S.D. in the theatre to which the unit was proceeding was given sufficient
stocks of spares to enable units to receive their initial stocks when they drew
their vehicles from the overseas M.T. V.R.D.
This system got over the
difficulty due to units having one type of vehicle at home, and being issued
with another overseas.
Spare Parts in the Field
The reorganization of the vehicle maintenance arrangements in 1942
led to a proposal by the Directorate of Warlike Stores that the
basket" should be abolished altogether, and that R.A.S.C. field force trans-
port units should draw their M.T. stores from R.A.O.C. 1 and 2 Echelon
This was unacceptable to S.T.3, on the grounds that the availability in
field park stores would be insufficient to meet the proved requirements
(two to three months' stock of spares) of R.A.S.C. transport units.
R.A.S.C. maintained about one-third of the total wheeled vehicles in the
Army, and the magnitude of their requirements was considered to justify
special arrangements.
This contention was accepted, and the " picnic baskets" were retained.
Ministry of Supply Scheme for Vehicle Repair
The War Office suggested to the Ministry of Supply in August, 1940,
that all repairs which, owing to lack of facilities or pressure of work,
beyond the capacity of Army workshops should be co-ordinated under the
vehicle repair scheme in operation in the United Kingdom under the
The latter agreed, and the proposal was given effect without
delay. It provided that repairs to vehicles which were for any reason beyond
the capacity of Army workshops were to be referred to the Ministry of
Supply Command Superintendent, one of whom was attached to each com-
mand headquarters.
All questions relating to the allocation of vehicles
to repair works, and advice regarding the disposition of the technical assistants
working under the Superintendents, would, for R.A.S.C. vehicles, be dealt
with directly between the D.D.S.T. of the command and the superintendent
Vehicles handed over for repair were issued on loan under temporary
receipt, as, with certain exceptions, the vehicles were normally to be returned
to the units to which they were on charge.
The exceptions were vehicles
considered by the Ministry to be beyond economical repair, and cases where
the time required for repair was likely to exceed three weeks or where the
absence of the vehicle was likely to impede the efficiency of the unit.
these cases, a vehicle would be struck of unit charge and replaced.
Types of Vehicle Affected
The question soon arose as to which types of Service vehicles should
be considered worth repair under the scheme, because, in some types of
impressed vehicles (which were the class most likely to need repair), the
(37477)
WO 277/21
