Readiness of Transport Units for Service
The demand for M.T. companies was never satisfied, and until 1944
units were constantly being sent on operational rôles before they were
fully trained, and with vehicles of a type with which the drivers were un-
familiar.
Then there was a modification of policy.
It had been realized
that, in the case of the fighting troops, it was no use pretending that men
who had only done their initial recruit training were fit to go out and fight
the Japanese, and continuation training was recognized to be essential.
corollary of this, as applied to the R.I.A.S.C., was that companies could
not be expected to carry out an operational rôle satisfactorily until they
had been given an opportunity to become accustomed to their vehicles; and
it was agreed that no M.T. unit should be regarded as ready for an
operational rôle until it had had at least 50 per cent. of the vehicles with
which it was to be equipped for at least two months.
In addition, as more
companies became available and the strain lessened, a gradual process was
adopted of employing newly ready companies on administrative transport
duties in India, from which they graduated to L. of C. duties and thence
passed to operational rôles.
A cognate difficulty was experienced in respect of pack transport com-
panies intended for employment in Assam and Burma.
The necessity for
hardening pack animals' backs before they were employed on active opera-
tions was not at first given sufficient weight in India.
The urgent require-
ment for pack transport companies resulted in units going forward as soon
as the men, animals, and saddlery had been assembled, with eventually it
a brief period for fitting saddlery and hardening backs.
Eventually
had to be made clear to the Staff that no animal transport company could
be considered fit for an active operational rôle until it had had
animals and men, and the necessary saddlery, for a minimum of two months;
and this view thereafter prevailed as the basis of calculation of the readiness
for service of a unit of this type.
Pack Transport
The R.I.A.S.C. Pack Transport Companies
consisted of four troops of
88 working animals each.
They had two British officers, and six V.C.Os.
The O.C. was, until 1944, only a captain, in spite of the very arduous and
important nature of his duties and those of his
In opposition to
the upgrading of the appointment to major's rank, in line with the officer
commanding an M.T. company, the argument was advanced that the value
of the animals was not comparable with that of the vehicles.
overdue reform was at last achieved.
The history of the R.I.A.S.C. pack transport contingent which proceeded
to join the B.E.F. in December, 1939, is recounted in Chapters IV and
Originally, all pack transport companies, R.I.A.S.C., consisted of mules,
the most satisfactory
type of animal for
the work in all
Unfortunately, the supply of these animals was extremely
limited, partly owing to the closing of one principal source of supply (China),
and partly owing to the diminution of breeding in all former supplying
countries, due to the increase of mechanization and the reduced demand
for pack animals for military purposes.
The greatest difficulty was therefore
experienced in maintaining supply. It was in fact inadequate, and had to
be supplemented by two other types of animal, neither of which was a
completely satisfactory substitute: the Indian pony, and the South African
The Indian pony is a rather weedy and temperamental
hard to keep in condition, and lacking endurance and
The
South African donkey is hardier than the pony, but slower than the mule,
and has the defect, from the point of view of jungle warfare, of preferring
to be herded in droves rather than led in strings.
The provision of saddlery
for these donkeys presented difficulties.
Their large heads required extra
big horses headcollars; and the problem of a saddle was ultimately solved
by using the standard Indian pack saddle with the girths fastened, one in
front of the belly and the other behind it (instead of crossed
as normally)
in order to keep the saddle from slipping forward and causing wither and
girth galls.
A strap linked the girths under the belly, the whole arrangement
being that in fact sometimes known as a donkey girth.
The shortage of supply of pack animals was made worse by the un-
satisfactory nature of the treatment which they received in the forward
area, and of the remount arrangements.
The latter were organized on the
normal Indian Army system, over which the S. and T. Directorate exercised
no control, although it was the biggest user.
Under that system, all re-
mounts on receipt from sources of supply went into Remount Depots, from
which those allotted to meet R. I.A.S.C. requirements in India were issued
to Animal Transport Training Centres.
There they received as much train-
ing and conditioning as possible in the time available, and
were then
passed on to newly raised
pack transport companies or sent up as rein-
forcements.
Animals which remained in Remount Depots also underwent
a limited amount of hardening.
Then, however, all animals sent forward
as reinforcements, as distinct from those which went up as part of units,
went to Advanced Remount Depots in the operational areas,
often in
charge of improvised parties, and taking weeks on the journey. At A.R.Ds.
there was insufficient staff to enable the animals to be hardened, and they
were consequently issued to units in soft condition and without fitted saddlery.
As a rule they had to be taken into immediate unit use with hastily fitted
saddlery, and the animals thus
quickly got sore backs.
They were then
evacuated to veterinary hospitals, which treated them as far as they were
able; but, owing to the shortage, and operational demands, they often had
to be sent out
with their sores not properly healed, and worked in that
condition, which was of course a vicious circle.
It seems at least probable that much of this trouble could have been
avoided if the old Army Service Corps organization of horse transport days
had been employed.
In this, Base and Advanced Horse Transport Depots
were established with adjacent accommodation for driver reinforcement
personnel, who were used to look after the animals in the depots, and to
keep them fit; and replacements went forward as complete turnouts, i.e., a
driver in charge of a pair of horses with fitted saddlery.
There can be
little doubt that this system could have been adapted with advantage to the
supply of animals to Fourteenth Army.
Something of the sort was eventually
organized at the beginning of 1945, but there was still no co-ordination
of personnel and animal reinforcements.
WO 277/21
27
