Fuel for U.S. Forces
The War Office assumed responsibility
for meeting all fuel require-
ments of the United States forces in the
United Kingdom.
U.S. units
demanded from Officers i/c Barracks in the same way as British units.
The U.S. Army authorities agreed to try and work to the British scales of
fuel, although it was realized that, owing to the far greater standards of
heating which obtained in the U.S.A., it would be very difficult for the
Americans to keep
within
the scales,
especially
in the case of troops
coming from
the Southern and Western States.
The U.S. troops did not
at first take the
economy seriously.
Their requirements were initially
budgetted at 85 lb. a man a week.
Then they realized that they must
co-operate, and, in 1943, they came down to the British target figure, which
was a fine achievement on their part.
They appointed fuel technologists,
following our lead in this direction.
W.D. Accommodation for "Blitzed" Civilians
At the end of 1942, the Ministry of Health approached the War Office
with a view to the use of empty military accommodation,
particularly re-
quisitioned houses, for housing civilians rendered homeless as the result of
air raids.
The War Office agreed to make available for this purpose any suitable
W.D. premises,
including
requisitioned
buildings, which might be un-
occupied at the time.
The arrangement would be on a temporary loan basis.
The avenue of approach from the civil to the military authorities would be
by the local Senior Regional Officer to the "Q" Staff of commands, and
preliminary discussion was to take place so that the most practical machinery
might be set up for giving assistance in this way if and when required.
Any such loan of accommodation would be subject to military reoccupation
at short notice should this be urgently necessary.
No financial adjustment would be necessary, but schedules of condition
were to be agreed on entry and vacation (except in cases of too great urgency
and of a very temporary nature, when this might be done on vacation
only), in order that any damage might be charged for, and the troops
subsequently
occupying
the buildings duly protected.
Electric, gas and
water meters were to be read, so that any use during temporary occupation
might be paid for.
Receipts were to be obtained for any fuel left by the
Army.
Should it be necessary for any accommodation stores to be lent,
arrangements to this effect were to be made between the Officer i/c Barracks
and the S.R.O., but no food stocks were to be handed over.
Other accom-
modation stores left on the premises were to be locked up in a room.
SECTION 7.-CATERING
Pre-War Reforms
The Honorary Catering Adviser to the Army, working under D.S.T's.
sponsorship, produced in 1938 a report on catering in the Army as
found it, the main criticism being that the standard had not kept pace with
developments, both in skill and equipment. which were continuous in civil
282
Life,
and that the Army had failed to realize the fundamental fact that
cooking is a highly skilled craft requiring employment of carefully selected
personnel who had been scientifically trained.
of a new
The reforms which were a result of this report included the building
Cookery Training Centre at Aldershot, and the remodelling and
re-equipping of Army cookhouses generally, and involved a capital expendi-
ture of over £1
million.
standard of cooking and messing.
The modernization of cookhouses improved the
by the employment of civilian chef instructors.
The system of training was reorganized
opportunities of promotion were given to Army cooks, and there
Better remuneration and
was an
duction of the supper meal.
increase in the establishment of cooks in units in consequence of the intro-
The introduction of the Militia involved a huge expansion of cook-
houses and dining-room accommodation.
It also entailed the provision
of a large quantity of modern cookhouse equipment, to obtain which it was
necessary to go outside the normal patterns specified under War Office
contracts.
It also became necessary to employ civilian cooks for the initial
stages of intake into the Militia, which created a difficult problem, because
good cooks would not leave their regular employment.
Cooks of the Territorial Army presented a special problem before the
war, owing to the fact that there was no scheme for training personnel as
cooks before the annual camps, and the cooking at these camps was therefore
carried out by inexperienced personnel.
Developments after the Outbreak of War
As there had been no Catering Branch at the War Office before the war,
but only an inspectorate controlled by the Supplies
Branch (Q.M.G. 6)
of the S.T. Directorate, there were no set plans for dealing with the problems
of enlistment, training, upgrading and posting of catering personnel.
These
problems were tackled as they arose during the war.
Special aspects of
these were:
(a) The training, refreshing and upgrading of cooks in the B.E.F.
(b) The procuring and training of cooks for the forces at home.
(c) The procuring and training of a proportion of the periodical intakes
under the National Service Act, for duty as cooks.
(d) The
provision of cooks for the Air Defence of Great Britain
organization.
In the B.E.F., the need was for men who could cook for a platoon, or
the equivalent, with improvised apparatus under field conditions.
Eventually
three field cookery training centres were sent out; but, until this was done,
and a Catering Inspectorate had been sent out to the L. of C., the B.E.F.
had to depend on its own resources.
The procurement of cooks for units at home was difficult, as trained
cooks just did not exist.
The complement of cooks on a unit's establish-
ment were men, but not trained cooks.
There were only a few men who had
registered as cooks, and these were posted to field units, often without
military training, and began work at once.
Field units had priority of the
output trom cookery training establishments.
Before the formation of the
Army Catering Corps, the olicer commanding a unit tried to obtain his full
283
WO 277/21
27
