time worked, and the materials used.
The necessary stores, spare parts, or
special tools, required for the repair of a vehicle were drawn from the unit
stores on a requisition form, and a signature was obtained.
In peace-time, the stores, etc., were accounted for in a ledger; but this
was modified in war-time, and the only accounting was carried out on bin
cards, showing receipts, issues and
remains.
These were kept in the unit
workshop office under lock and key, and were not accessible to the personnel
employed in the stores.
At the outbreak of war in September, 1939, the heavy responsibility
for mobilizing R.A.S.C. units fell
upon Os.C., R.A.S.C.
This was very
unsatisfactory, since many of the officers filling that appointment were posted
away to fill appointments elsewhere, and the new incumbents had not only
to carry out this particular task, but also to administer the R.A.S.C.
in conditions already sufficiently difficult.
With the rapid expansion of the R.A.S.C., it soon became evident that
this arrangement was totally unsuitable and inadequate.
proposed the formation of a mobilization centre to control the mobilization
of R.A.S.C. units, which was a new departure and without precedent.
The first R.A.S.C. Mobilization Control Centre, as it was at first called,
was accordingly set up at Ramsgate on 30th November, 1939.
establishment was laid down, but the commander had verbal authority to
engage civilian clerks, and to employ other rank personnel from the original
intake which began to arrive from all over the country.
Six weeks later,
some 20 R.A.S.C. units were in process of formation and mobilization simul-
taneously. A second Mobilization Centre was formed in January, 1940, and
The functions of a Mobilization Centre were eventually laid down in
(a) To supervise the mobilization of all units mobilizing in the centre,
and to ensure that they are complete in all respects by the dates
given for the completion of mobilization.
(b) To train instructors for all units in the centre.
(c) To supervise the formation and collective training of new and con-
verted units, and to supervise individual training in units.
(d) To report to the War Office when units now mobilized are fit to
move out of the centre; this should be not later than three months
(e) To supervise the training of cooks in emergency cookery training
centres, where provided.
(1) To supervise the disbandment of units ordered to disband under the
control of mobilization centre.
The above sufficiently describes the work performed by these centres.
They proved particularly useful after the evacuation of the B.E.F. from
who came back.
France, in organizing and re-equipping the ASC, units and personnel
They were organized in the following sub-units: -
(a) Depot company, to provide for the administration of all ranks
employed at the headquarters of the mobilization centre,
act as a holding unit for trained R.A.S.C. personnel, to the number
nominally of 200 trained R.A.S.C. personnel.
(b) Holding company, to act as holding unit for nominally 200 trained
R.A.S.C. personnel; actually, the numbers held in these companies
averaged between 750 and 1,000 men.
(c) Workshops, to maintain all vehicles held by the headquarters
the centre; to give technical advice to workshops in units forming
and mobilizing in the centre; and to carry out any trade tests
required by units in the centre.
The vehicles of units
mobilizing
were thoroughly inspected
C.I.M.T./C.I.T.S. branch before they left the centre, in order to
that they were in a fit condition for active service.
The centres were War Office controlled units, and came under the control
of A.G.8, the Adjutant-General's branch dealing with the R.A.S.C.
R.A.S.C. of Reserve Divisions
It was decided in December, 1942, to establish four reserve divisions in
the United Kingdom, whose function was to hold personnel whose training
was being completed for drafting overseas.
The Order of Battle of a reserve division included
two Composite
platoons, one ammunition platoon, one
composite platoon, three R.D.Is.,
and a workshop platoon.
A C.R.A.S.C., with a small staff, was appointed to the headquarters of
the division to command these two companies, as the latters' function was
the training and man-management of about 1,000 raw troops.
also administrative duties in connection with the preparation of the men for
drafting. The appointment of a C.R.A.S.C. was therefore considered justified.
Functions of the Composite Companies
The companies had no local operational or administrative commitment.
The divisions were based on C.S.Ds. for supplies, and normally unit first
line transport was used for drawing rations. The employment of the transport
element of the composite companies on local services was intended to be
exceptional rather than habitual, and then with the object of giving drivers
experience with laden vehicles.
Disposal of Trained Personnel
Personnel, who had completed training in the reserve divisional R.A.S.C.
Were withdrawn for three purposes, i.e., drafting overseas; to meet wastage
in units which had completed mobilization; and to build up new units
forming in mobilization centres.
For drafting overseas, complete transport
WO 277/21
27
