and protective screens, but that particular measures were essential for their
security.
The basic principles adopted in this theatre for their organization
and control with this object in view were: —
(a) That each formation should have a secure administrative base and
a rear harbour area.
The administrative base contained the
ammunition, supplies, stores, and transport, that comprised the day
to day needs of the formation, and a reserve.
Dumps tended to
grow, and owing to the scarcity of transport they often could not be
moved when operations became mobile.
Unless there was close
"Q" Staff, R.A., and the services over this
matter of supply and ammunition dumps, serious losses of rations
and ammunition followed.
The rear harbour area was sited well
back, about a day's journey by M.T., and contained the transport,
baggage, and stores, not required in the forward area while the
formation was in action.
(b) That no administrative unit or installation should be left isolated.
(c) That one strong administrative base was preferable to several weak
ones; only insuperable difficulties of ground were allowed as an
excuse for violation of this principle.
(d) That the rear harbour area should be so far back that no additional
troops were required for its protection.
The commander of the administrative base was responsible, amongst
his other duties, for the arrangements for the control, timing, and security
of convoys running between the administrative base and the forward areas.
The protection of administrative bases (known in the unofficial military
idiom of the theatre as " administrative, or admin, boxes"), relatively large
areas which had to be held by comparatively few troops, required certain
modifications of the normal defensive lay-out. A perimeter had to be held
in order to prevent the enemy from close observation of the area.
held partly by the administrative units themselves, who were responsible
for their own defence and for the defence of the sector of the perimeter
within their area, and partly by additional troops specially allotted to the
Throughout the operations in Arakan and Assam, it was repeatedly
shown that every man fighting in enemy-infested jungle should be armed
There was no room for non-combatants.
Many formations armed their Indian followers (cooks, sweepers,
men, etc.) many of whom became keen marksmen instead of being a use-
less, defenceless rabble that huddled together whenever the enemy infiltrated
through our front.
The Battle of the " Admin Box"
These arrangements were very highly tested during the Japanese offen-
1944, particularly in Arakan.
Division became responsible for the operations on that front. Its immediate
task was that of covering the concentration of 15 Corps.
This involved
first one brigade and then two being maintained o the east side of the
Goppe Pass, with the usual difficulties.
Besides this, the work of building
up the stocks of ammunition and supplies that were to be held forward on
both sides of the Mavu Range began at once The two tasks together entailed
62
continuous hard work for the pack transport, and the importance of good
animal management became very apparent.
The same three Army pack
transport companies which were used to supplement the divisional companies
had now been a long time in Arakan without relief, and were under strength
The division gradually advanced, and by December, 1943, it was possible
to switch from the Goppe Pass-
-Taung Bazar route to the Bawli Bazar-
Maungdaw motor road, and thence over the range by the Ngakyedauk Pass,
which was improved to a standard capable of taking loaded 5-ton lorries.
This of course eased the transport task very considerably.
On 4th February, the Japanese launched their offensive, and cut in behind
In the past, whenever they had done this, our forces had fallen
back and fought a battle at the point where the line of communication had
been cut, in order to re-establish it. If the enemy could then repeat the
manoeuvre farther back, our troops would fall back again. In this way, the
Japanese had evolved a technique of forcing us to retreat.
The new British policy was that, if troops were cut off in this
way, they were to stay where they were, and they would be maintained by air.
7 Division accordingly now stood firm, and fought where it was. Morale was
The enemy column trying to force the Goppe Pass ran into a
mule company, which stood its ground and fought so well that the Japanese
drew off, and took another route.
The administrative units of the division in
the " Admin Box"
', as the divisional administrative area became known to the
world, defended their perimeter sectors as infantry, and nightly took part in
The battle of the " Admin Box" lasted 17 days, and was
a very bitter struggle, with the Japanese attacking incessantly without success.
On 24th February, 15 Corps reopened the line of communication, and the
Japanese, disappointed of the British supplies which they had counted on
capturing, and without rations for ten days, broke and began to withdraw.
Their force was practically annihilated. It was the first great encounter with
the Japanese which the British and Empire troops had won.
made possible by air supply.
In anticipation of the offensive, ten days'
rations for 40,000 men had been accumulated near the airfields, and the
necessary aircraft were somehow made available.
stores were dropped during the siege, and the new policy had completely
Assam and North Burma, 1944
In spite of their lesson in Arakan, the Japanese persisted in adopting the
same technique against 4 Corps on the Imphal front, when they launched
their offensive there, at the beginning of March, 1944.
road, but not the Tamu road; they cut the Kohima-Imphal road early in
April, and advanced on Kohima, as a preliminary to the capture of Dimapur.
Our strategy was to fight in the Imphal plain, and 17 Division consequently
began to withdraw from Tiddim, reaching Imphal with most of its transport
three weeks later after fighting all the way.
The three months' reserve of
supplies, etc., laboriously built up at Tiddim, had to be destroyed. Through-
out its retreat the division was supplied by air.
we
+98717
WO 277/21
27
