APPENDIX VIIB
(See Vol. I, pages 31 and 101)
RESPONSIBILITIES REGARDING WATERBORNE CRAFT
(Directive issued by War Office, June, 1944)
1. Introduction
It is necessary, as a wartime measure, to lay down a dividing line between
the functions of the Directorate of Transportation and the Directorate of
Supplies and Transport as regards the provision, manning, operation and
maintenance of waterborne craft.
This differentiation provides a guide as to
whether any special unit formed to meet military requirements should be
manned by R.E. or R.A.S.C., as an indication of the division of responsibility
for operational theatres in the future.
In all theatres, the closest co-operation
will be maintained between the two services, in order that the maximum value
may
be obtained from all the craft, personnel, repair and
maintenance
facilities available.
2. General Responsibilities
The general principles on which the organization and responsibilities of
the Directorates of Transportation and of Supplies and Transport should be
based are as follows:
(a) Directorate of Transportation-for the
provision,
manning,
operation of craft forming an integral part of bulk movement on
the L. of C. of the Army, including such craft as are necessary for
the construction, working and repair of ports of loading and
discharge.
(b) Directorate of Supplies and Transport-for the provision, manning,
and operation of such waterborne craft as are required for, and
whose normal use is intercommunication,
distributive movement
of personnel and material, such as the daily maintenance of a
formation.
Conditions peculiar to a particular theatre, or considerations leading a
theatre commander to vary application of these principles,
arise, but
they will, when practicable, be applied.
3. Provision, Manning, and Operation
To full the general responsibilities set out in paragraph 2 above, the
responsibility for provision, manning, and operation, of all craft will be as
(a) The Directorate of Transportation will be responsible for:-
i Tugs.
(ii) Dumb and self-propelled barges and lighters, except special
craft for the carriage of bulk petroleum.
(ii) Pontoons and special ferries, e.g., the Rhine Ferry.
408
(iv) Floating cranes and other floating equipment used for port
operation.
(v) Craft required in connection with construction and repair of
ports and inland waterways.
(vi) Coastal craft when used for bulk delivery on Army lines of
communication.
(b) The Directorate of Supplies and Transport will be responsible for
the R.A.S.C. Static Water Transport Services, and in addition: —
(i) Launches, including target towing launches.
(ii) Cabin
cruisers.
(iri) Pull
boats.
(iv) Drifters, M.F. Vs., schooners, and small coasters.
(v) Radio-controlled targets.
(vi) Fire boats and floats.
(vii) Dumb and self-propelled barges or lighters, and small tankers
for the carriage of bulk petroleum products.
(viti) Small coasters when used for distribution purposes.
(c) R.A.S.C. craft operating in ports or inland waterways will come
under
the
co-ordinating
control of Transportation
authority responsible in those areas.
(d) In cases where Transportation or S. and T. units require, as part
of their unit equipment, ancillary craft of types which are normally
the responsibility of the other service, the latter service will be
responsible for provision of craft and supply of spare parts, but
not for manning or operation.
Where Transportation or S.
and T. units temporarily require craft which are the responsibility
of the other service, such craft will be issued on loan to the unit
requiring them.
(e) Amphibious vehicles, though they may be used for ship discharge
as lighters, will be provided, manned and operated under arrange-
ments made by the Directorate of S. and T., though they will,
when so employed, be under the
co-ordinating control of the
authority responsible for the work of the beach or port.
4. Maintenance and Supply of Spare Parts and Stores
Responsibility for the maintenance of craft of both services, and supply
of ships' stores and spare parts, will be as follows: -
(A) Maintenance.
(a) Transportation and S. and T. units are responsible for the
maintenance and repair of their own vessels, but where
repair facilities are limited it will be necessary to pool
all resources of both services; sometimes in conjunction
with the Royal Navy and Ministry of War Transport.
(b) It will be the responsibility of R.E.M.E. to repair petrol
and high-speed diesel engines of Transportation and S.
and T. units, when these can be removed from vessels to
R.E.M.E.
workshops.
409
7
WO 277/21
27
