Generally speaking,
supplies and petrol were provided
throughout the operations.
without fail
SECTION 3.—RETREAT FROM BURMA
Topography of Assam and Burma
The scene of the operations which form the subject of the next three
parts of this chapter was set in Eastern Assam and Burma.
The nature of
the terrain of those areas had so much influence on the operations,
and
particularly on the transport aspect of them, that some account of it is
necessary to the history.
It is important that the reader should constantly bear in mind the great
distances involved, and the inadequacy of communications.
Island in the south-west to Fort Hertz in the north-east is nearly 600 miles
as the crow flies, and from Dimapur in the north to Rangoon in the south is
600 miles; but by land route it is about 1,000 miles in each case.
7 Indian Division moved from Bawli Bazar in Arakan to Manipur Road
(Dimapur) in Assam, the journey, a " peace" move following the grain of the
country over roads improved and developed by our forces, took nine days,
including a day's halt, for a distance of about 500 miles.
Brigadier Wingate's "Chindits" marched 140 miles between the rivers
Chindwin and Irrawaddy, an operation which included some fighting and
took about five weeks; the move was across the grain of the country, with its
succession of jungle-covered ranges and rivers.
In this theatre of operations, the problems of distance and terrain were
eventually overcome on our part by the use of air transport on a very large
scale, which perhaps more than anything else contributed to the ultimate
defeat of the Japanese in Burma.
Eastern Assam comprises,
from north to south, the Naga Hills with
Kohima as the administrative centre, Manipur State with its capital Imphal,
and the Chin Hills.
Between the Brahmaputra valley in the north-west and
the River Chindwin in the east, is a wide mountainous belt rising in places
to 13,000 feet.
Imphal lies in a large plain, about 40 miles from north to
south and 20 miles wide, surrounded by
In the wet season (the
monsoon, from May to September) most of this plain becomes a swamp, but
for the rest of the year it is possible to move anywhere.
West of the Imphal
road for most of its length from Kohima southwards, the hills are high, and
form a natural barrier to military operations.
is lower and more open.
East of the road, the country
It is the scale of this country that is most remarkable. The hills are large,
the valleys deep, and most of the hills are covered with dense jungle.
these operations, vehicles, even tracked. were rarely able to move off a road
until engineer work had been carried out.
movement over any distance away from the toad called for mule or porte
Until jeep tracks could be made.
transport, and all movement off the roads was extremale anand laborious
38
North Burma is formed by the basins of the Irrawaddy and its tributary
To the west are the Chin Hills and the Naga Hills; to the
north, in the Myitkyina district, lies a great mountainous region; and to the
east rise the mountains forming the water shed between the Irrawaddy and
North Burma is an area of difficult densely wooded country,
which had scarcely any roads at that time; it consists of jungle-covered
mountain ranges, running from north to south, with swift rivers flowing
through deep ravines between them.
The valleys sometimes open out into
broad, well-watered plains, from which low hills occasionally rise.
To the south of this area lies the dry zone of Burma, which below Shwebo
and Mandalay, becomes an expanse of arid, sterile country, sparsely covered
Here conditions more nearly resembled those experi-
enced in warfare in open country, and animal transport ceased to be necessary.
East of the Irrawaddy from below its junction with the Chindwin to Tharra-
waddy, and west of the Mandalay-Rangoon road, lies the Pegu Yoma range,
up to 3,000 feet high.
South Burma, or Tenasserim, the coastal strip running from the Lower
Salween down the west side of the Malay Peninsula, is damp jungle country.
The area in which the Arakan campaign was fought comprised from east
to west (a) the Kaladan River valley; (b) the Arakan Yoma (Hills); (c) the
Mayu River Valley, which, in its upper reaches, is known as the Kalapanzin
River; (d) the Mayu range, running down the Donbaik Peninsula; and (e) the
Naf River valley and Teknaf Peninsula, beyond which is the Bay of Bengal.
All these features run north-west and south-east.
this area are intersected by numerous chaungs, or streams, and are covered
" paddy" (rice) fields.
During the dry weather, these valleys were
passable to wheels or tracks almost everywhere if the low banks of packed
earth round the small paddy fields were flattened with a spade; but engineer
help was often necessary when a chaung had to be crossed.
which were exceptionally heavy here, the valleys were impassable to wheels
or tracks, the chaungs become broader, and for this reason, and because they
are fringed with mangrove swamps and bounded by muddy banks, movement
was reduced to the speed of ferrying across them.
The hills are a succession
of innumerable steep ridges, many of them razor-backed and covered with
Communications in Burma and
Assam
The lie of the land of Burma runs north and south, and the communica-
tions naturally followed the same direction.
In their lower reaches, the water-
ways were normally the country's chief means of transport, and in peace-time
steamers ran regularly to Bhamo on the Irrawaddy, and other services plied
up the Chindwin to Homalin.
A railway ran up the middle of the country from Rangoon, the seat of
Government and principal port, to Mandalay, from which point three branches
Lashio, Myitkyina, and Ye-u, respectively.
nected Rangoon with Bassein and Prone, and a third with South Burma.
One motor road ran alongside the railway, and another up the left bank
Rangoon to Mandalay in each case; while a third
39
WO 277/21
27
