S. and T. Organization at Army Level
As a result of the predominance of air supply, Army roadhead was, in
fact, generally Army airhead.
This difiered from the orthodox Army road.
feed of other theatres, in that stocks of supplies and P.O.L. were not normally
held there for corps and divisions forward.
The number of Army troops
was always large and the units reasonably concentrated, and stocks of seven
to ten days were held for them under direct Army control in depots in the
Army had a supply company of four platoons directly under command as
Army troops, which held Army P.O.L. stocks as well as supplies.
also had the necessary field bakery units, and a local purchase organization.
Maintenance System Forward
Under the normal system for ground supply, the stores, etc., for field
formations were moved up from railhead by general transport companies to
the L. of C. terminal under A.L.F.S.E.A. arrangements.
port was supposed to deliver to Corps Field Maintenance Areas, from which
second line transport drew; but in fact, there were many instances when it
was necessary for L. of C. companies to deliver direct to corps F.M.As. The
difficult country, deficiency of communications, and shortage of suitable
ground for off-loading, made it necessary to push the L. of C. transport as
Thus when the leading troops of Fourteenth Army
were at Mandalay, L. of C. transport was operating
(Dimapur) to just behind the leading formations, a distance of about 450
miles.
The basic allotment of M.T. companies to formations, as set out above,
was designed to lift second line requirements 50 miles from roadhead main-
tenance areas to corps F.M.As., and 35 miles from the latter to corps or
divisional administrative areas.
met by the additional allotment of General Transport Companies to Army
from the A.L.F.S.E.A. pool.
Corps F.M.As.
Throughout the advance,
Corps F.M.As. were
There were periods when it was practicable for divisions to draw
on these stocks using their own second line transport. In general, however,
it was found that such occasions were confined either to periods of consolida-
tion or of concentration for a major battle; e.g., during the fighting for
Meiktila, when 4 Corps was suitably concentrated to receive air-landed
maintenance into one common maintenance area.
At other times, direct
supply to divisions was looked upon as quite normal. Corps then continued
to maintain their own F.M. As., holding stocks of three or four days for corps
One of the great administrative difficulties throughout the campaign was
the endeavour to avoid the abandonment of unconsumed maintenance behind
the advance In the case of cords F.M. As.. it wae usuallu nossible to employ
the normal "leap frog" method of eating down an existing FM.A while a
94
new one was in process of being established. In the case of divisional dumps,
however, the necessary notice could not always be given, and divisions were
then obliged to abandon stocks which they could not carry forward.
and sometimes Army, had then to absorb such stocks as best they could.
Corps,
Divisional A.S.C.
In the earlier stages of Operation " Capital", it was the practice, based
on the experience of 7 Division and the " Admin Box" episode, to concen-
trate all divisional administrative units into one confined area, for purposes of
defence, mutual protection, and ease of control.
When this happened, the
movement of divisional second line transport was to some extent dictated by
the commander of the divisional administrative area (or group). Once the
battle fanned out from the Chindwin and Irrawaddy bridgeheads, freedom of
control of their commands did not leave the hands of the Cs.R.A.S.C./
R.I.A.S.C.; in any case, they never lost the initiative in this respect, and
whenever immediate control of their commands was denied them, it was a
matter of expediency for mutual benefit.
Where concentration in D.A.A. was in force, replenishment was effected
transfer in the area.
Otherwise the normal system of
replenishment of supplies, ammunition, and P.O.L., applied within divisions,
i.e., through supply, ammunition and petrol points; but this was subject to
variation if the formation was on air supply, according to the method in use.
When divisions were receiving air-dropped or air-landed maintenance direct,
it was often more practicable to form dumps near the landing strip or drop-
ping zone, from which units drew their requirements.
Direct delivery to units
by second line transport was also often carried out, thus providing employ-
ment for the transport which might otherwise have remained relatively idle.
The normal method of employment of divisional second line transport
With the varied assortment of transport in the " Standard"
divisions, 3-ton and 30-cwt. lorries, jeeps or 15-cwt. trucks, and animal trans-
port, and with varying methods of maintenance, sometimes from Corps
F.M.A., sometimes by direct air supply, flexibility was of prime importance.
In this respect, as indeed in regard to the employment and disposition of
S. and T. units generally, large scale improvisations with little regard for
orthodox methods were the rule rather than the exception throughout the
campaign, which was conducted on the basis of making the best use of avail-
able resources which were often dangerously limited.
Animal Transport
Practically every form of animal transport was used in this campaign
except camels.
Elephants hauled timber and built bridges, helped in the
construction of airfields, carried stores, evacuated casualties, and performed
shunting duties in rail-served P.O.L. depots where there would have been a
A buffalo cart company worked on the L. of C. Pack bullocks
were used by the West Africans, as already noted.
The most valuable animal of all was the pack mule, which was indispens-
Unfortunately, the standard of animal management among the arms
was not always as hish as it should have been, since many units had only
95
H 2
(37477)
1987/17
WO 277/21
27
