The order contained the following principal clauses: —
1. The Q.M.G., through his branch of the Staff, is responsible for the
co-ordination of the use of all load-carrying transport, when it is not
required for operational and training purposes.
2. The Staff is responsible for:
(a) The allotment, in consultation with the senior S. and T. officer
concerned,
formations, and the issue of orders for the move of such units.
(b) Defining in general terms to the senior S. and T. officer the
tasks to be carried out and their relative priorities.
3. The control of road transport is a function of the D.S.T., and
of his representatives at lower formation
They are responsible
for deciding the means of carrying out tasks, the amount and type
of transport required, the method of performance, and the units, etc.,
to be used, and for the general control of the operation.
The channel
of communication in regard to these matters in static formations will be
through S. and T. channels, i.e., D.S.T.-B.R.I.A.S.C.-C.R.I.A.S.C.,
etc., -S.T.O.
Instructions were also included for the placing at the disposal of S.T.Os.
of all unit first line, and in the case of Army Service Corps units second
and third line, load-carrying vehicles, under the same conditions as were
then in force in the United Kingdom (see Chapter XII, Section 2); and it
was laid down that orders issued by the S.T.O. or other co-ordinating officer
for duties to be performed by such transport placed at his disposal would
carry the weight of orders issued by the commander concerned.
These regulations resulted in a much more satisfactory state of affairs
in the administration of transport in India, and helped to introduce the idea
that there was no point in the Staff doing all the work when there was a S.
and T. Directorate.
Indeed latterly the barriers between the Staff and the
Services were largely broken down.
measure due to the fact that there was a considerable number of R.A.S.C.
and R.I.A.S.C. officers on the staff, showing that it was realized that the
training and experience of the officers of these corps fitted them for planning
and for accepting responsibility in important administrative matters.
At the same time as the above-quoted regulations were promulgated, steps®
were taken to initiate a Transport Office system throughout India on the lines
of the R.A.S.C. organization.
The enormous distances between military stations in India, and the
comparatively few and poor roads, made it impracticable to employ in
that country such methods for economy of transport as the return loads
scheme;
but, where it was possible, training convoys carried considerable
quantities of goods for other government departments, thus relieving con-
gestion on the railways and expediting the movement of essential raw materials.
timber for railway sleepers from areas where no civilian
available.
transport was
Expansion of the R.I.A.S.C.
The expansion of the R.I.A.S.C. was enormous.
Before the war, the
Corps was responsible for maintaining an army of less than 250,000, and
units then bought a large part of their rations.
There were, therefore, few
supply units, and nearly all of the 1,500 such units which existed in August
1945, had been raised during the war years.
The animal transport com-
panies increased from 44 to 148, and the M.T. units from 49 to over 700.
In addition,
the R.I.A.S.C. was called upon to build up
an air despatch
organization,
to operate a P.O.L. distribution system which was the
most
lengthy of any theatre of war, and to drive in
various theatres all the
different types of transport vehicle employed in the British Army.
process of expansion was not made any easier by the differences
of language and the backward character of the personnel to be trained.
This was particularly marked in the case of the mechanical transport.
the beginning of the war, the regular cadres of the M.T. companies con-
sisted of men from the north of India, of a very good type.
calls on this class of recruit, however, made it necessary for the R.I.A.S.C.
to go farther afield, and the resources of Southern India were exploited.
only were a larger proportion of these recruits of non-martial classes, but
they spoke languages completely unknown to the Northern Indian, and the
existing Viceroy Commission Officers, and the N.C.Os., from the North, were
therefore severely handicapped in dealing
difficult to find officers who understood these men and their languages.
was therefore necessary to teach the recruits Urdu, the common language
of the Indian Army, before they could be instructed in their duties.
as six distinct languages were often spoken in one unit.
In any case, whether in north or south, there were the greatest difficulties
to be overcome in training as drivers men who came straight from villages,
where they had scarcely even seen a motor vehicle, and who had no road
There was an appalling shortage of vehicles for training
purposes, and of instructors; and training was usually carried out by civilian
drivers of doubtful skill, on old cars and buses and lorries of every sort.
This would not perhaps have mattered
so much if continuation training
had subsequently been possible on service vehicles; but for many months
this was not so, and drivers were sent up as reinforcements,
operational units, who had never driven a service 3-ton lorry.
time, the period of training for drivers was only 14 weeks all told, so that
it will be appreciated that the standard of driving was low.
Drivers who were
so inexperienced that they could not change above second gear came up to
drive six-wheel Studebakers on the
dangerous and difficult Manipur road.
But there was nothing better available at the time.
Given a fair chance, the Indian driver was in fact very
well in such exacting tasks as the
"Aid to Russia" route in Persia, tank
transporter driving,
His weaknesses
was not adaptable, and required time to become accustomed to a new type
of vehicle, until he developed into a really experienced driver; and that he
" rusted" in the early stages, i.e., got out of practice if unemployed.
weaknesses were
often accentuated by impatience on
British personnel who had to deal with the Indian driver.
W02947
7
WO 277/21
27
