The inspectorate carried out its duties admirably, and it was considered
to be in no small measure due to its regular inspections that such a high
standard of accounting efficiency was achieved in the operation of the supply
depots at home.
The Rationing System-Peace-Time
Towards the end of 1938, the first steps were taken towards converting
the existing peace-system of rationing in the U.K.
to one more capable of
working in war conditions.
At that time the authority behind the system
lay in Allowance Regulations, and Army Order 65 of 1937.
These laid
down a basic scale (see Appendix IX), and a Messing Cash Allowance
of 3d., with an increase of 005d. a point rise above 100 in the Cost of
Living Index for foodstuffs, plus an additional element for supper in the
case of other ranks only.
The basic scale did not represent a ration which was actually issued
in kind, but was merely a standard on which to calculate the monetary
value of the ration.
This, together with the cash allowances, provided, in
the aggregate for a unit, the sum which might be expended by the unit
messing officer.
He was allowed to obtain whatever items of food he thought
fit without relation to the basic scales, provided he kept within the total
cash value admissible for the month.
This method had the advantages that it permitted complete freedom in
choice of foods, and that it furnished a faultless check on the consumption
of food in terms of money, and enabled a debit or credit balance to be
readily struck.
Of the items in the
basic scales, the R.A.S.C. were re-
sponsible for provision of bread,
flour,
meat, tea, sugar,
and salt,
while
N.A.A.F.I. were responsible for the supply of cheese, margarine and butter,
bacon and jam, potatoes and vegetables, and all other items included in the
soldier's diet.
The cash values of these items and the amount of the Messing Cash
Allowance were published monthly.
The value of the R.A.S.C. issue was
calculated on S.R.D. or other contract prices, and that of the commuted
cash allowance (i.e., N.A.A.F.I. items) on the wholesale N.A.A.F.I. prices.
The
cash allowance is. cash allowance was increased by eight per cent. and.
19 per cent. for units with a messing strength of 50 to 100, and under 50,
respectively; these increases were designed to mitigate the inevitably heavier
wastage involved in preparation and cooking in smaller units.
Items of R.A.S.C. issue and provision were drawn in quantities
con"
venient to the unit.
These were normally confined to tea, sugar, and salt;
preserved meat and biscuit were issued
only for purposes
of turnover.
Other R.A.S.C. it were rovided under War Office (e.., frozen meat)
or local (e.g., bread) contracts, and were often delivered direct
actually going through R.A.S.C. hands at all.
the O. i/c supplies paid periodic visits of inspection to
Where this was the case
supplies were up to standard.
ensure that the
from local N.A.A.F.I. messing stores.
The N.A.A.F.I. items were bought by units
A bill for the value was presented
to which the cash allowances due were credited.
to whi unit at the end of the month, and paid from a messing cash account
Thus the pre-war system permitted
scale within the total cash value of the basic ration.
a unit to devise
its
own ration
The R.A.S.C., though
234
charged with the responsibility for feeding the Army and R.A.F., had
degenerated into a mere " source of supply" from which units could drad
what they thought fit.
food values.
There was little knowledge, and no control, of
Refore the war, and in its early stages, the unit indented on O. i/c
Supplies for the quantities of the R.A.S.C. items required.
was a supply depot, the indents were scheduled on an issue sheet, and the
receipt of the unit representative was obtained as an interim acknowledg
ment.
At the end of the messing period, the O. i/c supplies obtained a
formal receipt for the total R.A.S.C. issues during the period on A.F. F 3179.
on which he also stated the current value of the commodities. This voucher
formed both an issue voucher in the supply account, and a receipt voucher
in the unit messing account.
Together with the N.A.A.F.I. bills, it provided
the paymaster with the requisite information as to the expenditure incurred
during the period against the value of the rations.
The entitlement
rations for the unit he checked against the number claimed in the
unit pay
and mess book.
N.A.A.F.I.—Its part in the rationing system
The picture of the organization for rationing the troops in the United
Kingdom before and during the war would not be complete without some
account of the situation arising from the fact of N.A.A.F.I. carrying out part
of the service.
This arrangement originated in the old system, obtaining before the First
World War, of regimental canteen contractors who supplied the troops with
all commodities apart from bread, meat, tea, sugar, and salt, which were
supplied by the A.S.C.
These gave way to the
Navy and Army Canteen
Board, which later became the N.A.A.F.I.
No doubt the system of the
N.A.A.F.I. providing part of the ration continued because it was more
economical both financially and in personnel, and avoided the necessity
for holding considerable stocks of various commodities, besides the attendant
risk of loss in perishable items.
Also the rebate on messing expenditure
provided a fund for amenities for the troops.
This system was, before the outbreak of war in September, 1939, working
satisfactorily from the point of view of the unit, which was able to obtain
a considerable
variety
of items from N.A.A.F.I., and from that of the
financial authorities.
From the R.A.S.C. point of view, however, there were
a number of disadvantages, some of which are indicated below.
The syst is revanced she scope of the R.A.S.C. supply organization by
relieving it of the responsibility for buying, holding, and issuing, a numish-
of commodities.
This must have had the effect of reducing peace establish•
ments.
and consequently the number of the R.A.S.C. officers
and men
trained in supply duties in peace.
Moreover, a number of the N.A.A.F.I
items were perishables, requiring special knowledge in their handling and
storing, and R.A.S.C. personnel did not gain experience in this respect.
R.A.S.C. officer was also deprived of the valuable experience he might other-
wise have gained in making local purchases of food-stuffs, such as vegetables,
fish and offals.
This was a serious defect, as the work of local purchase and
the handling and issuas of those items supplied by the N.A.A.F.I. in the
United Kingdom, felon R.A.S.C. personnel as soon as they went overseas
235
WO 277
27
