Reference has already been made to the views expressed by the Mission
in regard to some aspects of the supply and transport organization and equip-
ment used by the Australians in that theatre.
The following brief descrip-
tion of the system of maintenance employed in New Guinea provides a back-
ground to the report of the Mission, and also gives some idea of the condi-
ions with which any force in the South-West Pacific theatre might be expected
to have to contend.
The country in which the Australians were operating was a succession of
ridges and ravines, covered with dense tropical vegetation.
one of extreme steamy heat, and almost continuous tropical rain.
The climate was
conditions were difficult and dangerous.
Flying
The Japanese landed in Papua in July, 1942, and advanced towards Port
Moresby.
The Australians stopped them short of that place, and drove them
back; and then began the long and difficult process of clearing New Guinea
of the enemy, which lasted until the end of the war. It consisted largely of a
series of operations along the north coast of the island.
Much of the success of the Australian operations in Papua was attribut-
able to the skill with which the available means of transport were developed,
thus making the troops independent of the roads and of M.T., on which too
much reliance had been placed in campaigns such as that in Malaya.
Distribution of supplies, etc., was normally carried out in four phases.
(a) Base to forward area.—Distribution was by air, road, or small boat.
The lack of roads, tracks and rivers often made the troops dependent on air
transport and air dropping; but the latter method was not a complete solution
to the supply problem, as, under the most favourable conditions, maximum
recovery was 90 per cent. of the supplies dropped, and the normal proportion
was from 40 per cent. to 70 per cent., depending upon the terrain, the extent
of the area over which the drop was made, and the nature of the article.
When air drop was being used, the dropping zone was manned by personnel
of a supply depot platoon which dealt with all A.S.C. items, while a brigade
ordnance warrant officer dealt with ammunition and ordnance and engineer
(b) Forward area to forward supply point.—Distribution was under
divisional or higher formation control.
Owing to the absence of roads, native
carriers were normally employed, working in stages, and carrying a load of
40-1b. apiece.
Brigade supply point was manned by the supply depot platoon
allotted to the brigade, and was invariably located close to brigade H.Q.,
which controlled it through the brigade A.S.C. officer.
Maintenance packs
of supplies and ammunition were made up here, bulk being broken as
necessary.
(c) Forward supply point to unit "@" echelon.—This stage was under
unit control, and carriers were allotted to the unit for carrying supplies, etc.,
lorward
(d) Unit "@" echelon to sub-units.—Unit "Q" echelon was established
far enough forward to allow parties from forward sub-units to collect and
distribute rations, etc., including hot meals when possible.
Troops were used
for carrying at this stage, as carriers could not be used forward of "Q"
echelon.
105
WO 277/21
27
