It was the
experience of the 1914-1918 war that,
given
maintenance and eficient inspection, it was unnecessary for any vehicle
which entered the war new to be evacuated for mechanical wear and tear
for four or five years.
(d) Composition and basis of the H.R.S.
The establishment of the H.R.S. was devised to serve a force of
4,000 lorry units, and based on a weekly output of 18 lorry units for
every 700 man hours for overhaul, at 50 hours a week.
The War
Establishment
was 12 officers and 318 other ranks, with provision for
increment of 34 other ranks for every
500 L.Us. additional.
Up to
eight increments could be added to the overheads of one H.R.S, then
another must be formed; i.e., the maximum commitment was 8,000 LUS.
which was about the figure for the original R.A.S.C. element of the
B.E.F.).
This basis legislated for warfare, on the whole mobile and
active, and its provisions were not therefore entirely applicable to the
static conditions in France at that time.
Provision of repair facilities
in the United Kingdom had not yet been inaugurated, but would afford
relief to the H.R.S.
But 100 per cent.
of repairs could never be sent
home, because of (a) the shipping question, and (b) the time taken to
notify, ship, repair, reissue and return.
It was impossible to increase the
reserve of fit vehicles, because the large total of reserve vehicles, which
was already essential, presented a serious problem in holding and admini-
stration.
There was at that time in France one H.R.S.,
for 14,800 L.Us., of
which about 13 per cent. were practically new vehicles.
It had been
postulated that a lorry would require complete overhaul after 41 year'
war service, and this figure was made the basis of the possible output
of the H.R.S., which works out at a weekly output of 4/9ths per cent.
of the lorries in a force.
2. As then operating in the B.E.F.
The system was in fact operating as intended, except that the number di
vehicles in service was far in excess of the normal load of a H.R.S.: but thi
was offset to some extent by the newness of the bulk of the vehicles, the
absence of active interference by the enemy,
and the acceptance by the
Ministry of Supply of responsibility for the repair of an unspecified per
centage of vehicle casualties.
The H.R.S. was concentrating on output y
overtake arrears (which had accumulated because it took about thre mot
1o get into appreciable production), and was therefore replacing rate lig
overhauling.
disposal.
Companies were making an effective use of the plan a lit
3.
Difficulties encountered or anticipated
increment and 2nd Contingent.
(b) Temporary shortage of unit repair facilities, in case of units alt
(a) Great dispersion of L. of C. and base establishments.
considerably mitigated by the rectification of the second.
The first of these was unavoidable for tactical reasons. and would?
392
The second was traceable to two causes, e.g.,
(i) The shortage of machinery and machine tools for workshop lorries.
The expansion of the B.E.F. took place too late to enable orders
placed for the necessary machinery to be executed as quickly as
the new units had to mobilize.
Lathes had to be
got from
America, a machine was promised 12 months from the date of
the order, and so on.
(ii) Given the machinery, there were not at that time the artificers to
operate it and to carry out repairs with the hand tools available.
The workshop lorry situation was expected to be solved by
May, 1940, by quicker production.
The Ist Contingent had left
the United Kingdom with 100 per cent. workshop and artificer
equipment, the increment with 50 per cent., and the 2nd Contingent
was leaving with 33•3 per cent.
It was doubtful if the improve-
ment in the artificer situation would keep pace with that of the
workshop plant situation.
Fortunately,
the inactivity
of
the
Western Front was reducing the demands on the H.R.S., and the
newness of a large percentage of the vehicles helped.
On balance, the state of affairs, particularly on the L. of C.,
was not yet satisfactory.
4. Suggested Alterations to suit Special Conditions in B.E.F.
General principles were considered sound, but there was a possibility that
the shortage of plant and of men might make it advisable to install semi-
permanent workshops at certain focal points on the L. of C.
Local labour
might be obtainable, and if so, the release of artificers and workshop vehicles
to meet the needs of Army areas might be possible.
In the absence of local
labour, no such scheme could be contemplated until military labour was
forthcoming; and it was probable that this military artificer personnel would
lag behind the delivery dates of workshop plant on order.
5. Aspects of Repair peculiar to the R.A.S.C.
Besides those mentioned above at 1 (a), (i) and (ii), and 1 (c), it was also
a fact that the location of the headquarters of R.A.S.C. units was nearly
always such that the
Workshop
Section could be near them; and the
presence of this section, which could be on the road in 15 minutes, had no
adverse effect on the mobility of the unit.
Other points
The systems described above had stood the test of four years' active
service during the war of 1914-1918, and it had merely been modified to
bring it un to date.
The fleet of vehicles then operated by the then A.S.C.
rose to 120,000, including 56,000 3-ton and 30-cwt. lorries.
The system of multiple H.R.Ss. had proved its efficiency in March, 1918,
when one was shelled out.
By dispersal of its work among the remaining
four in France, it was able to re-establish itself and be in production again
within 12 weeks.
It was then bombed out, and repeated the process.
393
was get 17
WO 277/21
27
