RESTRICTED
Employment of Water Transport Units
Only one H.Q., C.R.A.S.C., Water Transport Unit, and three Harbour
Launch Companies went out to join A.L.F.S.E.A. before the end of the wat
The first company arrived before its vessels, and the personnel
were employed to man tugs for the carriage of stores from Akyab to the forces
It was actually part of the maintenance plan to employ R.A.S.C. water
transport for the distribution of stores in the forward area, taking the place of
Corps, and even of divisional, transport, where road transport could. not
operate; but, apart from the instances which occurred in Arakan, this rarely
happened in practice.
Provision and Despatch of Craft
The provision of the craft was made under War Office arrangements. A
large proportion of the craft were specially built under War Office contract,
S.T. 1 being responsible for design,
progressing,
and final
All craft had to be protected against the teredo worm.
The shipment of small craft in ocean-going ships presented difficulties due
to the pilferage of equipment during the passage.
come by sending
" ship keepers" with each consignment.
Detailed preparations had to be made for the voyage of the Ambulance
Launch Company to Rangoon under its own power.
were to leave by mid-September, so as to complete the journey as far as
Gibraltar before the weather in the Atlantic made the trip for such craft
unduly hazardous.
The third division would not have been ready in time,
and would probably have had to reach the Mediterranean by way of the inland
waterways of France.
Each division was to have an officer of the Royal
Navy attached for liaison purposes.
made of the places
where top overhauls and underwater inspections would be required, and
Provision had also to be made for replenishment of fuel, water and rations.
A generous allowance of time had to be made in the programme, to cover
bad weather, delays in port for maintenance, and, an important factor in deal-
ing with small craft, the fatigue of the crew.
Personnel Matters
Besides the very much higher standard of navigation and seamanship
required for the management of the larger vessels, which has already been
mentioned, the provision of personnel for the water transport units for the
Far East was complicated by the introduction of an age and service group
limitation for service in that theatre.
This excluded a high percentage of
experienced officers and N.C.Os., and officers had to be taken direct from
112
CHAPTER XII
R.A.S.C. SERVICES IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Introductory
This chapter describes the organization and activities of the R.A.S.C. ser-
vices in the United Kingdom during the war.
It is divided into seven parts,
dealing respectively with: home defence, air and land; road transport; water
transport; supplies; P.O.L.; barrack services; and catering.
They are dealt with in this manner, because, although the various services
were supervised, and co-ordinated where applicable, by D.Ds.S.T. of com-
mands and Os.C., R.A.S.C., of districts, they operated largely in compart-
ments independent of each other, and, except in the case of Anti-Aircraft
Command, they were not amalgamated in the same way as in the forward
area in the field.
They had three separate aspects of their work: home defence; normal
maintenance of the forces in the United Kingdom; and the rôle of base for
Changes and developments in each of these directions
affected the policy in respect of these services, and produced direct
indirect changes and developments in them; but the process was generally
The different influences sometimes worked against each other, some-
times could be co-ordinated. Operations overseas affected the organization
at home more in the preparatory and mounting stages than when they had
been launched; and their subsequent course, except in the case of the B.E.F.
in 1940, was not, in general, related to events at home.
home was affected principally by shortages, especially of manpower, of food-
stuffs, of petrol and rubber, and by the necessity for co-operation to the fullest
possible degree with the civil authorities, so that all resources were used to
the best national advantage.
In the light of all these different circumstances, it is difficult to distinguish
any very clear phases in the progress of events in the United Kingdom;
but, on broad lines, perhaps four may be observed.
First, there was mobilization, in its widest sense, and the despatch of
the B.E.F. to France, its build-up, and eventual disastrous return in June,
The emphasis in the second phase was chiefly on home defence, gradually
giving place, as the threat of invasion receded, to the idea of an offensive
policy, and the consequent build-up of an expeditionary force again, cul-
minating in the despatch of the force to North Africa in November, 1942.
Planning for the invasion of Europe had then already begun, and in
the third
phase the
preparations for that operation went on in ever-
increasing tempo, until they came to fulflment on D-Day, 6th June, 1944.
ransport at a a one tie, stipen a ser vehic
113
WO 277/
2
7
