and captured that place on 4th August, after which 11 East African Division
took up the advance on this road.
It was soon slowed up by administrative
difficulties, of which the first was the condition of the so-called roads.
The road from Palel to Tamu had deteriorated during the monsoon, and
all but four-wheel-drive vehicles blocked it, and were therefore kept off, with
the exception of vehicles carrying bridge equipment, of which there were no
four-wheel-drive available.
Experience in this theatre showed that specialist
vehicles should either all be four-wheel-drive, or that their equipment should
be capable of being fitted on a standard chassis.
The latter was considered
preferable, as, should the specialist vehicle be damaged, its load could be
quickly transferred.
The track to Sittaung was not really a road at all; it was passable for 4x4
lorries only as far as the Yu river, 10 miles east of Tamu; jeeps could go for
another six miles, after which pack or porter transport had to be used.
road southwards from Tamu down the Kabaw Valley was only called such
by a euphemism, being in fact a sea of mud.
Corduroy tracks were laid,
over which jeeps and 30-cwt. 6x6 lorries bumped their way.
The lorries
proved excellent in these conditions, having the cross-country performance
of the jeep except on narrow tracks, and very nearly the carrying capacity of
the 3-ton lorry.
They were on occasion loaded up to 2½ tons, and carried
this well.
Normal maintenance arrangements were now in force. H.Q., L. of C.
had assumed responsibility as far as Palel, and Corps opened and kept stocked
a F.M.A. at Khongkhang.
which had come with 70 Division from Middle East. Then a new F.M.A.
was opened at Moreh by two sections of the Burma Supply Company, the
D.I.D. moving up along the Yazagyo road to relieve a composite platoon of
the East African Division.
Employment of DUKWs
A section of DUKWs was attached to 11 E.A. Division, in order to provide
a water L. of C., when all bridges on the road from Tamu to Kalewa had
been swept away by floods.
current of four to five knots; the trip down stream took four hours for 30-odd
miles, and the return journey sixteen to nineteen hours.
heavy logs floating in the river took heavy toll of the vehicles, continually
damaging propellers and shafts.
The experience gained here showed that it was necessary to have a water-
borne machinery lorry in the workshop platoon, as DUKWs that had broken
down could often not be brought ashore at other than a few places on either
river bank.
One DUKW was therefore adapted for this role, with the equip-
ment of a normal machinery lorry, and proved invaluable in later operations
when detachments were widely separated and no roads provided communi-
cation with the company H.Q. and workshops.
This detachment of DUKWs was drawn from a company of 2 Divisional
R.A.S.C., which had originally been trained for this role, and had now been
reorganized on an ad hoc War Establishment as an amphibian company of
two platoons. to operate forty DUKWs. Pach latoon had twenty DTIKWs
74
the workshop
platoon was Serial 3, and the strength of the unit was five
officers and i66 other ranks all told, to carry out operation and maintenance.
The task of the workshops in keeping the vehicles running was made more
onerous by the circumstance that no spare parts for DUKWs were available
throughout the campaign.
Transport Difficulties
On the Tiddim road, 5 Indian Division was advancing down the right
bank of the Manipur river, less one brigade which went down the left bank
in order to turn the Japanese defences.
This brigade was on an all-pack
basis, and in order to provide it with sufficient of this form of transport
every available animal had to be used, as a large number in the A.T. com-
panies were out of action owing to the number of drivers on leave.
mountain artillery mules of 20 Division were pressed into this service; in
the event, it proved impossible to get them back before the force reached
Kalemyo, and this delayed the move of the battery to join Northern Combat
Area Command (the American-Chinese force on our left), which goes to
prove that transport should be diverted from its proper role only in very
exceptional circumstances.
A Corps F.M.A. was established with great difficulty 80 miles out from
Imphal by Corps and L. of C. transport; the road was even worse than the
Tamu road.
Beyond that point it was impracticable for M.T. In the end,
the labour of building up stocks to support the fighting which had been
expected at the crossing of the Manipur river proved vain, as there was no
battle, and all the stocks had to be taken back, as they could not be carried on.
The end of this commitment gave some much needed relief to the Corps
administrative services, which had been badly overstretched. This particularly
affected the Corps transport.
It was placed on record that it was incompre-
hensible how they fulfilled their tasks at this time,
but they did, and no
operations were ever held up by administrative difficulties.
The relief was
short-lived, however, as 2 and 20 Divisions had to be concentrated south of
Tamu before crossing the Chindwin.
Divisions and Air Supply
§ Indian Division went on to air supply for the next stage of its operations,
leading to the capture of Kalemyo.
The formation had a very good liaison
with the American supply dropping pilots, and its arrangements and organi-
zation for dealing with the drop were excellent.
In consequence, it never
lacked anything.
This result may be compared with the much less satisfactory results
obtained in 11 East African Division.
In this case,
the ration was always
unbalanced, and there were unexplained shortages of items specially ordered.
It was then discovered that pilfering was taking place at the dropping zone,
owing to bad organization.
The trouble was attributed by Corps to lack of
foresight by the
Divisional staff,
combined with
bad handling by the
E.A.A.S.C. of articles dropped, and unfair distribution.
Kalewa was captured on 2nd December, 1944.
75
1 7
WO 277/213
27
