This took the form of a main transport office at the headquarters of
each district, to co-ordinate the work of sub-offices, and to deal centrally
with all paper work in connection with the payment of bills and earmarking
The sub-offices were dispersed in accordance with the location
of troops, transport units, etc., throughout the district; and the executive
work of detailing road transport was carried out by reduced staffs in the
Until this time, the establishment of each transport office had been on
an ad hoc basis, and the only co-ordination had been carried out by the
O.C., R.A.S.C., district.
Now, the establishments of transport offices were
organized on a "standard brick"
basis, comprising three types of office,
"A", "B", and "C".
The "A" type consisted of a major, a captain,
and ten clerks, and was designed as the District Transport Office, i.e., the
main office, and also included an element which carried out the local
The "B" type, under a captain, and the
"C" type under a subaltern, each had four clerks, and were intended as
The responsibility for checking railway bills was transferred from officers
i/c transport to the Army Pay Office (Railways Branch) in September, 1941.
Copies of carriers' notes (the authority for conveyance of military stores by
rail) were still sent to transport offices for registration, but no further action
In the case of large establishments, despatching frequent
consignments, blocks of numbers were allotted by the transport office to
the establishment, and these were used as required until exhausted; in such
cases, the fifth copy of the carrier's note only was sent to the transport office,
after the stores had been despatched, and was retained there.
Distribution of Ordnance Stores
Before the war, most of the distribution of ordnance stores to units
had been effected by rail transport, the R.A.S.C. making the arrangements
for conveyance of stores between depot and station.
Units within reach of
the depot drew direct, and hired transport was sometimes used for the
conveyance of camp stores to camp sites, where this was the more economical
In the early months of the war, this system continued, but on the return
of the B.E.F. in May and June, 1940, with the very large quantities of
stores requiring distribution and the extreme urgency of the situation, the
railway method of distribution proved too slow.
Consignments might take
as much as three weeks to reach their destination.
therefore employed to supplement rail.
Road transport was
At the Weedon Small Arms Depot,
this was carried out by a small detachment of R.A.S.C. lorries, working
unceasingly; in other depots, it was effected by hired transport, and in
either case there was no unnecessary delay.
transport organization.
Complaints of delays were, however, levelled, and attributed to the road
Ordnance branch, therefore, instituted its own de-
livery system, with a fleet of vans and lorries manned by ordnance personnel.
i was claimed that by this means stores left the depot en route for consignee
within 24 hours of the receipt of the indent.
It was, however, a somewhat
extravagant system, as there was no proper organization for looking after
170
the vehicles, and a high proportion were off the road. The expenditure of
petrol in the operation of this service amounted in one case of a big depot
to 12 gallons a ton delivered, while the figure for the stores delivered under
R.A.S.C. arrangements by hired transport from the same depot was only
9 of a gallon a ton. This latter result was achieved by using the most suitable
vehicle for the job, and arranging full loads wherever possible.
It was eventually decided to form Station Transport Companies to carry
out the distributive and internal work of the larger ordnance depots, and
supplemented by the Road Haulage Organization
At the end of 1943, 265 W.D. load-carriers and 320 Road Haulage
Organization vehicles were engaged in internal or delivery work for Central
Ordnance Depots.
A scheme was evolved by the Movement Control Branch in March, 1942,
for the distribution of ordnance stores to selected R.A.O.C. dumps through
13 railheads suitably located in England and Wales.
It was expected to
effect a saving of time in the despatch of ordnance stores, as well as a
considerable economy of road transport.
3-ton lorries would be necessary at each railhead for the onward transit of
The scheme was duly put into effect, the lorries
being drawn from local R.A.S.C. transport units.
A responsible R.A.S.C.
N.C.O. was put in charge of each railhead detachment.
operation of the scheme depended on there being first-class co-operation
between R.A.S.C., R.A.O.C., and Movement Control Staff at railheads.
The minimum weight of a consignment by rail was fixed at one ton,
and a proposal to increase this to two tons was resisted by S.T.3, in view
of the additional provision of road transport it might require.
The reconsignment of stores by rail from railheads, where practicable,
was agreed, subject to the time factor being satisfactory.
S.T. was required to issue instructions, defining the areas of road delivery
from each railhead, to facilitate the approximate consignment of stores for
onward delivery in the area concerned.
R.A.O.C. escorts had to be pro-
vided where civilian drivers were employed, but not where W.D. vehicles
were driven by R.A.S.C.
In November, 1943, delays were reported in the delivery of stores under
the scheme; but, on enquiry, it was found that there was no delay in road
movement, and it was not considered that any speeding up could be effected.
There was some room for reduction of the rail movement timings, and,
subject to this, the total time taken between the date of the indent and
that of the receipt of stores was not excessive.
About this time, it was estimated that some 22,000 tons a week were
being despatched from C.O.Ds., most of it to railheads, for onward carriage
In certain cases, however, alternative methods of delivery were approved
where the normal method was not sufficiently expeditious.
mandants of the C.O.Ds. at Greenford, Didcot, Branston and Solway were
171
WO 277/21
27
