The consequent gap between decreasing military transport availability
and home service road transport requirements could only be met in one of
two ways: by increasing the home service transport units, or by reversion
to hiring on a considerable scale.
The former course called for additional manpower which could well be
used to other and better advantage, the latter would save wear and tear
on W.D. vehicles of field force units, and would use for the most part man-
power which would in any event be denied to the Services through being in
a " reserved " occupation (i.e., not liable to conscription).
No material increase in the existing numbers of Command (Mixed) Trans-
port Companies could be contemplated, as it would drain men out of field
There was already a considerable deficiency
indicated above, and the view of the D.S.T. was that in the circumstances
of shortages of drivers and vehicles in home transport units any expansion or
raising of these units should be deferred until all existing mixed companies
were in fact complete to War Establishment in both respects.
It was evidently necessary, therefore, to reorientate the disposition of
C.(M)T. companies in commands so as to release them for essential work
in the country and the more remote districts and for the special military
requirements noted above; and to make increased use of the civil haulage
industry to fill other administrative transport commitments.
The policy would also be beneficial to the industry itself.
progressive limitations imposed on civilian use of road transport, there was
a tendency to divert the movement of goods from road to rail, with the result
of decreasing the capacity of the civil haulage industry.
This was already
causing concern to the Ministry, for fear that the fleets of commercial vehicles
might be dissipated, and their organization so thinned out as to be incapable
Policy of Increased Hirings Adopted
In view of all these considerations, the War Office adopted the policy of
a gradual increase of hiring, in order to ensure that the civilian vehicles
would be available when withdrawal of military transport became necessary.
The policy was held to be the corollary of the reorientation of our strategy
from the defensive to the offensive, and was expected to cause the minimum
of dislocation to essential services in the country.
It was not thought that
it would lead to any great waste of military transport during the transition
period, though some would not be used to capacity.
On the other hand,
there would be a gain in preserving the efficiency of military vehicles, and in
the greater opportunity for training personnel.
here was no financial objection to the policy, but it was stipulated that
such W.D. transport as could be made available must be used to the fullest
extent; that transport must not be hired while Army transport stood idle;
and that hirings must be on a " day-to-day", and not on a " stand-by " basis.
Methods of Implementation of New Policy
To had been in continuous touch with the M.O. W.T. in connection with
the best method of implementing it.
te proposed poncy of increased use of civil transport for military needs, and
which they could help.
The Ministry suggested two ways in
200
Their Road Haulage Branch could be used in the capacity of common
carriers, using the Ministry's large fleet of chartered civil vehicles for long-
After examination, however, it was agreed that the parti-
cular needs of the Army at home would only permit this organization to be
used to a comparatively small extent.
Alternatively, local transport services could be placed out to local civilian
hauliers on a direct contract basis.
the Ministry had two objections.
This was favoured by War Office but
They thought that such contracts might
weaken the rigid control they exercised, through the medium of petrol ration-
ing, over the use of road vehicles; and their rubber allocations were not based
on any very extensive use of civilian vehicles for W.D. traffic.
already conducting special enquiries, asked for by War Office, as to the
provision of civilian transport to meet the heavy demands on the War Depart-
ment for the carriage of low-grade materials for camp road construction.
Eventually an agreement was reached with the Ministry, the terms of
which are recorded below, in connection with the Road Haulage Organiza-
Implementation of New Policy
The new policy was put into effect in January, 1943, when commands
were authorized to make consequential hiring of transport to take the place
of that of field force units which were to be withdrawn for training and other
The Charter Fleet of the M.O.W.T. was to
the maximum, and existing contracts were to be expanded
settlement of a new arrangement with the Ministry.
The effect of the new policy on hiring costs was soon apparent.
ture under this head had already begun to rise again in September, 1942,
as the result of the withdrawal of G.T. companies previously mentioned;
and for that month the figure was £56,000, or a 50 per cent. increase over
The upward trend continued steadily in consequence of the new
policy, reaching £98,000 in February, and over £200,000 in October, 1943.
F.F. Transport Freed from Local Duties
This policy was further developed in April, 1943, when home commands
were told that hired civilian transport was to be used wherever practicable,
irrespective of the local availability of transport of field force units.
operational efficiency of G.T. companies had suffered considerably from
inability to carry out unit training, owing to being required to
local transport duties. It was now laid down that M.T. vehicles of mobilized
units of the field force were to be subject to the minimum use
transport work, compatible with the individual training of the unit for its
The use of field force units for transport details was to be limited as
much as possible. In particular, the following conditions were to be enforced.
Such units were to be used only for large lifts requiring the use
less than one transport platoon, in circumstances affording experience in
self-contained operations; i.e., where the unit or sub-unit could effect the
lift as a formed body over a sufficient distance to afford practice in convoy
duties, defence on the line of march, etc.
The orders for such details
201
WO 277/21
27
