in the Middle East base are at this moment handling both R.A.
and "B" vehicles, while their output is going, without prejud,
either to R.A.S.C. or other units.
Though, for the reasons given
above,
it is considered sound to centralize all repair in
R.A.O.C. so that the Directors of that service can co-operate pro-
vision and supply
with repair,
Senior
Ordnance
it will be desirable to give the
Mechanical
Engineer
wider
powers
ordination and control of workshops and spare parts holdings.
3. Extended enquiries have been made into the question of whether Ist
and 2nd line
workshops,
which at present exist in all R.A.S.C. transport
companies,
should have their 2nd line functions curtailed.
there would appear to be no valid reason
why
R.A.S.C.
In strict logic,
should be in
a different situation from other mechanical units such as the Royal Tank
Corps.
It has, however, been found that, during active operations in this
theatre, it has often been necessary to allot R.A.S.C. companies to a Corps or
Army entirely out of proportion to the workshop capacity at their (i.e., the
formations') disposal.
This allotment of R.A.S.C.
companies is, moreover,
a varying one, and, if the workshops were removed from the company estab-
lishment, there would be a grave danger that workshop
capacity
with the
formation would be quite incapable of competing with the large and varying
amount of mechanical transport which is serving it or under its orders.
The
retention of the workshop in the R.A.S.C. transport company ensures that
the workshop capacity controlled by the formation keeps step
with the
amount of transport allotted to it.
For this reason, a change in the present
system of a workshop in each R.A.S.C. company is not recommended.
4. Consideration has been given to the possibility of carrying out the
above changes in the Middle East during the war.
It is thought that they
should be introduced in the following ways: -
(a) By the transfer of all R.A.S.C. personnel at present employed in
heavy repair shops and M.T. stores depot, who are serving on
a war engagement, to the R.A.O.C. in the same rank and at the
same rates of pay.
(b) By the secondment to the R.A.O.C. of any officers or other ranks
of the R.A.S.C. on a Regular engagement, serving in base work-
shops or M.T. stores depots, in the same rank and at the same
rates of pay as they now enjoy, and without prejudice to their
present corps seniority or future prospects.
(c) By holding seconded R.A.S.C. personnel available at any time to
be recalled to fill positions in R.A.S.C. units or establishments.
(d) By ensuring that transfers in the theatre of war of R.A.O.C. personnel
to maintain company workshops,
R.A.S.C.,
at the necessary
strength are made as and when required.
This should only be
necessary if R.A.S.C. reinforcements are inadequate.
5. It may be urged that the mechanical engineering skill of the R.A.S.(
will be lowered, and that their ist and 2nd line maintenance will sufer.
is doubtful if this point is valid. if the standard of Roval Tank Corps pe
sonnel is taken as a comparison.
But it may require the retention of certain
3rd line shops in the United Kingdom for training purposes and experiment.
396
6. There would naturally be some dissatisfaction on sentimental grounds
and possible loss of esprit de corps among the transferred personnel."
There
has been for many years some rivalry between the corps,
and this matter
has been the subject of many enquiries.
These have resulted in the main-
tenance of the status quo, by which both have retained their separate responsi-
bilities for provision and repair of their own vehicles and provision of their
own spare parts.
It is considered, however, that officers and other ranks would
be ready to cast aside their pride and prejudice in the interests of army
efficiency.
These factors bulk less largely in war than they do in peace, and
for this reason alone it is desirable that a change is made during a time when
any consequential troubles or friction can be smoothed out as a result of
practical trial in the field.
WO 277/21
27
397
137477
