officer was sent to supervise and to report on the suitability of the packaging
of the foodstuffs for the operations envisaged.
Various packs were found
unsuitable, but although representations were made through the B.F.M. for
changes to be effected, and the matter was referred to the War Office, only
in a few cases was action taken to remedy the defects.
By December, the full quantities were available, and it became a matter
of concern how the stocks were to be turned over.
The Department of
Agriculture also feared that they might be challenged by
Congress for
spending so much money on holding large quantities of foodstuffs which
might deteriorate if kept too long.
The problem was solved by the stocks
being used for the maintenance of the British forces in North Africa.
Revised Procedure for Export
The procedure for the export of military foodstuffs procured under Lend-
Lease worked satisfactorily for some time, but during the latter part of
1942 and the early part of 1943 the shipping position deteriorated monthly,
and a situation arose whereby monthly demands could not be shipped in
full, and a backlog accumulated which there was no means of liquidating.
A revised procedure came into force in February, 1943, under which a fore-
cast of the type and tonnage of stores actually
sent from the B.A.S. to the theatre concerned, which then selected from the
list the items and tonnage required to which priority of export was to be
By this means, it was ensured that when shipping space was not
sufficient to carry complete monthly requirements to a theatre of war, the
latter would receive those items of which it was in most urgent need.
The effect of this new arrangement was that as the priority cables were
received by the B.A.S., the authorization to call forward and export could
only come from the B.A.S., and not, as hitherto, from the Ministry of Food
and the Food Mission, and many
difficulties arose in implementing the
P.O.L.
The control and supply of all P.O.L. to U.S. Armed Forces and to the
British Government under Lend-Lease was in the hands of the U.S. Navy
Department.
The responsibility for placing War Office requirements with
the Navy Department was that of the British Petroleum Mission, on instruc-
tions from the Petroleum Division, Ministry of Fuel and Power, London.
S.T. Branch of B.A.S. was responsible, as far as P.O.L. was concerned,
mainly for the supply of lubricants from U.S.
sources.
They were not
responsible for petrol, as that was not normally shipped in small containers.
tapo siere forspensi, a mat was shipments of lubricants to Middle East,
Persian Gulf, East and West Africa, and India.
In October,
India Supply Mission took over the procurement and supply of all P.O.L.
Early in 1942, it was decided to establish a reserve stock of lubricants
near the port area to act as a buffer, owing to the difficulty of co-ordinating
shipments direct from manufacturer to ship, and to assist in meeting urgent
or unexpected War Office demands.
store, which had a capacity of 12,000 tons.
p, lubricants passed through
294
Demands for the packed lubricants for shipment to Middle East, Persian
Gulf, and East and West Africa were made by War Office on B.A.S.
mands for oils required at the tank depots were submitted by Ordnance,
B.A.S., to S.T., B.A.S.
Procurement was then effected by S.T., B.A.S.,
placing demands on the British Petroleum Representative, who submitted a
the Foreign Economic
approved, the Foreign Economic Administration forwarded the requisition
to the U.S. Navy, which placed the necessary contracts with civilian oil
The oil was then consigned in accordance with the individual
instructions issued to the U.S. Navy, at the request of S.T., B.A.S., and the
office of the British Petroleum Representative.
Standardization of P.O.L.
The arrangements for the standardization of all grades of P.O.L. and
their nomenclature are described in Chapter XII.
changing over to heavy duty oils, discontinuing
They involved the British
adopting the U.S. Army nomenclature.
the M.220 grade, and
The change over to heavy duty oils made the procurement problem more
difficult.
Certain chemicals were then in short supply,
and the British
Petroleum Representative was required to forward a half-yearly estimate
of the quantity of oil likely to be required for the British Forces.
The duty
of estimation devolved on the theatres of war, who were asked to produce,
months in advance, figures which could at best only be guessed.
At the
same time, it was arranged that all armoured vehicles shipped from U.S.A.
direct to theatres of war should each be loaded with 100 gallons of oil, so
that they could move under their own power from the dockside on arrival.
Maintenance of British Troops in Iceland
In order to economize British shipping, and to conserve other supplies
exported from the United Kingdom, it was agreed by the U.S. Government
that foodstuffs might be exported from U.S.A. to Iceland for the maintenance
of the British troops there.
A demand for six months' supplies was accordingly placed with the
U.S. Quarter-Master Corps, and arrangements were made with the
Army Transportation service for the conveyance of the stores to Iceland
at the same time as those for the American forces there.
his arrangement
had to be cancelled owing to shipping difficulties, and the British Merchant
Shipping Mission proceeded to arrange freight.
But none of these stocks
ever reached their consignees, as they were unloaded and taken over by
the U.S. forces in Iceland.
It was then arranged that Iceland should demand
direct on B.A.S. After a good deal of difficulty, the system was got into
working order, and continued until the British left Iceland in 1943.
Maintenance of the Caribbean Areas and Bermuda
Until November, 1942, the " O" maintenance of the British West Indies
and Bermuda was the responsibility of the War Office, foodstuffs being
obtained either under contrap os direct from the United Kingdom.
295
7
WO 277/21
27
