Storage Space
Although the number of S.R.Ds., and the available storage accommodation
in them and in their auxiliary depots and the main supply depots, had grown
so greatly,
storage space never kept pace with requirements.
Extensions
always took longer to carry out than was forecast.
A review in July, 1943,
showed that, for the authorized holdings of reserves and working margins
(252,000 tons), four million odd square feet were required, at 16 sq. ft. to the
ton.
There was a deficiency at that time of 178,000 sq. ft. in S.R.Ds. alone.
By the end of the year, in S.R.Ds. and M.S.Ds.
combined, there was a
deficiency of 837,000 sq. ft., and in September, 1944, it was 870,000 sq. ft.
To make things worse, in 1943 the problem arose of finding storage
space for 42,000 tons of supplies, the increased reserves in anticipation of
Overlord"
In order to do this, two projects were considered; one for
a new depot at Twyford, and the other for the extension by 672,000 sq. ft.
of the existing S.R.D. at Steventon.
The latter was rejected on account of
labour difficulties, already acute there, and the former because of railway
difficulties.
In the end, a site was selected at Barby, near Rugby, and, in spite of
protests by the Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries
against the use of
valuable agricultural land, the construction of a new S.R.D. of the requisite
covered storage space began in the second half of 1943.
It was ready just
in time to be of use for " Overlord"; by March, 1944, it held 18,000 tons,
and by July, 35,000.
One of the factors which adversely affected the storage space situation was
the necessity for providing the
American Forces with depots.
In July,
1942. Plan
"Bolero", under which the arrangements were made for the
U.S. Forces which came to the United Kingdom for eventual operations on
the Continent, required two of the best S.R.Ds.—Barry and Taunton—to be
handed over to the U.S. Army.
A programme was drawn up for clearing these depots and at the same
time permitting the infiltration of the U.S. Army personnel and stores.
Clear-
ance proceeded according to plan, though there were difficulties, as U.S.
stores arrived on schedule but the personnel did not, and British personnel
had therefore to handle American stores.
By September, 1942, however,
Taunton was clear, and Barry 75 per cent. so, the process in the latter case
being completed early in 1943.
The reduction in the general load of reserves in the autumn of 1944
made it possible to give up some storage accommodation.
Two sections
of No. 1 S.R.D. in Scotland, at Glasgow and Pollokshaws, were disbanded,
and one of No. 19 at Hendon.
In anticipation of pressure to give up requisitioned premises, efforts had
been made to recover the old Nos. 2 and 3 S.R.Ds. at Barry and Taunton
from the U.S. Forces, but this did not come about till after the end of the
war with Germany.
In May, 1945, orders were issued for No.
19, from
Osterley, to re-occupy Taunton, and Barry was taken over by No. 5 from
Lancaster by the end of the year.
establishments.
At the end of 1943, there was a cut in manpower employed in home
226
units where such stafi numbered 40 or more. After the cut had been carried
out, the strength of units was not at any time to be increased without the
personal authority of the Secretary of State.
This undiscriminating scheme produced a number of illogical results,
of which perhaps the most striking was that affecting Barby S.R.D.
was almost ready to open, when, two days before the instruction about the
cut was issued, a proposal was put forward for an amendment to the War
Establishment so as to add the variable additions required for the depot's
transport needs.
By the time the proposal was approved, the instruction
had come into force, and the addition to the
therefore be implemented.
The result was that the new S.R.D., authorized
at the beginning of 1943, built at a cost of £750,000 and its manpower
covered, could not operate and prepare to receive 40,000 tons of supplies
already arranged for because the authority for the transport personnel could
not be implemented. Ultimately, the case had to go to the Secretary of
State for him to approve the addition of 35 men, and the depot could begin
to work.
W.D. Stocks in M. of F. Depots
In order to augment storage accommodation in W.D. depots, arrange-
ments were made in 1942 with the M. of F. Warehousing Division to store
up to 100,000 tons of W.D. stocks in Ministry Buffer Depots. This arrange-
ment continued until the end of the war.
At first the policy was to ask
the Ministry to allocate storage near S.R.Ds. and M.S.Ds., in order to
facilitate inspection and to reduce the time taken in transfer when the supplies
were eventually required in W.D. depots.
Owing to transport difficulties,
however, during the invasion of Europe, the policy was changed and it was
agreed with the Ministry that Buffer Depots at the nearest point to con-
tractors' factories would be allocated to the W.D.
The commodities to be stored in the buffer depots were decided by C.P.O.;
in the main, they were Service biscuits, of which there was a large reserve,
and seasonal items, i.e., tinned fruits, vegetables, potatoes, jams.
Tonnage Statisties of S.R.Ds. and M.S.Ds. Analysed
The tonnage held by the two S.R.Ds. in September, 1939, was 60,000
tons, which rose to 114,000 tons in November that year, and remained little
below that figure until June, 1940.
Then if here unto increase rapidly, reaching 180,000 tons in September,
1940.
This was due to two main factors resulting from the evacuation of
the B.E.F.; first, large quantities of supplies, which had been sent on their
way to France but had not arrived there, came back into stock at home;
and secondly, the accumulation in the depots at home of the supplies which
had been ordered on account of maintenance of the B.E.F., but of which
it was not possible to restrict the intake of contracts in order to adjust the
position until late in 1940.
Thereafter, there was a marked fall over the next few months, to 153,000
tons. This decline was due to reduced intake in order to effect the necessary
adjustment referred to above; to the closing down of No. 1 S.R.D., Deptford,
ise he con
due to air attacks on London; to the eating down of stocks which had become
227
WO 277/21
27
