APPENDIX IIN
(See Vol. I, page 73)
POST-WAR ORGANIZATION OF R.A.S.C.
A. Field Force Units
examined after the end of the war, in the light of operations and experiences
The existing organization of R.A.S.C. field force units was carefully
in all theatres of war, in order to ascertain whether or not it was satisfactory ;
and, if not, what changes were necessary.
The following is a record of the
principal conclusions reached by the War Office Standardization Conference.
1. Infantry Divisional R.A.S.C.
(a) The existing organization of the infantry divisional R.A.S.C., i.e., four
2-platoon transport companies, was basically satisfactory.
(b) Infantry Brigade Companies should contain only A, B, and C sections
of the Composite Platoon, and the Infantry Divisional Troops Company
should have a complete Composite Platoon.
2. Armoured Divisional R.A.S.C.
(a) Troop-carrying vehicles.
Two main questions arose :—
(i) Whether T.C.Vs. should be replaced by 3-ton lorries.
(ii) Whether the existing organization of two platoons of T.C.Vs. in the
Armoured Divisional Troops Company was satisfactory.
The arguments adduced against the use of T.C. Vs. and the existing organiza-
tion were as follows :—
(i) T.C.Vs. were specialist vehicles, and while little superior to 3-ton
lorries as personnel carriers, they were inferior to personnel carriers
as load-carriers.
(i) T.C.Vs. became
"tied up" with unit first line transport, and could
not easily be made use of by divisional R.A.S.C. for general trans-
port duties when not required for troop-carrying.
(iii) While the two transport platoons were adequate to lift an infantry
brigade, the organization did not fit the three battalions in a brigade,
and three sub-units were required.
The question of the use of T.C.Vs. of lorries for troop-carrying was not
finally decided at that time ; but it was agreed that, if T.C.Vs. were retained,
they should form part of the Infantry Brigade Company; and that, if they
were replaced by lorries in the Armoured Division, they should be organized
in a separate three-platoon company.
(b) The existing organization of the Armoured Divisional R. A.S.C. was
otherwise agreed to be satisfactory, except for the distribution of Composite
Platoon sections. In connection with these it was decided that the Armoured
Divisional Troops Company should include a comnlete Composite Platoon,
and the Armoured Prigade and Infantry Bricade Companies a Composite
Platoon of A, B, and C sections only.
340
3. Corps Troops R.A.S.C.
(a) The organization of Corps Troops R.A.S.C. was considered unsatis-
factory, and the following organization was agreed in substitution :—
One H.Q., Corps Troops R.A.S.C.
One Supply Company, consisting of two Supply Platoons and one Petrol
Platoon.
One G.T. Company, 4-platoon, 3-ton.
One G.T. Company, 4-platoon, 10-ton.
One Tipper Company, 4-platoon.
One Corps Car Company.
This organization would
provide sufficient transport for the stocking of
F.M.As.
A third Supply Platoon would be required from Army Troops
during periods of mobility.
If 10-ton lorries were unsuitable for local condi-
tions, three 3-ton G.T. Companies would be substituted for the 10-ton Com-
(b) The M.A.C. should be Army Troops, allotted on a scale of one for
each corps.
General Organization, Method and Doctrine
The following items express the considered opinion of a conference of
senior R.A.S.C.
officers with wide experience in various theatres of war ;
representatives of the other War Office Branches, etc., concerned were also
present.
It does not follow that these conclusions were invariably implemented.
1. Control and Operation of Road Transport
(a) Corps should be given sufficient transport to enable it to stock corps
(b) Army should be provided with sufficient transport for replenishment
from location of G.H.Q. stocks.
(c) Transport used for stocking L. of C. terminal should be under direct
operational control of H.Q., L. of C.
2. Control of a Roadhead
The system of controlling a roadhead, as evolved by Second Army in North
West Europe, and described in Chapter VIII, was recommended for adoption
as standard, i.e., H.Q., Army Troops, to be responsible for works services,
provost, accommodation, and defence, and H.Q., Transport Column, R.A.S.C.,
with representative of Q(M) and H.Q., Pioneer Group, to be responsible for
clearance of railheads, and allocation of transport and labour to railheads and
depots.
3. Opening of a Port
The adoption of the following amendments to the existing doctrine in
connection with the opening of a port was recommended :—
(a) Large-scale reconnaissance parties must be accompanied by the supply
and transport units required to maintain them.
(b) R.A.S.C. should have executive control of road transport, and be
consulted by the provost staff before traffic circuits are fixed.
(c) Supply and petrol control points are necessary to regulate the flow of
commodities.
341
22917
717
WO 277/21
27
