These limits were only to be exceeded in special circumstances, and
even then were not to exceed the following:
Cars, 40 m..h.; motorcycles, 40 m.p.., a d-carriers not exceeding
3-ton, 30 m.p.h.; load-carriers exceeding 3-ton, 20 m.p.h.; coaches and
T.C.Vs., 30 m.p.h.; load-carriers with trailers, 20 m.p.h.
Other classes were as before; but the speed limit of 25 m.p.h. applied to
heavy tank transporters was later considered to be too high, and likely
to cause serious mechanical defects, and consequent deterioration of vehicles.
It was therefore decided that tank transporters
with a load capacity of
20 tons or over should be restricted to a maximum speed of 15 m.p.h.
More Stringent Control of Transport
A.C.I. 101 of 1940, referred to above, was revised and amplified in June,
1942, the principal additional clauses being as under.
It was stressed that
they were to be enforced by all commanders.
Units in the same station were to co-operate with the officer i/c trans-
port to ensure provision of the most suitable
and economical type of
vehicles available.
This was linked with the existing order, that, whenever
possible, rations should be drawn
Personnel in charge of W.D. load or passenger carrying transport who re-
ported at a railway station were directed to notify the R.T.O. of any spare
carrying capacity in the vehicles before they left the station, so that it could
be used, if reasonable, to obviate a separate demand for transport.
arrangements were to be made at places of collection and delivery, to deal
with loading and unloading of vehicles without delay.
was to be avoided as far as possible, by carrying full loads on both the
outward and return journeys, where possible.
This was to include the con-
veyance of non-military loads for the Ministry of War Transport; the special
organization for this service is described elsewhere in this chapter.
drawing of ordnance stores in unit first line vehicles,
whether as a matter of
urgency or not, was forbidden except where authorized by the officer i/c
Perhaps the most important provision of all was that which confirmed
and extended the long standing principle, that all load-carrying transport,
including cars, not required for training, was at the disposal of the o.
i/c transport, to detail for general transport services. It was now stated
that all first line (and, in the case of R.A.S.C. units, second or third line)
load-carrying vehicles, not detailed for operational or driver-training require-
ments, were to be made available to perform the various administrative road
transport requirements as co-ordinated by divisional or other formation,
district, area, etc., headquarters concerned.
These headquarters were to
end th that the maximum amount of such transport was made available
and that it was placed at the disposal of officers i/ transport, R.A.S.C,
concerned, or other officers detailed for the purpose.
In a War Office letter amplifying these instructions, it was suggested
that in field formations an officer, possibly the brigade R.A.S.C. office
night be charged with the duty of co-ordinating regular transport details an
the miscellaneous demands for conveyance of stores, baggage, sick, etc.; an
hat static units and establishments should requisition transport through the
officer i/c transport, and not use their own transport for the regular
miscellaneous demands unless it were detailed for the
officer i/c transport.
Equal or even greater economy was enjoined as necessary in the use
of motor cars.
Complaints of Misuse of W.D. Transport
A sidelight is thrown on the question of the control of the use
transport by the following instances.
In November, 1942, commercial motor users and road transport associa-
tions represented through Ministerial
channels that many Service vehicles
were being used wastefully, and that, in the opinion of many commercial
operators, much could be done to save a considerable amount of wasteful
At about the same time, the Treasury raised an observation in connec-
tion with a case of the irregular use of W.D. cars, as to whether the War
Office instructions on the use of W.D. transport were sufficient.
S.T. took the standpoint that the current War Office
instructions on this subject were adequate.
correctly employed in commands, in accordance with those instructions,
became a matter of discipline.
If the instructions were obeyed, there should
be no question of wasteful or improper use.
Any cases which did arise must
be considered as due to faulty local administration, or breach of discipline.
In this connection, it has also to be remembered that a great deal of
transport was on the roads which was not under even the indirect
of the R.A.S.C. officer i/c transport, and for which S.T. Branch could not
therefore be held responsible.
Its proper use was then a matter for the
Staff to enforce. (See also page 202).
The necessity for adopting a policy of increased hiring of transport as
the result of the withdrawal of field force transport units in the second
half of 1942, as described later in this chapter, led to a consideration on
the highest level at the War Office of the general transport situation in the
United Kingdom, and of the efficacy of the various economy measures.
The instructions imposing limitations on the use of W.D. transport were
still not always correctly interpreted, and in one command their too rigid
application led to the situation where, after taking into account
lest-days, and " transportless" days, there were 18 days a month on which
the majority of vehicles were idle.
intended to happen; but it led to misunderstandings, as when a shortage
of A.T.S. driver personnel was alleged, and it was asked why more were
required when those already existing were sitting idle on so many days.
A proposal was made at this time indeed to abolish transportless days,
and to reduce the establishment of drivers and vehicles in transport com-
panies instead, in order to achieve the desired economy in petrol and rubber.
This idea
was based on the misconception that the situation in that one
command was representative of all, which was far from being
the case.
A review by the Controller General of Economy had disclosed the fact that
WO 277/21
27
