Reorganization of R.I.A.S.C. M.T. Companies
The reorganization of the R.I.A.S.C. M.T. companies in India and
S.E.A.C. on to the " standard brick" system did not take place for a long
time after that of the R.A.S.C.,
being completed in July, 1944.
When
adopted, it proved as successful as it had been elsewhere.
Previously, the Indian General Purpose Transport (G.P.T.) Company,
the equivalent of the British General Transport Company, had consisted of
four sections, each of 25 task vehicles.
Indian infantry divisions had three such companies, allotted as Brigade
Composite Companies.
An improvised Divisional Troops
formed by the withdrawal of two sections and other personnel from the other
companies. In addition, some divisions late in 1942 organized their companies
into ammunition, supply, and petrol sections, of varying numbers of vehicles
according to the scales of each commodity to be carried, with the balance
This was a reactionary policy, but the "pool" system of the
employment of transport was slow to be accepted in the Indian Army.
The Indian company had only five British officers, (six in divisional
companies) and six Indian V.C.Os., as compared with ten British officers
in the British unit.
The V.C.O. was, before the great expansion, very
good, but the standard deteriorated as demand exceeded supply.
The outstanding difference between R.A.S.C. and R.I.A.S.C. transport
companies was in respect of workshop facilities.
The R.I.A.S.C. companies
had only a Light Aid Detachment provided by the I.A.O.C. (later I.E.M.E.),
consisting of a British warrant officer (or, more commonly, a V.C.O.), a
storeman and an armourer, with one electrician and two vehicle mechanics
for each transport platoon.
The only technical vehicle was a breakdown
lorry.
Repairs beyond the capacity of the L.A.D. were the responsibility
of the divisional or local workshop company.
The arrangement did not
work out satisfactorily, and an important measure of reorganization was
the provision of workshop platoons for R.I.A.S.C. transport companies.
described in Section 1 of Chapter IX, the M.T. in P.A.I.C. was in a very
bad state at the beginning of 1942, and the D.Q.M.G., who was Q.M.G.,
India, designate, determined that he would do all he could to restore their
workshops to R.I.A.S.C. transport companies.
Although not a R.I.A.S.C.
officer, he had at one time been D.S.T., India, and consequently understood
While the necessity for providing transport companies with their own
workshops, capable of carrying out their second line repairs, was accepted
at G.H.Q., India, it was considered impracticable, at that stage of the war,
to reconstitute the workshop organization of the R.I.A.S.C. as an integral
part of the corps, and a compromise was reached under which companies
were to be provided with workshop platoons on the same lines as those of
the R.A.S.C., but manned by, and under the technical control of, the
I.A.O.C. (later I.E.M.E.).
This was better than nothing, and its effect on the mechanical condition
of the transport was indeed excellent, the percentage of vehicles off the road
in those units which had their own workshops falling to a marked degree.
At the same time, the fact that the control was in the hands of another corps
was definitely an unsatisfactory factor. -
charter defining the re-
lationships of the R.I.A.S.C. and I.E.M.E., the D.S.T., India, wished to insert
a clause giving the O.C. company the right to decide priority of repair; but
this was refused by D.M.E., India, who insisted that the O.C. company should
exercise no control over the workshops whatever, but only be administratively
No doubt, difficulty would only occur when there was
a conflict of personalities, but the possibility remained.
the incidence of exterior control was that the I.E.M.E. regarded the com-
pany workshops as part of their general repair assets, and therefore on
occasion withdrew them for employment elsewhere,
reference to S.T., leaving the unit to be maintained by the local static work-
The necessity for a transport company having its own workshop was
specially marked in India, where distances were very great, and a company
was liable to be sent off on an independent task, perhaps
the nearest static workshop, on which it was considered to be a reasonable
arrangement to base it, until S.T. insisted on more adequate provision.
Again there was a common practice of permanently affiliating an ex-
number of additional vehicles
solving a local maintenance problem, but only at the risk of the unit itself
inadequately maintained.
Water Transport
Until 1944, the water transport services in India were mainly in the
hands of the transportation service. Those under the Directorate of Supplies
and Transport consisted of a few vessels in the larger ports, operated under
Command arrangements, without any kind of co-operation at G.H.Q.
was no unit organization, the crews were locally engaged, and there were
scarcely any regulations governing operation, employment, and control.
With the increasing importance of Indian ports in connection with the
campaign in South East Asia, it became evident that a proper water trans-
port organization must be built up.
In addition, the decision was taken that
India would follow the principle of the division of responsibility for water
transport services between the Transportation and S. and T. directorates,
which had been established in other theatres by
the Army Council ruling
of June, 1944, (see Appendix VIIB).
This brought a number of additional
under S.T. control which had formerly been operated by Trans-
portation and other services.
War Office provided a staff captain, experienced in water transport, for
duty in the S.T. Directorate, India; and also a cadre of R.A.S.C. personnel
to form the nucleus of an Indian Water Transport Company.
were also made for the provision of a Boat Stores Depot, but Q.M.G., India
ruled against this unit, and Ordnance were directed to take over the supply
of marine stores in India.
For A.L.F.S.E.A., a Boat Stores Depot, R.A.S.C.,
was provided to maintain both R.A.S.C. and Transportation Water Trans-
The Indian Water Transport Company operated about 90 vessels at
six ports from Karachi, to Calcutta, about 4,000 miles of coastline.
of this wide dispersion, it was the intention to split the unit into four, but
the end of the war came before these plans could be implemented.
17 17
WO 277/215
27
