(b) War Wastage (3 months maximum)
Lorries,
G.S.
Motor cars, motor vans, motor ambulances
0-25 per cent monthly
1•00 per cent monthly
4•00 pel
Cars, 2-seater
Motor cycles
Technic Vehicles and trailers, " As may be determine per
cent monthly
cent monthly
D.S.T.,
in the Field.
B.E.F.
initial consignments of the reserve vehicles was
of shippinga
arranged to
2. The progress of the war falsified the presuppositie Lof an active start, with little L.
C. and Base work by comparison.
On the contrary, the L. of C. and Base work was of sudf
unexpected heaviness that
this cancelled out the advantages gained by
foures welv
1940, to hold good for th
active phase of the war and probably for the more active (from an operational point of
view) phase to follow.
3. Cars, 4-seater, were issued in lieu.
4. Less 777 for Sub-section Corporals, not available
APPENDIX VIB
(See Vol. I, pages 27, 50 and 121 : Vol. II, page 178),
R.A.S.C. SYSTEM FOR THE REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE
OF VEHICLES IN THE FIELD
In January, 1940, a Commission went to France to examine the question
of repairs in the field.
War Office, as a brief on the R.A.S.C.
The following paper was prepared for it by D.S.T.,
and maintenance of vehicles in the field.
system then in operation for the repair
1. As planned before the
war
(a) The general system of maintenance and repair of R.A.S.C. vehicles
in the field is based on the presence with
every
operating company of a
workshop section, backed up by one or more Heavy Repair Shops.
Closely related with the successful operation of this
system is the
inclusion in the War Establishments of 10 per cent. spare load-carrying
vehicles in every R.A.S.C. unit,
vitally necessary because (i) apart from
these, every vehicle on the W.E. has its specified load, and this load must
reach its destination; no breakdown of the load-carrier can be permitted to
stop the progress of its load; and (ii) R.A.S.C. companies do not get rest
periods in which to rest and refit.
It is only by the inclusion of these
" spares" that regular workshop inspection of vehicles is rendered possible.
(On the subject of spare vehicles, see also note at end of this Appendix.)
(b) The general system of maintenance and repair is: —
(i) In the Company.
Daily maintenance and inspection by the driver.
Weekly inspection by the section commander.
Fortnightly or monthly inspection by the workshop officer.
Minor repairs by artificers in vehicle lines.
Larger repairs by workshop personnel in company workshops.
(ii) On the L. of C.
Repair and /or replacement of units and assemblies.
Complete overhauls.
Evacuation if irreparable.
(c) Reasons for adoption of this system.
The guiding principle is to make the officer commanding the R.A.S.C.
unit fully responsible for the mechanical condition of his vehicles.
This
he cannot do unless he controls the workshop section as the medium
through which his unit is kept mobile.
Operation and maintenance
cannot be divorced. It is a point of honour, driven into every R.A.S.C.
officer, that he must never evacuate a vehicle except out of sheer neces-
sity due to enemy action, accident or old age of the machine.
At the same time, he must not employ his workshop
section on
repairs when these would interfere with the mobility of the unit or
absorb an undue proportion of the artificers' time.
Anything beyond
the overhaul of a major component should be avoided.
391
390
WO 277/2k
27
