Description and Comparison of Containers
Illustrations of various types of container are to be found in Appendix
XJ.
Wall.
Returnable
under five per cent.
Non-returnable
from 25 per cent. to 50 per cent.
Technical Stores Depots
In the United Kingdom, 9 Petrol Depot was used as a P.O.L. technical
stores depot, from which stores were sent to units to equip them on mobiliza-
tion and also to Petroleum Technical Stores Depots in 21 Army Group.
Two
of the latter units were formed, and to facilitate the process of stocking
them they were originally raised at 9 Petrol Depot.
Certain stores for
P.O.L. units were of R.E. provision.
These were supplied in bulk by the
R.E. to 9 Petrol Depot, who issued in the normal way.
Coastal Tankers
In 1942, the programme for construction of small tankers was upset, as
the Ministry of War Transport decided that the yards and slips which had
been building coastal tankers should be turned over to the production of
cargo vessels.
The need for very considerable numbers of these tankers
to ensure the success of any future amphibious operations was however later
realized, and their construction resumed.
Even so, the vessels available
during the operations in France and Belgium in 1944 were far short of re-
quirements, and at one time the number damaged and under repair through
groundings or enemy action, or otherwise withdrawn from service, led to
short deliveries of petrol, which gave rise to some anxiety.
(See also Chapter
VIII.)
There was also a shortage of small tankers in Middle East, con-
cerning which refer to Chapter VI.
Standardization of P.O.L.
The problem of the numerous varieties of fuel and lubricants required
for the different types of vehicles and stationary
Army was constantly presenting itself throughout the war.
machinery
Designers and manufacturers of prime movers and stationary engines
tend to introduce peculiarities in their products which require a special fuel
or lubricant to enable optimum performance to be achieved.
This leads to
a demand for a multiplicity of types of fuel and lubricants.
On the other
hand, a military supply system in war obviously asks that
the variety
increasingly complicated.
grades of both be cut to a minimum or provision. storage and distribution ar
In spite of constant watchfulness on the part of sm? the number an
variety of petroleum products in current sunnly bu the R.A.S.C grew to a
262
considerable figure during the war. There were 11 types of liquid fuel and
80 types of lubricants in use in the Army before standardization with America
took place in 1943.
These were progressively reduced to five types of fuel
and 55 types of lubricants.
after standardization, see Appendix XL.
For a list of the principal types, before and
The question of the quality of the lubricant and grease provided had been
satisfactorily solved by an arrangement whereby these items were no longer
bought automatically from the lowest tenderer.
The increasing number of
matters concerning specifications and quality control as between War Office.
the U.S. Forces, and the oil industry, led to the appointment in 1942 to S.T.2
of an expert petroleum technician, to deal with them.
Later, a separate
section of the branch was formed to deal solely with quality control.
Generally speaking, the efforts to keep down the number of varieties and
grades of petroleum products, particularly lubricants, had been successful.
But it was clear that the problem would become more extensive and com-
plicated with the entry of the United States into the war, and the certainty
that petroleum products for the vehicles and equipment of both countries
must at all costs be completely interchangeable on a common user basis, and
that there must be uniformity as to mutual qualities, specifications, nomen-
clature, and identification in the field.
A War Office representative therefore went to the U.S.A. and reached a
satisfactory degree of co-ordination with the U.S. Forces.
and take, a unification and simplification of grades was achieved, particularly
those of automotive lubricants and greases, which proved of value in sub-
sequent operations.
Following this, the change-over from the British " M" grades of lubricating
oils to the American detergent grades, known as " Heavy Duty" (H.D.), was
mainly carried out in 1943.
Since the oils so changed, and gear oils in
which no change was necessary, represented the bulk of the lubricant re-
quirements of the forces, this was a considerable step forward both in quality
and in
progress towards complete inter-changeability between the British
and U.S. forces.
The eventual resulting simplification of supply in theatres
of war was considerable, but in the case of the introduction of H.D. oils
initial difficulties were extensive.
The cleansing action of these oils in engines
necessitated flushing, draining and filter change when the oil change-over was
effected, and it was technically undesirable that "M" grades should be used
again in any engine in which H.D. oils had been used.
The chief difficulties which had to be taken into consideration in each
theatre when the change-over was about to be made were as follows.
Stocks
Di He hen the change-over wast base packed P.O.L. depots, and all teted
C. and forward distribution points, so that the change would be effected
smoothly throughout the command.
Existing stocks of the old grades, both
in depots and in transit, had to be consumed before the use of the new
grades became general, as otherwise, once the change had been efiected, very
litte demand for the ola grades would arise and large quantities of unwanted
oils would be left on hand.
Care had to be taken in the maintenance of
reserve levels throughout the change-over to ensure that the lubricating oil
position in any one theatre was not imperilled.
Finally, the change-over had
to be co-ordinated with other services, chiefly Ordnance, who were responsible
for the supply of filters and filter cloth.
263
WO 277/21
27
