into the theatre changes from package to bulk, new and larger Petrol Depots
will take over, thus freeing the small Type "C" Depots to open advanced
depots, or be reallocated.
(b) Bulk storage—initial stage :-
(i) General areas to be allocated for the development of bulk facilities
must be decided from air photographs and large scale maps.
An
advance party of a Bulk Petroleum Storage Company, R.A.S.C.,
must be included in the early landings of administrative troops, to
reconnoitre and plan, in conjunction with R.E. and S.T. technical
staffs, for bulk reception and storage facilities.
Storage installations,
once established, will be operated and maintained by B.P.S. Cs.
(i) " Floating tankage" :—
Responsibility :—
Provision
Towing across Channel; placing
E.-in-C.
R.N.
and maintaining moorings.
Barge to shore line
Chief Engineer of Force
and R.N.
Operation
D.S.T. of Force.
Concrete storage barges, each of approximately 180 tons' capacity,
are to be used for floating tankage.
Their purpose is to provide
initial bulk storage facilities in harbours, estuaries, and inland water-
ways at the earliest opportunity.
They are not transport craft, and
should only be used in sheltered waters, with a level bottom, suitable
for tanker ships from which they will be filled by line.
Experiments
have shown that discharge of a tanker riding at moorings off shore
is most uncertain, and also indicate that, where concrete barges are
used in tidal conditions, with no berthing facilities, it will be best to
have two lines; one from tanker to shore, and one from shore to
barge.
(iii) Pre-fabricated cylindrical tankage.
Responsibility :-
Provision and erection
E.-in-C.
Operation
D.S.T.
This consists of 30-foot by 9-foot tanks of 40-tons' capacity. They
will be fed by small coastal tankers, and must, therefore, be located
alongside sheltered waters for the reasons given in the previous
sub-paragraph.
(iv) Bolted tankage.
Responsibility :—
Provision and erection
R.E.
Operation
R.A.S.C.
This is of bolted type, and may be used for new storages, or to
reconstitute existing damaged installations, being fed by whatever
proves to be the most suitable means.
It will also be useful to serve
airfields and their feeding from main storages by pipelines.
9-ft tanks can also be used for airfields if available.
30-ft. X
518
(d) Bulk distribution.
i Plan.
A detailed plan of development will form part of the mainten-
ance project, in order that military units and material may be pre-
pared for shipment.
The object must be to develop bulk as early
as possible, and to arrange bulk delivery and refilling of containers
as far forward as the situation permits.
(ii) Road.
The moving forward of bulk petrol to filling centres and to
inland storages by road, and direct feedings to vehicles or refuelling
points, will be carried out by Bulk Petrol Transport Companies,
R.A.S.C.
These companies will also deliver bulk aviation spirit
from storage or pipehead to airfield.
(i) Rail.
Responsibility : Director of Transportation.
Rail tank wagons
of average 20 tons' capacity will be operated when the situation
permits.
(iv) Pipeline.
In order to relieve road and rail traffic, an extensive use
of pipeline to distribute oil to inland storage, distribution points,
and airfields, will be introduced as soon as operations permit.
Main
pipeline routes from base storages to inland depots and distributing
centres may be on a 4-inch or 6-inch basis ; the latter is the largest
size of pipe readily handled without mechanical aid ; subsidiary
development lines will be on a 4-inch basis, or such size as may be
convenient.
519
WO 277/
