Taking civilian capacity at 430,000, this gave a total nominal production
of 1,333,000 Ib., which did not cover the revised requirements by 100,000 lb.
However, four static machine bakeries (A.T.S.) had been approved in
principle, though they were not yet productive; and there were also eisin
prina Bakeries (Mobile, and one Field Bakery Type "A", counting against
home defence forces.
"All these field units proper were employed in home
commands as far as their operational commitments allowed, and their total
capacity was 198,000 lb.
The requirement could, therefore, be met if these
field units produced only at half capacity.
The establishments of existing static bakeries were brought up to date
during 1941-1942, and several new ones were opened, the principal object
being to increase military bread production,
especially
the ration
strengths were large and where there was a shortage of civil and military
baking capacity.
The Tidworth bakery had such heavy calls upon it as the
result of enemy action affecting Bristol and the West that entirely new
machinery had to be installed, which also increased capacity from 50,000
to 60,000 lb. a day.
Employment of A.T.S. for Bread Production
Although, owing to manpower shortages, A.T.S. were introduced into
Army bakery establishments, their employment for bread production proved
uneconomical.
Generally speaking, they could not in the arduous and hot
conditions of a bakery do as much work as men, so they had to be provided
in a much higher ratio than in other forms of substitution for men.
They
were liable to injury when handling bread in and out of the ovens, which
were too high for them; and this work, as well as the handling of sacks of
flour, had to be done by men.
Apart from these limitations, however, they
did much useful work in bread production.
The correct ratio between men and women formed the subject of much
discussion; eventually, when the establishment for the Aldershot bakery was
authorized, including 86 A.T.S. bakers and 33 A.T.S. issuers, the correspond-
ing male element was placed at 83 all told.
The alternative establishments
ing male ament as price are either one officer, seven male other ranks,
and 99 A.T.S., or one officer and 57 male other ranks.
The proportion of
A.T.S. proved inaduate and six A.T.S. bakers had to be added, as the
Wen proved inadequate, and s than had been anticipated, and the original
establishment did or elve fods suicient rest periods, with the result that
disposition.
there was a percentase of women constantes absent from duty through in-
This intermittent loss of working strength prevented attainment
of the full output of 50,000 Ib. daily, and the addition of a few women to
each shift was the only solution.
The need for continuous output and working
by shifts meant that the cookhouse had to be warmed. and meals prepared,
throughout the 24 hours, and extra cooks and mess orderlies had iT
There were great delays in the provision of the static (A.T.S)
necessary, as premises suitable for conversion could not be found; in one
bakeries, owing to shortage of materials.
New construction was always
case, building took 21 months instead of the estimated three, and then pro-
duction was limited by a shortage of bread trollies.
252
Production Policy, 1943
In 1943; the bread supply situation was again examined in view of the
prospective loss of a number of field force bakeries (mobile), due to Be
overseas when the assault on the continent of Europe began.
The position was found to be as follows:-
Gross strength
2,634,000.
Daily bread consumption
Bread supply; Military ...
Civil ...
575,000 lb. (incl. five per cent. pro-
duced in R.A.F. bakeries).
843,000 lb.
Total supply
1,418,000 lb.
These figures excluded London District, whose requirements were easily
met by contract, and N.I.D., where the field bakery and civil contract could
maintain supply between them.
There were 33 mobile bakeries in the United Kingdom, but, while these
had a maximum output of some 693,000 lb., a considerable measure of
under-production had to be accepted, due to two factors:
(a) The need to avoid unnecessary consumption of petrol and rubber
in delivery over long distances, as would occur if the output of
mobile bakeries were substituted for supply from local civil sources.
(b) The necessity for keeping down wear and tear on the machinery
against the day when it would be required to operate overseas at
full
capacity.
This under-production varied from 54 per cent. to 71 per cent.
This policy also ensured a reserve capacity against the problems to come,
of which not the least was the additional commitment on account of the
increase in U.S. troops in the United Kingdom.
The U.S. policy was to put
combat troops into this country as quickly as they could, with little or no
reference to the maintenance of due proportions of administrative services,
particularly bakeries.
In this connection, see below.
Meantime, commands
were enjoined to try and maintain civilian production at existing level.
Production Policy, 1944
In fact, no serious difficulties arose in maintaining bread supply through-
out the
period preceding
the invasion of Europe.
Thereafter, a review
showed that as a result of the fall in ration strength,
military bakeries were
only working to about 50 per cent. capacity.
It was
methods:-
therefore at first proposed to adjust this by the following
(a) To reduce the number of field bakeries (mobile) still in the United
Kingdom until the total production of such units in each command
was up to at least 75 per cent. of nominal output.
(b) To adjust bread supply arrangements, in such a way as to raise
static W.D. bakeries to at least 90 per cent. of nominal output.
(e) Where necessary nes to eat least 9 to accent of laina ouncel civilian
253
(37477)
7
WO 277/2k
27
