Vehicle repairs
Some form of military
third line repair organization was essential, but,
while Ordnance had insufficient artificer personnel available, the R.A.S.C.,
with the majority of the personnel of the Heavy Repair Shop of the M.T.
Depot from Malaya, had little hope of obtaining any equipment for a long
time.
The R.A.S.C. workshop personnel were therefore lent to Ordnance,
who formed them into the first wing of a H.R.S. organization improvised
in requisitioned civilian workshops.
Difficulties in elearance of cargoes
There was a big time lag in the discharge of ships in Colombo.
All
vessels were moored to buoys in the harbour, and discharge was effected
by lighters.
Sometimes a vessel would be in harbour for three weeks before
the hatches were removed, and often a further three would elapse before
discharge was completed.
Items urgently required were often at the bottom
of a hold, due to the world-wide shortage of shipping and the consequent
necessity for loading all ships with stores for all consignees at ports of
In April, 1944, the docks at Colombo and Trincomalee were considerably
congested, owing to the expansion of imports and exports of civil and
Something effective had to be done to clear the jumbled
cargoes. A committee was accordingly formed, of which the D.D.S.T. was
chairman, and which included representatives of the civil departments of the
Admiralty, Port Controller,
Senior Naval Stores Officer, the Commodore
R.N. Superintendent of the Dockyard, and of Movements and Transporta-
Its object was to discuss and co-ordinate transport arrange-
ments for the clearance of the docks at Colombo. Until then the system, so-
called, in operation was that of each department helping itself, using its own
transport to collect whatever stores it thought belonged to it.
The Committee decided that the process of clearance of the
stores from the docks by M.T. must be systematized, and carried out under
and did so, soon bringing order out of chaos.
S. and T. were asked to take over and organize this service,
A representative of the Ministry of War Transport visited
the latter part of 1944 in connection with the working of ports, and on
his return to the United Kingdom reported some difficulty being experienced
in the operation of road transport in this connection.
provided a H.Q., C.R.A.S.C., Transport Column, to supervise the work.
War Office accordingly
Control of Naval Transport
applic to War Office for a Deputy Director of Transport to be appointed,
which was done.
to the Flag Officer, Ceylon.
was under the D.D.S.T., but was attached
The arrangement worked very satisfactorily.
20
Recreational Transport
In February, 1944, S.E.A.C. asked for authority to apply the conditions
governing the use of W.D. road transport for recreational purposes, as in
G.H.Q., India, regulations, to the troops located in Ceylon.
War Office did
not agree to this, as British personnel in Ceylon came under War Office for
financial administration, and were therefore outside the scope of Indian
regulations.
Shortly afterwards, the
Admiralty
issued an instruction, based on a
Treasury ruling, regarding the use of Service transport in Ceylon for recrea-
tional purposes.
It waived the normal restrictions on distance and frequency
whereas military personnel in the island were restricted to
a minimum distance of two miles and to one journey a week.
agreed that the conditions which governed the use in Ceylon
Army Command of W.D. transport for recreational purposes should conform
to the instructions issued by the Admiralty.
Supply Situation
Large reinforcements arrived in the island in the first half of 1942,
which strained the existing supply distribution organization to the utmost.
was necessary to change over from the peace to the war system of accounting
for supplies at the most difficult time.
obviated to a very great extent if Ceylon had been put on the field service
ration scale as soon after the outbreak of war as arrangements could be
Stocks, and the personnel to handle them, could then have been
built up gradually and without confusion.
The troops were fed, but to do so it was necessary to get special train-
loads of supplies from India, and ships arrived which had been diverted
from Indian and Far Eastern ports; the cargoes of many had been trans-
shipped several times,
and were consequently in extremely bad condition.
The crushed and punctured tins alone ran into hundreds of thousands.
The ships and docks had to be
cleared as quickly as possible, and the
supplies
got to the consumers.
Supply was on a hand-to-mouth basis.
and accounting was impossible.
Base Supply Organization
The Headquarters of a newly-raised Indian
Supply Company arrived
and took over the Base Supply Installations in Colombo.
A.A.S.C., R.I.A.S.C., and C.A.S.C. units, manning Base, Field, and Detail
were overworked, and neither
Indian nor
personnel were fully trained.
As a first step towards overcoming the difficulties, a Central Accounts
and Bills Section was formed of R.A.S.C. clerks under a C.A.S.C. officer,
with responsibility for the control of receipts of supplies from
stocks in Base supply installations, and despatches to F.S.Ds.
and D.I.Ds.,
and for the passing for payment of all bills for supplies bought in the island.
This section formed the basis for what became later, first H.Q.,
WO 277/21
27
