CHAPTER XI
BURMA AND THE FAR EAST
Synopsis of events
Before the war spread to the Far East, the British Army there was organized
in two commands, the Malaya Command and the China Command.
Malaya Command comprised the Malay Peninsula and Singapore Island ;
China Command included Hong Kong, Shanghai, and Tientsin, until the two
latter garrisons were withdrawn in August, 1941.
Burma had become independent of India at the beginning of 1937, and
had its own Army, with an element of British and Indian troops.
These commands remained practically on a peace footing for the first two
years of the war.
Then, during 1941, the attitude of the Japanese began to
cause anxiety, and such reinforcements as could be made available were sent
to the three commands in the latter part of the year.
Preparations were
hastened on in all three areas, but the storm broke too soon.
On 7th December, 1941, the Japanese attacked the American naval base
at Pearl Harbour, and declared themselves at war with Great Britain and the
United States of America.
Hong Kong was attacked next day; and after
making what resistance it could, capitulated on 25th December, 1941.
The invasion of Malaya began in the north on 8th December, and our
troops gradually withdrew down the peninsula, until, by the end of January,
1942, they had been forced off the mainland; and a fortnight later Singapore
surrendered.
Burma was invaded in the
extreme south on 10th January,
1942; the
defending forces here too were driven back, and, after some resistance on the
line of the Sittang River, Rangoon was lost on 8th March.
Then the Burma
Army began its 600-mile retreat to the Indian frontier, which the rearmost
elements crossed on 29th May, 1942.
For the next two years, our forces on the Assam and Arakan fronts were
mainly on the defensive, while behind them the process went on
tion for an ultimate offensive against the Japanese, of expansion of the Indian
Army, and of improvement of the lines of communication from India.
operations during 1942 and 1943 on these fronts were of a comparatively
minor character, the most noteworthy being the campaign of Wingate's Long
Range Penetration Groups behind the enemy lines in Burma.
In the autumn of 1943, a new phase began in this theatre, signalized by
the formation of South East Asia Command, which took over the control
operations from India Command. Under the new leadership, the war against
the Japanese assumed a different aspect.
Until that time,
fallen back when the Japanese cut their communications; and active opera-
tions had practically ceased on both sides during the monsoon period.
the policy was to stand firm and rely on air supply when land communica-
tions were severed, and to fight on, march on, and fly on, throughout the
The fruit of thie nolicy was seen in 1944 whan the enemy took the offen-
sive, first in Arakan, and then in Eastern Assam.
case. he cut of a division. and in the latter a whole corns, these held their
Although in the former
26
ground and were maintained continuously and entirely by air. The Japanese
plans were thus completely frustrated,
practically annihilated and the scattered remnants driven back.
By the end of 1944, the Allies were on the offensive on all parts of the
In Arakan, the objective was to capture airfields from which Fourteenth
Army, advancing through Central Burma, could be supplied by air.
objective was achieved, and the advance went on maintained almost entirely
4 Corps, indeed, was altogether dependent on air supply during its
dash to capture Rangoon before the monsoon broke.
plish this, but was only thirty miles away when the city fell to a combined
airborne and seaborne operation at the beginning of May, 1945. This virtually
completed the reconquest of Burma, although there was severe fighting against
considerable Japanese detachments until the final surrender on 20th August,
An expeditionary force of a quarter of a million men was already embark-
ing for the recapture of Singapore, and the place was reoccupied peacefully
in September, 1945.
It had been the intention to send large British forces to the Far East after
the end of the war in Europe, to take part in the intensive war which was to
be waged against the Japanese in South East Asia and the South West Pacific;
and planning and preparation had been going on in the United Kingdom and
elsewhere since 1943.
The unexpectedly early end of the war against the
Japanese meant that these preparations were to a great extent abortive; but
some account is given in Section 6 of this chapter of those which concerned
supply and transport matters as an indication of the lines on which these
services were to be organized in order to meet the conditions which had to be
expected in the theatre of operations, and of the trend of developments as the
result of practical experience against the Japanese in Burma and the Pacific.
A brief account of the system of maintenance employed by the Australians
in New Guinea and of some aspects of supply and transport there is also
included as an illustration of the conditions obtaining in the Pacific theatre.
SECTION 1.-CHINA COMMAND
R.A.S.C. Organization
At the outbreak of war, China Command included three stations, Hong
Kong, Shanghai, and Tientsin.
There was an A.D.S.T. at Command Head-
quarters, and an O.C., R.A.S.C., at each of the three stations.
The R.A.S.C. organization at Hong Kong consisted of a Supply Depot;
a M.T. Company, R.A.S.C.; the Hong Kong Mule Corps, R.I.A.S.C.; an
Officer i/c Transport; and two Officers i/c Barracks, one on the island and
one on the Kowloon Peninsula, the leased territory on the mainland which
formed part of the colony.
There were the usual supply, transport, and barrack services for the small
garrisons at Shanghai and Tientsin until those stations were evacuated in
August, 1941. The outbreak of war brought no great change in the operation
27
WO 277/21
27
