APPENDIX X B
(See Vol. I, page 147)
RESERVE STORAGE AND CONTINUITY SUPPLY OF M.T. PETROL
TO THE BRITISH TROOPS IN EGYPT IN WAR
(Extracts from report prepared by the Mission, sent from the United Kingdom
to examine this question, February, 1939)
1. This report deals only with M.T. spirit.
For technical reasons it has
not proved possible to evolve a combined scheme with the Air Ministry.
It has been assumed that :—
(a) The Mediterranean is closed.
(b) The land forces operating in Egypt require package distribution of
petrol.
(c) After the early stages of the war, the Royal Navy can guarantee freedom
of the Red Sea.
2. Requirements in war of the R.N., the Army, and the R.A.F., in M.T.
spirit, amount to 2,000 tons a month, an average of 20,000 gallons a day.
This
in 4-gallon tins,
represents a daily requirement of 5,000 tins for M.T. spirit
alone ; the R.A.F. require a further 5,000 daily for aviation spirit.
3. Existing facilities to meet the war requirements
(a) The existing system of petroleum products supply in Egypt appears to
have been built up without consideration of war requirements, and no Govern-
ment action has been taken to safeguard supply in time of war.
On the assump-
tion that Alexandria can be ignored as a source of supply in war, the whole
petroleum supply of the country depends on Suez.
(b) The basic supply of M.T. spirit in the country is from indigenous crude
oil refined at Suez.
As the output of the refinery approximates to the annual
consumption of the country, extensive stocks at Suez do not exist.
It is, there-
fore, not possible in Egypt, as elsewhere, to face a percentage loss of stocks, and
still have a reasonable balance in hand.
The refineries, and such stocks as
exist, are extremely vulnerable to enemy air or sea attack, and also to sabotage.
The tin-making and filling plant at Suez is equally vulnerable.
4. Proposed Civil Development
The Shell Company have under consideration a scheme to construct at
Abbassia, Cairo, a new distributing depot, connected to Suez by a pipe-line
with a transit rate of 25 tons an hour of spirit.
This can only be regarded as
an economic and speedy method of transfer from Suez to a centre of off-take,
and is not designed to be used for direct importation of oil ex-tanker ships to
Cairo.
5. Supply in War
(a) In the event of cessation of operation of the installation at Suez, or its
destruction by enemy action or sabotage, the only method of supply is by the
importation of refined products.
be via the Red Sea, either in bulk or tinned and cased.
With the Mediterranean closed, this must
(b) Importation in packages from the East (e.9., Abadan), has attractions,
mainly financial, but heavy consignments in package are cumbersome to handle
and store, and extremely vulnerable during disembarkation and in store.
510
(c) Importation in bulk by tanker is to be preferred, but necessitates :—
(i) The provision of adequate secure storage tanks to receive ships' cargoes,
and adequate pipeline and pump facilities to ensure discharge of the
tanker at a high rate in order to avoid delay in turnround of the ship.
(i) Provision of packages for detailed distribution after the bulk has been
(d) It is, therefore, necessary to consider the problem as two projects :—
(i) The erection of fully protected storage tankage capable of accepting
an economic cargo ex-tanker, connected to deep-water discharge
points by a system of pipelines and pumps capable of handling
200-250 tons an hour.
the building of a protected tin making and filling factory, capable
of a minimum output of 10,000 4-gallon tins a day; or the provision
of protected cleaning and filling plants to deal with returnable
containers, which would be held in war reserve.
The following factors have been borne in mind :—
(a) The length and dimensions of pipelines from Suez to sites, and from
sites to deep water in the Great Bitter Lake.
(b) The selection of sites on which excavation does not present serious
(c) The location of the installation and pipelines so as to enable periodic
turnover of the stored spirit by the Shell Company in the course
(d) For reasons of security, both internal and external, the area between
Fayid and Geneifa is the most suitable, but there is no militar
objection to the area near the Cairo-Suez road, between Km. 99
7. Plans
A number of plans were prepared, many of which had to be rejected by the
Mission itself as either financially impracticable, or technically unsound, and
four alternative plans finally remained.
In every instance provision was made
for the tankage being buried to afford protection against a direct hit by a 500-lb.
Plan " A". —To store at Geneifa 4,000 tons of M.T. spirit, with a main
discharge point capable of handling 250 tons an hour at the Great Bitter Lake,
and a secondary discharge point capable of handling 45 tons an hour at Suez.
Approximate cost £100,000.
This includes 1,000 tons of protected storage at
Cairo, connected with the Shell Company's line.
Plan "B"—In order to provide two points of intake at a rapid rate of
discharge from tanker (250 tons an hour). to at Suer and Creat Bitter Lake.
Storage of 8.000 tons at Geneifa. with pinelines to hoth of those areas, and with
1.000 tons of tankage at Cairo.
Approximate cost £210,000.
Plan "C"-In order to reduce cost of pipelines. and to avoid having to
develop a new oilpoint in miniature at Geneifa, to place 8,000 tons storage in
(07477)
LL 2
511
WO 277)
27
