When the Lethbridge Mission report was eventually received, it was found
that its suggestions about special ration packs agreed with the conclusions of
the War Office Committee, with the exception of the requirement for a Pacific
Emergency Ration, and this was consequently produced (see Appendix IX).
SECTION 5.—THE RECONQUEST OF BURMA
The Operational Picture
The pursuit of the enemy wherever he could be found was carried on
relentlessly; and, though fierce fighting continued, the defeat of the Japanese
in Assam was at last complete, and the last of them had left Indian soil by
20th August, 1944.
The plan for the reconquest of Burma was known as Operation " Capital",
and comprised four phases.
These may be summed up, as far as Fourteenth
Army was concerned, in terms of the main objectives of each, with the dates
on which these were achieved, as follows: —
Phase 1: Kalemyo and Kalewa; Kalewa was taken on 2nd December,
1944.
Phase II: Ye-U and Shwebo, captured on 2nd and 10th January, 1945,
respectively.
Phase III: Mandalay, finally captured on 20th March, 1945.
Phase IV: Rangoon. This was captured on 3rd May, 1945, by a com-
bined sea and air landing, mounted by 15 Corps from Arakan.
Both
4 Corps and 33 Corps had been pressing southwards as fast as they
could, and the leading troops of 4 Corps were only 32 miles, and of
33 Corps some 200 miles, from their objective.
The monsoon broke
early that year, on the very day that Rangoon was re-occupied; it
would have been impossible to maintain Fourteenth Army in Central
Burma during the monsoon if the port of Rangoon had not been
reopened.
The operations in Arakan during the period from November, 1944, to
May, 1945, were directed principally to the capture of airfields from which
Fourteenth Army could be maintained by air supply during Phase IV.
After the capture of Rangoon, severe fighting took place against con-
siderable Japanese detachments,
until all resistance ceased with the final
surrender on 15th August, 1945.
Air Supply in the Monsoon, 1944
The chief obstacle to our advance in the operations which resulted in
clearing the enemy out of Assam was the weather. It was the policy of the
Supreme Allied Commander that his forces should fight on, march on, and
fly on, throughout the monsoon (i.e., between May and November), and that
a standstill should not be accepted for its duration as hitherto.
was carried out, but it was not easy.
Wheeled transport could not leave the
main roads, many bridges were down, and landslides were numerous.
transport was indispensahle. and at a premium. Air sunnlv was carried on
with the greatest difficulty.
72
A column of two brigades was detached from Kohima towards Ukhrul,
by way of a route over very difficult country, with tracks so bad that on one
occasion it took four hours to advance 500 yards.
The column was supplied
by air drop, which was an extremely difficult proceeding in the continuous
thick cloud conditions prevailing.
Not only were the atmospheric conditions
during the monsoon very dangerous to aircraft, but it was often impossible
to find a gap in the clouds and to locate the dropping zones; there were con-
sequently many abortive sorties.
One of the two brigades in this particular
column had, in consequence of the shortage of mules, only one day's reserve
No supply drop was then received by either brigade for three
days, owing to cloud, and one brigade was then down to half a day's rations,
while the other had none.
was no possible alternative method of
supply, and the squadron responsible for the air drop made repeated attempts
to get through without success.
At last it found one gap in the cloud over
the whole area, and under that gap was the dropping zone for the force.
33 Corps recorded this as nothing less than a miracle, and the answer to many
After this experience, the following rules were laid down for troops
depending on supply drop during the monsoon: -
(a) All troops were to carry a minimum of three days' reserve of supplies.
(b) Immediately the supply drop failed, all troops and mules were to
be put on half rations until dropping was resumed.
This meant that the troops could exist for six days, plus their emergency
After these rules were made, the greatest number of consecutive days
on which dropping proved impossible was five.
A serious situation arose
once again in the Ukhrul column, due to non-observance of the rules; but,
although the troops suffered, the shortage was made up to some extent with
locally purchased rice and cattle, and with mule meat.
was an expedient which could be ill-afforded from the transport point of view,
owing to the shortage of this type of transport animal.
Leave of Animal Transport Personnel
In order to provide even the inadequate amount of transport for this
column, it had been necessary to use every available pack animal, including
five troops from another division.
This was yet another example of the con-
tinuous strain that was imposed on the animal transport companies; the
drivers were becoming excessively tired, for, although other troops had
periodically been given rest and leave, this had never been possible for the
personnel of A.T. companies.
50 per cent. of the A.T. companies had had
no leave for over 18 months, and some had been in Fourteenth Army
for more than two years without leave.
The Commander, 33 Corps, conse-
quently agreed that rest for drivers must take priority over operations during
the monsoon period, and large parties were immediately sent on leave.
subsequent policy was for five per cent. of them always to be on leave.
Operation " Capital", Phase I
The operations on the Assam and North Burma front during this phase
were under the direction of 33 Corps.
The first task was the clearance of
the roads to Kalewa and Tiddim.
23 Division started down the Tamu road,
73
WO 277/21
27
