but even though supplies of ingredients were so limited that production of
the fuel seemed unlikely to be sufficient to meet requirements, all theatres
held large stocks at the end of the war.
Another problem was that, while supply to British formations was of
ready-mixed fuels, the Canadian Army wanted to continue their own method.
whereby petrol, aluminium stearate and xylenoid were supplied separately and
mixed in a Mobile Field Mixing Plant. It was obviously undesirable that
21 Army Group should have two different methods of supply in the Armies
under its command, and the Canadians eventually adopted the British system.
Thus, what had at first appeared to be merely the acceptance of another
grade of fuel for supply by the R.A.S.C., became a distinct and involved
problem.
SECTION 6.—BARRACK SERVICES
Responsibility for issue of fuel, light and disinfectants
Instructions were issued to home commands in May, 1939, that in the
event of an emergency, fuel, light and disinfectants would continue to be
provided by the Barrack Department for troops quartered in barracks and
permanent hutments; but that for troops quartered in camps,
temporary
hutments and requisitioned buildings, provision would be made through the
R.A.S.C. supply organization, and issues accounted for by units on Army
Form F 727A, the form for fuel and light accounts in camp.
This decision resulted in units having to deal through different channels
for these commodities, according to the type of accommodation occupied.
They might in some cases be quartered partly in one and partly in the other
type, when the complication is obvious.
The system was found to be un-
satisfactory, and the normal procedure of issue of and accounting for these
items by Officers i/c Barracks was adopted in March,
1940, a
simplified
system of accounting being introduced at the same time (see A.C.I. 217 of
1940).
The matter was further simplified in October, 1943, when it was decided
that Officers i/c Barracks would be solely responsible for the supply of
all disinfectants and all water-purifying chemicals (except water sterilizing
outfits) required for use at home or for initial issues to complete A.F. G 1098
(War Equipment) stores.
had been indenting for, and supplying, these items.
Hitherto, both C.S.Ds. and Officers i/c Barracks
C.S.Ds. continued to supply water sterilizing outfits and Tommy cookers
for field so continued to supply water sie supplies of chemicals for overseas
water purifying plants continued to be submitted to S.T.6, the Supply Branch
at the War Office.
Electricity, Gas and Water Supply
There was no difficulty in ST. in arranging for the supply of electricity.
895, and water, but these services gave a great deal of work in barrack offices.
Ofers ile harole were empowered to mole adreamenta for supply to
requisitioned premises of a normal domestic type.
The extent of the re-
sponsibility is indicated by the figures for the value of bills passed annually
by the average officer i /c barracks which amounted to f33 000 for electricity,
€15,000 for gas, and £16,000 for water.
266
Other Barrack Charge Statistics
The following details indicate the nature of an average barrack charge,
i.e.,
during the war.
the responsibility of an officer i/c barracks in the United Kingdom
The officer in charge had an assistant officer and 11 clerks.
He had on the average 114 units to administer,
with a total strength of
23,000, spread over an area of 800 square miles.
amounted to £275,000 a year.
His financial responsibility
Standardization of Procedure
On the formation of S.T.7 in May, 1943, special attention was directed
from the start to the necessity for evolving a standard procedure from the
many in operation in home commands.
They varied not only
between
different commands but also within commands.
These variations had risen
in consequence of the shortage of trained barrack personnel, local admini-
strative difficulties, and the paramount necessity for getting on with the job
without waiting for detailed instructions from higher authority.
Different
officers evolved different methods, some good,
others not so good.
The
advantages of a standardized barrack
procedure
were obvious.
Units
would be familiar with it, however often they changed station at home, and
Officers i/c Barracks would have the benefit of collective experience.
The keynote of the reforms introduced was simplicity. They included
the following: —
(a) Standardization of accounting for accommodation stores.
(b) Simplification of unit monthly fuel accounts.
(c) Improvement in the administration of conservancy services, effecting
an annual saving of £160,000.
(d) Economy resulting from investigations by the Fuel Technologist.
(e) Provision of all disinfectants and water
purifying chemicals, except
water sterilizing outfits, by Officers i/c Barracks, instead of by both
the latter and by C.S.Ds.
(f) Standardization of the procedure for dealing with barrack damages
at marching-out inspections.
(g) Standardization of allotment of duties in a barrack office.
(h) Standardized
procedure for dealing with bills from public utility
companies for the supply of gas, electricity or water to large numbers
of requisitioned buildings.
Fuel Accounts
In peace, and for some months after the outbreak of war, the system
ot accounting for fuel in the Army was very intricate, and required expert
Knowlednting for fle the account to be properly prepared.
It required a
number of separate scales for various separate services in barracks and
camps; i.e., there were allowances for cooking and heating, with additions
for what were termed " accessories" -various sorts of accommodation used
is stores, offices, etc. and for purposes such as drying wet clothes, besides
The fuel year consisted of
allowances for
messes, married quarters, etc.
three periods of four months each, one being a summer period, from June
267
WO 277/21
27
