Another complication was introduced by the fact that the policy of the
Admiralty and of the Air Ministry was, on various occasions, found
confict with that of the War Office, and these differences had also to be
reconciled.
Fundamental Principle of the Concession
The use of W.D. vehicles for this purpose was prohibited on the outbreak
In December, 1939, however, such use was conceded
operational stations overseas; and at the end of 1940 the concession was
extended to troops in the United Kingdom.
The fundamental principle on which the concession for the use of W.D.
transport for recreational purposes was based was that it might be used
only where it was impossible, in view of the isolation of a unit's quarters,
for individuals to obtain, within a two-mile radius, such recreation as was
necessary to assist in keeping them healthy in mind and body.
amenities, e.., sports grounds, places of amusement and shops, existed within
two miles of a unit's quarters, W.D. transport was on no account to be used
to secure better or more popular amenities.
W.D. vehicles were not to be used where public service transport
was available, unless this was unduly expensive for other ranks; or where
rail travel facilities could be provided, under a later arrangement which is
They were not to be used for the purpose of accepting
hospitality or attending race meetings; or for journeys to places less than
two, or more than 20, miles from the unit's accommodation.
was allowed more than one journey a fortnight, except in winter,
journey a week might be allowed, subject to specific notification to that effect
The type of vehicle used was not to exceed the capacity required; cars
were not to be used, unless it was uneconomical to use a larger vehicle.
was a standard charge of one penny a mile for each
officer, and one farthing
a mile for each soldier or auxiliary, for the actual distance travelled, with
a maximum charge of sixpence for other ranks.
Officers travelling with
other ranks were to be assessed at the lower rate.
Restrictions Imposed
It was necessary in 1942, to restrict considerably the use of W.D. transport
for recreational purposes.
in order to set a definite limit to the extent of
suda use, an allotment of 135,000 gallons of petrol a month was made by the
Oit Control Board for use in this way by the Army in the United Kingdom.
Within this figure, a tree issue of 4,500 gallons a month was allotted "
A.A. Command for their scattered and
isolated units.
The figures for
a result considerably less than the allotment.
petrol consumption on this service, over a period of three months, shower
In the winter of 1941-1942, and each subsequent winter, the additional
concession was granted for the use of transport for recreational purposes
once a week instead of once a fortnight. Where a good case was established,
the use of W.D. transport for recreational purposes, beyond the limit of 20
miles, might be approved by the War Office.
Representations were made that hardship was caused to some units in
isolated locations because they had no unit transport and the o. i/c trans-
port had not enough .D. vehicles available to meet recreational demands.
The Treasury approved the hire of civilian vehicles on a casual basis for
this service where necessary in particular circumstances, the usual conditions
being applicable otherwise.
In order to effect economy in rubber, recreational travel by rail
authorized in suitable cases in May, 1943.
Application to Officers
The A.C.I. (2105 of 1942) which embodied the instructions in force
on the subject, while it allowed this concession to officers as well as to
other ranks, neither specifically permitted nor forbade such use
to enable
officers to enjoy pastimes, such as shooting, fishing, and golf. It was con-
sidered undesirable on political
grounds to grant formal authority for the
use of transport for these special purposes; and commanders were therefore
informed semi-officially that there was no objection provided that the various
provisions of the A.C.I., as regards distance, frequency of entitlement, type
of vehicle, availability of public service vehicles, etc., were strictly adhered to.
Concessions to Overseas Commands
As the result of representations from overseas theatres, the Treasury in
September, 1943, agreed to the relaxation of the conditions governing the
use of W.D. transport for recreational purposes in certain of those theatres
(a) North Africa and Middle East.-The existing limit of 20 miles a
journey in North Africa and of 50 miles in Middle East, of one
journey a week for each individual, and the repayment charges,
might be waived at the discretion of divisional commanders and
the equivalent; but the minimum of two miles a journey was to stand.
The waiver was not to apply to troops quartered in large towns
of base areas, to which the existing conditions would continue to
(b) Trag, East Africa, and West Africa.-The existing limit of 20 miles
a journey and the repayment charges were waived subject to
discretion of divisional commanders, etc.
The minimum limit of
two miles, and the limit of one journey a week, were to stand.
(c) North Caribbean Area.-In March, 1944, the use of W.D. transport
for recreational purposes and for educational purposes
other
ranks in the North Caribbean Area was approved, subject to a
repayment rate of one farthing a mile, without restriction as to the
maximum distance,
provided that not more than 120 miles
individual a quarter for recreational purposes was allowed.
WO 277/21
27
