RESTRICTED
Pacific Emergency Ration
This ration was the direct result of the Lethbridge Mission report.
It was
based on the Australian Type A.3 ration to provide a ration for use in an
emergency by detached patrols or other troops likely to be cut off.
It had to
be both light and compact.
The ration eventually produced weighed only
1-lb. gross, and had a volume of 27½ cubic inches.
Its make-up, in its final
form, is shown in Appendix IX.
It included salt tablets and mepacrine (anti-
malaria) tablets; but water-sterilizing tablets and detaster tablets had to be
excluded, as there were no facilities in the trade for the production of a suit-
able container for them, and the medical authorities agreed to rely on the
individual outfit issued to each man for these items.
R.A.S.C. Supply Units
In consequence of the recommendations of the Lethbridge Mission, War
Office took action to prepare special War Establishments for supply units to
be employed in the Far East, and to raise and train experimental units so
that a pool of fully trained personnel should be available as a nucleus for the
formation of other units. A spare Base Supply Depot was made the basis for
a comprehensive system of training, supplementing the normal work of the
Supply Training Centre; and a Mobile Field Bakery which had been training
units of 21 Army Group was now used to train others for the Far East, paying
particular attention to producing bread with improvised apparatus, a matter
on which the Lethbridge Mission had laid stress.
Provisional experimental units were formed of various types of supply
unit, and practical experiments were carried out in conditions artificially
created to simulate as nearly as possible those which would be encountered in
the Pacific theatre.
As a result, new
War Establishments were drawn up
covering
the following
units, of which some details
are contained
Appendix IIH:
(a) H.Q., C.R.A.S.C., Supply Units (Light).
(b) Base Supply Depot, Type "A" (Light).
(c) H.Q., Supply Company (Light).
(e) H.Q., Field Bakery Company (Light).
(A Field Bakery Platoon (Light).
Machine Maintenance and M.T. Platoon (for field bakery).
(h) Port Detachment, R.A.S.C. (Light).
(i) Pest Infestation Unit (Light), subsequently redesignated Pest Destruc-
For the position regarding the despatch of these units from the United
Kingdom, see Appendix VO.
R.A.S.C. and Air Supply
The recommendation of the Lethbridge Mission that all R.A.S.C. units
should be trained in Air Transport duties was not fully accepted by the War
Office. It was. however. considered essential that all R.A.S.C. second line
transport commanies sent out to the Far Bactern theatre should he ailed in
108
the stowing of their own equipment if required to act in an air-portable role,
and in the reception of stores and supplies either by air-landing of air-
dropping.
This last task was no longer to be considered that of specialists,
and it was laid down as War Office policy that every R.A.S.C. officer should
acquire a knowledge of this sphere of Corps activity.
Steps were also taken
to train a proportion of all transport personnel of suitable medical category
in air despatch duties.
Transport Organization
The primary role of the British divisions which it was planned to send out
from Europe to the Far East was to be one with a normal L. of C., and the
secondary role a seaborne or airborne assault.
The design of the second line
divisional R.A.S.C. was therefore planned on a basis of four 2-platoon com-
panies, of which one company
might be equipped with jeeps, while
others might be equipped with 3-ton lorries, or other suitable vehicles, includ-
Corps, Army, and L. of C. transport units were to be organized
on the same basis as for European warfare, though it was expected that it
might be necessary to use a higher proportion of relief driver increments in
G.T. companies, especially those with a dual role, i.e., which were to operate
both land and amphibian vehicies.
A.L.F.S.E.A's. proposals in this respect
were for three R.D.Is. for 4-platoon G.T. companies, and two R.D.Is. for
3-platoon companies; and for two R.D.Is. for divisional companies.
It was decided that the normal R.A.S.C. transport organization gave a
sufficient flexibility in operation for use in the Far East, and that it was un-
necessary to modify it on the lines suggested by the Lethbridge Mission.
could be split up; but lightweight two-wheeled technical trailers were approved
in place of the standard machinery and stores 3-ton lorries.
were of five types, i.e., electrical repair; generator; machinery; store; and
Amphibian Policy
The policy to be adopted for the operation of amphibians in the war in
the Far East was formulated by War Office in December, 1944, on the follow-
(a) There would be two categories of amphibians, i.e.,
(i) Support amphibians, including two types of L.V.T.;
(i Lopporarriers for use for assault and maintenance to include
DUKWs, L.V.Ts., Neptunes and Terrapins.
(b) There was a requirement for both wheeled and tracked types of
amphibians, the normal proportion being 50 per cent. of each type.
(c) Support amphibians should be manned by Royal Marines; load-
carrying amphibians by the Army, and by the R.A.S.C. in particular.
(d) Six companies would be required for Beach Groups, and twelve as
Army Troops and to be available when needed to carry troops in the
(The total requirement was later reduced to twelve com-
109
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
