(e) Maximum speeds for cars and motor-cycles were reduced from
60 to 50 miles an hour.
(* The practice of keeping M.T. vehicles under load for continuous
periods for emergency reasons was
to be reviewed, and reduced
to a minimum.
(g) Alternative methods of transport, e.g.,
animal transport and hand-
carts, were to be used, where practicable, for drawing stores and
rations and for domestic services in barracks and camps.
Dificulties were experienced in interpreting these instructions, and a few
months later they were amplified.
The essence of them had been to achieve
a reduction in the overall mileage run by M.T. vehicles generally, with a
view to definite economy in petrol and rubber, and to ensure that every
vehicle was off the road for a fixed period.
There was no intention of
hampering the urgent conduct of the war, or creating uneconomical situa-
of the rigid application of the instructions.
" essential services" was extended to cover the movement of personnel and
stores in connection with moves overseas, the loading and
ships and railway wagons, assistance to the civil authorities in urgent cases,
training at M.T. establishments, and the transport details of Station Trans-
port Companies where these were of essential urgency.
hiring might be made as a result of the restrictions, since that would have
defeated the whole object of the economy
at conserving fuel and rubber both within and outside the Army.
Petrol Rationing Scheme
The situation at the beginning of 1942 made it necessary to take further
steps to conserve petrol, and the Army Council decided that a petrol ration-
ing scheme should be introduced in each command.
which had already been initiated in one corps and was working well and
favoured both formation and unit commanders, is described as follows.
Each headquarters called for a return from units under their control of
their petrol consumption for the previous three months, excluding amounts
used for exercises. Similar types of units were then compared.
the greatest consumption, and that with the least, were taken, and an average
struck between the two on a monthly basis.
The result was the new ration
Petrol for exercises was allotted separately, and was
It had to be impressed on units that the ration was the maximum, and
was not an entitlement, and a special appeal was necessary to those units
with a better consumption before the introduction of the scheme not to
exceed their previous figure thereafter.
After the scheme had been introduced, units sent in to the appropriate
headquarters a monthly return of each month's consumption;
and, where
a uses, had exceeded its ration, the commanding officer would, in exception
grounds for the expenditure.
cases, de liable to pay for the overdrawal, unless he could show reasonable
A "Black List" was kept, and if units appeared
on it regularly, sterner methods were used to enforce adherence to the
might be necessary.
Atle the first month, slight adjustment to suit individual units
The basic idea of the scheme was that sensible men cut their coats
according to their cloth.
If therefore a commanding officer was allowed
only a limited ration of petrol, he was likely to take considerable pains to
see that none was wasted or used unnecessarily.
For any such scheme to succeed, it must receive the support of Army
and formation commanders and their staffs, as there would be some uneasiness
at first among commanding officers from the fear that their training would
The corps in question had in fact carried out its reductions
without upsetting training at all, and the divisional commanders agreed that
the scheme was an unqualfied success.
Speeds of Service Vehicles
The War Office and Air Ministry had in July, 1941, agreed certain
maximum speeds for all types of M.T. vehicles operated by the Army and
the R.A.F., and these were also accepted by the Admiralty, which
operated comparatively few vehicles.
At the beginning of 1942, in consequence of the vital importance of
conserving supplies of rubber, and in view of the very definite relationships
between vehicle speeds and consumption of P.O.L. and wear of tyres, it
was decided that a reduction must be effected in the maximum speed limits
previously laid down for W.D. vehicles.
The revised speed limits were :
Cars, over 10 h.p.
50 miles an hour.
Cars, 10 h.p. and under
Motor-cycles
Trucks, 15-cwt.
Load-carriers,
3-ton
Load-carriers,
under 3-ton
Coaches and troop-carriers
Tracked vehicles
Tractors, tracked
Tractors,
wheeled (including tank
tralls
porters)
About April, 1942, a decision of the Lord President's Committee restric-
ted Service motor cars of all types and motor-cycles to a maximum speed
of 40 miles an hour.
A counter
to civilian criticisms of the manner in which the Services
managed their transport was found in a suggestion by the G.O.C.-in-C. of
a command that representations should be made to the Ministries concerned
for the application to all civilian operated M.T. vehicles of the same speed
limits as were imposed on W.D. vehicles.
It appeared that the matter had
already been discussed by the Lord President's Committee, which had decided
that such a restriction should not be imposed; but action was contemplated
by the civil authorities to enforce existing civilian speed limits more strictly.
In June, 1942, the W.D. limits were revised.
The limits imposed by
law were to be observed in normal circumstances, e.g., in built-up areas, and
during the black-out, and in relation to the weight or classification of the
vehicle.
In the last case, this appled principally to lorries, 3-ton and over,
Which, by the Road Traffic Act, 1930, were limited to 20 m.p.h. at all times.
181
WO 277/21
27
