which believed that equal attention should be paid to catering for Indian as
for British troops eventually gained the ascendancy; but, with the limited
resources available, any practical assistance was for a long time impossible.
The newly-established E.C.T.Cs.,
however, included Indian wings, which
fourished and proved worth the effort, the cooks re-acting favourably to
The efforts so made on behalf of Indian stoops in S.B.A.C.,
together with the definite recommendations put forward as to the urgent need
for training and grading Indian cooks, did much to stimulate the beginnings
of an Indian Catering Corps.
The feeding arrangements on the L. of C. were a constant source of
trouble and complaint, and were the subject of adverse comment by Lord
Munster, who was sent out as a special envoy to enquire into the welfare of
the troops in S.E.A.C. This problem became one of the first priority, and
A.C.CC ficers were allotted to the work as they became available. Ideas for
bulk feeding, which had been put into practice in the mounting of Operation
"verlord" (see Chapter VIID, were incorporated here, particularly at the
feeding centres at the river crossing near Gauhati, where there was a constant
flow of British and Indian troops, 2,000 daily being served.
Further up the line, at junctions and important stations, old-fashioned
messing detachments, till then working without direction or supervision, were
brought under the control of area catering advisers. The detachments were
still under the command of G.H.Q., India, but a
scheme was put in
operation for their reorganization as, in effect, L. of C. feeding companies,
adequately staffed to take over transit feeding in any part of the A.L.F.S.E.A.
Sten.
Measures to Improve Standard of Feeding
The use of air supply had the subsidiary but very beneficial result that it
was possible to send fresh supplies to the forward troops, a valuable contri-
buting factor to the maintenance of health and morale.
a day of vegetables, fruit and eggs were sent forward in this way.
of meat for British troops continued, and the supply of this commodity was
Air-dropping of cooked foodstuffs was initiated
at Christmas, 1944, when hampers containing Christmas fare for the British
troops in the 81 West African Division were dropped. During March, April
and May, 1945, 5,000 portions of cakes, buns and sausage rolls were dropped
daily to forward divisions. In a theatre of war where feeding by pack rations
particularly in relieving the monotony of a pack ration.
A revised field service ration scale for Indian troops was introduced in
November, 1944, followed by a revised scale for British troops on Ist March,
1945, and for African troops on Ist May. These scales were not only of great
calorific value, but provided a more varied and palatable diet. For their
composition, see Appendix IX.
The scale for British troops, in particular, provided by far the best scale
in issue to British personnel anwhere in the world. as was indeed justifiable
for the theatre so completely lacking in amenities of any description; and it
was considered to have fulfilled the requirement, even at the high standard
98
stated by the Lethbridge Mission.
The inclusion of additional items such as
tinned cake, variety meats, and tinned puddings, ensured greater variety in
the most convenient form.
The basic allowance of 2-oz. tobacco, or 50
cigarettes a week, was doubled for all troops serving in the forward area.
This increase, intended to overcome the absence of facilities for the troops to
buy such items, was opposed on financial grounds, but eventually approved
A 3,000-ton refrigerated store ship arrived from the United Kingdom in
February, 1945, and was located at Chittagong as a floating store.
cold storage plant was also installed at this port in March.
A 500-ton
Rail delivery of
frozen meat into Assam began in January, and the fly-in of this commodity
could then be stopped. While these steps greatly improved the situation as
regards British and African troops, meat issues to Indian troops could not
be increased to the same extent; they were, however, raised to eight issues a
month by February.
Several factors prevented further improvement; the large
number of Indian troops in the theatre compared with the available supply
of goats, the apparent impossibility of increasing the supply of dehydrated
meat from India, and the religious susceptibilities of the Indian troops them-
Although Fourteenth Army had a local purchase organization, its activities
were very limited, since, apart from a few vegetables and fruits, the local
economy could provide little in the way of supplies.
The procurement of rice
was treated as a separate problem, and was dealt with by the Civil Affairs
Although improved ration packs were introduced and put into production
in the United Kingdom, it does not appear that they were actually in issue
in Burma before the end of the war with Japan. They are therefore discussed
in Section 6 of this chapter.
Civil Affairs Supplies
As the reconquest of Burma proceeded, the Civil Affairs organization
took over the administration of the civil population.
siderable measures for the relief of destitutes and refugees.
Service depots for relief supplies and stores were established at the principal
Army advanced bases.
The difficulty of course lay in moving these supplies
forward to distribution centres; and Army air and road transport had to be
used for this purpose until such time as Civil Affairs Service transport com-
panies could be formed. In spite of the shortage of transport, the paucity of
communications, and bad weather, the whole of the relief supplies were
successfully distributed, including 6,000 tons of rice, 1,500 tons of salt, and
large quantities of milk and other stores, up to November, 1944.
Affairs transport companies gradually came into operation,
being restricted by the shortage of vehicles, as only about 1,900 could be
spared out of the 7,000 required.
Operation " Capital", Phase IV
After Meiktila and Mandalay had been finally cleared, the defeated
Japanese
army began to withdraw southwards.
Only about five weeks
remained before the monsoon was due to break; when it did so, it would cut
the land line of communication from Kalewa to Shwebo, which was a stretch
WO 277/21
27
