to a revised Home Service scale being published in October, 1940.
The
principal changes were a 25 per cent. cut in the bacon ration, total re-
placement of butter by margarine, reduction in rice, and increases in oatmeal,
milk, and dried fruit.
The question of whether or not a cash allowance was
desirable was still being considered, and ultimately the decision was taken
to substitute an allowance of Ild. a head a day for the weekly issues of
slab cake, meat paste, galantine, meat pie, and the culinary adjuncts; in the
case of the A.T.S., two eggs a week and the culinary adjuncts were replaced
by 1d. a day.
The cash allowance was not applicable to male or A.T.S.
officers, who thereby suffered the loss of the items deleted without recompense.
In the autumn of 1940, persistent allegations were made that the soldier
could buy unlimited supplies of food through the Army canteen.
At the
same time, it became necessary
were kept separate from messing supplies.
The Ministry demanded a drastic
cut in the number of canteens, of which 7,000 were operating; but this could
not be done without adversely affecting general welfare.
At the same time,
the military authorities recognized that there ought to be some restrictions
on the quantity and range of food provided in these institutions.
Canteens were therefore divided into two categories, one to provide full
canteen establishment facilities, and the other to provide light refreshments
only.
The Ministry of Food agreed that this placed the soldier in much
the same position as the industrial worker, as it permitted restaurant meals
to be made available for personnel who were unable to get their normal
meals in mess, and very light refreshments for those who had normal
meals in mess.
The revised Home Service scale was soon brought under review.
In
October and November, 1940, in consequence of the Battle of the Atlantic,
the Ministry of Food were becoming
anxious
about the food situation,
particularly meat, and determined attacks were made on the soldier's ration.
In December, the men's scale was reduced from 10 to 8 oz., and the women's
from 7 to 6 oz.
Compensation in the form of cash was suggested on the
basis that reductions in issues in kind could not be made good by suitable
substitutes as a regular issue, and cash would enable units to exploit local
This the Treasury opposed, on the ground that the national food
resources. This the Tara sure, that the general situation justified a general
reduction in the soldiers' scale, and that the scale of rations should be varied
for difierent classes of personnel.
an increase in cash of 1d. a day.
In the end, compromise was reached on
The next important oh dage was a reduction in the 12 oz. bread ration
to 10 oz. as it was found that units were not drawing their full entitlement.
Limitations had then to be
shortage.
on the use of tinned milk,
easy to handle.
Units tended to take it, even when fresh was available, as it was
In the spring of 1941 considerable pressure was brought to bear by
the Ministry of Fond to reduce the meat ration and to effect savings in
the women's and service ration card holders' scales.
This pressure
shipping losses.
probably based not so much on low stocks as on the possibility of heavy
been approved, and the resources of the U.S.A.
It must he remembered thot and Teace had not then
were not yet available.
Ministry of Food's damand was that the soldiere ration in the TIK should
242
be brought down to the civilian scale, and they produced combined figures
of allocations to the
Service
and N.A.A.F.I.
to show that the soldier was in an exceptionally favourable position.
purported
following cuts were accordingly made by War Office in March, 1941:
Meat from 8 oz. to 6 oz.
Sugar from 2z oz. to 2 oz.
Tea from ¾ oz. to 2/7 oz.
The reduction in meat was to some extent mitigated by an agreement that,
although the civilian could only get offals as part of his meat ration,
the
Army would receive an allocation of offal and sausage of 1 5/7 oz. a day
a head; while N.A.A.F.I. received sufficient manufactured meat to provide
one meat pie, 1 oz. fish paste and 3 oz. galantine a head a week for sale
against the cash element of the ration.
It was also agreed that the War
Office could claim 1/7 oz. cooking fat if required.
Calorie Value of the Ration
As a result of the reduction in the ration in March, 1941, and with a
view to dealing on a scientific basis with any future requests for reductions,
the advice of a nutritional expert who was a member of the Army Hygiene
Advisory Committee, and of the dietetic adviser to the Ministry of Food
was sought.
any further reduction in the calorie value of the ration should be resisted to
The calorie value of the ration after the cut was about 3,136 calories,
with a further 200 for the cash allowance of 22d.
Units could also draw
an additional 4 oz. of bread (two normal, and two for manual labour or
training); this added 250 calories making the total value about 3,586.
may be observed here that, in 1921, the pre-1937 standard ration was estima-
ted at 3,611 calories, and it was claimed that this formed a scientifically
In June, 1936, a Commission of the League of Nations main-
tained that 2,400 net calories are sufficient for a person carrying out no
muscular activities; supplementary calories were added from 75 an hour
for light work to 300 for very hard work.
In 1940, the Director of Hygiene,
War Office, estimated that a fair
average for the soldier under training is 200 net calories additional for
"net" calories was used to define the actual intake
after cooking and table wastage, and the normal means of arriving at the
figure wasing deduct ten ver cent. from the gross (raw food) calorie value.
The Director of Hygiene's estimate, therefore, contemplated a ration of
2,400 + (6 × 200) = 3.600 net, or 4,000 gross.
Home Service Scale, 1941-1945
1941, a pamphlet was issued called "Home Service Ration
This is reproduced at Appendix IX, as revised to 17th
September, 1945. Between the two dates, there had been of course a number
of amendments. but there is no object in tracing everyone of them.
important is noted below; but many were trifling,
due perhaps to temporary
Shortages or surpluses, and many were designed to meet individual prefer-
ences of small sections of the ration strength.
243
WO 277/21
27
