total number in the Army was very small, and many of the types were
obsolete and spare parts for them unobtainable.
War Office
branches,
therefore, provided the
Ministry
with particulars under the following
(a) Vehicles which could be eliminated from the service, and for which
no spares were required, i.e., those completely obsolete.
(b) Vehicles, which could be eliminated gradually in types where spares
were difficult to obtain, but were necessary for the vehicles of the
same type still in the service.
Such repairable vehicles would be
broken down to provide spares for operative vehicles.
(c) Vehicles required to be returned to W.D. service.
It was found that of impressed R.A.S.C. vehicles of which there were less
than 25 of a type in service, the total was 700 load-carriers.
These were
handed over at once to the Ministry of Transport for sale into civilian service.
Spare parts held by the W.D. for such vehicles were also handed over for
the benefit of the potential civilian user.
Restrictions on Scheme
By March, 1941, the demands on the scheme had increased to such
an extent that the Ministry of Supply was obliged to instruct command
superintendents to restrict for two months the acceptance of further vehicles
for repair, so as not to impede work already in progress.
D.Ds.S.T., home commands,
were consequently told by S.T.3, that
R.A.S.C. unit workshops should undertake
vehicle repairs to the fullest
possible extent, in order to keep as many R.A.S.C. vehicles as possible in
operation.
Where repairs were beyond the capacity of unit workshops,
and could not be accepted by the Ministry of Supply, the vehicles were to be
retained by the unit pending disposal instructions, and replacements demanded,
where essential, in the normal way.
Arrangements were also made for the
Heavy Repair Shop, R.A.S.C., at Feltham, to undertake more overhauls
of selected types and makes of vehicle.
The R.A.O.C. established collecting centres for non-runner vehicles, both
"B" and R.A.S.C.
In October, 1941, the situation was reviewed, and it was revealed that
in the six weeks ended 30th September the
number of vehicles sent in
for repair had been 670 a week, but the output only 400 a week.
put in, about 20 per cent. were R.A.S.C.
The gap between intake and
output was serious, as some 8,000 W.D. vehicles were held up in repair
Next month, it was found that output had exceeded intake for the past
six weeks, but there was still two months' accumulation to work off. Output
was 600 a week, but this was expected to rise to 900 a week by February,
Output of engines equalled intake, but there was an accumulation of
The repair scheme therefore appeared to have turned the corner of its
difficulties, and promised to full its obligations in the course of a few
Reorganization of Scheme
Apart from the time-lag in repair, the standard of the repairs effected under
the scheme was not always satisfactory.
With a view to achieving greater
efficiency, the repair procedure of the Ministry of Supply was reorganized.
Instead of repair being carried out in numerous civilian establishments, large
and small, as had been the case, the Ministry appointed the comparatively
small number of 62 substantial civilian repairers, to be known as Ministry
of Supply "Army Auxiliary Workshops"
District superintendents were abolished, but command superintendents
continued to function as before.
At every auxiliary workshop, there was
placed a progress officer for administrative duties, and an inspection officer
to inspect all W.D. vehicles before, during and after repair.
were to be repaired to W.D. standard requirements, i.e., made fit to run a
further 10,000 miles as a minimum.
Motor coaches, Bedford quick loading troop-carrying lorries,
W.D. ambulances were to be returned to their units after repair; all
vehicles were struck off strength on being handed over to the Ministry of
Supply for repair.
Recovery of Spare Parts
A Ministry of Supply Section had been set up at the Ordnance Depot,
Chilwell, to deal with the recovery of spare parts from R.A.O.C. types of
vehicles repaired in R.A.O.C. shops, and in Army auxiliary workshops.
both R.A.S.C. and R.A.O.C. vehicles were repaired in the army auxiliary
workshops, some difficulty was expected, as Chilwell could not take in re-
coverable parts from R.A.S.C. vehicles.
It was proposed, therefore, to set up
a similar organization at one of the M.T.S.Ds., R.A.S.C.
Army auxiliary workshops would then segregate recoverable parts, sending
those from R.A.O.C. vehicles to Chilwell, and those from R.A.S.C. vehicles
to the M.T.S.D., for handing to Ministry of Supply Recovery Section for
parts would be passed to
Disposals in the ordinary way.
The value of spare parts recovered and the
easing of the spare parts position generally would justify the course proposed.
War Office Cars Excluded
In view of the special class of car involved, it was decided that specially
allotted War Office cars, i.e., those allotted to members of the Army Council,
Directors, etc., should not be sent to Army auxiliary workshops.
arrangements were made for them to be repaired by the vehicle makers
concerned, or their agents, under the authority of the O.C., R.A.S.C., London
District, where the cost did not exceed £10.
In more costly cases, the C.I.M.T.
authorized repairs, and inspected the vehicle on completion.
Local Arrangements
Arrangements were later made by which repairs to W.D. vehicles might
be carried out by civilian repairers under local arrangements.
In case of
difficulty in locating repairers able to do the work,
assistance was to be
sought from Regional Maintenance and Certifying Officers of the M.O.W.T.
145
7/77
WO 277/21
27
