All hirings on U.S, account were treated as if they were W.D. services.
Coaches in particular would be asked for urgently as special services, and,
as the use of public service vehicles was involved, the W.D. was obliged
to accept the decision of the M.O.W.T. as to the particular civilian service
to be used, and could not hire coaches on a competitive basis.
Hirings were
eliminated as and when the U.S. Forces could arrange to operate their own
transport services.
Repairs
Southern Command received a large part of the U.S. Forces, and was
directed to make all existing Army repair facilities available within their
capacity for the benefit of the American Forces until the American Forces
could provide their own repair and maintenance organization.
of the command was instructed to consult the D.D.M.E. of the command on
all questions of repair and maintenance
of U.S. Forces vehicles, and to
continue to render all assistance practicable through R.A.S.C. units.
Movement of Stores
It was impossible for the W.D. to meet, with W.D. vehicles, the whole of
the considerable demand made on it by the U.S. Forces for assistance in
the movement of stores by road.
Only minor casual services could be so
met, and the major requirements had to be carried out with hired civilian
transport, arranged through local R.A.S.C. officers i/c transport.
situation was accepted by the U.S. Forces.
Co-ordination of W.D. and U.S. Transport
Instructions were issued to the U.S. Forces in the United Kingdom, with
the object of obtaining the maximum degree of pooling and co-ordination
in the use of W.D. and U.S. transport.
The main restrictions on the use
of British Army road transport were incorporated.
of the U.S. Forces were directed to make every effort to co-operate and co-
ordinate the use of U.S. road transport with R.A.S.C. officers i/c transport
The U.S. Forces were already participating in the " return loads"
scheme (g.v.), in so far that, where any of their vehicles were going outside
a 25-mile radius, the local British M.T.L.O. was advised, with a view to a
return load of W.D. stores being arranged.
Hirings on U.S. Account
The question was raised in August, 1943, of the provision of civilian hired
transport to replace U.S. Forces vehicles which had left the United Kingdon
for operational theatres.
The requirement could be met through the existing
machinery of the M.O.W.T. and the Road Haulage Organization.
It was
estimated at 3,200 tons, lift equivalent. in load-carriers. breakdown lorries
and 12 bulk petrol lorries. Officers i/c transport earmarked suitable vehicles
Arrangements were also made for U.S. Regional Transportation Officers
10 demand direct on the ROo Haulage Organization at certain ports in cass
of emergency. The Area Road Haulage Officer concerned was to be con-
sulted.
This arrangement only applied to traffic on a tonnage basis, specific
vehicles continuing to be dealt with through normal channels.
Revised Procedure
A revised procedure was adopted in February, 1945, for the
of administrative road transport services for U.S. Land and Air Forces in
the United Kingdom. Its provisions were as follows:
(a) U.S. Army Resources.—District pools of U.S. vehicles were organized
under U.S. Forces arrangements, and were used for carrying out
U.S. requirements, before resort was made to W.D. and civilian
transport.
(b) was Dee manded a the Amore Reis requiring praion
Officer, who transmitted the demand, when necessary, to the appro-
priate R.A.S.C. officer i/c transport. The R.A.S.C. officer i/c trans-
port met the demand, either from the pooled resources of W.D.
vehicles at his disposal, or by provision of civilian vehicles.
latter event, the officer i/c transport decided, in consultation with the
A.R.H.O., whether the service required the provision of hired vehicles,
or whether it could be carried out as a tonnage service by the Road
Haulage Organization.
In either case, the arrangements were dealt
with as W.D. services.
(c) U.S. Traffic from ports.—In case of urgent requirements of civilian
transport for road movement of U.S. stores from ports in the United
Kingdom, the U.S. Regional Transportation Officer could arrange
direct with the A.R.H.O. as before.
Recreational Transport
The policy regarding the recreational use of M.T. by U.S.
was discussed between War Office and U.S. Forces.
The U.S. Forces had
already been asked to adopt a scheme similar to that in force for British
They now put forward a revised scheme, of which the main points
were that the concession should cover journeys of from five to 50 miles,
instead of from two to 20 as for the British; one journey a week to be
tree, instead of all being on repayment; and conveyance of civilian friends
to organized recreational facilities to be permitted.
The War Office view was that the last point would lead to difficulties
and repercussions, and suggested that full advantage should be taken of public
The proposals were revised accordingly.
Vehicles for Allied Forces
The requirements of Allied Forces formed no inconsiderable item in the
issues of vehicles from R.A.S.C. resources during 1940-194.
The Greek
Army accounted for about 1,000, and the Free French forces for 264 3-ton
For work
with the Free French, the Hadfield Spears volunteer
ambulance unit received 27 vehicles on repayment.
WO 277/21
27
