Finally, the R.A.S.C. Fleet and Water Transport Service were still vers
much in being, operating and maintaining some 1,500 craft, and had taken
over most of the I.W.T. functions of the Transportation Service in all theatres.
white 1.W.T. (In.) had virtually ceased to exist at home and overseas owing
to releases.
The Transportation
Service Case
The Transportation Service claimed its historical background from the
1914-1918 war,
including a cross-channel barge service which had conveyed
over 1½ million tons to France.
It quoted Field Service Regulations, Vol. I, as stating
between the terminal points is provided normally
railways or inland
waterways, the executive control of which is the responsibility of the trans-
portation service," and as going on to describe road transport as a supplement
to inland water transport, and not vice versa.
The Transportation Service must continue to be responsible for port
operating, and I.W.T. was intimately connected with port lighterage and
the discharge of ships.
The latter could often be discharged direct into
I.W.T. craft.
Provision of all craft, marine engines, spares, and stores would be under-
Field and Transportation.
user service.
It had been decided that transportation stores were to be the responsi-
bility of the D.E.S., and that the former Transportation constructional units
were to come under the Chief Engineer of a theatre, and it was therefore
argued that the Transportation Service could now easily take on the operation
of all water transport, whereas the R.A.S.C. had acquired new or increased
commitments, i.e., amphibians, supply and maintenance by air, complicated
provision and distribution of P.O.L., and the Army Fire Service.
Finally, the Transportation Service had very close contact with Q (Move-
ments) Staff on all movement matters, other than movement by air.
Comments
It will be seen that it was a delicate question of decision between tradition,
proved service, and the unity of transport control, on the one hand, and a
more even spread of the maintenance load between the two services and the
centralization of everything to do with boats within the Corps of Royal
Engineers, on the other.
It was not in any case casy to define responsibilities by functions, and
not practicable to do so by types of craft.
R.EM.E. had carried out some repairs for R.A.S.C. water transport unis.
obtaining the necessary spares from the boat stores depots.
The Decisions
Although, if this were done, there might be some saving in manpower and
a little to gain over provision and repair, on balance more would be lost than
The considerable number of trained personnel in the R.A.S.C., and
their experience, would be wasted.
Transportation would have to take on
all sorts of tasks, such as towing artillery targets, running launches,
which were not its functions; that service must concentrate on its primary
function of operating the main L. of C.
By using both the R.A.S.C. and Transportation, the Army stood to gain
flexibility, a wider knowledge of water transport throughout the Army, and
the ability of one service to help the other.
The former ruling would therefore be adhered to as the principle for
the division of functions, though the wording required revision.
in Italy, for instance, had really exceeded their functions as laid down (see
The question of the standardization of craft, marine engines and stores,
and provision, was to be examined with a view to making one service respon-
sible for all Army provision.
As a general guide, repairs were to be carried out on the major user
principle.
The operation, maintenance, and repair, of craft hired or requisitioned
by the Principal Sea Transport Officer in an overseas port would have to be
considered by the Joint Planning Staff, as being an inter-Service and inter-
departmental matter.
Transportation units were to have launches for their domestic and inter-
communication use as part of their war equipment.
its own vessels and craft for port working.
412
(37477)
413
WO 277/21
27
