India, except for special pack rations, which were provided by A.L.F.S.E.A.
When S.E.A.C. troops went forward from India Command they were main-
tained by A.L.F.S.E.A. for all requirements.
In January, 1945, the level of reserves and stocks to be held in India
was laid down by War Office as follows : -
GS Reserves
Maintenance Stocks
Total
Field Force
60 days Kt 120 days, imported stocks
180 days
Non-Field Force ..
90 days, imported stocks
The scale of reserves of indigenous supplies for both categories was left
to the decision of G.H.Q., India.
There was a differentiation between field
force and non-field force, although there was in fact no practical difference
between the two as regards the importation and
consumption of supplies.
As it took from six to eight months to meet India's demands for imported
supplies, the reserve was none too big.
Provision of P.O.L. and Containers
The estimated requirements of liquid fuels for the Allied Services in
India Command and S.E.A.C. were co-ordinated by the Petroleum Officer
of the Defence Department of India, who communicated them to the com-
mittee representing the major oil companies, which estimated civil require-
ments within the limits imposed by Government control.
After allowing
for indigenous production, this committee advised the final figures for import
to the Overseas Supply Committee in London.
All storage and distribution facilities of the principal oil groups in India
were pooled, in order to avoid dissipation of effort and duplication of stocks.
Installations of small companies, which were unable to obtain supplies, were
taken over by Government, and /or pooled with other facilities in the general
Lubricants were demanded by G.H.Q., India, direct on Washington, the
Committee in India not being involved.
An Allied Joint Committee was formed in India to screen all demands
for petroleum products and
S.E.A.C.; G.H.Q., India; R.N.; and R.A.F.
representatives
to S.T. 2, G.H.Q., India,
Its decisions were notified
who placed demands for finished containers on
These demands were met, either from indigenous Indian pro-
duction, from Middle East supplies, from P.A.I.C., or from South Africa.
Later, containers were sent from surplus stocks in the United
Kingdom and
The production of containers in India was disappointing.
October, 1943, only 44,000 4-gallon drums were produced against an estimate
The major difficulties were lack of trained operating personnel;
the age and condition of civilian plants taken over for production of military
requirements; lack of spares, tools, and maintenance materials; unexpected
time lags in the receipt of new plant and its erection; and of course the
vast area to be covered by those responsible for supervising production.
In order to try to improve matters, a new branch was set up in G.H.O,
India, under the Engineer-in-Chief, to control,
plants for the manufacture of jerricans was beginning in Madras.
of 1943, the installation of two
P.O.L. Standardization
The general question of the standardization of grades and
P.O.L. is dealt with in Chapter XII.
types of
The particular aspect of it affecting
India and the Far East need only be briefly mentioned here.
In December, 1944, by agreement
Petroleum Board, importation
with the U.S. Army and
was limited to three grades
of spirit only,
i.e., (a) 100 octane aviation spirit (maximum lead content 5•5 c.cm. for an
Imperial gallon); (b) 80 octane motor spirit; (c) 80 octane motor spirit base
unleaded, of octane rating not less than 70 octane.
91 octane aviation spirit
The use of unleaded petroleum spirit continued only for
engines of rating 4 K.W. and below, and for certain hospital equipment.
The advantages were simplification of tanker programmes;
main port tankages which were critically short; and simplification of internal
storage and distribution.
P.O.L. Units
Indian P.O.L. units were reorganized on lines similar to the British
Previously, Indian Supply Companies had been modified to
carry out P.O.L. duties by the addition of some
artificers
organized as H.Q., Base Petroleum
H.Q., Petroleum Companies; Petroleum Platoons; and Petroleum Container
Repair Platoons.
Peculiar to India were P.O.L. Contract Sections, R.I.A.S.C., which were
located at all main ports and at refineries.
Their primary function was
liaison with the oil trade,
and the arrangement of distribution of all con-
They were mainly accounting units, but also checked and verified
all pack and bulk despatches made ex-trade installations to military con-
They were responsible for the reception and distribution of, and
accounting for, Lend/Lease consignments of lubricants from U.S.A., and
for arranging the collection, filling, and despatch, of locally-produced con-
The O.C. of the section acted as the officer operating the P.O.L.
contract, meeting the demands of the Army by the issue of supply orders
on the oil companies.
In order to assist India in building up its technical petroleum organization,
officers were sent out as instructors in the R.I.A.S.C. Petroleum
Technical Training School, where all aspects of packed and bulk storage,
handling of the discharge of ocean tankers, filling and distribution of P.O.L.
in bulk and pack, container repairs, etc., were taught.
P.O.L. Equipment
India was not in a position to equip fully, with the necessary P.O.L.
technical equipment, the P.O.L. units,
R.I.A.S.C., raised to meet its own
and S.E.A.C's, requirements, and War Office therefore supplied from the
United Kingdom pumps, filling equipment, washing machines,
items. This was in addition to the equipment for the R.A.S.C. P.O.L. units
going out to S.E.A.C.
The supply position in the United Kingdom in respect
of petroleum technical stores and equipment was acute, and the allocation
of shipping space was on a priority basis, so that procurement and despatch
(31411)
WO 277/21
27
