In February, 1941, "General Staff Reserves" and "Q.M.G.3 Scale",
were defined, in the following terms: —
General Staff Reserves are calculated according to operational needs
and to the risk of interruption of communications from the producer
Q.M.G's Scale represents the quantity of stores which may have to
be kept in movement along the L. of C. to maintain the General Staff
reserves at the correct level.
A year later, " Q" Branch decided that, owing to changing conditions, the
use of the term "Q.M.G.'s Scale" should be discontinued.
to be the responsibility of each service to maintain the General Staft reserve
at the correct level, and each service was empowered to communicate with its
own representatives in the overseas commands regarding, and to use its own
nomenclature to describe, what was formerly called " Q.M.G.'s Scale "
term selected by S.T., War Office, to cover these reserves was
margins", in accordance with common R.A.S.C. practice; and this expression
continued in use until it was superseded in June, 1944.
There was then a change of policy in this respect, and it was decided
to adopt the term " maintenance stocks" for general and staff use, in place
of such terms as "working margins", " store margins", etc.
had been left to services to use their own nomenclature, it was considered
that confusion would be avoided if the R.A.S.C. adopted the standard
term " maintenance stocks" in connection with supplies and P.O.L.
The term "working margin", therefore, ceased to be used in reference
to stocks of supplies,
etc., held in excess of G.S. reserve, and the term
Chief Provision Officer (Foodstuffs)
As described in Chapter II, the appointment of Chief Provision Officer
(Foodstuffs), in short C.P.O. (F.S.), originated in that of an A.D.S. (Provision)
10 relieve Q.M.G.6 of much executive work in connection with the Supply
Reserve Depots
The first material increase of the load on provision organization came
in June, 1940, with the introduction of Main Supply Depots (see page 220).
The care of these involved more work than the existing provision establish-
ment could cover, and the expedient was tried of forming a Base Provision
Office (home) on the Field Force War Establishment to control them.
This
proved unsatisfactory, as there were then two central authorities conducting
work of a similar, often identical, nature.
The B.P.O. was therefore soon
merged with the provision branch, under a D.D.S. (Provision), the new organi-
zation being divided into two sections.
P.O.L.), and Provision and Statistics.
Demands. (Home,
Overseas, and
In December, 1941, D.D.S. (P.) was
redesignated C.P.O. (F.S.), chiefly because of misunderstandings as to the
functions of the organization, particularly in connection with its contacts
with manufacturers and other non-military parties.
A second A.D.S. (P) and stant were ad pertin June, 1942, to cope with the
very heavy programme for the establishment of new S.R.Ds.
and auxiliary
depots, the handing over of two S.R.Ds. to the Un Army, and the impending
work in preparation for the North African and N.W. European campaigns.
222
As the result of losses of supplies, particularly flour, due to the ravages
of food pests, the need for an officer with highly specialized qualifications
food pest infestation duties,
This resulted in the saving of vast sums of money, and, more
important, of otherwise wasted shipping space.
The growth in the number of S.R.Ds. and M.S.Ds. and in the tonnage
handled led inevitably to growth in the staff of C.P.O. (F.S.).
April, 1943, a D.A.D.S.T. was added to deal with the provision of forage.
Hitherto, this class of commodities had been dealt with by a forage duties
officer on the establishment of No. 1 S.R.D., working under C.P.O. (F.S.).
The quantity of forage, particularly hay, which was available and not
required by growers for their own purposes, had decreased during the past
12 months to such an extent that the procurement of forage was a task of
very considerable difficulty, entailing continuous travel to buy small quantities.
At the same time, the use of animal transport was now planned for projected
operations, and C.P.O. (F.S.) had to build up a reserve and working margin
of some 3,600 tons, provide 15,000 tons per annum for maintenance, and
conduct experiments in compressing forage,
normal admini-
Further modifications came about early in 1944, as a result of recom-
mendations by the Inspector of Establishments, intended to provide for the
employment where possible of civilians in lieu of military, and small reduc-
tions due to the 27 per cent. cut in manpower then imposed.
1944, difficulties in finding suitable civilians
to hold civilian posts in C.P.O. (F.S.) led to a proposal to include A.T.S.
clerks' posts, with the provision that civilians were to be employed in lieu
This was held up for a considerable time while other
branches made abortive attempts to prove that suitable civilians were after
all available, but was eventually agreed.
The provision of special packs was an extremely complex business.
When it was decided that a certain stock of a particular pack was to be built
up, the C.P.O. (F.S.) was instructed to take appropriate action.
ingly placed demands both for the components of the pack and for their
packing through the Ministry of Food, the Ministry of Supply, and the
Director of Army Contracts at the War Office.
This involved a very large
number of contracts, with consequent bills.
The number of transactions
involved even in one pack were considerable.
In every case, there was at
least one contract, and usually several, both for production of each com-
ponent and for the packing of all the components into one container.
for many components further contracts were required for sub-
packing; e.g., an item might have to be (a) manufactured; (b) covered in
cellophane; (c) put in a tin; (d) packed in a wooden box. There would be
at least one contract for each process, and normally the quantities required
would mean that more than one firm had to handle each process.
The accounting work was at first carried out by personnel borrowed from
depots; but the task grew to such dimensions as to warrant the creation
in December, 1944, of a special section for this specific purpose. Moreover,
pressure on S.R.Ds. and M.S.Ds. was such that they could not afford to
continue lending personnel.
The section consisted of one officer and 19
O.R.
When the section was formed, the current programme covered 9z
223
0 2
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
