4. Method of Supply when Invasion Scale is in operation
Units not belonging to field formations will continue to draw from the
nearest C.S.D.
Formations will draw in bulk from the same depots.
C.S.Ds.
are located, so far as possible, to meet normal and operational requirements.
In the event of one or more C.S.Ds.
becoming inoperative,
supply should
normally be effected by other depots in the vicinity; but in certain circum-
stances it may be necessary to set up temporary supply depots or supply
"railheads".
Plans for feeding must invariably take into account that, so far as possible,
the normal sources of replenishment, particularly in the case of items drawn
from Ministry of Food sources, should be utilized.
Such plans should also
embrace arrangements for the collection and transfer of N.A.A.F.I. stocks
either from command N.A.A.F.I. depots or warehouses.
From the method of replenishing Command stocks shown below, it will
be seen that principal sources of supply are the Ministry of Food agents,
Main Supply Depots and N.A.A.F.I.
Stocks in M.S.Ds. are normally con-
trolled by
War Office.
In emergency, if normal communications are dis-
arranged, alternative arrangements for M. of F. items will be arranged as in
paragraph 5, and demands for items obtained from R.A.S.C. sources would
be placed direct on the nearest M.S.D., instead of through War Office as in
normal times.
5. Replenishment of Command Stocks
(a) Frozen meat.-
-Commands should continue to demand, so far as
possible, on normal M. of F. Service Meat Agents.
Arrangements should be
made with the latter that supply depots are kept informed of the names of
agents to whom demands can be sent in an emergency in the event of com-
munications with normal agents breaking down.
Reserves of frozen meat are
held by the M. of F. at the disposal of War Office in certain Inland Meat
Stores.
(b) Bread and flour.—It should be ensured by
constant inspection that
local bread contractors are holding the reserves of flour required by their
contracts.
There are arrangements for obtaining bread in an emergency in
co-operation with Area Bread Officers.
No reserves of flour for breadmaking
are held under War Office control for local contracts and
War Department
bakeries, as reliance is placed on continuity of supply from M. of F. reserves.
A reserve of flour for culinary purposes is held in M.S.Ds.
(c) Preserved meat, biscuit, tea, condensed milk, jam and alternatives,
M. and V. ration, cheese, and salt.
effected from M.S.Ds.
Replenishment of these items will be
(d) Margarine.- Replenishment stocks are not held under military control;
but, in an emergency, if a break in communications prevents the normal
method of demanding on the M. of F. agents, supplies may be obtained on
application to local agents already notified.
(e) Sugar.
are also held in M.S.Ds.
Will continue to be demanded from M. of F, agents. Reseries
way from their warehouses, M. of F. agents, etc.
(A N.A.A.F.I. items.—N.A.A.F.I. will continue to supply in the normal!
will be maintained through command, group, and district representatives.
Liaison with N.A.A.FI.
428
6. Emergency
rations
To meet invasion conditions, stocks based on approximately 50 per cent.
of feeding strengths are held under command control for issue at short notice
to field formations.
Issues in advance will normally only be made to static
and A.D.G.B. units where communications are poor, and there is therefore
risk of isolation.
7. Disinfectants and hospital supplies
Stocks of these,
and of chemicals for water purification, are held at
M.S. Ds.
Stocks of water sterilization outfits are held under command
arrangements.
8. Relations and co-ordination with the Ministry of Food
Particular care must be taken not to make unexpected calls on civil
resources other than those normally utilized for the purpose.
The M. of F.
would, in the event of an emergency, decentralize their powers to Chief
Divisional Food Officers.
The M. of F. hold reserves for the civil population.
WO 277/2k
27
429
(37477)
