Ceylon Army Service Corps
Until September, 1938, the Ceylon Army Service Corps was composed of
Europeans, on a voluntary basis similar to that of the Territorial Army at
After that date, only Ceylonese were recruited.
Training was limited
to three hours a week and one annual camp in 1939, and equipment was
limited and out of date,
as the local government did not show much
practical sympathy with the Ceylon Defence Force.
As a consequence, when
mobilization came, the C.A.S.C. was not fully trained in its various duties.
This was
Mobilization and subsequent developments
The war had little effect on Ceylon until December, 1941.
had been mobilized on the outbreak of war, but, after a month, the Ceylon
Government decided to send a large number of the personnel on leave
These included C.A.S.C. personnel, but some were retained
to carry out S. and T. duties for the rest of the C.D.F. garrison.
still necessary to hire the bulk of the transport; this was unsatisfactory,
because there was only a limited amount available, it was not reliable and the
charges were high.
Units of the C.D.F. were not issued with barrack stores by the R.A.S.C.,
but by the government storekeeper, and consequently there were frequently
two types of "barrack" equipment in the same building.
This obviously
undesirable situation was one of the results of the differentiation between
financial responsibility for Imperial and C.D.F. units, which hampered the
work of the R.A.S.C. and C.A.S.C. in all departments.
Headquarters, Ceylon Army Command, was established in March, 1942,
from the remains of the Staff of South West Pacific Command.
It included
a D.D.S.T. (brigadier), and the usual S.T. Staff.
The eventual organization of the S.T.
staff in the command
was as
follows: D.D.S.T. (brigadier); A.D.S.T.; one D.A.D.S.T. for supplies and
transport, one for barracks, and one for personnel; a staff captain, and a
catering adviser.
In addition, at Headquarters, Flag Officer, Ceylon, R.N., there was a
D.D.T., with a D.A.D.S.T. and a staff captain.
The functions of this officer
are described elsewhere in this chapter.
Attached to the S. and T. directorate were the commander, C.A.S.C., and
the C.R.A.S.C., Petrol Installations.
of C.A.S.C. units and personnel.
as inspector
The latter acted as technical adviser to
the D.D.S.T., and was responsible for technical supervision and maintenance
of stocks of petrol units, which were under the OsS, R.A.S.C., of areas
for local administration.
C.R.A S.C. supply units. controlled the Pase and Advanced Base Supply
Depots, and was responsible for the general, as opposed to
administration of supply units.
the local,
He was responsible for the importation and
produce obtained on contract within the island.
distribution of all foodstuffe into the island and for the handling of loca
18
Transfer to India Command
In November, 1941, Ceylon was placed under the operational control of
India, which was inevitable in view of the situation in the Far East.
India
also assumed administrative control, although Ceylon remained an Imperial
The result was unfortunate, as, during 1942, India was herself
fully engaged in expansion of the war effort, and had little time to spare
for the small garrison of the island.
The differences between the Imperial
and Indian systems and procedure led to constant delays and misunderstand-
of the new arrangement, S.T.,
to have any direct responsibility for Ceylon.
After A.L.F.S.E.A. Headquarters moved to Ceylon about the middle of
1944, Ceylon Command came under its control, instead of that of India,
and the channel of communication with War Office was through A.L.F.S.E.A.
Personnel
The acute shortage of British personnel became a serious problem at
times,
but recruitment of Ceylonese in the R.A.S.C. (C) and the Ceylon
A.S.C. helped to bridge the gap.
subject to overseas service if required; and, of about 6,800 recruited, 4,500
proceeded on active service to the Middle
C.A.S.C. were restricted to service in the island.
he dorite to in the an at to ront:
Those enlisted into the R.A.S.C. (C), were
The personnel of the
Transport Situation
all units of the force, and maintain all vehicles and vehicle records.
task was performed with difficulty,
especially the maintenance of a large
number of
vehicles with ill-equipped workshops, and it was necessary to
put many of the heavy repairs out to civilian garages.
too reliable, and expensive to hire.
When 34 Indian Division came to Ceylon in December, 1941, the
C.A.S.C. were responsible for requisitioning about 500 vehicles to equip it.
The arrival of the reinforcements in March, 1942, found the organization
for acquiring, issuing,
and maintaining,
vehicles, still very
much a S.T.
responsibility, and the R.A.S.C. and the C.A.S.C. hired and requisitioned
vehicles for the new formations and for the increased station duties.
The local transport work in Colombo, in particular, was very heavy,
in consequence of the influx of troops, supplies and stores, and the transport
situation there was in a state of fluid confusion.
Transport was marshalled
at the beginning of each day at strategic points and given verbal orders,
and subsequently collected and shepherded by despatch riders to meet the
constantly changing situation.
19
WO 277/21
27
