Their use greatly accelerated the speed with which stores could be trans-
ported by river, and saved coolies and mules many fatiguing journeys.
craft employed included small coasters, tugs, and standard
300 to 500-ton
cargo flats.
Ramped cargo lighters, resembling small landing craft but made
of plywood, with a capacity of 25 tons and petrol-driven, proved very useful
tank transporters and general purpose carrying
Eurekas of wooden construction proved unreliable as tugs, but "D" type
tugs, also of wood but diesel-driven, were reliable.
Wooden Higgins barges,
decked in and able to carry 60 tons, were extremely useful, though they
deteriorated rapidly owing to the depredations of the teredo worm which
flourishes in those waters.
Organization of S.E.A.C.
A new phase in the history of the war on this front began in October, 1943.
when South East Asia Command was formed under a Supreme Allied Com-
mander (S.A.C.S.E.A.).
He assumed operational responsibility on 16th
November; but G.H.Q., India, remained responsible for the majority of the
administrative questions affecting the Command, as the administrative staff
of the newly-formed 11 Army Group, which commanded the British land
forces, was not yet ready to undertake full control.
There was no S.T.
representation on the staff of S.A.C.S.E.A.
11 Army Group comprised Fourteenth Army and Ceylon Army Com-
mand, which were composed as follows: —
Fourteenth Army. 4 Corps, consisting of 17 Indian Light Division (two
brigades). 20 and 23 Indian Divisions.
15 Indian Corps, consisting of 5, 7 and 26 Indian Divisions, and
81 West African Division, less one Brigade with Special Force.
Ceylon Command. 11 East African Division and 99 Indian Infantry
Brigade.
In addition, the following formations, etc., were assigned to S.E.A.C. for
future operations, but remained for the time being under India Command: -
33 Indian Corps: —2 British Division; 36 Division, called Indian,
but actually consisting of two British brigades, with Indian services; and
19 Indian Division.
3rd Indian Division, the cover name for Wingate's Special Force,
including three British infantry brigades from 70 Division, and two
Indian and one West African infantry brigades.
50 Indian Tank Brigade; 3 Commando Brigade.
The S. and T. staff of 11th Army Group consisted originally of a D.S.T.
(Brigadier, from the R.I.A.S.C.; a Deputy D.S.T. (Colonel) of the R.A.S.C:;
an A.D.S. (R.I.A.S.C.) and an A.D.T. (R.A.S.C.); and an A.D.S.T. (Planning)
(R.I.A.S.C.). An A.D.S.T. (P.O.L.) was added in January, 1944, and was
upgraded to D.D.S.T. in May, 1944, when the A.D.S. and A.D.T. became
D.D.S. and D.D.T, respectively. Later an R.A.S.C. oficer was appointed
D.S.T., and the D.D.S.T. then came from the R.I.A.S.C.
56
On Ist May, 1944, H.Q., 11 Army Group, assumed full control of the
administration of Fourteenth Army and Ceylon, although G.H.Q., India,
continued to deal with normal maintenance demands.
In November, 1944,
the title of 11 Army Group was changed to that of Allied Land Forces,
South East Asia (A.L.F.S.E.A.).
The S.T. organization remained unchanged.
H.Q., Fourteenth Army had assumed control of the forces on the North
Burma and Arakan fronts in October, 1943, with its location at Comilla, in
East Bengal, and thus very much nearer than Eastern Army had been to the
scenes of active operations.
The S.T. representation on this H.Q. was a
supplies, transport, and P.O.L., respectively.
R.I.A.S.C. (equivalent to D.D.S.T.), with three A.Ds.S.T., for
The S.T. representation in corps and divisions was similar to that in other
At the headquarters of static formations, there was a D.D.S.T.
(Colonel) at H.Q., L. of C., an A.D.S.T. at each H.Q., L. of C. area, and a
C.R.I.A.S.C. at each H.Q., L. of C. sub-area.
The responsibilities of the S.T. Directorate in this theatre were similar to
those in other theatres, with the exception of air despatch, the position in
regard to which is dealt with later in this chapter, and water transport, which
was operated almost entirely by Movements and Transportation in the absence
of an S.T. organization for this service until towards the end of the campaign.
Situation, Fourteenth Army, November, 1943
The situation of Fourteenth Army at the time of the formation of S.E.A.C
was as follows: —
15 Corps was holding a line in Arakan approximately from Teknaf
to Taung Bazar. 81 West African Division was moving in, and by the
end of the year was beginning operations down the Kaladan valley.
4 Corps was responsible for the defence of the Imphal and Tiddim
areas of the central front.
17 Division was holding the Fort White-
Tiddim area, and 20 Division was going to relieve 23 Division which had
been in the forward area for 17 months without relief, and had its head-
quarters at Tamu.
Plans for the Winter of 1943-1944
The tasks planned for Fourteenth Army for the winter of 1943-1944
were : —
(a) To secure the frontiers of Bengal and Assam.
(b) To occupy North Burma, as far as the Mogaung-Myitkyina area.
(c) To advance in Arakan down to the Maungdaw-Buthidaung road.
To carry out these tasks, it was intended to contain as many enemy troops
as possible in Arakan and Assam, while American and Chinese forces carried
out the second task, supported by Special Force, which was to be flown in to
operate south-west of Mogaung.
cut off Imphal, which the enemy calculated we should thus either have to
57
+/17
WO 277/21
27
