The terrain of the theatre was such that the rapid supply of petrol to the
forward areas by pipeline, as in 21 Army Group in North West Burope in
1944-1945, was impracticable.
The jungle did not lend itself to the quick
laying of pipelines; and when these ran through jungle country, the personnel
operating them were exposed, not only to the normal risks of war, but to the
depredations of tigers
and
wild elephants.
Pipelines
were
nevertheless
extensively used on the L. of C., as will be seen from the following account of
the developments in this way up to the middle of 1944.
An American 6-inch pipeline, known as " Infinity", actually 780 miles
long, had been completed from Calcutta to Tinsukia near Ledo, as part of
"Aid to China" scheme.
Thence petrol was flown over the Himalayas,
known as the " Hump", to China.
Work on a similar line from Chittagong
to the same area had been started. It was to have a capacity of twelve million
gallons a month to Manipur Road, and of nine million gallons from there to
Tinsukia.
The British were laying a 4-inch line from Chittagong to Manipur Road,
with the intention of extending it eventually to Imphal and Tamu.
stage of it, to Chandranathpur, was built to carry six million gallons a month,
of which 11 million were for airfields in East Bengal; and the balance was to
go on to Manipur Road, over the second stage, which was 150 miles long
and ran via Haflong along the railway called the hill section.
of difficult gradients, and here the pipeline was subject to landslides, inter-
ference by local inhabitants, and a constant loss of 12 per cent.
Transport in the Forward Areas
If communications in the rearward areas were difficult, those in the
forward areas were even more so, as will be apparent from the accounts
already given of conditions on the Assam and Arakan fronts.
It was impossible to adhere to any fixed maintenance organization, and
no two supply routes were the same, owing to variation in the
country and jungle encountered.
It was essential to plan communications
When a formation entered a new area, it probably found only
a few coolie tracks, and these were developed, first for mules, then for jeeps,
and afterwards for 3-ton lorries and heavier vehicles.
four-wheeled-drive 3-ton lorries could go wherever a 15-cwt truck could, and
were more economical of road space and manpower, besides causing much
less wear and tear on road surfaces, as there were fewer vehicles on the road.
The normal organization of second line transport in all Indian divisions,
except 17 and 36, was at this time one 3-ton company and two 15-cwt. truck
companies, each company of four platoons. The 15-cwt. companies had also
a number of jeeps on their headquarters establishment.
17 Indian
had three jeep companies, and no 3-ton company, and 36 Division two jeep
The jeeps towed one trailer each, and were loaded as follows: —
A jeep with a spare driver carried a load of 480 lb.
A jeep without a spare driver carried a load of 600 lb.
The trailers were loaded with 500-600 Ib. each, and the average load of
jeep and trailer combined was taken as 1,100 lb.
60
As divisions were withdrawn to rest, many of their best vehicles were
retained in the forward areas, and they were re-equipped entirely on a 3-ton
During the winter of 1943-1944, many units had too many vehicles or
types of vehicles that were unsuitable for use in forward areas.
also a danger that, where roads were few, they might become blocked by the
passage of too many vehicles.
Accordingly, in Arakan at least, the bulk of
the divisional M.T. was kept back by Corps for third line duties, and the bulk
of unit transport was centralized by Division for second line duties.
retained the minimum number of vehicles needed to draw supplies from the
brigade administrative area, the number varying according to the sector of
Sometimes, a unit had no mechanical transport.
seldom that a unit or formation had anything like the scale or type of trans-
port laid down in its War Establishment, and they had to be prepared to move
with any sort of transport, and to change the type at short notice.
With the reduced scales of transport imposed by the lack of good com-
munications, and as units and formations were below strength in vehicles,
ferrying and dumping formed an integral part of the transport system.
was regarded as a necessary evil, and could have been minimized if forma-
tions had not taken excessive amounts of kit and equipment with them
operational areas, so that baggage dumps had to be formed behind the
To maintain efficiency in this country, the highest possible standards of
vehicle maintenance and traffic discipline were essential.
on vehicles was very heavy, and was unfortunately
worsened by careless
The number of jeeps irreparably damaged by bad driving by officers
was most marked. At one time, the incidence of accidents was highest for
British officers, next for British troops, and lowest for Indian troops.
81 West African Division, operating in the Kaladan valley, was main-
tained throughout by air supply.
This formation depended for its transport
very largely on the enlisted porters which had accompanied it from West
These units were originally W.A.A.S.C., but later became part of
the Nigeria Regiment, although a large proportion of the British personnel
The carriers were trained soldiers, and carried 40 lb. apiece
Another form of transport employed by the formation was
a pack bullock company, but it did not prove satisfactory, as the animals
were slow in movement, and wasted much time in grazing and ruminating.
One driver was required for each animal, compared with one man for three
so a considerable time was necessary for dispersing a
column in the event of an alarm.
These drawbacks, combined with the
lack of a suitable pack bullock saddle, led to the conclusion that this type
of transport was not suitable for operations in this theatre.
Administrative Bases
In a campaign of this description, against an enemy whose favourite
tactics were to infiltrate behind the fighting troops, it is obvious that the
administrative units and installations in operational areas could not be left
to the general protection afforded by the dispositions of the forward troops
61
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
