APPENDIX X E
(See Vol. I, page 308)
" PLUTO"- DEFINITION OF RESPONSIBILITIES AS BETWEEN
GOVERNMENT AND SERVICE DEPARTMENTS
(June, 1944)
1. Petroleum Warfare Department
Responsible for :-
(a) Provision of materials, except petroleum products ; technical design,
development, and provision of materials, including spare parts, for
technical plant and machinery, in collaboration with Service Depart-
ments concerned.
(b) Financial relations with Treasury for matters connected with the above
provision.
(c) Experiments, technical advice, and co-ordination of progress.
(d) Operation and technical supervision of the United Kingdom terminals,
and repairs to plant there.
(e) Connecting up sea lines above high water mark on United Kingdom
shore.
(f) Provision of specialized couplings for the far shore for use by British
or U.S. military engineers concerned.
2. Directorate of Supplies and Transport
Responsible for :—
(a) Provision of R.A.S.C.
personnel to operate the United Kingdom
terminals, and carry out minor repairs.
(b) Provision of, and accounting for, the petroleum products (in conjunction
with Air Ministry for aviation fuels) as required by S.H.A.E.F. to
the maximum capacity of the plant.
(c) Notifying the Petroleum Board and the Petroleum Warfare Depart-
ment when pumping operations were to begin, and when the feeder
systems were to be charged ; also, from time to time, the quantities
and grades of petroleum products required to be delivered through
Pluto in accordance with demands.
3. Allied Naval Commander, Expeditionary Force (A.N.C.X.F.)
Responsible for :-
(a) General control of the actual operation of establishing Pluto.
The
laying of the pipelines was carried out by Senior Naval Officer, Pluto.
(b) Ordering the beginning of the operation after consultation with the
Commander of the Armies in the Field, and notifying all concerned
of the issue of orders to begin laying.
(c) Maintenance and repair of all sea cable and pipelines.
4. Ministry of Fuel and Power-Petroleum Division
Responsible for general departmental supervision of petroleum
supply
arrangements in the United Kingdom (except terminal pump stations), in con-
juarion with the War Office, Petroleum Warfare minal pump station Petroleum
520
5. Army in the Field
During the period when C.-in-C., 21 Army Group, was responsible for the
stration of all ground forces on the Continent, H.Q., 21 Army Group,
responsible, irrespective of whether the far shore terminals were manned
Parish or U.S. personnel, for :—
(a) Notifying S.H.A.E.F.,
could be accepted into the theatre of operations.
A.N.C.X.F., and War Office, when pipelines
1) Hauling ashore the cable and pipelines when presented for acceptance
by A.N.C.X.F., and coupling up to storage.
1) Provision of necessary terminal facilities for the reception of petroleum
products to be delivered by Pluto.
(l) Arrangements for the provision of the necessary communications
between terminals.
1) Notifying War Office of readiness on far shore for pumping operations
() Notifying War Office (S.T. 2) of the quantities and grades of petroleum
products required to be delivered by means of Pluto.
When the Supreme Commander allocated a separate area of responsibility
Fist (U.S.) Army Group :—
(a) S.H.A.E.F. assumed responsibility for deciding the policy for the
further development of the Pluto project, and for issuing executive
instructions to A.N.C.X.F. and British and U.S. Army Groups.
(d) Supreme Commander also became responsible for notifying War Office
(S.T. 2) of grades and quantities of petroleum products required to
be delivered by means of Pluto.
521
WO 277)
