The R.IA.S.C. organization of supply units was H.O., B.S.D., H.Q.,
supply companies, supply platoons, field bakeries, and other similar units.
Until a short while previously, R.I.A.S.C. supply units had handled P.O.L.
when necessary; but H.Q., petrol companies, H.Q., base petrol depots, and
petrol platoons, had then been formed.
The proportion of British units to
Indian in the P.O.L. organization of A.L.F.S.E.A. was one-third to two-thirds.
By January, 1945, there was a severe manpower shortage in R.A.S.C. and
disbanded and 400 gunners from them were transferred to the R.A.S.C.,
R.I.A.S.C. personnel in A.L.F.S.E.A.
Two anti-aircraft regiments were
being converted to form supply and petrol platoons.
As a further step, in
February, 1945, India agreed to the dilution of static supply units in rear
areas with civilians, thereby releasing soldiers to reinforce forward supply
This scheme was extended later to include all supply units; and
Burmese civilians in the liberated areas volunteered for such employment,
and were enrolled in the Burma Army Service Corps.
L. of C. Transport Column Reorganized
In February, 1945, the L. of C. Transport Column, which was now work-
ing from Dimapur (Manipur Road to Kalewa, a distance of 320 miles, under-
went its final reorganization.
In order to provide sufficient drivers for day
and night running under the " round the clock" system, it had been necessary
for companies to operate less than their normal establishment of task vehicles.
The original allotment was of 90 lorries for a company, later raised to 99;
i.e., the companies only operated three platoons of vehicles with four platoons
of personnel. This resulted in the tonnage lifted being less than the maximum
The rapid advance of the Fourteenth Army, the
lengthening of the road L. of C., the increased allotment of vehicles, and the
desirability of having a more flexible organization, together rendered it
necessary to introduce a new system of working.
Under this, all companies working on the line (except the 10-ton and
Bulk Petrol Transport companies) were brought on the normal establishment
of vehicles and personnel, and operated their full scale of the task vehicles,
i.e., four platoons of thirty, or 120 in all, plus 10 per cent. spare.
R.I.A.S.C. company had an I.E.M.E. workshop section attached and no longer
depended on a workshop unit separate from it.
and recovery companies were provided in addition.
Mobile workshop companies
The transport companies, as far as possible, worked through the daylight
hours only, the loading and unloading at depots being done at night.
system proved a success.
The average time of turnrounds remained un-
affected, but the tonnage lift increased, and vehicle maintenance improved.
other words, the normal Army Service Corps metaintena working, and the
again vindicated.
principle of the value of a transport company havine its own workshop, were
A Commander, R.A.S.C./R.I.A.S.C. Transport Column, was provided
on the scale of one for every six companies, thereby relieving the Headquarters
of the L. of C. Transport Column of duties which had hitherto made it top*
heavy.
90
The lift worked out at 2-75 3-ton vehicles a ton from Manipur Road to
Indainggyi, and four 3-ton vehicles a ton from Manipur Road to Shwebo.
For the basis of calculation used in planning in this organization, and some
statistics, see Appendix VI H.
Northern L. of C.
The Northern L. of C., as it was eventually organized, consisted of three
sections, namely: —
1. Road, from Manipur Road to Kalewa
from roadhead at Kalewa down the River
Chindwin to Myingyan.
3. Rail and road, from riverhead at Myingyan, via Thazi
The first section was that operated by the L. of C. transport column, as
The road was difficult, much of it typical hill country, with
many hairpin bends, and along the edge of steep declivities. In the Kabaw
valley, it was only a track made by bulldozers as the advance proceeded, and
the dust in dry weather was six inches deep, reducing all traffic to a second
Eight miles an hour in a jeep was considered good going.
the event of rain, a complete standstill order was in force.
Delivery at Kalewa amounted to 1,200 tons a day, exclusive of personnel.
The transportation stores carried included three 70-ton locomotives (carried
on special trailers), six 21-ton locomotives (carried on transporters), and a
number of large craft, e.g., ramped cargo lighters.
The craft were cut into
sections for convenience of carriage, but even so the movement of these
awkward loads over the already congested L. of C. presented many problems.
The turnround for the vehicles of the column for the various sections of
the road was as follows for the dry season: -
Manipur Road-Imphal/Palel: two days.
120-150 miles.
Imphal/Palel-Moreh: two days.
Moreh-Indainggyi: two days.
120 miles approximately.
Indainggyi-Kalewa: one day.
20 miles approximately.
Kalewa-Shwebo:
Shwebo-Monywa: two days.
50 miles approximately.
The turnround from Manipur Road to Kalewa in the monsoon, however,
took from 14 to 16 days.
The conveyance of replacement tanks over the very long L. of C., with the
number of rather worn-out
problem which called for herculean efforts on the part of the transporter
company, on the whole successful.
The supply of petrol to Fourteenth Army by way of the Northern L. of C.
had been considerably
developed since the middle of 1944.
was now brought as far as Moreh by pipeline, intermediate points being
supplied from this line and by road tank lorry.
These vehicles were of
800-gallon capacity.
There were container filling facilities at Manipur Road,
Imphal and Kalewa.
Supply to formations was entirely in barrels.
spirit was carried to the Imphal airfields by pipeline, and by road tank lorry
+7/17
WO 277/21
27
