D.S.V. Pool
The functions of the Director of Small Vessels Pool, under the Admiralty,
included the maintenance of a register of small craft requisitioned or avail.
able for requisitioning (launches, cabin cruisers, fishing vessels,
the allocation of these craft and of Admiralty-built common-user craft
(36-ft. harbour launches, motor fishing vessels, etc.) to the different Services.
There was no hard and fast division of responsibility between S.T.1 and
S.T.1 placed their requirements for craft with D.S.V.P., who
also periodically supplied lists of availabilities.
was done by the Ministry of Sea Transport (later M.O.W.T.).
locate vessels not already on the D.S.V.P. register, and have them requisitioned
by the M.O.W.T. direct.
On the formation of R.E.M.E. in 1942, the question was raised as to
whether that corps would be required to take over responsibilities for the
maintenance and repair of vessels of the W.D. Fleet, or craft of Motor
Boat Companies, at home and abroad.
It was agreed that this would not
be necessary, in view of the decision by the committee on R.E.M.E.
maintenance and repair activities in respect of vessels operated in the W.D.
Fleet and Motor Boat Companies should remain unchanged.
repairs to craft of the Motor Boat Companies were carried
workshop platoons of those units, while third line repairs and other work
was effected in naval dockyards under arrangements made with the Admiralty.
The shortage of accommodation for the Marine Stores at Woolwich led
to their being moved to Slough. Later, in 1941, the W.D. Fleet Store,
as it had then become, was made a group in an M.T. Stores Depot, R.A.S.C.,
but this arrangement was short-lived, and the group became a separate unit,
known as the Boat Stores Group, a name subsequently changed to Boat
This unit eventually returned to Woolwich Dockyard, and
soon stocked all marine stores, equipment, paint, etc., for all arms of the
In 1942, all boat and vessel stores, including small boats, had been
transterred from R.A.O.C. to R.A.S.C. supply, and in 1943, the depot
also took over the provision of targets for artillery practice seawards.
The growth of the Fleet led naturally to a great increase in the number
and quantities of stores required to be held and expeditiously despatched.
As an indication of the volume, the value in December, 1943, was Elz
million, or ten times what it had been in September, 1942.
Militarization of the W.D. Fleet
swing to the severe restrictions on manpower during the war, it was
distinary to man the majority of craft in Water Transport Companies (a5
distinct from Motor Boat Companies), with civilians.
ever, of the necessity for employing military instead of civilian
In consequence, how-
vessels engaged in operational duties of a security or hazardous nature at
212
home, coupled with manpower difficulties, a certain amount of militarization
was introduced in the form of the substitution of military for civilian crews
and the employment of military artificers.
In November, 1943, the militarization of the Fleet was approved within
a ceiling of 34 officers and 400 other ranks.
This was to be a gradual process,
with military crews only being employed in vessels engaged on
services of a security or hazardous nature.
S.T.1 for consideration.
Cases had to be submitted to
The change was not in fact implemented to any
great extent until after the war, when the militarization of 25 per cent. of
units in the United Kingdom was approved.
object of providing continuation training for personnel before being posted
It became increasingly difficult to obtain civilian artificers for the main-
tenance of vessels of Water Transport Companies, and the employment of
military artificers of low medical category was accordingly authorized where
civilians could not be obtained.
Military artificers of field force category
had to be withdrawn from Water Transport companies at home
the increasing reinforcement demands of Motor Boat and Fast
Companies with 21 Army Group.
Qualifications of Military Water Transport Personnel
Two factors in particular contributed to a very marked raising of the
standard of navigation and seamanship required of all ranks of military
personnel manning vessels of the W.D. Fleet.
These were militarization, and
the introduction into the Fleet of larger, sea-going craft.
Where, formerly, a waterman, class II, had been adequate to handle
a small 36-ft. launch, a class I navigator was now required as the skipper
of a large ship, with knowledge approximating to a yacht master's certificate;
and few could attain this standard without some years of experience. Skippers
of craft, such as the 112-ft. motor launches, the 100-ft. motor oil barges, and
90-ft. and 75-ft. M.F.Vs., had to reach navigator, class II, standard.
By the end of 1944, the training and classification of R.A.S.C. water
transport personnel were being given special consideration, with particular
reference to the provision of greatly improved training facilities and the
foundation of a proper system of training and grading of such personnel.
The new Army trades of "Navigator" and "Marine Engineer" were
introduced, graded in Group "A", i.e., the highest, in view of the consider-
able nautical and
engineering knowledge required in each case.
Courses were arranged to give effect to this decision.
It involved the pro-
vision of specialist officers as instructors, and also called for a higher standard
of intake of other ranks for training in these trades.
The policy was that
corporals and upwards, previously classified as watermen, should become
navigators, and barge engineers should become marine engineers.
Training-Continuation and Advanced
Continuation training for water transport personnel, after they had com-
pleted their initial training at the Waterborne Training Centre, was carried
out in the Motor Boat Company located in Scotland and allocated for the
The full training of personnel for R.A.S.C. waterborne units was
213
WO 277/21
27
