APPENDIX XI B
(See Vol. I, page 320)
FEEDING ARRANGEMENTS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM IN
CONNECTION WITH THE
MOUNTING
OF OPERATION
" OVERLORD "
1. The Army Catering Corps had two special functions in connection with
the feeding of Field Force troops of 21 Army Group before their embarkation
to take part in the invasion of the Continent in Operation " Overlord"
These
were (a) to organize the messing of such personnel when they were receiving
" hotel service" in Marshalling Area camps; and (b) to supply hot tea to field
force troops in Embarkation Areas.
The arrangements are described below.
2. Provision of meals :—
(a) On leaving the Concentration Areas, all troops were provided with
haversack rations under unit arrangements to last until arrival at
Marshalling Areas, where all camps, except reinforcement units,
were " hotel serviced ".
(b) Bills of fare were based on the field service ration scale (U.K.), and
Normally, troops received a hot meal, or, if that
was impracticable, hot tea, on arrival in the Marshalling Area.
continued to receive the normal meals throughout their stay.
final meal was substantial, and served as near as possible to the time
(c) Food for officers' messes at camps was cooked in and drawn from other
ranks' cookhouses, and separate cooks were not provided for these
provided
officers, warrant officers, and serjeants, and china, glass and cutlery
were provided for these messes.
Service and washing-up was carried
out by officers' servants.
(d) Other ranks personnel provided their own mugs, but two tin plates a
man were provided, and these were dried and stacked by the per-
Plate washing, rinsing, and sterilizing apparatus
was sited near dining room accommodation.
Improvised hot
plates for food service were arranged where possible.
(e) Catering Staffs were provided to camps on the scale of : Cooks,
N.C.Os., 2, privates, 9; butcher, 1 ; storeman, 1 ;
N.C.Os., 2, privates, 9 ; for every 500 men in camp.
In the event
nof insufficient cooks being available to this scale, the deficiency was
made up from cooks of units passing through.
An A.C.C. officer
was appointed to each camp to maintain the bill of fare, account
for supplies, and generally supervise the feeding arrangements.
There was a senior catering officer in each Marshalling Area, who
acted as adviser to the Commander of the Area, and was responsible
for the efficiency of cookhouses in all camps within the Marshalling
Area and the Embarkation Area, and that all emergency cooking
arrangements were satisfactory.
538
3. Apparatus. —Oil drum ovens, kettle trenches, Aldershot ovens, etc., were
installed as reserve cooking apparatus, in case the normal cooking apparatus
4. Tea Points :—
(a) An A.C.C. officer and a warrant officer, Class II, were allotted to each
Embarkation Area, and were responsible for tea distribution.
(b) The method of distribution differed for marching personnel and for
i) Marching personnel collected tea at or near resting accom-
modation from suitably located tea-serving points.
cedure was impracticable tea lorries were sent to selected points on
Where possible, troops filed past the tea-
making points to collect tea.
ii) Vehicle parties: vehicles did not leave the marching route,
and tea was delivered in static staff vehicles to selected points by
means of a milk round ; but it was emphasised that speed in delivery
Tea was distributed in 6-gallon containers, holding
enough for 50 men.
(c) Tea points were formed under Area arrangements, and were subject
to local facilities, but the aim was separate service for each 100 men.
One cook for 1,000 men was allowed for tea-making, and distribution
was made by mess orderlies.
The allocation of staff for this purpose
was made from static staff personnel.
(d) The ration for tea-making was allowed at the following scales : 10-oz.
tea, 3-1b. sugar, and 8 pints of milk (6 U.S.A. tins) for 10 gallons of
water, = 100 men.
5. Bag Rations.—Field force personnel normally received only hot tea in
Embarkation Areas.
A special distribution of bag rations was necessary when
troops were delayed for more than five hours in the Embarkation Areas.
These
rations were provided under arrangements made by Os.C. Embarkation Areas.
They consisted of 6-oz. sweet biscuits and two 2-oz. bars of chocolate.
539
