the foothills behind Suez, and 1,000 tons in Cairo.
intake only, Suez.
Cost about €126,000 ; or if only 4,000 tons were stored,
Plan " D". —To provide storage at Geneifa for 4,000 tons with a 250 tons
an hour rate of discharge from the Great Bitter Lake; and 4,000 tons in the
foothills behind Suez, with a similar rate of discharge from that port.
tankage at the two places to be connected by a pipeline capable of handling
25 tons an hour either way.
Also, 1,000 tons storage at Cairo, interconnected
by pipeline with both the installations.
Approximate cost £150,000.
The Mission considers Plan "D" the best, although it envisages the holding
of more spirit than originally contemplated, on the basis of affording protected
storage for two months' war reserves.
The areas seen are suitable for the construction of a fully-protected tin-
making and filling factory, capable of a minimum output of 10,000 tons a month.
At a conservative estimate such a factory will cost £100,000 to build.
In view of the very high cost of the factory, the difficulty of supply of tin-
plate, and other materials in war, and difficulty in providing skilled labour to
operate the plant, the Mission is of opinion that it is for consideration whether
it would not be preferable to utilize returnable 4-gallon containers in war,
holding such containers in war reserve, and putting them into circulation when
supply of ordinary 4-gallon tins from civilian resources fails, either through lack
of materials or destruction of the existing facilities.
This idea has much to commend it, provided that :—
(a) The containers are of sufficiently robust design and construction to
withstand continuous rough usage without being unduly heavy.
(b) Adequate protected cleaning and filling facilities be provided at selected
(c) A sufficient quantity be held in war reserve to cover an anticipated
(d) The containers be of the external dimensions of the 4-gallon tin, on
account of special carriers on vehicles.
A suitable container could be produced for about five shillings each, and a
protected washing and filling plant capable of handling 5,000 containers per
diem, with storage space for 15,000 filled containers,
could be built at the
storage point decided upon, for about £5,000 per plant (estimated).
production of a suitable container is a matter for experiment and development.
Because of the peculiar situation in Egypt with regard to petrol supply in
peace, and the grave dangers of complete cessation of supply in war, we have
been compelled to contemplate what is, in effect, the creation of a new system
of reception, custody, and distribution, of petrol. Strategical and security
reasons have forced us to use long and expensive pipelines, and thus raise
Cost may, at first sight, appear high, but once lines are laid, and
the installations are in being, additional tankage to meet further expansion can
be added at a price comparable with similar storage elsewhere.
is flexible, gives two points of entry, and achieves dispersal of
Note.-Geneifa lies about midway between Suez and Fayid.
APPENDIX X C
(See Vol. I, pages 199 and 341)
RESPONSIBILITY FOR P.O.L. MATTERS, NOVEMBER, 1942
At the start of the war, bulk installations were operated by the bulk com-
panies, who met the demands of the military authorities.
installations were constructed or taken over purely on W.D. account, and
Later, tankage and
operated by Bulk Petroleum Storage Companies, but usually linked in with
existing civilian oil installations.
When bulk facilities were required in opera-
tional areas, and all work had to be done by military personnel, responsibilities
had to be divided between the R.E. and the R.A.S.C.
was that the R.A.S.C. were responsible for all distribution in bulk, and for
operation of pumps and valves, and control of stock within the installations ;
whilst tanker discharge boosters, pumps, and interconnecting pipelines were
an R.E. responsibility, together with all construction and rehabilitation work.
The introduction of extensive pipeline systems brought an added complica-
tion, which was temporarily solved by the assignment of all construction and
operation of pipelines to the R.E., with the R.A.S.C. still responsible for dis-
The War Office directive on the subject of responsibility for P.O.L.
matters, issued in November, 1942, is reproduced below.
Each theatre was operating, with variations, on this policy, but a change in
policy and greater uniformity in procedure became necessary, particularly as;
in most theatres, the Americans were also actively interested in, and participating
in, the operation of the pipeline networks.
From a control angle alone it was
undesirable that the R.E. should continue operation of pipelines, as the fuel
started on R.A.S.C. charge, passed to R.E. account whilst in transit through
the pipelines or in static storage at pumping stations, and came back on charge
to the R.A.S.C. when in tankage at distribution points.
the difficulties of ascertaining accurately the leakage losses, and of general
accounting of the fuel can be readily appreciated.
As described in Chapter VIII, the position was ill-defined and caused some
dificulty in practice.
Accordingly, a further War Office directive was issued
in April, 1945, setting out the respective responsibilities for the two Corps, for
which see Appendix X F.
War Office Directive, November, 1942
1. The responsibility for planning the policy to be adopted for supply he
POL. in any operatity for plantithe " O" Staff, aided by the advice of the
apropriate S.T. Branch and that of the Honorary Petrol Adviser.
2. The responsibility for making provision for the various grades of P.O.L.
echnical eaninment other than that cnecified in naragraph 5. and containers,
is the dutv of the D.S.T aided hu the Honorarv Petrol Adviser.
3. The detailed planning of the requirements within staff policy, research,
design of equipment other than that specified in para. S, formulation of require-
tents on. D.F.W. maintenance of statistics oneration of installations, storage
ssue, and accounting, is the duty of the D.S.T., aided by the Honorary Petro
513
WO 277/21
7
