Their R.A.S.C. identity and allegiance were obscured, and their R.A.S.C.
responsibilities negligible.
It was then recommended by the War Establish-
ments Investigation Committee at the War Office that specialist pools should
be formed to provide detachments for checking R.A.S.C. supplies, instead
This allowed a separate allotment of personnel for
each group of ports, i.e., Bristol Channel, N.W. and N.E. England, and
Scottish, with variations according to local conditions, the average for each
group being three officers and 25 other ranks, including 15 supply storemen
The greater flexibility of this system proved valuable as compared with
the previous arrangement, but it was not altogether adequate to deal with
the ever-increasing flood of R.A.S.C. supplies and stores going out of ports
in the United Kingdom.
Still more flexibility was needed,
better control
was desirable, and above all the numbers of personnel were insufficient for
the task.
Port Detachments
The success of the Port Detachment, R.A.S.C., developed in the Middle
place of the War Office Supplies Embarkation Pool.
Ten Port Detachments were accordingly formed in September, 1943, each
comprising an officer
, seven supply storemen and five clerks.
These were
allotted two to Bristol Channel area, four to N.W. and N.E. area, and four
to Scottish ports area.
The introduction of the Port Detachments provided the necessary flexi-
bility in the R.A.S.C. services at ports in the Ü.K.; but organization in the
E.S.Ds. still left much to be desired, and there was a lack of co-ordination
of the R.A.S.C. services as a whole within each port.
The E.S.D. establish-
ments had not been revised for a considerable time, and were inconsistent
with each other and not properly related to their respective tasks.
Reorganization was therefore carried out in March, 1944, in the form
of a unit in each was area reocar es a R.A.S.C. Port Services (Home),
consisting of a headquarters, commanded by a major, a supply depot section
(captain), a P.O.L. section (captain), and a special duties section (subaltern
or warrant officer, class 1).
The headquarters was capable of controlling
up to five Port Detachments in addition to these sections.
three Port Services differed slightle ton to these conditions, the size of the
port areas, the relative importance of supply and P.O.L. duties, etc.
were excluded from the organization, up xperience had shown that they
were not suited for tasks in the dific as experien of working at the ports.
The new arrangement did not make any material difference in the duties
of the respective parts of the Port Services.
Port detachments continued in
Supply Depot Ss. Post detachmout the duties of
Embarkation Supply Depots, and the P.O.L. sections were
responsible for defuelling and refuelling vehicles for shipment, refuelling
imported vehicles, and the salvage of fuel from leaking containers.
The R.A.S.C. Port Services were controlled by S.T.6, through C.P.O.
The instructions issued by that officer, and a list of technical
duties of Port Detachments, are contained in Appendix III.
ment was not altogether satisfactory from the P.O.L. point of view.
Supervision of the loading of packed P.O.L. on ships was at first carried
out by personnel of the Port Services, but the lack of an independent P.O.L
organization to ensure that cargoes were complete, to dispose of containers
arriving at the docks damaged or leaking, and to exercise general supervision
on behalf of S.T.2, was acutely felt.
The policy was that O.C., R.A.S.C., Port Services (Home) should make the
best use of the personnel allotted to him.
He was thus entitled to use supply
section personnel for P.O.L. duties, and vice versa, according to the variations
in relative loads.
In these circumstances, it was not possible for S.T.2 to
exercise direct control over the port service personnel, who moreover had
not received the specialist training required for the efficient handling of
In consequence, high leakage losses, waste of time
general inefficiency tended to develop.
The P.O.L. organization could only
act indirectly to prevent this result, by advice given through the Port Services
A possible solution was tried by attaching a specialist P.O.L. officer at
ports where P.O.L. loadings were heavy, to supervise and give the benefit
of his specialist experience in methods of handling and stowage, fire pre-
But this arrangement was unsatisfactory, for the officer could
only advise; if he took a stronger line, dissension resulted.
In May, 1944, detachments drawn from late-phased P.O.L. units of 21
Army Group were placed at ports for duties in connection with the loading
By arrangement with S.T.6, they worked directly under orders
from S.T.2, War Office.
The Special Duties Sections were an expedient in connection with the
mounting of " Overlord", and their disposal is described in Chapter VIII.
An additional duty included in the functions of R.A.S.C. Port Services
was the supervision of the handling of R.A.S.C. Marine Stores passing through
ports.
The improvisations connected with the mounting of " Overlord" eventu-
ally created some confusion in the R.A.S.C. Port Services, with consequent
administrative difficulties.
The three Os.C.,
R.A.S.C. Port Services,
were
operating improvised organizations in three other port areas, e.g., South-
ampton, South East Coast ports, and East Coast ports, the personnel being
made up of the special duties sections and a miscelaneous collection ng
personnel from C.S.Ds. and other sources.
The three original Port Services
were operating under their seconds-in-command, and had lent some of their
other personnel; while some i the original ten Port Detachments were working
at ports in the mounting commands, together with some of the Port Detach
ments of 21 Army Group which were still in the United Kingdom.
Reorganization became imperative, and it was effected by replacing the
three original R.A.S.C.
Port Services (Home) by six smaller headquarters
under the same name, by increasing the number of Port Detachments from
249
WO 277/21
27
