Statistics
The extent of the work carried out by the transporters is shown by the
figures of loads carried: —
Other
Stores
1942, 2nd half
1943, Ist half
1943, 2nd half
1st half
1944, 2nd half
1945, January to May
Tanks
380
1,200
7,800
6,800
3,300
3,500
vehicles
Cons
1,000
1,000
2,700
30,000
80,000
100
45,000
Delivery of Vehicles
In March, 1941, as it was becoming more and more difficult for con-
tractors to deliver vehicles they had made to W.D.
depots, the Ministry of
Supply asked S.T.3 if more vehicles could be collected from manufacturers.
Owing to the temporary shortage of R.A.S.C.
drivers, however, increased
collection could not then be arranged, but the possibility of using A.T.S.
drivers was considered, and eventually this method was employed.
From August, 1941, in fact, all contracts for the supply of new vehicles
were arranged on an " ex-works" basis, i.e., the War Department collected
from the factory.
This necessitated arrangements for the provision and re-
placement of petrol for the vehicles collected.
It was decided that contractors
should issue the necessary petrol, and report weekly to Central Vehicle
Control the amount of it supplied, quoting the serial numbers of the vehicle
inspection note.
The Control collected the returns,
and forwarded them
to the Ministry of Supply, who arranged direct replacement.
The petrol
supplied was accounted for by the unit in the ordinary way.
Arrangements
were also made to help contractors who had difficulty in obtaining supplies
of petrol for the purpose.
Economy in the Use of Transport
The imperative need for economy in the use of mechanical transport was
fully appreciated in the War Office as a matter of vital importance.
It was
desirable not only with the object of conserving resources of petrol and tyres,
but also to reduce demands on the factory capacity and manpower required
for the maintenance of enormous fleets of W.D. road transport vehicles.
Consequently, on the outbreak of war, Army Council Instructions were
at once issued for the use of W.D. transport to be restricted to the minimum
compatible with essential training and administrative efficiency.
These
instructions directed that the use of vehicles was to be confined to essential
thating and transport services; that it was to be strictly controlled to ensure
that only essential journeys on military duty were periormed and that load
carrying capacity was utilized to the maxine; phat the unnecessary use
of large vehicles for small loads should cease; that the use of transpor
should be co-ordinated, where necessary, between units in the same area;
and that the use of W.D, vehicles for recreational purposes was to cease.
174
At the same time, D.S.T. stressed, through departmental channels, the
necessity for work-tickets,
vehicle log-books, etc., being properly kept, as
and A.T.S.-driven vehicles were concerned.
later, the necessity for keeping work-tickets, as a control on the unauthorized
use of transport, was emphasized for the whole army.
A succession of instructions, designed to achieve economy of transport,
was issued during the war; the principal of these are noted below.
of them were necessitated by the developments of the war, but the majority
were new attempts at solving the fundamental problems when on the whole
all that was needed was the proper enforcement of the existing rules.
these had been conscientiously carried out, the result must have been an
enormous saving; but it is regrettably necessary to record that this was not
Transport readily lends itself to improper use with little fear of
detection, as the rules can easily be transgressed and it is difficult to bring
delinquencies home to offenders.
It therefore offers a peculiar temptation,
especially when there are restrictions on private motoring or difficulty in
the use of public services, and it appears to be one of those things in which
many people feel that it is no sin to take advantage of the State.
From another angle, economy was not achieved as the result of these
instructions owing to the reluctance of units, other than the R.A.S.C., to
place their transport at the disposal of the R.A.S.C. officer in charge of
This may be attributed to a fear that the control of their own
transport would pass out of their hands, and that they
be free to employ it, rightly or wrongly, as they chose.
ineffective any attempt to achieve full co-ordination of the use of W.D.
transport and its consequent employment to the best advantage, and could
only be overcome by the most stringent supervision by the staff and action
to ensure that all unit transport which could be made available was in fact
Rules for Control and Use of W.D. Transport
Rules for the control and use of War Department transport had been
in existence before the war in a pamphlet so named; but, as the result of
changed conditions and current requirements, this pamphlet became out of
date, and it was consequently revised at the end of 1940.
In the meantime, an Army Council Instruction (101 of 1940) was issued
modifying some of the instructions and laying down rules designed to con-
serve petrol and oil in the United Kingdom.
The principal provisions were
The use of W.D. owned, or hired, transport vehicles was
essential training and transport services, with certain special exceptions.
W.D. transport was to be so controlled as to ensure that
only essential journeys were performed, and that the load-carrying capacity
of vehicles was used to full advantage.
The unnecessary use of large vehicles
to carry small loads was to be avoided.
A work-ticket was to be completed for every journey of a W.D. vehicle,
the purpose and authority of the journey being inserted.
Whenever the time factor permitted,
W.D. stores, including supplies,
were to be conveyed by rail in preference to road.
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
