CHAPTER XIII
BRITISH ARMY STAFF, WASHINGTON
Origin of B.A.S.
Early in 1941, it was proposed to establish Army reserves in the United
States, and to transfer to that country the task of supplying rather more
than one-half of the total maintenance requirements of British forces over-
seas.
The Lend-Lease Act was passed in March, 1941, under which the
U.S.A. supplied Britain with many of her needs in exchange for the use
of bases in British territory and other reciprocal services.
The Quarter-Master-General, War Office, saw that it would be necessary
to establish in North America a suitably qualified military staff and organi-
zation through which he could exercise efficient control over
considerable part of his functions which would inevitably have to be dis-
charged in America in the years immediately ahead.
concerned, i.., War Office, Ministry of Supply, Ministry of War Transport,
and representatives of the United States War Department, had agreed on
the necessity for such an organization, action was taken to create a military
body in North America, modelled on the Q.M.G. organization in the United
Kingdom.
closely as possible those of its parent, so that from the beginning it could
enjoy the advantage of acting along well-established and proved lines in
a new task and under familiar conditions in a foreign country.
Creation of Q.M.G. Branch, North America
On 20th June, 1941, therefore, the Q.M.G. organization for duty in
North America was officially created, being at first called No. 208 Military
Mission, with the general identifying description of Staff of Q.M.G., North
America.
was under the control of a
D.Q.M.G. (a Brigadier, late
R.A.S.C.), and the Supplies and Transport Directorate was represented by
an A.D.S.T.
it began to overate at once.
In August, 1941, this mission
was combined with two other British Missions to the United States, under
the title of British Army Staff, Washington.
of military organization, and did not alter the existing.
This development was a matter
working of the
various Missions, which had become branches of the British Army Staff,
nor relations with the British Purchasing Commission.
S. and T. Branch-Functions
The functions of the Supplies and Transport Branch of B.A.S., Washing
ton, were eventually as follows:
(a) Collating and forecasting all
supplies, petrol, oil, and lubricants.
War Office requirements of food
(b) Maintenance of serd bricant their turnover; supervision of the
shipment of monthly demands in close collaboration with the British
Food Mission and British Petroleum Mission and with the British
Food Mission at Ottawa, Canada.
(c) Progressing War Office demands.
288
(d) Liaison between the War Office, British Food Mission, U.S. War
Department and U.S. Navy Department on all questions relating to
food supplies, experimental rations, and lubricants.
(e) The policy of co-ordination of ration scales, packing, containers,
etc., in collaboration with those departments.
(f) Advice to the British Food Mission on day-to-day problems arising
in connection with procurement and types of packs required.
(g) Arrangements for the R.A.S.C. maintenance of North and South
Caribbean Areas and Bermuda.
(h) Supervision of the procurement, distribution, and shipping, of all
vehicles and spares.
Organization of the Branch
The S. and T. Branch of the B.A.S. was at first mainly concerned with
transport matters.
B.A.S., in August, 1942,
The transport section was transferred to Ordnance branch,
then adopted at the War Office.
in accordance with the policy of reorganization
The supply branch was not formed until
early in
1942.
The appointment of A.D.S.T.
was
upgraded to that of
D.D.S.T. in May, 1942.
Transport-Previous Procedure
Before the establishment
of S. and T. Branch,
"B" and R.A.S.C.
vehicles had been obtained in the United States by the British Purchasing
Commission on a cash basis, and shipped by the British Ministry of War
Transport on instructions issued by the B.P.C. Movements Branch.
Up to August, 1941, no vehicles had been procured under Lend-Lease
although some requirements had been tabled and accepted
by the Lend-Lease authorities and the U.S. War Department.
shipments of vehicles had of course been proceeding for many months pre-
viously against orders
placed direct on the Canadian Department of
Munitions and Supply by the Ministry of Supply, London.
orders, the B.P.C. had no concern.
Initial Task of S.T.
In these circumstances, it was at first almost impossible for B.A.S. tu
obtain any control over the supply of vehicles and spares.
The first requisite
was the compilation of a summary of all vehicles supplied to date, from
both U.S.A.
and Canada, together with details of all orders outstanding
and yet to be tabled in both countries.
This proved to be a big task, as
the records were divided between several different departments, and there was
no complete picture.
Considerable progress had been made, however, when
London called for a status report of all vehicle orders placed in North
America, to be amended monthly thereafter.
This instruction had the effect
of ensuring that all advance information within sections of the B.P.C. and
the Depant that all autices and Supply was collated in Washington, with
the result that, by the end of December,
1941, S.T. had a reasonably
accurate overall picture, and the responsibility for maintaining this record
and reporting to London monthly was vested in S.T.
7
WO 277/21
27
