This plan had no solid administrative founda-
evacuate, or be starved out.
tion, but relied on the capture of British supply dumps, and on the ability
of the Japanese troops to live on the country.
It was to cost them most of
8.000 men in Arakan, and the bulk of three divisions in Assam, thus disposing
of the legend that the Japanese could live for long periods on rice and local
resources.
One of the principal causes of the failure of the Japanese plans was our
ability to maintain our forces by means of air supply.
tenance had been given an impetus in this theatre by the demands of the
evacuation from Burma.
improvisation, the hastily-formed R.I.A.S.C. unit already mentioned per-
formed air despatch duties for the maintenance, not only of the refugees, but
also of native levies operating independently, and of part of a Chinese army.
From this beginning, an air despatch organization was developed. A training
establishment was set up in India, and an Air Supply Company, R.L.A.S.C.,
the first of five, was formed. The Divisional R.A.S.C. of 70 Division was
reorganized as an Air Despatch organization for the maintenance of Special
Force, absorbing a large number of British drivers who were badly needed to
make good deficiencies elsewhere.
The scale on which air supply was employed during 1944 was only made
possible in the first place by the establishment of air supremacy by the Allies
at the end of 1943. It then depended on the availability of base airfields
with rail connections; on the sufficiency of transport aircraft and supply
dropping equipment; and on the training of personnel to pack and load the
These matters were all taken in hand, and the difficulties were
overcome as operations progressed.
Thus, when there was a shortage of
supply dropping parachutes, the Calcutta jute trade produced " parajutes",
which filled the gap; they worked satisfactorily in dry weather, but in wet
became sodden and ineffective.
In the early stages, the ground organization consisted of R.I.A.S.C. units
co-operating with R.A.F. personnel.
Experience showed that there was an
urgent need for a permanent organization to handle the movement and main-
This was
Maintenance of S.E.A.C.
The base for Fourteenth Army was India, and all imported or indigenous
supplies passed through the Indian reserve base depots.
The system
provision of imported supplies is described in
Chapter X.
held all
reserves of supplies in the country for both its own and S.E.A.C. forces, as
part of its general stocks.
S.E.A.C. had no control of its own supply resources
other than those with Fourteenth Army, and had not at this time been given
the use of base installations in India under its own control.
Stores from the Indian reserve bases were delivered to advanced bases in
the Fourtenth Army Area, which, for the southern L. of C. (i.e., that support-
ing the forces in Arakan) were located about Chittagong and Mumensingh
(about 100 miles west of Sylhet), and, for the Northern L. of C. (that support-
ing the troops on the Assam and Burma front) at Gauhati and Manipur Road
S.E.A.C. to reach their destination.
It took two months for supplies demanded from India by
The northern part of East Bengal was served by Mymensingh, whence the
requirements of the Air Forces and the air supply base airfields were met.
The northern, or Assam, L. of C. depended on four main routes, i.e.,
(a) The metre-gauge railway from Gauhati to Dimapur and to the
American bases at Ledo.
This was designed only for very light
traffic, and was now called upon to carry an enormously increased
(b) the broad-gauge railway from Calcutta to river "ghats" (landing
stages) on the Brahmaputra, and transhipment stations on the metre-
(c) The river (Brahmaputra) route.
(d) The Assam access road, running north of the Brahmaputra from
Bengal into Assam.
Both road and rail communications in Assam were subject to serious
seasonal flooding; and the Brahmaputra is liable to rise suddenly and wash
away ghats, or form sandbanks and make ghats inaccessible by river craft.
All these routes were greatly improved and expanded. Railway lines were
doubled, the Assam access road was extended, and additional river craft and
train ferries were provided.
A 60 per cent. increase in deliveries to Fourteenth
Army was thus effected between November, 1943, and April, 1944.
Supply Difficulties, 1943-1944
The building up of stocks on both the northern and southern lines of com-
munication was nevertheless a matter of some anxiety during the early part
of the period from November, 1943, to June, 1944.
port of Chittagong barely kept pace with the needs of the forces based on it.
On the northern L. of C., the total capacity available until April, 1944, was
only just sufficient for maintenance.
Reserve stocks of many commodities,
especially petrol, fell to dangerously low levels.
In neither Arakan nor Assam, with the exception of the rice crop which
barely met the needs of the civilian population, were any foodstufis obtainable.
This imposed on the Army the necessity of obtaining fresh meat, vegetables,
fruit, etc., from distant areas, and of supplying large quantities of tinned and
dehydrated substitutes to rectify deficiencies in the fresh ration.
resources Branch was established which brought some 18,000 acres under
vegetable cultivation, and units were encouraged to grow their own vegetables
Pig-breeding, goat-rearing, and chicken-farming were
planned on an extensive scale.
One of the means adopted to meet the difficulties of the northern L. of C.,
and at the same time to relieve the load on other forms of transport, was the
construction of oil pipelines over great distances.
WO 277/21
27
