S.T.6 obtained estimates of their requirements from commands, and
produced these at weekly meetings at the Ministry of Fuel and Power, at
which the coal-producing areas and the four principal coal-distributing firms
were also represented.
She figures were studied, and agreement was reached
as to the amount of coal to come from each area, and whether it was to be
conveyed by sea or rail.
A programme was then drawn up showing the
weekly allocations to each command.
Under the controlled system of deliveries there were no longer con-
tractors in the strict sense of the word, but simply local suppliers employed
as a convenient channel.
Prices were controlled.
The procedure for dealing
with these local suppliers was that the chief firms acted as group leaders,
and arranged to provide coal for the smaller firms.
Thus, if "X" had
previously held a contract at a certain station, he did not, on the introduction
of the new system, continue to demand from his previous suppliers, or from
any other supplier; but the group leader concerned arranged the delivery of
a certain tonnage to
"X" weekly, and the latter passed his bills to the
officer i/c barracks in the usual way, and then paid the group leader.
Part
of the cost for working the system became known as the "margin" (about
6d, a ton), and this was divided between the group leader and "X" on a
basis settled between the two, to reimburse the group leader for handling
the business.
Later, as the scheme developed, requirements arose at new locations, and
these became known as " new business". The D.A.C. made special arrange-
ments for rates of repayment in such cases.
Build-up of Reserves
Beating in mind the possibility that during the winter of 1940-1941 there
would be severe dislocation of railways and ports by enemy bombing, and
that this would prevent sufficient coal being carried by rail during the winter
to keep the Army supplied, a system of building up reserves at military
stations was devised.
This consisted simply of taking in 1/52nd of the
annual coal requirement of each station every week, beginning in June.
The result was that a considerable stock was accumulated by October; and,
The result was and a house the winter, the diference between what was
coming in on the weekly programme, and what was required for consump-
tion, was drawn out of the accumulated reserves.
This system gave general
satisfaction, and helped to get a good deal of the traffic off the railways in
winter-time.
There was no shortage of coal during the subsequent winter.
To implement the policy enunciate by the Mines Department as described
carlier in this chapteriley anunciated by they, ine, to put down stocks in
a number of reserve dumps, under command arrangements and control.
the main dificulty during the winter had been in connection with rail trans-
port, the alienative iro the winter had been in seves at central railvay
locations of at colle proposal to accumulate restre problem, which was
essentially that of ensuring that stocks were sufficiently widely dispersed
throughout the country as to be near the various users.
A two months' reserve stock at winter
retained intact throughout the summer and winter.
scales was to be built up and
It was not to be used
270
as a working stock.
The disposition of troops during the winter of 1939-
1940 was to be taken as a guide when planning the size and location of
reserve dumps, due regard being given to any new accommodation known
to be opening later in the year.
Where practicable, existing barrack coal
yards were to be extended; but it would probably be most convenient to
site the dumps in or near C.S.Ds.
were to be avoided.
Elaborate or costly storage arrangements
even when the dumps were located at C.S.Ds.
Stocks were to be held on charge of Officers i/c Barracks,
The dumps were duly established, although difficulty
was experienced
in completing them to their full quota, particularly in Eastern and Southern
Commands, which were farthest from the mining areas and also most affected
by damage to railways caused by bombing.
Movement Control of commands were directed to try and arrange, in
consultation with S.T. of commands, for the dumps to be stocked by means
of special trains from collieries to the stations serving the dumps, and to
assist in providing the movement facilities by rail.
This action had to be
undertaken by agreement with the contractor, and the situation regarding
transport for delivery from station to dump would have to be closely watched.
Interruption of rail facilities had another consequence in the formation
of certain dumps in the Midlands.
Trainloads of coal, intended for civilian
domestic use and of a quality unsuitable for long storage, which were unable
to reach the Southern Counties, were diverted to these dumps, which were
obliged to accept them.
This caused difficulty in stacking, and resulted in
deterioration of the coal before it was turned over.
Solid Fuel Reserves
The general policy in regard to the holding of fuel reserves gradually
crystallized on the following lines.
The amount of reserves to be held was decided by two factors: the
amount which the Ministry would allow, and the geographical relationship
between command and coalfields.
Southern and Eastern Commands were
farthest from the major coal-producing fields, and their rail communications
were particularly subject to interference
Therefore, these commands carried
bigger reserves than those which actually contained coalfields.
Thus if the
Ministry agreed in principle to a reserve of three weeks' stock at winter
rates, this was sub-divided between commands on the following basis: Eastern
and Southern Commands, four weeks; London, three weeks; Northern, Scot-
tish, and Western Commands, two weeks.
There were eventually two methods of accumulating reserve stocks. One
was to state the number of weeks' reserve at winter rates to be held at
the end of the following April, and to divide the quantity arrived at by 50
(allowing two weeks for miners' holidays), the result being the planned weekly
intake throughout the year.
The other method was to fix the number of
weeks' stock to be held in October, and then to state the reduced number
of weeks to be held the following April, and to adjust intake accordingly
The former system was found to work better, as the latter, in effect, meant
wo separate programmes during the fuel year, and in practice resulted in
considerable progences in adjacent monthly programmes.
271
T 2
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
