One complete firm (staft, lorries, workshops and spare parts) was taken over
as an army unit, and proved invaluable, in spite of the drivers being civilians
of doubtful quality.
Another heavy commitment was for troop-carrying.
due to regrouping in order to meet the changing situations had to be effected
by M.T., not only personnel but mules being carried.
mitment, coupled with the continuous desertion of Burman M.T. drivers,
made the available transport insuficient for maintaining the two brigades;
but the railway helped by running a supply train for some days (until it was
derailed) from Toungoo to brigade meeting points, from which it was only a
short run to delivery points.
To make up for the desertions, personnel of
some R.I.A.S.C. transport companies were flown into Burma.
Maintenance from F.S.Ds. to meeting points was not made a divisional
responsibility in Burma Division.
This was due to the fact that, as brigades
had become accustomed to working independently in this respect, it was
considered by Divisional H.Q. that it was better to let them continue in that
way, rather than cause confusion by putting a divisional system into opera-
tion.
Another reason was the very meagre system of communications, few
messages getting through in time, if at all, and the dearth of motor-cyclist
despatch riders.
C.B.A.S.C. exercised control by holding a conference of his
officers every evening, and giving out orders and advice.
Neither in the Toungoo area, nor later on the Irrawaddy front, was there
an automatic flow from the rear of any commodity other than supplies and
petrol.
To get any ammunition and ordnance stores, D.A.D.O.S. of the
Division had to take transport to Meiktila, then the base, and bring what he
could collect.
Brigades and units joined in the hunt for stores, and the main
road was full of vehicles engaged on such independent missions.
organization had been set up early in 1942, but the dividing line between
divisional and L. of C. responsibilities was not well defined, and staffs were
insufficient.
The C.B.A.S.C. and his staff had therefore to do much work
properly that of S.T., L. of C., particularly in sorting out the transport tangles
resulting from over-worked, under-repaired vehicles, driven by undisciplined
personnel.
Administrative Situation after Fall of Rangoon
Before Rangoon fell, the base and L. of C. installations and reserves had
been moved north; but the civilian heavy repair shops in the Rangoon area
could not be moved and were lost. In consequence, the maintenance of M.T.,
which had depended on them, became a matter of great difficulty.
The loss of Rangoon was very serious from the administrative point of
view, as it was the only point of entry to Burma through which supplies
could be moved in large quantities, in the absence of adequate land com-
Stocks of imnorted supplies, together with existing stocks. olus anticipated
purchases, of indigenous commodities, were existing stoo keed the army for
siu months, with the important proviso that this period would be less if the
of stocks through enemy action.
sources of indigenous supplies could not be held per if there was further loss
The importance of this proviso was soon
demonstrated, as large quantities of supplies were lost at Prome and Mandalay;
while the withdrawal from Toungoo involved the loss of some of the best
rice-growing areas, with double advantage to the Japanese, whose staple food
The collection of indigenous supplies became more
difficult as the civilian organization disintegrated under enemy air attack.
This last circumstance also handicapped movement, as many links (rail,
ferry, road, and river) which were manned by civilians broke down during
air raids, when civilian labour almost invariably deserted.
As far as P.O.L. was concerned, the production of spirit and of drums was
stepped up, and the situation was satisfactory so long as the oilfields could
With no supplies coming into the country from outside, this administra-
tive problem resolved itself into the progressive back-loading of supplies in
conformity with the projected plan of operations.
As the army withdrew
northwards, it was to a large extent carrying its base with it, and the problem
was one of transportation.
The Retreat to India
After the formation of Burma Corps, there was some relief for the
and corps arrangements never failed to provide
the requisite supplies and P.O.L.
Corps also became responsible
maintenance of 2 Burma Brigade, on the other side of the river.
of the other brigades in Burma Division continued to be decentralized, as far
as supplies and P.O.L. were concerned.
Another severe loss of transport occurred at Yenangyaung. First, Burma
Division second line transport was caught in a roadblock, and many vehicles
were burnt, and others abandoned.
Then the division was surrounded and
had to move across country to get out, abandoning almost all the vehicles
Only such of the first and second line transport was saved as
had happened to be outside the battle area, and some loaded lorries were
recovered from the scene of the roadblock when the Chinese forces came to
These forces were carried from Meiktila by a
G.P.T. company, which
worked at the task for 96 hours on end.
Burma Division came out of the trap, the problem was to provide it with
food, water, and cooking equipment, and the means of conveying them.
supply packs were prepared by the divisional A.S,C., unit representatives
cooking pots, were delivered at selected points along the main road, to which
the troops were directed as they straggled in.
There was an increasing need for more animal transport, not only to stop
gaps that could not be made good by the normal replacement procedure, but
also to free formations from being tied to a M.T. road.
animals were requisitioned locally, and Burma Division alone
1,200 bullock carts, while 2 Burma Brigade was largely dependent on this
These animals were of course very slow, their speed being
only two miles an hour, and they suffered from the circumstance that, while
they needed sixteen hours a day rest, grazing, and rumination, they
called upon to work much longer than eight hours a day, and there were
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
