Can Making and Filling Arrangements
Two schemes were developed in 1940 to increase the limited and con-
centrated can filling facilities then existing, as described in Chapter II.
The
first of these consisted in setting up two static Base Petrol Filling Centres,
one at Carrickfergus in Northern Ireland, and the other at Carlisle.
They
were operated by mixed R.A.S.C. and A.T.S. personnel, and filled returnable
containers until 1943, when the changing strategical situation led to their
disbandment.
The second scheme planned a chain of small W.D. can making
and filling factories, known later as "Satellite Factories", to augment exist-
ing resources.
It was known that the two existing factories could not supply
enough packed P.O.L. for the force ultimately to be employed; and this
circumstance, together with the fact that one or both might at any time
be put out of action, was a principal factor in the decision to adopt the
proposal.
Eleven such factories were planned.
Their location was governed by
a number of conditions.
It was essential that they should be situated
reasonably near bulk installations, W.D. or civilian, with which they could
be connected by pipeline.
They had also to be situated on good rail traffic
routes for the reception of raw material and the despatch of finished pro-
ducts; located reasonably near centres of population, so that civilian operatives
could be easily recruited and maintained; and sited well away from the centre
and eastern side of the United Kingdom.
There was difficulty in providing the special machinery required, and
in securing and erecting the necessary buildings to house the plant, when
acquired.
It was many months, actually March, 1942, before the first can was
produced in one of them.
Nevertheless, the scheme was partly successful,
and though never fully completed or extended owing to delay and the con
sequent change in the war situation, it justified itself in the end.
Without
the contribution made by
these
factories
during
"Overlord", a serious
shortage of packed P.O.L. might have occurred and operations have been
slowed down in Europe.
Before all the factories were in production,
the returnable container
programme made it necessary to alter their function, and by the end of
1942 most of them had been adapted to fill either type
required.
of container as
None of them was extended during 1942 on
W.D.
behalf, but
they afforded invaluable assistance to the Air Ministry in filling aviation
fuel.
Reserve Installations
During 1941, sites were found and prepared for six War Office con-
trolled depots; railway and road communications, hutted camps, and covered
storage, were built; and the R.A.S.C. units and Pioneer Corps labour force
raised and installed.
Good progress was also made that year in the arrange-
ments for the reception, filling, and storage, of War Office reserves, both
bulk and packed.
The new petrol depots
455,000 ons of all products, and by the end of the year they held about
were planned to hold a total
I March, 1941, an arrangement was made which had far reaching efiects
the assistance afforded hu the Petroleum Rnard to the Carica Ministrie
on War Office policy in respect of bulk reserve storage.
It was typical of
throughout the war. It was evident that the War Office required very large
reserves under its control, far in excess of these held in W.D.-owned tankage
The construction of the extra tankage as a W.D. project, however, presented
difficulties, and because of acute shortage of labour and materials could not
in any case be completed in time to meet an invasion if it had taken place
in the autumn.
As a result of discussions between the War Office, the Oil Control
Board, and the Petroleum Board, the additional tankage was made available
from existing civilian resources, no further W.D. construction having to be
undertaken.
This storage, at installations selected by the War Office, was
administered by the Petroleum Board, but quantities and grades to be held
were decided by the War Office in the light of operational requirements
from time to time.
The advantage to the War Office of this arrangement
will be seen from the fact that, while, at this time, the W.D.-owned tankage
totalled some 227,000 tons of M.T. fuels, in 1944 one million tons' capacity
of bulk storage was actually on call for the War Department.
During
1942, six additional depots were planned to hold the balance
of packed
reserves required for the projected operation, eventually to be
known as " Overlord"
Each was to be capable of holding some 30,000
tons of P.O.L.,
or 54 million gallons in all.
They were also intended to
provide points for the reception, filling, storage, and ultimate despatch,
returnable containers, both 4-gallon drums, and jerricans (see Chapter VI
and Appendix XJ), then in production.
Jerrican Depots
The plan for the reception and filling of jerricans involved the construc-
tion of six new depots situated in South-east England on rail links acceptable
to Movements Branch for the future rail traffic to southern ports.
Each
was to be capable of holding about 30,000 tons of P.O.L., and five were to
be equipped in addition to fill 100,000 containers weekly.
In the event, it was not found possible to site more than four of the
new depots in the
desired area, partly owing to military congestion but
mainly because of the time factor.
It was appreciated that to build military
filling points in areas far removed from bulk installations was an uneconomical
and very lengthy project, whereas if these depots were placed near to bulk
installations it would be a comparatively quick process to erect filling
machinery linked to the existing pipeline and pumping system.
Sufficient storage and filling facilities had to be available in time to
receive the
jerrican flow.
The first batch of home-produced
jerricans
materialized in
August, 1942.
It was planned that some 20 million con-
tainers should be ready by March, 1943, rising to 30 million by June of
that year.
These numbers called for storage and more particularly filling
facilities far in excess of anything possessed by the W.D. at that time.
Although the Petroleum
Board immediately offered such suitable filling
points as they could make available, which were accepted and employed to
their full capacity, only the creation of these special W.D. installations was
expected to cope with the full container production.
It was, therefore, decided to set up one depot near the civil installations
at Thameshaven, Essex, while two others were established in civil installa-
tions at Thornton, Cheshire, and Grangemouth, Scotland.
The other three
257
WO 277/21
27
