absurd, seeing that, as they claimed, mechanization had advanced to the
oint at which M.T. vehicles could go anywhere that pack transport could.
In the event, it was fortunate that wiser counsels prevailed.
Overseas, some animal transport was retained, notably in Hong Kong,
where there was a mule corps with Indian personnel.
R.I.A.S.C. Animal Transport
The need for animal transport with the B.E.F. in France does not seem
to have been foreseen before the war, but it very soon became apparent,
as explained in Chapter IV, and none was available in the United Kingdom.
India was asked to help, and responded by sending four animal transport
companies of the Royal Indian Army Service Corps, which reached France
towards the end of December, 1939.
These units were of excellent quality,
the personnel being all Regular soldiers, and all Mahommedans, which
removed most of the difficulties about caste prejudices.
One company was captured, having kept together and
discipline to the very last, in spite of its British officers and warrant officer
having been removed by the enemy.
The other companies reached the
United Kingdom, with a number of their mules.
There was, however, no immediate requirement for pack transport, and
only one of the three Indian companies was retained in that capacity, the
personnel of the other two being trained in M.T. duties, with a view to
their employment as Station Transport Companies.
Pack Transport Companies, R.A.S.C.
Meanwhile, in May, 1940, to meet a possible requirement for operations
in mountainous and snowy country, a Pack Transport Company, R.A.S.C.,
was formed, with 240 pack ponies rendered surplus from the Lovat's Scouts,
and began training in Scotland.
The War Establishment allowed a headquarters and three sections, each
of 90 pack animals.
each of ten pack animals.
Each section was sub-divided into nine sub-sections,
The personnel consisted of six officers and 305
other ranks, the animals of 300 pack mules or ponies, 11 riding horses, and
20 light draught horses, the draught horses intended to draw nine limbered
wagons and a water-cart.
Early in 1941, a requirement arose for a special project, involving the
provision of eight pack transport companies.
following way.
These were found in
The original pack company, R.A.S.C.; a new company,
raised from surplus animals from a cavalry training brigade, the Equitation
School at Weedon, etc; the three original R. I.A.S.C. companies (two being
reconverted from M.T.) and three further companies sent from India.
Later, these companies were organized in two pack transport groups.
The idea was to employ the companies as
first line transport with
independent brigade groups, and for carrying such of the essential equip.
ment of the battalions as could be broken down into pack loads.
the useful load was fixed at 225 lbs.
animals, apart from those of the Indian companies were horses. of which
164
Actually, these units were never used in active operations.
interest to note that when the employment of pack transport in mountainous
and snow country was being considered in 1941, it was decided that both
the personnel and animals of pack transport companies should be trained
in the use of snowshoes.
Effect of R.I.A.S.C. Repatriation
In May, 1943, the question of the repatriation of the men of the original
Indian contingent had to be considered, as they had been away from their
homes for a long time without leave to India.
This involved the provision of personnel to replace them during the
period before their reliefs could arrive from India.
The R.A.S.C. could not accept the commitment at the expense
existing R.A.S.C. manpower ceiling; nor could the proposal be
that Canadian or Allied Forces should find pack transport units
meant that the R.A.S.C. would have to carry out M.T. tasks then being
performed by Canadian or Allied units.
An offer by Canada to produce
six pack companies in substitution of four Canadian G.T. companies could
It was decided that only four pack transport companies, instead of
eight, would be required after the six Indian companies had
so only two additional companies, R.A.S.C., were raised.
At the end of 1944, the personnel of these two companies were sent
to Italy as cadres to be used in the formation of local units.
disbanded in January, 1945, and the two remaining companies, later that
The last of the Indians were repatriated during 1944.
Animal Station Transport
An Animal Station Transport Company was formed at Aldershot in
December, 1940, from 100 surplus animals, with L.G.S.
afterwards, commands were asked for their views on the question of the
employment on general transport duties of a number of additional light
draught horses which had become available, but the answer was unfavourable,
and nothing further was done at this stage.
The question came up again early in 1942, when a number of Members
of Parliament addressed the War Office on the subject of the use of animal
transport in place of M.T. on War Department services in home stations,
in view of the rubber and petrol shortages.
the wagon situation was a limiting factor, as there were only 560
Commands were once again asked what animal transport they could use-
fully employ on short hauls in depots, etc.
one M.T. vehicle would have to be released for each horse-drawn wagon
accepted, due allowance being made for the relative load-carrying capacity.
There could be no net increase in the number of men allotted for transport
The question was then considered of the method of organization of the
animal transport in commands.
7/77
WO 277/21
2
