SUPPORT GROUP COMPANY-continued
Function
Second line transport for ammunition, petrol and anti-gas reserves, and
vehicles for supplies on double echelon system, for all units of Support
Group of Armoured Division.
Replenishment petrol carried was 75
miles for the vehicles of units of the Support Group.
ARMOURED DIVISIONAL TROOPS COMPANY
Composition
Headquarters and workshop section.
Four transport sections composed as follows :—
Ammunition Section
Three 3-ton and four 30-cwt. lorries.
Petrol Section
Ten 3-ton lorries for petrol, two 3-ton lorries for anti-gas reserves.
Supply wing, of two sections (each section operating as an echelon) :
each section : 11 30-cwt. lorries and three 12-cwt. vans for supplies,
two 3-ton lorries for R.A.O.C. stores, one 3-ton lorry for R.E. stores.
10 per cent. spare vehicles.
Second line transport for ammunition, petrol, and anti-gas reserves, and
vehicles for supplies on the double echelon system, for units of Armoured
Divisional Troops.
Replenishment petrol carried at 75 miles for vehicles of Divisional Troops,
excluding R.A.S.C. companies.
ARMOURED DIVISIONAL AMMUNITION SUB-PARK
Composition
Headquarters and workshop section.
Four transport sections, composed as follows :—
Two sections for the replenishment of the two Armoured Brigade
Companies, each 23 3-ton and one 30-cwt. lorries.
One section for the replenishment of the Support Group Company, 20
3-ton and 2 30-cwt. lorries.
One section for the replenishment of the Armoured Divisional Troops
Company, three 3-ton and four 30-cwt. lorries.
Function
Transport of third line ammunition for all units of Armoured Division.
The sub-park would normally have joined the Corns Ammunition Park
of the Corps of which the Armoured Division formed part.
304
ARMOURED DIVISIONAL PETROL SUB-PARK
Composition
Headquarters and workshop section.
Four transport sections, composed as follows :—
Two sections to replenish the two Armoured Brigade Companies, each
18 3-ton lorries for petrol, and two 3-ton lorries for anti-gas reserves.
One section to replenish Support Group Company, ten 3-ton lorries for
petrol, two 3-ton lorries for anti-gas reserves.
One section to replenish Armoured Divisional Troops Company, and
also carried reserve rations for whole division, see below.
Eight
3-ton lorries for petrol, two 3-ton lorries for anti-gas reserves and ten
3-ton lorries for reserve rations.
Function
Third line transport for the carriage of petrol, anti-gas reserves and two
days' reserve rations, for all units of the Armoured Division.
Formerly,
three days' reserve rations were carried by an Armoured Divisional
Reserve Supply Park, but that unit was eliminated in April, 1940.
for replenishment was carried on the scale of 50 miles for all units of the
Armoured Division.
The sub-park would normally have joined the
appropriate Corps Ammunition Park.
G.H.Q. COMPANY
Composition
H.Q. and workshop section.
Ammunition and petrol wing (wing H.Q
and two sections).
Supply wing (wing H.Q. and two echelons).
Function
Second and third line transport for G.H.Q. troops, other than artillery.
G.H.Q. (ARTILLERY) COMPANY
Composition
Headquarters.
One self-contained R.A.S.C. section for each artillery
regiment of G.H.Q. troops, on a special W.E. for each type of regiment
concerned.
The workshop sub-sections of these sections were grouped
to form the company workshops.
The company included a small supply
detachment.
Function
Second and third line transport for G.H.Q. artillery units.
One for each
corps.
HEAVY ARMOURED BRIGADE COMPANY
Composition
H.Q. and workshop section.
One section each for ammunition, petrol
and supplies, etc.
Supplies in double echelon.
Function
Second line transport for Heavy Armoured Brigade.
305
медит
WO 277/21
27
