However, it became clear that there would be increases in the strength
of U.S. troops and of P.W., and consequently the disbandment policy
not carried out.
This was fortunate, since early in 1945 21 Army Group
asked for additional field bakeries (mobile), and two were accordingly
At the end of 1944, the total daily bread requirement was 1½ million 1b.;
of this, one million was produced under contract, the balance by military
About 14 per cent. of the total requirement (223,000 lb.) was on
U.S. Forces account.
Machine Bakery Platoons
In June, 1945, when the figures for daily requirements and production
were still about the same, there was a considerable deficiency of personnel
in bakeries, and this was accentuated by the incidence of the release pro-
gramme.
A policy of reduction was accordingly proposed on the
basis
of stepping up production in the remainder from 60 per cent. to 85 per cent.
It was, however, discovered that, though this was theoretically practicable,
in fact the degree of dispersion of troops was such that in
very few cases
would a field bakery (mobile), working at 85 per cent. of its capacity, find
sufficient units within a reasonable distance to consume its output.
Accord-
ingly a new type of unit was produced called a " Machine Bakery Platoon",
which would use the field bakery (mobile) equipment, but work on one
shift only, and have a capacity of 9,500 lb. daily.
This was extravagant in machinery, but there was ample available, and
there was a substantial saving in manpower.
The new unit consisted of
one officer and 26 O.Rs., a saving of 30 O.Rs. as compared with the field
bakery (mobile), and gave two units for each of the mobile bakeries which
could be retained.
U.S. Army and Bread Production
The Americans in the United Kingdom were never self-supporting in
providing their own bread.
Before the invasion of the continent, a fair
proportion of their requirements was produced in mobile bakeries handed
over by us and operated by American personnel; but these units were
withdrawn for service in N.W. Europe, leaving the U.S. troops in the United
Kingdom almost wholly dependent on British military and civil bread pro-
duction.
At the end of 1944, the U.S. absorbed 14 per cent. of the British
Army bread supplies.
to U.S. Forces in the United Kingdom.
Actually, about 300 million 8 oz. rations were supplied
The Former in the United Kingdoins which arrived in the United Kingdom
had U.S. equipment and ovens.
Each company had a W.E. of 168 all ranks,
and produced 20,000 lb. of bread daily; it required 30/40 23-ton lorries to
move it complete.
When this was compared with the British Mobile Bakery,
the latter
impressed the U.S. authorities very greatly by its mobility,
efficiency and
man-power economv. for it required only Ya all ranks to produce 30.000 lb
daily: it was carried on eight trailers, requiring only eight prime movers tc
move it. and it could he ta production doin in a new location in 19 hours.
The Americans immediately placed a demand on War Office for 15 sets of
Mobile Bakery machinery.
that some U.S. companies could be equipped at once.
Additional requests
followed, and in all 72 sets, with spares and technical equipment, were sup-
plied, enabling all U.S. Bakery Companies to be equipped.
facilities were also set up to instruct U.S. army personnel in the use aining
Special training
equipment.
SECTION 5.-P.O.L.
Method of Supply
Un the outbreak of war, the peace-time system of petrol supply in the
United Kingdom continued as far as was practicable.
Large numbers of
civilian petrol
pumps
were requisitioned, and either operated by
C.S.Ds.
where convenient, or allotted to units.
The tanks were refilled by the civil
oil companies on the order of the officer i/c supplies, who was responsible
for passing bills and for supervising the hand-over of tanks on a change of
unit.
Packed petrol was only issued where the use of pumps was impractic-
able, for turnover purposes, or for use in exercises.
When it became evident that one result of the disaster to the B.E.F. in
France in 194U would be the loss of large quantities of P.O.L.
arrangements were at once made to lay down reserve stocks in the United
These were intended both to provide P.O.L. supplies where
required on the Continent, using the United Kingdom as a base, and also
to meet possible operational requirements at home.
The action taken in connection with the first of these objects is described
in Chapter IV; and, to meet the second, the newly established Main Supply
Depots (see Section 1 of this chapter) included petrol sections, intended to
hold part of the proposed reserve.
By the middle of June, 1940, stocks
were being built up in them.
On a long-term planning basis, while it was anticipated that immediate
operational needs in the United Kingdom would be covered by the stocks
in M.S.Ds. and C.S.Ds., to be held under command control, it was decided
also to hold large reserves of packed P.O.L. in War Office controlled depots.
These were intended to be used, both for future local operations if necessary,
and to provide reserves for the launching and maintenance of operations
When the first six of these depots were set up, their location was considered
mainly from two angles:
convenience for rail movement to ports, and
security from air attack.
Over-riding consideration was accorded to the
second of these factors, and they were therefore sited in remote areas and
with very widely dispersed stocks.
These principles of location and lay-out
were later found to be a great handicap to operation when the danger of
invasion and air attack had passed away.
Avonmouth and to an emergency depot at Llanelly when the surrounding
In fact, while some damage was done to the plants at Llandarcy and
installations were bombed in 1940 and early 1941, no direct attack was made
on any W.D.
petrol installations, and no damage was done to any War
Office controlled petrol depot.
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
