Daily deliveries were carried by ramped cargo lighters.
as the distance grew.
but de curf and beach conditions often prevented these from getting to shore.
bu, 5 (of an R.I.A.S.C. company trained at the Indian Amphibian School)
acted as ship-to-shore links through the surf. Mules then continued the lift to
The Donbaik peninsula was cleared by 26th December.
The rapid advance of the division upset the maintenance plan, which was
to establish a F.M.A. at the southern end of the peninsula with ten days
stocks, from which the force attacking Akyab could be maintained until store
Tt was originally intended that 26 Division should
ships could enter that port.
carry out this operation, and in preparation for its task the formation was
placed on a convalescent scale of rations as a rehabilitation measure after the
efforts during the monsoon.
This involved the conveyance of largely increased
quantities of fresh supplies daily over 100 miles of rough road, including
hundreds of thousands of eggs, tomatoes, and oranges.
Overnight the plan was changed, and 25 Division attacked from the
Donbaik peninsula, capturing Akyab 11 days ahead of schedule, on 3rd
The stocks for the proposed F.M.A. were only coming in
slowly, and, as they were not meant for immediate issue to the troops, they
Two coasters were loaded with pack and bulk rations at
Maungdaw, and sent down; but early in January the weather broke for a
few days, and these vessels could not sail.
All troops moving south had
carried four days' rations, and all available space on transport was packed
with composite rations, and so the stormy period was tided over. Daily main-
tenance was nevertheless difficult, and there was not always enough food for
current issues, allowing for the fact that stocks had to be frozen against the
next phase of the operations.
A modified ration, about 40 per cent. of
normal, had to be issued on several occasions. At the same time, the feeding
strength on Akyab island expanded rapidly, including Corps and Army
troops, and also the Naval staff and the crews and technical personnel of a
large fleet of landing craft, until it reached 25,000. There were only two
Indian composite platoons to make the issues.
All available divisional M.T.
ferried rations forward from the Maungdaw base, and this saved the situation.
Against this had to be set off an unfortunate example of lack of co-ordination.
The Naval craft had been dependent on the Army for their fuel, and 500
liquid tons of diesel fuel were carried from Chittagong to Maungdaw, in road
transport that could be ill-afforded; but uselessly,
as Naval tankers then
arrived and took over the maintenance of their craft.
The Petrol Depot, R.A.S.C., from Dimapur was placed at Akyab in March.
1945, in charge of the bulk installations, and received its first delivery from
ocean tanker in April.
Pumping from the main depot to airfield tankage
The unit assisted in the erection of the installations, and
operated both the main depot and the pipeline.
Myebon and Kangaw
The supply of rations went on rapidly after the landing on Akyab. while
the operations continued un the chaungs to Mehon and Kangaw (the latter
up a waterway about eight miles N.E. of Myebon).
Myebon with four days' rations; and daily maintenance was then carried out
All troops landed at
by water concurrently with the building up of a F.M.A. there.
began to reach Akyab on 15th January, D +3 of the Myebon operations, and
the stock position there, which had been very unsatisfactory, then improved
Myebon, from which the Kangaw operations were also maintained.
Water transport of all sorts working from Akyab then stocked
The Kangaw landing was effected by 3 Commando Brigade and 51 Indian
Infantry Brigade.
replenishment was carried out by water.
The troops landed with 48 hours' reserve of food, and
The principal difficulty here was
the supply of drinking water. The water at the beach was brackish, and 4,000
gallons a day had to be sent up in 2-gallon cans.
The commando brigade had
no water tanks or other containers, and so had to keep its cans for at least
a day, the allowance being one can a man for each day.
This created a
shortage of cans, which was overcome largely by the use of empty petrol
barrels, which were first burned out and then washed in sea water.
L.V.Ts.
were used for the delivery of supplies to forward areas from the Kangaw
beach-head, and proved invaluable in the flooded conditions prevailing,
especially as their armour made them proof against anything but a direct hit.
Ramree
26 Division landed on Ramree Island on 21st December, but mopping-up
operations were not completed until 15th January. The supply problem here
was easier, as more time had been allowed to arrange for properly stowed
store ships, which came from Calcutta and Chittagong.
a difficulty, none being loaded for three weeks.
flown in daily for British troops, but the Indians had to depend on dehydrated
mutton until a supply of live goats could be arranged. From March onwards,
fresh fish was obtained locally, but otherwise local resources were negligible
throughout the campaign.
The R.A.S.C. petrol depot, which had been working at Chittagong, was
brought down to operate the bulk installations at Kyaukpyu.
Ru-Ywa and Tamandu
For the assault landing at Ru-Ywa, about 60 miles south of Myebon, an
intermediate F.M.A. was built up by water transport working from Myebon.
No preliminary stocking was possible near the area of the assault, and main-
tenance stocks accompanied the force in depot ships, loaded with balanced
rations, which discharged into a temporary F.M.A. near beach-head.
process of building up stocks,
carried out from Ramree, was helped by a
limited air lift.
The brigade which carried out the operations in the Tamandu area, north
of and inland from
Ru-Ywa, had sufficient M.T. to be self-contained, and
closed the road behind it, being maintained by water.
Another F.M.A. was
established at Tamandu, stocked at first from the intermediate F.M.A. men-
Store ships moved
tioned above, and later from Calcutta and Chittagong.
up the chaungs as far as they could and were off-loaded by DUKWs and
L.V.Ts. into the F.M.A.
82 (West African) Division, which had relieved
81 Division and been working down the coast, had now come off air supply.
and also depended on this F.M.A.
This created a further problem, due to a
WO 277/21
27
