United Kingdom, and was in fact functioning before they got there.
Much of
the equipment was bought locally.
It was only just coming into full operation
would not have been big enough to cope with all the reinforcements.
The fullest possible use was made throughout of civilian workshops and
organizations to supplement the R.A.S.C. resources.
Provision of Vehicles and M.T. Stores
Besides the vehicles obtained by impressment and local purchase, pro-
vision was also made from the United Kingdom, the U.S.A., and India.
Few R.A.S.C. vehicles were received from the United Kingdom until the
end of 1941 and early 1942, and these consisted of ambulances and other
vehicles for medical units.
A difficulty with these vehicles was that they were
of a different type from those in normal operation in the command.
Vehicles from America proved far more suitable, their four-wheel drive
enabling them to negotiate flooded paddy fields and wet rubber plantations.
The first instalment arrived in January, 1941, consisting of 480 Ford 3-ton
lorries, the assembly of which was to be arranged by the command with local
Twelve months' spares and 15 per cent. spare major assemblies
only, and this required the building of bodies locally, with consequent con-
siderable difficulties over labour, the provision of parts, etc.
Apparently
Malaya was not consulted before the order was placed for chassis, or the
difficulties could have been represented.
units until after the expansion of the garrison.
principal source of supply, and considerable difficulty was experienced in the
latter part of 1941 in effecting this, attempts to get stores having to be made
all over the country from small dealers and merchants.
The principal delivery of stores and spares from the United Kingdom
began when it was decided to increase the holding from six to 12 months.
Only a small proportion of the required stores were actually received.
only spares received from America were those referred to above as accom-
panying the vehicles, and spare parts of a minor nature were in very short
Water Transport
A Water Transport Company, with a small basic establishment, was formed
in 1940, and as time went on it incteased all basic asta in size, with the put.
chase of new and second-hand vessels.
Continual dificulty was experiencen
in obtaining local crews, in consequence of the varving rates of pay of civilians.
Towards the end of the camnaion all the local crews deserted. and artificer
personnel of the Combined M.T. Depot took over the vessels.
36
Description of the Theatre
The western side of the Malay Peninsula was developed more than the
eastern.
Most of the towns, the main railway lines and roads,
centrated there, the trunk roads running north
were
con-
and south from Kedah and
Province Wellesley (with the island of Penang linked with the mainland by a
ferry) to Johore Bahru, which was linked with Singapore Island by a cause-
way.
In the west coast area, as far inland in some districts as 100 miles, were
most of the rubber and coconut plantations, most of the ricefields and other
forms of cultivation, and most of the tin mines.
Rubber and tin were the
principal products, and extremely valuable from the war material point of
view.
Indeed, the loss to the Allies of this source of supply of these com-
modities was to prove exceedingly embarrassing, as will be seen in various
other chapters of this history.
A mountain range ran down the peninsula like a backbone, for the most
which stretched for miles down towards the east
coast.
Indeed, jungle covered most of Malaya.
Singapore Island was the location of the military headquarters and of
the naval base.
The seaward defences of the island were very strong, and
calculated to act as a deterrent to attack from the sea, but were not sited to
protect the island against an attack from the landward side.
Supply and Transport during the Operations
The invasion of the Malay Peninsula began on 8th December, 1941, on
the Thailand border.
Our troops, faced with a new technique of warfare,
were slowly forced back down the peninsula.
The normal system of main-
tenance operated during the early stages
of the active operations on the
peninsula, based on the static depots.
Control was largely exercised through
the Os.C., R.A.S.C., of the areas, including the control of the second and third
line transport in Singapore, Johore, and Kuala Lumpur.
In Penang, D.D.S.T.,
3 Indian Corps, controlled the formation transport, and also the static
services and third line units under O.C., R.A.S.C., Penang.
It was found in these operations that our troops were too heavily equipped,
and the forward zone was cluttered up with unnecessary baggage and trans-
port.
Our vehicles tended to become canalized along indifferent roads, and
became easy targets for air attack.
Our troops were at this time at a dis-
advantage compared with the Japanese, as they were not sufficiently adapt-
able, and were too dependent on a rigid system
of supply.
There were
occasions when our troops were short of transport or supplies and greater use
might have been made of local resources.
It was apparent that British troops
must be prepared to live on a much simplified diet and scale of rations.
In
this theatre, some eighty or ninety different ration
commodities had to be
provided.
When it became evident that the troops were going to withdraw to Singa-
pore Island, Command Field Supply Depots and petrol dumps were set up
at various points from which units could draw with their first line transport,
the
area had become
sO
restricted that second line transport
was
immobilized.
As the enemy advanced, moves of depots were planned, but
did not take place until much ground had been lost.
This meant that the
Army Service Corps were continually in the front line, so that
the terms,
second and third line, were really meaningless.
WO 277/21.
27
