the latter respect, the corporation had, by War Office direction, been obliged
to employ a quota of Regular Army reservists and some
Territorials in
peace-time,
but was not allowed to retain these on mobilization; it was
therefore obliged to depend upon the Labour Exchanges for its supply of
personnel.
There were also difficulties on the Army side,
due to lack
of cooking equipment.
Subsistence allowance, which had been intended to
cease on 17th September, had therefore to be continued until ist October,
1939, when the normal peace system came into general use.
Modification of the Basic Ration Scale
The lack of a comprehensive ration scale proved a continual stumbling
block when, in the early months of the war, the D.S.T. was involved in
negotiations with the War Cabinet regarding national rationing arrangements.
The civilian Ministries found constant difficulty in understanding the complex
system of arriving at the cash value of the ration, and could not appreciate
that the scale of issues laid down by military regulations bore little relation
to actual consumption.
In anticipation of the introduction of a civilian ration scale, a War
Office committee was set up to compare the civilian ration scale with the
military scale. It decided that the theoretical scale in Allowance Regulations
could be reduced in certain respects, i.e., meat from 12 to 10 oz.,
bacon
from 2 to 14 oz., and that sugar should be increased from 17 oz. to 3 oz.;
that the military scale could not be brought into line with the proposed civil
scale; and that discrimination in the scale of rations as between military
personnel engaged on active or less active duties was impracticable.
In November, 1939, the Ministry of Food pressed for a substantial re-
duction in meat and bacon in the military ration, though these items were not
yet rationed for the civilian population.
To this, the War Office would not
agree unless a compensatory addition of 2d. was made to the value of the
ration to enable alternative items of equal food value to be bought, which
would be at retail prices.
The Treasury suggested reducing the value of
the ration below that which had been in force in 1937 on the grounds that
the increase then approved had been solely a recruiting measure, and there
was therefore now no reason for not going back on it.
Cocoa was also
proposed to replace meat.
Meanwhile, the War Office limited issues of meat
and bacon to the scales laid down in Allowance Regulations, and of sugar
to 3 oz. a head.
The question was at last, in February, 1940, referred to a committee
that: —
of experts under the auspices of the Ministry of Health.
This recommended
(a) As long as the calorific value of the ration could be maintained at
4,000 calories, there was no objection to a 10 oz. meat ration.
(b) Greater use should be made of cheese, sausages and offals.
(c) No discrimination between personnel feeding in mess was practicable.
(á The women's ration should he reduced frm its current figure of
8 oz. meat to 7 oz., and of 2 oz. bacon to 1 oz.
The last of these was accepted. but the cash value of the women's ration
remained unaltered, which enabled alternatives to be bought.
238
Units were also asked to restrict their consumption of meat to 11 oz.
in units between 100 and 500 and 10 oz. in those over 500.
The figures of actual drawings by units were scrutinized, and it was
decided to recommold to the Food Committee that the standard ration
could be reduced as follows: —
Meat from 12 oz. to 10 oz.
Sugar from 3 oz. to 21 oz.
Bacon from 2 oz. to 1 5/7 oz.
Bread from 16 oz. to 12 oz.
This reduction coincided with the decision, precipitated by the events of
May and June, 1940, to issue a complete scale of rations in kind.
Home Service Ration Scale
The peace-time system of rationing proved unsuitable for war conditions
with inexperienced personnel, and, by May, 1940, the chaotic state of unit
administration
made it plain that that system was no longer practicable
Accounts could not be elucidated; credits and debits were beyond reconcilia-
It was decided to relieve units of the duties of accounting as far as
possible, and two fundamental changes were quickly introduced, viz., the
authorization of a complete ration scale, called the " Home Service Ration
Scale " (see Appendix IX), and the introduction of the procedure whereby
units indented for the number of rations required, and not by commodities.
The difficulties previously put in the way of this procedure disappeared
under the urgency of the situation.
The new Home Service Scale was based on the provision of breakfast,
dinner, and a substantial evening meal which could be split into a tea and
The cost was actually less than the messing cash value of
the ration for June, 1940, milk being reduced from 77 to 6 oz., and part of
the butter replaced by margarine.
To meet the difficulty of feeding small
numbers, a new provision was made whereby units could draw an extra
percentage of rations, 19 per cent. for those with a strength under
and eight per cent. for those between 50 and 100.
The women's ration
was fixed at 4/ 5th of the male ration, i.e., they indented for the total number
of men's rations less 20 per cent.
In September, 1940, this last arrangement
was cancelled and a special scale suited to women's requirements was issued.
A provisional form of indent (later to become A.F. F 757) (see Appendix
VIIIG) was introduced, and the unit representative drawing supplies acknow-
ledged receipt on this,
one copy being returned to the unit as an invoice
At the end of the messing period, the supply officer
prepared a statement showing the quantities issued during the period and
the number of rations issued daily; this was checked and certified by the
O.C. unit and returned to the supply officer as his voucher.
NA AF. pupared a delivery note for the issues made daily to mach
unit; the quantifies so issued were summarized for the period; the su entary
was priced and passed to the supply officer, who checked the unit's entitle-
ment against ration strength, and passed the summary to the paymaster
for settlement.
work on the C.S.D. office staff.
This system worked satisfactorily, although it threw much
239
R 2
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
