isolated locations to which they would have to be sent.
This had scarcely
come into being when the cris arose in September, 1938, and many troops
had to be fed by means of subsistence allowance.
Petrol had to be obtained from civilian filling stations, with many
attendant difficulties at the time, and over-payment subsequently.
The most immediate commitment was the deployment of a large number
of heavy guns and tractors from Chilwell to their positions, a process which
had to be completed within 24 hours.
The A.A. divisional transport com-
panies had, in peace, only a limited number of training vehicles, and gun
tractors of the type required were still only in the experimental stage, and
it was necessary to rely on civilian transport for that purpose.
Plans
had been carefully pre-arranged with a haulage firm, and the service was
carried out satisfactorily, the firm accepting its liabilities although no scale
of charges had then been agreed by the War Office.
It emerged clearly from the experience of the crisis that the peace-
time system of administration was quite unable to deal with emergency condi-
tions, and steps were taken to effect an improvement.
following arrangements were made for the supply and transport services of
A.D.G.B.: -
All supply contracts were handled by the D.Ds.S.T. of home com-
mands; hired transport arrangements were co-ordinated by home com-
mands, and, although A.A. Cs.R.A.S.C. were authorized to select the
special type of transport required for gun towing, or other services, and
they made the contracts, these then went to the home command con-
cerned.
P.O.L. supplies to suit the special lay-out were arranged by A.A.
Corps, in conjunction with Q.M.G.6 and the Petroleum
Board.
Ammunition supplies were arranged by A.A. Corps direct from
War Office depots, and third line ammunition supply was effected by
the home command to which each A.A. division was affiliated.
Home commands had therefore a very considerable co-ordinating authority,
and there was doubt as to the extent of the control which the
a home command should exercise over A.A. R.A.S.C.
so in respect of transport, and it was eventually laid down by C.I.G.S. that
A.D.G.B. transport was only to be used for A.D.G.B. purposes.
The A.A.
divisional transport companies continued to co-operate with the R.A.S.C.
of home commands, where possible, but the extent of their assistance was
in fact very limited.
After the formation of A.A. Command, the representation of almost all
R.A.S.C. requirements, except barrack services, passed direct through that
Command to D.S.T., War Office.
Contracts for hired transport had been ratified, and a suitable agreement
form produced, which went to
Commissioner,
though the rates of hire had not all been settled at the outbreak of war.
In June, 1939, began the period of partial manning of the defences,
known as the "Couverture", which lasted till war began.
R.A.S.C, fed their own troops and any ashers in theit ocality, while home
transport arrangements.
commands in turn fed A.A. troops not conveniently covered by their own
116
In order to save the use of packed petrol which would be required for
overseas, underground petrol tanks were installed in A.D.G.B. supply depots.
and these were filled by the civilian petroleum companies in the usual way.
Petrol was then drawn in bulk by second line transport, in portable 600-
gallon tanks on 3-ton lorries, which were emptied into barrels at gun and
searchlight sites
The system worked
throughout the war.
well, and continued in operation
Ammunition supply depots, in advance of the railhead, had been com-
pleted for A.D.G.B.
zines or intermediate
units, and were known as equipment ammunition maga-
ammunition depots.
The equipment ammunition
magazine held two and a half days' supply, and was usually about 30 miles
from a site; the intermediate ammunition depots were much farther from the
guns.
It had been laid down that A.A. R.A.S.C. ammunition lorries should
feed the guns direct from the E.A.Ms., and that the E.A.Ms. should draw
replenishments from the I.A.Ds. with third line transport, provided by the
home command in which the depot was situated.
This arrangement con-
tinued in effect until 1943.
A.D.G.B. on Outbreak of War
When deployment became necessary on the outbreak of war, much
difficulty was experienced in obtaining civilian towing vehicles, owing partly
to the delay in the settlement of the previous September's accounts, some of
which were still outstanding, and partly because there was still no War
Office authority for the rates to be paid.
The War Department simply said
that it would pay in accordance with the rates obtaining at a later date.
firms which had done the work before refused to do so again in some cases,
or insisted on part payment in advance, which units had to meet.
general shortage of transport also affected A.A. Command, and by the
end of the year it was still short of over 2,000 vehicles.
Considerable calls were made upon A.A. Command for both personnel
Not only were individuals posted away, but in the early
months of the war half a dozen companies were taken to make good trans-
port requirements for overseas.
The method adopted, where possible, was
to split a unit so as to leave a nucleus behind on which a new company
could be built up; otherwise, the remaining companies of the division had to
share the commitments of the unit withdrawn.
In place of W.D. pattern vehicles given up to equip the Field Force
A.A. Command received impressed vehicles.
The system whereby the Officer i/c R.A.S.C. Records made direct demands
on units for personnel
required for posting to other units continued until
1941, when troops were demanded in bulk from S.T., A.A. Command.
It had been the intention that the responsibility for feeding A.A. Com-
mand troops should pass to home commands on the outbreak of war, but this
did not take efiect until the spring of 1940, when the A.D.G.B. supply depots,
together with their personnel, were transferred to home commands.
Organization of S.T., A.A. Command
The heavy demands for ammunition during the Battle of Britain, when
the A.A.
guns first began to fire continuously,
required the continuous
turning of transport of A.A. Command.
The condition of the transport
117
WO 277,
27
