to another, ostensibly under the scheme, but not in fact complying with the
basic principle that they should be carrying a load on their direct way home
In this way, for example, a field force lorry was
rather than go empty.
absent from its unit for 16 days, and covered 2,272 miles.
Instructions were
therefore issued that return loads should normally only be accepted for
destinations on the driver's return route to his original starting place, or
within the permissible deviation of ten to 20 miles.
Application to U.S. Forces
On the arrival of the U.S. Forces, the question was raised of their vehicles
being used in the return loads scheme, in which they might wish to co-
operate, as there would be scope for reciprocal assistance in the movement
of U.S. stores in British W.D. and civil vehicles, and of British stores in
Agreement was reached in principle that, wherever possible,
vehicles of the U.S. Forces would be made available to participate in the
In the initial stages, the U.S. participation was restricted to vehicles
going outside a radius of 25 miles.
U.S. despatching officers were to advise
M.T.L.Os. through U.S. rail transportation officers of such vehicles; and the
M.T.L.O. would then try to arrange a return load as for British vehicles.
Assistance to the Civil Authorities
Assistance in the form of the provision of W.D. transport was rendered
to the civil authorities on innumerable occasions in response to requests
by the M.O.W.T. or other Departments.
These were for a variety of services,
c.g., clearance of debris caused by bombing, distribution of water where the
supply had been disrupted, conveyance of factory and munition workers
during civilian transport strikes, transport of essential supplies during dock
strikes. It became necessary in November, 1940, to instruct home commands
that local requests from civilian sources for transport assistance from military
All such requests must be dealt with in
the first instance by the Regional Transport Commissioners, who would pass
the request to the M.O.W.T. for submission to War Office, with a recom-
As an indication of the extent. of the commitment at this time, it may
be mentioned that in the last quarter of 1940 two Reserve M.T. Companies.
four Bulk Petrol Transport Companies,
and an Ambulance Car Company
(equipped with tankers or lorries), were employed on debris clearance and
water-carrying in London alone, while similar assistance was
Birmingham and Bristol.
also given in
Delivery of Civilian Loads
intended for W.D.
In January, 1941, War Office agreed to new imported M.T. vehicles
purposes being usefully employed in the conveyance
of loads for the Ministry of Food and the Ministry of Supply to places
between the ports of disembarkation and the depots to which such vehicles
Agreement was subject to safeguards against excessive mileages,
trionsibility for loss or damage to loads, and the subordination of convoys
driven by military drivers to Movement Control.
The use made in this way of such R.A.S.C. vehicles was not extensive,
only 100 tons being lifted in three months.
206
In 1940, a transport company was lent to the General Post Office to
assist with distribution of Christmas mails. The following year, this assistance
was extended to the provinces, commands being authorized to meet demands
coming through the local military assistant directors of Army Postal Services.
Scme 300 vehicles were employed in all.
In 1942, the arrangement was limited, and the G.P.O. was required to
approach the M.O.W.T. in the first instance,
only if the Ministry could not provide.
Thereafter, it became an annual
Assistance to Ministry of Agriculture
In March, 1941, it was decided that no R.A.S.C. or W.D. hired transport
was to be used for the conveyance to and from their work of men of
Pioneer Companies employed with the Ministry of Agriculture.
modified in September, 1942, when the use of W.D. transport for the con-
veyance of troops to and from farms was made permissible only when public
service facilities were unavailable or inadequate.
Arrangements were made in September, 1941, between War Office and
the Civil Ministries concerned, by which farmers could obtain the use of
W.D. transport at short notice for helping to get in the harvest.
were permitted to apply direct to local unit commanders.
The charge was
fixed at 4s. Od. an hour for a 3-ton lorry.
were received, 6,500 vehicles were employed, and they worked altogether
Financial recovery was arranged by R.A.S.C. officers i/c
The following year, this arrangement was modified. Farmers must first
use all available civilian road transport, after which they might apply to
the nearest military unit direct; but W.D. transport was not to be supplied
at the expense of training or military duty.
The charges for use of military
transport were made at civilian rates, by the Regional Transport Commissioner
against the County Agricultural Committee concerned.
was adopted in subsequent years.
Winter, 1941-1942
Provision was made for assisting the civil community by the allocation
of W.D. transport units during the winter of 1941-1942.
to be needed mainly for the clearance of docks and inland distributing depots,
but demands on the Army were only to be made when civil resources were
unable to deal with essential commitments.
Four G.T. Companies, R.A.S.C., of 100 vehicles each, were nominated
to be made available during the winter.
Though normally equipped with
3-ton lorries, they could be re-equipped with 10-ton and 6-ton lorries.
Motor Coach Companies were also made available for the conveyance
Revised Conditions for Assistance
In February, 1942, revised instructions were issued governing the use
DE W.D. transport for civilian services.
W.D. transport was only to be
Provided when either the M.O.W.T. or, locally in certain cases, the Regional
Transport Commissioner, had decided that an essential transport need could
not be met from commercial sources.
207
P4
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
