Scale
a day
nz.
Remarks and Equivalents
Item
(R)
Salt ••
1ặđ.
Cash element
Not
admissible for officers (see
Notes below).
Notes to Part I (a) and (b)
(a) A.T.S. officers and auxiliaries (and other recognized women's organizations) serving
in mixed units will receive the scale authorized for officers and men in Part I (a).
All purchases from the cash element of the ration will be made at
the N.A.A.F.I.
with the exception that if supplies of potatoes,
vegetables or fruit are available at advan-
tageous prices in the immediate neighbourhood, and C.Os.
consider that any quantity of the
items is required, additional to the normal fixed ration scale, such additional quantities may
be purchased direct from producers.
In no circumstances will additional quantities of nationally rationed items included in
the ration scale be purchased from the ration cash allowance ; nor will N.A.A.F.I. items of
the ration scale be exchanged for more expensive items on payment of the difference in price
from the ration cash allowance.
Part Il
1. VARIATIONS TO SCALES
(a) DOMINION FORCES
(i) Canadian Forces receive Home Service Scale with the modification that
they may draw coffee in lieu of tea, $-oz. tea being equal to 1-oz. coffee.
(ii) Forestry units (except Australians (see sub-para. (iii)) receive the Home
Service Scale, with the additional 2-oz. bread and 4/-oz. slab cake authorized
for troops in hard training, and plus the following extras
Additions
Total Daily Issue
Oatmeal
14-Oz.
11-oz.
Cocoa
3-oz.
1-oz.
British Forestry units may receive these additions.
(i) Australian Forestry units receive the normal Home Service Scale, plus
the additional 2-oz. bread authorized for troops in hard training.
In lieu of
the further additions to the scale mentioned at (il above, the Australian Forestry
units receive 14d. in cash.
(iv) The Forestry units at (i and (in) also have the option of drawing a
extra 2-07. of menta de in resnect of which a reduction of 3, will he made
in the cash allowance.
additions :—
(v) Newfoun dond nite receive the Home Service Sanle with the following
in lieu of tea, t-oz.
Salt cod, 1%-oz., in lieu of meat, /1-oz., and cheese, 4/-oz.; coffee, 2-0.,
478
(b) Allied Forces.— U.S. Army units or advance parties requiring British
rations will receive the British-American Ration Scale (see Scale 31).
troops actually in mess with a British unit will receive the same bill of fare as
British troops.
Other Allies draw the normal Home Service Scales, varied as follows :-
(i) Belgian troops draw 12-oz. of coffee in lieu of -oz. tea and f-oz. cocoa.
(ii) Dutch troops draw 1z-oz. of coffee in lieu of -oz. tea and j-oz. cocoa,
and have the option of drawing bread in lieu of flour.
(i) Norwegian troops draw /-oz. Coffee in lieu /+oz. tea.
(iv) Polish troops draw o-oz. coffee in lieu of -oz. tea, and may draw
sauerkraut, 3}-oz., in lieu of fresh vegetables, 8-oz., on two days a
week.
(v) French and Czech troops may draw 12-oz. of coffee in lieu of ⅔-oz. tea
and 8-oz. cocoa.
in lieu of %-oz. oatmeal.
They may draw %-oz. rice or 1½-oz. dried pulses
(c) Muslims with British units may be issued with meat in place of bacon,
ounce for ounce.
(d) Orthodox Jews and vegetarians by conviction (also applicable to the
A.T.S.) may draw the following items in lieu of meat and bacon :—
In lieu of meat :—
Bread
Margarine
Cheese
4-oz.
1-07.
1-oz.
In lieu of bacon :—
Fish (uncleaned)
or fish (fillets)
or dried skimmed milk powder
4}-Oz.
3-Oz.
1-oz.
(e) Prisoners of war and internees :—
(i) Prisoners of war engaged on manual labour receive the normal Home
Service Scale with certain variations peculiar to their national
characteristics.
Non-workers receive a special scale.
(ii) Internees receive the scale of rations authorized for non-working
prisoners of war.
(iii) Prisoners of war and internees temporarily accommodated by a unit
will be
given the normal home service scale.
The ration cash
allowance accompanying the home service scale will be admissible
for prisoner of war officers when so accommodated.
(f) Invalids Offers and men and personnel of the A T.S. who are on duty,
but cannot hecause of sicknace or other disability. ent the normal home service
ration. may be catered for by heing given special food items as recommende
by the medical ofter (ste also para. 2 (f) below).
(3) Personnel absent from meals in mess. - When officers or soldier end
Personnel of the A.T.S. who are regular dining members of a mess are absent
on duty for one or more meals for three or more days in an ten-day period, an
II 2
479
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
