Dehydrated Meat
The supply of this commodity from the Southern Dominions, while not
actually a matter of local resources in Middle East, may conveniently be
mentioned here, as it materially assisted the shipping position.
only occupied one-tenth of the space required for telescoped carcase meat,
was claimed to be equivalent to 5½ times its weight of carcase meat
It was lighter and more compact than corned beef, and
did not deteriorate on opening.
It was packed in 44-gallon
containing 225 lb.; but this pack was too bulky, and required sub-division.
It was found simple to issue and convenient to use, suitable for all static units,
and able to be issued during operations if time was available for re-constitu
Both beef and mutton were supplied in this form.
Statistics for the 12 months ending March, 1943
The quantities of supplies
obtained locally in
Palestine, and Syria) during the 12 months ending March,
(Egypt,
Forage contracts
Meat contracts ..
Cultivation contracts (forage, potatoes, onions)
Manufacturing contracts (tinned vegetables, jams, etc.)
Oil mill products
Commodity
contracts (fruit,
vegetables, potatoes,
wood, cotton seed, oil and cake, etc.)
Total, excluding forage
Forage, multiplied by 7, equivalent shipping space.
Tons
80,000
3,000
59,000
22,000
40.000
196,000
320,000
654,000
974,000
Local production also included a number of items not calculable in terms
of tonnage; e.g., 300,000 sacks, 100 million cigarettes, 20,000 gallons of wine,
30,000 bottles of brandy, 190,000 gallons of insecticide, 112,000 gallons of
methylated spirits, etc., and 39 million eggs.
The total value of the production of local resources for the year was
Besides the above, which were dealt with by the Local Resources Branch
D.Ds.S.T. of Armies and Commands had also
responsibilities for local purchase, and the approximate figures for these
activities for the same year were 188,000 tons, value £3,462,000.
The grand total for Middle East for the year was, in terms of shipping
space saved, above 1,162,000 tons, and, in terms of money, over El1 million.
426
APPENDIX VIIIF
(See Vol. II, page 131)
SUPPLY ARRANGEMENTS IN HOME COMMANDS UNDER
EMERGENCY CONDITIONS, e.g.,
INVASION
Extracts from a War Office Memorandum dated May, 1941
1. Invasion Ration
Scale
The scale of rations to be issued in circumstances where it is impracticable
to provide and use the Home Service Ration
invasion, is as shown (see Appendix IX).
Scale, i.e., in the event of
In deciding that it is necessary
to change from the normal Home Service Scale, the desirability of maintaining
the normal system as long as it is feasible and the necessity for economizing
in the use of preserved rations will be considered.
The power of deciding
whether it is necessary to adopt the scale is delegated to Army commanders.
The scale will be issued completely in kind by the R.A.S.C., items of
N.A.A.F.I. supply being taken over in bulk by the R.A.S.C: from the local,
etc., N.A.A.F.I. depots.
In the event of difficulties in the maintenance of
supplies of potatoes and fresh vegetables, RA.S.C. formation supply officers
will make special purchases.
2. Reserves (Command Control)
The number of days' reserves to be held is as shown (see Chapter XII,
Section 4).
The allocation of the R.A.S.C.
reserves as between C.S.Ds.
and formations or units is left to the discretion of Army Commanders, subject
to the provision of a proper check and inspection of stocks where held for-
Stocks not held in C.S.Ds. should, where possible, be held with the
formation R.A.S.C. and only with units when replenishment under invasion
conditions is likely to be impracticable.
When held with units, stocks should
be stored separately from the daily food supply, and should be frequently
checked by both unit commanders and the
R.A.S.C. The R.A.S.C. will
continue to have these stocks on charge, and will be responsible for turnover
of the tinned supplies so held.
Turnover of non-tinned supplies will be the
responsibility of the unit commander.
Responsibility for stocks issued to
R.A.F., and for turnover, will rest with the R.A.F.
supplied by N.A.A.F.I. will not be held forward of N.A.A.F.I. depots, i.e.,
they will not be held by formations or units.
Reserves held by formations will, where necessary, accompany forma-
tions on moves from one command to another.
It should not normally be
necessary to transfer the reserves held by individual units not forming part of
3. Working Stocks
Working stocks in C.S.Ds. of items in everyday general issue will continue
to be held in accordance with the present system of demanding current re-
quirements.
427
wet
WO 277/21
27
