(b) The eficient help of O (Movements) in arranging special trains
or ships, and progressing normal rail consignments through with the
minimum of delay.
(c) The constant drive for fuel economy, coupled with the vigilance of,
and instruction by, the Fuel Technologists.
(d) Monthly reviews in commands and at War Office of coal and coke
(e) Continuity of control at the top, as the officer who was responsible
for fuel and light at the War Office in 1939 remained in that situation
Accounting for Accommodation Stores
The instructions issued in May, 1939, were no doubt responsible for the
view taken in certain home commands that the normal barrack
services
(e.g., the issue, maintenance and accounting connected with accommodation
stores on barrack inventory by the barrack services staff) were not intended
to operate in respect of temporary wartime accommodation, and that for
such buildings units would obtain their requirements direct from Ordnance,
as in the case of tented camps, and hold the stores on unit ledger charge.
The situation which developed in consequence involved considerable wastage
of stores and loss to the public.
The issue of definite instructions on this point to commands before the
war would have ensured the continuous operation of barrack services on the
outbreak of war, with uniform systems for the issue of, and accounting for,
accommodation stores, fuel, etc.,
for all troops in the United Kingdom,
irrespective of the type of accommodation occupied.
That no such instruc-
tions were issued may perhaps be attributed to the fact that there was at
that time no one branch in the War Office responsible for the administration
of the barrack services as a whole.
The Committee on Barrack Services,
which sat in 1941, considered, amongst other matters, the question of whether
the difficulties resulting from the operation of two systems of accounting for
accommodation stores could continue to be surmounted.
These two systems,
in force in all home commands except two, were respectively, the barrack
inventory
system, for permanent barracks
and hutments,
and the
unit
ledger (A.B. 165) system, for accommodation stores in requisitioned build-
ings.
They are described below.
Under the barrack inventory system, the stores required to equip the
requisitioned buildings were demanded from Ordnance by the Barrack Services
The stores were then issued to the unit and entered on an inventory
by the barrack staff, and the unit and the barrack staff each held a copy
of the inventory.
The barrack staff thus had a complete record of the
stores issued to the unit, and with the record the articles in possession could
be checked at the marching-out inspection.
Under the unit ledger system, issues to equip the building in the first
place were made by the R.A.O.C. on the demand of the unit.
was responsible that issues were not in excess of schedules.
The D.A.D.O.S.
taken on charge in the unit ledger (A.B. 165), which was thus the
The articles were
record of the articles on charge to the unit.
only
This account was not required to
the unit marched out.
be submitted for wait hut the ledger was handed over with the stores wher
276
The views of a number of unit quarter-masters on the two systems were
ascertained, and are summarized below.
The simplified inventory book system was preferred to the ledger system
for field force units, because under the inventory book system they were not
saddled with vouchers; changes in the total number of an article
on charge
were recorded by the barrack warden altering the record and initialling it in
the presence of the unit representative.
The ledger system was regarded as unsatisfactory, because the book had
to be handed over on leaving the station, and the unit had thus no records
to refer to in the event of subsequent observations being raised.
Whenever
a unit went to a new station where there was no outgoing unit to hand over
its ledger, a new ledger had to be prepared. Under the ledger system, a great
deal of work had to be done by the unit in the preparation of lists of the
stores handed over at each location occupied.
These lists had then to be
consolidated to arrive at the grand total of the numbers of each article handed
over for comparison with the number shown on charge in A.B. 165.
persion of sub-units made it impossible to obtain sufficient representatives of
the Officer i/c Barracks to supervise the hand-over between units, and units
had not enough qualified personnel to carry out this duty properly.
Con-
sequently, articles were not correctly identified; this resulted in complicated
lists of surpluses and deficiencies which had to be reconciled.
The establish-
ment of the "Q" staff of units was not sufficient to compete with the degree
of accountancy involved in the ledger system.
Personnel Difficulties
The
possibility of substituting the simplified barrack inventory book
system both for the normal barrack inventory system and for the unit ledger
system had already been considered in the War Office before this committee
began its work; and the conclusion had been reached that this was desirable
if the additional barrack staff necessary for the purpose of implementing the
barrack inventory book system could be provided.
In view, however, of the
manpower situation, and because suitable civilians could not be obtained for
the appointments of barrack wardens and barrack labourers and that personnel
could not be provided from military sources, it had been decided that the
two systems of accounting should be retained.
Views of the Committee on Barrack Services
The Committee considered that all possible steps should be taken, parti-
cularly in the case of field force units, to relieve the unit as much as possible
of accounting and clerical work.
The difficulties described in the unit views
recorded above could not be avoided while the ledger system was in operation.
It recognized that the crux of the matter was the provision of the necessary
staff to enable the inventory book systems to be introduced, and made certain
recommendations towards the solution of this problem, e.g., the greater use
of female civilian clerks in barrack offices, and the improvement of the rates
of pay of barrack wardens and barrack labourers, or equivalent appointments.
The Committee recommended that the commands concerned should be
instructed to subst recomme barrack inventory system for the unit A.B. 165
system gradually, as and when the necessary civilian staff could be obtained
277
WO 277
27
