APPENDIX VIID
(See Vol. I, page 99)
PARTICULARS OF R.A.S.C. CRAFT
Fast Launches
(a) 40-foot.— Enclosed wheelhouse and cabin, open welldeck aft.
speed about 20 knots, maximum speed 23 knots.
Twin Perkins Diesel
(b) 45-foot.—Enclosed wheelhouse and cabin (four berths).
speed about 16 knots, maximum speed 20 knots.
Triple Power Meadows
accommodation.
Cruising speed 18 knots, maximum speed 21 knots.
Triple Perkins Diesel
Thirty-six-foot.—An open launch fitted with canvas dodgers giving limited
protection from weather.
Capacity 50 men or five tons of stores.
Speed
eight to ten knots.
Engines either Kelvin or Vosper.
An outstandingly good
sea boat for its size; a company of these craft crossed the English
Channel
in a Force six-seven wind shortly after D Day.
Used in every theatre with
great success.
Their capacity made them invaluable for harbour and estuary
work.
General Service
Launches
Forty-five-foot and 50-foot.—Designed to cater for the needs of small
garrisons supplied by sea.
Capable of carrying passengers and cargo, the
former in a passenger cabin, and the latter in a small hold complete with
derrick.
Good sea boats and handled well.
Ambulance Launches
One hundred and twelve-foot.-Converted Fairmile Type "B" Naval
motor launch.
Fitted to carry 20 lying or 40 sitting cases, with accommodation
for the medical staff. Good fast sea boats with beautiful lines.
The conversions involved the following modifications: -
(a) Flush deck over crews' accommodation and engine room.
(b) Erection of two ambulance wards,
seven to eight feet high, with
maximum width of 12 feet on deck; the fore ward was about 24
feet long, and the after ward about 29 feet long.
(e) Stretchers were arranged in three tiers along the sides of the wards,
(d) Wheelhouse and bridge cabins for master and mate were erected on
top of the fare ward the noner ofears anarters being need for.
three or four medical orderlies, medical stores, etc.
(e) A WC in sach ward and a sureery at the after and of the after
ward. Cumhined dring room and storage for blankets and linen.
Refrigerating outfit and ice store.
(f) Comfortable mattresses for the stretchers.
414
Motor Fishing Vessels
Sixty-one and a half-feet, 75-feet, and 90-feet.-
-These were, as their
names implies, built on the lines of a fishing vessel, and were stoutly built
good sea
boats.
Essentially small
cargo carriers,
and could only
carry
passengers in fine weather, i.e., on deck or seated in the hold.
Used as
coastal carriers of cargo, as " mother" ships to small craft, and as fire-fighting
vessels.
The 61}-foot type had a large hold forward, capable of carrying 20
tons, a speed of 10 knots, and Kelvin, Widdops, or Lister engines; the larger
types were in proportion.
Target Towers
Sixty-eight-foot and 69-foot.—High speed towers designed to meet the
needs of coastal artillery training.
Their machinery was rather complex, and
required very skilled engineers to ensure correct maintenance and running.
Good sea boats, and carried small cargoes in the open sea in an emergency.
Military
Oil
Barges
Eighty-foot and 104-foot.—These vessels were designed for the carriage
of petroleum ship to shore, in estuaries, or coastwise in fair weather.
Capable
of discharging into shore installations, or direct into jerricans, eight at a time.
The older, 80-foot type were converted dumb barges, and not easy to handle.
The later, 104-foot type was a better sea boat, and more manoeuvreable.
The
80-foot type had a freeboard of only two feet when loaded to capacity, and
a speed of six to eight knots.
The crew's quarters left much to be desired;
no heating was possible, and no cooking except when empty; yet crews lived
aboard for 14 months.
T.I.D. Steam
Tug
A very useful tug, but not sufficiently powerful to tow a barge in bad
weather.
Minca Barges
Dumb pre-fabricated wooden barges made in Canada.
Landing
Craft, Tanks (L.C.T.)
These vessels were similar in arrangement to an oil tanker ship, the bridge,
engines, accommodation for
crew, stores, etc., all being at the after end.
The rest of the hull, which was rectangular, formed the hold; and a ramp at
the forward end could be let down to allow vehicles to pass in or out.
craft were
useful for ferry
Chapter VII, Section 2,
They were used by the R.A.S.C. mainly
for dumping unserviceable ammunition at sea, their flat low deck making
them invaluable for this purpose.
415
BE. 2
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
