Provision of Craft
The provision of vessels for this company was effected mainly by local
purchase, requisitioning and hiring.
War Office, however, arranged
for the provision of a number of vessels of a special type.
These included
target towing launches, 36 ft. harbour launches, 27 ft. launches,
Cargo Lighters, tugs
and "Queen Gulls" (wireless control targets).
vision of 614 ft. M.F.Vs., for use as fire boats, was made from the Admiralty
programme in the Simonstown Dockyard in South Africa.
fire-fighting equipment and vessel stores were sent from the United Kingdom.
Strategic Pool of Vehicles
In the middle of 1941, it was decided to hold a strategic pool of vehicles
in India and South Africa as a reserve for use in any emergency
might arise in Far Eastern theatres.
This was intended to cover the following
contingencies, in terms of 3-ton lorries: —
(a) 5,000 for making good deficiencies in Middle East War Establish-
(b) 10,000 for Middle East wastage, at 1,000 a month.
(c) 5,000 for South Africa reserves.
(d) 6,000 as an Indian Pool.
(e) 5,000 for Indian reserves, as a War Office pool.
The vehicles of the Indian pool would be turned over to meet India's
wastage, but those in the War Office pool were not to be turned over
War Office and Indian specifications were to be
unified, so that the whole pool of 11,000 vehicles could be placed
India's disposal, provided it did not fall below 5,000 vehicles without War
India was to submit demands for spares and M.T. stores
to War Office, and the latter would make bulk demands on Ministry of
Supply. War Office assumed responsibility for the maintenance of Malaya
and Burma in vehicles and spares, to be effected from Middle East.
Arrangements were accordingly made for the provision of the necessary
storage accommodation in India and South Africa, and for erection of the
All reserve vehicles were shipped in "completely knocked down"
Catering Services
In the early days of the war, the interests of Army catering in India
were served by one officer, the Inspector of Army Catering for India, who
inspected the catering facilities for the British Army in India, i.e., the British
troops as distinct from the Indian Army.
In December, 1942, the first expansion took place, six N.C.Os. with
catering experience being commissioned as lieutenants, and posted to the
Armies/Commands in India as Assistant
Inspectors of Army Catering.
About the same time, 50 N.C.Os. of the Army Catering Corps left the
United Kingdom for India.
By August, 1943, the assistant inspectors were found insufficient for
the task, and catering advisers were appointed to Armies/commands and
to areas, drawn from R.A.S.C. and R.I.A.S.C. officers, who underwent a
A Chief Catering Adviser was appointed to 11th Army Group (later
A.L.F.S.E.A.) in April, 1944, and subsequently relieved India Command of
its direct commitment in the forward area in that formation.
Then an inspector of the Army Catering Corps, and 30 officers and 34
other rank instructors of the A.C.C. were sent out from the United King-
dom, and so the organization in India was slowly built up
There were many difficulties in the way of achieving a satisfactory
of catering in India. Most of the cooks were Indians, which
resulted in language difficulties.
Some of them were first-class civilian
cooks, but most were half-trained, and all were dangerously unhygienic.
There was a lack of modern equipment. Other difficulties are described
in Chapter XI.
The number of A.C.C. personnel available was insufficient to cope with
the catering and training requirements of the British troops in India, let
alone do much for the Indian troops who composed by far the larger part
Yet it was invidious to have a catering organization con-
cerned only with the well-being of British troops.
were two schools of thought regarding the feeding of Indian troops, one of
which advocated equal attention being paid to British and Indian troops by
catering advisers, and the other which believed firmly that Indian soldiers
were best left to themselves in this matter.
The former school gained the
day, and in May, 1945, the Army in India Catering Corps was formed to
serve the special needs of both British and Indian troops.
Supply Provision
India was not, in theory, dependent on War Office for the provision
In 1941, however, it was found that the placing by India,
directly on producer countries, of orders for all non-indigenous
was causing direct competition with the Ministry of Food and the Director
of Army Contracts in the United Kingdom.
The, India Ofice,
agreed that, to ensure co-ordination,
the requirements of the Indian Army
should be submitted through the War Office to the Ministry of Food.
There was a delay in putting this
arrangement into effect, due to
two causes: the difficulty of obtaining from India
of the supply situation, and the necessity of routing all cable communications
through the India Office, which involved a time lag of many days.
It was not until May, 1943, that India
Office agreed to S.T.6,
direct with the corresponding branch in
India, on normal routine supply questions.
By the spring of 1942, demands were being received from India in a
form, and purchases were made to meet all
These, in fact, arrived punctually, and India
was by then holding the correct reserves.
These were: three months' reserve
for each force, held in the theatre;
reserve of imported food-
and two months' reserve of indigenous
for all forces serving outside India which were the latter's responsibility.
As far as indigenous products were concerned, the resources
were considerable, and she could at first provide all the
A large proportion of food items for
European troops, however, had to be imported, either from the Southern
Dominions or from North America.
WO 277/21
27
