permit correlation of the return with the A.G. (Statistics) return at War
The two were, of course, by no means duplicates, as the A.G's.
return excluded R.A.F., and did not provide for the breakdown between the
various rationing methods noted above.
Comparison of ration strength figures with A.G. strength returns was
the only way in which it could be ascertained whether or not there was any
serious degree of overdrawal of rations as the result of units over-stating
The supply officer was, of course, obliged to accept
the certificate of the O.C. of a unit as to the ration strength on which his
indent was based, and had no check on its correctness.
fact that overdrawal of this nature sometimes reached considerable propor-
tions; and it was therefore essential to try and keep this practice in check.
It was not found possible to agree the two returns, and consequently
in 1943 an attempt was made to simplify the return and ensure its greater
A new form of return was produced, requiring figures under the
following headings: —
(b) Drawing ration allowance-any rate.
(c) Sundries, such as billeted with subsistence, absent, messed by con-
The first two were subdivided into Army and R.A.F., and each of these
again into men and women, officers and O.Rs.
Sub-divisions each shown separately in the earlier forms and now omitted,
Drawing personal ration; in hospital; in detention barracks; drawing
ration allowance (except leave rate); drawing leave rate ration allow-
ance; absent without leave; messed by contractors; travelling; and other
than as shown separately.
This return was suspended in April, 1944, in view of complications arising
out of the mounting of " Overlord".
and a gross estimate by
D.Ds.S.T.
was substituted.
In October, 1944 after another system had been tried
and proved impracticable) the return was once again brought into use.
The periodical ration strength in the United Kingdom is shown in Appen-
dix VIIIA.
Troops not rationed in kind
The rationing of troops not feeding in mess requires some mention.
the question was considered before the war in relation to the possible intro-
duction of a national rationing scheme,
it was agreed that
coupons on the ration cards issued to Service personnel should be equivalent
in value to the normal personal ration that the ration cards should be issued
through Service channels and that if military personnel were billetted with
subsistence, they would be issued with ration books which they would hand
over to the householder on whom they were billetted.
In February. 1941 when heavy cuts were made in the Army ration,
it was agreed that all Service nersonnel excent those billetted with subsistence
should receive the civilian scale of rationed items,
entitlement was to be based on a money value. and not on a given quantity.
and that their meat
Personnel billetted with subsistence were to be entitled to double the civilian
meat ration, chiefly on the ground that the majority of R.A.F. personnel
so billetted were in active training.
It is of interest to note the very large numbers not rationed in kind,
at one time,
December, 1941, actually exceeding 500,000 out of a
strength of 2,850,000, or 17} per cent.
Embarkation Supply Depots
Embarkation supply depots were set up at Southampton, Newport (Mon.),
and Avonmouth, in the middle of 1939, as a link in the supply arrangements
in the event of an Expeditionary Force being sent overseas.
Their functions were: —
(a) To feed the personnel of the embarkation establishments.
(b) To supply rest camps with the R.A.S.C. portion of the normal peace
(c) To receive stocks of emergency rations ex-S.R.D. Deptford, and
to issue them to Os.C. ships in accordance with strengths carried.
(d) To receive certain initial shipments of supplies to be embarked at
ports, as apart from bulk supplies to be embarked at stores ports.
(e) To receive and issue, to ships concerned, special voyage rations
for personnel whose voyage was likely to exceed 48 hours.
(* To receive deck cargoes of petrol and place them on board M.T.
vehicle ships, under instructions from Movement Control.
(8) To arrange for the removal of petrol from fuel tanks of vehicles
before embarkation, under instructions from Movement Control.
A reserve of three days' rations of preserved meat, biscuit, tea, sugar,
and salt, was held by each depot (12,000 at Southampton, 1,000 at Newport,
E.S.Ds. were also opened at other ports in the early months of the war,
stocked to provide four days' voyage and landing ration.
were responsible for the loading of vessels with the Scale
"E" rations for the B.E.F., referred to in Chapter IV.
Supply personnel
sections were sent to those ports at which there was not an E.S.D., where
The unfortunate experience of the Expeditionary Force in Norway in
connection with the loading of supplies in transports (landing rations had
been stowed at the bottom
of the ships' holds) led to it being made a
special responsibility of E.S.Ds. to ensure that loading was correctly carried
out in such respects.
After the evacuation of the B.E.F., it was unnecessary to retain all the
E.S.Ds., and all except four were closed.
In 1944, these were absorbed into
the R.A.S.C. Port
Services organization, which had been set up in the
United Kingdom in September, 1943, as described below.
Other Embarkation Detachments
Until August, 1942, there was located at each port, as part of the
Embarkation Establishment, an R.A.S.C. Embarkation Stores Sub-section,
which was a small body of R.A.S.C. specialists provided at the request
and for the benefit of Movement Control to advise them on R.A.S.C. stores.
247
wO 277/
27
