APPENDIX XI A
(See Vol. I, pages 16, 21)
DUTIES OF THE CATERING DEPUTY DIRECTORATE,
WAR
OFFICE (S.T. 4) AS AT THE END OF THE WAR
1. D.D.S.T. (Catering) was responsible to D.S.T. for the administration of
the Catering Services; for advice as to the correct use of the ration provided,
and as to the desirability of variations to that ration; the technical problems
involved in facilitating the collective feeding of troops; the conservation of
messing by-products ; the training of A.C.C. personnel, A. T.S. cooks, hospital
cooks, and regimental personnel (including regimental messing officers) ; and
all questions connected with the general catering arrangements of the Army.
2. The Inspector, A.C.C., carried out inspections of
(a) A.C.C. personnel attached to all arms of the Service at home and
(b) The general catering arrangements of the Army.
3. The respective duties of the two sections into which the Deputy Director-
ate was divided, namely, S.T. 4 (a) and S.T. 4 (b), are set below.
The somewhat
unusual features of the lay-out of these sections was due to the fact that officers
were out with formations, units and establishments.
On their return to the
War Office, their reports necessitated departmental action by both sections.
In these circumstances the detail below is set out under two headings, i.e.,
duties inside the War Office, and duties outside the War Office.
(a) Duties inside the War Office
S.T. 4(b). (i) Personnel questions, including selection at interviews of
candidates for commissions in, or transfer to, the A.C.C., and as cookery
instructors ; liaison with A.G. Branch concerning A.C.C. personnel matters
at home; War Establishment questions; pay questions ; liaison with Medical
Branch on officer appointments for military hospitals.
S.T. 4 (a). (ii) A.T.S. questions, including interviewing
A.T.S. personnel as catering advisers, instructors, and specialist messing officers;
liaison with A.G. Branch on matters affecting A.T.S. messing personnel ; report-
ing on A.T.S. messing personnel, etc.
S.T. 4 (b). (il) Catering, including all questions concerning catering for
the Army at home and overseas; preparation of papers and manuals dealing
with cookery ; preparation of bills of fare, recipes, and costings for ration
scales; information for Public Relations Branch: Parliamentary questions;
Departmental liaison with the Catering Services in overseas commands;
technical reports, following tests at the A.C.C. Training Centre (experimental
section), on commodities in issue or proposed for issue; attendance at con-
ferences, etc., at which catering matters were involved.
S.T. 4 (b). (iv) Cookhouses. All questions from the catering angle con-
cerning the design and lay-out of cookhouses.
536
S.T. 4 (b). (v) Cooking
Equipment and Apparatus.
Liaison with War
ofice Branches on all questions, other than provision, concerning cooking
apparatus, cookhouse equipment, portable petrol cookers, insulators, field
cooking apparatus, scales of unit war equipment, war accommodation schedules,
and mobile kitchens; reports on tests at A.C.C. Training Centre of equipment
and apparatus; liaison with Inspectors of Cooking Equipment.
Fuel Economy. Tests on all kinds of cooking apparatus to
determine how fuel economy might best be effected.
S.T. 4 (a).
Inspection reports. Notification to commands regarding the
findings of War Office inspectors on visits to units, etc.
S.T. 4 (b). Messing By-products. All questions and policy regarding the
retrieval and disposal of messing by-products (swill, bones, grease trap fat, etc.).
S.T. 4(a). Training.
Messing training policy at home and overseas for
all arms; compilation of training syllabuses; control of A.C.C. Training
Centre, its technical efficiency, regulation of intake, etc. ; technical supervision
of E.C.T.Cs., etc. ; supervision of trade testing and upgrading policy ; liaison
with other War Office branches concerned, regarding training (A.T.S., hospital
cooks, etc.).
(b) Duties outside the War Office
S.T. 4 (b). (i) Catering : liaison with catering branches of Admiralty and
Air Ministry, and with Ministry of Food.
S.T. 4 (b).
(ii) Cooking equipment and apparatus. Liaison with Admir-
alty and Air Ministry.
S.T. 4 (a). (iii) Demonstrations and exhibitions.
Planning and super-
vision of cookery demonstrations for the Army ; liaison with Ministry of
Information about Army cookery exhibitions for the public.
S.T. 4(a). (iv) Films. Liaison with Ministry of Food in connection with
S.T. 4 (a). (v) Fire Service. Arrangements for Home Office for training
of National Fire Service cooks.
S.T. 4 (b).
conferences in commands.
(vi) Fuel economy. Liaison with Ministry of Fuel and Power ;
S.T. 4 (b).
(vii) Messing by-products. Liaison with messing by-products
departments of Admiralty and Air Ministry;
liaison with Ministries of Agri-
culture and Fisheries, Food, and Supply, the Directorate of Salvage and
Recovery, and firms and local authorities
sterilizing plants.
operating swill processing and
S.T. 4(6). Post-war settlement of Army Cooks. Liaison with all con-
ST. 4(a). (vii) Inspections. Visits of A.C.C. and A.T.S. inspectors to
ormations, units, etc. to enquire into the standard of messing in the United
537
WO
279
