Air Supply and Transport
The axion that the carriage of stores by air is as normal a method of
transport as is transport by road, rail, or water, could scarcely be applied
with greater truth to any type of warfare than jungle operations.
theatre, arranging for the transportation of supplies by air became a normal
"O" Staft undertaking, and every unit had to be thoroughly familiar with the
methods of receiving and collecting supplies dropped to them from the air,
for otherwise a considerable proportion of each drop was lost. Formations
had to be able to switch to air supply without warning.
So many forms of ground and water transport were used on this front that
improvisation was the rule.
The exception was air transport, and it very
soon became apparent that movement by air of formations or large quantities
of stores could not be successfully undertaken without detailed and elaborate
administrative planning.
Improvisation was certain to break down.
closest liaison between the senior army and air force headquarters was essen-
tial, on account of the conflicting requirements of air movement and air
supply, and because of the daily
fluctuations of calls on air
squadrons.
This liaison was desirable at lower levels, but could not always
be achieved, owing to shortage of staff; and as a result difficulties arose which
could not at once be remedied.
The experience gained in the maintenance of 4 Corps by air during April,
May, and June, 1944, led to the institution of two organizations; the first an
element of Army H.Q., to work with the senior Air Force H.Q.; and the
second, rear and forward airfield maintenance organizations, the former to
provide a link between the Air Force station commander and the Army unit
commander on each airfield. Previously, each air supply company
mander had kept in direct touch with the Air Force commander, and had as
a result undertaken duties beyond the resources at his disposal.
Army Air Transport Organization
The organization formed in October, 1944, for the control of air supply
and transport in this theatre was called the Army Air Transport Organization,
under a commander, A.A.T.O., responsible to H.Q., 11 Army Group.
His
main duties were as follows: —
(a) Liaison with Air Force Headquarters.
(b) Control of all rear air maintenance organizations in S.E.A.C.
(c) Ensuring that the requirements of forward formations for air supply
or air transport were met in accordance with the policy laid down by
11 Army Group.
(d) Advice and assistance to formations depending on air supply.
The principal difference in the organization, as compared with the British
system, was at the despatch and forward airfelds, where Staft establishments
(the rear air maintenance organizations and forward air maintenance organi
zations respectively, took the place of the R.A.S.C. ait ablishments (reat air
the air despatch operations in other theatres.
supply organizations and forward air supply organizations) which controlled
The reason for this difference
76
was that strict Staft control of rear airtields was considered necessary in view
of the following factors, which frequently involved priorities:
(a) Advance depots were not always within easy reach of airfields.
(b) Communications were extremely bad.
(c) Enormous distances.
(d) Limited number of airfields available; many were only fair weather
(e) Shortage of aircraft.
(f) Airfields had to deal with: -
(i) Despatch of complete formations and units in the mounting
of an operation.
ii Despatch of reinforcement personnel.
(iii) Despatch of stores.
(iv) Air Force operational commitments (fighter cover, etc.).
The S.T. responsibility in connection with air despatch was as follows: -
(a) The holding of supplies and P.O.L. at or near R.A.M.Os.
(b) The packing of all stores for dropping.
(c) The loading of aireraft.
dropping zones.
(f) Forecasting, calling forward, holding, and issuing, supply dropping
equipment.
The Indian Air Supply Companies were reorganized to handle eighty tons
daily of stores for air dropping, and were renamed Air Despatch Companies.
"Standard" Divisional Organization
In the autumn of 1944, the divisions in 11 Army Group were reorganized
on a " Standard" basis, the objects being to reduce the number of different
types of division: to produce a formation capable of being employed in any
type of operation; and to meet the need, for warfare in Far Eastern condi-
tions, of a formation which could readily be transported by rail, sea, M.T.,
A major feature in the new organization was the reduction in the number
of lorries in both first and second line transport, and the introduction of a
large number of jeeps.
The eventual intention was to have two types of
vehicle only; the 3-ton four-wheel-drive lorry and the jeep, apart of course
from a limited number of specialist vehicles.
The effect of this change on the various Divisional Army Service Corps
was in theory the substitution of two four-platoon companies (one heavy, or
3-ton, and one light, or ieep) for the four two-platoon companies of the
R.A.S.C., E.A.A.S.C., and W.A.A.S.C., and the three four-platoon companies
of the R.I.A.S.C. It will be observed that this was in conformity with the re-
commendations of the Lethbridge Mission.
The light company was to have
three platoons of jeeps, and one platoon of carriers, though the carriers were
not armoured as recommended by the Mission.
The total lift of the two com-
panies combined amounted to 427} tons, which has to be compared with the
G
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
