APPENDIX X N
(See Vol. I, pages 248, 277 and Vol. II, page 263)
THE PETROLEUM " SLATE"
The Petroleum
"Slate" was first adopted during the Italian campaign,
and was later used in other theatres.
It was a statement of account by each stockholding depot, installation, etc.,
made up to an agreed date in each month. It was divided into three sections,
i.e., Bulk Fuels, Packed Fuels, and Lubricants.
The account started with the
stock brought forward from the previous period.
To this were added the
receipts during the month, divided between (a) imports into the theatre ;
(b) inter-theatre stock transfers ; (c) transfers between bulk and packed, i.e.,
filling and decanting ; and (d) transfers between " slating"
parties.
From
the total were deducted issues to consumption, losses, and transfers, leaving
the closing stocks as at the date of the account.
Details were also given of
cargoes of ships in port in process of or awaiting discharge, and schedules of
ships which had completed discharge during the period and whose cargoes had
been taken into the account concerned.
The next section of the account gave the desired stock levels four months
ahead, together with the estimated consumption for each of those months of
the forces for which the authority, etc., was responsible.
The estimate for the
first two months remained as previously submitted, but where circumstances
had changed a revision of the estimate for the third month was allowed.
Each stockholder rendered the account in the form of columns, giving the
above details for every grade held or required.
The " slate" prepared by each stockholder then passed through the normal
chain of headquarters, being consolidated with others as it progressed, until it
finally reached Petroleum Section, in the case of A.F.H.Q., or the equivalent
in other theatres.
Here all the " slates" were consolidated, together with the
record of ships en route to the theatre, into a final " slate", which showed by
areas the estimated stock position four months ahead, compared with authorized
reserve levels (desired stock levels), and thus gave the amounts of each grade
which had to be imported in addition to known shipments in order to maintain
stocks at the desired level.
The final document was of very considerable dimensions, as it covered every
petroleum product used by the Army, Navy, and Air Forces of the British,
American, and other Allied Forces, in the theatre, as well as civilian and
industrial requirements.
It was also sub-divided into areas or groups of ports,
so that shipping could be routed to the ports concerned, and internal move-
ment or coastwise shipping thus be kept to a minimum.
Details of the forces covered by the estimates of consumption given in each
"sate" were included by each " slating" authority, from which it was possible
to check that the requirements of all consumers had been provided for, and also
that the same requirements had not been included in more than one estimate.
Although it may appear that the system was unnecessarily involved, it has
to be borne in mind that the number of stockholders wesso large, and the supply
systems of the various arms, nations, etc., so closely interwoven that some
central statistical organization was essential.
In consequence of the many
534
rasters between stockholders, the use of common pipelines and installations,
and issues by depots of one nation to the forces of another, it was practically
possible to say exactly who the ultimate consumer was, and an arbitrary basis
of accounting had therefore to be adopted.
The method was to charge each
esponsible nation with its share of the total consumption and losses of each
group of petroleum products, calculated by dividing such consumption in the
radio of the numbers of vehicles, aircraft, or vessels (depending on the grade
concerned) maintained in the theatre by the chargeable nation.
as accurate a system as could be devised ; it kept to a minimum detailed
accounting, and materially increased the flexibility of the petroleum supply
Besides serving as the basis for arranging shipments, the " slate" had many
uses. It was as complete a stock state of petroleum products as it was possible
to obtain in the circumstances, and as a result it was often possible to transfer
or offset surpluses with one " slating"
authority against the deficiencies of
another, ensuring balanced stocks and an economy in ocean shipping which
would not have been possible without such a comprehensive stock state.
petroleum products, particularly lubricants, often got into the wrong depot
through bad sorting at the docks; e.g., Transportation oils into Naval depots,
Ordnance oils into R.A.S.C. depots.
Examination of the " slates"
Petroleum Section to trace these lost stocks and arrange for their transfer to
It was also often possible to meet emergencies arising, for
example, through the shortage of an Army grade, by the use of, say, a Navy
grade of similar specification.
535
