Such troops as could be spared from frontier and internal security duties in
India, were, however, sent to Burma, and also the remainder of 17 Indian
Division, which was there made up with two brigades of assorted units.
This
division had been trained for desert warfare, and such transport as it possessed
was mechanized, and unsuited to jungle tracks.
There was, indeed, a general
deficiency of pack transport throughout the force.
Operational Progress of the Campaign
The campaign in Burma really began on 10th January, 1942, when the
Japanese invaded Tenasserim, though they had occupied
Victoria Point in
the extreme south on 14th December, 1941. The brunt of the fighting fell on
17 Division, which twice halted the enemy for a few days, on the Salween and
2 Burma Brigade was extricated with some difficulty from
Moulmein, much transport being lost.
After 22 days' continuous retreat, 17 Division reached the River Sittang,
over which a railway bridge, hastily made practicable for M.T., formed the
only means of crossing.
This river was the last barrier to the Japanese
advance on Rangoon, and, in order to deny them the use of the bridge, it had
to be blown up while two of our brigades were still on the eastern bank.
remnants of these swam the river, all the transport being
At the same time as this was happening, an important reinforcement was
disembarking at Rangoon, 7 Armoured Brigade, with its R.A.S.C. transport
Company, but without any tank transporters.
Rangoon became indefensible when Singapore fell; and, without Rangoon,
our Army in Burma could not be supplied from outside, as there were no land
The only feasible plan was for the Army to withdraw north-
wards, thus covering the road to India, enabling the oilfields in Central Burma
to be destroyed, and allowing the Chinese time to give military aid from
This plan was given effect.
By 7th March, the Japanese had advanced beyond Pegu, thus cutting one
road to the north and threatening the other.
Rangoon was accordingly
evacuated, the oil storage plants and the refinery buildings and equipment
being set on fire, and as much damage as possible done to the oilfield pro-
duction and refinery machinery.
Then began the long retreat to the frontier of India, which was to last
17 Division withdrew toward Prome,
Brigade up the west bank of the Irrawaddy, while the remainder of Burma
division, having been relieved in the Toungoo-Pyu area by the Chinese, went
into reserve north of Prome.
command of the newly-formed Burma Corps H.Q.
The two divisions were now placed under the
fell to the enemy about the end of March.
Both Prome and Toungoo
Two weeks later, the Japanese were threatening the Yenangyaung
fields, which were consequently destroyed.
there, but managed to escape at the cost of much transport.
division was encircled
At the end of
fate of the campaign.
April, the enemy reached Lashio, and cut the Burma Road; this decided the
from Upper Burma.
Nothing remained but to extricate the Allied forces
Purma. Army therafars withdraw to Todig hu way of
Mandalay, Shwebo, Kalewa, and Tamu, together with elements of the Chinese
Army, the bulk of the latter going out through Myitkyina and Ledo.
2 Burma
Brigade continued along the right bank of the Irrawaddy and Chindwin rivers,
going by way of the Gangaw valley, down which 4 Corps was to advance
three years later.
By 20th May, the last of Burma Army had crossed the Indian frontier,
through a thin screen under 4 Corps, and it then ceased to exist as a formation.
Administrative Difficulties, January-March
One of the principal administrative difficulties throughout the campaign
was the insufficiency of administrative units. Although such of these as could
be spared by India had been sent to Burma, the transport and supply units
available were less than the requirement for administering the force.
possible failure of the attenuated services, especially in regard to M.T., was a
source of constant anxiety.
The situation would probably have been less
complicated if the administrative organization had been set up before active
scale which made confusion inevitable.
were, improvisation became necessary on a
This was particularly the case with
The transport of most of the units in Burma at the outset, or sub-
sequently sent from India, was on a mixed scale of M.T. and pack.
organization was found unsuitable for such a country, with few roads, and
M.T.; first line transport should have been on a
pack basis, with the M.T. brigaded. As it was, movement was much handi-
capped by the broken country.
As the fighting approached Rangoon, it became the more essential that
transport should sail in the same ship, or at least in the same convoy, as the
unit to which it belonged; but this was not the case, and units landed without
their transport, and had to go into battle thus as soon
as they landed.
Improvised arrangements were made,
but this impaired fighting efficiency,
and lowered morale.
Transport was at best very short, and
our forces would have been
immobilized if the Chinese had not presented us with 620 Lend /Lease lorries.
The situation was made worse by so much transport being lost at the River
An example of improvisation occurred during the battle there.
Owing to shortage of transport for the maintenance of the formation, the
divisional R.I.A.S.C. loaded a train with urgently needed supplies at the
nearest F.S.D., Pegu, and ran it with a volunteer driver to within a mile or so
Improvisation of another sort was necessary when the survivors
of the two brigades reached the west bank, hungry, and without food or cook-
Rice and tea were boiled in bakery kneading tubs by supply
personnel, and in this way the troops were fed.
close to the fighting troops in these operations that bread was often baked
under shell fire.
Burma division transport worked under increasing strain after the active
Stocking of depots was speeded up, and Chinese troops
had to be maintained to the extent of 1,000 tons of rice a month in addition
Transport for this purpose was obtained by
up a large amount of the civilian transport employed on the Burma Road.
we
14717
WO 277/21
27
