The V.R.D. dealt with vehicle receipts and issues. At the outbreak
of war, it held 850 vehicles and 550 motor-cycles.
The M.T.S.D. handled spare parts, tyres, stores and workshop machinery,
and supplied all stations at home and abroad.
The daily tonnage of stores
handled in peace-time was 40 tons.
Mobilization stocks of technical M.T.
stores and equipment were also held.
The H.R.S. carried out all repairs and overhauls of R.A.S.C. vehicles
and, if necessary, modifications.
The average weekly output of repaired and
overhauled vehicles was 12 in peacetime.
Mobilization and Expansion
The activities of these installations on mobilization are described in
Chapter II, Section 3.
As the number of R.A.S.C.
units and vehicles in the Army increased,
it became necessary to expand the Home M.T. Depot organization, and new
depots were therefore opened as required.
The first of these was at
Slough in October, 1939, the next at Ashchurch (Gloucester) in December,
1939, followed by others at Preston and in Northern Ireland, and at
Glasgow and Lancaster.
These depots did not all include all three components, i.e., V.R.D.,
M.T.S.D., and H.R.S., but these were allocated as required in each case.
V.R.Ds. were located at Feltham, Olympia (to July, 1940), Ashchurch,
In November, 1940, S.T.3 represented that it was necessary to set up
a separate organization to deal with the influx of vehicles from
America, as the existing storage space for reception V.R.Ds. was insufficient.
Space for about 4,000 vehicles was needed.
S.T.3 suggested that it would
be necessary to establish a separate Headquarters, Vehicle Reserve Group,
with two M.T. V.R.Ds., one of which would carry the additional personnel
for duties at ports of disembarkation in the United Kingdom.
Agreement was eventually reached in January, 1941, and arrangements
were then made for one sub-park of a Corps Ammunition Park, R.A.S.C.,
to be temporarily employed at the V.R.D. in Glasgow.
V.R.D. in the receipt, custody, and handling of the accumulation of M.T.
In March, 1941, action began to set up a V.R.D. near Lancaster from
which reserve and replacement vehicles could be distributed in the
an invasion. The need for this had been demonstrated in a large scale
exercise concerned with home defence.
Receipt of vehicles began at once.
Financial criticism on the estimate of work required, however, delayed
and the work was still not completed in November of that year.
necessary roads, buildings and other works services,
in October, 1941, instructions were issued for the setting-up of vehicle
sub-parks at selected sites under command control on
" action stations"
being ordered, in order to hasten the red control of R.A.S.C.-operated
136
M.T. Stores Depots
No. 1 M.T. Stores Depot, the main R.A.S.C. Stores Depot in the United
Kingdom, was located at Feltham, No. 2 at Slough, and No. 3 at Ashchurch.
No. 4 M.T. Stores Depot began operations at Preston in October, 1940.
On 5th August, 1940, No. 5 M.T. Stores Depot was formed at Belfast,
Northern Ireland, to carry out R.A.S.C. M.T. Stores Depot functions for
units in Northern Ireland.
The respective responsibilities of these M.T. stores depots
were
No. 1, Feltham
Preparation of technical workshop packs, and
No. 2, Slough
initial spares required by units.
Issue of spare parts, etc., to R.A.S.C.
Eastern and Aldershot Commands.
No. 3, Ashchurch ...
Issue of spare parts, etc., to R.A.S.C. units in
Southern Command and part of Western
Command.
No. 4, Preston
Issue of spare parts, etc., to R.A.S.C. units in
Northern and Scottish Commands and part
of Western Command.
No. 5, Belfast
M.T. Stores
Depot services for
Northern Ireland.
Central Provision Branch (M.T.) R.A.S.C.
In November, 1940, a separate organization was set up for the central
control of the acquisition and provision to M.T. Stores Depots of spare parts,
tyres and stores for R.A.S.C.-operated M.T. vehicles.
This was designated the Central Provision Branch, and it was established
near the existing No. 1 M.T. Stores Depot at Feltham, but as a separate
With the merging of M.T. Stores Depots into the R.A.O.C. in July,
1942, the Branch was absorbed into the Central Ordnance Depot, Chilwell.
Heavy Repair Shops (M.T.) R.A.S.C.
At the outbreak of war, in accordance with mobilization arrangements,
the Heavy Repair Shop in No. 1 M.T. Depot, R.A.S.C.,
the nucleus for No. 1 Heavy Repair Shop in the Field Force organization,
and this unit proceeded with the British Expeditionary Force to France.
static H.R. Shop at Feltham was reclassified the Home Heavy Repair Shop,
and remained in its peace location.
No. 2 Heavy Repair Shop was raised at Feltham tentatively to reinforce
No. 1 Heavy Repair Shop with the B.E.F. but did not actually go overseas.
No. 3 Heavy Repair Shop was raised in July, 1940, in Northern Ireland
to carry out repair services for R.A.S.C. operated vehicles in Northern
In October, 1940, it was considered necessary to raise a further heavy
repair shop primarily for the training of apprentice tradesmen, R.A.S.C.
The unit was organized by withdrawing personnel from the
Home Heavy Repair sh was Feliham, and was located at High Wycombe.
and designated NO. 4 Heavy Repair Shop, R.A.S.C.
WO 277/21
