The same trouble had occurred in South Africa
consequent heavy losses.
50 years before.)
The mule companies displayed remarkable endurance,
covering thirty miles a day.
In the later stages of the retreat, the increasing shortage of transport made
it necessary to withdraw lorries from every possible source for employment
in the pool. All baggage and stores which did not affect a unit's immediate
value were dumped.
Tentage, which in the early days took up much load-
carrying capacity, had long since been discarded.
Troops were ferried in
M.T., which worked on the simple system of picking up a unit, carrying it
on its way, and then going back for the next body of troops it met.
Either
corps or 17 Division transport did this, as Burma Division had less than
twenty vehicles left.
17 Divisional R.I.A.S.C. came out well, having the
advantage over Burma Division of being composed of trained and disciplined
personnel, and of a much longer existence as an organized unit.
the half were issued, and, although one brigade was without rations for two
days, there was no general shortage of supplies.
H.Q., Burma Army, laid
out an excellent system of supply dumps along the route, and units collected
from these.
As far as P.O.L.
was concerned, the diminishing resources
latterly made any system of maintenance impracticable, and petrol was picked
up as and where it could be found. When this failed, vehicles were aban-
doned.
Some 400,000 refugees, mostly Indian labourers and their families, fled
from Burma with the retreating Army. It was impossible in such a country
to improvise an organization for dealing with this huge exodus; but the
arrangements, which civilian officials, missionaries, and others, succeeded in
making, worked well, and very few demands were made on Burma Army for
rations for the refugees.
Assistance was, however, given from India to those
who followed the road to Ledo through the Hukawng Valley, and were cut
off by flooded streams.
The help took the form of an improvised air drop to
refugee camps, a R.I.A.S.C. Air Despatch Company being hastily formed for
the purpose; and a mule company was also sent to take out food, and to
carry back those unable to walk.
This work continued until August, 1942.
At last, Burma Army reached the Chindwin, where all the tanks, and most
of the remaining transport, had to be destroyed for want of shipping to carry
them across; but on the other side help was being organized by 4 Corps with
such limited resources as it possessed, and both food and transport were
waiting to meet the force when it crossed that river, and entered the last stage
of its long journey to the Indian frontier.
Maintenance from India
The organization of a L. of C. from India to the Burma frontier began in
February, 1942, when the construction of an adequate railhead and advance
base was initiated at Dimapur (or Manipur Road), till then an unimportant
station on the single-track metre-gauge railway line from
Gauhati,
Brahmaputra, to Dibrugarh and Ledo in the extreme north-east of Assam.
The country surrounding Dimapur was dense innole in which denot areas
had to be made to hold a reserve of thirty days fur a force of three divisions
plus non-divisional troops and labour. The railhead was planned to handle
46
1,000, rising to 2,000, tons a day.
Burma Army long before it was really ready.
It was called upon to operate to maintain
Railway extensions had
not reached the depots, and all supplies had to be carried six or seven miles to
the latter by road, which made heavy demands on the limited amount of
Before the roads in the depots had been completed,
supplies were being taken in by day, and convoys were being loaded by night,
in the A.B.S.D.; when the monsoon broke early in May, and it was excep-
tionally heavy, lorries became bogged in the depot, and held up all movement.
beginning of May.
There were only six G.P.T. companies, R.I.A.S.C., at Dimapur at the
and twenty-two spare and domestic lorries, each.
They had an establishment of one hundred task vehicles,
Many of the drivers had
had only a few weeks' driving experience before being called upon to drive
up a most difficult and dangerous mountain road.
For, in addition to build-
ing up the base, these companies had also to maintain the Burma Army, and
one of them proved of inestimable value beyond Palel, lifting the tired troops
back in relays.
7 Armoured Brigade personnel, after abandoning their tanks,
supplied drivers for such M.T. vehicles as had been brought over the
Chindwin, and also supplemented the drivers of the G.P.T. companies working
north and south of Tamu.
The only other transport available on this line was a group of civilian
units, which had been raised by the impressment of small motor omnibuses in
Bengal and Assam, with civilian drivers; but they were of little value, as the
vehicles were not in good condition to start with, they could not stand up to
the bad roads, and the existing repair organization could not keep them on
the road. In addition, the drivers for the most part deserted when Imphal
These companies were used principally for carrying stores
from railhead to depots, but the vehicles were unsuitable for such work, and
had only a small load-carrying capacity.
In spite of these difficulties, supplies
were put in at Kalewa between Ist and 3rd May, and a succession of staging
camps was organized thence back to Tamu.
A good stock was also built up
in the F.S.D. at Palel, which proved invaluable in maintaining the troops and
refugees in that area and beyond.
The last of Burma Army had crossed into India behind the thinly-held
defences and the formation ceased to exist as such on 20th May.
Its personnel
were, for the most part, tired out after months of continuous marching and
fighting, and malaria
and dysentery were rife.
Few of the administrative
units were in a condition to assist in maintaining the force.
The B.A.S.C.
units had practically all disintegrated, as had also some of the Indian supply
units, hastily raised and sent to Burma without proper training or discipline.
Even good units dwindled daily through sickness until there was sometimes
no effective strength left.
The task of maintaining over 30,000 troops at a distance of 100 miles and
upwards from Dimapur proved extremely difficult.
The limited amount of
transport had already been very hard worked, and was becoming increasingly
unequal to its task, as the vehicles were suffering from inadequate time for
maintenance and insufficient repair facilities, and the men from overwork and
The road only permitted one-way
traffic,
although widening
operations were being pressed forward, tea-garden labour being used for the
purpose; but this work at the same time added to the dangers of the road.
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
