8. Ambulance Units
The organization of a M.A.C. was considered unsatisfactory, and it was
agreed that, from the R.A.S.C. point of view at least, the roles of the M.A.C.
and the Ambulance Car Company could probably be carried out by one
standard ambulance unit, to be called a Motor Ambulance Company, and
operating on the following organization
H.Q., M.T. Company.
Three Transport Platoons of ambulance cars.
One Transport Platoon of troop-carrying vehicles.
One Workshop Platoon (serial 3).
One Medical Platoon would be added when this company was performing
the duties of the existing M.A.C.
If medical units were affiliated to a Motor Ambulance Company for vehicle
maintenance, a Serial 4 Workshop would be required.
9. Station Maintenance Companies
It was decided that there was no requirement for Station Maintenance
Companies in a field force, but that there was a requirement for Independent
Workshop Platoons, Serial 5, with the addition of a second officer and a techni-
cal M.T. serjeant.
10. Transport in Base Ordnance Depots
There was agreement between S.T. and Ordnance that the transport working
within B.O.Ds. should be manned and controlled by R.A.S.C., who would also
operate a transport office in the depot, which would control all external trans-
port when in the depot.
11. Stores Convoy Units, R.A.O.C.
These transport units were originally formed in the Middle East, where the
method of supply of ordnance stores by pack train to railhead and thence by
normal road transport echelons to the troops was found not to have been
quick enough in the case of A.F.V. and M.T. spares, gun parts, and other
special stores, for the following reasons :—
(a) These stores were generally in short supply, and sufficient stocks were
not available to allow adequate holdings in ordnance field parks.
(b) Demands for urgent fighting stores were always a matter of operational
urgency, and must be met with the least possible delay.
(c) The range of M.T. and technical stores was so large that it was un-
economical to hold a complete range on wheels.
Arrangements were therefore made by Ordnance Branch for a quick
delivery service from Base to forward troops.
This comprised three R.A.O.C.
units ; one called a L. of C. Vehicle and Stores Convoy Unit, which delivered
such stores from base to roadhead, and also delivered replacement vehicles;
and two Corps Stores Convoy Units, which delivered from roadheads to
Ordnance Field Parks.
Europe, 1944-1945.
Stores Convoy Units were also employed in N.W.
service should be provided from R.A.S.C. sources.
The question was now considered whether. in future. the transport for this
344
Ordnance branch was opposed to this, on the grounds that :—
(a) In view of the urgency of the stores likely to be carried, it was highly
desirable that transport should be drawn from a special unit serving
Ordnance only.
(b) In existing units of this type, the drivers were also R.A.O.C. storemen,
and the R.A.S.C. could not provide drivers with the necessary
qualifications.
The attachment of special R.A.O.C. personnel to a
R.A.S.C. transport company for progressing stores would be un-
economical.
The S.T. point of view was that :—
(a) The R.A.S.C. could undertake the functions of a Stores Convoy Unit,
and the R.A.S.C. driver could deal with packaged stores.
(b) R.A.S.C. transport units allotted for this service should be provided
specifically to serve Ordnance, and the transport should not be
drawn from pool resources.
The final decision was that they should be R.A.S.C. units, and this was
put into effect.
12. Bridge Companies
The existing company organization of ten platoons was considered too
unwieldy ; and administration of the platoons was difficult, because, although
they were not self-contained, they often had to operate independently.
It was therefore agreed that platoons should be made administratively self-
contained by the addition of a captain to each in command, and other minor
changes; and that the maximum number of independent Bridge Platoons
grouped under command of a company H.Q. should be five.
It was the intention that the 30-cwt. lorry should be substituted for the
Although there would probably continue to be a requirement for a small
number of motor-cycles in R.A.S.C. companies, the majority might with
advantage be replaced by jeeps on a proportional basis.
14. Cranes
It was agreed that mobile cranes should not be operated by R.A.S.C. except
in those units where cranes were necessary for the efficient performance of the
unit's own duties.
There appeared to be no requirement for additional cranes
in R.A.S.C. units except possibly in Amphibious Companies operating in the
beach maintenance area.
15. Water Transport
In view of the fact that the R.A.S.C. Fleet was now undertaking duties
which had been formerly carried out by the transportation service,
it was
considered logical that this principle should be carried further, and that the
R.A.S.C. should take over the following functions from I.W.T. :-
(a) Bulk movement of personnel and stores from ship to shore.
(b) All personnel and load-carrying water transport, i.e., inland waterway
and canal traffic.
345
wester
WO 277/21
27
