TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
ordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
chants in the bismen to stre rats or refres casuali tie a she and be note de
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
c. 36), and personal
(vini) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
our, or. Te to no she be entered up ench in the veer given i might he the time they
his representatives.
war diaries will be
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
NoTE B.—Sce also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
toutine oder or instruction issued during the period covered by d of care a votine of
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
red, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
for reference.
PARA. 2.-A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
ina to provide data
upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
Cail be ents to undy, hach entry actio a ty ten of et appall to tep it, on,
auraction and
retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
Sec F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.- (FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
PARA. 3.-0mitted.
PARA. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:-
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
decisions taken.
(* Day location Moment don that to
ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
Ee units or of formati four hour and present dispositions.
Month and Year.
September, 1944.
Pace
Date
Hour
1st.
2nd.
5th.
6th.
7th.
8th.
9th.
10th.
the SPECTA NOT The time catered should be the time the infally & site
WAR DIARY
72 Company:
Unit..
RASC.
Inf Bde)
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Major L.A.
(Delete heading not required).
Commanding Officer
J8Lay, 1
RASC.
Summary of Events and Information
Roferences to Appendices
guay a mond to rated a a at 1400 are. 3 ploting ono
3 Div RASC once more reconstituted
task of 3eà Line
Ipt in bulding
up No. 4 Arny Rd Head.
Coy HQ est at ST. GERMAIN do GROSEILLERS
FLERS at 1730 hours.
This Coy to provido 58 vehs to troop carry 8 Bde in the Div move due to start at
0001 hrs, 3 Sep.
24,000 gals pot carried by the Coy from BAYRAUX to the P.P.
at 47 Coy for 1
use of the Div.
Capto Hall 1/e the troop carrying dotail start-
ing at 2100 hours.
Joy & Adm Area moved to area
Division noved during to-day. N.R. of PARIS noaT
Goy packed up ready to move by night.
LES ANDELYS...
72 Joy moved at
0130 hra & arrived at MOUFLAINES, East of LES ANDELYS at 1500 hrs.
Very moon-
light night & fine day made travelling very good
Orders received as soon aB
reached- new location for both Platoons to go to BAYBAUX on another detail for
3 Gorya transporting petrol to form a 'cushion! at ARRAS.
This is a 5-day
Major Cardy & Capt.
East to go to BAYBAUX to man report
tent a tha trip 172 Way Workshop& with Capt Brigga to go to Harbour Area South-
centre there.
trip to ARRAS.
Very
wet night & day with some considerable wind and
soldv
A further tpt Pl made up of all domestic vehs of the Div RASC (5 supplied from
Coy HQ & Comp. Pl of 172 Coy) concentratad at 48 Coy at 1700 hrs to-day ready
to move off to BAYBAUX on 9 Sep to collect petrol & bring Divl 2nd Line pot
holding up to strength.
172 Coy transport in location to-day roduced to one water truck & one cook's
vehicle & one car 2 str.
Every other veh in the Unit away on 3rd Line tot details.
Capt. Varley called at loy HQ on way back to BAYBAUX on return from his detail.
0301, Wt.(3123/1073, 3193r. 2/43. Wy.D.P. Gp.658.
oned:
