TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
of mobilisation or
ordinate command
important out of operatin Fat rot important one pot an or foring
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
. 36), and personal
is representatives.
war diaries will be
opt tom the mot aay
NOTE B.-
- See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
and 1 provide data dian eat. Te diet is foremen a hi tria record, pipation,
organisation and administration.
that try faction a try te on of defiled to nep it, on,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
oF her per a ment he indeet hot thie ofter who is to do in rierie the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
preparing aty so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
() Imp decisit osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i Raty cation Meets during the at twenty four hour and present dispositions.
fi) Important matters relating to the
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
Occur, one Fee to to a te mered p, at in the order a river ah rit it the time they
PARa. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
) Act of care felt retin (. is tre pet. Vor) aye of cut protine of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
or. References
(See TASA., Voll diaries will conform to the resulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows:—
cript. July, 1944.
Month and Year...
1 de
2nd.
заде
4th.
5th.
th
1th.
8th.
9th.
10th.
11 the
the spEcTAt NoTe The tim entered should be the time the int
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Unit 172 Company, RASC (Int Bae).
Commanding Officer Major Laf. Cardy
References to Appendices
Summary of Events and Information
Shel11ng 2145 braig vehiclo es
Gpl Balavin posted to
Robinson posted from
i this Unit to 8 Pa Anb.
Cpl w,a,1, 13 Jube 44, Fte Robinson promoted
Shelling 2300 hrs.
Sh hờ ng kg kg i ang a 03300 bit Than ben to tra to
outh maid at he Barrago by 1l1 od guns contin throughout day.
15100 Ida 105 mm issued.
alight raftopl. Balaria a
Some enemy alT sotlity Ol Baldin acm'thei 10 P. .5:
Weather dul at order the ira Roll more i on Aid ahot to Marahalling
Ada re her old intervalo, let enemy air notiny: very heart aok aok.
barrage by our guns. Vy.I.P. Gp.650.
CAR DIARIES SECTION
- 9 AUG 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
full
quire at the
pur documer
your Bulk
Urder
are
requested,
or the
