pg_0043.pdf:
V10322 (42) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
40
except for large craters, it is generally quicker to dig a " cut
and fill" ramp or to make a diversion. This requires men,
picks, and shovels, all of which will be available on the spot.
When engineer equipment, particularly bridging equipment,
has to be brought forward, it must be realized that the vehicles
are large and unwieldy. An early study of this problem from
the map is, therefore, important, and must not be postponed
until the equipment is wanted.
20. SIGNALS
In making their signal plans for the advance, the officer
commanding divisional signals and his brigade and regimental
signal officers have to meet two main requirements; com-
munications during the advance; and communications for the
operation which is likely to develop from the advance.
Communications will be influenced by the method of con-
ducting the advance, the method of movement, the distances
separating headquarters of formations and units, and the
dispositions of headquarters during the move.
As soon as the method of conducting the advance has been
decided, signal communications must be so planned that
they will ensure the rapid passing of information direct to
those commanders who will require it. The dispositions of
will passing
commanders and staffs during an advance will be largely
influenced by the need for early information. These dis-
dur early
positions must therefore be so arranged as to enable this need
to be met by a simple and reliable signal plan.
Communications will be chiefly by wireless, despatch riders,
and motor contact officers.
Use will be made of any line
communications which exist. These may be supplemented
by lines laid by corps signals; but the cable section of
divisional signals will always be held in reserve, well forward,
ready for immediate use in the event of a divisional attack
or a defensive battle. With this cab' section should also
be a cable detachment from corps signals.
Signal resources for traffic control can be made available
only at the expense of tactical communications.
It will rarely be justifiable to impose wircless silence during
a tactical advance.
When, however, it is considered necessary
to do so, clear initial orders must be issued for the subsequent
breaking of wireless silence, which should not anyhow be
delayed beyond first contact with the enemy.
21. MEDIUM MACHINE GUNS
The M.M.G. is primarily a weapon of defence. Normally it
will, therefore, have a low priority in the order of march.
Further, M.M.G. detachments, being truck borne, are very
V10322 (42) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

