pg_0041.pdf:
V10322 (40) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
38
unless good roads are plentiful. Their reconnaissance parties
should, however, move well forward, so that preparations for
deployment will
be advanced when the guns arrive.
On occasion, some long range medium artillery may move
with the leading infantry brigades, since the moral effect of its
fire is out of all proportion to the damage inflicted. It will,
however, require air observation. Medium artillery allotted for
this purpose will be given its tasks by the C.R.A.; but its
movement will be controlled by the brigade commanders
concerned.
3. Anti-tank artillery
A division advancing will almost always require some
measure of all-round anti-tank protection.
When army tanks are moving in front, they will provide the
bulk of the frontal protection, leaving the anti-tank artillery
to protect the flanks and rear.
When the division is not
preceded by army tanks, some anti-tank artillery will be
allotted to the divisional reconnaissance battalion.
For a short advance, the piquetting of likely approaches
may be practicable; but, for a long advance,
anti-tank
resources will be inadequate. The anti-tank artillery will
then have to be distributed by troops or sections, and some-
times even by guns, throughout the columns.
4. Anti-aircraft artillery (see also Sec. 14, para. 3.)
Control of the light anti-aircraft artillery will generally
be centralized for the advance; but a degree of decentralization
may be necessary when leading brigades reach areas in which
they will require their own anti-aircraft resources-e.g., river
crossings at the end of the advance.
The anti-aircraft plan is built up as a result of the divisional
commander deciding what are the most vulnerable areas.
These will be the areas in which the advancing columns will
be most easily delayed by air attack. The commander must
decide on their relative importance.
The light anti-aircraft sub-units will initially move as far
forward as possible.
Troops will be sent into action independ-
ently, and will remain in position until the column has passed.
Unless the column is a marching one and alternative routes are
available, the guns will not be able to regain their original places.
The plan must be flexible, so that a call to protect an area
in which congestion has been caused by enemy action can be
met at short notice.
The resources available will seldom allow of the protection
of embussing points.
Debussing points, on the other hand,
will often require some measure of protection.
V10322 (40) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

