pg_0021.pdf:
V10322 (20) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
18
4. Composition of the detachment
The principles affecting the composition of the detachment
are as follows. First, it must be fast. All units must, there-
fore, be fully mechanized or carried in mechanical transport.
Secondly, it is desirable that all portions should have approx-
imately equal mobility. This requirement affects the inclusion
of army tanks, which is discussed below. Thirdly, the detach-
ment must be as small as possible, all unnecessary personnel,
vehicles, and equipment being dispensed with.
Lastly, it
must have a reconnaissance element.
It will be rare for army tanks to be included in a mobile
detachment sent far ahead, because of their comparatively low
speed and small radius of action. If the detachment moves
ahead at its best speed, and army tanks follow in the gap
between it and the rest of the division, it will usually be
preferable for the divisional commander to keep the tanks
under his own control. This arrangement will not affect their
time of arrival on the objective, but will facilitate their com-
mand.
If the objective is close and particularly if light enemy
forces are thought to be on it— or if the object of the detach-,
ment is to protect the division against enemy A.F.Vs., army
tanks will form the bulk of the mobile force, which would then
be under the tank commander.
5. Method of movement of the detached force
The reconnaissance screen will precede the force and will be
spread out across its front. It will be under control of the
detachment commander. Since information is of first import-
ance, the reconnaissance element will make use of all available
roads.
The object of the rest of the detachment is not to search
the country or to cover the advance of the division, but to
reach the objective as quickly as possible. It will therefore
follow the reconnaissance element on a narrow frontage.
will adopt a formation designed for best speed, subject to its
having protective detachments in front, and sufficient room
for deployment in support of these detachments. Flank pro-
tection will be obtained by spacing anti-tank guns throughout
the columns.
If the enemy is met during the move forward or on the
objective, the detachment commander must be guided by his
instructions; but, generally, a bold and rapid attack will be
the best solution.
On arrival at the objective, the reconnaissance element will
go straight through to occupy a covering position beyond,
while the detachment takes whatever action is necessary on
V10322 (20) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

