pg_0022.pdf:
V10322 (21) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
19
the objective. If attacked on the objective, the action of the
detachment must be governed by its instructions and by the
distance away of the remainder of the division. Suitable
provision for such an eventuality should, however, have been
made by the commander who detailed the detachment.
6. Method of movement of the remainder of the
division
Two considerations will affect the method of advance of the
remainder of the division. First, speed is of paramount
importance, since, until it arrives on the objective, there is
danger of defeat in detail. Secondly, any protection derived
from the mobile detachment will
be incidental. Enemy
armoured forces may come in from a flank, or airborne troops
may be landed behind it.
The remainder of the division will normally follow on a two
brigade front, each forward brigade providing its own advanced
guard.
Further considerations concerning the movement of the
remainder of the division are discussed in Secs. 10 and 11.
7. ARMY TANKS IN AN INDEPENDENT ROLE
(see also Sec. 4, para. 4.)
If there is a threat of attack by enemy armoured formations,
an army tank brigade allotted to an infantry division may be
given the role of destroying the hostile armoured formations
immediately they approach within striking distance. For
this purpose, the army tank brigade must be capable of in-
dependent action like an armoured brigade. It will always
require reconnaissance elements and will also often require
support units.
When used in an independent role, the army tank brigade
will seek to provoke an encounter on ground and in circum-
stances favourable to itself. Since armoured formations are
likely to be speedier than the army tank brigade, a battle will
usually be sought where the scope for manœuvre is restricted,
and where the enemy will be compelled to make use of well-
marked approaches.
Thus, it will often fulfil this role by com-
manding a tank obstacle and attacking the enemy armoured
formations as they attempt to debouch from the crossings
over the obstacle.
On other occasions, the divisional re-
connaissance battalion may be employed to lure enemy
tanks on to army tanks concealed in preparation to engage
them from the flanks. Or, again, skilful siting of anti-tank
guns may deflect hostile tanks into avenues where army tanks
can best destroy them.
V10322 (21) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

