pg_0036.pdf:
V10322 (35) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
33
Part IV.-THE ARMS IN THE ADVANCE
15. DIVISIONAL RECONNAISSANCE BATTALION
1. Characteristics
The divisional reconnaissance battalion has good road
mobility, which is limited only by the carriers; fair ability
to search country; and a moderate striking power against
unarmoured troops. Its vehicles are, however, very lightly
armoured. The battalion is, therefore, unsuitable for action
against enemy armoured forces unless it is closely supported
by army tanks, or reinforced with anti-tank artillery and
protected by tank obstacles.
2. Role
The battalion has two possible roles in the advance; first,
reconnaissance; secondly, to secure a tactical feature tem-
porarily against light opposition.
The unit's primary role is reconnaissance: reconnaissance
for a detached force sent on ahead of the division, for an
army tank formation or unit, or for a column advanced
guard. When the unit is employed to secure a tactical
feature, it will normally require the assistance of tanks and
M.M. Gs.
The scope of the battalion's reconnaissance demands
quickness of decision and rapidity of movement; while
the necessity for the company commanders to handle other
arms demands the closest co-operation.
Both call for a
very high state of training.
3. Method of movement
The ability of the battalion to search the country traversed
will depend on the speed of the remainder of the division
and on the frontage to be covered; but, since the necessity
to thrust forward will be paramount, detailed protective
reconnaissance will normally be impossible.
Until contact has been gained, patrols of reconnaissance
cars, supported by carriers, will be pushed forward; but,
once determined resistance has been encountered, carriers
will lead the advance.
Minor resistance will often be overcome by pénetrating
gaps and attacking from the flanks or rear. Against stronger
opposition, a rapid deployment will be necessary. When
obstacles are encountered, immediate use should be made
of the infantry platoons to find a way over or round then.
V10322 (35) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

