pg_0034.pdf:
V10322 (33) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
31
immediate and detailed information about the nature
of any obstacles they encounter. Further, it will
often be necessary for the forward troops to fight
for engineer information.
ili. Administrative reconnaissance.-Administrative units
must have reconnaissance parties ahead of them,
particularly when they are moving in rear under
divisional control.
14. PROTECTION
1. General
Under the conditions of modern warfare, every formation
and unit must have all-round protection at all times.
There will often be a possibility of attack by enemy
armoured formations from almost any direction. Further-
more, the speed with which the advance is conducted precludes
the possibility of searching all the country traversed.
It will be rare for any advance to be made without some
attention from the air; and there will always be the possi-
bility of attack by airborne troops.
2. Protection from the ground
Frontal protection is obtained by the correct positioning
of army tanks and by the action of the leading troops, as
discussed in the preceding sections.
Flank protection will often have to be provided owing to
the presence of enemy armoured formations.
A careful
appreciation of the area in which enemy infiltration is likely
will, however, enable the commander to economize troops
employed for flank protection.
It may sometimes be necessary to detail a special flank
guard either to block crossings on the line of an obstacle, or
to hold important tactical features.
Often, however, it may
be possible to meet the threat by distributing anti-tank
weapons in the order of march, by having piquets at a high
state of readiness at intervals throughout the columns, and
by providing an adequate warning system by patrols on the
flanks.
Bold offensive action by flank guards will, however, usually
provide the best protection.
Local protection against raiding A.F.Vs. and airborne
troops will always be essential, since small numbers of
A.F.Vs. may elude the protective screen, and parachute
V10322 (33) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

