pg_0047.pdf:
V10322 (46) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
44
5. Other administrative problems
i. Supplies.—It will usually be advisable for units to carry
one or two days' preserved rations with them, particularly if
their locations are likely to be uncertain, or if road space is
unlikely to be available for the divisional supply column
vehicles until late at night.
ii. Water.-In certain theatres of war water will present a
problem of paramount importance. It admits of much the
same solution as that suggested above for petrol. Apart
from any provision of special vehicles made by higher forma-
tions, water tanks and tins must be considered in relation to
the transport lift available for this purpose.
In some theatres of war it will often be necessary to fight
for a water supply, in which event the problem will affect the
whole plan for the advance.
iii. Medical.- Companies of field ambulances should initially
be placed under command of the leading infantry brigades.
When casualties occur, sections will open up to take charge
of these casualties. If the advance continues, the remaining
sections will move forward, leaving behind the sections that
have opened until they have disposed of their casualties.
If the advance is temporarily held up while an attack is
staged, the sections that have opened would be reinforced by
the others to form advanced dressing stations. Main dressing
stations will open under divisional control.
iv. Ordnance.—The task of the unit L.A.Ds. will be two-
fold-to keep vehicles moving whenever possible, and to keep
the roads clear. Breakdowns will be towed clear of the road—
preferably under cover-and their location reported. Recovery
will be under divisional control.
v. B echelon.—The bulk of B echelon transport will almost
certainly move brigaded,
but it will often be considered
desirable to include cooks' lorries with A echelon. Blanket
lorries may be demanded by brigades, but their release will
depend on circumstances.
6. Administrative communications
The bulk of the administrative transport will move well
back in the columns, or by bounds in rear of brigade groups.
Wireless communication between
advanced
and
rear
divisional headquarters is essential in order that adminis-
trative instructions may reach the services without delay.
Special measures will be necessary to keep in close touch with
any administrative units that may have to be moved forward
at short notice.
(12884) G.525 350,000 7/41 K.H.K. Gp. 8/7
V10322 (46) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

