pg_0031.pdf:
V10322 (30) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
28
The movement of the anti-aircraft and anti-tank artillery
is discussed in Sec. 14, below.
The movement of the adminis-
trative units has been touched on in Sec. 4, para. 9, above,
and is discussed in greater detail in Part V, below.
Control of movement of the remainder of the division will
be exercised by divisional headquarters.
12. ADVANCE WITHOUT ARMY TANKS AGAINST
AN ENEMY EQUIPPED WITH A.F.Vs.
1. Generai
An infantry division advancing against an enemy formation
which is supported by armoured units should, whenever
possible, be covered by an armoured division or by army
tanks. If, however, these are not available, special disposi-
tions may have to be adopted, and a degree of caution will
inevitably be imposed on the movement of the division.
This restriction will very seriously reduce the speed and limit
the distance of the advance.
2. Information
The method and speed of movement will depend largely on
the information about the enemy, particularly the number and
location of his armoured formations. The normal inteiligence
must be supplemented by air reconnaissance, which will
concentrate on discovering the whereabouts of the enemy
A.P. Vs., and by a bold use of the divisional reconnaisance
battalion, which, supported by anti-tank artillery, must be
prepared to take exceptional risks to warn the division of the
approach of enemy A.F. Vs.
3. Movement by night
If it is known that strong bodies of enemy A.F. Vs. are within
striking distance, and if the general situation allows an
advance by night, the best method will be to move by night
only, the division lying up in tank-proof areas by day. The
areas selected will be those which will absorb the minimum
man-power to render and maintain them tank-proof
During the latter part of the day, a light reconnaissance
detachment should be sent to locate the enemy. Shortly
before dark, the divisional reconnaissance battalion-re
inforced as considered necessary-will move ahead to occupy
positions to protect the division during its night advance.
The remainder of the division will then advance behind a light
screer. Movement will inevitably be slow, and it will be co-
ordinated by divisional headquarters to ensure that progress
is even across the whole front.
V10322 (30) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

