pg_0013.pdf:
V10322 (12) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
10
To forestall the enemy on an important obstacle or tactical
feature, it may be desirable to send forward a mobile force
under a separate commander. The nature and composition
of such a force will vary with the character of the opposition
to be anticipated. If strong resistance from an armoured
force is to be expected, it will be desirable to send forward
an army tank brigade, with a suitable allotment of other
arms.
This brigade, whose role will naturally be an inde-
pendent one, may be ordered either to provoke an encounter
battle or to seize a tank obstacle. If, on the other hand,
the enemy's local strength will not allow him to fight more
than light delaying actions, the divisional reconnaissance
battalion may be sent well ahead, under its own commander,
to deal quickly with such opposition and so enable the
division to advance unchecked.
Two main factors must always be taken into account when
deciding whether the forward troops should be under divisional
control or decentralized to brigade groups: these are the
width of front and the degree of enemy opposition anticipated.
On a wide front it will be difficult for one commander to
exercise effective control. Unless, therefore, the front can
be restricted, it will usually be advisable to place the leading
elements under command of brigade groups.
Strong enemy resistance will demand quick reinforcement
of the
leading elements. Again, in these circumstances,
decentralization to brigade groups will be advisable.
This
co-argentin ill depth between the vat out el, on a chie
advance, and will ensure early information for those com-
manders who have first to act upon it. Decentralization
will also enable one brigade group to continue the advance
even if the other is held up, thus outflanking the enemy
opposition.
Decentralization encourages initiative, speeds up decisions,
and makes for rapid action. It does not, however, imply
abdication by the divisional commander. On the contrary,
the divisional commander must retain effective control.
cannot be delegated. Whatever the degree of decentraliza-
tion decided, effective control will depend upon the precision
and lucidity with which the divisional commander defines
his intentions and conveys them to his subordinates.
5. Allotment of troops, and order of march
During mobile operations, especially on extended fronts, cen-
tralized control of supporting arms will often be impracticable.
V10322 (12) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

