pg_0028.pdf:
V10322 (27) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Researc
mig.org
25
10. THE ADVANCE OF THE LEADING INFANTRY
BRIGADE GROUPS
1. Composition
The allocation of troops to the leading infantry brigade
groups will depend on the tactical situation and on the role
of the division on reaching its objective.
To facilitate and speed up the work of the staff, the normal
system of grouping should be adhered to unless there is good
reason to depart from it. Units or sub-units should be
added only if the opposition likely to be encountered, or the
task of the division on arrival, makes such additions necessary.
Leading brigades may, for instance, require army tanks or
additional anti-tank artillery for the advance, or machine guns
for the occupation of a defensive position.
The light anti-aircraft batteries, on the other hand, will
usually be centralized for the advance; and, although they
will often move within brigade groups, they will be working
to a divisional plan and may have to be given a special place
in the order of march. (See Sec. 14, para. 3.)
2. Order of march
The order of march of a leading infantry brigade group is
designed, first, to enable it rapidly to support its advanced
guard, should the need arise; and, secondly, to further the
object of the division as a whole. The second consideration
may necessitate a high priority for certain units for example,
medium machine guns-which may not be needed for the
advance, but which will be required immediately it is over.
3. Method of movement
The infantry of the leading brigades will either move in
mechanical transport or march. The limitations of mechanical
transport have already been mentioned in Sec. 5, para. 2,
above.
i. The advance with infantry in mechanical transport.-
Brigade groups will be prepared to advance by
bounds from one concealed area to another as the
advanced guards gain successive objectives. Bounds
should be as large as possible, and will be decided by
the speed of the advance and the distance-in terms
of time-which the head of the main body may be
behind the advanced guard. Moves into conceal-
ment areas relieve road congestion and make it
V10322 (27) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

