176
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Planning Dilemmas over "Veritable"
Examination of the circumstances surrounding the planning and execution of
Operation "Veritable," the 8 February 1945 assault from the River Maas towards
the Rhine, sheds further light on the impact that the relationship between the
21st Army Group and the First Canadian Army exerted on the overall conduct
of the campaign. For the campaign's historical literature has not yet observed
the startling extent to which Montgomery was prepared to deny the operational!
logic of the situation facing him in his attempts to get the Second (British) Army
to undertake "Veritable" instead of Crerar's Army.
To understand this complicated episode, regard has to be paid to the interre-
lationship between the geography of the
"Veritable" attack and the overall
disposition of forces within the 21st Army Group (see map essay).
During the
initial planning in October and November 1944, the First Canadian Army held
the northern part of the army group's front from the North Sea at Walcheren due
east along the River Maas up to the east side of the Nijmegen bridgehead near
Gennep.
Dempsey's Second (British) Army faced east holding a front from
Gennep running approximately north-south along the Maas until they met
American forces near Geilenkirchen.
In early October, Montgomery had wanted Second Army to carry out Op-
cration "Gatwick," a precursor of "Veritable," but developments prevented
Dempsey from undertaking this offensive. In November, planning commenced
on "Veritable" (or "Valediction" as it was then termed) for which Montgomery
had earmarked Dempsey's Army; Crerar's Army was
merely to provide
protection for the northern flank of Dempsey's advance. 42 Given the restricted
geography of the area, there was barely sufficient space for the Second Army to
Concentrate for the offensive and to build up the logistical infrastructure so vital
for a successful advance. Crucially, to be able to do so, Dempsey's assault forces
would also have to control the "Island" bridgehead immediately to the west and
north of the area of the proposed offensive.
The "Island," however, was the
most strategically important piece of ground within the army group's entire front
because it contained the bridgehead over the River Waal, which could serve as a
launching point for an easterly advance into Germany.
had to hold the "Island" in considerable strength. 43
The Allies, therefore,
Unfortunately
the
"Veritable" attack frontage was adjacent to the vital "Island" bridgehead, and
this constricted geography complicated the planning of this offensive.
Dempsey's Second Army, however, could not concentrate sufficient troops
for "Veritable" in the Groesbeek area, hold the "Island" strongly, and defend the
southern half of its front from south of the "Veritable" area down to the inter-
army group boundary. It had too few forces, even with reinforcement, to hold
such a long front including the vital "Island" bridgehead. Giving the Second
Army sufficient forces for these tasks would have meant allocating virtually all
of the army group's resources to Dempsey, leaving the First Canadian Army
emasculated
If Montgomery had commanded two solely British armies, he
may well have opted for this course of action; but to Crerar and the Canadian
government it would be politically unacceptable to have the First Canadian
Crerar and the First Canadian Army
177
Army stripped bare. However, even if the latter had been done, any eastward
advance by the Second (British) Army would only increasingly expose its
already dangerously stretched southern flank; its penetrative power would
dissipate gradually as forces were redeployed to protect this lengthening flank.
As a result, it looked increasingly as if Dempsey's Army could not undertake the
offensive.
To enable the Second (British) Army to concentrate for "Veritable" without
thinning dangerously its southern flank, Montgomery then suggested that
Dempsey share the defense of the "Island" with Crerar's Army.
This would
shorten Dempsey's front and hence permit both concentration and security for
the sector south of the "Veritable" assault frontage.
However, it soon became
clear that the cramped geography and limited communication routes in the
"Island" rendered it impracticable to divide defense of the "Island" between two
separate armies with their respective administrative infrastructures.
This area
was scarcely able to support the administrative networks of two corps of the
same army, let alone two corps from two different armies.
Therefore, Mont-
gomery ultimately recognized that there was no way that the Second (British)
Army could concentrate its forces at Groesbeek for "Veritable," hold part of the
"Island," and maintain the security of its defensive southern sector down to
Geilenkirchen. 44
The army group staff prepared these convoluted arguments for Montgomery;
to so professional a commander as the Field Marshal, the implications of these
appreciations must have been clear.
Clearly, Montgomery's suspicion of
Crerar's abilities led him to explore several impracticable alternatives that would
allow Dempsey's Army to undertake Operation "Veritable."
Sound operational
reasoning, however, also influenced Montgomery's desire that the Second
(British) Army undertake this offensive rather than Crerar's forces.
Firstly, if
Crerar's Army undertook "Veritable," it would be advancing southeast from the
eastern end of its north-facing front; every mile it advanced eastward would
lengthen its exposed north-facing flank. Because this flank was already thinly
held, albeit facing similarly stretched enemy forces, Crerar's Army
was in
danger of becoming unbalanced. In fact this situation was similar to that facing
the Canadians in Normandy after the closing of the Falaise pocket, but trans-
posed through 90 degrees.
Consequently, if Crerar's Army undertook
"Veritable," there might be a limit to how far east it could advance; its offensive
strength would be increasingly weakened by dispersion to protect this length-
ening northern flank.
Given that the Second Army was deployed facing east on a front running
north-south, it made better sense for it to advance east or southeast, and for the
Canadians to advance north or northeast. Yet, despite this, the other considera-
tions explained previously prevented Dempsey from carrying out "Veritable."
There was only one satisfactory answer to these conflicting operational consid-
erations, and that was the one eventually adopted; despite Montgomery's
suspicions of Crerar, the latter's army would have to be massively reinforced by
British troops so that it could undertake "Veritable," leaving an emasculated
Second (British) Army in static positions for the first time, planning the future
