116
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
secured the "Overlord" lodgment area, the Germans stood little chance of
preventing the eventual Allied liberation of Nazi-occupied Europe unless they
managed to undertake successfully an operational level counternffensive that
denuded substantially Allied morale.
Through their stranglehold on the
initiative for most of the campaign, the Allies imposed on the Westheer a
reactive defensive posture based upon a series of negative, delaying, and
unimaginative fighting withdrawals.13
Frequently, Allied attacks compelled the
Westheer desperately to throw into the front line whatever reinforcements that
had just arrived, to shore up a front line in imminent danger of collapse.
examination of the deployments of the Westheer during the Anglo-Canadian
"Veritable" offensive reveals the desperate nature of the repeated German
attempts to prevent a major Allied penetration.!4
Balance
Montgomery's orders to his commanders and his messages to Brooke also
reveal that he placed great emphasis on balance in Northwest Europe.!5 Balance
was a facet of concentration and its sibling classic military principles, economy
of force and security: The Field Service Regulations defined the concept as the
correct combination of these three characteristics! Montgomery's sense of
balance was interconnected with his emphases on the master plan, caution,
maintenance of the initiative, and flank protection.
Balance referred to a
commander's ability to deploy his forces so effectively with regard to terrain,
communications, and likely enemy reaction, that these forces could accommo-
date easily, rather than react to, any countermove by the enemy. Hence, balance
reflected Montgomery's intent both to enact a master plan and maintain his grip
on the initiative, because balance permitted a commander relentlessly
proceed" with his plan. " Moreover, Montgomery's emphasis on balance in
Northwest Europe also facilitated his objective to sustain troop morale, because
balance enabled Anglo-Canadian forces speedily to halt enemy penetrations
before they could achieve tactical success that might damage Allied morale.
Balance also reflected the fixation the cautious Montgomery maintained over
tidiness -his concern to avoid dangerously exposed salients and an untidy,
ragged front line that might offer the Germans opportunities for successful local
counterattacks.
During 1944 45 the Field Marshal's concern with balance was most notice-
able in his fears over the vulnerability of the eastern flank of the Normandy
lodgment area. Given the potential risk of Allied forces in the east of the
Normandy bridgehead being swept back into the sea by enemy counterattack,
the cautious Montgomery remained determined to keep his
dispositions
balanced even if this meant postponing impending operations: This was the
motivation behind his suspension of offensive operations for forty-eight hours
on 14 June 1944. Hence, even though balance in some ways facilitated
Montgomery's intent to maintain the initiative in Northwest Europe, real
tensions pervaded the relationship between these two elements of his overall
operational technique. In reality, the Field Marshal's concerns with balance, the
117
The Other Elements
nurture of troop morale, and the avoidance of excessive casualties reinforced his
innate caution and encouraged him to adopt a defensive or limited offensive
orientation.
Yet neither of these two postures facilitated Montgomery's
attempts —through the combination of repeated, successful, offensive action and
continued grasp of the initiative —to maintain troop morale and achieve victory
in the theater on his desired terms.
To Montgomery, victory meant the
achievement of Britain's
particular politico-military
campaign objectives
through the securing of a high national profile within a larger Allied effort that
successfully brought the German army to decisive defeat. Like most higher
field commanders, Montgomery's generalship revolved around
the art of
balancing all these contradictory objectives and concerns within the context of a
rapidly changing battlefield situation.
Administration
Another fundamental aspect of Montgomery's operational approach was the
administrative dimension.
Administration
concerns the organization
of
logistical supply —the transportation from depots in the rear up to the front line
of the ammunition, petrol, oil, rations, and all other supplies necessary to sustain
a fighting force in the field. Montgomery based his operational technique on the
principle that "administrative arrangements must be equal to the strain imposed
in carrying out the strategical or tactical plan. "18 What Montgomery believed to
be logistically possible determined his consideration of what was operationally
feasible; operational possibilities remained principally a function of logistical
ones.
Consequently, administration proved integral to Montgomery's theater
strategic master plan for Normandy.
The "Overlord" plan sought to establish,
by about D+90, a lodgment area that stretched from the River Seine in the
northeast, to the River Loire in the south, and to the Brittany peninsula in the
west. The Allied High Command intended to open rapidly the ports within this
lodgment area to facilitate the importation of the many thousands of tons of
logistical supplies required each day by the Allied Expeditionary Forces.
Montgomery planned to launch a decisive campaign only after D+90, when the
21st Army
Group-plus the newly formed American Army
Group -had
established successfully this administrative network. In reality, the campaign
developed contrary to Allied expectations because the enemy decided to stand
and fight a decisive battle west of the Seine in Normandy. Consequently the
Allies fought their crucial operations before they reached the Seine, rather than
afterward as they had planned 20
The overriding concern within the Allied "Overlord" planning process was
to establish a sufficiently rapid rate of build-up of men and matériel within the
lodgment area established in Normandy. This was a difficult task because the
Germans could reinforce their troops more quickly by land than the Allies could
across the waters of the Channel. The Allied staffs devoted vast amounts of
labor into the production and frequent updating of these hugely complex daily
build-up tables? The 21st Army Group staff recognized only too well that "the
outcome of this battle will depend primarily on whether our rate of build-up can
