138
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
Further evidence of Montgomery's close grip on Dempsey's handling of
O'Connor is to be found in the case of Operation "Dreadnought." During mid-
June 1944, prior to the "Epsom" offensive, Montgomery had contemplated an
attack, "Dreadnought," from the bridgehead beyond the Caen canal that sought
to outflank Caen from the east. O'Connor made a negative appreciation on the
planned operation, which he sent, as requested, to Montgomery rather than to
Dempsey.
Montgomery replied that he had reconsidered the operation after
O'Connor's "very clear exposition" of the difficulties involved and had "old
Bimbo to chuck" the attack in favor of an operation toward Evrecy." Again,
this operation demonstrated the
possible symbiosis that existed between
Montgomery and Dempsey - or their mutual desire to claim responsibility for
decisions. In 1946 Dempsey confirmed to Chester Wilot his diary entry of 18
June 1944 that he had informed Monigomery of his decision "to cancel the
proposed attack by 8 Corps from the airborne bridgehead. "42
Whether the
decision to abandon "Dreadnought" was made by Dempsey or by Montgomery,
or the two together, remains a mystery.
The evidence presented indicates that Montgomery bypassed Dempsey in
dealing directly with the latter's corps commanders.
It is significant, however,
that Dempsey offered no criticism of this meddling by his superior.
It is not
entirely clear whether this acceptance stemmed from a general deference to
Montgomery's will, or whether Dempsey tolerated this interference because he
recognized Montgomery's undoubted operational qualities and subordinated
personality issues to the crucial requirement of producing a battlefield perfom-
ance capable of defeating the Westheer. D Este has suggested that in Normandy
Dempsey became increasingly frustrated with the stalemate in the bridgehead,
with Montgomery's excessive grip on the Second Army, and with his corre-
spondingly low profile within the 21st Army Group.
Brigadier Williams
recalled that Dempsey "would deliberately sit up as high as possible in his staff
car so that the troops would recognize him. "43
Moreover, the practice of
Montgomery's Liaison Officers to report directly back to the Field Marshal,
ignoring regular command channels, not only annoyed many commanders but
sometimes upset "even the impeccable" Dempsey."4
Whatever the reasons
behind Dempsey's stoic acceptance of Montgomery' interference, this accep-
tance constituted a crucial element in the efficiency of the two commanders'
working relationship, a partnership on which much depended if the Allies were
to defeat Germany 45
Is this picture, however, of Dempsey being bypassed by a
superior who often dealt directly with his corps commanders really the whole
story? To leave the analysis at that would lead to a significant undervaluation of
Dempsey's overall contribution to the campaign.
Dempsey the Significant Contributor
There is other evidence, however, that indicates that Dempsey did make a
significant individual contribution to the conduct of this campaign.
D'Este
concluded that Dempsey had "a far stronger personality" than that "suggested by
his public image. "46"
Moreover, Dempsey did contribute to the higher direction
Dempsey and the Second (British) Army
139
of the campaign.
Even if his influence on Montgomery's theater strategy in
Normandy remained negligible, Dempsey and his army staff played a substan-
tial role during the pre-invasion planning in fleshing out into the
final
"Overlord" plan the broad framework for the Normandy campaign produced by
the 21st Army Group.
At times during the campaign, moreover, Dempsey exerted a marked influ-
ence on the sequence of operations developed in pursuit of this strategy and on
the conception of particular operations. The build-up schedule constituted a
fundamental part of both Montgomery's strategic plan for Normandy and of the
sequence of operations he envisaged to fulfill this plan. The fact that Dempsey's
opinions resulted in alterations to the build-up schedule attests to the influence
he exerted on his superior.
On 26 June 1944, at a Second Army staff confer-
ence, Dempsey stated that he now wished that the Il Canadian Corps Head-
quarters should be landed before the troops of the 2nd Canadian Division,
reversing the sequence originally timetabled in the build-up program. Dempsey
then simply requested that Montgomery "approve this arrangement. "47
Dempsey
influenced
individual
operations
most
significantly
in
"Goodwood" —the Second Army's all-armored assault on 18 July 1944 that
sought to outflank Caen from the east. This attack was conceived by Dempsey,
who sold it to a reluctant Montgomery. Dempsey told Liddell Hart in 1952 that
it was "my suggestion that I could break out. "48
At the army group conference
of 10 July 1944, when "Goodwood" was proposed, the ambitious Dempsey
attempted to convert Montgomery to a significant change in the theater strategic
plan for Normandy, which shifted the main breakout role away from the
Americans and to the British.
At this conference, Dempsey recollected, he
"suggested to Monty -when talking in private -that I should make the break-
out, and could do so. But Monty did not favour such a change of aim. "49
Dempsey was more frustrated with the slowness of the advance in Normandy
than his superior. It is unclear to what extent this frustration reflected the fact
that the constricted lodgment area facilitated Montgomery's stifling control of
Dempsey's activities as commander of the Second Army. In Dempsey's mind a
successful "Goodwood" would alleviate the burden of the grip Montgomery
currently exercised over him.
Despite Montgomery's refusal to allow
Dempsey's proposal to alter his master plan, it is significant, however, that a
few days after this conference, Brigadier Richardson's army group G(Plans)
section began study on an appreciation,
"Lucky Strike," that allocated the
British by far the greater role in a breakout toward the Seine."' While Mont-
gomery refused to sanction this fundamental alteration to his Normandy
strategy, he acquiesced in the launching of "Goodwood" —an attack for which
Dempsey, privately, appears to have entertained the highest hopes for a decisive
British breakout.
Another example of the significance of Dempsey's contribution during the
Normandy campaign concerned Operation "Bluecoat." On 25 July, Montgom-
ery instructed Dempsey to carry out an operation to help the American "Cobra"
offensive, which would "have no geographical objective" but would divert
German forces away from the Americans. The next day Dempsey informed his
