Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
be effectively consulted in operations which are of such capital consequence. "t1
Churchill, moreover, informed Montgomery on 12 December 1944 that he
"greatly fearled] the dwindling of the British Army as a factor in France as it
will affect our rights to express our opinion upon strategic and other matters. "62
By the time of Germany's defeat, American forces in the theater outnumbered
the Commonwealth's best effort for a significant military force by well over
three to one. Churchill, obsessed with "bayonet" strength, remained determined
to avoid reduction in the 21st Army Group's peak 1944 strength of sixteen
divisions. Yet the manpower crisis compelled Montgomery to break up several
divisions to provide reinforcements for other formations in his army group.
3 December 1944 Churchill angrily ordered Montgomery to halt the disbanding
of the S0th Division as soon as Brooke had informed him of the decision.
Churchill only reluctantly reversed his halt decision after the Chiefs of Staff had
backed a firm message from Montgomery that informed Churchill that he had
already begun the disbandment, that he could not easily reverse these actions,
and that any attempt to do so would cause severe damage to British prospects in
the theater.64
Brooke shared Churchill's concerns over Britain's international political
eclipse.
The CIGS revealingly responded to a proposal by Major-General
Harding, Alexander's Chief of Staff in Italy, that this theater should become an
all-British front, with forces withdrawn from Europe. Brooke inquired whether
Harding "thought it advisable that the offensive on the main front [Northwest
Europe, responsible for the final defeat of the Germans, we should leave the
task entirely to the Americans and take an insignificant part? "os
Brooke
believed that the maintenance of Britain's international influence necessitated
that British forces assume a prominent role in the prosecution of the vital
Northwest Europe campaign.
The 21st Army Group, however, scarcely
possessed sufficient forces to achieve such a military prominence.
Montgom-
cry'S decision-making throughout the campaign remained impaled on the horns
of this politico-military dilemma.
The desire of senior British commanders to preserve Britain's international
position made them highly concerned to avoid heavy casualties that might
decimate the British army-the very institution that embodied this position.
Churchill intervened directly in the conduct of the campaign at least once by
raising the matter of casualty conservation in a telephone call to Eisenhower.
Major-General Kenneth Strong, chief intelligence officer at SHAEF, noted that
Churchill asked Eisenhower if he could "avoid too many British casualties"
because "British losses had been severe, and Britain was being assaulted by the
V weapons." According to Strong, Eisenhower told Churchill that "if Britain
wished to be in the van of the battle, as Montgomery had suggested, British
casualties could not be avoided. "66
One of the keys to Montgomery's conduct of the campaign lies in under-
standing these contradictions -for the Field Marshal remained caught in an
intractable dilemma throughout the campaign.
He recognized that his army
group command could secure for Britain a significant role in deciding the
political fate of postwar Europe by its assumption of a prominent role in the
Casualty Conservation
65
military defeat of Germany.
To a large degree,
Britain's postwar political
prestige rested on the glory that her soldiers won on the battlefields of Europe.
However, if Montgomery maintained such a high profile by using the 21st
Army Group to spearhead the Allied onslaught against the Westheer, his
formation would incur severe casualties, particularly in infantrymen. Given the
British infantry reinforcement crisis, such high losses would force Montgomery
to disband additional divisions.
Consequently, the order of battle of the 21st
Army Group would decline further from its meager peak strength in Normandy
of sixteen divisions.
The fewer the number of combat-experienced divisions
that the British army emerged with at the end of the war, the smaller her
influence on Europe was likely to be in the face of the growing military might
of the two nascent superpowers. This paradox remained as clear to Montgom-
ery as it was insoluble. For if the British commander-in-chief strove to secure a
significant British political influence on postwar Europe through the mainte-
nance of a high military profile in the Northwest Europe campaign, he risked
destroying the very force —the
21st Army Group-that would secure this
political agenda. Montgomery's generalship in Northwest Europe constituted an
attempt to solve this paradox: He sought the achievement of a high British
military profile in the theater while avoiding the inevitable casualties that went
with such a profile.
Montgomery, unfortunately, faced another thorny dilemma in Northwest
Europe. The longer the war lasted, the smaller would be the British effort in
comparison with that of the Americans, as the latter deployed gradually their
full numerical might.
In consequence, the British politically remained more
interested in achieving victory quickly than the Americans, because "the British
economy and man-po ver situation demanded victory in 1944: no later. 67 The
21st Army Group, however, possessed insufficient resources to achieve early
victory by itself, unless the Germans collapsed unexpectedly.
Equally, Mont-
gomery could not afford to sustain the heavy casualties that would be incurred
in a British-dominated attempt to secure quick victory over the Westheer.
Should such a full-blown British offensive effort fail, Montgomery's emascu-
lated army group might be reduced to a secondary role in the theater, con-
demned merely to watch from the sidelines as the Americans achieved the glory
of defeating finally the Wehrmacht. Britain might be on the war's winning side
yet still lose the peace.
The motivations behind Montgomery's atypically bold
"Market-Garden" offensive are more intelligible in this context. The operation
constituted his exploitation of a unique battlefield opportunity for him to gamble
realistically his forces in an attempt to secure for Britain a prominent profile in
an Allied victory over the Westheer achieved during 1944.
Montgomery remained both an ardent military professional and a staunch
champion of British political interest; an uneasy bifurcation, at best. He faced a
double dilemma: how to strive to esin both the war and the peace by seeking a
high military profile in the wider Allied campaign and/or by secking an early,
British-dominated victory: wit in both cases to do so without destroying his
amy group in the attempt, and hence wrecking the force that stood the best
chance of achieving these political airs. Montgomery's simple solution to this
