Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
88
in general Montgomery conducted his operations in Northwest Europe in terms
of preconceived operational-level, suboperational, and individual operation
master plans.
Concentration
The second key characteristic of Montgomery's operational approach in
Northwest Europe was concentration of force.
This classic military principle
concerned the deployment of massive force at the decisive point of battle; as
such it was inextricably associated with the principles of economy of force and
security.
To Brooke, Montgomery described this approach as smashing
"through towards the selected objective" by both concentrating "great strength"
and having ready "fresh divisions to exploit the success gained. "53
Montgomery
would only commence offensive operations after thorough preparation that
included copious stockpiling of logistical supplies, especially artillery ammuni-
tion. In Northwest Europe the Field Marshal concentrated maximum offensive
strength on a narrow frontage, with two division attacks like "Tractable" and
"Totalize" being launched on a front ranging from two to four miles, respec-
tively. Moreover, Montgomery echeloned his offensive forces in great depth
behind this narrow frontage.
His January 1944 theater policy instructed that
divisions should attack on a narrow front with only one brigade up and the
remainder echeloned in the rear.54
Allied air superiority in the theater made
concentration of such high troop densities possible by removing the threat of
heavy casualties incurred by enemy air attack.Ss
Concentration of force on a narrow frontage with units echeloned in depth
ensured maximum offensive power at the point of break-in. Once the assaulting
units had achieved their initial objectives, commanders redeployed the eche-
loned follow-up units through the forward troops in order to attack the next set
of objectives.
This passing through of echeloned forces in pursuit of modest
objectives both helped sustain combat power and maintain attack momentum by
keeping assault forces relatively fresh. Though this method sustained offensive
momentum, the tempo of unfolding operations remained slow as this frequent
passing through of units consumed much time and created tactical pauses.
During Operation "Veritable," the First Canadian Army's February 1945 drive to
the Rhine, commanders passed fresh assault units through forward troops
between one and four times each day $6
Furthermore, echeloning in depth
enabled corps commanders to insert reserve formations into the break-in battle
to widen and deepen the penetration. During "Veritable," Horrocks erred by
inserting his reserve divisions too soon along restricted communications routes,
causing massive congestion.$7
In Montgomery's brand of concentration,
armored forces were held in reserve ready to exploit success. Once his forces
had completed the break-in battle, Montgomery released the armor. More than
armor firepower, however, concentration relied on the firepower of massed
artillery. In this campaign, concentration meant, above all, massing all available
artillery to provide fire support for the attack, augmented when possible by
"flying artillery" —bomber aircraft. Operation "Veritable," during which the
The Set-Piece Battle
89
21st Army Group deployed nearly two-thirds of its entire resources in one
location, epitomized Montgomery's emphasis on concentration 8 On 8 February
1945, five infantry divisions attacked on an eight-mile frontage, backed by 1056
guns, with a three-divisional central thrust on a two-mile front. This approach
was also evidenced by Montgomery's refusal in late December 1944 to attack
the northern shoulder of the Ardennes salient until he had gathered ample forces
for his assault.
Another aspect of Montgomery's emphasis on concentration was "tidiness,"
which reflected other facets of his technique such as balance, flank protection,
and the master plan.
Tidiness reflected Montgomery's concern both to control
an orderly battle and to achieve and maintain concentration before and during an
operation.
To Montgomery tidiness meant ensuring that an attack was "teed
off"
properly —that he had deployed correctly his forces and had allocated
appropriately to them available supporting resources. Montgomery did not "tee-
up" Operation "Goodwood" effectively, because the narrowness of the starting
line in the Orne bridgehead forced him to deploy into the assault his three
armored divisions one behind the other.
This dilution of shock combat power,
plus the consequent restriction on tactical maneuver, contributed significantly to
the failure of the operation."1
Montgomery sought to ensure tidiness during offensives (and thus both
orderly control and concentration) by conducting operations where possible
within well-defined battle areas delimited by topographical features like rivers.
His plan for Operation
"Veritable" selected the River Maas to delimit the
western and southern ends of the battle area and the River Rhine the northern
and eastern ends.2 Similarly, he selected the River Maas to delimit three sides
of the combat area for Operation "Nutcracker/Mallard." Such delimitation was
prominent in Montgomery's winter 1944-45 operations because the topography
of Belgium and Holland, with numerous water-courses, proved conducive to
such delimitation; in Normandy there were fewer such opportunities.
This geographical restriction of the battlefield maintained concentration by
avoiding dispersion of forces over an expanding battleground —a feature of
some American operations that Montgomery
deplored.
Furthermore, this
restriction ensured continued concentration of the spearhead, economy of force,
and security, because only modest forces had to be diverted from the main thrust
to protect flanks hinged on easily defensible topographical obstacles. Last, such
delimitation helped keep the advance orderly and facilitated Montgomery's tight
control of a relatively rigid combat situation.
Montgomery sought in his operations to avoid untidiness —situations where
the front had become ragged and extended, with troops dispersed rather than
concentrated.
Such untidy situations hampered tight command and control,
represented uneconomical disposition of force, and presented opportunities for
German counterattacks to pinch off Allied salients.
If untidiness occurred,
Montgomery often halted an operation in order to let his forces regroup.
Despite his instruction that "Veritable" be continued "night and day" until the
Rhine was reached, when by 20 February 1945 the Il Canadian Corps had
