136
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
only be decided after closer discussion between Montgomery and Dempsey. At
times, however, this seems not to be the case.
In Operation "Market-Garden,"
the final decision to go for Arnhem —instead of for Wesel as Dempsey fa-
vored —remained Montgomery's decision alone.
David Belchem, the army
group's BGS(Ops), later observed, "there was no question of going to Arnhem.
Dempsey and Browning arrived" early on 10 September "to finalize their master
plan for Wesel."
But Montgomery
"greeted them" with "we are going to
Arnhem," even though he knew that "all of us from Dempsey downwards were
against Arnhem. "32
Dempsey recollected that he telephoned Montgomery that
morning and arranged a meeting to decide finally what objective they should
set. Dempsey arrived "convinced that we should go to Wesel," but when he got
to the caravan, "Montgomery was standing at the door with a telegram from the
War Office in his hand" about the V2 rocket threat.
Dempsey believed that this
message "decided the question," because Montgomery had not "really made up
his mind on Arnhem before he got this telegram. "33
Montgomery clearly
overrode the advice not only of his staff but also of the army commander
responsible for the operation. In his diary, Dempsey observed that the enemy
was doing "all he can to hold" Arnhem.
Consequently, Dempsey pondered,
"Are we right to direct Second Army to Arnhem or would it be better to hold a
firm left flank along the canals and strike due east" in conjunction with the First
United States Army?34
Dempsey's willingness both to carry out an operation
that he personally felt was suspect and to accept Montgomery's dismissal of his
opinions suggests that Dempsey remained subservient to his forceful superior.
An army commander also contributed to the conduct of the campaign in
other ways.
Dempsey's key function was the day-to-day coordination and
supervision of his subordinate corps and the operations these undertook.
This is
the sphere in which Dempsey might justifiably be expected to have made a
highly significant contribution to the overall operational conduct of the North-
west Europe campaign.
Yet Dempsey's subservience to his superior, as
illustrated in the Arnhem incident, prompts consideration of whether Montgom-
ery bypassed Dempsey (just as he did with Crerar) through dealing directly with
Dempsey's corps commanders. At least in the case of O'Connor, Montgomery
made clear his policy that corps commanders could pass over their army
commander to discuss matters directly with him. On 11 July 1944, O'Connor
wrote to Montgomery, "You did tell me to ring you up or write to you on
tactical questions when I am in doubt, which I often am! And so I am doing so
now. "35
O'Connor informed D'Este that Montgomery often visited him and
sometimes issued new orders on the spot, whereas at other times Dempsey
would issue subsequently orders that confirmed what Montgomery had asked
O'Connor to do.36
At first sight, O'Connor's case might seem to be a special one, since the VIII
Corps commander had been in an Italian prisoner of war camp for two years,
and naturally was rusty on the latest tactical methods.
It had been for this
reason, as well as on grounds of age, that Montgomery had been unhappy at
O'Connor's appointment to command the VIII Corps in Northwest Europe;
Montgomery also simply did not want another corps commander who was not a
Dempsey and the Second (British) Army
137
"Monty man" because he always remained suspicious of independently minded
commanders whose careers he had not personally nurtured or whom he had not
inculcated with his techniques. But such concerns do not justify Montgomery's
interference in a problem that ought to have been dealt with by O'Connor's
immediate superior-Dempsey.
It is possible, however, that Montgomery
anticipated that O'Connor, the firm-minded victor of Beda Fomm in early 1941,
might resent being nursed operationally by his erstwhile subordinate -Dempsey.
If this had been the situation, with O'Connor being a unique case, Montgomery's
interference with Dempsey's handling of the Second Army might have been
more defensible.
Montgomery's bypassing of Dempsey, however, does not seem to be re-
stricted to just the special case of O'Connor. Both Lewin and D'Este concluded
that Montgomery regularly bypassed his army commanders.?7
Dempsey was
also bypassed in Montgomery's dealings with Horrocks, with the latter recol-
lecting that although "Dempsey was told what Montgomery was doing" during
the advance into Belgium and in "Market-Garden," he doubted "whether
Dempsey had been told beforehand when Montgomery came up to see me just
prior to my last battle ... the seizure of Bremen. "38 Equally, it was Montgom-
ery, rather than Dempsey, who ultimately made major operational decisions,
such as the withdrawal of the 1st Airborne Division from the Oosterbeek
bridgehead during Operation "Market-Garden. "39
O'Connor's frankly astounding 11 July 1944 missive to Montgomery illus-
trates well that the latter bypassed Dempsey.
In this demi-official letter,
O'Connor asked Montgomery's opinion on two projected operations, which
Ritchie's XII Corps would undertake when they had taken over the frontage of
O'Connor's VIII Corps.
The latter stated that Dempsey had accepted his
recommendation that the next attack should aim to capture the high ground west
of Evrecy. However, Dempsey refused to accept O'Connor's further argument
that the Evrecy operation had to be "preceded by an operation to capture the
high ground about Noyers." O'Connor then explained his proposed preliminary
operation, the tactical reasons behind it, and Dempsey's grounds for rejecting it.
If he undertook the Evrecy operation before the Noyers one, O'Connor insisted,
the former "might possibly be a failure." O'Connor then asked Montgomery to
"consider the matter. "40
Clearly, O'Connor unofficially had referred to Montgomery a disagreement
between him and Dempsey over projected operations that were going to be
carried out not by him but by a third party, Neil Ritchie. Even if one acknowl-
edges that O'Connor knew the terrain better than Ritchie, this seems a strange
state of military affairs! One is led to ponder to what degree Montgomery's
willingness to interfere in Dempsey's handling of his corps commanders
damaged the army commander's authority with these subordinates or encour-
aged them to refer matters direct to Montgomery.
Unfortunately, no written
reply by Montgomery exists in the relevant archives, and one is forced to
surmise that in all probability any response was given verbally and will not now
ever ne known.
