168
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks'
became Operation "Veritable." On 28 November Crerar replied to Montgomery
that it was not "practicable to initiate any such operation at this time."
The
Field Marshal's exasperated response reiterated that this was a long-term plan
that he never intended to carry out in the immediate future.?4 With hindsight, it
is hard to comprehend how Crerar could think that Montgomery could order
such all operation to be launched immediately at a time so obviously unsulted
for its undertaking.
his mind, during
Perhaps Crerar had the recent "Market-Garden" scenario in
Which Montgomery-hoping to seize a golden strategic
opportunity to exploit enemy weakness-atypically ordered an operation to
commence despite the existence of an inadequate administrative situation.
However, by late November the theater situation was far different from that of
early September; dismal weather, waterlogged terrain, strained logistics, fragile
morale, and a largely revitalized enemy force all precluded a full-scale army
group offensive. Crerar ought to have recognized that this situation was obvious
to Montgomery.
There also were other examples when Crerar's operational handling of the
First Canadian Army remained weak. John English criticized Crerar's failure to
intervene directly in the conduct of "Totalize."
In contrast, in mid-June
Dempsey intervened decisively to shift the axis of advance of the 7th Armored
Division toward Villers Bocage in order to exploit a weak spot in the German
front. Crerar erred in not overruling Simonds' understandably cautious decision
to wait for the second bombing run despite the swifter-than-expected success of
the first phase of "Totalize." It was not surprising that Crerar failed to recognize
this decisive moment. He lacked the "fingertip feel" for the battle that a
commander as skillful as Montgomery or Dempsey possessed, and "simply did
not know operationally as much as Simonds." As a result Simonds lacked "the
isual counsel, help, and coercion that might have been received from an arm.
leadquarters," and thus "could not have been more alone."8:
Montgomery felt that although Crerar handled the Seine crossings well, his
conduct of operations during the rapid advance to the Scheldt area in Holland
left much to be desired? It is surprising that during the 1944 45 campaign the
often scathing Montgomery seldom criticized openly the performance of his
aborainate commanders in elther his own contemporary Notes or in his
confidences to Brooke and Simpson. This restraint was due both to the abilities
of these subordinates and to Montgomery's concerns to sustain morale.
contrast, he freely castigated officers in other commands such as SHAEF,
Bomber Command, Allied Armies Italy, and the United States armies. Mont-
gomery did not record in ink any criticism of the commanders involved in the
partly unsuccessful "Market-Garden" offensive, and virtually the only corps
he was dismissed.
commander to receive open criticism during the campaign was Bucknall when
It is, therefore, striking that one of Montgomery's rare criticisms to Brooke
Seine havior subordinates alleged that Cera's operations "since crossing the
Seine have been badly handled and very slow."
This message was written
under the very rare War Office "Guard" security classification, the existence of
which has not been yet brought out in the campaign's literature.
The "Guard"
Crerar and the First Canadian Army
169
classification was reserved for use by only the highest British commanders
relating "messages of far reaching importance or controversial matters which
must never be known to the United States."®& Even the existence of the "Guard"
procedure was never to be disclosed to the Americans! Montgomery used it for
his correspondence with Brooke and Simpson when castigating Eisenhower
during the lengthy dispute on theater strategy and command.?9
As one of very few examples in the campaign of direct criticism made by
Montgomery of his senior subordinates, this comment seems particularly
significant. Paul Dickson has interpreted this particular criticism as the product
of Montgomery and Crear's serious disagreement of 2-3 September 1944. The
Field Marshal clashed with Crerar on the Second after the latter ordered the
Canadian 2nd Infantry and 4th Armored Divisions to halt, the former at Dieppe
to absorb over 1,000 reinforcements.
Crerar ordered the halt even though
Dempsey's forces were over 100 miles ahead of the Canadians and still advanc.
ing.
That evening Montgomery, newly promoted to Field Marshal, became
irritated by Crerar's sluggishness and signaled that both Crerar's armored
divisions should "push forward with all speed" and that he did "not consider
this" a time for any division "to halt for maintenance. "90
An irked Crerar
responded testily that the halt was "quite essential" and that Montgomery could
"be assured that there is no lack of push or rational speed" in the First Canadian
Army."
Crerar pointed out that the narrowness of his front prevented him
deploying more than two divisions abreast, and thus the halt had no real impact
on the Canadian advance.
Yet Crerar misunderstood that his superior actually
had objected to the halting of one of Crerar's armored divisions, not the halt of
the 2nd Infantry Division at Dieppe.
what out of touch with his superior's thinking."
Crerar, again, seems to have been some-
The next day Montgomery summoned Crerar to an operational conference,
but Crerar had already arranged to attend the ceremony honoring the Canadian
casualties of the 1942 Dieppe raid. Through signals error, the fact of Crerar's
absence was not conveyed to Montgomery, who waited in vain for Crerar to
turn up. It seems that Crerar deliberately ensured that no messages preventing
him from attending the ceremony reached him." During a stormy meeting later
that evening, Montgomery indicated with the words "Our ways must part" that
Crerar was to be removed.'S
However, when Crerar stated that he would raise
the matter with higher authority —the Canadian Government and the Joint Chiefs
of Staff -Montgomery precipitously backed down. A few days later the Field
Marshal wrote a sickly note of apology; once again the light had changed from
yellow to red.'
At that moment, Montgomery "would have been happy to
replace Crerar whom he had never wanted as one of his army commanders, but
he was not prepared to risk a political row" in doing so??
The souring of the
relations between the two commanders was probably a combination of these two
disputes, which exacerbated Montgomery's earlier suspicions arising from
Canadian failures in the hot August days in Normandy?8
One cannot be certain whether the interpretation of Dickson, whose work
appears favorably disposed toward Crerar, is correct. However, these disagree-
ments, for which both commanders must accept some responsibility, made
