28
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
vital?3 In particular, this meant making every possible effort to get supplies of
hot food and drink forward to the frontline troops.
Montgomery's technique
aimed to ameliorate the terrible demands that combat placed on soldiers as far as
possible given the operational situation.
Montgomery asserted that if British
commanders combined these elements with repeated success, it was possible to
create and sustain a high state of morale among the troops.
When the British
army managed to integrate good morale with a marked numerical advantage in
matériel, its troops could take on the
best troops of the Wehrmacht,
and
consistently defeat them.
THE MORALE OF THE 21ST ARMY GROUP
Having elucidated Montgomery's great concern with the maintenance of
morale, this study now examines the morale of the forces fielded by the 21st
Army Group during the campaign.
Space limitations preclude a definitive
exploration of the morale aspects of the 21st Army Group experience during
1944.49
This section merely demonstrates that serious morale problems
existed within Montgomery's command during this campaign, but that (despite
this) his forces advanced into Germany with their morale still intact.
There is
evidence that in the 1939-45 War, the morale of the British army remained
fragile relative to the typically high, and surprisingly resilient, morale of the
German army.
This applied equally well to the 21st Army Group against the
Westheer. Indeed, a recent study of the campaign concluded that Montgomery
fought it "with a much more "lawed weapon' in his hand than has been real-
That this was so is not surprising, when one considers that the 1939-45
British army was characterized by the following features: It was a mass-
conscripted civilian army, based on a very small peacetime cadre; many of its
regular officers possessed Empire-wide experiences of peacetime soldiering and
training that scarcely prepared them for a major, technologically advanced,
European war; its soldiers came from a society that lacked a particularly strong
martial tradition; and last, many of its personnel lacked the almost suicidal
fanaticism that characterized sizable numbers of the German armed forces,
largely because British personnel lived in a political, economic, and sociocul-
tural context that did little, if anything, to foster such sacrificial fanaticism.35
Most of these characteristics also applied to the 1939-45 Canadian army, but
perhaps in even more extreme forms.
The
Tanatical
resistance
offered by substantial elements within
the
Wehrmacht during 1943-45 was engendered by the combined and cumulative
impacts of Nazi ideology, a decade of indoctrination, previous paramilitary
experience and training, a stronger martial tradition, increasingly harsh military
discipline, and the desperation bred by the imminent prospect of Götterdäm-
merung —unconditional surrender, utter defeat, and inevitable Allied retribution
for the Nazi regime's terrible crimes. The combination of this fanaticism with
sheer professionalism and success at "institutionalizing military excellence"
made the German army the most formidable of foes.??
This may be "an
The Maintenance of Morale
29
unpalatable truth" given the "odiousness" of their cause "in fighting for one of
the most obnoxious regimes of all time," but it nevertheless remains a clear
fact.?'
Despite this general high standard, however, historians must also
acknowledge that the
Wehrmacht encompassed a curious mix
across the
spectrum of performance from excellence to ineptitude.10
Within the ranks of
the Allied armies, it is clear that not inconsiderable numbers of soldiers
performed acts of "suicidal" courage.4l
In general, however, although British
soldiers certainly "could be relied on to do their duty" and daily to risk their
lives, their commanders could not expect them to meet the sacrificial, superhu-
man, efforts German officers frequently demanded of their troops.
Put simply,
British and Canadian troops in Northwest Europe were not fighting to avert the
immediate prospect of utter defeat, and thus could afford the
"luxury" of
wanting "very much to get home alive.
On D-Day itself, the British and Canadian troops clearly possessed "very
high" morale. 43 This pattern generally was repeated when fresh, even inexperi-
enced, formations initially joined combat in the theater. To some "green" troops
the "Overlord" assault came as a relief as they finally commenced the monu-
mental task for which they had trained so long and hard. However, during the
first three weeks of bitter fighting in Normandy, the fighting edge of the 21st
Army Group became blunted. Evidence for this blunting comes from the fact
that by the end of June all the Anglo-Canadian Corps ashore had established
Battle Exhaustion Centers.44 The cumulative degradation of the fighting power
of this formation continued as the desperate struggle for Normandy raged on. 45
Indeed, the bitter realities of fighting in Normandy proved a shock to many;
even to Montgomery they were, if not a complete surprise, then at least an
undesired and unexpected reminder of the horrible truths learned by bitter
experience in North Africa and Italy.
The blunting of this well-conditioned weapon was the result of a combina-
tion of the natural degradation inherent in bitter combat and of features unique
to the Normandy battles. In terms of the latter, the aggregation of the following
factors caused this morale degradation: The constant hard fighting and the
limited British opportunities to remove frontline divisions for rest or to absorb
replacements; the determined and skilled resistance offered by the Westheer; the
defensibility of the bocage terrain; the frequency of enemy harassing fire,
mortar attack, and sniper action; the marked superiority of enemy armor; the
lack of successful Allied advances; the frequency of local Allied reverses that
compelled troops to incur further casualties by reattacking objectives they had
gained previously but subsequently lost to enemy counterattack;*7 above all, the
steady stream of casualties, that destroyed British small group cohesion; and
particularly the severe casualties suffered among officers, that wrecked the
effective function of units.
All these served to exacerbate the inevitable,
cumulative sapping of Allied physical and mental strength caused by lack of
sleep, physical hardship, and the trauma of combat. 48 The combination of these
factors took a serious toll on the morale fabric of Montgomery's command.
Indeed, by mid-July, after six weeks of intense fighting, serious morale prob-
lems began to manifest themselves in several 21st Army Group divisions."*
