Acknowledgments
The author would like to express his gratitude to the following for their help in
the process of bringing this book to completion. To the staffs of the following
institutions I owe a debt of gratitude for their assistance: to Patricia Methven
and Kate O'Brien at the Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives, King's
College, London; to the staffs of the Public Record Office, the Churchill College
Cambridge Archive, and the Imperial War Museum; to Major Bob Caldwell and
the staff of the Directorate of History, Canadian National Defense Headquarters,
Ottawa; to the staff of the National Archives of Canada, Ottawa; and last, to the
helpful staff at the Central Library, the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst.
I am indebted to the following for their comments and suggestions on this
work: Professor Michael Dockrill, Lieutenant-Colonel Dr. John English, Profes-
sor David French, Allison Gough, Professor Dominick Graham, Dr. Tim Harri-
son Place, Dr. Russell Hart, Gary Huckle, Dr. Matthew Hughes, Dr. Chris
Mann, Dr. Tim Moreman, Chris Packham, John Peaty, Professor Ed Spiers, and
my colleagues at the Department of War Studies, the Royal Military Academy
Sandhurst. For their help with the maps and final layouts, I must thank Dr. Niall
Barr, Keith Chaffer, and Aryk Nusbacher.
My parents and sister have all been
generous in their support. I am grateful also for the help and cooperation of
Lieutenant-General W. A. B. Anderson, Brigadier G. E. Beament, and Major-
General N. Elliot Rodger who kindly agreed to be interviewed.
I would like to state my appreciation for the financial support awarded me
by the Economic and Social Research Council, without which this work would
not have been possible, and also that by the Department of War Studies, King's
College London.
I also owe a vital debt of gratitude to the sagacious comments and advice of
Dr. Brian Holden Reid of the War Studies Department, King's College London.
Dr. Heather Ruland Staines, Nicole Cournoyer and the staff at Praeger also
merit my gratitude for their patience and professionalism.
Notwithstanding all
