80
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
commanding the Eighth Army in North Africa and Italy, argued persistently
with the War Office over the correct organization of the armored division, as
well as the related distinctions between the infantry/cruiser tank and the
armored/tank brigade.'
The policy of the 21st Army Group in Northwest
Europe denied any such distinction, in contradiction to the War Office position.
Though historians justifiably might reproach Montgomery for the vitriolic and
vain manner in which he debated these issues, they ought also to display some
sympathy with the resentment of didactic field commanders to the doctrinal
instructions issued by War Office "arms" Directors, some of whom possessed
less recent combat experience than those in the field?
Despite these disagreements, a broadly similar school of operational thought
had emerged by 1944, originating after Dunkirk via the experiences of El
Alamein and the desert. An important source in the development of this
common doctrinal approach was the didactic Montgomery.
Montgomery's
military
policies, though progressive in
their professionalism, remained
grounded in the conservative bedrock of British military thought of the 1916-39
period.®
The foundations of Montgomery's orthodox approach, based on
traditional gunner methods, had been formed as early as his Western Front
experiences of 1917-18? As commander of Southeastern District in 1942, he
imparted his operational policies to the Canadian Corps, and he developed
further his methods in North Africa!" His high profile in doctrinal development
resulted not just from the unrivaled success of his recent combat experience but
also from the support of General Brooke, the CIGS. Back in England during
spring 1944, Montgomery outlined his technique to his new army group
command, while in Italy his former subordinate Oliver Leese continued to
utilize the Montgomery method in its author's absence."
It was not surprising that the operational technique utilized by the 21st Army
Group in Northwest
Europe mirrored
Montgomery's
methods, given the
following: Montgomery's professionalism, dogmatic opinions, didacticism, and
his successful field experience; his good relations with the CIGS; his desire to
impose his will on the 21st Army Group; and last, his appointment of trusted
former Eighth Army subordinates to many of the army group's senior staff
positions.
Consequently, Montgomery made the most important individual
contribution to the manner in which the 21st Army Group conducted this
campaign.
Montgomery's contribution, however, reflected just one of several impulses
on the way in which the 21st Army Group conducted the campaign.
Conse-
quently, historians must assess his participation in the context of the institutional
framework of the army group; his influence interacted with the contributions of
other institutions, including his army group staff and his two subordinate armies.
Nevertheless, Montgomery was not a typical army group commander and his
influence on the 21st Army Group was more significant than other such
commanders, like Alexander in North Africa. His determination to disseminate
his undoubted experience to those serving under him in the 21st Army Group
led him sometimes to "overcontrol" subordinates -particularly, to give tactical
instructions direct to officers beyond his immediate subordinates in the chain of
81
The Set-Piece Battle
command. Consequently, though historians must analyze the contribution that
Montgomery made to the conduct of this campaign within the wider context of
this formation's senior command framework, his own policies nevertheless
pervaded the 21st Army Group.
METHODOLOGY FOR ANALYZING MONTGOMERY'S
OPERATIONAL APPROACH
This study now analyzes Montgomery's operational methods by using two
approaches.
The first examines what Montgomery wrote or said about opera-
tional technique by utilizing three types of evidence —his contemporary verbal
discussions, the instructional pamphlets he wrote during and immediately after
the war, and his postwar published works!? This analysis considers whether
Montgomery was consistent in what he said or wrote on operational method.
The second approach analyzes the operational actions that the Field Marshal
ordered to be undertaken in Northwest Europe.
This material includes his
directives to his subordinate army commanders, his discussions with senior
officers, his memoranda, messages, and telegrams.
This analysis investigates
whether Montgomery's operational conduct of the campaign remained consis-
tent with his thoughts on operational technique: Did the circumstances of the
campaign allow Montgomery to utilize his usual approaches, or was he forced to
modify these policies?
An analysis comparing what Montgomery said or wrote about operational
technique with what he did in the field is dogged by methodological problems.
Much of what Montgomery said was misleading and needs careful interpreta-
tion. Many of the Field Marshal's buoyant speeches and optimistic reports were
rhetorical public relations exercises designed to keep up the morale of his troops
and also maintain his reputation; these two were complementary because, as
Montgomery recognized, his troops needed complete faith in their commander-
in-chief if they were to possess high morale.!* Interwoven with this feature was
Montgomery's exaggeration of his own achievements in order to avoid sharing
"the slightest sliver of glory" with his colleagues.!s
Shabby examples of
Montgomery's sordid glory-grabbing include his grasping of the media limelight
both for the 1943 Allied victory in Tunisia, and the American repulse of the
German December 1944 Ardennes counteroffensive.!6
This rhetoric and
exaggeration create methodological problems for historians attempting to
analyze Montgomery's statements.
Another problem with interpreting the Field Marshal's stated intentions was
that he sometimes mislead his colleagues -Eisenhower especially — about these
alms.
In order to receive greater air support from SHAEF for Operation
"Goodwood," VIII Corps' armored thrust that sought to outflank Caen from the
east, Montgomery deliberately exaggerated to Eisenhower his expectation that
the operation would achieve a decisive breakthrough.
Dempsey admitted to
Liddell Hart the "confidentia" fact it " misunderstanding" over Montgomery's
true intentions during the "Goodwood" offensive was "increased because of
Monty's reticence to Ike." Nor was this deception uncommon, for according to
