14.01
Montgomery and "Colossal Cracks"
superior that he had selected the Caumont sector for this operation: Dempsey
alone made this significant decision.
In contrast, moreover, to the evidence
that Montgomery often bypassed Dempsey, the Second Army commander's
diary reveals that he was actively involved in the daily business of supervising
his corps commanders.
Dempsey's diary indicates that he remained in very
frequent contact with his corps commanders, usually twice daily in Normandy,
and that in most cases Montgomery was not present at these meetings.
Quite
correctly, Dempsey was in contact with his corps commanders far more
frequently than he was with Montgomery.
This diary also shows that he was
intimately involved with the corps commander's planning of operations;
therefore, cases like Operation "Dreadnought," where the Field Marshal and
O'Connor seem to have marginalized Dempsey, constituted the exception rather
than the rule.53
The picture of Dempsey being circumvented frequently also sits uneasily
with the fact that Dempsey was clearly a competent army commander who often
displayed "fingertip feel" over his battles. It is an army commander's privilege,
if not duty, to intervene in his corps commander's battle if he thinks that the
latter has missed a tactical opportunity. Where this stopped being appropriate
intervention and became
"overcontrol" of subordinates is a moot point.
Dempsey displayed the authority and keen grasp of the operational situation not
only to intervene when he felt this necessary, but to do so without prior
reference to Montgomery. On 12 June 1944, for example, Dempsey intervened
crucially to shift the weight of Major-General Erskine's 7th Armored Division to
the west prior to their advance on Villes Bocage, in order to take advantage of a
thin point in the German front. In 1946, Dempsey recounted how he "went to
see Erskine - gave him his orders and told him to get moving and that I would
tell the corps comman]d[e]r what he was doing."54 Thus, Dempsey also
bypassed his subordinate corps commanders to deal direct with divisional
commanders. This crucial intervention permitted the strategically significant
British advance to Villers Bocage -a beneficial development sadly marred by
the débâcle of the forced retreat inflicted by Michael Wittman's Tiger tanks.
In Normandy, the close control that Dempsey exercised over his corps
commanders during the break-in phase of operations, particularly with regard to
the deployment of reserves, further demonstrated his "fingertip feel." This
suggests that Montgomery's bypassing of Dempsey was limited in both fre-
quency and in context. Dempsey, for instance, moved his Tactical Headquarters
up to that of O'Connor during Operation "Goodwood," in order "to control" the
operation if the enemy collapsed as expected.55
If enemy resistance had
disintegrated, Dempsey wished "to be forward" so that he "could take over and
direct the exploitation."s This was not the behavior of an army commander
who was routinely circumvented. Similarly, in "Bluecoat," Dempsey situated
his Tactical Headquarters less than a mile away from the Tactical Headquarters
of the two corps involved in the operation.
Presumably, the purpose of this
move was to help Dempsey exert a firm grip on his subordinate commanders.
Furthermore, it is significant that Dempsey's Tactical Headquarters were located
further forward than those of Lieutenant-General Hodges, the commander of the
Dempsey and the Second (British) Army
141
First United States Army after Bradley had been promoted to army group
command.58
Finally, during Operation "Charnwood," Dempsey only permitted
his subordinate corps commander, John Crocker, to pass his reserves, the 3rd
(British) Division's rear brigade plus the 33rd Armored Brigade, through his
left-hand assault forces after receiving Dempsey's express permission. Clearly,
Dempsey often gripped firmly his subordinates.
Dempsey's close control of the break-in phase of offensives also reflected his
general policy of keeping reserves under his own army control instead of
releasing them to corps commands.
On 11 June 1944 Dempsey received
indications that German armor was preparing to attack the vulnerable eastern
flank of the bridgehead from where the panzers could roll up the entire Allied
lodgment area. Dempsey ordered Crocker to place all his armored reserves on
the dominating high ground at Colomby-sur-Thaon -terrain so critical that
Dempsey called it "the heart of the British Empire." The army commander
instructed Crocker "not to move his armor from it except on orders from me. "60
Similarly, on 30 June 1944, Dempsey informed Bucknall, the commander of the
XXX Corps, that while Bucknall's reserve division would remain under his
corps command, he would "position it at Bayeaux and not move it without"
Dempsey's authority 61 Once again, in the midst of the crisis during "Market-
Garden," when German forces had cut the axis of advance of the XXX Corps,
Dempsey instructed Ritchie's XII Corps to place a brigade group at Zon that
could not be moved "without orders from me. "62 Brigadier Pyman, the Second
Army's Chief of Staff, was much impressed by Dempsey's determination
personally to control these reserves, and his resistance to the repeated pleas of
corps commanders to have them released to their own control.63
When the
evidence presented here is considered as a whole, it is clear that Dempsey was a
competent army commander who gripped his subordinates during break-in
operations and who possessed sufficient confidence to intervene directly in the
corps battle. This side of Dempsey is hard to reconcile with his image as a mere
cipher of Montgomery.
Analyzing Montgomery's opinion of Dempsey provides evidence that sup-
ports both seemingly contradictory views of Dempsey's role in this campaign.
Montgomery respected and trusted Dempsey's ability, as indicated by the
smoothness of their working relationship both in Italy and in Northwest Europe.
Montgomery told Oliver Leese on 24 July 1944 that Dempsey was a "first class"
army commander, and in 1969 he told the historian Ronald Lewin that Dempsey
could "always be relied on. "64
Montgomery's favorable opinion of Dempsey,
however, resulted in part from the latter's compliant acceptance and stoic
tolerance of his superior's interference.
The clearest operational manifestation
of the trust Montgomery placed in his subordinate was his deliberate delaying of
the date at which Crerar's First Canadian Army became operational in Nor-
mandy. Rather than have troops serve under the suspect generalship of Crerar,
Montgomery preferred to permit Dempsey to control as many as five corps; a
heavy burden-even with Montgomery's nursing grip-for an accomplished
army commander.
