pg_0016.pdf:
Two mins bofore the ond of a halt a DR will bo cont down tho
coln to givo ordore
for the romoval of omouflago note and/or uncovering of windreroons, and for personnol
to close en
thoir voha.
16. At all halts gp sonda nro romonsiblo for ordoring ground ond AA protection. Won
a coln is holtod for ton mina or longor AALMo will bo mountod on tho ground.
DISPERSAL.
Bn is rosponsible for mnning its Die I and for ito ovn movemont from the Die P.
Dia P vill bo cign boardod, o.5.
"Dio I 100 yde choud. "
SPEED AND DUNSITY.
18. (a) Normal donsity will bo i-
Day 30 vin.
Night 40 vtra.
NOTB: Dvre will be briofed that 30 vtm = 60 yas botween veno.
(b) Normal speeds will be :-
Day
25
mi2h.
Night 18
ni2h.
In the event of vohs in a coln losing distance thay will rogain thoir corroct spncing
as soon as posablo.
In no circunstancos,
hovever, will they excood the mximum spood
leid down for tha voh.
VEH LIGHTING.
20. The following degroon of lighting my be ordered; -
headlights and toil-lights.
Sidolights and axle lighting.
(c)) Minimum
axlo lighting only.
In all cases
loading vohs of gps will carry sidelights and ronr vohs will carry
tail-lights.
Lighting will alwys bo'Norml" unlons othorviao onlorod.
IT'S OPHER THAN VEHS.
(a) No naked lights will bo shorm.
Torchoo will bo dimmed.
Dashboard lighte and internal lights in vohs will be screened.
Driving mirrors vill bo dofloctod to the ground at night.
FROFBCTIOV CN THE MOVE.
(a) Brons will invariably bo mountod in all to carrying vehs and continuously minnod
throughout a move.
(b) In the ovont of onomy nir attack colns will normally continue thair novement.
the evont of direct attack on my part of the coln the cond will ordor his coln to stop and
engage
Woapons mounted for ration on the move will engage all low flying
chery circraft within range.
Overicking is forbidden oxcept whon ordored by tho fm or unit ordoring the novo. No
gp of vohe will pass another go of vohs which is haltod on tho routo unless
thoir halt pormits it.
Singlo vohs which have lost thoir placo owing to temporary break-
down my only catch up during tho 10 min and long halte.
Broken down vohs will clear or bo pushed cler of the route.
Recovery will trice pince
no soon as it is possible without interforing with noverent on the routo.
25. Durs and their mtos vill nevor unole when in vehs, Others travelling in vohs my
only smoke with the pernicsion of the coln cord.
Bapt and
stool holmats will bo worn by all runke.
All oonds of unit or sub unit goa will have their aunopy openod when this ia posciblo
so that thoy con stand up on the novo in tho front of tho voh.
In fino wonther n1l voh covors will bo opened or rollod bao!: to onuble dvris maton to
stand up.
Thoy will do do fron tiro to time to obsorvo the movorent of othor vohs in tho
MARKING OF VEHS.
Front and roar vohs of units,
sub-units and gos of frn HQs will bo rurkod on tho
offrido by day with flags and by night with lamps no follows:-

