pg_0017.pdf:
FRONT
REAR
BLUE
-
GREEN,
29, Whon to carrying vohs are in use the sorial number of the unit orrid will bo
chalkod are me blocl: portion of the serial nunber plate.
When units debus the chali:
number wil be rubbed out.
PICQUETTING.
30:
When the bn is onllod upon to picquet a route either for itzolf or for tho Bae the
following procadure will bo followed (unleas specially stated othorieo) .
31. Bn HQ will dotail a sub unit (oithor Coy or T1) to do tho picquotting.
32. The piaquotting sub unit will nove off in its place in the mirch tablo.
33.
Thore will be at louct one and if possible two offra in the louding truck.
vill bo responsiblo that tho corroct routo is follovod and thet picquots ur dropped at
appropriato points.
34.
Bn HO tall doteil tho roquisito numbor of 3 tonnore to move at the toil of the unit
or frn for whon tho
routo in boing pioquottod.
Picquotting sub unit vill dotail a full
ranl: NCO to novo in
thoso 3 tonnors.
Hie romonsibility will be
to pick up all the
picquets when thoir job is corplotod.
35. Picqueto vill always lo proporly drossod an ordorod, ma vill HAVE HOLD of thoir
arms.
Unloco othorico ordorod ploquote vill bo postod in pairs.
36. Picquots will NEVER louve the placo thoy have boon ported for ony ronson whatsovor,
unloes thoy have indo ndoquato arcongononta for tho dircotion of trific in their absonco.
37. Picquote rust be groful at night Kor to drezlo dres with thoir torchos.
38.
Following tro gon pta bout the pouting of picquote.
(a)) Picquote nro vluablo fighting ron and will NOr be postod whore NOT necossary.
(b) Whon thoro jo NO plaquet troffic will follow tho trin ra.
(c)
thoro le no ploquet at a * rde truffic will go etright across.
(a) Piequoto mat alvya bo put at any juno thoro the route loavos the min ra or
artery.
39. Motor ayoliata viil givo nil possiblo nosistanco.
Tho following v111 be tho bn drill for orbusing:-
(a) TO will mai in white chalk all vehe which aro to bo uned for tw carrying with
the coy to whách thoy are nilottod. Ho will then set the veho out by coys.
(b). At a tino to bo ordorod by Bi HQ ouch doy will sond a full rank NCO guido to.
under the TO, the embussing area.
roCCo, o) doya vill divida thor personnol into veh loda before reaching the embussing
(a) Guides reterrod to in sub para (b) above will guide the coys to their vehs.
(e) They will embus on ordere Coy Condo.
41.
(a) When bn is embuasing on plutforn system drill will be as above except that sub
paras (b) & (a) will. not apply and sub-para
(a) is particularly important.
(b) T.O. is rosponsible that ty carrying voha arrive at ombussing pt in correct
order.
pt 500 yda beforo the dobussing pt.
(b)) A vign "DEBUSSING PT" will be put up at the debussing pt.
(c), The utmost spood in dobussing is most inportant when debussing is on the platform
system.
Field,
14 Aug 44.
DISTRIBUTION.
Riflo Coys.
Sp Coy
HQ Coy
Comd
2
IC
Cond. 6-Bn. The Groen Howards.
No, of Copios.
each
No. of Copios,
6
OM.
FS M.
69 Inf Bde
War Diary
Filo

