NoTE B.- See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
PARA. 2.
-A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
rganisation and administration.
on A a diary Wil be entered ud thay, cach traction ail reten the officer detailed to keep it,
at le exuacuon and retention or appendices. mans. er
war diary is an offence under the Otheal Secrets Act:
" should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
ed in para. 1, not the omcer ne detals to do the clerical work.
lould be recorded when
s, messages or despatches received and issued.
ring them of formations anours and present dispositions.
n branch of the ctaff
PILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174)
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
ay of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
unportant onases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
ubordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
officers and the number of other ranks or
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
uments sec. sol and
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
id his representatives
ay, war duties will be
PArA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or reterence.
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
operations turnis ed sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account on
luvereu, and each will have a brief doe
saly Vala. 4. 1v above)
Appendices will be
o appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118
criptive heading naming the author. References
iv) Copies or important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations
hey should be which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
see F.S.R., Volume II)
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
"i) Unlovather is ordered, the of the copy ding war dia cy for the pre oding me chal.
direct to the officer i
be charded on the irit day to the sur eding mont, i tact to the offices appendices
are attached.
SPECIAL NOTE
he uni
e time entered should be the
me of the event recorded should also be formation be ot, er end
Army Forms
2118.
39 COY RASC (Gen Ipt)
Commanding Officer Mad•l.J • 5. Colley, RASC
Month and Year.
August 1944
1001
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Stan him int Fee 360 18% -
Strength 10 Offrs 370 OR's.
A not y nd and not rout cos coupetition
Transhipment Figures - 120 vehs - 1659 tons.
Strength 10 offrs 370 OP's.
Raining until 1000 hrs, remainder of the day
fine and warm. Franshipment of stores held up by heavy swell at sea.
Pte. acDonald IJ., Dur Driver DJ., joined Coy and TOS.
Dvr Jensen R
sionate Leave.
Rather noisy night.
Tt Not 1 pen 3he una store
ant Trian Brell.
80 vens
Strength 10 Offrs 372 OR'S.
Strength 10 Offrs 372 OR's.
ground mist..
rayed 51 0034.
Dve Cain I admitted to Field Punishment Camp
Ted to ot tament do and see and
23C (Con T)
Simnonds CR
an to to condition
hospital
and SOS.
Turner)
posted to unit from 706 Coy RASC (Gen Tpt)
and TOS.
Strength 10 Offrs 371 OR's.
Transhipment figures - 73 vehs - 658 tons.
Fine day. Strength 10 Offrs 371 OR's.
Vt.47724998 2,000,000 8/48 W. H. & S.
WAR DIARII
4- SEP 1944 S
G.H. Q. 2nd ECHELS
he Infor
ments har
Ik Order are guara
ed, or they may h
1onuos
wished:
