NoTE B.-Sce also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
Nore C.--Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary
should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, thi
ough the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.1),
The War Office, London, S.W.l
PARA, 2.
-A war diary is Secret.,
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
nd to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment
rganisation and administration
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
lations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factual experience
in regard to weapons, equiy
oneration WhIch
may be
of benefit for sh
on AT C. i. i is contend up thai each tray mande en the of appeale to keep it,
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
it other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARa. 4. -In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
() And deit osters, instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and issued,
1) Day ation the ements during the at torenty fou are or sid prese
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
LATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
y of mobilisation or
subordinate command
mportant phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks of
and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
tments (Sec. 36), and
viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
ccur or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added
d his representauves.
ly, war duties will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
ie order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
fili) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para, 4, v above)
sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118
(iv) Copies of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
ey should be included
which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
ARA. 6.-All diaries will contorm to the regulations for drafting orders, reports. eti
See F.S.R., Volume II)
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the pre odice me thi!
forwarded on the miss day to the sar office, mat
• heino taken that all 1is apoenaic
SPECIAL NOTE. —The time entered should be the time the information or order
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if ki
Haddington
do.
do.
do.
10A..
do.
do.
do.
Month and Year.Feba...y4-o
Date
our
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete headig not reyere"
summary of Events and Information
17
23
25.
26.
27.
27.
Lieut.A. I. Chard proceeded on leave...
T.E.V.T. No.1 see 0.0.No.1.
Capt. 3. 0. Braden returned fron leave..
Exercise 'Roundabout! Y commenced see 0.0.No...
II.A. T. Chard returned from lente.
It. B., James and It.V.O.Kay proceeded on le ve.
It.B. l, James proceeded to Nool Civil Affairs L of C Regtl Officers course.
Exeroise 'Roundabout' T ends..
Exercise 'Roundabout' VI starts.
dapt.G.B. Grosthuite proceeded on leave.
5189615 L/Col Nash, e
died in Leith Hospital as a result of injuries
received
Inspection of the Coy. by It-Gol. lapgand. RASC
It.A.V. lames returned from course and leave.
Capt.. C. Dovies proceeded on leete...
Vt.47724, 998 2.000.000 8/48 W. H. & S. 01/00%9
Army Form C.
2118.
Unit.39 Gen.Ipt. Goy., B.A. 3.0.
Commanding Officer Majol.J.E. Cobbey,
References to Appendices
A MAIOR,
Soul ant
NERAL TRANSPORT COY:
/our Bulk Order are gi
requested, or they
ur documen
uire at the
