ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
of mobilisation or
ordinate command
. 36), and personal
is representallyes.
war diaries will be
kept trom the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
i stone i Be quet, hop out whether do, a that diary should t st by a ai
The War Oice, London, S. W.1.
PARA. 2.-A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operation:
nd to nrovide data upon
hich to base future improvements in army training, equipment
organisation and administration.
i will be at to be roil hat he exy ration and reten on or appendices, maps, etc.
noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
or other person mentil be mi pe cleat, that the officer who initials the he dier is the commander
not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-0mittel.
preparing aTy so far as they are applicable, the fallowing points should be recorded when
Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issue‹
ii) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(i) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
1V) Detalled account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
perations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
oncers and the number or other ranks or lolowers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vini) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up,
occur, or come to notice.
not in the order as given above but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. D.- Appendices as uncer will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
outle oruer or misu ueron issuce dure te benod covered ov the current volime of
ve war alary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
or leerchee.
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
ming the author. References
PARA. 6.-All Giaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders. reports. etc.
See FS.R. Volume IT).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
sposal will be made monthly or war alaties as follows :—
ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a cavalry or infanty brigade or higher
SPECIAL NOTE.-
-The time entered should be the time the information or order riches
the unit concerned. The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text. if !
Blair Athol
Paan
Army Form
2118
Instructions regarding War Dinin on a lean A
prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year Maich N4
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Unit 39 Gen Ipt Coy RASC
Commanding Officer.
Maj.H.J.E.Coll
Delete heading not required).
References to A onendices
Summary of Events and Information
It.W.G. Moore(258122) & 20 OR's of 377 Gen Tpt Coy RASC atta to this Unit
for rations and accommodation.
Capt.G.B. Crosthwaite (53375) returned from leave.
2/it.J. Carlton (300561) reported for duty with this Unit. Authy: 31, 47y, GP Ul.21 Army Cp/3856/A/ST a/a
10..
Column Rifle, Bren & ING Competition for Offrs at Dunbar Ranges,
It. W. G.loore(300561) and 20 ORs 377 Gen Ipt Coy RASC ceased to be atta
this Unit w.e.f. 10 Mar 44•
13
17
19
20
21
10800.
her)
Inspec 6101
Coy by Coma 34 I of C Tot Coln RASC
Exercise "ROUNDABOUT VII commenced.
Urgent Memorandum from HQ Lothian &Border District received advising that
the Unit will move from Faddington to Glastullich Vamp, Ross-shire, Scotland.
G. H.Q. 2nd Echalon
Advance Party consisting of 1 Offr & 30 ORs left.
The Coy vacates loch at Haddington for new loch at Glastullich Camp,
Tain, Ross-shire, Scotland.
arrives at Scottish Horse Camp and stages there for the night.
лав
Coy arrives at Glastullich Camp, Tain, Ross-shire, Scotland.
Exercise "LEAPYEAR" commenced.
CAPT. FOR MAJOR,
Exercise
"LEAPYEAR"
O.C. 79 General Transport Coy:
58. Wt.88126/345. 200м. 11/42. Wy.L.P. Gp. 656.
R. A. S. C.
Bulk Order are guar
'sted, or they ma
