NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NoTE C.-Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, thi
The War Office, London, S. rough the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
PARA. 2.-A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data
organisation and administration
tionh to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
It will be entered
daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
AR. C2118
It is
noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTI.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
of other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:-
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(i) Daily locations.
ich tables in the case of large units of of formations
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions
are of assistance
(ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff
TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations
of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
prdinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength
unicers and the
mulber or other
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
s or followers and of animals should be noted
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
- 36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NoTE. — Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
his representatives,
war diaries will be
ParA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009)
of cach fed retin ( sing the per see a l ca operation of
(i1) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer requirec
for reference.
(ii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
numbered, and
h vin the ta bot the diary gathereto, a supplement the accounti
ch will have a brief descriptive headin
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118
aming the author. Reference
(See TA. Van diaries will conform to the regulations for drating orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaties as follows :—
Camp 4.10
Gosport haras
Month and Year.
Hour
0525
1200
1400
2145
0600
the unit concerned
SPECTA. NOT i in tre tout to the ting ho rem in on an e
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Informatior
Unit 39 Coy RASC (Gen Tpt)
MaJoIJ. E.Colley,
Commanding Officer
References to Appendices
Strength 10 Offrs 384 ORS.
OC together with CRASC 21 Tpt Coln RASC visited all pls in their respective
to ascertain the condition of the vehs which had been giving minor
Cond 101 BSA visited Unit HQ
My Serial moved to Gosport Hards for embarkation.
Ordered to embark. Serial embarked and was completed at about 0200 hrs 2 Jun 4.
Pte.Neesham S admitted to
AIRS
and SOS: Strength 10 Offrs and 383 ORs.
It was learnt that Dve Boone JD who was with It. Young's Party at Camp A.4
had gone absent.
Camp
confirmed and 612/15(2) Commanded by
The , Got that'
left for
embarkation
fact
very Junior Offre shoula be appointed as 00 Craft in addition
to nis duures
on that partioular Serial or Craft.
Very Often Junior Offrs find themselves
cormanding craft and Senior Off'rs travelling as passengers.
UVI
were Sole ta have a
well earned rest.
The vehs were run and it was found that several batteries
required charging.
These were charged.
Strength remained
the same
10 Offra gna 383 ORs.
Strongth 10 Offrs and 383 ORS.
W1NT138.000 9,000,000 3/43 W. 11. & S. 51/556
WAR DIARIES SECTIO
15 JUL 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
See Appendix "A".
ТЯАЧ
198
it the in
cuments
Bulk Order are gua
ested, or they ma
