pg_0003.pdf:
-R. The
Staffordshire Yeomonry.
WAR DIARY
June 1944.
6th (contd
Note.
In the encounter with enemy tanks only 2 hits were scored on our tanks and
neither of them was put out of action.
The enemy K.2d. one M.10 S.]. A/Tk. gun.
We destroyed seven and KOd. two enemy tonks all Mc. IV Specials.
Some of which
were wrongly described as Mk. Vi tanks owing to the additional amour plates
fitted.
Our Casualties were lieut. D.F, Alexander and Winter holder Killed.
Troopers. Rowse, Furnivall, Bradbury, Roberts,
and Issott
killed.
Opl. Knight, Tors. Bailey, Samuelson wounded.
pla Ducker,
Tyr. Wright,
@ol. Cowley, L/Opl. Wyatt, Ters.
Sugden and Harkness missing.
7th
[8th.
V
[oth.
Toth.
At first light the rogiment less one Sh. was ordered back to the high ground
North of FERIOR-SUR-LE-DANS and took up
battle positions facing South and South
"A" Sgh. remeined in the area BIEVILLE and throughout the day supported
attacks by 2 Warwicks and 1 Norfolks, on LEBIHY. The enemy appeared to have
reinforced strongly during the previous night and all the attacks were unsuccessful
the infantry suffering heavy casuolties.
The ground to the East of BIEVILLE was unsuitable
for the purpose of the required
support and it was found that there were no possible erossing places of the
natural A/k obstacle between the main axis and the road.
BLAINVILLE - CAEN
185 Bde eventually decided to consolidate North of the obstacle No.1. Tp. "A" sqn.
destroyed a Staff Car in the LE LANDEL area and machine-gunned a party of 10
Germans.
The only survivor surrendered.
They mey have been menning two 105 me
S.E. guns shich were formed intact and which had moved up during the night.
remainder of the Regiment stayed in battle positions all day but although a few
enemy tanks were seen near the Western extremity of the A/k obstacle shortly
before last light they did not advance,
We were shelled intermittently during the day but casualties were. light mounting
to one killed and two wounded.
Casualties.
No tank casualties.
Tersonnel - Trooper Gillingham killed
Cpl. Taylor and Tyr. Webster wounded.
Location unaltered.
Back at first light to Battle positions on It. 61 Rug. we
were machine-gunned as we came out of our leaguer by Focke-Wolfs,
A certain amount of enemy movement was seen around LEBISHY, but itwas
difficult to ascertain any definite trend in direction. An attack by 9th Bde was
discussed down through Gazelle towards ST. CONTEST assisted by the Armd Bde.
A small batch of P.O.W. were brought in by It. Kennedy*s Tp.
"c" Sqn. and
despatched to P.O.W. Coge.
Now discovered Canadians had hardly advanced at all the 1st Day leaving our right
flankcompletely exposed.
Canadians apparently now making good progress South and
a reasonable West to East line established.
Echelon build up now commenced and Hole Longuer formed North of the 6t ridge IN
Fulled back at last light behind the ridge and leagured a short way in front of the
"B" Vehicles. Casualties - Tanks NIL, Personnel Set. Evans "(" Sgn. wounded.
Location unaltered. Beaches again bombed in the night but A. A. defences now very
much stronger.
An intense barrage put up and searchlights in operation. Higher
appreciation still appears to believe a large counter-attack by armour way try to
cut us off from the Canadiens, or in any case try to push round our Div.
flank and secure the high ground on which we are sitting. At first light therefore
we pushed up again to our position on It. 61 ridge.
Little enemy movement
was seen, but the 9th Bde Assisted by E.R.Y. managed to take CAMBES,
went to watch the Battlewith the Brigadier.
Spasmodic shelling but only slight on our own position.
Fulled back into same
leaguer at last light. Casualties Vehicles - NIL,
scat his own
shanged tanks
arri that night.
Location unalterdd. Beaches again bombed in night and attacked by fighter bombers
one small party only who were fortunate in brewing the whole of Sector Stores dump
of ammo and petrol which burnt hard the whole of the morning and caused dense
volumes of black smoke. Apparently the whole of the Petrol and ammo were packed in
one tight area. It was reported that parachutists dropped on FLUMTOT in the
middle of the morning, but this later proved entirely untrue.
Pulled back into
same Leaguer at night. Cas. Vehs.NIL. Capt Manning wounded Tprs.
Smith "CH and
The remainder of that Honey Crew less
Cowell RECCE wounded L/C. Humphreys
L/C. Humphreys the DOL who had been
Recce Killed.
killed returned across country to say that
their tank had been K.0 near DOUVRES.
Capt. Manning went to investigate and was
sniped in the arm.
We later found that the RADAR STATION had never fallen, and
The Honey had driven straight up the main road to within
100 yds of the RADAR STATICN and was K.0. at point blank range.

