pg_0004.pdf:
• 201.90012
to sto du
dabl orit od stoid botabro
gaton
odd 2o onoge
o:1d Ans
•Holtafontado at to resoll odab
t: boyada duont
evin don bit
Do Jitost ni
and britiod. difatt tas
•n: bodhod naga eo foco"
ju dug ogsudad canetat au
a ovotlod of atsonas
VIC 11O
Seasore slam, od ved oaso vie mi so cano:bano ond
Stadovon Veno otta
cogbia lò out no notdreog so ot ni
yd botataal oba deo
Brigenal
WAR DIARI.
lol. ReR. The Staffordshire Yeomenry
Pago, &
11th.
June. 1944.
12th.
13th.
14th.
15th.
Location unaltered.
Ordered to move at Ist Light on 12th to E.R.Y. area at Gazelle
in order
that they could pull back for maintenance, but still remein in
observation on It. 61. ridge.
C.O. and Sqn. Idrs went to make plans for change
over to E. R.Y.
Little enemy movement seen.
We appear to be pounding LEBISBY
both with our guns on shore and from the Naval support ships.
The night bombers caused damage generally in Echelon areas with Anti-personnel
Back into Leaguer at last light.
Vehs.
Several 3 tonners damaged but repairable.
Personnel.
L/Cl. Bullock, Sqna QMS Fointon, Ipr. Randle, Tpr. Gregory,
Reid, Tpr. Batley, and Lieut. Derbyshire wounded.
Location unaltered.
Moved at first light to take over E.R.Y. positions. "A" Sqn.
remained in position at 61. until E.R.Y. relieved them.
"g" Sqn. went on right
"C" Sgn. left and took up positions lonking forward on flanks of CAMBES.
found their observation very restricted by the close country although "B" had a
slight advartege in being on higher ground.
Approx positions "C" - 0375 to 0475
"B" an Square 017) VILLONS-LIS - BUISSONS 0075.
"B" Sqn. made contact with Canadians on right flank whose
infantry now hold
"A" went into reserve and rested
by RHQ whose location was now in a house on the outskirts of GAZHILE location
track and road junction 028759.
Heavy enemy mortaring took place at various times
of the day.
Casuelties were caused, and one of our own infantry carriers carrying
mortars was brewed up just behind our R. H.Q.
Night quite peaceful, but for more
small arms fire to be heard, presumably from CAMBES perimeter defences.
"B" & "C" pulled back into RHQ area and leagured with "A" on Southern outskirts
of GAZELIE at last light.
In "G" Sqne a 75 A.I. hit the top of Sgt. Watson*s tank ricochetted off the
sighting gear and carried away the turrett flap.
Sgt. Watson and Capt. Hitchen
who were standing on the back of the tank were knocked-off and Capt. Hitchens arm
was boken.
The gunner was killed instantaneously by being hit in the head.
Casualties. Vehs.
Killed.
Tor. Billington, QI. VIllanE "C Son wounded.
Capt. Hitchen and Tpr. Rheeder
Location
"A" & "B" Sons. took over at first light and "C" remained
resting.
enemy movements
seen and infantry reported that infantry and tanks
were digging in in
LA BIGUDE 0273-
More
enemy mortaring towards evening and more casualties. Pulled back at last
light to same leaguer area.
Casualties.
Vehs.
NIL.
Personnel.
Lieut. Guerault, Sgt. Warren, Tyr. Stokes wounded,
Tpr. Toder "C" and Tpr, Fryce "Recce" Killed.
Location unaltered. "A" & "C" Sans. out "B" Sgn. resting in same areas as before
Echelon had quite a number of casualties in the night both vehicles and personnel
from A.P. bombs inel. several of vehicles and men arriving in build up which were
still on their way to the Echelon Area from the Beach. A small probing sortie was
tried on the left under the 2 i/o but the leading Honey in the Recce Ty. was
knocked out at close range by an A/ik gun. A mortar stonk followed and the crew
were not seen again. Fulled back to leaguer as
Orders received late
at night to move back to E.P.Y. area at Point 61 ridge, at first light on June 15th
Casualties Veh. 1 Sherman 75 Damaged, 1 Honey K.0.
Location unaltered.
The Honey crew appeared less the D.O.h. who was killed in the
tank. Sgt. Warren the Commander was wounded plus one other and were evacuated, and
the other member was returned to rest in the Echelon.
E.R.Y. Colonel arrived over
at RHQ with 2 Sqns.
We completed the hand over and
moved back complete to Pt. 6t ridge making our new RHQ in the Farmhouse which had
previously been a store behind the strong point "Hillman" at ref. 073768.
Our
Orders were to observe forward as before, but we were now allowed to stand down
1 Sqn. to 30 mins notice and leave onlyt
Troop each from the duty Sqbs actually
in position on the Ridge. Remaining vehicles harboured in the hedgerows round the
farm and camouflaged.
One or two shells landed rather close and in the evening we suffered some casualties
rom the shelling
"B" Ech. roplenished by vehicles from their old area where they
ere now brigade
by a covered route out of sight from
LEBI SHY.
The area was very dirty and left/generally bad state by the few British
units who had used it.
We tried to get it tidier and make poper sanitary
arrangements. Patrols from heavy Sqns. came in at last light and 4 tanks from

