pg_0002.pdf:
300, 19. Д.
ot duo bevoss
1105l guiD ni beinoa oron Lomontes gainiamo
ast O0St da .d au quad ot duo bovott edgal odd to Loctoason -
elson at 01.7
•taos boog a bali enoyseva •sou a
post graciodosal of boogong of des Mos feasonsog A + C bro S ti
nose gailladatin anivaol
in cowa
Janga 2oad door boa T
boltea vilent ol
are he get sono od of beas
pianotaada
brody dosad odd so
•tosa ed of"
tillola othomas g
ra ni: du
oIftovos
"Re The Staffordshiro lemony.
vial
WAR DIARR
June 1944e
6th (conta$
Note.
In the encounter with enemy tanks only 2 hits were scored on our tanks and
neither of them was put out of action.
The enemy K.?d. one M.10 S.I. A/k. gun.
We destroyed seven and K.Od. two enemy tanks all Mc. IV Specials.
were wrongly described as Mk. W tanks owing to the additional amour plates
fitted.
Our Casualties were Lieut. D.F, Alexander and Winter holder Killed.
Troopers.
Furnivall,
Bradbury, Roberts, and Issott
killed.
Opl. Knight, Tors. Boiley,
Samuelson wounded.
Q1. Ducker,
Tyr. Wright,
col. Cowley, L/Ol. Wyatt, Tprs.
Sugden and Harkness missing.
7th
sth.
gth.
2+ .
At first light the regiment less one
Sgh. was ordered back to the high ground
North of FERIOR-SUR-LE-DANS and took up
battle positions
facing South and South
"A" Sqn. remeined in the
area BIEVILLE and throughout the day supported
attacks by 2 Warwicks and I Norfolks,
on LEBISHY.
The enemy appeared to have
reinforced strongly during the previous night and all the attacks were unsuccessful
the infantry suffering heavy casuolties.
natural ATk obstacle between the main axis and the road.
BLAINVILLE - CARN
185 Bde eventually decided to
consolidate North of the obstacle No.l. Ip. "A' Syno
destroyed a Staff Car in the L' L/NDEL area and machine-gunned a party of 10
Germans.
The only survivor surrendered.
They mey have been manning two 105mn
S.l. guns shich were formed intact and which had moved up
remainder of the Regiment stayed in battle positions all day but although a few
enemy tanks were seen near the Western extremity of the ATk obstacle shortly
before last light they did not advance.
We were shelled intermittently during the day but casualties were . Light mounting
to one killed and two wounded.
Casualties.
No tank casualties.
Tersonnel - Trooper Gillingham killed
Cpl. Taylor and Tpr. Webster wounded.
Location unaltered. Back at first light to Battle positions on It. 6t Rug. we
were machine-gunned as we came out of our leaguer by Focke-Wolfs,
but no damage
was done.
A certain amount of enemy movement was seen around LEBISHY, but itwas
difficult to ascertain any definite trend in direction. An attack by 9th Bde was
discussed down through Gazelle towarts ST.
A small batch of P.O.W. were brought in by It. Kennedy*s Tp.
despatched to P.O.W. Cage.
Now discovered Canadians had hardly advanced at all the Ist Day leaving our right
flankcompletely exposed.
a reasonable West to Eest line established.
Echelon build up now cormenced and Hole Longuer formed North of the 6t Fidge IN
the lower ground.
Fulled back at last light behind the ridge and leagured a short way in front of the
"B" Vehicles. Casualties - Tanks NIL,
Personnel Sgt. Evans "(" Sqn. wounded.
Location unaltered.
Beaches again bombed in the night but A. A. defences now very
much stronger.
An intense barrage put up and searchlights in operation. Higher
appreciation still appears to believe a large counter-attack by armour way try to
cut us off from the Canadians, or in any case try to push round our Div.
flank and
secure the high ground on which we are sitting. It first light therefore
we pushed up again to our position on It. 6t ridge.
Little enemy movement
was seen, but the 9th Bde Assisted by E.R.I. managed to take CAMBES,
The C.0.
went to watch the Battlewith the Brigadier.
Spasmodic shelling but only light on our on position.
+ 1.2-1--
na. Fulled back into same
WAR DIARIES SECTION
No.
20-JU2 19444
G. H.Q. 2nd Echolon

