10. How to Hit the Target - Gun Laying
Indirect fire, i.e. when the target cannot be seen
from the gun, is achieved using an auxiliary
aiming mark, but as this mark can be any well-
defined object around the gun, a specialised sight
is needed. Such sights were introduced by the
Royal Artillery at the beginning of the twentieth
century. One of these was Dial Sight No. 7 used
for the 18-pounders in the Great War 1914-
1918. This had one scale for line
laying
(direction to target). Later, during the 1930s, a
second scale was applied in order to make it
easier to apply corrections for the individual gun.
Fig 10-1 Most British guns had up to 1943 a dial sight
of the type Dial Sight No.7 B. A similar improved
version, 'Dial Sight No. 9', was introduced 1943.
1944. This was used long after the war and is shown
here. (RAHT)
This was a 'slipping scale'. The revised version
was called Dial Sight No. 7A, others were Dial
Sight No. 7B and Dial Sight No.
7C. These
were the most commonly used sights for all types
of gun during the Second World War. They were
in 1944 followed by an improved version, the
Dial Sight No. 9. We can see a sight with double
scales for line laying in Fig. 10-1. One of the line
scales was marked (engraved) clockwise and the
other anti-clockwise. The top of the sight could
be released and turned easily towards an aiming
point before locked again, when it was to be
moved/turned by means of graduated scale mi-
crometers, one for each one of the line scales.
The sight top, the upper prism, could be
revolved horizontally 360° and thus directed to any
aiming point around the gun while the layer looked
through the lower telescope part, which always was
directed straight forward. When looking into the
sight the layer could see two engraved cross lines,
which should be laid against the aiming points)
once the ordered direction towards the target had
been applied. This was done by means of the tra-
versing hand wheel. Upon arrival at a new position
all the guns were to have their barrels in parallel in
the ordered direction, the zero line. More about this
in Chapter 11.
The range, i.e. the distance to the target, was
a function of barrel elevation, which in its turn
was dependent on the projectile muzzle velocity
and applied corrections for factors like weather
Conditions, projectile weight etc. Britike uns had
Calibrating Sights, which meant that the range
could be set directly by the lasant that the range
was engraved, as far as the 25-pounder Was
concerned, on a cone being part of the sight
carrier. A fixed reader arm with markers for
different charges was used. These could also be
adjusted to make allowance for decreasing
muzzle velocity. By means of the range indicator
wheel the cone was moved till the ordered range
was set against the marker. Then the barrel wa:
brought into the correct position by means of the
elevation hand wheel and a Sight Clinometer
water bubble, which and a Sight Clino level
position (Fig. 10-2).
1141
HOW TO HIT THE TARGET - GUN LAYING
Fig. 10-2 On the 25-pdr, range was set by means of
wheels affecting the unique range cone/drum seen
here. The cone has engraved lines for different
ranges. Markers for each Charge were on the ruler
beyond the cone. Lower ruler is engraved with muzzle
velocity scale (Author's collection)
If there was a difference in height between
the gun and the target, an angle of sight corre-
sponding to this difference must be taking into
account when laying the gun (Fig. 10-3).
Fig. 10-4 Sight Clinometer with spirit (bubble) level
for adjusting the elevation with the angle of sight to
be set by means of a separate scale (Author's
collection)
For other guns such as the modern medium
guns, the same types of dial sight were used but
the range laying was made by means of readers
set against engraved range scales on a vertical
plate. The readers, one for each charge could be
moved to compensate for changes in muzzle
velocity. Once the reader had been set against the
range scale the barrel was brought into right
elevation by means of the clinometer's water
bubble, which was to be level when the laying
had been completed. See the arrangement for a
5.5-inch gun-howitzer in Fig. 10-6.
Fig. 10-3 The geodetic relation between firing units
and targets must be determined in three dimensions.
This implied that the gun elevation must be corrected
with the angle of sight if the height difference is sig-
nificant. If not, the shell will fall short of the target as
illustrated here (Author)
The Sight Clinometer is shown in Fig. 10-4.
We can see that the trajectory must be raised
a little in order to get projectile impact at the
correct place. This was called a non-rigidity cor-
rection. The magnitude was found in the 'Range
Tables and the correction was set on the Sight
Clinometer' by which the elevation, and thus the
range, was adjusted to bring the projectile to
touch ground at the right place.
We may in this context observe that the layer
of a 25-pounder operated both the traversing hand
wheel and the elevation hand wheel (Fig. 10-5).
Fig. 10-5 Laying of a 25-pdr. This was done by the
layer who operated both the traversing hand wheel
and the range (elevating) wheel. The dial siaht is set
on the line bearing and the range on the cone/drum
usina the charae marker (AWM No 041054)
115
