GUNFIRE
Major General Hetman
Jack Parnam
CB. CBE. DSO
General Sir Sidney
Chevalier Kirkman
GCB. KBE. MC
Lieutenant Colonel.
Professor John T. Whetton
OBE. DSO. MC. TD
Lieutenant (later Captain)
Sidnev Beck
Lieutenant (later Major
Douglas Goddard
MBE FCIS
Lieutenant
(later Major General)
Tony A. Richardson
CB, MBE
Lieutenant (later Captain)
Peter Wilkinson
We have in this book met a few good repre-
sentatives of this kind of professionals. One was
Sidney Beck
who
landed on D-Day
Normandy
with his
SP
regiment. 86 Field
Regiment RA. I have with the kind permission of
his son, Benjamin Beck, taken several quotations
from his distinguished personal war diarv. After
the war, Sidney Beck left the Army and returned
to his civilian life as a civil servant, first as a
Customs Officer, later as Economist in various
governmental authorities. His last position was as
Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration
(the Parliamentary Ombudsman). He died at the
age of 82 years in 1998
An ex-subaltern who has given me invalu-
able help was Douglas Goddard who served as
Gun Position Officer with 112 Field Regiment
RA during the campaign in North-West Europe.
His
regiment
played as we have seen an
important role in the battle of Normandy and
When the remnants of 1 Airborne Division were
rescued back over river Rhine in September
1944. He continued as a rechine in septembe
war until 1957 when he left the Army with the
rank of Major. He held thereafter many distin-
guished positions in the industry and was also
entrusted with important community posts
H.M. the Queen demonstrated her appreciation
of Goddard's distinguished services by appoint-
ing him Member of the Order of the British
359
GUNNERS WE HAVE MET
Empire (MBE). Douglas Goddard died at the
age of 91 on 11 December 2011.
Another distinguished and skilled representa-
tive of the ex-subalterns is lony Richardson who
served with 147 Field Regiment RHA, a SP
regiment. He too assisted in the evacuation of the
'Ked Berets', the 1st Airborne Division, at Arnhem
He stayed on in the Army after the war, eventually
reaching the rank of Major General as commander
of British Army Air Corps'. With his kind permis-
sion, I have availed myself of several of his articles
on military subjects. General Richardson died at
the age of 92 on 26 March 2015.
A young officer who experienced the fierce
battle of Arnhem on site was Peter Wilkinson. He
served there as 'Battery Command Post Officer
of 3 Battery of 1 Airlanding Light Regiment RA.
After having taking part in the battles both in
North Africa and Italy he was an experienced
airborne officer' long before being landed at
Arnhem. He was awarded the Military Cross in
recognition of his service in Italy. Having
returned from Arnhem with the remnants of the
Ist Airborne Division, he was promoted Captain
and made Troop Commander. In this capacity
he took part in the disarming and repatriation of
German forces in Norway in 1945. His final as-
signment was as an AOP pilot in Germany
before being demobilised in 1946. He then
served as economist and chartered accountant
over the years before assuming the position as
Managing Director of Anglia Building Society. I
had the privilege of translating and publishing
his excellent book, The Gunners at Arnhem, in
Sweden in 2004.*
Two ex-subalterns who have published
detailed accounts of the roles played by thei
regiments during the war are G.W. Robertson
and Robert Woolacott. The former served with
136 Field Regiment RA and took part in the
Burma campaign. His book, The Rose & The
Arrow: A life Story of 136th Field Regiment Roval
Artillery 1939-1945, has been an important
source for this book. I am with gratitude pleased
to acknowledge that Woolacott's book, The
Winged Gunners, also has been an excellent
source in my research. The book covers the
history of 1 Airlanding Light Regiment RA from
its creation in 1942, through the war to its short
post-war role (see also Truesdale et. al. in the lit-
erature list)
The presented ex-subalterns are good rep-
resentatives of all those who 'used the sword that
Parham and Kirkman had 'forged".
* Peter Wilkinson died at the age of 94 on 20th
Tanuarv 2017
359
