GUNFIRE
The surveyors
preferred
locations
heights, ridges etc., which were visible over large
areas. The 'trig points' were marked with a piece
of an iron pipe or a concrete pole in the ground
In the field trig points could be marked also with
a special beacon tissue to increase its visibilty
from long distances. An example is shown in
Fig. 9-1, although it is post-war photograph
If good maps were available and objects that
easily could be identified such as road junctions
bridges, churches etc., 'trigs' could be fixed
without triangulations. An example when this
was possible was the Normandy invasion. In
preparation of this a cluster of trig points was
printed on maps for the whole area (see
Kirkman papers, RAHT)
These 'trigs' supplied by the RE surveyors
formed the
starting point for the artillery
surveyors for their own schemes. As mentioned
above, one Survey Regiment RA was attached
to each Corps. These regiments also hac
qualified survey personnel and the necessary in-
struments, including theodolites. The latter cai
be seen in use in Fig- 9-1
The task of the surveyors was the establish
ment of a common grid for the artillery units lo
be engaged. They
were to provide correct
bearings when such were not available otherwise,
called Orientation, and, which was the most
common task, to survey the Battery/Troop
positions as accurately as available time and
enemy actions made possible. Determination of
coordinates was called Fixation
The resources were not sufficient enough to
survey every single troop or battery, not to say
the single gun. What they could do was to fix a
single point near the guns, a Bearing Picket,
Where the artillery regiment's own survey groups
could themselves proceed by traverse and fix co-
ordinates for a Bearing Picket near their guns
and also bring forward to this a true bearing to
be used in gunnery calculations. The surveyors
would leave a card at the Bearing Picket giving
the true bearing to one or several easily identifi
able points, such as buildings, church towers, a
single tree, a power line pole etc. The correct co-
Fig. 9-1 When artillery units were surveyed into the
same coordinate grid the surveyors from a Survey
Regiment started from a so-called trig-point with well-
defined and accurate coordinates. Bearings to
reference objects, which were well identifiable, could
here also be provided. The data were brought to
regiments and batteries, observation posts etc. by
means of different survey techniques. A beacon was
placed at the final control point called Bearing Picket
(BP). A BP Card gave the coordinates and reference
bearings. From this accurate data were brought to the
unit through survey by the unit's own staff. This post-
war image illustrates the procedure, which was used
also during the war (RAHT)
Fig. 9-2 Battery staff used a'director' for surveying
the location of troop deployments. This instrument
was also used when the guns were to be aimed into
the zero line with parallel barrels. The procedure was
illustrated in Royal Artillery Museum (Author's
collection)
110|
HOW TO HIT THE TARGET - GEODETIC REQUIREMENTS
Fig. 9-3 The distance of the legs of traverse were
preterably measured by means of a measuring string
or wire (AWM No. 0944306)
ordinates were also given on the card.
In the regimental headquarters and in the
battery headquarters too, survey groups were
attached who could undertake the final survey
as indicated. These groups were normally using
directors and not theodolites. The former was a
less complex survey instrument with lesser
accuracy than the latter, but it was sufficient for
survey close to the guns. A version of this instru-
closed polygor
Fig. 9-4 Known coordinates and bearings presented
at the control point (BP) by the Survey Regiment were
carried forward by means of a traverse using a
Theodolite or Director. The instrument was used for
measurements of angles by the regimental or battery
survey resources to batteries, observation posts etc
where accurate survey data were needed. In order to
get the results of measurements checked anc
mistakes avoided, the traverse was often closed as
the picture also illustrates. The distance between the
points where the instruments were placed had also to
be measured as accurately as possible (Author)
ment, a Director No. 7, used by a Gunner was
shown at the Roval Artillery Museum, (Fig. 9-
2). The method to carry a bearing from one
place to another within a regimental or battery
deployment area was traverse by means of
airectors'
Traverse in this context means that angles
are recorded at various positions in the terrain
and bearings calculated starting with the bearing
at the first pont of the traverse polygon. The
distance between measuring points is measured
also, using either a measuring tape or line or by
pacing, 1.e. counting walking steps. Fig. 9-3
gives an example
When applying an open traverse, bearings
are recorded for each leg of a polygon. An alter-
native is a closed traverse measuring also the way
back to the starting point, which is undertaken
as a control of the traverse. These principles are
lustrated in Fig. 9-4
In view of the importance of correct orien-
tation the data from the survey scheme to the BP
needed to be self-checking. This could be ac-
complished using a second team working on a
line close to the first team, this was known as
Parallel Traverse. It could also be done by
combining the polygons of two close, but inde-
pendent, schemes to produce the BP data bv
having the two polygons to cross each other a
couple of times. The number of small closed
polygons thus accomplished gave further check
points. This method was known as Diamond
Traverse. In both cases the location and orienta-
tion data for the BP card had to agree within fine
tolerances, if so the scheme was then 'closed' 130
Sometimes coordinates could be fixed also
by means of Resection or Intersection. The
former method implied measuring the bearings
to three or four obiects with known coordinates
from the position with unknown coordinates
The crossing of the measured lines on a map or
an evaluation board gave the unknown coordi
nates. This method was often used in the deplov-
ment area of own units.
The latter
method, "intersection'. imnlied
measuring the bearings from a few of position.
with known coordinates to the position to be fixed
Again, the intersection of the bearinas gave the
unknown coordinates. This was the natural method
to be used when positions outside own deploument
areas were to be fixed, for instance targets.
Finally analvsis of air-photographs was
another method to determine exact location of
11 11
