EPILOGUE
operation, but artillery again developed an
offensive role, supporting armoured manoeuvre
from the line of march, and with increased
ranges and precision It also called for develop-
ment of improved target acquisition and com-
munication technologies
Turning to the question as to whether
what the Germans call 'Auftragtaktik'
has been in line also with British tradi-
tions and mentality?
Background to the question: Some historians
have stated that the British during the big wars
emphasized rigid plans and control based on
hierarchy with less room for initiatives by indi-
viduals at lower levels. On the other hand, it has
been stated, the Germans were much more
flexible and stimulated personal initiatives, when
it came to how best a given task should be
executed, 1.e. "Auftragtaktik' was the doctrine.
Would you say this is correct?
- First, I am against too superficial generalisa-
tions like this. Britain could not have run an
empire successfully for about 200 years in the
days before electronic communications without
a very high degree and expectation of devolved
responsibility and decision-making in its all-
volunteer forces. Britain never had conscription
until 1917.
Looking at the Royal Navy for example,
they have always emphasized personal initiatives.
Nelson called his ship commanders to his cabin
and told them the outline of his plan and what
he wanted to accomplish. From this he expected
his subordinates to plan and execute their part
of the battle. And he himself quite often
disobeved orders when the situation changed,
and he believed a revised plan would be better
in respect of the overall objectives. This was a
kind of 'Auftragtaktik' and was after him for
decades called 'the Nelson touch'.
As regards the Army, the mentality was
similar. An officer's wish was always to inde-
pendently command a battalion or whatever at
the North-Western Frontier or any other place
in the Empire a long way from London. So, the
British mentality certainly has been in favour of
'Auftragtaktik' long before the Germans started
to use the word. But we must realize that the
situation was quite abnormal during the big
world wars. Britain had to throw large armies of
civilians into battle with relative little training. In
such a situation you have to go to basics as
regards training and leadership in battle, i.e.
there was no room for ' Auftragtaktik', 'Befehlstak-
tik' was more likely to succeed.
We must furthermore realise that the
'Wehrmacht' went to war with well-trained for-
mations. Most of the conscripts and their com-
manders at lower levels had got a basic training
in 'Hitlerjugend', which was a good basis for 'Auf-
tragtaktik'. A German 'Feldwebel' in World War II
[corresponding British rank was Sergeant) had
more military training than a new British or
American Lieutenant.
But historically, 'Auftragtaktik' has always
been the heart of the British Army, even though
this might be harder to identify if one looks only
at the two World Wars.
But what happened to 'Auftragtaktik' after
the war as far as the British are concerned?
- Much did not change as long as we had a big
conscript army, but when we returned to o
regular army of professionals after 1963, more
emphasis on 'Auftragtaktik' could again be im-
plemented. It would also become the basis for
training. Another important basis for this was the
change of NATO strategy towards strong coun-
terattacks and manoeuvre, which became the
accepted strategy
in the mid-1980s,
required a general implementation of 'Auftrag-
taktik' and this then became the official doctrine.
But today the debate is also going in the opposite
direction, implying that local personal initiatives
are not enough. Circumstances, in particulai
when huge combined operations of land and air
forces will be the case, may again call for more
strict control from higher levels of command.
Finally, about 'Auftragtaktik', what is
officially the corresponding word in
English?
- In the official doctrine from mid-1980s it is
'Mission
Command'
British
military
doctrine, 'Mission'
means
a task plus the
purpose of it. So, if the task given proves impos-
sible or unsuitable for any reason to undertake,
the commander, e.g. a company commander, is
expected to change or revise it in order to ac-
complish the purpose.
What role do you foresee for artillery in the
future?
- Linear types of conflict between national forces
EPILOGUE
seem to be a thing of the past, if only because we
have the ability to strike deep throughout a
theatre of operations. Simple combat between
military forces without the friction and ambigu-
lues created by
civilian
populations seem
unlikely. Will it ever happen again? Now we have
to face asymmetrical conflicts like Afghanistan
and just now Libya. As mentioned, there will be
a need for capability in manoeuvre warfare in the
future. A consequence will be much more focus
on long range and precision, and improved
means for long-range target acquisition and
communication.
Besides
cruise
missiles,
Unmanned Armed Vehicles (UAVs), attack hel-
icopters and advanced aircraft resources, the
artillery will have its share. Although new
precision ammunition will be a priority, the
artillery will definitely retain its capabilty to
launch fire
against area targets.
precision can be too good!
sometimes
We have seen that the existence of a large
number of Terriorial regiments in 1939
made a fairly quick rearmament possible.
What has the Territorial Army meant in
the post-war period?
- It is true that the Territorial Army could
mobilise a strong force in both world wars,
although the Territorials were not prepared for
the type of war they were called upon to fight. It
should be noted that this force was, however,
othing like the reserve forces of Germany and
France whose systems of conscription allowed
them to support much larger reserve forces; and
ones with a high level of training based on the
training of individual members, who had already
served their periods of conscription.
After the Second World War the Territorial
Army has gradually been reduced and is today
mall as compared with its strength in 1939.
Another change that has taken place, is that the
Territorial formations are not intended for use
as formed combat units. Their role has been
reduced to provide qualified individual replace-
ments for the regular formations, replacement of
specialists in for instance logistics, communica-
ton and headquarters tinctions in particular.
They are still collectively trained in regional units
as before, but there is not anything like Territorial
batalions to be deployed for attacking the
enemy the moment this is the situation. The
future of the Territorial Army and Reserves is
now being reviewed, although I do not know
anything about the deliberations that might
introduce a change back to formed combat units.
We will learn more about this towards the end of
this year [2011], when the report will be issued.
Author's comment December 2015:
From the document Transforming the British
Army An Update - July 2013 (British Army) it is
seen that the Army of 2020 will comprise 82,000
Regular personnel and
30.000 trained Re-
servists
The Army will
retain five regular
artillery regiments being part of a new Artillery
Brigade. In addition to these a parachute artillery
regiment will also be retained. Reserve artillery
will be organised in three regiments attached to
the artillery brigade. They are to be trained to act
as complete formations for combat as the regular
formations. Hence, the previous more limited
role to provide replacements for regular forma-
tions will be relinquished. Furthermore Royal
Artillery will provide four regiments for an In-
telligence and Survey Brigade to which The Ho-
nourable Artillery Company will be attached as
well. It is not known as to whether
Commando Regiment Royal Artillery will be
retained by Roval Marines.
Finally, if for anv unforeseeable reason a
significant
rearmament
will
nrove
necessary in the future, what will be the
major problems to overcome?
- First, we have to identify clearly the type of
threat that is emerging and what kind of
resources that will be required to meet it. For the
time being it is difficult to see a threat requiring
such a significant increase of artillery resources
in UK. We are again discussing the future in the
terms of the 10-year rule, as we did in the 1930s.
This would imply that we can for the time
neglect some elements of capability, as we will
have at least ten years to prepare for a major
threat requiring any significant rearmament.
If rearmament is found necessary, however,
we have to decide whether we are to develop a
large number
of regiments with 155-mm
howitzers and, if so, what types of target acqui-
sition system and ammunition these will require.
Or shall we develop regiments with MRS
[Multiple Launch Rocket System] or UAVs, or
would the money best be spent on cruise missiles
and other types of missile? There are several
important questions of this kind to clarify before
