GUNFIRE
and other exercises were here arranged through-
out the war. About such practice firing, unthink-
able in peacetime, Major Douglas Goddard has
wrluen
The South Downs behind Lewes, Brighton and
Shoreham became one vast training and firing
range which must have caused great discomfort
and nervousness to the people of the towns and
villages in the area; who were already suffering
from regular enemy air raids and who now had
the constant noise of war weapons and sadly the
odd random rounds landing dangerously close
The artillery seemed intent on sinking the Downs
under the weight of bombardment. 287
Running firing exercises across the land of
heaths in Scotland was another popular and
efficient type of training.
Practicing indirect fire was of course the
main task, but also direct fire against moving
targets, 1.e. potential tanks in particular, had to
be practiced (cf. Fig. 10-1). With departure
from peacetime conditions this could also be
arranged
a nearby
beach. For Douglas
Goddard and his mates from 112 (Wessex) Field
Regiment RA this often meant shooting at the
Lydd
peninsula
Hastings.
between
Folkestone
and
In 1941, larger exercises with higher forma-
tions could be arranged as preparation for a
more offensive
action
against
an invading
German force than had been possible in 1940.
Many exercises at divisional and Corps levels
thus took place. As had been the case in France
these large-scale exercises were short in time, not
more than 3-4 days. The difference, however,
was that it was
any longer primarily
defensive operations that were in focus. The
training aimed now at improving the ability to
act offensively for the defeat of the enemy.
should he invade the country.
In the autumn 1941, one of the greatest
military exercises ever held in Britain took place
at the turn of September/October,
Exercise
Bumper. According to one report, albeit a bit
uncertain, 250,000 men were engaged directly
or indirectly. The Royal Air Force took part with
some of its army-cooperation squadrons as well.
In that exercise, two armies,
the "South
Army' and the 'East Army', had both been given
the task to defeat an invading enemy army
Supreme leader of the exercise was Lieutenant
General Bernard L. Montgomery, now promoted
Corps Commander. To his assistance, several
groups of umpires and instructors had been es-
tablished. On the artillery side the chief umpir
was Brigadier (later General) Sidney Kirkman;
an individual who will be encountered elsewhere
in this book.
Kirkman had been the commander of a
medium regiment in France and had made a
rapid career after the evacuation from Dunkink.
He was
first appointed divisional artillery
commander
(CRA)
of the
S6th Infantri
Division and then artillery commander of three
Corps in turn, I, VIII and XII Corps. He was to
be appointed artillery commander of 'South
Eastern
Command'
in 1942 before being
assigned the position of Artillery Commander
the 8th Army in Egypt.
An
officer
who
had become
much
impressed with Kirkman's qualities was Mont-
gomery, who in 1941 was commander of XII
Corps. It is therefore not surprising that he
nominated Kirkman as his chief artillery umpire
for 'Exercise Bumper'.
This enormous exercise proved to be very
important for the development of artillery batte
techniques and tactical use of artillery resources
at large. Not least, it led to a better understand-
ing of the need for concentration of artillery fire.
How direct cooperation between infantry and
armour on one hand and the supporting artillery
on the other hand was to secure concentration
of fire was made clear by this exercise. At last,
two years after the outbreak of the war, new
thoughts had taken root.
Concentration of artillery resources and fire
is a matter of principile ay resources and fire
employing resources in the right way. Efficient
gunnery procedures are required when to ac
complish fire concentration with speed and
accuracy. If Kirkman was the man for the first
iSsue, Jack Parham was the man for the firs
inspirers and developers regarding the second.
He had in the autumn 1941 been promoted
Brigadier and divisional artillery commander
breakthrough
(CRA) of the 38th Inal rilery com Ander
regards new methods for
accomplishing rapid concentrations of artillery
fire came with demonstrations made by him in
late 1941.
the pioneering contributions made by
Kirkman and Parham in 1941 had probably not
materialised had they not been supported fron
222
FROM IMMINENT INVASION THREAT TO OFFENSIVE TRAINING
higher ranks. Amongst gunners one of the key
figures was the artillery commander 'Home
Forces', Major General Otto M. Lund. His
superior, the old gunner General Alan Brooke,
the Commander-in-Chief of 'Home Forces', was
another. Amongst non-gunners understanding
what it all was about, and giving his strong
support was, not surprisingly, Montgomery. He
is said to have declared that, 'The business of the
Gunner Commanding Officer is first to train his
Kegiment and
then to
train infantry
(and
armour) brigadiers to use it properly?288 What he
meant was that concentration of artillery forces
and fire should be ensured by close cooperation
between the infantry/armour commander and
his artillery
commander.
The artillery plan
should be an integral part of the operation plan
of the supported formation; hence joint planning
must be the rule.
Now back to 'Exercise Bumper'. We will
look at some of the observations
made bi
Kirkman and presented by him at the general
briefing after the exercise that was held at the
School of Artillery at Larkhill on 3 October 1941
and which was chaired by Alan Brooke. 289
Kirkman started with a presentation of the
employment of Army and Corps artillery, i.e.
those formations not belonging to any division.
He had found that the command of these
regularly had been delegated to levels too low.
The consequence was that these units had not
been employed where
best
needed,
and
sometimes even remained idle. No tactical con-
centration had been possible. Another conse-
quence was that
some
divisional artillery
headquarters had been overloaded by having to
lead more units than their capacity allowed.
Kirkman criticised also those artillery com-
manders who had not been close to their Corps
commander. One had been away for two days.
He wrote in his report:
It must be wrong for Cs.C.R.A. [Commanders
Corps Royal Artillery to move and remain away
from their Corps HQ. Cs.R.A. can control the
movements of their artillery from a distance by
DR. [Dispatch Riders, W/T or periodical visits,
but they cannot be consulted by their Corps
Commander, know what is in his mind, or be in
the tactical picture so as properly to position his
artillery and anticipate the Corps Commander's
plan, if they are permanently away from Corps
and HOs 290
Then Kirkman turned to one of the strongest
parts of criticism in his report, the miserable use
of divisional artillery, ie. most of the field
regiments. He had noticed that the CRAs by
routine had decentralised their artillery to the
brigades of their division. They had often put
regiments under command of brigade com-
manders and sometimes even split them up by
putting single batteries under command of
infantry (armoured) battalions. Kirkman had
noticed that one CRA, when having got external
regiments put under his command, had put the
whole lot under command of a single brigade
It was not acceptable to use artillery
resources like this, Kirkman energetically stated:
As soon as the Div front is stabilised, Arty should
revert to the C.R.A., who can then establish com-
munications with his Regts and locate them so
that the maximum amount of fire can be concen-
trated on the front of any Infantry Bde which is
to attack.
Kirkman had found that despite the regiments
were regularly put under command of brigades
they had not even there been used properly. He
illustrated with thirteen examples how brigades
had attacked without having had the artillery plan
coordinated with the brigade commander's plan.
Artillery fire could therefore only be delivered br
improvisation as observed fire on 'opportunity
targets' with an inferior number of barrels
Brigade commanders had generally overlooked.
Kirkman said, the need for well-planned barrages
or concentrations in support of their attacks, and
they had also been reluctant to give the gunners
the time needed for necessary preparations. He
concluded quite harshly:
Attacks were normally organised so quickly that
even if there was time for adequate orders being
given to the Int, insufficient time was available for
the gunner, particularly as two or three Regts
were often grouped under one Arty Regtl Cmdr
The speed at which attacks were staged is
perhaps inevitable on manoeuvres. In real wai
enemy bullets would make the necessity for
Aruillery sunnort obvious Umnires renort that in
the Cdn Corps cooperation between Arty and Inf
hardly exist. "
More was to come. Kirkman had manv words to
say about counter-bombardment. ie. how to
223
