GUNFIRE
Regiment RA, Douglas Goddard, related that his
25-pounders fired around 15,000 rounds per
gun from landing in Normandy 1944 to the end
of the war in May 1945 and yet calibration was
undertaken only once in this period. It took place
just after the breakout from the Normand
bridgehead and the advance northwards was
halted at river Seine at the end of August
1944.120 Other batteries it must be said were cal-
ibrated more often
As the deviation of muzzle velocity from the
nominal values of the 'Range Table' was one of
the most critical factors affecting the trajectory
of a gun it was always a matter of constant ob-
servation. Calbration was never neglected in
battle pauses or when units were withdrawn for
recovery, if needed. We get an example in the
War Diary of 69 Medium Regiment RA for 29
October 1942 at 17.45 hrs when the battle at El
Alamein still was raging:
From 1400 hours when not firing at targets Regt
fired calibrations shoot from pivot gun of each
troop in conjunction with 4th Survey Regt. Data
from this shoot proved that the average loss of
M.V. since the offensive started was 55 f/s. The
necessary adjustment to the sights was made. 21
Several factors
of influence could be
determined at the gun position, but not all of
them. The difference between chemical energy
of different batches of propellant was unknown
at the gun positions. It was also difficult to get a
grip of the impact of extreme air humidity,
which for instance was a big problem during the
monsoon periods in
Burma. To
'keep the
gunpowder dry', this good old rule was not
always easy.
Range Tables provide information on tra-
jectory physics
As mentioned the 'Range Tables' are rich sources
of data on the physics of the trajectory of guns
firing various types of ammunition. With the 25-
pounder as an example we will have a look at the
magnitude of the impact caused by variations in
nominal data. First, a list of the latter given for
Charge 3:
Muzzle velocity: 1,450ft/s (442m/s)
Air pressure: 30 inch Hg (762mm)
Air temperature: 60°F (15.6°C)
Wind velocity: O ft/s (all directions relative
Propellant (Cordite) temperature: 60°F
From this example we can see that the barrel
(15.6°C)
wearing of a medium gun could be considerable
after one week of continuous fighting only. It has
Now, if other values were applied what did it
mean to the change of the point of ground
been stated that calibration shoots were to take
place every three days for these guns. 122
impact, or in other words: what will the range be
The problem occupied central authorities
as compared with the one
achieved under
throughout the war and various policies were im-
nominal conditions? Fig. 8-2 illustrates the
plemented. The voluminous shooting during the
deviation as a function of nominal range for the
following variations of nominal values: 123
war resulted in empirical data on the relation
between
measured barrel wearing and the
decline of muzzle velocity, which were added to
the 'Range Tables' as valuable pieces of informa-
tion in the field. By means of this data it was
possible to make adjustments to the gun sights
also between formal calibration shoots
As a policy it was later decided that every
regiment was to have at least one gun, called the
standard gun, which should be well calibrated all
the time. The other guns of the regiment could
use this one for comparative shootings. It was
furthermore made clear that the commanding
officer of the regiment was responsible for this
arrangement, and he was also to make sure that
battery
commanders
really
calibration shootings regularly.
undertook
Muzzle velocity: - 100 ft/s (-30.5m/s)
Air pressure: -3.0 inch Hg (-76.20mm Hg)
Air temperature: -20°F (-11.1°C, i.e. 4.4 °C
absolute)
Wind straight against the shell: +30 ft/s
(+9.1m/s, i.e. 9.1m/s absolute)
The graph clearly indicates the importance of
checking the degrading of the muzzle velocity.
Weather data should also be recorded as up-to-
date as possible; otherwise the shells might
descend far away from the target, in particular
When the range is long. The wind was often
hitting the shell from an acute direction, or across
it. Such wind directions required correction not
only of the range but also the firing bearing.
HoW TO HIT THE TARGET - TECHNICAL
GUN CHARACTERISTICS
Fig. 8-2 An illustration of various factors influencing
the shell trajectory of a 25-pdr firing high explosive
shells with Charge 3. As an example, if the range to
target is 10 000 yards the gun must be aimed for the
range 10 600 yard if the muzzle velocity has declined
by 100 ft/s through wearing (Author, data from Range
Tables Part 1 for QF 25-pdr Guns, Mark | and II, 1944)
In the first place corrections to meet adverse
conditions were calculated. The combined result
of all corrections was called Correction of the
Moment (CoM) and could as seen in Fig. 8-2
have a high impact, in particular along the firing
bearing. Even if the calculations have used the
best possible data there was often a remaining
uncertainty. This could be determined only by
means of shooting and correcting the ground
impact of the shells towards the target; this was
called ranging, which we will come back to later
in the book.
It is understandable that the staff working in
Troop and Battery Command Posts had to cope
with a hectic situation when they had to make
lots of calculations of corrections, in particular
when the situation changed dramatically or when
huge fire plans for numerous targets had to be
prepared. In order to make it a bit easier
calculation procedures had been standardised
and appropriate data forms provided.
Fire dispersion unavoidable
Even if extensive calculations had been made it
did not imply hole-in-hole ground impact of the
rounds fired. If one single gun fired a large
number of projectiles without change of the gun's
elevation and fire direction a dispersion pattern
would be observed. Normal probability rules
gave the shape of the area within which the pro-
jectiles hit the ground. The distribution within
this area followed standard statistical models. To
make it easier the Royal Artillery gave the disper-
sion length for 50%. 82%. 96% and 100% of the
projectiles, Fig. 8-3124
and Fig. 8-4. Similar
Fig. 8-3 If a number of shells are fired against the
same aiming point they will on hitting ground be
dispersed over an area as illustrated. Range Tables
provide information on the size of the area within
which the shells will fall with 50% probability. This is
given along the firing direction as well as the size
straight across this. As indicated, the latter is normally
much smaller (Author, data from Range Tables Part 1
for QF 25-pdr Guns, Mark | and II, 1944)
50% range dispersion, yards
harge 1
2000 3000 4000 5000
Fig. 8-4 The size of dispersion at various ranges for a
25-pdr Gun for different Charges. For Charge 3 the
dispersion across the firing direction is indicatec
Observe that Super Charge implies bigger dispersion
than Charge 3 due to its less elevated trajectory
(Author, data from Range Tables Part 1 for QF 25-pdr
Guns, Mark I and II, 1944)
errors also occurred in the line of fire and the
two patterns were called Probable Error Range
and Probable Error Line respectively. If doubled
these measures gave the whole dispersion area
and they
are given in the Range Tables. The
graphs of Fig. 8-4 have been prepared by using
data for different charges. 12s
102
