GUNFIRE
towards manufacture of other types of gun.68 A
special program for manufacture of muzzle
brakes had, however, to be organised from the
end of 1943.
Fig. 4-5 Deliveries of the main parts of 25-pdr Guns
(Author)
The 25-pounder is well received by
artillery units
The new gun immediately became popular
amongst gunners for its robustness and reliabil-
ity as many war diaries and other accounts tell
us. An example below illustrates this
Of course some 'teething problems' could
not be avoided. A real and thorough test came in
North Africa during the battle of El Alamein in
October 1942 where the huge barrages required
the guns to fire 600 rounds each during the first
24 hours. It was noticed here that the upper part
of the carriage with its cradle was a weak point.
Quite a large number of guns had to be removed
and taken to repair shops.
136 (1st West Lancashire) Field Regiment
RA did not receive their new 25-pounders until
August 1942 when it had been decided that the
Table 4-5. Gun data - 25-pounder Mark II
Calibre
Weight
Type of shell
Shell weight
approx. 1.750
High Explosive (HE)
regiment was to embark for Burma. There was
still a shortage of guns so the regiment had to
take over guns from 174 Field Regiment RA in
exchange of
their
18/25-pounders. A bad
exchange for the latter! The arrival of the new
guns at 136 Field Regiment RA has been
described as follows:69
For a year we had been the proud 'owners' of
twenty-four 18/25-pdrs, which the gunners had
learnt to handle and appreciate. Naturally we had
hankered after a set of the new 25-pdrs (.... we
had only occasionally spotted an example in our
travels [...] The arrival of the new guns at each
Battery caused great excitement and they were
at once surrounded by all ranks. It is the gun,
which is the centre of all activities and purpose
in an Artillery Regiment in much the same way
that the aircraft is in an RAF Squadron. For the
next few days the gunners were busy learning all
about their new charges and were very pleased
with every aspect of the design and construction.
They were worth waiting nearly three-and-a-half
years for.
Before leaving
the 25-pounder
we will
summarise some data in Table 4-5?°
The old mountain howitzer
The old much appreciated 3.7-inch (94-mm)
mountain howitzer remained in the Royal
Artillery through the whole war, in several
slightly revised versions. In addition to this
another gun was provided for certain light
regiments. It was the American 75-mm pack
howitzer, which came into service 1943 and was
Muzze velocity
Max. range
Armour piercing
10.810
Sources: 1) Nigel F. Evans website: British Artillery in WW 2, Chapter The Guns 25-pdr 2) Range Tables QF 25-pounder Mark I
A DECISIVE REARMAMENT
supplied to the airborne divisions. When it came,
it was still equipped with wooden, ironclad
wheels. Len Gittings has the story:"
When we saw the 75-mm howitzers with the cart
wheels we had a good laugh. Then they told us
we could go off on two weeks leave and, when we
returned, the gun had been modified with rubber
lyres
More about these guns can be found in Chapter
7, where we are to look at the artillery of airborne
Army and corps artillery modernised with
new medium guns
The Medium Regiments had initially to be
satisfied with the vintage 6-inch howitzer and the
60-pounder gun. A few of the latter had been
upgraded with 4.5-inch lined barrels, but this did
not help much; the medium artillery was not up
to standard as regards firing range and mobility.
Development of new guns had during the 1930s
had to stand back for priority development of
the 25-pounder and the new heavy anti-aircraft
gun (3.7-inch) for high altitude fire.
When the war broke out, no complete
designs for new
medium guns
had been
approved. In January 1939 a specification had,
however, been agreed on. This said that the new
gun was to have the calibre 5.5-inch (140-mm)
and a firing range of maximum 16,000 yards
(14,600m) when firing a shell with the weight of
1001b (45.6kg). It should be a gun-howitzer, and
thus be able to fire flat trajectories as well as
higher ones with steeper descent. In this book
we will call it 'Gun' for short. The carriage could
be a modernised 60-pounder carriage. Gun
weight should not exceed 5.5 tons.72 Later
during this year this was found to be a bad idea
as far as the carriage was concerned. A com-
pletely new carriage
design
was required,
therefore, to be provided.
Furthermore, it had been decided, in haste,
that a second medium gun with smaller calibre
must be produced as well; it should be a 4.5-inch
gun (114mm). The weight of projectile should
be 551b (25kg). By reducing the propellant and
shell size, it would be possible to increase firing
range up to maximum 20,500 yards (18,700m).
It was also decided that this gun, a true gun, was
to have the same carriage as the 5.5-inch gun.
The latter is shown in Fig. 4-6.
Manufacture of prototypes of the two new
medium guns took place during the first year of
the war followed by final tests. Now, it really was
urgent! Production was speeded up before all
'teething troubles' had been found and been
remedied. Towards the end of 1941 the first
Medium Regiments could be reequipped with
new guns. For instance, 64 Medium Regiment
RA, which took part in the battle of El Alamein,
Fig, 46 The new generation medium guns began to arriva in 1041 The tun taos of aun with the calibre
4.5-inch and 5 Each had the come carried an info turn to th
55 inch Gun followed quite soon (RAHT).
