GUNFIRE
Glider-borne troops began to arrive around
10.20 hours in 440 Horsa and Hamilcar gliders.
They were divided into six different groups
transporting 6 Air landing Brigade and heavy
equipment and ammunition etcetera. In the fifth
group came the artillery headquarters, 2 FOU
and 53 Air landing Light Regiment RA.
In the British sector, the northern route, all
was over after about one and half hour. Along
the southern route it would take a couple of
hours more until the American division was in
place. Well, not exactly. The major part of a
parachute battalion landed far into the British
sector. The latter thanked for the extra, unex-
pected help provided!
The first supply transport was delayed. The
240 bombers did not begin to arrive until 13.00
hours, and they flew too low causing many para-
chutes not to open. Destroyed and damaged
canisters were a consequence. Another difficulty
as regards supplies was that the RASC force
allotted for collecting and distributing the
supplies to the fighting units was much reduced
in strength due to loss of several Hamilcar
gliders. It has been estimated that only 30-35%
of the supplies could be collected, a consequence
of which was acute ammunition shortage during
the afternoon at the parachute brigades.
The shortening of the artillery bombard-
ment against flak positions, and the difficulties
on the part of fighter-bombers to locate their
targets due to bad visibility, resulted in a small
number of anti-aircraft guns destroyed by direct
hits. A limited neutralisation effect was all that
could be
accomplished. The commander of 7
Survey
Regiment
RA
Lieutenant
Colonel
Clegg, who could watch the course of the air-
landing operation afterwards wrote that aircraft
arriving first avoided flak
fire, but then the
German anti-aircraft units regained their power
and went
lht.
full
action
again 45:
Of the
estimated number of guns, 1,000, the majority,
70% were
light
anti-aircraft guns with calibres
down to 20mm. These were very efficient against
slow, low flying aircraft about to drop parachute
formations
and against
gliders about to land.
They caused immense destructions. In particu-
guns
deployed north and east of
Diesfordt Woods had escaped the British bom-
bardment and were excellently
positioned in
relation to the arriving airborne troops.453
The German infantry that was deployed
near or even on the landing places caused terrific
Fig. 22-11 At 10 a.m. 24 March 1945 one British and
one American Airborne Division began crossing River
Rhine over the bridgehead on the eastern side of the
river. All artillery fire against enemy anti-aircraft units
and other targets then had to stop. The landing of
the British units was planned to take 70 minutes,
whereas the Americans needed up to three hours to
get all landed. During this period all artillery units
west of the river were silent, no support could be
provided! (imperial War Museum BU 2139)
losses. The artillery headquarters, including the
'Brigade Major', landed with their Horsa almost
on top of a German position. Those on board
had no chance to take cover and were all killed.
The position as "Brigade Major' was transferred
to the commander of 2 FOU, Major Harold
Rice, who personally related these events to me.
The 6th Airborne Division lost almost 1,000
men the first day, out of which some 250 were
killed in action. As regards heavy equipment, i.e.
Jeeps, light tanks, carriers, anti-tank guns etc
about 50% were lost. 454
Was the light artillery regiment better off?
What fire support could they provide? The first
gliders of the
78 allotted for the transport of the
airborne part of the regiment (a large part came
on road, the sea tail began their landing at 10.50
hours in landing zone P' where also the divisional
headquarters
and its artillery headquarters were
to land. Harold Rice has described the landing as
very rough as
the farmland could not carry the
weight of the Horsas. The wheels immediately
sank and the glider body shuffling along the
ground surface caused a huge cloud of dust.
The first gliders carried the reconnaissance
staff of the two batteries of the light regiment.
The gun positions had been selected from the
THE FINAL ONSLAUGHT - THE RHINE CROSSING
map, but a detailed reconnaissance of them had
to be done. A first task on the part of the glider
pilots was to escort these detachments when
carrying out this reconnaissance, which was
done quickly and efficiently. The war diary
reports that eleven guns
s were ready for action at
11.00 hours. Five of these were from 211 Battery
RA, including one that had come from 210
Battery RA when the latter was split and its gun
distributed to the two enlarged batteries. Six
guns came from 212 Battery RA, out of which
three had been allotted from 210 Battery RA. 455
The time mentioned is seen in
many
sources. Provided the landing time, 10.50, is
ten minutes
for
reconnaissance,
unloading the guns, transport to the site and de-
ployment seems to be too short a time. Before
being ready for action the guns should further-
more be surveyed in with parallel barrels and
ammunition unloaded and prepared for firing.
The war diary anyway
states that the
regiment at 15.00 hours was well established and
target rangings had taken place. Fire against
enemy detachments had also been executed. It
is however added that the latter primarily had
been done with medium guns from position
west of river Rhine, this in order to be careful
with ammunition spending. Bringing down the
stock below 100 shells per gun required permis-
sion from the regimental headquarters. When
only 60 rounds per gun were left, it meant cease
fire for that gun until replenishment could take
place. It had been planned that 160 rounds per
gun, complete with charges and fuzes, would be
provided each day once supply arrangements
were in full operation, but before that the guns
had to rely on ammunition brought by them-
selves to the battlefield. 456 Besides this ammuni-
tion, four Hamilear gliders would bring some
extra ammunition and thus extend perseverance.
But it did not go as planned in this respect. One
glider disanneared and the three others landed
too far from the planned landing zone.
Eleven guns were, as seen, ready for action
carly, without damages. What had happened with
the thirteen
otner
guns, and the two
pounders? Well, as was the case for other parts of
the huge armada, losses for the artillery regiment
were also large. Due to the bad visibility on the
ground,
many
gliders
landed far from
planned landing zones; in some cases some 3-
5km away. Enemy fire reaped many victims too.
The war diary summarises the landing results for
the 78 gliders (inclusive 4 Hamilcars) employed:
35 gliders (45%) landed within 1,000 yards
from the landing zone (LZ)
14 (18%) landed far from the LZ, but the
gunners managed to find their way to the
regiment with the glider loads intact later
during D-Day or D+1
7 (9%) landed west of river Rhine, but
could link up within four days
22 (28%) were destroyed:
- 3 shot down by anti-aircraft guns
- 3 destroyed when landing;
- 15 landed far away and were destroyed
by the enemy
- 1 one was hit when landing and caught
Tire
Hrom
an interesting attachment that is
available, we get detailed information about every
single glider. We can read who were on board, what
kind of load the glider carried, where the landing
took place (coordinates given) and whether the
load could be unloaded or was lost etc.
We can see from this list that most of the
gliders were of the Horsa Mark II type, i.e. the
latest version. Loading and unloading took place
through a hinged nose
section, which
was
opened after landing. In addition to the gliders
transporting the twenty-four 75-mm howitzers
three extra had been allotted for the transport of
the two 25-pounders with ammunition and
equipment. This seems to have been the only
time such guns were transported like this.
Review of the list shows that six or possibly
seven 75-mm howitzers were lost. Another six
were landed away from the LZ, often about a
kilometre, but in one case almost 5km wrongly.
One of the two
25-pounders
was lost.
mentioned none of the four Hamilcars fully
loaded with extra artillery ammunition could
make it, one of them landed 4km from the L.Z
Maybe this was the Hamilcar load that was
retrieved in a raid during the night to the 25
March and brought back to the regiment.
A patrol with glider pilots had left at 22.00
hours on D-Day and returned safely at 01.45
hours with the load. This is another example of
the flexibility in action proved by British glider
pilots. They certainly could do much more than
flying and landing their gliders!457
The two batteries had each eight guns in
action at 4 p.m. Three of them had been provided
