1. The Period Before the First World War
Fig. 1-1 2nd Rocket Troop Royal Horse Artillery under Swedish Command in action in the battle against
Napoleon outside Leipzig, October 1813 (McCleery, O/HO Battery (Rocket Troop] Royal Horse Artillery)
Two pictures
It is a battle, an intensive battle. A village can be
partly seen in the background, some of its
houses seem to be in flames, and in front of
them we can visualise one of the combatants'
soldiers fighting their opponents in the
foreground. Gunpowder smoke is dense
Between them a couple of fallen soldiers, the
horse of one of them already dead, the other
one in death-throes. The head and neck are
stretched forwards in panic, the left leg seems
to be kicking intensively, and soon life will be
gone. A mounted troop in colourful uniforms
is in the right corner of the picture, led by
their commander with drawn sabre. Order is
given: Attack!
As far as this, it could be any painting of a
battle from older davs. But there is an unusual
element. Behind the mounted troop, there are
two horizontal arcs of fire and smoke heading
straight into the formation of soldiers at the
opposite side.
Rockets! And closer to the
observer: soldiers in the same uniforms as the
mounted troop is carrying can be seen. They are
preparing rockets attached to wooden rods ready
to fire, in a great haste, as it seems. See Fig. 1-1.
The other picture is a photograph. And it is
one from the Second World War, published more
often than most photographs from this war. It can
be seen in hundreds, not to say thousands of books
and magazine articles. On the western shore of the
River Rhine the top war leaders from Britain can
be seen. Churchill, Alan Brooke and Montgomery
are having lunch. It is 26 March 1945. Two days
earlier, the Allies had crossed River Rhine in a
grand concentration of their military resources, not
least artillery. Churchill and Brooke had come over
from London in order to witness the crossing in
company with their host Field Marshal Bernard L.
Montgomery. The crossing operation commenced
the night between 23 and 24 March 1945
Although numerous artillery rounds were fired
after the crossing, this was the great finale on the
part of the British artillery, and I will come back to
this later in this book.
When looking closer at the photograph
Fig. 1-2, we can see that Churchill is comfort-
ablv seated and has put his walking stick into
the ground behind him; his back against the
photographer. He is holding a glass in his
hand. To the right of him is the host Field
Marshal Montgomery, Commander of the
British 21st Army Group. Opposite Churchill
is the Commander Imperial General Staff.
Field Marshal Alan Brooke (later Viscount
Alanbrooke). Slightly bent forward, he keeps
his eyes on Churchill, and we might assume
that the latter is speaking just when the
photograph was taken. Maybe their discussion
not only dealt with the events of the last few
days, but also with a question raised by
Montgomery to his guests during the morning
24 March, when they witnessed the large air-
landing operation taking place east of the River
Rhine: 'Now British soldiers are again fighting
on German soil, when did it last take place?'
Churchill, knowing his history, told the others
that it was on 18 October 1813. The British
Rocket Brigade, attached to the Swedish Army,
Fia. 1-2 'Picnic' on the western chore of the Pivor
Rhine for the three British war leaders Churchill
Brooke and Montgomery, just after Operation
Plunder, the Rhine Crossing 23-24 March 1945.
Churchill could tell the others of the role played by
the British 2nd Rocket Troop when attached to the
Swedish Army in the battle at leinzia in Orthor
1813 (Olmperial War Museum BU 2636)
