GUNFIRE
The plan was now to launch a pincer
manoeuvre against Irondheim. This operation
was called Operation Hammer to be effected on
22 April.
Everything began 'swinging' already before
the first landings north and south of Trondheim
had commenced. The Royal Navy got cold feet
after having experienced unceasing bombings by
Luftwaffe on ships near the Norwegian coast. It
was concluded that the risks
on ships
andi
landing infantry would be too large, and it was
recommended that Operation Hammer would
be cancelled. An additional factor affecting the
decision was that British Press had started to
about
a coming operation
against
Trondheim. Hence surprise was definitely lost
On 19 April the formal decision to cancel the
operation was taken by the Cabinet. It was now
instead hoped that the pincer operation would
be able to pursue and Trondheim thus to be
retaken. However, the southern leg got other
things to attend to. Upon Norwegian request, the
brigade turned southwards into the Gudbrand
Valley in order to halt the German onslaught in
cooperation with Norwegian forces. 15 Infantry
Brigade, not any longer required for Operation
Hammer, was landed at Andalsnes and rushed
southwards into the Gudbrand Valley.
In the North, the Mauriceforce was stopped
halfway
towards Trondheim. Against well-
trained German mountain warriors, and lacking
own artillery and anti-aircraft guns, nothing
could be done, in particular as the Germans
maintained absolute air superiority.
The details of the fighting that followed will
not be discussed here; we may just notice that
the allies soon
were
forced to realise that
Trondheim could not be
recaptured, neither
could the German advance be halted nor encir-
clement avoided. At last what remained to do
was to retreat and save the remnants of the
forces by evacuation. This was organised, and
was done successfully on 3 May
Now the battle for Narvik remained, but
before leaving the middle sector we will notice
how lack of artillery was experienced by one of
the
front commanders, Lieutenant Colonel
E.E.F. Cass, commanding a battalion in 15
Infantry Brigade. He was to meet the Germans
in the Gudbrand Valley. After the evacuation he
wrote about this. Lack of artillery was one of the
greatest mistakes in this campaign (see Farndale
(1996), p. 27):
First came tanks and about 50 lightly equipped
infantry. Behind came more infantry on foot
motor-cyclists, machine guns in side-cars and
towed guns. Behind again came motor vehicle
after motor vehicle
It was a target that
Gunners would dream about - three quarters of
a mile of confined road, crammed with troops
and vehicles, all clearly visible from our observa-
tion post. Just one battery of 25-pounders (12
guns in a battery] could have blown the enemy
off the road. [Farndale: 'but there were no guns
But where was the artillery?
If the British-French intervention in Finland had
taken place, two British divisions had been sent
to Narvik for transport via Sweden to Finland;
42nd and 46th Infantry Divisions were allotted.
Both of them had most likely come with all their
divisional artillery, i.e. 2-3 field regiments each.
When the adventure went to the grave with
haste after the Finnish truce on 13 March 1940,
the two divisions were dispatched to France. But
only the 42nd Infantry Division brought artillery
to France. The 46th Infantry Division was to
protect BEF supply lines and left its artillery at
home in England. Here was now a resource for
Norway.
In France, 15 Infantry Brigade left BEF in
early April for engagement in Norway. Normal
support for a brigade was one artillery regiment
(24 guns), but no artillery was accompanying
the brigade. Maybe, one thought it could come
later
When the
whole British 5th Infantry
Division on 29 April prepared itself for transport
from Le Havre to Norway, no exception for its
three artillery regiments was envisaged. They
would go to Norway, all three of them.
When the evacuations of British troops from
Andalsnes and Namsos were finished, a contra-
order was issued to the division: Stop embarking
return to BEF! With this order valuable resources
disappeared from the Norwegian scene.
We will therefore now take a look at the
artillery of the 46th Infantry Division left in
England. One of the divisional regiments was 51
Field Regiment RA. What does its war diary tell
The regiment was organised at the time in a
regimental headquarters and two batteries, each
with twelve guns divided in three troops, as were
other regiments after 1938.
The batteries were
203 and 370 Battery RA.
204
FAILED INTERVENTION IN NORWAY
The regiment was a Territorial formation,
which had been mobilised in September 1939
and was then gradually equipped and trained
during the winter. The intention was to join BEF
in France during the spring 1940. Certain recon-
naissance work there was done in February.
Nothing in the war diary hints at engagement in
Norway or Finland.
In March 1940, the regiment was a given a
'warning order' that it should be made ready for
transport overseas. The order was received when
several regimental exercises were going on (Easter
Sunday this year was on 24 March). Immediately
after the Easter holiday, equipment maintenance
was performed and packing commenced, activi-
ties that continued over the end of the month. On
9 April the regiment was ready to leave its
quarters at Aldbourne and Ramsbury (around 40
miles north of Plymouth). But two days later
something strange happened. It was suddenly
made clear that only one of the batteries was to
leave; the choice was 203 Battery RA.
On the following day, 12 April, the battery
was ordered to be ready to go upon six hours'
notice. At 17.00 hours, the order came that a
'road detachment' should leave at 11.00 hours
the next day. A 'railway detachment' should leave
the following day, 1 April. The former comprised
three officers and 125 other ranks and was
directed to a port in Southern England. The de-
tachment brought all guns and vehicles that
would be loaded on a ship. The rest of the
battery was to travel to an unknown northerly
port, which later turned out to be Glasgow.249
The main body of the regiment (now
without 203 Battery) was ordered on 14 April to
be ready to go, certain parts of it on 15 April. On
16 April a 'railway detachment' arrived in
Glasgow and on the 17 April the regimental
HQS and 370 Battery RA embarked on the
troop carrier RMS Lancastria. Later during the
The n
"road detachment
arrives
and
embarked. The regiment could however not get
all its vehicles on board. Still nothing was known
about the destination
On 19 April it was suspected that it was not
France but Norway as winter kits were distrib-
uted to the soldiers on this day. The convoy to
which they were attached assembled the same
day with escorting ships outside Greenock; but
still no departure. On 23 April, they are all back
in Glasgow again and disembarked! Short leaves
were permitted for some; the others were
engaged in drills and marching. And on 25 April
a final order was received to leave the port and
the ship. The order was to go to Leith where the
regiment (except 203 Battery) embarked on the
troop carrier Ulster Monarch, which at 22.45
hours on 26 April hoisted its anchor and sailed
northwards along the eastern coast of Scotland
Most of the personnel believed now Norway to
be the destination.
Ulster Monarch arrives the next day at the
naval base Scapa Flow after an adventurous
passage; 'the boat very crowded' the war diary
tells us. The day after arrival, the regiment left
the ship and went to quarters ashore at the naval
base. Again, there were doubts as to whether
Norway was the destination after all, because on
29 April they embarked on the troop carrier
Orion, which on 1 May at 20.15 hours sailed
southwards
and I
eventually
anchored the
following day close to the Forth of Firth Bridge.
On 3 May, they went ashore at last in Leith and
were given quarters at Marine Gardens Porto-
bello. After recovering and having got comple-
mentary equipment, training was
resumed.
Having been 'shuffled' here
and there on
crowded ships and unclear instructions about
the purposes of the movements quite a lot was
needed for restoring good spirit and discipline.
On 11 May it was time for next transfer,
now to new quarters at Jedburgh where the
regiment remained until Tune
1940|
September, finally, the regiment went overseas.
now complete with both batteries. Egypt via
Cape Good Hope was the destination.
The account indicates that the intention in
April never was to engage the regiment in
France, nor at Narvik, but in the Trondheim
area. Probably the plan was to support the
reserve brigade, 147 Infantry Brigade, when this
had been landed. When the attack on Trondheim
wast
cancelled, it seems that the intention
changed again, now landing at Andalsnes for the
support of Sickleforce was the plan. But this force
had to be evacuated, as we have seen, and this
caused the final disembarkation of the regiment.
In hindsight, one
might wonder why the
regiment was not instead redirected to Narvik;
maybe they were a victim of chaotic leadership
and frequently changing plans?
The only artillery unit
As a consequence of events, the only artillery
unit sent to Norway was 203 Battery RA from
