GUNFIRE
mental headquarters (4 Survey Regiment RA)
was a central 'Survey Troop'.
These resources needed much time for de-
ployment and could not be used during the
march. It was not until 'Club Route' had been
opened after it had been cut off 22-23 September
that the intelligence resources were ordered
forward. On the latter day, 48 Composite Battery
established a 'Long Base' on the Groesbeek Hill
measuring in an easterly direction. On the same
day the 'Sound Ranging Troop' of this battery
opened a 'Sound Ranging Base' with six micro-
phones and two 'Advance Posts' mainly along the
road from Nijmegen to the South, i.e. measuring
towards the east as well.
The following day the latter base was
extended with two additional microphones
further to the South.
On 25 September the two troops of 48
Composite Battery RA were replaced by two
troops of 47 Composite Battery, which had
now been called forward. The former had been
ordered to establish new observation bases on
the 'Island'. The 'Sound Ranging Troop' of the
relieving battery established two new bases
with four and five microphones respectively
One of them was to measure in northeasterly
direction from the Groesbeek Hill, the other in
southeasterly direction from the Hill. With this
arrangement good opportunities for location of
enemy artillery and mortar positions threaten-
ing the American the 82nd Airborne Division
were in place.
48 Composite Battery reconnoitred a sound
ranging base on the 'Island' for measuring
towards the Arnhem area. This could however
not be deployed until the following day. It was to
cover a distance from Valburg in northwesterly
direction with six microphones. The 'Long Base'
near river Waal
established by the
Flash
Spotters' was complemented with an additional
observation post
near
northern shore of the river.
Slijk-Ewijk
the
A '4-pen recorder' sound ranging section
had been attached to this battery, which could
be deployed within a couple of hours only. When
the Guards Division ran into trouble on 17
September the need for this new resource
quickly emerged.
The section
deployed along the Maas-
Schelde Canal (Escaut) on both sides of 'Club
Route' during the afternoon of 17 September
and was ready to measure at 17.30 hours. The
next day it was time for redeployment forward.
On 20 September the section deployed at the
Groesbeek Hill and was ready at 16.40 hours. It
remained there for a couple of days during which
it was heavily engaged in locating enemy mortars
in particular. The next redeployment came on 23
September when the unit moved to the 'Island
and established its sound ranging base just north
of the large Nijmegen bridges. On 25 September
the section redeployed further north and estab-
lished its sound ranging base northwest of the
village Homoet, which meant that it was posi-
tioned about a mile and a half north of all the
artillery now positioned around Valburg.
In summarv, we can thus see that the
artillery intelligence resources were quickly
brought into action as soon as the tactica.
situation made this possible. During the final
days of the operation they covered all front
segments to the north and the east with 'Long
Bases' and "Sound Ranging Bases'. It was proved
that these resources were the only ones that
could provide good information from the depth
of the enemy positions. The Army Cooperation
resources of RAF, which would normally provide
air photographs, were available on a limited scale
only. The observation bases of the survey
regiment became even more important when a
more static situation followed after Operation
Market Garden.
The role of airpower
The
air forces were very busy before 17
September in order to secure air superiority
These operations were effective but it did not
result in total superiority. Thrive but it did not
extensive rocket attacks carried out at the initial
breakout of the Guards Division on the first day
were, as we have seen, also very effective and
successful. Close air support to all three divisions
of XXX Corps had been care all three divisions
the provision of liaison staff from the Royal Air
Force to the divisional headquarters, known as
Tentacles. The Guards Division had a special
liaison group with own vehicle
and radid
equipment for direct cooperaticle and ra tho
advancing ground forces perative airtact. the
British 1st Airborne Division had no possibility
do call for help from the asion bad no sessibly
due to lack of radio communication
Iwo
circumstances limited air support
before the last days. One was bad weather
conditions both in England and in Holland for
3041
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
several days. The other was that the air space
around 'Club Route' and the areas where the
landings had taken place was reserved daily for
the hundreds of aircraft flying in those airborne
troops that had not been flown in the first day.
Huge amounts of supplies would also be flown
in daily to those already fighting on the ground.
Together, these circumstances made it necessary
to reject most requests
for support from
bombers and fighter-bombers. It was just a
matter of lacking air space. For the British north
of river Rhine, this was a severe disadvantage.
On 22 September, the 1st Airborne Division
got some initial support when 24 Typhoons
attacked targets near the perimeter, and this was
repeated the following day. But on Sunday, 24
September an even more massive attack took
place. For several hours numerous targets were
attacked with rockets
primarily
'Nebelwerfer' units and artillery pieces.
mortars,
Also during the critical following day,
25 September, it is recorded that 'a very large
number of targets' were attacked by Typhoon
formations. A large formation of bombers also
dropped their bombs at 17.00 hours. One source
tells that it comprised 74 bombers, 405
No detailed reports have
been found
regarding the effects of these aerial attacks, but
probably these were of significant importance.
Loder-Symonds reported a couple of times how
delighted he was over this help. It was reported
too that, as soon as British fighter-bombers or
bombers appeared over the battlefield, enemy
artillery and mortar fire stopped around the
perimeter. One may assume that the reason why
the ground attacks weakened significantly during
the critical afternoon of 25 September was due
to the increased activities of the Royal Air
Force 06 Seen over the whole nine days period,
the aerial support was however a disappointment.
Disappointed Scottish gunners
When the 52nd (Lowland) Infantry Division, in
the summer 1944 was ordered to prepare itself
for employment as an air-transported formation
this naturally
caused
consequences for
artillery Regiments, 79, 80 and 186 Field
Regiment RA and the attached 1 Mountain
Regiment RA. We have seen that they had to
prepare for two different alternatives. One was
a scenario where the division and its artillery
were to be transported by air to an area still
pardy under enemy control. The second was
based on a tactical situation where the landings
would take place behind the foremost lines of
own forces. This meant that the gunners in the
first alternative would be armed with 3.7-inch
mountain howitzers instead of their normal 25-
pounders. 186 Field Regiment RA would be
flown in first, and if this was not sufficient in the
first phase, 80 Field Regiment RA would follow
suit. In the second alternative two regiments
would be landed with
25-pounders.
The
remaining regiments would follow by sea, or be
flown in later, 407
As had been the case with the 1st Airborne
Division many planned operations had been
cancelled at the last minute with much disap-
pointment following. Finally, Operation Market
Garden materialised and transport to the
Deelen Airfield north of Arnhem was to take
place. This looked like an operation of the
second type above, i.e. it was assumed that the
Scottish division would fly in behind own
forces. Hence the gunners would come armed
with 25-pounders in the field regiments and
3.7-inch mountain howitzers in the Mountain
Regiment RA.
It was a big setback when the employment
of the division was cancelled on 20 September.
The Deelen airfield had not been captured.
Preparations for alternative plans started im-
mediately, one being a limited landing with
gliders near Arnhem. This was a transport alter-
native never prepared, but it was not a reason for
concern. The gunners were used adapting to
new conditions!
A battle group from the division was to be
landed, supported by a temporary artillery force
comprising one troop of 25-pounders from 80
Field Regiment RA (B Troop), 452 Mountain
Battery RA and an anti-tank battery. This force
would use Horsa gliders but also quite a number
of American Waco gliders. 408
When bad weather and the changing tactical
situation finally made this alternative employ-
ment impossible too, great disappointment was
unavoidable. Maior Ross wrote:409
The weather had now definitely taken a turn for
the worse, and further postponements rendered
negligible our chance of going. when the oallant
survivors of Arhem turned up in Lincoln, saving
that with guns thev would have held on, a wave
of disappointment swept all ranks. It was the anti-
climax after three months of particularly hard
