GUNFIRE
General Sir Alan Brooke (background as a
Gunner Officer) this was however prevented
So, in August 1941 the very first AOP Squadron
RAF
Air Observation Squadron was
formed. 102 This and two other squadrons were
planned to be equipped with Stinson aircraft, but
this did not take place. During 1941 a new
version of the Taylorcraft aircraft had been
developed specifically for these first squadrons
This aircraft was the Taylorcraft Auster simply
known as the 'Auster'. It was to be manufactured
in several successively improved versions; in total
1.604 aircraft were delivered to British and
Commonwealth Air Forces (Fig. 6-4)
It was to take more than a year before the
new organisation was tested in battle for the first
time. This took place in Operation Torch, the
allied invasion in Northern Africa in November
1942. The person who made it happen was a
very able man. It was Jack Parham, i.e. one of the
pioneers, now Brigadier and Commander Roval
Artillery of the 1st British Army. He took a
personal interest in this test
Several AOP Squadrons were under estab-
lishment and training in Britain at the beginning
of 1943. A second squadron was ready for active
service in March, the 654 AOP Squadron RAF,
which was transferred to the front in Tunisia.
'The denomination 'AOP' had now been estab-
lished as an acronym for 'Air Observation Post'
This type of squadron was now well established
as an intelligence and fire control resource for
the Royal Artillery. In parallel with provision of
Fig. 6-4 Fire control from the air became a more
common method closer to the front than deeper into
the theatre where the RAF Army Cooperation
Squadrons operated. Air squadrons with gunners as
pilots and at the same time fire observation officers
used the Auster type of aircraft and were commis-
sioned in 1942 (RAHT)
more squadrons during the war, tactics and
methods were gradually further developed and
improved. The flying gunner officers became
more and more skilled to use their 'instrument';
they understood well when a single target like a
gun or a tank was best engaged by one heavy
gun or when the target was best engaged by a
concentration of 600 guns, e.g. when a large
enemy counter-attack was to be stopped. They
also determined when the best fire alternative
was engagement by ships of the Royal Navy. An
extra-ordinary example of this flexibility took
place on 17 September 1944, when the fire from
the coast artillery at Dover together with the fire
from huge rallway
guns destroyed
several
German coast artillery guns across the Channel,
which was arranged in connection with a
Canadian assault, 103
When the organisation based on experience
in battle had stabilised, a typical AOP Squadron
could have the composition as is here illustrated
with 656 AOP Squadron as an example; this
squadron became operative on 31 December
1947-
RA Officers (all pilots)
23
RAF Officers (not pilots)
RA Other Ranks
RAF Other Ranks
i.e. in total
196 men
The emblem of this squadron is shown in
Fig. 6-5.
The manpower was distributed in Squadron
Headquarters and three Flights (A, B and C
Flight). The latter were in their turn divided in
Flight Headquarters and four Sections.
Section was commanded by a RA Captain/Pilot
as was the Flight. The Section had one aircraft,
which was maintained by technicians from the
RAF A signaller from RA was responsible for
radio communication with the aircraft equipped
with a No. 22 wireless set. For communication
with the artillery regiment to be assisted a second
set of the same type was used. The headquarters
of the RAF Squadrons and Flights had the same
type of radio communication equipment. In the
Section there was also a gunner serving as
Batman/Driver.
The AOP Squadron thus normally had
twelve aircraft, but in some of them a fourth
Flight was attached, i.e. the number of aircraft
was increased to sixteen. 104
Fig. 6-5 The emblem of 656 AOP Squadron RAF illus-
trates the cooperation between the gunners and RAF
(RAHT)
One could perhaps perceive a 'hybrid' formation
of this kind, with manpower from both RA and
RAF, to experience some 'frictions' between the
two groups. This seems, however, not have been
the case, on the contrary, many statements of the
opposite can be found. Fighting spirit was
normally remarkably good.
The twelve - by and by - AOP Squadrons
were together with the RAF Army Cooperation
Squadrons the main resources available to the
artillery as regards intelligence acquisition and
fire control from the air. But situations appeared
when the resources were not sufficient and some
kind of improvisation was required. This was in
particular the case in Burma, where the jungle
often made direct observation on the ground
impossible or at least very difficult. Airborne
resources were therefore very welcome as a
complement. London could not allocate more
than one squadron to this theatre, 656 AOP
Squadron mentioned above. Its twelve aircraft
certainly could not meet the demand when the
fighting was dispersed over a very large area. But
in the 14th Army an innovative spirit was always
hand
when
difficulties
arose.
The
commanders and their units were used to
LOOKING FAR INTO THE BATTLEFIELD
improvisation and keen to find local solutions to
emerging problems.
A very valuable resource in this context was
the US Army Air Force, which had a large
number of Stinson L-5 light aircraft organised
in Liaison squadrons. One of these was attached
to each British Corps in Burma. The primary
tasks were liaison flights and evacuation of
wounded. Besides the pilot and a passenger the
aircraft could transport one stretcher with a
wounded soldier. The versatility of the aircraft
gave it the nickname 'The flying Jeep'.
A few British artillery units, amongst them
136 Field Regiment RA, which was one of the
regiments of the 7th Indian Division, persuaded
the American pilots and their chiefs to let them
use the aircraft also for fire observation and
control.
Neither the pilots nor the gunner
officers had anv tramning whatsoever for this, so
training and exercises were organised, and this
with great enthusiasm on both sides! The pilots
found this more advanced type of flying much
more exciting than the daily duties as 'taxi and
ambulance drivers'. And the Observation Post
Officers indeed appreciated the much improved
observation
opportunities.
Artiller
Commander RA of the 19th Indian Division
also recognised the advantages and took similar
steps. So, in parallel with the professional 656
AOP Squadron resources were created for fire
observation and control from the air by means
of, as they were called, Amateur Air Ops. 106
Air observation units were Corps units and
were concentrated in the European theatres of
war. Normal practice was to attach one squadron
to each British Corps and having its three Flights
delegated with one to each division of the Corps.
If an Army Group Royal Artillery (AGRA) was
allotted to a Corps, this was normally also given
an AOP Flight with four aircraft. But before all
resources had been provided, it was necessary to
make the best of the situation and allocate scarce
resources to formations where they were most
needed. Four AOP Squadrons were eventually
allotted to the Italian theatre and seven to the
Northwest European theatre. As mentioned.
only one was provided in Burma: with normal
practice four would have been given.
The light aircraft only required around 100
yards to take off, so a take off/landing strip of
250-300 yards was sufficient to find. Hence, it
was often easy to deploy the aircraft close to
artillery headquarters and deployed guns. 107
