GUNFIRE
More artillery
crossed river Waal on 24
September. 55 Field Regiment RA from the
Guards Division came in different batches
during the afternoon and deployed a couple of
kilometres northwest of the Nijmegen road
bridge. From there they could possibly reach the
northern shore of the Rhine, but hardly of any
help to the besieged within the perimeter.
124 Field Regiment RA had a better
position. I was one of the regiments from the
50th (Northumbrian) Division, which initially
had been far back in the divisional columns and
been stopped south of Veghel when 'Club Route'
was cut off. But on 23rd September they could
pass this village together with 69 Infantry
Brigade and pass Nijmegen in the morning the
following day. The regimental headquarters
deployed southeast of Valburg. Probably the
batteries were in positions a bit further to the
north in order to get the whole Oosterbeek
perimeter within range. Targets furthest away
were at maximum range when Super Charge
was used
In the war diary of 64 Medium Regiment
RA it is noted at 20.30 hours on 23 September
that the second-in-command in the morning the
following day should reconnoitre gun positions
south of Valburg (coordinates 6669 and W1/2
6769 were given). No entry in the war diary
confirms however if this was done or whether re-
deployment actually took place. But in the
personal diary of the commanding officer, Lieu-
tenant Colonel Hunt it is clearly stated that 212
Battery RA (5.5-inch guns), which had to come
closer to Oosterbeek, really deployed on 25
September. The battery was ready for action at
15.00 hours.414 The war diary of 47 Composite
Battery RA confirms this. The surveyors fixed
the location of the battery that day at 13.00
hours; the grid square was 6867.415
A redeployment of this battery with its 5.5-
inch guns was indeed a necessity due to the am-
munition situation. In the war diary it is noted at
10.50 hours on 24 September that 212 Battery
RA had used all 80-1b shells, which is further
confirmed at 17.15 hours that day. The battery
on the other hand still had 175 100-lb shells, but
this type of shell gave a shorter range by approx-
imately 2km
As regards the 211 Battery RA with 4.5-inch
guns the situation was brighter. There were stil
about 120 shells per gun and another 105 shells
per gun available at a rear ammunition depot
When it comes to 155-mm ammunition for
the guns of 419 Heavy Battery RA, the situation
was critical. At the same time this battery had
only 41 shells per gun left, and at the rear am-
munition depot, Second Line, none! Major
Palmer notes in his account for 25th September
that they were down at only eight shells per gun.
Map 21-5 illustrates where the various
artillery units were deployed in the evening of
25th September
when Operation Market
Garden was close to its end, as far as can be
confirmed by original sources. For a couple of
them, question marks prevail.
The evacuation was to be protected by a
massive artillery fire during the final night. On
one hand this was to conceal sounds and
movements from the perimeter, on the other
hand to give the Germans an impression that a
large river crossing from the south was taking
place. The fire plan was prepared by the divi-
sional artillery commander Lieutenant Colonel
Loder-Symonds, assisted by Major Taylor and
Lieutenant de Burgh at his headquarters. The
plan was transmitted on radio, slightly coded by
means of Slidex, in two long messages. Unfor-
tunately these messages have not been found.
On the other hand two fire orders from the
43rd (Wessex) Division dated 25 September
are available in archives. Most likely these have
been prepared on the basis of the plan sent
from the artillery headquarters of the airborne
division. 41
The smaller of these was called "Swindon'
and was to be fired by 94 Field Regiment RA.
This was part of a deception plan aimed at con-
cealing the real intentions, evacuation at Oost-
erbeek. A deceptive attack was to be launched
by 4 Battalion Wiltshire Regiment of 129
Infantry Brigade. The feint attack was to be
executed a bit to the east of the village Heteren
about 3km downstream of the Oosterbeek
perimeter. Artillery fire was to be opened at
20.50 hours against 'targets' on the northern
shore and later be moved step-wise further
away from the river as if a landing of forces
from the southern side took place. To add some
confusion smoke belts were to be fired at
21.00-21.15 hours.
The fire plan was to be repeated a couple of
times during the evening including addition of
some new targets. 4y
The larger fire plan was called 'Java' and is
illustrated in Map 2 lan was called Java and is
308
BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
and the time for their engagement is given by
'TI', 'T2' and 'OC' respectively. 'T' means H-
30 to H+120 minutes, and "T2' means H+120
to H+270 minutes. 'OC' means 'On Command',
ie. the tactical situation would determine when
these targets should be engaged. We can note
here that units firing "T' + "T2' would fire con-
tinuously for five hours!
As shown on Map 21-6 a line of defensive
fire around the whole perimeter was to be fired.
All units illustrated on Map 21-5 would be
engaged except the heavy battery and those units
which had difficulties in reaching the perimeter,
ie. 55 Field Regiment RA and 511 Battery RA.
The heavy anti-aircraft battery was also given an
important role against ground targets. The 'H'
hour was decided to be 21.00 hours, which
implied continuous fire until 02.00 hours 26
September. The fire order had all details about
targets and times for engagement, i.e. for a
specific unit which targets to engage, when to
start and when to finish firing. Ammunition ex-
penditure and fire intensity were other details in
the order. The limited availability of artillery am-
munition implied a directive to the units to
preferably fire short bursts rather than continu-
ously. In particular the medium regiments had
to be careful with their spending. As an example,
for a task over two and a half hours, they were to
fire only 20 rounds per gun, i.e. on average one
round per 7-8 minutes.
The field regiments being better off could
fire more, but for these still not more than one
round on average per two minutes could be
In addition to the pre-planned fire during
the night, some targets could, as we have seen be
ngaged on order: those denominated 'OC' on
Map 21-6. Exact time for firing was not given
in the order. These targets were located just
outside the western side of the perimeter with a
Certain concentration on the southern sector. It
seems likely that the intention was to protect the
evacuation of 4 Dorset Battalion with fire on
these targets.
begin at 02.00 hours at the earliest.
This evacuation was assumed to
94 Field Regiment RA was to be employed
by order only, and this particularly against
targets further to the west, near those engaged in
"Swindon' as part of the deception plan.
In the literature the extensive defensive fire
programme is often described in terms such as
"massive firing, violent artillery fire', etc. If the
fire order Java' was followed, as much seems to
confirm, this was hardly the case. The fact that
the firing was still experienced as 'massive' and
"violent' might be a consequence of the large
number of batteries with different types of gun
employed (at least 142 guns) and that the fire
from this came irregularly and unsynchronised.
Hence, all the time shells whistled through the
air on different targets and in numerous bursts
within a fairly limited area. And against the same
targets, fire continued for hours. The medium
batteries fired, as mentioned, for five hours as
did 431 Battery RA of 147 Field Regiment RHA
and other field batteries.
Some field regiments also fired smoke shells
during the morning hours to protect the crossing
of late stragglers when light began to return.
Responsible for this part of the overall artillery
programme
was
The
commander of
(Wessex) Field Regiment RA. Douglas Goddard
noted that his battery fired smoke shells between
04.00 and 06.30 hours. For the 24 hours period
25-26 September his battery fired in total some
50 smoke shells, probably most of them were
fired during these morning hours. 418
Lieutenant Sidney Beck who on the 25
September was at the Groesbeek Hill with his SP
Regiment in support of the Americans has in his
personal diary described how they experienced
the evacuation as 'spectators': 419
News was still vague and disturbing. Our
thoughts were still with the boys at Arnhem. That
night we stood outside our bivvies in the dark and
watched the almost continuous flash of gunfire.
Lo the north the skyline, as far as we could see.
the brilliant yellow flashes of cordite were illumi-
nated. The continuous dull roar of the guns
throbbed in the air and at times the ground
trembled with the intensity of the barrage. It went
on for hours, seemingly without a pause, and we
stood silent and fascinated wondering [...] We'd
seen nothing like this before. There
was
something angry in the air, as though great
dragons were at bay, roaring and spitting
defiance. Was it the last assault crossing, the
crown of the operation. or. and none dared to
voice these thoughts, was it withdrawal, a
desperate rearguard action? Sometimes after
midnight there was a sudden hush and the
horizon darkened and quietened. We turned in,
puzzled but hopeful
