was well coordinated with simultaneous attacks
by strong American, French and Polish units
The barrage fired along the 20km-long front
Ine from Cassino to the sea was one of the
largest artillery concentrations in the Second
World War.
Sidney Kirkman stayed on in Italy until the
beginning of 1945 when he was injured and had
to leave his command and return to England. He
had been a much-appreciated commander in
Italy and he was much missed. After having
recovered, he was appointed commander of all
forces in Southern England. General Officer
Commanding-in-Chief Southern Command. In
this capacity, he received the German capitula-
tion on the Channel Islands
He was assigned several important positions
after the war, amongst them commander of a
Corps in the British Army of the Rhine and
Deputy Chief of the Imperial General Staff
Another important task given to him was to
assume command of all the administrative work
of the British Army as Quarter Master General,
now with the rank of a full General. Further-
more, he was member of the prestigious Army
Council 1945-1950.
Kirkman retired from the Army in 1950, but
other important responsibilities followed. He was
nominated Special Financial Representative in
Germany on behalf of the British Government
1951-1952.
Finally, in 1954-1960 he was
Director General Civil Defence. He never lost
an interest in the
Royal Artillery
and his
comrades-in-arm. In the period 1947-1957 he
held the position of honour Colonel Comman-
dant Royal Artillery. It must finally be mentioned
that he was a popular lecturer and leader of
seminars in military history at various univers1-
ties as well
General Sir Sidney Chevalier Kirkman died
at the age of 87 years on 5 November 1982.
Distinguished Territorial officers
Lieutenant Colonel, Professor 7ohn T. Whetton,
OBE, DSO, MC
Whetton was born on 27 October 1894 in New
Fryston near Castleford as one of 13 brothers
and sisters. He had to leave school already at the
age of thirteen and start working in a coal mine,
but he had an interest in, and the talent for,
further study. In 1908-1914, he studied at
Castleford Technical College. When the First
World War broke out he finished his studies and
GUNFIRE
got enlisted in the Army and served in France.
He was seriously wounded in 1916 and sent
home. His skill had been observed and he was
promoted several times. In 1918, when he had
recovered from his wounds, he was constituted
Captain
and became commander of a ski
company
(!), which was engaged in Russia
against the Bolsheviks after the Russian revolu-
tion. He was awarded both a Russian Order and
the British Military Cross (MC).
Back in England from Russia in 1920, he
was demobilised and began studying mining
techniques
at
the
Leeds University
and
graduated as Bachelor of Science in 1923 and
Master of Science in 1925. He continued along
the academic route at Armstrong College in
Newcastle, where he researched and lectured in
mining techniques,
applied geophysics and
survey up to 1939 when the war broke out. His
interest in the nation's defence and his experi-
ence from World War I soon made him an officer
of the Territorial Army. In this capacity, he took
part in the compulsory yearly training that the
civilians of this army had to undertake. In
parallel with his demanding academic career he
also had embarked on a military career.
As a consequence of his first-class civil and
military qualifications he was in 1937 requested
to build a new survey regiment, which was given
the name 4th (Durham) Survey Regiment TA.
He now held the rank of Lieutenant Colonel.
Before this, there were only thretengular survey
regiments in the Royal Artillery and it was now
obvious that more were
needed. Over the
coming years, ten regiments would gradually
come into operation in the British Army.
Whetton's regiment was set on war foot
when the war broke out, and he arranged with
strong hand systematic training of it including
many exercises to make it ready for war service.
As we have seen in a previous Chapter, the
regiment was in 1940 sent to Egypt, where it was
put under command of 8 Army as the only
survey regiment! Here a homible how came
upon it in June 1942 when one of the two
batteries was caught at Tobruk, this when the
locked-in British forces hauto surrender to
Rommel.
Whetton demonstrated his strong leadership
in this severe situation and eate bichd uite soon
a new battery with surveyors flown in from
England. The
regiment was again complete
when the battle of El Alvas a bian on 23
356
GUNNERS WE HAVE MET
October 1942. The rapid advance westwards by
the 8th Army after this battle introduced many
challenging survey problems to the regimental
surveyors, but also to the 'Flash Spotters' and the
'Sound Rangers'. With his excellent background,
Whetton quickly found good solutions to the
problems emerging.
Whetton's regiment was later taken back to
England to be attached to XXX Corps. The
regiment was to support the artillery of the
Corps when landing in Normandy on D-Day, 6
une 1944
and the
subsequent battle
of
Normandy and North-West Europe. At the
beginning of 1945, Whetton was once again
wounded and had to leave the regiment. He was
to experience the end of the war in England.
John Whetton's extraordinary successful and
much appreciated contribution to the war effort
was rewarded several times. He was made
Officer of the Order of the British Empire
(OBE) by H.M. the King in 1941 and awarded
the Distinguished Service Order (DSO) in
1943. He continued as an energetic commander
of 4th (Durham) Survey Regiment TA for three
more years after the war.
Whetton returned to the academic world
when being demobilised after the war. He was
appointed Professor of Mining Sciences
Leeds University in 1945 and began immedi-
ately with well-known determination and enthu-
siasm to bring up research and academic
education to high standard. In 1957-1959 he
was Pro-Vice Chancellor of his university. He
maintained a large international network with
colleagues around the world up to high age. He
was entrusted many posts also outside
academic world.
The
Professor John T. Whetton died at the age of
85 on 23 September 1979. He is a good example
on how Britain's armed forces took advantage of
the skill of talented civilians with preparedness
to contribute in peace and war. Many were
engaged as officers of Territorial Army' and
some were promoted to high positions. Two of
them I would like to just mention very briefly,
but their achievements would be worth more
complete presentations in another context.
Brigadier, Chief Dentist Alfred Francis Hely
Another good example of a distinguished terri-
torial officer is Hely. Despite being a dentist, he
served as artillery officer in the Territorial Army'
and was commander of a regiment in North
Africa during the first part of the war. Later he
became divisional artillery commander (CRA)
and deputy divisional commander in Burma, a
most distinguished role indeed entrusted a ter-
ritorial officer.
Brigadier, Sir Philip J. D. Toosey
Toosey is one of the most well known of senior
territorial officers. In his civilian life, before and
after the war, he was an investment bank
executive. He too served as commander of a
Royal Artillery regiment when the war broke out,
and was a very skilled and by all appreciated
officer. He served in Singapore commanding 135
Field Regiment RA when the British had to
surrender to the Japanese on 15 February1942.
As prisoner of war he was to play a remarkable
role as the head of several prison camps through
the war, always making his utmost to assist his
fellow prisoners, thus taking consistent large
personal risks. He was the model for the
character Colonel Nicholson in the cinema film
The Bridge on the River Kwai, played by Sir Alec
Guiness, who however plaid a much different
role than the much-praised role Toosey played in
real life. After the war, Toosey was promoted
Honorary Brigadier and commander of an Army
Group Royal Artillery (AGRA) for some years.
He
assumed this military responsibility
addition to an impressive post-war civilian career.
They used the sword - the subalterns
The large number of artillery formations during
the war required numerous subalterns. 1.e. officers
with the rank 2nd Lieutenant and Lieutenant.
They were needed to assist in deployment of
batteries and their troops and, when this was done,
to serve at the battery and troop command posts
with fire planning, managing artillery boards. cal.
culations of 'corrections of the moment', prepara-
tion of laving data for the guns and manv more
gunnery tasks related to the indirect fire system'.
The workload was often extremely hich The suh.
alterns had to be ready also to replace troop com-
manders in battle s HOOs/OPos
The subalterns were in most cases often
young men, often of the age 20-22 years, who
after school had been rapidly trained to be com-
missioned as officers (cf. Chapter 13). In that
initial training they were given the basics of their
profession, war service gave the necessary extra
training, making them real gunnery specialists
after some time.
