20. A New Front is Opened - Normandy
Rarely has a single human been under such
pressure as the allied Commander-in-Chief,
General Eisenhower, was during the morning
hours on 5 une 1944. At least when one 1s
looking at the consequences of the decision he
had to make. As we know, the decision was 'We
will sail tomorrow'! [de Guingand, but other
sources have other versions] The invasion in
Normandy was to be launched on 6 June. The
bad weather during the past few days would
improve
little
during
that
day.
All
preparations were finished, troops had been
loaded on-board the transport ships, naval
ships and air forces were ready to go since one
day back.
Beginning at dawn the landings were to take
place at two American sectors. Utah
andi
Omaha, and three British-Canadian, Gold, Juno
and Sword. Three infantry divisions were to
land in the western American sectors and three
also in the eastern British-Canadian sectors.
These landings were to be preceded by the
landing of two American airborne divisions on
the western flank and one British on the eastern.
They were to seal off the main landing area and
by that impede German attempts for early
counter-attacks. We can see the operation area
at large on Map
20-1, where the planned
extension of the bridgehead at some dates is
indicated
The American divisions were part of the 1st
US Army under General Bradley
and the
British-Canadian part of the 2nd British Army
under General Dempsey. The armies constituted
together 21st Army Group commanded by
General Montgomery.
To make the operation a success, a logistic
planning was required that might be the most
demanding and extensive one humanity ever had
experienced then and later. And to make the plan
work, a most skilled transport management must
be at hand, as well as prepared and trained units
of all kinds
The presentation of the battle of Normandy
now following is limited to the British sector.
Preceding bombardment - the task of the
navies and air forces
An extensive bombardment was to precede the
landings aiming at the destruction or neutralisa-
tion of known coast artillery batteries and field
artillery deployments. Another aim was destruc-
tion of fortified beach defence positions. Hence,
it was the 'Atlantic Wall' that was the objective.
the programme started months before the D
Day
and
was
coordinated with extensive
bombings further to the east and north for
deception purposes.
The dav
before the
landings, the bombardments near the landing
beaches were intensified and just a few hours
before the first landings, the Royal Navy
commenced an intensive bombardment.
Thirteen ships were engaged in the British-
Canadian sector with its three landing zones. We
summarise the number of guns of different
calibres of these ships: 345
1 Monitor
2 Battle Ships
2 x 38 cm (2 x 15 inch)
16 x 38 cm, 20 x 15.2 cm,
16 x 10.2 cm (16 x 15,
1 Heavy Cruiser
20 x 6, 16 x 4 inch)
7 x 19 cm, 9 x 10.2 cm
1 Dutch Gun Vessel
(7 x 7.5, 9 x 4 inch)
3 x 15 cm (3 x 5.9 inch)
A strong reserve was available
1 Battle Ship
9 x 40.6 cm, 12 x 15.2 cm,
6 x 12 cm (9 x 16. 12 x 6,
6 X 4.7 inch)
1 Monitor
2 x 38 cm, 8 x 10.2 cm
(2 x 15, 8 x 4 inch)
If we group all these guns in accordance with
land artillery principles we can see that the Royal
Navy made available the following resources for
the preceding bombardment and later direct
support:
Light artillery (cf. divisional artillery)
Medium artillery
Heavy artillery
Super Heavy artillery
93 pieces
24 neces
93 nieces
29 pieces
258
A NEW FRONT IS OPENED - NORMANDY
The total number of guns, 239, can be compared
with the artillery resources normally being
available to a Corps, which were 300-350 guns.
The air attacks began when the airborne
troops had commenced their landings at 01.30
hours and continued until dawn when the naval
ships took over from
positions
outside the
landing beaches at 05.00-05.30 hours. Their
bombardment covered the transport of assault
units towards the beaches and was aimed at
continued destruction and neutralisation of
artillery that could fire at the transport ships and
all landing craft. Initially observation and control
of this fire was the task of RAF Army-Coopera-
tion Squadrons. As soon as possible direct fire
control was to be taken over by landed Observa-
tion Parties, Forward Bombardment Observers
(FBO). These parties could communicate
directly with the artillery ships but also with
artillery commanders of landed infantry units.
The detailed planning of the artillery
programme preceding the landings was the re-
sponsibility of the artillery headquarters of the
2nd British Army. The artillery commander of
this army was Jack Parham, who afterwards
expressed how strange it was to have an artillery
headquarters at this high level to prepare
detailed fire orders for the participating ships
and air force units. But... Operation Overlord
was certainly not an ordinary type of operation!
In the British-Canadian landing zones, the
first units were to disembark their landing craft
at 07.25 hours on D-Day, 6 June 1944. Before
this, disembarkation of transport ships into the
small landing craft and their ranging was a time-
consuming process. Upon this followed the rush
towards the beaches, in all 3-4 hours were
required for the whole process, a very tough and
demanding time for the infantry in the dark, and
exposed to heavy sea as they were.
The final phase of covering bombardment
in the British-Canadian sector was made by 37
destroyers moving at the flanks of the columns
of landing craft and firing continuously at the
beach defences. The fire from guns on-board the
landing craft themselves,
miictl
mentioned. We will come back to that below
(Fig. 20-1).
Fig. 20.1 Destroyers of the Hunt Class moving towards the Normandy beaches on the flanks of the invading
forces fired continuously towards targets near the beaches (RAHT)
