Air Force and changed tactics towards terror
bombing of London and other large cities, the
so-called Blitz.
The Roval Navy had embarked on an
offensive strategy right from the beginning
including daring attacks into the ports where
invasion vessels and barges were assembled, thus
demonstrated that another prerequisite was
denied the Germans. British naval ships could
not be kept away from the planned invasion
lanes.
When neither Luftwaffe nor Kriegsmarine
had succeeded, Hitler had to cancel the whole
operation on 17 September, at least 'for the time
being'
With this decision, the first phase of invasion
defence ended, thanks to the Royal Air Force
and, even more, the Royal Navy. They had saved
the countrv
The British Army was now much stronger
than it had been just after Dunkirk. All had been
done to restore fighting strength, but although
British industry after the summer was working
flat out, it would take a long time until the Army
had compensated for what had been lost in
France (and Norway). Replacing lost heavy
equipment and armament of numerous new Ter-
ritorial formations and other new formations was
still a process to take several years
In September
1940, the Army had
26
divisions and 16 independent brigades, amongst
them a few armoured brigades. Contingents had
also arrived from Australia and New Zealand.
The divisions
were grouped
in twelve
Corps, two of which were mobile forces. One
was IV Corps in which the 2nd Armoured
Division was grouped along with two infantry
divisions. The second 'mobile' force was VII
Corps with the lst Armoured Division and the
1st Canadian infantry
division.
The
armoured divisions were the only so far existing
of this type
Looking at the artillery we can now see that
a significant force had emerged. In September
there were 94 Field Regiments, out of which 22
were Army Field Regiments attached to the five
regional commands, Western Command etc.,
which constituted the national military structure
of the time. The bulk of the regiments were divi-
sional artillery. In Northern Command there
were also three light batteries, the embryo of the
airborne light regiments to be established later.
Twenty-seven medium regiments were in
GUNFIRE
place; 17 of these were army units, the rest Corps
Five heavy and three super heavy
regiments added to the national artillery force.
In terms of regiments, it was indeed an
impressive force built up till September 1940.
But...still a very troublesome shortage of
modern guns prevailed. The number of field
regiments
mentioned plus training units
would need around 3,000 guns, reserves for
damages and war losses included. What they
had were 400 obsolete guns and some 500
modern 25-pounders. To this stock a few
hundreds of the American 75-mm guns 'on
loan' must be added.
The medium regiments would nominally
have together 500à 600 modern guns but after
Dunkirk only 200 obsolete guns were available
in England. No production of the new genera-
ton of medium guns had as vet commenced
Searching 'in the barns' for more guns had to be
pursued. Those then found had to be brought
into order as soon as possible. Important too,
was to get the guns modernised without delay.
Other Commonwealth countries were also asked
to help. Even if the British Army now in
September was much stronger it is, in respect of
remaining deficits, hard to believe that it had
been able to quickly enough concentrate a force
needed to defeat the nine well-trained German
divisions that were to land in England in the first
wave, had Operation Seelöwe been launched
successfully.
The necessary redeployment and concen-
tration of the British artillery to counter a large-
scale invasion, wherever it was to take place
stood small chances to succeed. Not only the
equipment shortage would make it difficult, but
also the command structure was a problem
In September 1940 large contingents from
Other
countries, in particular from those
occupied by Germany, had been assimilated in
the British Army. The largest was the Poles,
around 18,000 were already serving with the
British Army. Their number was to be doubled
many times during coming years. Second largest
contingent was the Norwegian. 256 Some of these
were gunners and early photographs show the
Norwegians training in Scotland and other
places with the French-designed 75-mm guns,
when such had arrived from America in accor-
dance with the 'loan agreement'.
FROM IMMINENT INVASION THREAT TO OFFENSIVE TRAINING
Second phase of invasion defence -
continued rearmament, training,
development of new methods
The first Phase can be said to have ended when
Operation Seelöwe was cancelled and the most
imminent invasion threat had disappeared. It
was in September 1940 that the war in North
Africa required more
attention and more
resources than those available in the British Nile
Army. A few divisions with their artillery were
now detached to Egypt by sea transport via
Cape of Good Hope. Amongst these was 51
Field Regiment RA. For the gunners of 203
Battery RA, it was to become a dramatic change
from having fought in snowy mountains in
Norway to preparing for battle in the deserts of
North Africa.
They had to stand up for the
motto of the Royal Artillery: 'Ubique - Quo Fas
et Gloria Ducunt' (cf. Chapter 2). Gunners had
to act 'Ubique', i.e. 'Everywhere'. We will in the
next Chapter see what this meant to them.
At home rearmament went on decisively and
atever increasing speed. There was a worry that
Hitler might again try to launch an invasion in
the spring 1941. Preparations were made over
the winter to meet such a threat in line with
General Brooke's strategy.
In parallel with
upgrading of units with new guns and training,
exercises were run intensively and systematically.
It was a matter of providing individual training
but also collective training at troop and battery
levels to become better prepared for defensive
tasks. Numerous recruits and conscripts were to
bring up the strength of formations to nominal
level, and they must be given basic skills and
become proficient gunners as soon as possible.
The respite should not be given up!
In the battle preparations, deployment and
firing exercises with live ammunition at battery
and regimental levels became an important in-
gredient on the part of restored and new artillery
units (F1g. 18-3)
It implied a great challenge for unit com-
manders to plan and run all training and firing
exercises. These were, as we have seen, arranged
at the five permanent large training ranges but
also to places near those where units were
deployed for invasion defence. One such area
was South Downs near the southern coast of
England. Firing with live artillery ammunition
Fig. 18-3 The Retich artillery graduall he and not The dian do fonce was trime
and improved through more gradualy recovexercises, often with live ammunition (RAH I
