GUNFIRE
No role for the divisional artillery commander
and his staff was foreseen. The defence in this
area did not last long. The following day, 23
May, Lord Gort had to order the Arras garrison
to withdraw westwards in order to avoid encir-
clement.
BEF under extreme pressure but holds
the right flank thanks to its artillery
The two British divisions, the Sth
and 50th
Infantry Divisions, still prepared a new larger
attack southwards, as we have seen. In the evening
25 May the divisional artillery commander of the
5th Division had called all his regimental com-
manders to his HQS near Douai to give order for
reconnaissance related to this attack. But when the
concerned officers arrived, they were met by the
message that the operation had been cancelled. 223
A few hours later, at midnight, the artiller
commander received order from the divisional
commander that he should immediately bring his
artillery up to the Ypres area, this was due to an
imminent Belgian collapse. Two field regiments,
9 and 91 Field Regiment RA, had not left the
division as the third regiment, 92 Field Regiment
RA, had, but now two other regiments were
attached, 18 and 97 Field Regiment RA. The
former came from the 48th Infantry Division
whereas the latter was a unit from III Corps.
A warning order regarding reconnaissance
and deployment was immediately issued to get
the units moving. At 04.00 hours on 26 Mav, the
inal order was given by the divisional artiller
commander. This took place just west of Ypres
Canal, to be more specific at Ploegsteert north
of Armentières. Around 12.00 hours most
artillery units were in place there and ready to
fire. The attacking German units had not as yet
reached the
area, so the gunners could take
advantage of the afternoon for fire planning and
improving the protection of their positions
Soon, however, they were all dragged into
heavy fighting, which culminated on the 27-28
May. Not least due to strong action by the Corps
commander himself, the old ex-gunner Alan
Brooke, and the
two divisional artillery com-
manders, everything possible was done to close
the gap against the attackers at this sector of the
front. This was to be accomplished by employing
a few medium regiments as reinforcement and
organising efficient re-supply of ammunition.
So here for the survival of the BEF, a most
vital concentration of available artillery resources
was arranged. The war diary of HQRA S
Infantry Division and a number of preserved
operation orders testify the forceful engagement
by,
in
Parucular.
divisional
arillery
commander and his staff to arrange an efficient
use of the artillery resources, which saved the
situation. As an example, we can look at the
fireplan for defensive and counter preparation
fire produced at the divisional level, which is
graphically illustrated in Map 16-6.
I have based this map on the written
fire plan with its attachments that the divisional
artillery commander issued to subordinated
units in the evening of 26 May. 24 From this
map, we can see that the 5th Infantry Division
took up defence with four infantry brigades
between Ypres and Comines. The forward line
followed the
canal and the railway close to it. A
fourth brigade had now been attached to the
division,
Broade. which
belonged to
sources are not consistent as regards the deploy-
ment of this brigade, which mavbe is due to the
fact that it was engaged in a counter-attack as di-
visional reserve, when the situation became very
critical. In Map 16-6 it has been placed in ac-
cordance with the divisional artillery order
mentioned above.
Closest to the front line, we can see a series
of 'DE" targets (Defensive Fire) marked DE"
plus a number. Further to the east, 2-3km, a
number of 'CP' targets were prepared (Counter
Preparation Fire), these also with a number. The
former are line targets' where the fire from
batteries are placed beside each other. The
artillery order stipulated that each regimens
were to plan their fire 300 yards beyond the fire
of the field regiments, biyards beyon dosette
own infantry positions. As we can see, it was nor
an unbroken line of defensive fire as would be
normal practice later during the war.
Turning to the 'CP'
largers.
these were
planned for concentrated fire trem alguns of a
regiment towards the samee frot. Most of the
targets were registered along a road stretching
north south in parallel with the a road here farm
buildings and small woods the loved. Places
Where the enemy was expas were locatele attack
forces or deploy artillery etc., had been selected.
I have in the map indicated which regiments
that were to prepare fire against the various
targets. We can identity tire amainst hegiments
besides the field regimens l medium Medium
1189
Regiments RA. These were not under command
of the division but were still under command of
corp;
CCMA
(Commander
Medium Artillery). The latter had, however,
ordered them to take part in the planned firing.
Coordination had thus taken place between
Brooke's Corps artillery commander (CCRA),
the CCMA
the
artillery
commander (CRA). There are despite this no
signs of planning for a concentration of all Corps
artillery against the same targets
How much ammunition was to be fired?
The order says that any call for fire should be
answered by two minutes gunfire, this for both
types of target. This implied an impact of 400-
500 shells when two regiments engaged the same
target. Defensive fire should be fired when three
green flares from Very signal pistols were fired
by the infantry, this if not the attached FOO
could give the order over telephone or radio.
The fighting on the eastern flank became as
mentioned very intense for several days, in par-
ticular over the 27-28 May. This meant that the
gunners had to fire again and again on regis-
tered, pre-planned targets. 91 Field Regiment
RA received a fire plan at 14.00 hours on 26
May and made preparatory ranging during the
afternoon, which ended at 17.00 hours.
Infantry made contact with enemy patrols
during the night and in the morning of 27 May
and the decisive battle began. 91 Field Regiment
RA records the story in its war diary. Here is an
extract:
Considerable air activity throughout morning.
The Regiment fired on D.E and C.P. tasks. Heavy
attack by enemy infantry on right and left flanks.
At one time it looked as though both flanks were
going. Orders received that the Regiment will
remain in present position until otherwise
ordered. Enemy infantry continued their attack
throughout the day, and our guns fired continu-
ally on D.F: and C.P. tasks.225
And the hard fighting continued all the evening
and night. At around 22.00 hours, the regimental
commander ordered a special control of the guns
as the enemy now was up to the own infantry
lines and friendly fire against own infantry must
be avoided at all costs. The regiment was ordered
at 03.30 hours to re-deploy backwards. The
enemy had pushed the British infantry back and
infiltrated their positions. Hence, there was a
- ACROSS THE CHANNEL
severe risk that the battery positions be overrun.
D-Troop did not manage to get away in time
and lost two guns when trying to winch the guns
out of their gun pits.
The general order for withdrawal north-
wards to river Yser came on 28 May. All unnec-
essary stores and equipment should be destroyed
including all vehicles not needed. It was made
clear again that no 18-pounders or medium guns
should be taken to the beachhead.
"The successful concentration of artillery and
the coordination of the fire planning at a most
severe phase of the battle leave us with an im-
pression of a very strong and effective divisional
aruillery
commander
The
5th
Infantry
Division. The impression is also that his staff
worked with calmness and efficiency despite the
very pressing situation. The artillery was led with
relevant, well-prepared orders and instructions
through the tough battle.
Another indication of the efficient manage-
ment of the 5th Infantry Division's artillery is
that four almost intact field regiments could be
brought into the beachhead with a total of 79
guns. Due to shortage of ammunition, they
could, however, not all be used. There were only
40 rounds left per gun. It was now decided that
the artillery of the 5th Infantry Division would
be attached to the 50th Infantry Division, and
furthermore, it was also decided that only two of
the four field regiments were to continue the
fighting. The two others were to destroy their
guns and other equipment and march down to
the beach for evacuation.
Typically British maybe, the choice of the
regiments to leave was decided by tossing a coin.
The result was that 18 Field Regiment RA and
91 Field Regiment RA would remain fighting. 9
Field Regiment RA and 97 Field Regiment RA
abandoned their equipment and went to the
beach for embarkation. 226 We may here recall
that 18 Field Regiment RA had belonged to the
48th Infantry Division and 97 Field Regiment
RA had been a GHQ/Corps unit of III Corps. It
is an illustration of the ability to improvise and
make good use of resources during those critical
days.
Brooke wrote in his diary the 28 May 1040
that the medium guns of I Corps had fired 5,000
rounds in 36 hours. By this, the front was held,
otherwise the 5th and 4th Infantry Divisions
would have been lost and II Corps rolled up. 27
In his diarv on 30 Mav he furthermore wrote
