GUNFIRE
Covering fire after the initial bombardment
When the assault troops moved towards the
beaches a violent and sustained covering fire was
needed. Several resources were available for this
kind of support. We have mentioned already the
destroyers of the Royal Navy moving in parallel
with columns of landing craft continuously firing
until around 2,000 yards from the beaches.
brigade group in their landing craft covered an
area with a depth of around 10,000 yards outside
the beach. In the columns were armed landing
craft, designated Landing Craft Gun (LCG), of
different types and with different types of gun.
They were moving in the middle of the columns
where also the assault troops were in thei
landing craft
Further back, a few landing craft with rocket
launchers were deployed. They could each fire
about 1,000 rockets against targets just beyond
the shores. The rocket salvoes were not very
accurate and the impact dispersions were quite
big, so their importance was thus more psycho-
logical - for both sides!
Towards the end of the columns came the
Priest
and 'Sexton' SP guns
of the field
regiments. As we have seen, ten regiments
equipped with these guns were to land on
D-Day. They had trained during the winter for
firing from their landing craft, Landing Craft
Tank (LCT), against beach defences. That was
known as a 'run-in-shoot'; it was planned to
begin around 10,000 yards from the beaches
and continue until the guns were around 2,000-
3,000 yards from the beach. In order to make
this possible, a smaller boat with radar fixed the
starting range and line of fire. Based on this data
and a fixed speed of 6 knots, the LCT captain
had to move towards the beach. By using a
special timepiece, artillery officers then ordered
change of the firing range (elevation) every, sa),
200 yards.
How were the guns and ammunition trans
ported to make this type of shooting possible?
The allotted landing craft, 'LCTs', were big
enough to transport a troop, i.e. four guns, and
a few tanks or half-tracks for observation parties
and command post personnel (Fig. 20-3).
Two guns were placed towards the bow
beside each other, and then came the tanks
and/or half-tracks and maybe a couple of jeeps,
then the two remaining guns. With this arrange
ment the latter could fire over the former.
landing crafts (LCT) with the guns on deck two by two. Th anded. They were transver the fonward pair durine
the advance towards the shore. This firing by the four guns rear pair of guns firen shoot" which commenced
around 6-7 miles from the shore and continued until they were a bit more than a mile from tha chore Th
technique had been much tested in exercises at home Paivere a bit more than and for RAI, RAHT Collection)
₫62
A NEW FRONT IS OPENED - NORMANDY
For the battle on shore, the guns brought
300 rounds each. Some of these were carried on
a towed sledge, called 'porpoises' (cf. Fig. 20-2).
For the 'run-in-shoot' 200 additional rounds
were provided for each gun. 350 All the ammuni-
tion was not to be consumed; a reasonable
reserve stock was to be kept. It was planned that
each regiment would fire around 1,800 rounds,
i.e. 75 rounds per gun.
This special type of firing was not done
blindly. At the front of each brigade group, a
group of small support boats moved. On-board
one of these followed a battery commander from
one of the field regiments to be landed who
could observe the fall of shots. With radio com-
munication, he could to some extent correct the
firing when needed. Many indications seem to
prove, however, that the material effect of the
"run-in-shoot' was limited. On the other hand,
many accounts suggest that the assault troops
experienced the
fire
psychologically very
positive. Certainly the fire here and there had
good neutralising effect on enemy soldiers in
open positions.
An officer who wrote down his account of
this type of firing was Lieutenant Sidney Beck
who served with 341 Battery, 86 Field Regiment
RA. An extract from his excellent account may
illustrate how it was to approach the beach while
firing this morning in June 1944. Besides, we will
come back to him several times later in the book.
But now Normandy: 351
Reveille on the L.S.I.s was 0230. Breakfast at
0300 on eggs and bacon. In the bowels of the
ship, lit only by weak orange lights, sleepy soldiers
loaded into L.C.As. At 0345 the tiny L.C.As were
lowered in the darkness into a vicious sea, which
tossed the 25-foot craft about like corks. A 1p
O.P. party set off independently in their I.C.S. to
position themselves to observe the run in shoot
B Tp O.P. party continued with the leading
company of the 7 Green Howards. It was a 7-mile
journey to the Normandy coast - a three-hour
journey of acute abdominal discomfort to one
and all.
On board the L.C. Ts the long uncomfort-
able night came to an end at 04.30 when prepa-
rations were begun for run-in-shoot. Blankets
stowed away, a hasty breakfast snatched by those
who felt capable of eating, ammunition prepared
and guns checked. Wireless silence which had
been maintained for more than 10 days was
broken at 0530 assets were switched on and com-
munications checked. By now it was light enough
to see the most amazing sight. The sea was
literally alive with ships of all shapes and sizes as
far as the eye could see. Just ahead were the small
L.C.As of the 7 Green Howards and on either
side were long lines of DUKWs, all heading in the
same direction, all intent on the strip of beach still
out of sight. The run-in-shoot began at 0645 hrs
while the L.C.Ts carrying our guns were still 7
miles from the coast. It was the signal also for the
Navy to open up. Fast destroyers raced past the
L.C.Ts firing their guns at the coast and even
drowning the noise of our own guns.
H hour, the time for the first troops to set
foot on the beaches was 0720. As the L.C. As ap-
proached the coast they were greeted by
spasmodic fire from the German coast defence
battery of 150-mm guns at Mont Fleury and the
rattle of Spandaus. A great pall of smoke drifted
along the coast line, the remains of the smoke
screen laid by our aircraft and the smoke from the
burning buildings from the bombardment and
bombing.
A few L.C.As were seen to go up on mines
but the majority picked their way through the
mines to land safely. As the L.C.As ran the last
1,000 yards to the beach the Regiments guns, stil
firing from the L.C. Ts and doing great work on
the causewav, shifted their attention to the light-
house area
The 7 Green Howards landed at 0750,
ahead of schedule. Their first objective was the
capture of the Mont Fleury batterv, which
dominated the coast. Although thev landed on thi
wrong beach, B Tp O.P. party, after trudeino
across the sand, joined up with the attackino
Company and pushed towards the enemi
Battery
Meanwhile the L.C.Ts carrying the
Regiments guns were steaming up and down off
the coast waiting for their turn to beach. The three
craft carrying A, C & T Tps beached first. A Tp
went into action immediately on the narrow strin
of beach with water lapping round their tracks.
Enemy infantry and tanks were worrying the 7
Green Howards attacking the Mont Fleury
Battery. The fire of the guns was directed on to
the enemy by Capt Perry and Capt Greig (an
F.O.O. attached to the Battery for the operation).
With this support the Green Howards rushed and
overpowered the enemy battery. the enemt
gunners being demoralized by the very heavy
