Dedicated to the Royal Regiment of Artillery
in honour of its 300 years of distinguished service
f
Gunfire: British Artillery in the Second World War
This edition published in 2017 by Frontline Books,
an imprint of Pen & Sword Books Ltd,
47 Church Street, Barnsley, S. Yorkshire, S70 2AS
Copyright © Stig H. Moberg, 2017
The right of Stig H. Moberg to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted by
him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
ISBN: 978-1-47389-560-7
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced
into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise) without the prior written permission of the
publisher. Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication may be
liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
CIP data records for this title are available from the British Library
For more information on our books, please visit
www.frontline-books.com, email info@frontline-books.com
or write to us at the above address
Printed and bound by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CRO 4YY
Typeset in 10.25/12 point Plantin Light
Contents
Foreword by Brigadier (retd) Ken Timbers RA
Preface
Acknowledgements
Part 1
Historical Background - War and Rearmament
1. The Period Before the First World War
Two pictures
The Black Prince takes to the guns
A permanent artillery organisation
The establishment of the Royal Regiment of Artillery
Twenty-two years of war against Napoleon
A paradigm shift
Ubique - Quo Fas Et Gloria Ducunt
2. The Period up to the Second World War
The great wars and the next paradigm shift
The Territorial Army - using society's best resources in times of national crisis
Artillery develops into a mighty force during the Great War
'It can be presumed...
Development against the odds
Goodbye to the horse
Organisational adaptation
Traditions and names
Twilight - War and Mobilisation
The Territorial Army (TA) doubles
To war with obsolete guns
Artillery mobilisation
4. A Decisive Rearmament
Construction takes five years
A new light standard gun for divisional artillery
12
14
38
40
