GUNFIRE
was considered appropriate, and for tank forma-
tions 200 yards every second minute.
The term 'barrage' is in literature often used
incorrectly as a term for heavy artillery fire in
general, either in defensive or offensive opera-
tions, but the term had a well-stipulated meaning
implying a stationary or moving belt of fire
providing a protective screen behind which the
attackers advanced 158
The method (principle) was not new, it had
been practiced already in the Great War, but it
was refined during the Second World War. In its
simplest form it was designed as illustrated in
Fig. 12-2.
This figure illustrates how a regiment fired
a 'barrage'. As seen, the fire from two batteries
was arranged beside each other. It was calculated
that the width of the fire of a troop was 140
yards, i.e. a battery covered a front of 270 yards
and the two 560 vards. The fire of the third
battery was superimposed over the two other
batteries. If the 'barrage' was to cover the
advance of tank formations, the regimental bel
could be reduced to around 400 yards. Several
regiments, engaged in parallel, might support a
Attack objective
B Troop
C Troop D Troop
° T 0 yards
280 yards
Start lin,
Fig. 12-2 Standard barrage to be fired by one field
regiment. The fire from two of the batteries are
beside each other along the first line, the third
battery is imposed over the two. The fire was moved
forward to subsequent lines with a speed adapted to
the advancing speed of the attacking infantry or
armoured units, for infantry normally 100 yards every
2-3 minutes, for armoured units a bit faster, say 200
yards every 2-3 minutes (Author)
larger formation's attack. As we will see some
large operations would require a front of simul-
taneous fire covering several kilometres.
Referring to Fig. 12-2 with its illustration of
the basic design of a regimental 'barrage', the
opening fire was on line a-a and when the
attackers commenced their advance the fire was
shifted to line b-b and then to c-c after 2-4
minutes etcetera, until the last line had been
reached. If deemed advantageous, pause lines
could be included in the fire plan, for instance
when the first objectives had been captured and
redeployment of the attackers was necessary
before continuing the advance. In Part 3 of the
book we will see several examples of 'barrages
with many regiments participating. A "barrage'
over a front of 4km and a depth of 4km or even
more became quite common in large operations.
In such cases pause lines were necessary and
they could imply a break in the advance for an
hour or more.
The advantage of the 'barrage' was that it
was not necessary to know exactly where the
enemy had his positions, which in particular
often would be difficult towards the depth of the
battle area. Another advantage it offered the
attackers was the psychological support they ex-
perienced from the continuous fire close ahead
of them but also further back. The disadvantages
were several. One was that the fire not always fell
on top of the enemy positions, which could
imply less efficient neutralisation when this was
most needed. Another was, as mentioned, the
waste of ammunition.
The preparations for a covering fire of this
type were simple. Regimental headquarters and
battery command posts received the corner co-
ordinates, for instance 'B' in Fig. 12-2, and the
main direction of the 'barrage'. They also had to
know the moving speed of the advance. With this
information it was easy for command posts to
prepare a 'gun programme' for every gun. This
was possible, as all calculations in relative terms
had been calculated beforehand. It was then easy
to recalculate from the real coordinates, adding
when needed also Correl cos odinates, anding
(CoM).
One problem was that the enemy's position
might be non-linear. hence they would not
conform to the linear barrage format. Positions
were placed with regard to the terrain and
tactical considerations. This meant that neutral-
isation was effective where the fire belt coincided
138
ARTILLERY BATTLE TECHNIQUES AND TACTICS
with the enemy positions whereas the fire was a
failure when not. The remedy, at least partially,
was to adapt the 'barrage layout in such a way
that fire belts better overlapped positions, at least
when the fire was to commence and where it was
to cease. Two variants existed.
One of them was called the 'wheel method.
Adaptations of the fire belts to the enemy
positions were made such that the distance
between belts were made shorter at one flank
while it was retained at 100 yards on the other
side. One never increased the distance above 100
yards. This design implied that the attackers had
to advance with different speed when it was
wanted to get them into all enemy positions sl-
multaneously. It could work if the speed differ-
ence was not too big
The other method was called the 'echelon
method. As with the
previous method the
opening line and the last were designed to
overlap enemy positions as well as it was
possible. The fire belts between these were
located with equal distance between them.
Hence, the advancing speed was expected to be
the same. The disadvantage was that attackers
had to cover different distances before breaking
in with their bayonets. Which method to choose
had to be carefully considered in respect of the
overall plan for the attack. This is an example
Where
close
cooperation
between
commander of the attackers and his artillery
commander was necessary in order to maximise
the effect of the artillery support. In large oper-
ations the two methods had to be applied in
parallel on different sectors.
The 'barrage method' worked well when the
terrain was fairly unobstructed and the attacker's
rate of advance easily predicted. In a very hilly
terrain this was not possible, in particular when
the slopes were covered with dense jungle as in
Burma. The speed of an attack in deep snow
could also be very difficult to estimate in
advance. Under these circumstances it was better
to plan the covering fire with 'timed concentra-
tions' with appropriate pause lines. Preparations
for changing of the timings and switches of fire,
as well as shifts to other targets, must also be
done, i.e. flexibility was required.
If medium guns
were
available normal
practice was to have them firing on a belt or
target beyond that of the 25-pounders, i.e. a bit
further away from the attackers in respect of
their larger safety distance. If the area to capture
was deep and availability of artillery permitted
it, several belts/lines behind each other could be
fired at simultaneously and with the fire from
medium guns superimposed over the fire from
25-pounders.
Taking as an example a 'barrage' designed
as in Fig. 12-2. One field regiment could fire at
the line a-a and another at b-b and a third one
at c-c with a medium regiment also firing at c-
c. If a Creeping Barrage was planned all the units
moved one line ahead simultaneously, say every
second minute, without changing the positions
between. An alternative was the Rolling Barrage
implying that the regiment firing on a-a, after
say, two minutes, 'jumped' over the two nearest.
which regiments continued their bombardment,
to line d-d. After another say, two minutes, it was
followed by a 'jump' by the second field regiment
from b-b to line e-e. Two minutes later this was
followed by the third field regiment and the
medium regiment which both jumped' from c-
c to f-f and so on. Hence, the barrage 'rolled'
forwards further into the area to be captured by
the attackers. A distinct advantage with this
method was that a regiment could 'stay' firing at
every line engaged longer than in the 'creeping
barrage alternative, hence the need for re-laying
the guns was reduced. This method was often
preferred when attack by tank units were
supported. Further examples will be presented
in Part 3 of the book.
The standard-pattern type of barrage was
easy to implement at command posts. The dis.
advantage was that the line targets not always
covered the terrain where enemy positions were
to be engaged. In order to get a better coverage
two alternative methods were used as indicated
in Fig. 12-3.
To the left of the middle section, which is the
simple standard version, the pattern called wheel
method' is shown. As seen the line targets have
been adjusted to cover the enemy
nositiond
better, but they are therefore not parallel. In the
left part the attackers had to slow down while
those on the right side had to cover a longer
distance before they all broke in on the defenders
simultaneously. The method required more of
calculations at command posts.
To the right of the middle section all line
targets still are parallel but the first one is placed
over the enemy position, and possible the first
objective, the so-called echelon method. As seen
the final lines do not cover the final objective.
