GUNFIRE
of staff officers as possible. For the regimental
headquarters the requirements were different. It
should not be split up. Its resources were needed
close to the front as it formed a central part of
the artillery communication system and thus the
control of the regimental fire. The headquarters
worked as a hub, when concentration of fire from
all available guns was called for, while the com-
manding officer was liaising elsewhere with the
commanding
intantry armour
officer to be
supported. In such situations the 'Regimental
Adiutant' was the key figure leading and coordi-
nating the work at the regimental headquarters,
indeed a busy time for him!
High commanders did not stav
at their
'tactical headquarters' all the time. Often they
wanted to be even closer to the front to support
their soldiers and officers doing the ongoing
fighting, in particular at the most important
frontal sector. Working radio communication
was then a must. A commander could rest
assured of this to be the case when his artillery
commander was with him. The gunners were
very good at radio communication and thu
could act also as a 'back-up' for supported unit
commanders
battle
of Arnhem in
September 1944 gave good and clear examples
of what the gunners could do.
A commander who liked to execute his
control of the ongoing fighting in this way, and
always had his artillery commander in sight, was
the Commander of XXX Corps Lieutenant
General Brian Horrocks. We can see him in this
role in Fig. 14-4. The photograph was taken
when his Corps just had crossed river Rhine in
March 1945 and fought to extend the bridge-
head.
Please note the radio equipment in his Jeep.
Is it maybe his artillery commander standing
with the map behind his back?
Fig. 14-4 When the battle was in full swing given orders must be checked and monitored. When needed they
must be altered to cope with the actual course of the battle through new verbal orders. Driving commanders
wanted to be forward near the front line units and from there aive new orders if and whan maid Hore is th
wanted to be forward near the front line units and from there give new orders if a role in connection with the
Rhine Crossing in March 1945. Observe the radio equipment in his Jeep (Imperial War Museum BU 2410)
16a
Part 3
How British Artillery Resources Were Used
- Descents into Battle History
