Number or hits
1000
Fig. 12-10 The number of rounds hitting an area of
100x100 yards as a function of the number of rounds
fired as 'Predicted Fire' in connection with the
counter-battery programs of Operation Veritable in
March 1945 (Source: Data have been compiled by the
Author from Report No.21: Accuracy of Predicted Fire
- Operation Veritable. Operational Research Sections
with 21 Army Group, June 1944-July 1945. RAHT
Collection MD/1479)
the centre of the target area. 65 In Fig. 12-10 the
result of the investigation is shown graphically.
From this it can be seen the number of hits
within 100 x 100 yards as a function of the
ordered number of rounds. 166
Efforts were made to find the reasons for the
poor accuracy
and
several factors
Were
discovered.
This
included
erroneous
trigonometric
calculations,
wrong
sraphic
interpolations and other errors related to human
behaviour, but also in-built system deficiencies
and natural
dispersion of shells.
But the
dominating factor by far was seen to be incorrect
'Corrections
of the Moment' (CoM), i.e
basically weather data. Wind data for various
trajectory heights that was not up to date did not
help, but also, it was found, there was much
stereotyped use of wind data. Resulting errors of
up to 700 vards were confirmed, but most of
them were in the order of 200-250 yards. The
fact that acceptable effect of the fire vet was
accomplished,
despite
the
bombardmen
systematic errors, seems to be due to the large
amount of ammunition spent
defence,
counter-bombardment
Was
equally important when pre-planned, but also
when Opportunity Targets were to be engaged.
As mentioned, the aim was to open fire on such
targets within ten minutes
War experience showed that the increasing
threat from mortars and Nebelwerfer required
GUNFIRE
better resources and methods for counter-
bombardment against such pieces. On the
intelligence side better resources were provided
in 1944 when the 4-pen recorder came. Towards
the final months of the war radar for location of
mortars was also provided, albeit at a small scale.
Combating mortars and Nebelwerfers was done
with the 25-pounders and 4.2-inch mortars.
Sometime heavy anti-aircraft guns could also be
used with great effect on account of the steep
angle of descent of their shells.
But improved coordination and control was
a must. It was found that this ought to be
decentralised to the brigade level. Hence the
position Counter Mortar Officer (CMO) was
introduced at brigade headquarters. The CMO
was assisted bv
an Assistant CMO.
Intelligence Officer and a few staff assistants. An
additional advantage with this reorganisation was
that a closer cooperation between the artillery
and the mortars of the infantry units emerged.
By this the latter learned to apply artillery
methods more effectively, 167 The arrangement
also meant that combating mortars at the
brigade level could be implemented much
quicker, as compared with the previous practice
when planning and control had first to be done
at a higher level. This did not exclude intelligence
and planning resources also athlude intelligence
for all kinds of counter-bombardment.
Furthermore, it was the responsibility of the
artillery also to plan engagement of light bombers
and fighter-bombers
as parts of counter
bombardment programmes. The methods for
this were refined towards the end of 1943.168
This review of some of the artillery battle
techniques is far from complete. For much more
of detailed information the reader is referred in
the first place to all Artillery Training Manuals.
some of which are listed in 'Sources'. It should
be observed that there was a large 'palette' of
techniques available for skilled gunners to use
depending
situation.
the
tactical
and operative
Needless to say, this required well-
trained gunners at all levels as well as numerous
adequate exercises, otherwise the potential of th
system indirect fire' would be to no avail. I
must, however, be said that despite all good
ambitions and good training things could go
wrong, terribly wrong. Before proceeding to the
next Chapter, it is worthwhile with a few words
about the human fachwhile with a few words
-149
ARTILLERY BATTLE TECHNIQUES AND TACTICS
The human factor
It might be well understood that good training,
adequate methods and well-conceived proce-
dures plus the right equipment, were necessary
in order to use the artillery efficiently. The
gunners were expected always to perform
perfectly, even when exposed to enemy fire or
just were exhausted from lack of sleep. And they
were also expected to take good care of their
equipment, never failing to maintain it properly.
Good ambitions to do what was required
were generally demonstrated, but, for instance, a
signaller could fail to read correctly a written
message to be transmitted, a GPO could record
the coordinates of a target at the wrong place on
the artillery board, a gun layer could forget to
check the laying in line after having set a correc-
tion on the scales of his dial sight, the gun crew
may insert Charge 2 instead of Charge 3 into the
cartridge case before firing and an OPO/FOO
may read the wrong bearing to a target etcetera,
etcetera. It was impossible to completely avoid
such mistakes; human wrong handling could
take place. The 'human factor' could turn around
the system indirect fire' and get it to fail. Of
course, many control procedures existed to
minimise such risks. When it still went wrong, a
simple human action could result in fatal conse-
quences.
Burma:
Major Robin Powell recalls an example from
HQ RA at once and he sanctioned five rounds
gunfire from all available guns by predicted
shooting on the target indicated. This was the
signal for one of those accidents of War, which are
inescapable and probably more frequent than is
sometimes supposed. The first round of the five
from one of the 5.5-inch guns landed in the com-
pressed area of Battalion HQ. To experience and
survive one and to know that there will be four
more shells to follow without having the time or
chance to stop them, counts as one of least
pleasant experiences of my life. When the dust
had settled after the salvo ceased and the
remaining four medium shells had done their
worst, the toll of casualties was headed by the
instant loss of Colonel Mattingley and a number
of Jocks who received a direct hit in the
temporary dressing station where they lay. In
addition, the KOSB Signals and Intelligence
officers, and many other HW staff, were
wounded, [.. I have always hoped that the rest
of the artillery strike found its mark on the
Japanese and justified poor Mattingley's last
request of his Gunners. 169
Unfortunately this was not unique a mishap. At
responsible quarters all were well aware of the
risks. In an evaluation report after the fighting in
Italy 1943-1945 it was expressed:
Unless CRA [Commanders Royal Artillery] and
Cos [Commanding Officers] make constant
[...I but at some point during the afternoon the
checks, the necessary standard of accuracy of all
observation pos
t saw a number of lapanese
types of supporting fire will not be maintained 170
infantry marching westwards from Buthidaung,
and Colonel Mattingley, judging these to be part
of a force about to form up for the counterattack
we expected, asked for a salvo from the Divisional
artillery on the area in which the enemy appeared
Without good training and frequent exercises
artillery would not be the battle winning resource
as it could and should be. We will now take on
this subject.
to be concentrating. I consulted Dick McCaig at
149
