GUNFIRE
tactical levels.20 We will later see how this
was applied many times during the twentieth
century. Again, an
important
part
the
historical legacy!
Much did not happen on the technical side.
However, development of ammunition continued,
and ammunition with high explosive capability
and time fuzes came into use more and more as
were shrapnel and case-shot
We have at the beginning of the chapter
touched upon William Congreve's development
of rockets. He, and others interested in new
devices, saw the rocket as a means to overcome
disadvantages of traditional artillery, in particular
the short range of fire and low mobility. Rockets
could be fired up to 3km, and it was easy to
bring fire over the walls of fortresses at sieges.
From naval ships fire on land targets could easily
be brought down in heavy concentrations, which
the Danes had experienced at Copenhagen in
1807 when the Royal Navy attacked the city.
Rockets set large parts of the city on fire.
An
advantage
of the
rockets,
much
appreciated, was its psychological effect and
ability to 'frighten the horses of the enemy'
Their poor precision was however a decisive
disadvantage. 21
An important lesson from the Napoleon
wars was that the best effect was accomplished
when artillery-infantry-cavalry arms were well
coordinated both in defence and in offensive
campaigns. This required officers with the right
understanding of the characteristics of each
'component' of the all-arms system and how to
coordinate them. Another important lesson -
not the least - was that thev
must understand
the need for joint exercises. It is amazing that
the British forgot most of these lessons soon
after the defeating of Napoleon. Tactics and
battle
methods were not developed further
during the subsequent forty-year period; and no
all-arms training was arranged, for which a high
price had to be paid in the next major battle, the
Crimean War. 22
The problem returned through the decades,
and to learn from history seems to be an 'eternal'
difficulty! All-arms exercises are not particularly
popular in time of peace; there seldom seems to
be time for them. First when put at test in war,
the fatality of such negligence is recognised -
and the price is high in terms of human lives. We
will return to this when coming to the Second
World War campaigns in this book.
When it comes to the role played by British
artillery during the nineteenth century, this was
also determined by technological conditions and
status. It was
possible to act in support of
infantry with direct fire and - by means of the
mounted artillery - the cavalry. The second
important
task was to attack
the enemy's
artillery. Hence, it was always important to find
a balance between different prime tasks, a duty
that really had not lost its interest when the
Second World War approached.
A paradigm shift
The Crimean War was a great war for Britain, but
hardly for its artillery.
Too much had been
neglected during the forty years that had passed
since
Waterloo.
1 hese
acuons
thog
often heroic, were achieved by single guns or
smaller formations. At these levels much was
accomplished, but it had no strategic importance.
Such actions led, however, to the awarding of the
new Victoria Cross to nine gunners; Britain's
highest ranked award for gallantry in battle
Another important
sequence of events
during this century was the Indian Mutiny, l
some countries called the "Sepoy Uprising. In
India it has been regarded as a Battle fo
Freedom. It commenced in 1857 when Indian
soldiers mutinied against their European masters
in some British-Indian Army units. Even some
artillery companies of East India Company took
part in the
mutiny, although many other
remained loyal to the British. The mutineers
committed
dreadfull
excesses gorinst th
European population, including massacres of
women and children, e.g. in ding massacres of
where Europeans had sought shelter under
protection of British armed forces, were under
siege for a long time. The British response was a
massive military intervention using forces in
place, but also by formations sent from Europe.
the decisive trials
The siege and capture dions sentfrom Europe:
of strength between the
opposing forces.24 The mutiny was finally
crushed in 1858.
A young Swedish Officer serving in the
Royal Navy, Axel Lind of Hageby, took part in
the fighting when the guns of his ship were taken
ashore and organised in a artillery sea-brigade,
which was sent to Delhi to reinforce the British
forces there. His account lin Swedish] is an
interesting report of what happened there?
violent
confrontation
led
to
THE PERIOD BEFORE THE FIRST WORLD WAR
disbandment of East India Company when the
rule of India was taken over by the British
Government. All military units of the Company
were either disbanded or taken over by the
British Army. This included a large number of
artillery companies that were transferred to the
Royal Artillery.
In this context it should be remembered
that despite the severe conflict Indians were to
serve the British with great loyalty and skill after
1858 and during the coming decades. During
the Second World War units of the Indian Army
with both British and Indian personnel played
an exceptionally impressive role on several
major theatres.
Captain Sing a retired Indian officer
represents many distinguished Indian officers
and soldiers (Fig. 1-4)
In 1859, the British artillery was reorganised
and 'Brigade'
was introduced instead of the
'Battalion', and 'Company' became 'Battery', an
order that was to last until 1938. An important
technical step of development was taken, also in
1859, when Armstrong's rifled breech-loading
Fig. 1-4 The retired Indian Officer Captain Sing may
represent all distinguished Indian Officers and
soldiers serving the British Empire in the World
Wars (RAHT)
gun with cylindrical high explosive shells was
introduced. This was followed by the intro-
duction of 12-pounders for the Field Regiments
and 9-pounders for the mounted regiments of the
Royal Horse Artillery.26 This meant longer ranges
and higher fire intensity at the same time as the
need for mobile artillery reserves was reduced.
The development of guns went on, and
buffer and recuperator devices for control of
recoil and return of the barrel to the firing
position after firing were eventually invented.
This reduced the need for re-laying of the gur
after every round. Hence, fire intensity could be
further increased. A further modernisation of the
guns was the application of shields for protection
of the detachment from enemy infantry fire.
All artillery had become more mobile, but it
was still necessary to fire direct, 1.e. the target
must be seen from the gun. Neither sights nor
communication equipment were as yet available
for indirect firing with the fire observer placed
tar
from the guns.
meant a tacucal
disadvantage that still prevailed.
New artillery practice camps were established
during the second half of the nineteenth century.
Besides Woolwich Shoe-buryness came in 1859,
Okehampton in 1875 and finally, the one that was
later to become Britain's primary artillery centre
during the twentieth century, Larkhill on the
Salisbury Plain, in Wiltshire.
The practical war experience was limited to
such that emerged from all small wars at the
outskirts of the Empire, which were going on
almost continuously. Britain was at the end of the
century ill prepared for large wars against well-
equipped and well-trained opponents. The Royal
Artillery remained very skilled in employing in
action small formations up to the strengths of
batterv. or iust a section of guns. sometimes
Single ouns
An organisational change came in 1899
when the Roval Artillery was split up into a
mobile part and a 'static', or at least a less
mobile part. The former part comprised th
Royal Field Artillery (RFA) with the Roya
Horse Artillery (RHA). The latter was named
the Royal Garrison Artillery (RGA).
Coast
artillery and heavier guns for primarily static
deployment and Mountain Artillery formations
were all included in RGA. This order lasted until
1924 when all formations
again became the
Royal Artillery, in which RHA retained its
special rank
