GUNFIRE
unit training, primarily the functions of a troop
with four guns.
For a reader today, it might seem amazing that
those to become 'drivers' needed as much training
as the 'specialists' (command post and fire control
assistants). The reason was quite natural. At this
time, not many had a driver's license from their
civilian life, so training had to start from the
bottom.
Captain
Johnny
Walker recalls the
problem when his battery was to take delivery of
lorries from the Ford factory at Dagenham:
It was soon discovered that of the draft of 'drivers
we received for the new trucks not one was able
to drive a motorised vehicle!. They were mostly
farm labourers used to working with horses! What
happened consequently was commendable and
one of the first examples of the resourcefulness
and willingness to overcome odds that quickly
became ingrained amongst the officers and men
of the Regiment [1" Airlanding Regiment RA).
Remarkably, all the draft were able to go to solo
after a few days intensive tuition and every one of
the vehicles was safely delivered from Dagenham
without a scratch."/
Once the basic training arrangements had got
their final forms in 1943 and become a routine
after much of improvisations during the first
years of the war, the seven then
operating
training regiments
for
field
artillery were
'producing 120 trained gunners every two
weeks. The regiment that still was active for
training of replacements for medium and heavy
regiments had around 200 men leaving every
two weeks. The training regiments for signallers
left 60 recruits every two weeks.
War-oriented officers training
Before the war, those to become regular artillery
officers were trained at the Royal Military
Academy at Woolwich, in southeast London,
popularly called The Shop. Officers of the Royal
Corps of Engineers and the Royal Corps of
Signals were also given their officer training at
this prestigious school. The courses took two
years to complete.
For the Territorial Army it was different.
Officers were commissioned after individual
evaluation of fitness and civilian educational
background and profession. The training was
then performed within the own unit and the
length of it varied.
Boys were often well prepared for future
military service right from time at school.
Most grammar schools had a special organisa-
tion for basic military training of the senior
pupils, the so-called Officer Training Corps
(OTC). After having passed the training, a
certification was awarded to the students, Cert
A, which was an indication of the student's
suitability for the officer profession in the
armv
Similar
organisations
existed for
preparing schoolboys for the profession in the
Royal Navy and the Royal Air Force.
When the war broke out in 1939, the system
for training of candidates for the officer trade
was changed overnight.
"The Shop' was closed
and a new system for selection of individuals was
implemented, the Special Army Entry, and six
special cadet
schools
were established, the
Officer Cadet Training Units (OCTUs):
121 OCTU, Alton
122 OCTU, Larkhill
123 OCTU, Catterick
124 OCTU, Llandrindod
125 OCTU, Ilkley
133 OCTU, Shrivenham
121 and 123 OCTU were established for field
artillery training, 124 and 133 OCTU for anti-
aircraft artillery. In 1941, 122 and 125 OCTU
were directed towards anti-tank officer training.
From 1943 when the demand for new officers
became smaller, the number was decreased to
three, one each for field artillery, anti-aircraft
artillery and anti-tank artillery."
The officer training had also to be impro-
vised initially. The length varied between three
and five months, eventually to be standardised
to six months for all OCTUs. 178
Senior pupils from grammar schools were
recruited to the OCTUs, but also NCOs who
had in active service proved to be suitable for the
officer trade. They were selected by a special War
Office Selection Board (WOSB).
Douglas Goddard told me how he experi-
enced his training as a Cadet at the 123 OCTU:
I have still the personal diary I kept which
certainly confirms that it was a very busy and
demanding half year. ...I I found it a fascinating
account of physical and mental exhaustion which
1 am rather surprised I survived - a number of
original 40 cadets dropped out. To summarise the
152
TRAIN, TRAIN, EXERCISE, EXERCISE...!
more significant elements: the first month or so
spent on introduction lectures, basic infantry
drills and exercises, physical endurance tests and
assault courses. From then we had leadership in-
struction and group tasks; constant artillery drill,
exercises and firing camps; training in public
speaking including lecturettes; physical toughen-
ing exercises; ceremonial parades; small arms
firing; lectures and demonstrations on explosives
by an explosives fanatic. Finally we went to the
Lake District for a gruelling ten day- and night-
battle course up and down mountains and then
off to an artillery range for an advanced gunnery
exercise. It was a good preparation for officer
leadership in war. 179
As was the case for all trainees, there was no time
for exercises at
unit level. This had to be
arranged when the new Second Lieutenants
came to the units to which they were posted.
When RA Notes 1943 wrote about training of
gunners, officers' training was included as
Training of RA officers is carried out at three
OCTUs - one each for Fd, AA and Atk. The
object aimed at is to turn out a young officer who
is technically sound, has a reasonable knowledge
of tactics, has had a grounding in the administra-
tive work of a unit, and is, therefore, able to
assume duty as GPO or other regimental
subaltern.
It is important that the Regimental Com-
manders should appreciate that subalterns joining
from OCTUs have had little opportunity of
putting their theoretical knowledge into practice
and that further instruction and assistance is
necessary in such subjects for instance as man
management'. In Fa Branch an attempt is made
to bridge the
gap between the OCTU and
Regiment so far as GPOs technical work is
concerned, by the institution of a Young Officers
course which all ex-cadets attend before joining
their Regiments. 180
We might here add that one basic skill that was
extremely important to acquire for a young
sunner officer was map reading. Many com-
manders skilled in training used to observe the
need and thus seldom missed an opportunity to
train their new officers. We have in a previous
chapter seen a good example of that.
This particular need inspired Colonel C.E.
Ryan to an engaged article in the Royal Artillery
Journal in 1941. The headline was Map Reading
Exercises and he commenced with the words
'DEPLORABLY LOW, INEXCUSABLY BAD.
These words have been used to pillory the
general standard of map reading. [...].181
The good Colonel continues by saying that
map reading is much more than the words tell
It is a matter of visualising the information tac-
tically and technically, to see possible advance
routes and suitable deployment positions and to
work from map to ground and vice versa. 'In
short, all that goes to make up and develop an
eye for country and a bump of locality. Viewed
thus, map reading is a fundamental military ac-
complishment, he adds. He savs that training in
map reading can be as 'dull as "ditch water" if
perfunctory, but it can also be of great interest if
carefully planned.' In his article he is presenting
a set of fundamental exercises collected together
from various sources. He does not claim them to
be enough for producing good map readers, but
'they have been "tried on the dog'
' in the shape
of some hundreds of officers, NCOs and, some
of them, on men too. But more is needed to ac-
complish good results from training in map
reading. He urges unit commanders: 'Energy, a
little imagination, and determination as always
make for success.' True!
Young officers were as seen given basic
training at OCTUs and other ranks at 'Training
Regiments', processes which were repeated
continuously during the war. lo this came com-
plementary training by the units to which the
recruits were posted. If time was available, the
units also tried to widen their basic skills
Gunners posted to man guns could be given
training not only in serving and loading the
guns but also, if talented, to be able to act as
layers; signallers could be trained to serve as
command post specialists, drivers to act as fire
control assistants and so on. By this the unit
was better prepared to meet casualties durina
extended battles. 182
A number of central schools and institutions
offered courses and special training programmes
for widening of officers' qualifications. Officers
were sent to courses in, for instance, motors
signals, intelligence, parachute jumping, head-
quarter staff methods and much more. The
School of Artillery at Larkhill was a large and
important centre for all training activities
During the war, the School was expanded to a
153
