GUNFIRE
The breakout operation was given the name
Operation Supercharge and Montgomery's order
for it was given on 30 October 1942. More time
was needed for the preparations, so the start was
postponed until the night of 1 and 2 November.
The attack was supported by a huge artillery
concentration. More details about this later.
The fighting raged until 4 November. When
the 8th Army finally broke through the German-
Italian defence at last and Rommel, who had
returned from Germany, ordered full retreat in
order to avoid encirclement and annihilation of
his remaining forces. The British superiority in
equipment and men had made the decisive
victory possible.
This
day, the British also managed to
capture the commander of the Afrika Korps.
reneral
von
Thoma
He was
Taken
Montgomery's Tactical Headquarters, where he
was well received (Fig. 19-8)
The two Generals exchanged views on the
battle just fought over a dinner, or was it tea and
sandwiches? Montgomery later wrote that he
found von Thoma being 'a nice chap'.
We will now go back and see how the
artillery resources were used during the now
concluded battle of El Alamein.
Continuous artillery fire for twelve days
After the initial counter-battery fire and covering
Fig. 19-8 The Commander of the German Afrika
Corps Lieutenant General Wilhelm Ritter von Thoma
was taken prisoner on 4 November 1942. Here he is
seen when having been brought to Montgomery's
headquarters. Over a dinner the two commanders
discussed the battle that had just been concluded
(AWM No. 014071)
fire, the British artillery went on intensively. The
medium guns fired almost continuously for the
first 20 hours, a demanding performance. Sub-
sequently the fire lessened, but went on the next
twelve days. It was a tough undertaking, for the
equipment and the gunners.
Teething problems emerged with the new
medium guns. In particular the buffer/recuperator
mechanisms, which proved to be too weak, were
affected. Guns had to be taken out of service for
repair. 64 Medium Regiment RA notes in its war
diary on 24 October that half of its guns were
taken out of service for a certain period.
It was also found that the wearing of barrels
was a quicker process than expected. This meant
a gradually decreasing muzzle velocity, which in
its turn implied reduced range. In several cases
rounds
dropped too short
and landed on
advancing friendly troops with casualties as a
consequence. This was of course not good for
the morale of the troops
Kirkman made a comment on the problem
'IT WILL BE A KILLING MATCH' - EL ALAMEIN
in his report after the battle and stressed that cal-
ibration of all guns should take place before any
major battle and that this should be repeated
every third day as long as the battle went on. 330
He also noted that seven out of eight 4.5-inch
guns and five out of eight 5.5-inch guns per
battery could be used on average during the first
24 hours.
The 25-pounders were affected by technical
problems too during the long period of engage-
ment. An interesting comment regarding the
need for spare guns is found in the report by the
artillery commander of the Australian division,
Brigadier Ramsay, who wrote after the battle:
At the commencement of the engagement on 23
Oct, one 25 pdr was available at No. 1 Rec Sec as
a 'pool for replacement purposes. Another 25 pdr
was made available next day from 2/1 AFW.
These two guns were of immense value. Between
Oct 23 and Nov 3 eighteen (18) 25 pdrs were
taken out of the line for various purposes and
evacuated beyond LAD's. Only six (6) replace-
ments for these guns were asked for. [...] By
using the two pool guns to replace guns pulled
out for repair (the number rose to three with the
return of one repaired gun from Wkshops) there
were only two occasions during those operations
one on night Oct 23/24 and one on night No
213) when the divisional arty did not have all 96
guns in action.
It is most strongly felt that the holding of one
gun per regt by a rec sec, to be used as replace-
ment for guns put out of action, is essential if the
fire power of the Div Arty is to be kept up during
a prolonged engagement.331
British attacks and the repulsing
of enemy
counter-attacks required intensive firing. The
gunners were now good masters of the art of
incentrating fire
quickly
and
efficiently
Kirkman tells us that in one of the divisions more
than 50 regimental concentrations (72 guns)
Were fired. In addition to these each of the three
regiments fired 20-40 regimental concentrations.
And the fire came quickly! Kirkman said that it
did not take more than 10 minutes to get a divi-
sional concentration onto the target from first
order, sometimes not more than 4-5 minutes 332
Montgomery
wanted to see
divisional
artillery used as a '72-guns battery' whenever
possible. This was what the gunners could
deliver! The preparatory
training
and all
exercises during September and October had
been a success, not least thanks to Mont-
gomery's support and encouragement. No one
wanted to let him down!
In respect of the fairly short range of the 25-
pounders, concentrations required quick rede-
ployments
forward
when
the
situation
demanded this.
The artillery mastered the art of planning
and executing huge barrages and timed concen-
trations. This was demonstrated in particular
during the final days of the battle. When the 20th
Australian Infantry Brigade attacked during the
night between 28 and 29 October, no less than
360 guns supported the brigade, i.e. almost all
the artillery of the Corps. When 26 Australian
Infantry Brigade continued the divisional attack
during the night 30 to 31 October this brigade
was also given massive support. 333
Operation Supercharge was launched under
heavy artillery support. A remarkably large
rolling barrage covering the whole front, around
4,000m, of the two brigades attacking beside
each other was covered, and to about the same
depth. The fire was shifted forwards with the
speed 100 yards per 2.5 minutes.
For this
programme that commenced at 01.05 hours on
2 November 1942, eight field regiments were
engaged, i.e. 192 guns. But in addition to these,
another five field regiments and three mediun
regiments took part firing on located enemy
positions and artillery deployments. Their fire
plans included targets also along the flanks of the
attacking brigades up to around 2km from the
barrage lanes. In summary, this meant that the
artillery fire covered a width of around 8km and
a depth of 4km! With this huge artillery
programme, Freyberg succeeded in reaching all
his objectives. But more was needed.
After a few hours break the barrage rolled
on another 2km in support of the attacking 9
Armoured Brigade aiming for the Rahman
Track. The problem was that a strong anti-tank
screen was situated west of the final barrage line
target, which in combination with strong enemy
artillery fire almost annihilated the brigade
(more than 70 of the brigade's 90 tanks were
destroyed!).
At the final stage of the operation, two days
later, 5 Indian Infantry Brigade attacked in a
more southerly direction supported by 270 guns.
which resulted in success. The 8th Army was
through the enemy positions at last. 334
251
