Acknowledgements
This book could not have been written without the help and encouragement from
many people. I am indebted to them all. My thanks first and foremost go to all the
veterans whom I have met or had contact with otherwise. In this context I want to
thank especially David Baines, Douglas Goddard, Sir Gilbert Heathcote, Tony
Richardson, Johnny Walker and Peter Wilkinson, who generously shared source
material with me as well as offered time for correspondence and lengthy discussions
about their own war experiences. They were all young artillery officers during the
war and made impressive careers after this, the four former mentioned military
and the latter two civilian. Douglas Goddard too, after having left the Army in
1957, made an impressive civilian career eventually on several high civil positions
in the industry and community.
My thanks also go to two veterans who served as infantry platoon commanders
during the last years of the war. They are John Coghlan, who served with the Black
Watch (Royal Highland) Regiment, and L van Aardt who fought with the King's
African Rifles. Their accounts have provided interesting perspectives on the
fighting in Italy and Burma.
Many veterans, who had already passed away when my work began, have,
however, through their documents given me valuable insights into their war expe-
riences. I would like to mention in particular Sidney Beck, whose extraordinary
war diary, notes and photographs have been most valuable, and I am indebted to
his son Benjamin Beck, who has kindly assisted me with this material. I also thank
Jim Whetton, who has helped me with unpublished material from his uncle John
T. Whetton, the distinguished commander of 4 Survey Regiment RA, who became
Professor of Geology and Mining Sciences after the war. He was one of many
talented Territorial Army officers in the Royal Artillery.
Another two deceased veterans I want to mention and thank here. One of them
is G.W. Robertson, who served in one of the many field regiments during the war.
After the war he wrote a comprehensive regimental history, The Rose & The Arrow.
His regiment took part in the fighting in Burma for several years. I have benefited
greatly from this work and extracted some quotations from the book and I am much
grateful for these. The second one I am indebted to is the late Robert Woollacott who,
like the aforementioned Johnny Walker and Peter Wilkinson, served in 1 Airlanding
Light Regiment RA. He has written the regiment's history in the book Winged
Gunners, from which I have taken some quotations after consultation with Bob
Gerritsen, holder of Woolacott's background material. I extend my thanks to him.
Related to the same regiment's history is Peter Wilkinson's excellent book The
Gunners at Arnhem, another important source for my writing. In this context I
would like to extend my special and deeply felt thanks to Peter Wilkinson for his
kindness to review and comment on the chapters on airborne artillery and
Operation Market Garden. Sadly, he passed away a couple of months after I
received his last comments.
Brigadier (ret.) David Baines has been so kind as to give me a copy of his
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
personal war diary and given me permission to refer to it. For this and interesting
communication with him I am very grateful.
I would also like to thank Philip Crawley, Permanent Secretary of the Burma
Star Association, who conveyed valuable contacts with Burma Veterans and has
assisted me also in tracing holders of copyrights.
It is natural that a work of this kind also leads to contacts with contemporary
historians with different specialties. First I must express my gratitude to the too early
deceased secretary of the Royal Artillery Historical Association Lieutenant Colonel
William Townend, who was a frequent and prominent battlefield guide. His special
interest was the battle of Normandy, which we had many discussions about. Much
appreciated by me was the extensive correspondence that we exchanged. We also
came to discuss issues regarding the future of the Territorial Army on which he had
written an academic treatise. Amongst other people interested in military history,
whom I want to thank for valuable exchanges of ideas about war historical events
and conditions, are the late lan Daglish, Major (ret.) Stephen King and Bill Hardy.
Stephen King has reviewed five of the technical chapters of the book and given me
a large number of most valuable comments for which I would like to extend a special
thank you. I am indebted to Bill Hardy for an exciting excursion to and around the
airfield where Il Army Cooperation Squadron RAF was based during the war. I owe
much to Nigel Evans, whose website about all aspects of the British artillery during
World War II has been of great help to me (see http://nigelef.tripod.com).
As mentioned, I had frequent contacts with Major (ret) Douglas Goddard over
many years. He so generously put his large private archive at my disposal and he was
always ready to answer many questions on gunnery problems and various war subjects.
Douglas Goddard sadly passed away in 2011 and I am grateful for the permission given
by his children Tina Hutton and Nigel Goddard for me to quote from his rich material.
I would like to extend my thanks to Major General, PhD, Jonathan BA Bailey,
who made himself available for the interview I have recorded in the Epilogue. He
is an authority on British artillery history, and has in his extensive writings also
analysed superpower strategies in both Europe and the Far East. He has taken an
interest in the problems of nation building in countries becoming independent, but
also countries where military intervention has thrown dictators out of the saddle,
for instance Iraq and Sierra Leone. In our dealings, I have had the opportunity to
discuss many of the observations and conclusions, which I have presented in
summaries at the end of several of the chapters of the book. For this and the
interview I am General Bailey much indebted.
I then turn to three Dutch friends who have also been instrumental. Robert
Voskuil is an eminent authority on the Battle of Arnhem, Operation Market
Garden. Over the years he has been most helpful through discussions and provision
of documents and photographs that I thank him very much for. I also owe him my
sincere thanks for reviewing and commenting on the chapter about this contro-
versial battle. Hans Onderwater, who although he is a Dutch is the Official
Historian for the RAF's Second Army Cooperation Squadron, has given me much
information and material on this RAF Squadron, which I appreciate. One of the
main tasks during the war was interaction with artillery, both in terms of intelli-
gence survey and fire control in depth of the battlefield. He has given me access to
interesting aerial photographs related to such tasks. For that I thank him very much.
The third Dutch expert to thank is Louis Meulstee, who is an expert on British
communication equipment used in the war and has published several books on
