GUNFIRE
RHA, began its advance northwards in the
afternoon on 20 September. Its 413 Battery that
was assigned the task to support one of the tank
battalions of 8 Independent Armoured Brigade,
the Sherwood Rangers, had crossed the border
around 4 a.m. on this day. The battery had to
stay in a 'hiding place until the closed road north
of Eindhoven had been cleared later the same
dav. During the evening the two batteries
bivouacked close to the road between Veghel and
Grave and proceeded the next morning at 7 a.m.
They too then deployed close to the Maas-Waal
Canal. A day later they redeployed a bit further
north in order to support 214 Infantry Brigade
in its attack north of the Waal
At 07.30 hours
the batteries (431 and 511 Battery RA) crossed
the
Waal and deployed just north of the
Nijmegen road bridge. The airborne perimeter
north of river Rhine was still out of range.
1 he
50th
(Northumbrian)
Infantry
Division was the last division of XXX Corps to
commence the march towards Arnhem. Its three
field regiments (74, 90 and 124 Field Regiment
RA) would in accordance with normal practice
support one brigade each. They were therefore
allotted to respective brigade column for the
march. Besides these regiments, 7 Medium
Regiment RA was also to march in this divisional
column. It was planned to have the leading unit
of the division cross the border during the third
day, i.e. on 19 September.
First to march was 69 Infantry Brigade with
90 Field Regiment RA attached. But due to the
heavy fighting south of Eindhoven this regiment
was already engaged on 17 September. During
the night between 17 and 18 September the
regiment was moved forward to positions just
north of the border. The batteries were deployed
very close to each other
and were ready for
action at 01.15 hours. A few series were fired
there before the regiment was ordered at 05.30
hours to re-deploy forwards in order to support
one of the battalions of the divisional brigades in
its attack northwards. The new deployment was
a couple of miles further to the North and here
the regiment was ready for action at 07.15 hours.
They stayed in this new regimental position
until 23 September and were heavily engaged in
the fighting around 'Club Route' but could even-
tually move forward on this day. The next deploy-
ment was
close to the road about halfwar
between Eindhoven and St. Oedenrode, where
they took part in the hard fighting around Veghel
During the period 24-26 September this
regiment, 90 Field Regiment RA, redeployed to
a few positions east of Uden where Operation
Garden was over for them.
It would not be until 23 September that the
sister regiment, 74 Field Regiment RA came
away, so the operation had begun with much
waiting. In their war diary for the period 19-22
September it was stated: 'Very quiet period.
Nothing fired although regt partly in action.39
But on 23 September the regiment rede-
ployed, at last, around 2 p.m. to an area south of
Eindhoven, but during the two following days no
substantial firing was required. The war diary of
24-25 September notes: 'Quiet time and very
few targets engaged. Weather had deteriorated
and its quite wintry [!] now? This regiment never
came further north while Operation Garden was
going on.
124 Field Regiment RA did not pass the
Maas-Escaut Canal
until the night 22/23
September after having been heavily engaged
before that in support of the
3rd Infantry
Division east of 'Club Route'. When advancing
northwards it was stopped south of Eindhoven
but could later move forward. And much firing
was required during the fighting around Veghel
the following days.
During the very final period, VIII Corps was
made responsible for the southern area and the
50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division was put
under command of this Corps. Exempted from
this was, however, 69 Infantry Brigade that was
leading the column of the division and was
heavily engaged in the fighting between Veghel
and Uden. Hence it remained under command
of XXX Corps and was now to be supported by
124 Field Regiment RA.
When the road once again had been opened
on 23 September, the regiment again was on it
wheels' northwards to support the brigade in an
attack north of Nijmegen. In the early morning
24 September the regiment crossed the river
Waal and deployed souiment crossed the river
erbeek within range.
Lieutenant Beck at 86 Field Regiment RA
tells how his battery, 341 Battery RA, had been
ordered to support 34l Battery RA, had been
King's Royal Hussars), which was part of the
11th Armoured Division. They were to reinforce
the Americans in their defence of 'Club Route
between Eindhoven and defence of Club Routs
put under command of a tank squadron and was
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
to cross the border with the squadron and move
up to Son and meet the Americans of the 101st
Airborne Division. 396
Beck tells us that once his regiment had
completed the initial Corps barrage they crossed
Joe's Bridge':
the German tanks began to withdraw. But the
next morning a renewed attempt was made
Beck noted:
We went into action about 1000 yards or so from
the bridge immediately in front of a Battery of
Medium guns. Shells from our own guns on the
other side of the canal were whistling overhead as
the Milk-Round' went on and another barrage
was fired. Our leading tanks were meeting stiff
opposition. The first 9 were knocked out in the
space of 200 yards! We dug in. At dusk the
bridgehead area was subjected to heavy enemy
shelling for nearly 45 minutes and although many
shells fell close no one in the Battery was injured,
although one man was evacuated with shell-
shock
The next day the regiment was still in this
position and fired almost continuously. The
battery was exposed to fire from snipers and
others and when the night had fallen they were
subjected to a violent air attack. Beck again:
Several JU-88s dive-bombed the bridgehead area.
Many H.E. bombs and A.P. bombs rained down
bursting like crackers down the lines of guns
amongst the concentrated vehicle, down each side
of the road, and around the bridge approaches.
We spent a most uncomfortable half an hour
shivering in our slit trenches, watching the scores
of tracer shells weaving patterns in the sky. A
troop had some remarkable escapes [...] It was
our first experience of deliberate air attack on our
own position and it wasn't pleasant.
During Tuesday 19 September they could
quickly move their SP guns forward and deploy
just northwest of the new Bailey bridge at Son.
Here they could see numerous gliders on the
fields in front of them and soon they were visited
by American glider pilots who were trying to
find their way back to England. The battery was
visited in the afternoon by the commander of the
101st Airborne Division, General Taylor, just as
six Panther tanks
attacked. An FOO was
positioned in the tower of Son Church and
began immediately to engage the attackers. A
tank hit the tower, but the FOO, Lieutenant
Craston, was able continue firing. Little by little
The enemy tanks returned to the attack in the
morning [20th September]. 15/19 Hussars put in
an attack supported by our gunfire. We got two
and the 15/19 got four. Total bag for the morning
six Panther tanks - and another dangerous threat
to the supply lines was removed.
On 22 September the battery was ordered to re-
deploy further ahead when the Germans cut off
the road past Veghel and halted all traffic. This
had enforced a quick reaction in the North. 32
Infantry Brigade of the Guards Division was
ordered to turn around and move southwards
from Nijmegen and with it followed one of the
batteries of 153 Field Regiment RA. In the
morning of 23 September the whole regiment
was to link up with the brigade down at Uden.
We will follow Beck's account of this battle
and his battery's experience for the whole
operation which was so critical in the evening of
22 September:
There was trouble further up the main axis where
the enemy had cut the main road at Veghel. We
were ordered forward and hurriedly packed up.
The road was congested with traffic and there
was a long stream of transport belonging to the
British 1 Airborne Division the Sea Echelon of
the division comprised 2000 men and around
1000 vehicles)... Traffic was at a standstill in St.
Odenrade but we found our way through and
took up a position just east of the main road and
south of Veghel. Our O.P.s found the American
in Veghel hard pressed as the Germans were
astride the road leading north from the town. A
fire plan was quickly laid on and under cover of
this the Americans succeeded in driving the
enemy back some distance from the road
On 23 September Beck wrote:
A very exciting morning for our O Ps and hard
work for the gun end and command post staffs.
The enemy. intent
on preventing supplies
reaching Arnhem, made repeated attempts to
capture the road from Veghel. Supporting his
attacks with 88-mm guns he kept the Americans
and the 15/19 Hussars hard nressed all the
morning. Our O.Ps. under constant shellfire. did
