GUNFIRE
habit. Encouraging to see the tremendous
firepower we have in tanks and artillery in this
area. I feel confident we can deal with the
counter-attacks
Enemy armoured attack. Engaging Divi-
sional target against the attack which was
repulsed
Enemy
shelling
and
mortaring
including air-bursts, fairly heavy for past two days
and continuing. Heavy counter attacks all day.
Regiment firing continuously. Some enemy tank
have broken through on right of Cheux. Infantry
battle with own tanks counter-attacking
Goddard's regiment fired almost continuously
for two months from their landing until the final
breakout from Normandy in August. It was a
heavy job for gun crews and supply units to
bring
forward
ammunition
consumed
Douglas Goddard made notes every day about
the ammunition consumed by his battery (8
guns). From his notes I have made the graph in
Fig. 20-6, which illustrates the daily consump-
tion of HE shells and smoke shells during the
battle of Normandv.
Fig. 20-6 Ammunition expenditure per gun and day
(RPG) recorded for 220 Battery/112 (Wessex) Field
Regiment RA in Normandy. During July 1944 the
heavy fighting for Hill 112 dominated followed by a
few days of recovery back from the front. During
August the Battery was in particular supporting the
advance towards Mont Pincon and the battle for the
Falaise Pocket. Extensive smoke firing took place
during the initial period to protect the flanks of
attacking infantry (Author, the diagram is based on
the records made by Douglas Goddard regarding the
ammunition expenditure at his Battery during the
Normandy campaign)
We can see that the peak came on 10 July
when Operation Jupiter commenced.
The artillery intelligence resources played
also an important role during the months before
the breakout. AOPs (Auster aircraft) as well as
flash spotters and sound rangers were busy all
the time being engaged in locating enemy
artillery and numerous mortars as a basis for
counter-bombardment programmes. Whetton
and Ogden state that during this period 4 Survey
Regiment RA located 649 enemy guns, out of
which 486 were located by the sound rangers
alone 361
Finally, a voice from the opposite side.
Douglas Goddard tells what a Prisoner of War
from the 21st SS Panzer Division said when in-
terrogated after the Hill 112 battle:362
At Tarnopol we endured heavy Russian artillery
but in Normandy we were hit again and again,
day after day by British artillery that was so heavy
the Frundsberg (10th SS Panzer Division) bled
to death before our eves. It was worse during an
attack, theirs or ours. We would be terribly
blasted. I saw Grenadiers struck dumb and
unable to move and others made mad by the
unceasing drumfire. Your artillery is my worst
memory of Normandy.
Summary of the role of artillery in the
British sector
The Normandy landings were a
tremendous logistic challenge. They were
also unique when compared with the
earlier landings on Sicily and at Salerno as
they were made against strongly fortified
and defended shores. The enemy defence
at the Normandy shores could only be
defeated through a coordinated attack by
bombers, fighter-bombers and - not the
least - naval artillery.
Field artillery played but a small role in
connection with the landings, albeit
innovative. Logistically, however, it was an
impressive accomplishment to land on the
very first day, ten field regiments with 240
SP guns, and in addition to these landings
the special support group of the Royal
Marines with its 80 howitzers mounted on
Centaur tanks. This metters mou landing
divisions had a nominal stock of guns right
from the beginning. As regards
reinforcement artillery the situation was
A NEW FRONT IS OPENED - NORMANDY
worse; only one American medium
regiment (battalion) was landed in the
British sector during D-Day.
• Landing of airborne artillery was not a big
affair. Shortage of gliders restricted the
transport by air to one battery. Fortunate
was, however, the decision to provide
additional fire observation resources to the
6th Airborne Division, which made it
possible for the division to avail itself of the
artillery of the 3rd Division already from
the first day in battle. This became a model
for future airborne operations.
The build-up of artillery resources was
well planned and was almost completed
within two weeks. From then on, there was
sufficient artillery available for support of
divisional and Corps attacks. The build-up
of artillery resources can be said to be
complete after 4-6 weeks.
• Naval artillery was, procedure- and
communication-wise, well coordinated
with the field artillery and divisions to be
supported. Fire observation could be done
by observation detachments on land but
also by means of AOPs and RAF Army-
Cooperation Squadrons. Two cruisers and
one monitor remained outside the landing
beaches for several weeks and were
included in divisional and Corps fire plans
as a sort of extra medium regiments
• The artillery units once landed all repre-
sented a high quality level in terms of
training and combat value. They were able
to adapt their support to any tactical re-
quirement, was it a matter of large-scale
operations or just minor attacks. Of partic-
ular importance was the ability of artillery
to meet and stop German counter-attacks,
even the strongest.
Covering fire plans in support of attacks
were planned as timed concentrations or
rolling and creeping barrages. Experience
showed clearly that the fire from 25-
pounders, even when extremely strong,
could not destroy defenders fighting from
fortified positions. But even strong and
battle-experienced units, such as the SS
units, could be neutralised as long as the
fire was over them. In order to make it
possible for the attackers to take advantage
of this, they had to move forwards just
behind the covering fire. This was not
always the case in Normandy. The conse-
quence was that the attacking soldiers were
met by murderous fire and had to stop;
own large casualties could not be avoided.
The British were skilled in concentrating
artillery fire very quickly, say within 5-10
minutes, from hundreds of guns irrespec-
tive of unit boundaries. This had devastat-
ing effects on unprotected enemy units
that were counter-attacking. Numerous
counter-attacks could be stopped thanks to
this important capability.
The British doctrine to centralise
Command of artillery resources to the
highest practicable level and at the same
time decentralising Control, basically fire
observation and control, to the lowest
possible level was a remarkable success.
The skilled and experienced signallers
needed for this doctrine to work were
almost always at hand.
The surveyors, well experienced too,
surveyed quickly all firing units into the
same grid, which was another pre-requisite
for large fire concentrations. Other intelli-
gence resources of the survev regiments
provided data needed for large counter-
battery programmes as far as artillery was
concerned. It was not that good as regards
locating mortar positions and Nebelwerfers,
but the situation began to improve when
the 4-pen recorders were introduced on a
trial basis. It was not vet possible to use
radar for locating mortar positions.
A British dictum was the almost unre-
stricted availability of artillery ammunition.
This meant that it was not necessary to be
overambitious when it came to ranging of
targets before fire for effect. Lack of
precision could be compensated by
spending more ammunition over a larger
area. Ammunition supply took place over
the landing beaches and the artificial
harbour at Arromanches. On a few
occasions the artillery units had to suffer
from ammunition shortage, for instance
when bad weather prevented a continuous
re-supply.
Tactically, artillery resources were used
correctly when the artillery plan was well
coordinated with the plans of infantry and
armoured units. This was normally the
case. A remarkable exception was
