First-hand objective
Enemy forward position
Slart line
Fig. 12-3 Examples of so-called Crooked Barrages.
The left section was designed in accordance with the
wheel method, where the different line targets were
placed to cover enemy positions and are not parallel,
which meant that the advancing attackers had to cover
different distances. They, however, reached the final
enemy positions simultaneously. The middle section
has the standard design as this covers the enemy
positions quite well. The right section is designed in
accordance with the echelon method. The first line
target fits quite well to the initial enemy position. All
other line targets are in parallel with this first one.
Hence, the final fire will not cover all parts of the final
enemy positions at the same time and the attackers
will not engage them simultaneously (Author)
The advantage is that all attackers can advance
the same distance and pace between the lines.
The disadvantage is obvious. All the attackers
will not reach the final objective simultaneously.
Those advancing to the left will have to wait for
more fire lifts before they have covered a longer
distance and reached the enemy position
A large fire plan in support of a major attack
could comprise both 'timed concentrations' on
individual targets and 'barrages' with
several
sections of the various types discussed above.
The plan was in writing and could include map
overlays for graphic illustration of targets.
barrage lines etcetera and tables with data on
participating units, schedules and more. The
details were given in Task Tables. In Part 3 a few
examples will illustrate some large barrages.
Fig.
12-4
1s an
example of a
Gun
Programme, which was given as the fire order to
each gun based on the unit's fire order. It was the
responsibility of No. 1 to order laving of his gun
and preparation of ammunition in accordance
with the programme and then to fire the gun in
GUNFIRE
strict adherence of the time ordered for each
serial.
Sometimes the paper work was as mentioned
very challenging, in particular when fire plans
and gun programmes for huge operations such
as attacks by a division or a Corps were to be
prepared. The distribution of orders and fire
plans in time was also a large undertaking.
Ammunition had to be brought forward and
stocked close to each gun when large fire plans
were to be executed. Special transport had to be
organised, as it could be a matter of stocking say
500-600 shells with cartridges, cases and fuzes
of different types. Transportation normally took
place at night hence the dumping programme
might take a week. To re-supply the guns with
new ammunition to cope with the needs for the
fighting under days or weeks after the initial
attack was another logistic challenge of great
magnitude.
During the final phase of the war plans for
large operations often included participation of
anti-tank guns, tanks, heavy machine guns and
also anti-aircraft guns in a ground role special
fire plans for such participation, which was
called 'Pepperpotting, were carefully drawn up as
a complement to the artillery plans.
Sometimes special plans for attacks on
GUN PROGRAMME.
Fig. 12-4 When a fire plan had been prepared, each
gun got a Gun Programme, a ben a described
exactly when the gun should fire, how it should be
layed and ammunition typed fre, wow its wel as fire
intensity. This example refers to a barrage that was to
be fired for half an hour (Douglas Goddard archive)
140
ARTILLERY BATTLE TECHNIQUES AND TACTICS
enemy anti-aircraft positions also had to be
prepared. This kind of engagement plans for
artillery
was
called
'Apple
Piẻ'
[Programme].
The time needed for all these preparations
including distribution of orders was necessarily
variable, but training manuals gave as guidance
the following:
A fire plan for a regiment: 3 hours
A fire plan when all the divisional artillery
is to participate: 10-12 hours
A fire plan for all the artillery of a Corps:
24 hours
dashed forward and jumped into a pit after the
burst and found the walls of it still hot after the
explosion 30 seconds earlier. If no enemy shells
mixed up with their own nothing could stop
them advancing, only short stops after each
hundred-yard dash. He felt proud of his platoon
attacking for the first time. No German soldier
could be seen; they were all forced to keep their
heads down in their slit trenches. Not without
satisfaction he noticed the great advantage of
following
the barrage
closely, the platoon
reached its objective before the enemy noticed
them.'s
For the simplest form of a standard 'barrage' as
illustrated in Fig. 12-2, a written order was not
necessary. The limited number of data required
could easily be transferred to those concerned
by radio communication. Hence, it was often
called a Quick Barrage, which became a very
popular method towards the end of the war, in
particular when the number of participating
units was limited. This technique was the object
for much training aiming at reducing the time
for fire preparations as compared to these given
above. If no re-deployment of guns was needed
the time could be reduced to the following
A regimental 'barrage': 60-80 minutes;
All divisional artillery to be engaged: 2
hours.
Before leaving this section of the chapter we will
look at an account by a platoon commander,
Lieutenant W.H.
Pope,
illustrating how
he
experienced covering fire when this worked, as
it should. He tells that he reached the opening
line just at H hour with his platoon in column
behind him. Everything happened so quickly
that it was impossible to really find out where the
attack objects were. In the early morning with
and
smoke from bursting shells
he
recognised a hill on top of which there were a
few buildings. As the barrage moved in steps of
100 yards upwards on the slope he quickly
decided the buildings to be his first-hand
objective.
Pope's soldiers followed the barrage as close
to it as they dared. i.e. around 100 yards behind
the bursting shells. He tells us that as soon as he
saw bursts 100 yards nearer the enemy he
Unplanned heavy blows might be lashed
after the barrage
The pre-planned fire plans for attack covering
had their end, but the attacks normally went on.
But sometimes things
did not develop
planned, and an attack had to be stopped. This
also called for the artillery fire plan to cease and
a new plan hastily improvised by the command-
ers of the supported arm and the artillery. What
was to follow was 'Observed Fire' against targets
suddenly emerging and not included in any
previous plans, against Opportunity Targets. The
whole palette of possible actions by the guns was
then to be used, from quick-firing troops and
batteries to the real big strokes with all the
artillery of a division or a Corps. I have
described the methods and techniques before
and will not repeat them here. I will end this
section with two examples illustrating how
artillery could be used in such situations. First
we will see what a subaltern, Fairley Mowat, had
to say in his account from the battles in the
mountainous terrain of Sicily.
One hour after sun set the infantry unit he
was supporting was exposed to heavy enemy
artillery fire. When this ceased a battalion of
grenadiers attacked from the northwest. They
were met, stopped and thrown back much
thanks to concentrated fire from three British
regiments, which was ordered via radio ['Uncle
Target']. Twice the grenadiers tried to climb the
slope; twice they were thrown back. 160
We will then look at a statement from a high
level officer. the commander of XXX Corps.
Lieutenant General Brian Horrocks. He recalls
how he used to take advantage of the artillery
firepower during the battle of Normandy in
1944:
1411
