GUNFIRE
isation and more advanced methods in order to
improve the precision of artillery fire. The need
for communication with fire observers at long
distances became another prerequisite for con-
centration of firepower
from
dispersed over a large area. A 'loud' and 'distinct'
commanding voice with or without megaphone
was not any longer enough! The one who
developed new artillery tactics based on the
advantage of "indirect fire' was a winner.
This, however, did not take place in Britain:
conservatism was too strong. And it seems that
those concerned had been too much influenced
by all the small colonial wars against weaker and
technology-wise inferior opponents and thus
being less willing to take on the new possibilities.
Hence, Britain went to war in 1914 with modern
guns but with obsolete tactics, and for 'indirect
fire' less developed methods. Britain lacked
qualified staff and command resources for con-
centration of firepower.
A large war on the
European Continent with British participation
had for long not been regarded as a likely threat.
Bailey (2004) again: '
.. ] At the turn of
century British artillery remained essentially but
a collection of batteries? 29
The wake-up was to be dramatic! Before
proceeding and summarising artillery develop-
ment during World War I, we will first note an
organisational change of utmost importance to
the British artillery during the twentieth century;
i.e. the taking advantage of the defence interest
by Volunteers.
The Territorial Army - using society's
best resources in times of national crisis
We have seen that artillery units of volunteers
were already organised in 1797. Other types of
formation also existed such as the Yeomanries, a
kind of local militia in the counties for protection
against external enemies and internal trouble-
makers. At the beginning of
the twentieth
century, it was found appropriate to reorganise
units of volunteers and establish a more powerful
resource, which could be used as reinforcement
of the regular army. The Secretary of State for
War in the new Liberal Government, which took
office in 1906, was a man of strong will, Richard
Burton Haldane.
He clearly saw a need for
reform. The growing and more united Germany
was seen as a coming threat to Britain and he felt
that Britain must be prepared to send a strong
Expeditionary Force to Continental Europe in
case Germany attacked for instance Belgium or
France. It should have a strength of at least
120,000 men and should be ready to deploy
across the Channel within fifteen days.
In support of this force, which must be a
professional regular army, another army must be
available at home for the protection of the
national territory. It had been seen during the
Boer War that the demands from Southern
Africa had drained the homeland of military
resources and made the country indefensible. In
the future this must be avoided and the solution
was the creation of a Territorial Force, also called
the Home Force, later renamed the Territorial
Army. After a lot of political struggles and
squabbles the Parliament approved a new law,
the Territorial
Reserve
Kill which
basically
became
an approval of Haldane's
reform proposal. According to this at least
fourteen fully equipped divisions with supply
and artillery would be established Haldane had
originally suggested the double this amount)
Fourteen cavalry brisade double this amount.
visional formations were to be set up in addition
to the mentioned divisions. The former Militia
was integrated with the regular
army and
became an important Specie ular arMy law
became effective on 1 April 1908 and two years
later, a Territorial Army of 286,618 men had
been created on voluntary basis.
After this reform, other reforms followed
regarding staff work, training and exercises etc.
for the entire Armed Forces.
The system with a Territorial Army meant
that Britain
had got the ability to quickly
reinforce the regular army with qualified forma-
tions, albeit not
immediately after mobilisation.
A six months respite for aely after mobilisa ion.
called for. A great
advantage was, and so it
prevailed, that valuable
civilian competence
from many areas of societs
y would be provided.
Not the least for the artillery, this was of grea
importance.
was
defence interest in the
could be taken
care of. As we
will see
, this was to become
of immense,
not to say decisive,
importance for
the rearmament of artillery before and during
the Second World War.
Those who had joined the Territorial Army
had to serve in evenined the Territoria darny
week,
up to 20 hours
annually as well as
attending a two-week summer practice camp.
THE PERIOD UP TO THE SECOND WORLD WAR
Artillery develops into a mighty force
during the Great War
Britain went to war in the summer 1914 when
the First World War broke out, the war that was
to be called the Great War. The
did so
burdened with traditions, obsolete doctrines and
incomplete methods. The opportunities provided
by the paradigm shift to indirect fire, and its con-
sequences in a broader sense, were not fully
observed and implemented. It was thought that
the war would be characterised by swift manoeu-
vres with mobile units supported by relatively in-
dependent batteries with the new light guns. It
would be a war for the Royal Horse Artillery and
Royal Field Artillery and not for the heavier guns
of the Royal Garrison Artillery. In total 72
Field Regiments were mobilised but only six
Heavy Batteries.
Ammunition expenditure was estimated based
on experience from the Boer War. It was planned
for a maximum consumption of 1,000 rounds for
each 18-pounder gun of which only 176 would be
available forward at the front. At home another 300
rounds per gun were to be stocked and another 500
were planned for manufacture within six months.
If lessons from Russian-Japanese War had been
taken into account, quite larger volumes would have
been secured. However, it did not take much time
until it had been made clear that a modern war
raised other demands. In 1918, for instance, it was
considered necessary to prepare supply of at least
600 shells per day for an 18-pounder, when a major
attack was planned. In total some 100 million shells
were fired during the war with this type of gun. 32
As most people know the war soon changed
to a static war with the opponents dug in into
vast systems of trenches.
However, both sides
made many large and small attempts with attacks
to break the deadlock. Not until the final phase
of the war, large mobile operations took place.
As to the artillery, focus
soon geared
towards destruction' and 'annihilation' rather
than 'neutralisation'. Hence, the need for heavy
guns increased dramatically, and these should be
howitzers due to their curved trajectories with a
steep descent towards the ground. By this type
of fire, enemy soldiers in the trenches were easier
to hit. As far as the British army was concerned,
such guns were provided from Royal Garrison
Artillery, but numerous new ones were manu-
factured too. Some of them were equipped with
wheel carriages; others were mounted on railway
carriages. The calibres were many:3
• 6U-pounder
• 6-inch 26cwt howitzer
• 8-inch howitzer
• 9.2-inch siege howitzer
• 9,2-inch railway gun
• 12-inch siege howitzer
• 14-inch railway gun
It is interesting to notice that the introduction of
all these heavy guns gradually lead to provision
of motor transport to replace the horses. It was
out of the question to use horses to draw the
heaviest guns.
Instead steam-driven tractors
were supplied (which in fact had been tested on
a small scale during the Boer War), but also
petrol-fuelled combustion tractors were used.
More than 1,000 American Holt tractors moving
on tracks were purchased. 34 Moving the guns
was still a slow undertaking: more than 3-5 miles
an hour could seldom be achieved. Furthermore,
the largest guns had to be dismantled into several
parts easier to transport.
Britain went to war with only six heavy
batteries, as mentioned above. It must be regarded
as an outstanding industrial achievement that
quite soon some 440 heavy
and super-hear
batteries could be set up complete with guns and
ammunition.35 With these new guns Army and
Corps artillery were established organisationally
for the first time as a complement to the divisional
artillery, i.e. the light Field Regiments.
However, long-range guns with fairly flat
trajectories were also needed in large quantity.
This
need was fulfilled by the light
guns
mentioned above, although the quantity of these
was too low initially. The number of batteries
increased gradually and amounted to 568 at the
end of the war as compared with 72 when the
war commenced. The stock of guns comprised
3,000 18-pounders with eight million shells and
around a thousand 4.5-inch howitzers with two
million shells. 36
The ammunition was developed also. When
the war commenced 1914 only shrapnel shells
were available for the 18-pounders, but thes
gradually
complemented
with
high
explosive shells, smoke shells and shells for
chemical warfare (tear gas and mustard gas).37
With this enormous artillery rearmament a
need for a new artillery command structure arose.
Artillery commanders were introduced at all high
levels; and staff resources for efficient coordination
of the plans for the artillery battle with those of the
