GUNFIRE
On the last day of the battle, 25 September,
the defenders on the eastern side of the perimeter
had been pressed back to the light regiment's gun
position close to Oosterbeek Church. Nothing
could be done to prevent 1 and 2 Battery being
overrun by enemy tanks and infantry that day.
The surviving gunners retreated to the woods
and continued to fight as infantry to the last. At
3 p.m. the German attempts to cut off the
remaining part of the airborne division from the
river shore suddenly ceased for
unknown
reasons. This caused an unexpected decline in the
fighting for the dead tired, hungry and shabby
" Red Berets', which made the eventual evacuation
possible the coming night
During the days and nights that had passed
since the first radio contact with XXX Corps
artillery had been opened on 21 September, the
artillery
of XXX Corps had been engaged
almost continuously against numerous targets
Forty regimental targets had been registered and
engaged. And in addition to these, a further 120
different targets had been engaged to a varying
extent. Particularly important had been the firing
on targets west of the perimeter, where the 1"
Airborne Division was exposed to numerous
severe counter-attacks and infiltration. On the
last day before the evacuation the British were,
as we have seen, almost overrun from the eastern
side. Had this been successful, the remains of the
airborne division would have been cut off from
the river and lost without any relief
The XXX Corps artillery units had, besides
providing support for the airborne division, also
been very active in support of the various
brigade attacks against Elst and other places on
the 'Island'. The medium batteries also fired
southwards and eastwards in support of the
American 82nd Airborne Division in its exposed
positions at the Groesbeek Hill and Nijmegen as
some field regiments also had done. There were
also 86 Field Regiment RA directly under
command of this American division and 413
Battery RA from 147 Field Regiment RHA.
Liaison and observation officers were frequently
exchanged between the
Americans and the
Fig. 21-10 A British Observation Officer assisting the Americans at the Groesbeek Height southeast of
Nijmegen. Observe the white bursts over the wood edge from the on-going artillery fire. American Waco-
Nijmegen. Observe the white bursts over the wood edge from the on going artilerial War Museum, Robertson
No. 03/55/1)
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
British units to facilitate cooperation (Fig. 21-
10). All the extensive firing drew on the limited
ammunition reserves
air: In the war diary of 25 September one of the
entries is as follows:404
How had the artillery intelligence
resources been employed?
Amongst the artillery resources available when the
operation commenced was 662 AOP Squadron
RAF that was under command of XXX Corps
Besides its own three Flights (A, B and C), each
with four aircraft, B Flight 658 AOP Squadron
RAF had been allotted since Normandy. This was
now called D Flight. 'A Flight' was under
command of the 50th (Northumbrian) Division
and 'B Flight' was now put under command of the
Guards Division.
'C
Flight'
remained
initially
under
command of the Sauadron Leader but was later
to be put under command of the 43rd (Wessex)
Division, 403 D Flight' was attached to Corps
Headquarters,
used
primarily
TOn
liaison/communication flights. One of its aircraft
was shot down when undertaking such a task.
In the planning of Operation Garden it was
assumed that these aircraft could not be used
before the XXX Corps had established itself
firmly north of Arnhem. Nor would there be any
need for engaging them earlier. Therefore, the
aircraft of B Flight were dismantled by
removing the wings so that they could be trans-
ported on lorries that would accompany the
Guards Division column northwards.
The
aircraft of the other Flights' were kept ready for
flying sorties.
Now, when the planned fast advance along
'Club Route' failed, the 'B Flight' portee aircraft
were unloaded near Nijmegen and the wings
attached so as to make them ready for the air
again. At the same time the CBO of XXX Corps
had established himself and his staff with the
Americans in the area. It then became a natura
task to have the AOP resources engaged in locating
enemy artillery and mortar positions, and also to
observe and control fire against such targets.
It was therefore decided to bring forward
also the two other Flights of 662 AOP Squadron
RAE, i.e. 'A Flight and B Flight. They were
somewhat delayed due to the repeated attacks on
"Club Route by the Germans.
We may note from the war diary of the
squadron that it was a dangerous undertaking to
fly with these aircraft around Nijmegen with the
enemy so close, both on the ground and in the
Captain Cracknell of C Fit today had a very
narrow squeak, he had a seven minutes duel with
a Focke-Wulf 190 and by really superb flying
managed to escape. The FW. had 3 separate
attacks at him but twice fired over his head and
one beneath his starboard wing
During the final days of September, two Flights
were redeployed forward to the 'Island' and used
for counter-bombardment tasks against artillery
and mortars
The survey resources of 4 Survey Regiment
RA were split up and allotted to the three
divisions of XXX Corps by which the survey of
divisional artillery formations into the same grid
was quickly secured. Certam resources were kept
centrally to make a Corps grid possible, if and
when needed. This turned out to be the situation
around 23 September when the number of units
deployed southwest of Nijmegen became signif-
icant. A special requirement emerged also.
namely survey of some American artillery units
into the same Corps grid
Another important task was to survey all the
units that redeployed to positions on the 'Island'
during the final days of the operation with all
firing plans to be executed there, not least the
extensive DF programme to be fired in protec-
tion of the evacuation from the Oosterbeek
perimeter across river Rhine during the nioh+ 2
to 26 September. The success of that demon-
strates clearly the precision of fire that had to be
put down very close to own positions. No casu-
alties due to 'friendly fire' have been registered.
We may recall that the 'Flash Spotting
Troops' and 'Sound Ranging Troops' had been
very active just before the breakout from the
bridgehead at the Maas-Schelde Canal (Escaut)
on 17 September.
During the first phase of the breakout, the
main parts of the resources of the surver
regiment were allotted to the two divisions
towards the back of the Coros column. the 43rd
(Wessex) and the 50th (Northumbrian) Division.
To the former was attached 48 Composite Battery
RA and to the latter 47 Composite Battery RA.
Under the Commanding Officer and his small
staff such batteries comprised, as we have seen, a
Survey Troop', a 'Flash Spotting Troon' and a
'Sound Ranging Troop'. Attached to the regi-
3021
