GUNFIRE
One would expect an airborne division to
have three field artillery regiments as the
ordinary infantry division. Certainly, this should
have been the case but it was far from possible
at the time. The regiments had been able to
organise and train, but the necessary transport
capacity was not available, far from it. Instead
the airborne division had to rely on support from
other artillery resources on the ground and -
sometimes - the guns of ships of the Royal Navy.
Tactically, the airborne division was to land
and capture territory, bridges etc, of strategic im-
portance and hold it for a few days only with its
own resources until other attacking formations
could reach the
area and relieve, or at least
support, the air-landed troops. It was further-
more anticipated that the artillery of the relieving
formations would be deployed within range of
the bridgehead to provide supporting fire as
early as possible. But in order to facilitate such
support more FOOs were needed.
The solution adopted was the creation of
special observation units called Forward Obser-
vation Units (FOU). Two of them were estab-
lished in 1944. the 1 and 2 Forward Observation
Unit RA for employment in North West Europe
and a third one, the 3 Forward Observation Unit
Fig. 7-4 The shortage of gliders was for long a major
problem. When the 6 Airborne Division was landed in
Normandy on D-Day, 6 June 1944, only one of the
three batteries of its light artillery regiment could be
landed from the air (RAHT)
RA, was organised later and deployed in Italy.
All three were strong and comprised a com-
manding officer with headquarters and three
sections, each one with six FOOs. A section was
to support a brigade attaching one FOO team
to each one of the three battalions of the
brigade, one to be kept as a reserve. The
remaining two were to be used as liaison detach
ments at the brigade headquarters with the task
operate radio
communication with the
artillery of the
approaching formations. 117
60 men of the FOU were dropped by parachute
or landed with gliders together with formations
of the airborne division.
This method for reinforcing the brigades of
the airborne divisions worked well in Normandy,
but as we will see later it was not a complete
success at Arnhem, for several reasons.
We have now foreveral reasons he field
artillery resources o briely reviewed the field
before leaving this subiect it must be stressed
AIRBORNE ARTILLERY
that the airborne divisions, besides the Air-
landing Light
Regiments
RA,
also
were
supported by a large number of anti-tank guns
and mortars in the parachute and air-landing
infantry battalions,
a most valuable direct
support as many books about
the battle at
Arnhem illustrate.
signal messages orienting him that something was
in the wind.
On 29 June the problem was expounded in
greater detail. The role of the Division was two-
fold:
Air-transported artillery another option
During the war, methods for 'air transportation'
of ordinary ground forces were also developed.
This was not the same as 'air-landing' for which
only air-borne troops
could be
used. The
transport as such was not part of the battle
technique and tactics, but a means for deploying
ground forces from one geographic area to
another, where they were to operate as usual. For
this purpose ordinary types of transport aircraft
were to be used, and not gliders. However, much
training was needed to make air transport a
versatile option and this applied to the artillery
in particular
An infantry division preparing for battle
after air transport was the 52nd (Lowland)
Infantry Division. In this Scottish division the
three Field Regiments 79, 80 and 186 Field
Regiment RA constituted the divisional artillery.
The two first mentioned were TA-regiments and
the latter a new regiment established during the
war (ready for operation in December 1942). A
mountain regiment was attached as well, 1st
Mountain Regiment RA. Major Walter J.M. Ross
commanding a battery in 80 Field Regiment RA
tells us how the artillery prepared itself for a role
as 'air-transported' regiment. 118
Until 1944 the regiment had acted as other
field regiments equipped with 25-pounders. But:
On Tuesday morning everyone at MONTROSE
was told on a muster parade that the Division was
to prepare for Air-transportation to a still undis-
closed theatre of operations: The aircraft to be
used were DAKOTA C 47, with a payload of
5000lb, and a man with his kit was to be taken as
weighing 2481b. More would be known on the
return of the G.O.C. from the War Office, and
meantime, officers were to be earmarked for a
short course at the Airborne Training Develop-
ment Centre, AMESBURY; but nothing was to
be discussed outside billets or mentioned in
letters. The C.O. then left by car for HAWICK to
break the news to 317, whose Bty. Comdr's lively
curiosity had already been whetted by cryptic
Role A: To be landed by air in enemy occupied
territory. In this operation 186 Fd. Regt. RA were
to be flown in armed with 3.7 [-inch] howitzers,
followed, if necessary, by 80 Fd. Regt. RA also
armed with 3.7 howitzers. If 80 were not required
to go by air, they were to go by sea, at assault
scale, armed with 25 pdrs.
Role B: To be landed by air behind our own
forward troops. In this operation both 186 and 80
were to be flown in armed with 25 pdrs.
The vintage mountain howitzer was something
new for the regiment (Fig. 7-5). They received
four guns for quick training from 3 Mountain
Regiment RA.
Now an intensive program for training and
adaptation for the air-transportable role with 25-
pounders also commenced. The regiment con-
structed 'mock-ups' of Dakotas with the right
dimensions and placement of the loading doors.
Loading ramps were made for attachment to the
doors with the correct angle. The 25-pounder
could not be loaded in one piece; it had to be
"stripped'. The shield was removed as was the
plattorm and certain other pieces to make it less
voluminous. This was also necessary in order to
get the right weight distribution inside the aircraft.
It was heavy work indeed, to load and lash
the gun and then to unload it. But practice gave
muscles and the right handling. According to the
regulations the whole procedure was not to take
more than 25-30 minutes, 1.e. to dismantle the
gun, load and lash it, and then to reverse it all
and restore the gun to one piece after unloading.
Most of the gun crews, thanks to enthusiastic
work, managed to get down to 17-20 minutes
after many exercises
The gun crews also had to acquaint them-
selves with leeps. a new tvpe of vehicle for them
Their usual 'Quads' were too big and heavy for
air transportation. These had to be taken hu ser
transport together with the rest of the regimental
heavy equipment. In replacement of the Ouads
the regiment was given 100 Jeeps to be used as
gun tractors after landing and transnort of a
first-hand stock of artillery ammunition, com-
