GUNFIRE
The initial attack in the north was supported
by some 1,050 guns. The artillery programme
commenced with a five hours long preparatory
Tire
against German headquarters, fortified
positions, and communication centres etc. A
larce
counter-battery bombardment against
enemy artillery was also launched. Not least, bv
means of the artillery intelligence resources and
air reconnaissance some 45 enemy batteries with
150 guns had been located in advance. The
counter-battery bombardment became a task for
some 600 British guns
Following the preparatory fire programmes.
a large Covering Fire Programme had been
prepared. This would include a tight fire plan for
Un e
tour
infantry divisions
attacking
Close
together. Superimposed on this, some 400 anti-
aircraft and anti-tank guns would fire a special
'Pepperpot' Programme for several hours. Three
of the divisions attacked behind a huge barrage.
The fourth division, the Scottish Highlanders,
preferred a fire plan based on timed con-
Fig. 22-2 Operation Veritable aiming at clearing the
area between River Maas and River Rhine started on
8 February 1945 as a preparation for the final allied
crossing of the River Rhine. The large attack was
launched in south-easterly direction from Nijmegen
down into Reichswald. The British-Canadian attack
was made by four infantry divisions deployed beside
each other. Three of them attacked behind barrages,
the boundaries of which are shown. We can see
pause lines included in the plan. The barrage moved
5-8km into the area held by the Germans. The fourth
division, attacking south of the former three, had its
covering fire planned as timed concentrations against
German positions that had been well located in
advance (RAHT)
centrations against located enemy positions.
Following the initial covering fire, direct support
on opportunity targets was foreseen. Altogether,
this was one of the largest pre-planned artillery
programmes in the Second World War.
An indication of the implications of the initial
artillery programmes
as far as artillery was
concerned is given by Fig. 22-2, which is
illustrating the design of the barrage. The barrage
covered the attack area southeast of Nijmeger
over Groesbeek Hill down into Reichswald.
A creeping barrage was fired by 4-5 field
regiments and 3 medium regiments in front of
each division. These covered the front of the
divisions up to a depth of some 500 yards from
the start line. The fire during the first 70 minutes
was aimed at the first lines of the barrage then a
lift of 300 yards took place every twelve minutes.
This exemption from normal practice and a few
others were applied too. Routine was to be
avoided. The barrage was planned to move
forward about 5-8km from the start line of each
division
I will now conclude this background
information by quoting Lieutenant Sidney Beck.
He tells us how his battery with SP guns
experienced a typical day in the middle of
Operation Veritable. An attack by 160 Infantry
Brigade on 24 February 1945 was to be
supported by no less than 400 guns, amongst
them Beck's guns:
We were still unloading ammunition when the fire
began at 01.30 hrs. It continued without pause
until 05.15 hrs necessitating firing on a different
target every 3 minutes. It says much for the high
standard of training that, despite the weariness of
the gunners after previous long days of firing, not
a target was missed during the four hours bom-
bardment.
The attack by 53 Div progressed
slowly and we were called upon for fire support
during the day. Towards evening more ammuni-
tion arrived and another load around midnight.
Tracks and fields were almost impassable to the
ammunition lorries and we had to use ou
Sherman tanks to tow the trucks to the guns. This
had its disadvantages as the tanks cut our
telephone and tannoy wires. It was no joke for the
signallers repairing torn wires in the mud and rain
of a dark night. More enemy in this landed in thn
Regimental areas, both A and B Troops having
shells on their positions, fortunately without ca-
sualties. 421
316
THE FINAL ONSLAUGHT - THE RHINE CROSSING
And now to Operation Plunder, the final
onslaught across river Rhine.
At the beginning of March 1945, Mont-
gomery's 21st Army Group was deployed with
the Ist Canadian Army south of Arnhem-
Nijmegen and the 2nd British Army south of
that along river Rhine down to the line Geldern-
Wesel where the 9th US Army took over; this
army under Montgomery's
command too.
Further south came two American armies. The
12th US Army Group in which two armies were
attached, one of them Patton's 3rd Army, was
closest to the British Army Group. The 6th US
Army Group under Devers was deployed south
of these. This consisted of one American and one
French army (see Map 22-1).
The planning was based on
extensive
analyses of terrain, logistic requirements and the
need for artillery and air support. The potential
and possibilities of enemy counter-actions
against the allied attackers
were of course
carefully considered also. In respect of the
normal large width of the river, which had been
further widened by the opened locks and dams,
the attack would be of the same character as
landings on a defended coast. A difference in
comparison with the Normandy landings was,
however, that no major concrete fortifications
existed along the shore.
It was eventually decided that the main
resource on the British side would be XII Corps
reinforced with the Ist Commando Brigade. The
Corps was to cross the river between Rees in the
north and the city Wesel in the south. Tò the right
of the British Corps, the 9th US Army would
each other.
attack simultaneously with two divisions beside
At a final stage of the planning process, it
was decided that the attack across the river was
to be done by two Corps in parallel. XXX
Corps, who had carried the heaviest burden
during Operation Veritable, got the task to cross
10 the left of XII Corps in the sector Rees -
Emmerich in the north. Due to the flooding and
lack of (likely) assault boats the final plan called
for an advance towards Emmerich along the
eastern shore of river Rhine from the Rees area
The Corps
once a bridgehead had been established there.
attack in the north was to be
unched a few hours before the main attack by
XII Corps, this as a deception. But roughly at the
same time, the Ist Commando Brigade in the
South was to cross and attack Wesel. This would,
it was thought; reinforce the impression that the
prime attack would be at Rees.
Wesel was an important road and railway
junction, and it was considered important to
capture the city at an early stage. If so, the 9th US
Army could establish a supply route with high
capacity for support of the huge allied forces
planned to proceed from the bridgehead into the
heartland of Germany. These were to enclose the
Ruhr industrial area from the north and attack
towards river Elbe and the Baltic coast.
After all deliberations, Operation Plunder
for the 2nd British Army had been broken down
into three distinct sub-operations:
Operation Torchlight, XII Corps
Operation Turnscrew, XXX Corps
Operation Widgeon, 1 Commando
Brigade
As a protection for all these attacking formations
and their preparations, the whole western shore
area was to be defended by the 3rd Infantry
Division in the north and the 52nd (Lowland)
Infantry Division in the southern sector as soon
as the whole area west of river Rhine had been
cleared in Operation Veritable. The commander
of the VIII Corps was to be in charge.
The tactical situation on the enemy side of
the river was unclear during the planning period.
The final judgement a few days before the attack
was that the allies were to meet the German 1s
Parachute Army. This consisted of II Parachute
Corps, with three divisions, the 6th, 7th and 8th
Parachute Divisions,
and LXXXVI Corps,
which in its turn comprised 84 and 180 Infantry
Divisions. None of these formations were,
however, up to nominal strength and lacked
much of their heavy equipment.
The parachute formations could not any
longer be regarded as airborne troops. They were
more like ordinary infantry divisions, albeit with
better training and battle experience. The overall
battle worthiness of the German forces varied.
In worst condition was the 84th Infantry
Division, who had lost more than 6,000 men as
prisoners of war. The parachute divisions had
each lost 1,500-3,000 men.
As a reserve further back from the river on
the German side, the XIVII Panzer Corps was
deployed with its two divisions, the 116th Panzer
Division and the 15th Panzer Grenadier Division.
Looking further to the north, the German
317
