GUNFIRE
be brought forward as quickly as possible
to support the airborne troops north of
Rhine. On 21 September in the morning,
one medium regiment was ready near
Nijmegen with Arnhem within range, and
towards the evening also the only heavy
battery. We now know that it could have
been two days earlier with better planning.
Had this been the case, one can rest
assured, that the 'Red Berets' had
welcomed it verv much.
Cooperation between British and
American headquarters and commanders
worked very well, as was cooperation
between their Forward Observation
Officers. The key to this was, that the
parties did not interfere on respective radio
communication networks. Instead, the
practice was to use haison officers
equipped with wireless sets netted on their
own networks. By this arrangement it was
easy to transmit fire orders etc. from an
American unit to British units and vice
versa. The liaison officer could be a regi-
mental or battery commander, but many
times subalterns were engaged
The field regiments brought much more
ammunition with them than normal.
Hence they did not suffer too much when
the supply transports were interrupted by
the Germans blocking the only available
road - as they did many times. The
medium regiments and the heavy battery
had a worse situation, and a severe
shortage of ammunition was unavoidable
on their part during the last critical days of
the battle
Appreciation was expressed from many
supported units on the accuracy demon-
strated by the British artillery again and
again, despite long ranges and frequent re-
laying of the guns in many directions.
Often there was a need to fire very close to
own troops. Normal safety distances could
not always be respected, but to the credit
of surveyors and gun layers no major
mistakes with casualties from 'friendly fire'
were reported.
The intelligence resources of the artillery
were effectively used despite the frequent
needs for improvisation, and many times
changed plans. In particular this was the
case east and southeast of Nijmegen where
the demand for target location was great.
The dashing attitude on the part of the
survey batteries with early and quick re
connaissance and deployment of sound
ranging bases and flash spotters proved
very valuable and was admirable.
The plan for the long defensive firing
around the perimeter to protect the 'Red
Berets' withdrawal across the river Rhine
the last night was prepared hastily, but was
executed with normal effectiveness.
Available artillery resources (some 140
guns) were well coordinated and used with
great skill. Again, some of the artillery
regiments played an important role when
supporting the deceptive artant rofew nio-
metres downstream of Oosterbeek.
Finally I conclude with a few words, which Major
General Tony Richardson, subaltern at the 431
Battery, 147 Field Regiment RHA during the
batle, said to me and some uRA during the
years ago in Arnhem: 'We came a long way and we
did our best! To me this is a lasting impression of
the role played by the gunners at the battle of
Arnhem, albeit a few question marks regarding the
planning of the operation must be raised.
314
22. The Final Onslaught - The Rhine Crossing
Since the failed operation at Arnhem in the
autumn 1944, higher headquarters had been
planning for a new massive attack across river
Rhine. In respect of the need for replacement of
all losses, and the necessity of boosting the
supply lines for all armies with ammunition, fuel,
livestock etc, they all needed several months of
preparations. An important part of this was the
clearing of the area north of river Schelde, which
was a prerequisite for making the
port of
Antwerp available for
the
Allies. This
was
accomplished in November 1944. Based on this,
it was thought possible to launch an offensive
across Rhine in January 1945 provided the
winter weather would not be too severe.
Everything did not go the Allies' way. The
German offensive through the Ardennes changed
the plans, but allied superiority finally gave the
Allies the upper hand and the German attack was
broken. They were pushed back roughly to the
point here they had started. This made it possible
for the headquarters of Montgomery and Bradley
to return to the planning of the Rhine Crossing.
But this must be preceded by a large operation to
clear all the area between the rivers Maas and
Rhine. The plan for this called for a British-
Canadian attack southeastwards from the area
between Nijmegen and Reichswald in parallel with
the heavily fortified Siegfried Line down towards
the city Geldern. This was the meeting point with
the American 9th Army, which was to advance
northwards from river Roer. This was the planned
Operation Veritable in the North and Operation
Grenade in the South.
Responsible
for
the British-Canadian
operation was the Ist Canadian Army. The
prime role was, however, assigned to the British
XXX Corps under Lieutenant General Brian
Horrocks.
temporary
Corps
benefited from
composition, which
implied
rouping of a huge force, some 200,000 men.
Four divisions would launch an initial attack with
the objective of capturing the Reichswald woods.
Behind them would several other infantry and
amoured divisions follow suit. Planning for this
huge operation without revealing place and time
for it became a really demanding task, not least
logistically. Staff work thus became an onerous
undertaking of highest calibre.
The battle commenced on 8 February 1945
in the northern sector with a huge artillery
programme. In the south, the Germans had
opened dams in the Roer River, which had
flooded the area where the Americans were to
advance. Large areas were flooded in the British
sector too (Fig. 22-1). The Americans had to
wait until 23 February before their part of the
overall operation could commence.
During the first two weeks, the Germans
therefore got the advantage of concentrating
most of their reserves against the British and the
Canadians. The fighting became very hard and
took a longer time than had been expected
Things were not made easier by the snow
melting and rainy weather, which converted all
roads to mud. In the vicinity of river Rhine
where Canadian units were to attack, large areas
were flooded
On 10 March the struggle was over
however, when the last German units withdrew
across river Rhine. The losses on both sides were
very large.
Fig. 22-1 Before the Germans were forced to return
across the River Rhine they had made the batlo a real
challenge for the Allies not least because of the
extensive flooding they had arranged by breaking
banks and dams. Amphibious vehicles were needed
for many supply transports in the Nijmegen-Cleve
area (AWM No. SUK 13839)
315
