GUNFIRE
actively attacking the German lines. Repeated of-
fensives would facilitate an early breakout in the
American sector, he thought.
Initially the resources were limited and
allowed only minor offensives at brigade and
battalion levels, but after two weeks from D-Dav,
offensives at divisional and even Corps levels
were possible to launch. As we have seen.
artillery resources strong enough for such oper-
ations were at hand. Initially, the main offensive
Was
Operation Epsom
and its
successor
Operation Jupiter. The objective was the capture
of 'Hill 112' and the high ground between the
rivers Orne and Odon southwest of Caen from
which a large area to the South and Southwest
could be observed. Another important operation
was Operation Charnwood, the objective of
which was to capture Caen after the bombers
had done their part. After these came one of
most important
operations, Operation
Goodwood, which would facilitate an American
break-out by enlarging the bridgehead south of
Caen and also binding as much as possible of
German armoured resources. After this followed
several sub-operations before the battle of
Normandy was over. An overview of the various
operations and their locations and dates for
execution is given by Map 20-4.
Operation Epsom was postponed several
days due to the heavy storm of the 20-24 June.
which delaved the landings of the 43rd (Wessex)
Division,
which
was
scheduled
for
this
operation. Overall responsibility had been given
to VIII Corps. The operation
was finally
launched on 26 June with the 15th (Scottish
Division in the lead. The division had the 11th
Armoured Division behind. The intention was to
grab, in several phases, terrain west and south of
Caen. At the same time I Corps was to launch a
smaller attack as the pincer of the operation
around Caen. In Phase I, the 11th Armoured
Division was planned to seize a bridgehead
across river Odon, the
westernmost
river
southwest of Caen
When the first part of the attack had taken
place, the 15th Division were to be replaced br
the 43rd (Wessex) Division with the task of con-
solidating captured terrain.
The night before the operation, 25 June, an
attack aiming at protection of the right Corps
flank was
launched by the 49th
(Riding)
Division of XXX CorDs.
It has been stated that this massive operation
by VIII Corps involved more than 180,000
troops. 353
the
disposal of the Corps
Commander were 700 guns. Some 400 of these
were from his own artillery units, whereas the
rest came from I Corps east of Caen and XXX
Corps operating west of VIII Corps.
This is not the place where the course of the
battle will be
presented in detail. We may,
however, note that the massive artillery engage-
ment started off with a barrage moving slowly
forward over a front 3km wide. The battle
became an extremely hard business and it turned
out to be impossible to extend the bridgehead to
river Odon as planned, except temporarily. The
so important 'Hill 112' was captured, but the
Germans managed to recapture it in a counter-
attack thus forcing the British to withdraw. I he
offensive then slowed down and the Corps had
to concentrate on meeting repeated strong
German counter-attacks: but it was possible to
keep most of the captured terrain thanks to well
coordinated engagement of ground and naval
artillery and fighter-bombers of the RAF.
The offensive was resumed on 10 July as
Operation Jupiter. Again VIII Corps was respon
sible but this was changed already on 13 July
When XII Corps was ordered to take over this
as the former Corps was to plan Operation
Goodwood
Operation Jupiter had as its prime objective
to finally capture Hill 112 and the vital area
around it. Both sides considered it strategically
extremely important to command this feature.
Again the fighting became extremely hard.
maybe the hardest during the whole battle of
Normandy, and went on fal weeks
The losses in lives and equipment were horren
dous on both sides.
The task to finally capture Hill 112 was given
to the 43rd (Wessex) Division. One of its field
regiments was Douglas Goddard's regiment, 112
(Wessex) Field Regiment RA. We can read in the
history of the regiment how the cunners experi-
enced the initial barrage this day:
Zero Hour was 05.00 hrs on 10ah Til and the
barrage started at 04.50 hrs The arty included
two AGRAs, the guns of 11th Armd and 15th
Scottish Divs as well as the pune of 43rd Div
The delivery of this massive fre power will
be remembered by all The entire Corps Arty
engaged at rates of un to s BPM frounds per
minute] with the guns having to be cooled with
A NEW FRONT IS OPENED - NORMANDY
water. The Regl Diary records Uncle Tgts of
1,260 RPM for 19 minutes. Between 8th and the
11th July CTp fired 2,753 rounds of HE and D
Ip 2,906 rounds. Bty ammunition expenditure
on 10th was 3,400 rounds
The attempt to capture Caen became an affair
on the part of 1 Corps.
who commenced
Operation Charnwood on 9 July. The operation
was launched after the city had been bombed by
the strategic bombers during the night between
8 and 9 July. The result was that the northern
part of the city up to river Orne was cleared from
enemy defenders.
Then followed Operation Goodwood on 18
July, which had to be terminated on 21 July due
to heavy rain, which made tank movements im-
possible
Operation Goodwood - an attempt to
break out?
This operation was larger than all those already
executed. The prime role was assigned to VIII
Corps, which now by a temporary grouping
became an 'Armoured Corps'. This leads the
thoughts to El Alamein where Montgomery had
also established a temporary Corps of this kind
by grouping three armoured divisions and one
infantry division together
The new armoured Corps was to attack via
a left hand hook' east and south of Caen with
the three armoured divisions in column. The
11th Armoured Division was to lead followed by
the Guards Division, which in its turn was to be
followed by the 7th Armoured Division (see
Map 20-5)
At the same time. the left flank of the Corps
was to be protected bv I Corps attacking with the
3rd Infantry Division. Protection of the right
western) flank was the task of the 3rd Canadian
Division from II Canadian Corps. This division
was to attack through the southern part of Caen
east and south of river Orne
The major problem to face was the limited
space east of
river Orne,
which made
necessary to launch the initial phase of the
offensive through a very narrow corridor. But
before that, all assault forces had to cross the
river Orne from the northern part of Caen
across the only three bridges available to get to
the opening line. More than 6,000 vehicles were
engaged. This was indeed to ask for trouble and
traffic jam.
The prime objective was to capture the
whole area south of Caen to a depth of 10-15km
up to Orne-Laize. This would secure the whole
city Caen and establish good opportunities for a
later breakout towards Falaise. The operation has
been much debated since the war; questions
have been raised as to whether Montgomery had
such a limited goal. Had he not planned for a
direct full-scale breakout from the bridgehead in
the direction of Falaise? Such visions were in fact
on the agenda early during the planning stage
When looking at the VIII Corps Operation
Order for Operation Goodwood, and also the di
visional order based on this, no direct guidance
is provided. These orders are focused on the
primary tactical objectives and how these would
be reached. One can, however, not escape a
feeling that unpronounced expectations existed
that in a second phase success would be
exploited southwards towards Falaise. When
reading the report presented after the battle by
the Corps Commander, General O'Connor, the
same indication appears.355 To the confusion
about Montgomerv's real intentions contributes
his own unclearness on the subject. After the
battle, he argued that the objectives were limited
geographically, and that binding as much as
possible of the German forces was the focus,
thus facilitating a breakout by the Americans
from their sector of the bridgehead
A likely hypothesis is that Montgomery in
view of the tremendous opposition he expected
did not dare attempting a large-scale breakout
On the other hand, he may have wanted to
establish a kind of mental preparedness on the
part of his subordinate commanders for a break-
out should the initial attack develop favourabl
This is supported hu
the third point under
"Intention' in the VIII Corps Operation Instruc
tion No. 4. where it is stated what will apolv when
the primary objectives had been secured. 35
If conditions are favourable. subsequently ex-
blottino to the COliTi
Operation Goodwood was opened by the
strategic bombers dropping their bombs on each
side of the planned advance corridor east of
Caen where the assault units would attack. After
the bombing a rolling barrage followed, about
5km long, divided in two parts. Behind this the
leading units of the 11th Armoured Division was
to advance. This unit was 29 Armoured Brigade
