15. Introduction
In Part 1 and Part 2 of the book, we have seen
what artillery resources that Britain mobilised
and established during the rearmament taking
place in the first four years of the war, the
equipment
provided
and how
ther
were
organised and trained. Gunnery methods, battle
techniques and tactics gradually developed and
applied have been discussed. Hence, the book
has described the main features of the 'indirect
fire system, how it was designed and worked.
In this Part 3, we will proceed and look into
the actual use of the available resources, this by
diving into the war history of a sample of
selected theatres and specific battles. At the same
time, we will see how the efficient use of artillery
was gradually pursued and how the general
doctrines were followed and - sometimes - more
or less dismissed
Giving a complete presentation of the role of
artillery on every theatre of war is obviously not
possible within the space available. A selection
must be made. At first I have selected
campaign in France and Belgium 1939-1940 for
my review, then the intervention in Norway 1940
followed by a discussion of what happened
artillery-wise at the Home Front after Dunkirk
Then I am turning to the decisive events in North
Africa in 1942, in particular the third battle at El
Alamein, which became a turning point. After this.
I am making a jump to 1944 and the period up to
the end of the war in 1945. Three central battles
during this period are analysed. The first one is the
battle of Normandy beginning with the landings
on 6 June 1944, then the battle of Arnhem in
September 1944 and finally the great artillery
finale, the Rhine Crossing in March 1945. Very
briefly, I will also touch upon the problems and •
challenges encountering the gunners in Burma
Within the scope of the objects selected, the
use of the artillery resources and the basic con-
ditions
for
this
briefly
discussed, but
sometimes deeper into details. As a background
an overview of the respective campaign is given.
This is far from complete and I refer for more
information to the manifold literature about
World War II
Even with the limitations in scope made, it
is not possible to discuss exactly the same
aspects of the use of artillery for every campaign
or battle selected. The availability of literature
and original sources, and the content and quall!
of these, have determined what can be presented
and discussed. Combined, however, the various
presentations give a fairly good picture of the use
and standard of the artillery as far as the British
are concerned and the results achieved.
When I have studied the British artillery
some issues raised have been the following. It
should, however, be observed that it has not beer
possible to find answers to them all for every
campaign and battle reviewed:
What artillery resources were employed?
How was the plan for their use?
Was the planning well coordinated with the
planning by the infantry and armoured
units to be supported? Did all-arms
training take place?
What battle techniques were applied?
• What fire plans were prepared?
Was concentration of artillery fire
Prepared
Was artillery ammunition in sufficien
quantity available? Any constraints
and water etc.?
angarding supply of ammonstraints Good
How were the intelligence resources used?
Did radio and telephone communication
and dependent command functions work?
Can any specific 'system deficiencies' be
observed?
I will in my presentation in some cases touch
upon cooperation with naval and air forces. Some
andific issues related naval and air forces. Some
and exercises will be discussed as well.
16. Artillery to the Field - Across the Channel
The 'Phoney War'
The final planning for the transport and deploy-
ment of British Expeditionary Force (BEF) in
France was initiated on 4 September 1939 and
orders were
given
The BEF
was to
bel
commanded by General Lord Gort and subor-
dinated the French High Command, more
specifically the commander of the North Eastern
Area of Operation, General Georges, and under
him the Commander 1st Army Group, General
Bilotte. The troops were to be transported from
harbours in South England to French ports
primarily Cherbourg and Le Havre, but the
smaller ports of Boulogne and Calais were also
used for disembarkation of troops. The BEF was
to be deployed on the border of neutral Belgium
apart from one
division, which was to be
deployed in Eastern France just behind the
Maginot Line
The regular 1st and 2nd Infantry Divisions
were the two divisions first in place. Their first
units left England on 22 September and were
almost completely deploved at the end of the
month. They were part of I Corps commanded
by General Sir John Dill. Soon after this the two
divisions of II Corps followed, the 3rd and 4th
Infantry Division. The commander of this Corps
was the distinguished and much respected
General Alan Brooke, as mentioned a former
Gunner. His two divisions had to take on a large
number of reservists and conscripts to get up to
nominal strength and needed thus more time for
mobilisation and training. They were deployed
in France on 12 October. The total strength of
BEF had now reached 158,000 men and 25,000
vehicles. But real fighting was still many months
away. Both sides needed more time for mobili-
sation and additional training for more troops to
come later. Hence, a 'Phoney War' followed
As far as the British were concerned, prepa-
rations for war continued systematically and
eventually the BEF reached its final strength
around 400,000 men, when the fighting started
on 10 May 1940. Ten fighting divisions in three
Corps were then ready. Some of them were
regular formations; others came from the Terri-
toral Army
(TA) and had arrived at the
beginning of 1940. In addition to these ten
divisions, there was another three without
artillery deployed along the supply lines. In total
a respectable expeditionary force, but still too
small an army
On the allied side, there were in total no less
than 139 divisions. Besides the ten British
divisions. 22 divisions from neutral Belgium, 5
from the Netherlands (also a neutral country).
and 102 French were ready. Of the French
divisions 27 were stationary fortress divisions
Against the allies were 137 German divisions 18
It should be noted that a fourth British Corps
was planned to be taken over to France and BEF
later in 1940, IV Corps, which had two TA
divisions under training in England in the spring
The responsibility of BEF was to cover onl
SOkm of the front, which went from the Channel
along the Belgian border, then along the Magino
Line down to the border with Switzerland, a total
length of no less than 600km. To its left. the BEF
had the French 7th Army and to the right the
French 1st Army. The sector assigned to the BEF
made it possible to deploy four British divisions
beside each other, the rest had to be deploved
further back (southwards). One division. the 51 st
(Highland) Division, was alone deployed behind
the North Western part of the Maginot Line at
the German border, just north of the city Met
(i.e. the Saar Front). All the allied divisions were
deploved along the long front line without anv
strategic reserves behind them
Many of the British artillery formations
came to France along with their divisions. some
were.
however, sent in
advance
Thoco
regiments, which were Army and Corps forma-
tions, came as soon as they had been mobilised
and equipped. With a reservation for minor
errors (for some formations the time of arrival
in France is uncertain) the build-up of the
artillery strength is illustrated in Fig. 16-1.190
165|
