GUNFIRE
Those fine Infantry Divisions [...] had been
fighting in the thick Normandy Bocage for many
weeks; not only were they physically exhausted
but they had also suffered heavy casualties - as
always, among the leaders of all ranks. When we
heard over the air that our advance was held up
by tough enemy resistance we would halt our
infantry and tell them to be prepared to launch
another assault in X minutes. I would then switch
the whole of the Corps Artillery on to the point
of resistance [hence a Victor target] - a ten-minute
concentration was usually enough. The next
message we received was always to the effect that
our troops were advancing again. o
To protect attacking units, when they had taken
their first objectives, defensive fire could be
prepared in advance, the plan being part of the
overall
plan
for
covering fire
The battle
technique was the same as that to be used in sta-
tionary situations, which we will have a look at
in the next section. The creation of smoke
screens
means of smoke
shells
component of the covering fire was also a
technique often applied. Sometimes artificial
light over the battlefield was required, and this
could also be delivered by the gunners. Plans for
harassing fire and counter-bombardment on
enemy artillery and mortars normally were made
as well. I will discuss these techniques later, but
first we will look at battle techniques used in
defence.
Be prepared to hit back hard! Battle tech-
niques for the defence
The techniques applied by the artillery in sta-
tionary defence
situation were the same as
applied in quickly emerging situations during an
offensive, for instance when the captured objec-
tives had been taken and had to be defended.
The basic difference was time for preparations.
The methods were in summary:
Concentration of fire towards an area
where the enemy was deploying as
preparation for a counter-attack
• Defensive fire close to own positions to
stop an on-going enemy attack
Covering fire in support of own counter-
attacks
Counter-bombardment, i.e. fire aiming at
neutralisation or destruction of enemy
artillery and mortars
In a defensive position it was necessary to be able
to concentrate as much artillery as could be made
available against an enemy concentrating forces
for an attack. The aim was to launch a quick but
massive response necessitating early preparations
This was called 'Counter Preparation Fire' (CPF).
The target map references could be the same for
all units to participate, but fire could be prepared
also against a wider and deeper target if found
appropriate.
Sometimes a CPF-target was
designated as a 'Murder Target' when all divisional
artillery regiments were to fire at the same point
on the ground.
In order to finally stop the enemy attacking
if 'Counter Preparation Fire' failed, or to
counter an attack where such fire had not been
prepared, defensive fire was prepared along the
whole front of own positions, and close to these.
This was normally prepared by registering
targets with extended width, i.e. line targets
located beside each other. To facilitate such
preparation a standardised concept was intro-
duced, it was called 'Stonk'.
This was a line
target where the fire from a regiment was spread
over 525 yards, i.e. slightly wider than the regi-
mental targets of the standard 'barrage'. The
depth of the fire was not specified, it was to be
determined by the dispersion of the shells. To
register a 'Stonk' it was sufficient with the map
reference of the middle of the target and the
bearing of the target.
The method had been invented in North
Africa towards the end of 1942. Width and depth
were then not fixed and many versions were
applied initially, but from 1943 the above
specification was decided. This did not, however,
prevent the New Zealanders from using their
own variant, which implied a wrom usin 200 m
and a depth of 300 m
Fire to stop an attacking enemy close to own
positions by means of "Stonks' or concentrations
was called Defensive Fire (DF) or SOS Fire. The
latter was one of the targets deemed to be in the
most dangerous direction. All guns not engaged
in other
activities
should be laid on this
particular target. By this arrange meat opening
of fire could take place on order without any
further preparations. Registered targets for
defensive fire were given a number preceded by
the letters 'DF, i.e. 'DF 123' as an example.
A chain' with DF targess veere located
around most of the defenders' own positions and
call for fire could be made on radio or telephone
142
ARTILLERY BATTLE TECHNIQUES AND TACTICS
Fig. 12-5 The battle techniques in defence. Where an
attack by the enemy was most likely to take place, fire
by all available artillery units was organized. It was
called 'Counter Preparation Fire'. To meet an attack
that had not been possible to prevent beforehand,
targets just in front of own positions were planned
with a number of such targets beside each other. This
was called Defensive Fire'. When no other activity
was going on, all guns should be layed on the most
dangerous part of this line of targets, 'SOS Fire' as it
was called. Normally, own counter attacks were also
prepared. These could be supported by means of
either rolling or creeping barrages, but as indicated in
the picture timed concentrations could be an alterna-
tive (Author)
or signal pistol (Very light). Using Very lights
could be a good reserve alternative. Two or three
signals from a signal pistol could mean that a
particular section of the defensive fire, or the
"SOS Fire target', should be engaged by the guns
immediately. These signals were of different
colour, preferably say two green and one red. By
such arrangements mistakes and confusion
could be avoided.
In support
of own counter-attacks the
simplest form of covering fire, for instance a
Quick Barrage, could be prepared, or improvised
when needed. Such improvisations tended to
replace written orders towards the end of the
war. Again, speed in action was always a priority.
A summary of battle techniques applied in
defence is given in Fig. 12-5. As mentioned
carlier some of these techniques could also be
applied in attack, once the attacker had reached
their objectives and had to defend the ground
captured.
Some battle techniques used in both an
offensive and in defence
Harassing fire
An important element in the preparations for an
offensive, but also in defence, was plans for fire
into the depth of enemy positions, 'Harassing
Fire'. This could be fired by single guns only, but
also by many more, for instance a battery or
several batteries. A few rounds or a salvo was
fired against locations where the enemy's supply
transport were to pass, for instance an important
road junction, or towards positions where enemy
headquarters were expected to be located.
Supply depots could be the targets too. The fire
was taking place irregularly and preferably
during the nights with the intention to disturb
and worry, if possible also to cause damage. In
order to avoid counter-bombardment from the
enemy artillery the 'harassing fire' was fired from
other gun positions than those to be used in
covering the attack of own troops.
War diaries reveal that this type of firing
normally was part of the ordinary routine, night
after night for long periods preceding large
offensive operations. Plans for this type of en-
gagement could on the other hand also be part
of the plans for a major attack.
This way of using the artillery had both its
advocates and opponents. The former argued
that it could affect the enemy's morale and
fighting spirit and his endurance. The latter, on
the other hand, were sceptic about the benefits
and pointed at difficulties to get the fire at the
right spot and at the right moment. In stationary
situations 'harassing fire' could be applied more
systematically and with better precision by taking
advantage of the artillery intelligence resources
such as the sound rangers, AOPs, etc.
Lieutenant Colonel T. P. Keene presented in
an article in the Royal Artillery Journal a good
example of the application of 'harassing fire' in
December 1944. He was second-in-command of
a field regiment, which was deployed for some
time between Venlo and Roermond just west of
river Maas. He was ordered to plan
implement a 'harassing' programme with his
regiment, which was to be fired against selected
targets very irregularly. It could take place within
ten minutes or whenever during a period of ten
hours, or it could be no fire at all!
For the programme Keene reconnoitred a
special battery position to which his three
batteries were rotated in turn. Good gun-pits
