GUNFIRE
1938. Besides the pilot, it could take onc
passenger/observer. It was manutactured in
many versions; one is seen in Fig. 6-1. In total
1,786 aircraft were delivered to several air forces
This aircraft was used for cooperation with
the artillery, in the first place for intelligence
tasks as the basis for planning of counter-
battery fire. A special procedure for communi-
cation between the aircraft and the ground staff
was introduced called Arty/R, 'R' for reconnais-
sance
This procedure included ways to communi-
cate during fire observation and - later -fire
direction. It was, however, found to be difficult
to do this, as it required close and adequate com-
munication between the pilot and observer
Many have witnessed the difficulties and the
thorough training that was needed for making it
work efficiently. Some squadrons specialised in
this, but generally speaking the fire observation
and control tasks to be undertaken by the
observer were not successful
During the battle in France 1940, it was
found that the Lysander was not up to the
standard required. It was too vulnerable unless
the RAF had gained air superiority, which was
not the case in France. The aircraft was too slow
and not swift enough to manoeuvre away from
attacking enemy fighters
Rearmament was necessary, and the Army
Cooperation
Squadron's
Hurricanes
Were
provided as replacement already in 1940. A bit
Fig. 6-2 After the Lysander several types of aircraft
were tested, but it was not until 1941 a really good
replacement was found. It was the first version of the
American Mustang fighter. The 'XV' on the plane
shows that this aircraft belonged to Il Army Coopera-
tion Squadron RAF (Il Army Cooperation Squadron
RAF via Hans Onderwater)
Fig. 6-1 RAF Squadrons for cooperation with the
artillery were equipped with the two-seater Lysander
aircraft when the war started. It was manufactured in
several versions. When the fighting had commenced in
May 1940 in Belgium/France, it was found that the
aircraft was too vulnerable and unsuitable for this task (I|
Army Cooperation Squadron RAF via Hans Onderwater)
Fig. 6-3 Targets for artillery were surveyed by means
of air photography. Contrary to the Lysander, the
Mustang had a fixed oblique camera fixed to it just
behind the pilot (lI Army Cooperation Squadron RAF
via Hans Onderwater)
later some squadrons got Spitfires and the first
version of the American-built Mustangs. The
new aircraft were single seat: hence the pilot
must be trained to undertake the observation
tasks himself. The Mustang is seen in Fig. 6-2,
and in Fig. 6-3 is seen its camera equipment for
oblique photography.
The RAF Army Cooperating Squadrons
played an important role during the war. Not
least the fourth battle at Cassino in Italy in May
1944 was a good demonstration of the state-of-
the-art, but they were still only a complement to
the artillery's own resources. Other types of air
observation resources were needed and this led
to the creation of own resources within the Royal
Artillery.
LOOKING FAR INTO THE BATTLEFIELD
Air Observation Posts
The Counter-Battery Officer of the 17th Indian
Infantry Division reported a mission flown by an
Air Observation Officer on 23 March 1945:
Evening sortie again with success. Flashes of two
guns were seen at map ref 287363 and 288363
which compared favourably with HB 2836 JY
originally fixed by Obs Sec at 28912 36200. A
Div concentration was put down at 1900 hrs
same evening, 88 guns fired scale 3.98
This is an example from the final phase of the
war, when significant air observation resources
were available, and the experience in their use
also was significant. But the road to this status
had been hard and lined with bureaucratic diffi-
culties and lack of genuine interest at concerned
decision-making levels.
A few artillery officers had commenced
arguing already at the beginning of the 1930s for
the Royal Artillery to acquire air resources of its
own; resources that could communicate direct
with artillery units and that could be deployed
close to the guns. One of these officers was Jack
Parham, one of the real innovators in the Royal
Artillery, to whom we will come back to many
times later in the book. He suggested as an alter-
native that autogyros should be used as air ob
servation posts." A test was made in 1935, which
showed the alternative to be uneconomic and
less effective.
The artillery officers interested in flying
aircraft established the Royal Artillery Flying
Club, where off-duty they could exploit their
interest in flying. Here was the embryo of an
own air observation organisation. When the war
broke out, 100 officers with flying certificates
were members.
The Club Chairman was
Brigadier H.R.S. Massy and Secretary Captain
Charles Bazely. These two gentlemen and
Parham argued intensively before the war for
the establishment of 'Air Observation Posts'
with pilot and observer being the same person;
and - of course - he should be a Gunner! A
small aircraft that could be based close to a
battery was what was required. The plan implied
that observation some 5-6km into enemy-held
territory should be made. Observation further
deep was to be the role of the RAF Army Co-
operation Squadrons.
A formal decision was made in 1938 to
undertake practical trials with an artillery air
unit. The Air Ministry was strongly against the
whole idea, which it regarded as impinging on
its territory, and also warned of risks in splitting
resource
between
the
arms.
But
December
1938,
the
Ministry
reluctantly
accepted that trials were to be undertaken. The
Air Officer Commanding the Army Cooperation
Command remarked sourly: 'There is nothing
new in this. An old horse resuscitated at War
Office request. As long as they [RA] provide the
bodies to be shot down, I do not mind ...
The trials were successful and resulted in
the proposal that 'Air Observation Posts' would
be established permanently and co-deployed
with RAF Artillery/Reconnaissance Squadrons.
'The 'Lysander' was unsuitable and a new light
aircraft was to be provided. In the autumn of
1939 the organisational set-up was clarified. The
RAF was to organise a
number of AOP
Squadrons with Gunner Officers as pilots.
The Cabinet had in November 1939, after
the Chief of Imperial General Staff had strongly
argued in writing that air resources under
control of the Army should be established, found
that'...it serves no meaningful purpose now to
take up the issue as to whether the Army should
have control over an air force of its own.
This message calmed down those worried at
the Air Ministry and RAF (it would last until
1957 before the Army got its own Army Air
Corps). Trials could now be initiated with light
aircraft of the Taylorcraft, Cagnet, Comper and
Stinson manufacture. The trials were to be
undertaken in England, but also at the Saar
Front in France. A special unit (D Flight) was
set up for the trials,. The task was to find a
suitable aircraft and a suitable organisation for
Air Observation Posts. Amazingly enough some
of the trials in France were to coincide with the
German invasion in May 1940. The Flight
narrowly managed to escape back to England on
20 May. 101 Two of the types of aircraft were
found to be the best alternatives, the American-
built Taylorcraft and Stinson. Both were high-
winged, which made
observation easier. A
British firm, Tavlorcraft Aeroplanes (England)
Limited, had a licence to manufacture the
former; and this was the aircraft selected.
After the retreat from France, RAF had
other things to attend to. The invasion threat
became imminent and one lost interest in the
trials. Towards the end of 1940, the RAF wanted
them totally disbanded. By intervention from
