GUNFIRE
LOOKING FAR INTO THE BATTLEFIELD
I WAI
were much used. An early example is seen in
Fig. 6-10
A graphic illustration of a 'Long Base' in
seen in Fig. 6-11. lypically, the width of the ob-
servation base was fairly large relative to the
measuring distance to the target. Another option
applied was the Short Base. This used only a
limited number of observation posts, normally
two only, deployed quite near to each other
Hence, the observation base was short relative to
the measuring distance. In order to still accom-
plish high accuracy the coordinates of the posts
must be fixed with best possible accuracy, which
required survey with theodolites; and bearings to
targets must be measured with (binocular)
theodolites and not directors. If so established
and equipped a 'Short Base' could provide data
on enemy gun locations with almost the same
accuracy as the 'Long Base
A Flash Spotting Troop was included in the
'Composite Batteries' of a Survey Regiment RA.
the
troop was used for observations a
described above. Again, it must be stressed that
the 'Flash Spotters' were an excellent resource
introduced, at first by the Germans. But it was
not possible to avoid flash completelv. Both
sides therefore went on using bases for visual
observation towards firing guns. This was done
from observation posts well located and well
surveyed in. It was an ambition to locate the
latter at high places with good sight into the
battlefield to facilitate observation. In Europe
church towers or house attics were good for
such location of observers. If this was not
possible observers had to dig in and camouflage
the post as best as they could for instance on a
hill, ridge and the like. An example is given in
Fig. 6-8
Measurements were made simultaneousl
from a number of observation posts, normally
four, sometimes five to six, which all had to be
accurately fixed in the grid system. The base had
Fig. 6-8 Cooperating observation posts established
by Flash Spotting Troops and being connected in
short- and long-bases were carefully surveyed and
had to be concealed towards the enemy side
Besides observation theodolites telescopes were
used as well (Imperial War Museum NA 11823)
a width of several kilometres, quite similar to a
sound range base. The observers could have
various instruments for recording the bearing
the flash of an enemy gun. Typically, a Instrumen
Flash Spotting was used. but also Telescopes. The
former was a kind of theodolite (Fig. 6-9)
Sometimes
'directors'
with
their
less
accuracy could also be used: or even hand
compasses. Measured directions to the enemy
gun from the observation posts were reported ol
telephone lines or radio to an evaluation/plotting
Fig. 6-9 'Flash Spotting' was facilitated by means of
accurate observation theodolites (RAHT)
centre. Here a plotting board with a coordinate
grid was used. The intersection of the reported
bearings gave the coordinates of the enemy
gun/battery. An
observation
base
Of I
the
described type was called Long Base
If time was scarce, a simplified base with
only 2-3 observation posts could be used as a
start. Coordinates could be taken direct from a
map, if it had adequate scale and quality. As soon
as possible, this base could then be extended up
to normal shape and standard with observation
posts fixed by means of theodolite or 'director'
survey. If so, enemy
guns/batteries could be
located up to around 20km from the observation
base with an accuracy of 25-50m or less
It was important to establish observation
posts as high as possible, but high buildings and
the like were not always easy to find. An
alternative practiced by the British was high
(10m or more) mobile towers made in sections
or sometimes of telescopic design. These were
transported on lorries and raised by means of,
instance
winches
when
deploved
In
particular in North Africa and Italy, such towers
Fig. 6-10 'Flash Spotting' was facilitated by means of
high observation posts. Observation opportunities
must always be balanced against the risk for enemy
fire against the observation post (RAHT)
