GUNFIRE
great work in bringing down fire from our guns
on to enemy concentrations. Many attacks were
broken up before they got moving. Others were
stopped by our shell fire just when the Americans
were in dangerous situation. The gun end were
constantly on the alert answering many calls for
fire. The Battery Command Post was now a
miniature H.Q.R.A. A battery of 25-pdrs., a
battery of mediums, and a battery of 3.7 H.A.A.
guns had been surveyed on to our grid. Tele-
phones were laid to them and all orders for fire
were passed on so that the O.P.s had quite a useful
concentration of artillery to call on. The H.A.A.
guns put down airburst concentrations over the
enemy, which proved particularly effective. By tea
time the excitement died down and the enemy
withdrew defeated, and the route was saved, for
a time anyway
The next day Beck and his fellow gunners could
move forwards again and eventually passed
Grave and from there through Nijmegen down
to the Groesbeek Hill. There the task assigned
was to support the Americans now pressed hard
also here. For the moment we will leave them
there
The medium and heavy guns rush forward
For Operation Garden, a mini-AGRA was
organised that comprised the three participating
medium regiments, 7, 64, 84 Medium Regiment
RA and the 419 Heavy Battery RA of 52 Heavy
Regiment RA. They constituted the Hunt Group
to which Beck's regiment, 86 Field Regiment
RA, was later attached. As we have seen, all of
them were under command of the various
divisions for the march to Arnhem. They would
of course thus be prepared to support these, but
the type of support presumed to be most urgent
when the plans were devised was support of the
main positions of the 82nd Airborne Division at
the Groesbeek Hill. Counter-battery engage-
ment against enemy artillery and mortars in pro-
tection of the Americans was the focus. To
advance as quickly and early as possible north-
wards to come within range of Arnhem with this
forceful resource does not seem to have been in
the mind of the planners, amazingly enough.
We have observed that the
two batteries
equipped with 4.5-inch guns (211 Battery of 64
Medium Regiment RA and 27/28 Battery of 7
Medium Regiment RA), i.e. the guns with the
longest range, had been placed far back in the
long marching column of the Corps. This was
also the case regarding the battery with the most
far-reaching guns, 419 Heavy Battery RA. The
regiment marching furthest to the north was 84
Medium Regiment RA, which had 5.5-inch
guns. These had a shorter range but the shells
were more powerful, which could be an
advantage in counter-battery bombardment.
It seems to have been realised by the Corps
commander and his staff on 20 September, or
possibly the day before, that the heavier guns
must be moved forward as soon as possible. This
coincided with the decision to speed up also the
advance by the 43rd (Wessex) Division when it
turned out to be impossible for the Guards
Division alone to crack the enemy defence north
of Nijmegen. So artillery support for the British
soldiers north of the river Rhine now became the
priority.
64 Medium Regiment RA crossed the
Belgian-Dutch border around 6 p.m. on 20
September. 397 'Club Route' was open again and
the regiment began to overtake all vehicles that
had been stopped during the morning when the
Germans closed the road. But it was indeed not
easy to rush forward!. The march continued all
day and night until 4 a.m. 21 September when
they halted for a short rest, but aptem 25 houn
the order came to proceed.
At 08.45 hours the regiment was ordered 10
deploy close to the road between Grave and
Nijmegen,
approximately
5km
from
Nijmegen bridges. This was the place where the
first radio contact with as the planers in the
perimeter at Oosterbeek was established at 09.35
hours. The range was alas established ards: so
only 211 Battery with its 4.5-inch guns could
engage targets there. The battery was deployed
an hour later and after another hour fire orders
from the perimeter could be executed. The FOO
from 1 FOU at the headquarters of the ist Air-
landing Brigade then ordered fire against ten
different targets, all located al fine the wester
boundary of the perimetered along tive of them
proved to be within range.
The second-in-command of the regiment,
Who normally was resumand of the econnais
sance and deploymene sponsible fort, immedi-
ately went northwards to the regimen postion.
closer to river Waal. At 0 20d news he ordered
B Troop to re-epl. At 12.07 hors hose to the
power station in westero a position a most at the
liver shore. They were re limegen, ion at 14.10
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
hours. The A Troop was then ordered to leave its
position and march as fast possible to the same
area. Nothing has been found as to when they
had deployed and were ready for action, but it
seems likely that it was around 15.30 hours.
While the 211 Battery had been active, the
sister battery, 212 Battery, reached the first
position and deployed there around 13.00 hours.
They fired a few rounds eastwards to 'control'
the fixation of their position made by the
surveyors. Arnhem was beyond the range of
these guns, but soon
they
could execute
harassing fire upon request from the Americans
at the Groesbeek Hill and also fire against some
DF targets to protect the infantry just north of
the Nijmegen road bridge.
The regimental commander who had been
at Corps headquarters returned to the regiment
around 13.30 hours. He informed his staff that
it had been decided that a special battle group
would try to force its way up to Arnhem. The
group would comprise a tank regiment, recon-
naissance units and an infantry brigade. Support
with artillery fire would be provided by a field
battery (25-pounders) and a medium battery.
The FOOs should be tuned to the command net
of 64 Medium Regiment RA with their flick
frequency' and thus be able to order fire from
this regiment. But the whole operation was
cancelled when it was found impossible to get
the units involved forward before dark.
The first rounds from XXX Corps artillery
in support of the hard pressed soldiers in the
Oosterbeek perimeter
had.
as had been
witnessed, a positive psychological effect. Spirit
went up.
and a feeling spread around the
besieged ' Red Berets' that help across the river
Rhine would come at last. When the gunners
down at Nijmegen had fired numerous series
during the night to 22 September the following
message was received from the divisional
artillery commander Loder-Symonds at 06.45
Support excellent. Having magnificent results.
Must have more regts at earliest opportunity, es-
pecially fid regts from relieving formation.?98
The reason why Loder-Symonds wanted field
regiments to support them was probably due to
the fact that the fire must be very close to own
positions within the perimeter. The shorter
safety distance of the 25-pounder shells was
therefore a distinct advantage.
Over the only radio connection working
between the 1st Airborne Division and XXX
Corps, being the one operated by the artillery via
the headquarters of 64 Medium Regiment RA,
a large volume of non-artillery messages had to
be communicated. The net was now doubled
and had been made more robust and safe thanks
to a couple of relay sets at the foremost units
north of the river Waal. Through Loder-
Symonds' network, requests to the Corps head-
quarters for engagement of fighter-bombers and
other army-cooperating aircraft were transmit-
ted. Bad weather however limited this kind of
assistance for some days.
During the night between 22 and 23 Sept-
ember, 212 Battery of 64 Medium Regiment RA
was redeployed forward to the same area near the
power station where 211 Battery was already in
action. From around 7 a.m. the battery could
start supporting the besieged in the perimeter.
But the northernmost targets could only be
reached with the 80-pound shells with their 2km
additional range. There would soon be a shortage
of this type of ammunition when the transport
from the South was stopped for almost two days
near Veghel.
On 23 September the artillery was rein-
forced when 275 Heavy Anti-Aircraft Battery
RA was put under command of 64 Medium
Regiment RA around 3.30 p.m. The battery was
then ready to engage ground targets from its
position north of river Waal opposite the powe
station. Within a couple of hours A Troop of 84
Medium Regiment RA could also be included in
the regimental arsenal, although not formally
under command. This unit was deployed in
Nijmegen close to the power station; probably
on 22 September.
The final unit to come under command of
64 Medium Regiment RA was 27/28 Battery RA
from 7 Medium Regiment RA. It was equipped
with 4.5-inch guns and came under command
at 13.00 hours on 24 September. It is not known
where it was deployed but as it was used for
several different tasks around the perimeter it
can be assumed that it was close to the southern
shore of river Waal, or possibly just north of the
river. 399
So, in summary, 64 Medium Regiment RA
became the core of the artillery group much
engaged dav and night from 21 September to the
end of 26. The units fired almost continuously
in support of the 1st Airborne Division north oi
