olition and this was actually ordered. But when
the Guardsmen's tanks began crossing the road
bridge, nothing happened. For some unknown
reason the ignition devices failed to work. The
fact that the bridges had not been blown up days
earlier is said to have depended on a strict order
by Field Marshal Model, who wanted to use
them for counter-attacks
The strong resistance south of Eindhoven
and the demolition of the Son Bridge had
delaved the XXX Corps advance by 36 hours
And when the Americans were held back at
Nijmegen and could not seize the two large
bridges over river Waal by a coup, the conse-
quence was a further delay of the Corps advance
towards Arnhem by another two davs.
A much debated issue over the vears to this
day is whether the Guards Division would have
been able to reach Arnhem during the night
GUNFIRE
between 20 and 21 September if they had
pushed on immediately after the capture of the
Nijmegen bridges,
as the Americans wanted
They complained
bitterly,
'the British had
stopped for tea'
Others have
: declared emphati-
cally that such
vas not possible as
the road to Arnh
ad high banks over the sur-
rounding terrain,
was soft or even marshy,
so the tanks coul
Id not leave the road for protec-
tion. Hence they
vould be easy prey to German
anti-tank guns already deployed and ready for
them, it has been
argued.
A counter-argument has been that the 10t
SS Panzer Division was brought across Rhine by
ferries and boats
upstream of Arnhem, arr
operation taking much time, and that it thus had
not been able that night to establish any strong
defence with anti-tank guns along the road. And
what action could British artillery been able to
Fig. 21.9 The defence of the perimeter at Oosterbeek required engagement of everybody, not only the fighting
men of the parachute and infantry companies but all within the perimeter i.e. signallers, orderlies, drivers,
mechanics etc. (AWM No. P02018.322)
200
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
do against unprotected enemy soldiers? The
resources for this were available that night. This
was a situation so critical for the success of the
whole operation that one might
wonder why the
Corps commander, Genera
in place to give s
I Horrocks, was not
•directives to
commanders and soldiers of the leading units, as
he used to do
When
the
in the morning on
21 September re
newed their advance it was too
late to bring help to Frost's battalion at the
bridge. The battle was
Germans had got time
over for them and the
ugh to
deploy their
anti-tank guns effectively,
advance along the
thus
eventing any
road up to Arnhem. After a
few kilometres
advance, the British forces were
forced to stop. The objective
now changed to
saving what was left of the airborne division in
the Oosterbeek per
rimeter by advancing instead
situation had
vesterly direction. There the
begun to deteriorate quickly and
was critical, exposed as the perimeter had been
for several days and nights to strong enemy
attacks from all sides and almost continuous
shelling by artillery and mortars. All who could
use small arms had to assist in the defence (Fig.
21-9). Losses in terms of killed and wounded
increased rapidly.
More infantry than that left of the Guards
Division was needed to make an evacuation
possible. The 43rd (Wessex) Division was
therefore called forward. It took them two days
to reach the Island' and launch its attack there.
This too has been criticised to have been too
slow an advance. In particular the commanding
officer,
Major General Thomas, has been
accused of having been too cautious and had not
showed the aggressiveness that the situation
demanded. Others, the Corps
commander
General Horrocks amongst them have defended
his actions. The traffic situation was such that no
Faster advance had been possible. The division
had many subordinate units and thus had more
than 5,000 vehicles as compared with the normal
strength of around 3,500 vehicles. The Germans
also made numerous attempts to cut 'Club
Route between Eindhoven and Nijmegen and
were successful a couple of times.
Anyway, when arriving at the 'Island' on
22 September, 129 Infantry Brigade launched an
attack on Elst along the Arnhem road and the
railway from Nijmegen northwards.
It was
supported by a tank battalion: the 13/18 Hussars
from 8 Armoured Brigade. The brigade was
stopped as the Guardsmen had been before them.
When 214 Infantry Brigade arrived supported by
the 4/7 Dragoon Guards tank battalion it was im-
mediately engaged in an attack towards ouster-
hout northwest of the Nijmegen road bridge.
During the early morning two reconnais-
sance troops from the Household Cavalry had
by a daring advance infiltrated through the
German
lines. Protected by morning fog and
advancing on small roads along a long westerly
turn and then northerly, they managed to reach
the Poles at Driel. The arrival of the Polish
brigade
1 delayed by bad weather for
several days landed at last on 21 September. On
this day.
round 1,000 men were dropped by
parachute (out of a total of 1,500 men). The two
reconnaissance troops making contact with them
were around 20 men with eight light scout
vehicles. 391
On the
same day, 22 September, the
commander of 214 Brigade got the order to fight
their way to the Poles on the southern shore of
the Rhine at all costs, which they by some 'un-
orthodox' methods managed to accomplish.
During the evening that day the Poles
aulempted to get a force across the river to the
northern side. Shortage of assault boats made it
impossible to transfer more than 50 men that
night out of the 1,000 that had landed at Driel.
Of these, only a few got in contact with the
British.
The next night another attempt was made
This time around 200 men got across the rive
Rhine and most of them managed to reach the
besieged British soldiers as welcome reinforcement
Late on Saturday evening the 23 September
the third brigade of the 43rd (Wessex) Division,
130 Infantry Brigade, reached the southern
shore of the Rhine and immediately began
preparations for an attack across the river. The
plan was that the 4th battalion of the Dorsetshire
Regiment should lead the crossing and be
followed by the other battalions. But this proved
to be impossible. Assault boats and amphibious
vehicles had been severely delayed by the
repeated German attacks on 'Club Route' (now
called Hell's Highway by all). The situation on the
northern side of the river was now so serious that
the brigade could not wait for these resources.
The plan was changed and it was decided that
only half of the Dorset Battalion should be
shipped across that night, and now not any
