18. From Imminent Invasion Threat to Offensive Training
Restoration
After the remarkably successful evacuations
from Dunkirk and ports further to the south in
France and also from the Narvik area, the time
had come for preparing the country to counter
a likely invasion of the British Isles. All were
convinced that this was imminent. Inspired by
Churchill's words about a never failing resist-
ance, on the beaches, in the fields, on the hills etc.,
the work began hastily. And one had to get on
also with new challenges; not unexpectedly,
emerging in other parts of the Empire. On
10 June 1940 Italy declared war on Britain.
British interests in the Mediterranean and
Egypt and other countries in the region were
attacked. The Japanese threat in the Far East
began more and more casting its shadows over
the British Empire
It became necessary first to restore the
forces that had left France without their heavy
equipment; a loss particularly serious on the part
of the Royal Artillery. As we have seen, some
60% of Britain's all available guns and tractors
had been left behind, as had all other motor
Daily Express
TENS
OF THOUSANDS
SAFELY HOME
ALREADY
Many more
comin
by day and night
Fia. 18-1 The evacuees from Dunkirk were received
at home as heroes and quickly and efficiently trans-
ferred to a number of collection camps around the
country for recovery and reorganization. Daily Express
had quite a correct description of what was going on
31 May 1940 although not yet knowing that the
number of British and French soldiers rescued would
exceed 300.000 (RAHT)
vehicles and
heavy
equipment,
all radio
equipment included. The BEF soldiers had been
brought back to many harbours in England and
had had to be dispersed to numerous temporary
camps around the country for reorganisation.
They were amazed to notice that they were
received as heroes by the general public; and
after having got something to eat and rest, and
in many cases also granted 48 hours leave
restoration of all units commenced with deter-
mination.
From
the
camns
soldiers
returned to their units wherever quartered. Re-
placements were gradually provided for those
lost in France and Norway.
The newspapers of course had been inter-
ested in covering the retreat as best as they
could, Fig. 18-1.
The morale and fighting spirit left nothing
to bother about. This is how 16 Field Regiment
RA saw it on 7 June:
Parties still arriving from all over U.K. Spirits
high. Looking forward to re-equipping. The
anxious inquiries after friends, the genuine
pleasure displayed on mee triends, the genuine
spirit of comradeship in the Regiment. The
kindness of the people of Halifax could not be
excelled. Warm and sultry. 27
A general comment in the war diary of 92 Field
Regiment RA leaves us with the same impres-
A difficult period as the regt. cannot fulfill its
proper role: that of a field artillery regiment,
through lack of equipment. Men are enthusias-
uc, and it is necessary to keep them interested
in constant infantry tactics, etc. Redrilling
classes and general smartening up is the order
of the day.273
However, it took time, until the end of June,
before units again began acting coherently and
with normal capacity. This did not mean that the
nominal strength was back everywhere. Much
Vital equipment was still lacking, including
214
FROM IMMINENT INVASION THREAT TO OFFENSIVE TRAINING
personal kits and weapons on many hands. The
vintage
guns
Stil
available
in the Empire
amounted to some 400 field guns and around
160 medium guns.274 These were already in use
by units under training, which had now to
transfer parts of their stock to units under
restoration, a process quickly initiated.
Deliveries of the new field gun-howitzer, the
25-pounder Mark II, had begun in April 1940
but only around 30 could be delivered in June.
Deliveries then increased gradually as we have
seen in an earlier chapter and reached its target
350 pieces/month in the middle of 1941.
Another important addition was some 900
75-mm guns of French First World War design,
which Britain in haste 'borrowed' from America
as a temporary solution while waiting for 25-
pounders. They were of no immediate relief, as
the first did not arrive before August 1940.
The distribution of guns seems to have been
directed towards provision of at least 8-12 guns
per field regiment. These could be of different
types depending on availability. The process
implied that regiments better furnished than
others sometimes had to transfer some of their
guns to regiments less lucky. Let us have a look
at some examples
One of the Royal Horse Artillery field
regiments, 2 Field Regiment RHA, recalls in
their war diary that the regiment had no guns at
all during the period 12-28 June 1940, but then
four 25-pounders Mark II arrived directly from
the factory of Vickers Armstrong at Newcastle-
on- Tyne. More followed, and on 30 June they
had a complete stock (24 guns). A problem was,
however, that no dial sights had been delivered;
and only eight tractors (Quads). 275
16 Field Regiment RA mentioned above
says that the regiment on 15 June expected their
first 25-pounders. The first arrived the next day
and a couple of davs later two more. It is noted
in the war diary that they on 30 June still had
only these three guns
A regiment quite well favoured was 76 Field
Regiment RA. This regiment was given eight
18/25-pounders from 7 Field Regiment RA
along with twelve tractors, sixteen ammunition
trailers and other technical articles; this took
place the first week after the regiment had been
evacuated from Dunkirk. On 20 June, five 25-
pounders arrived, but the regiment had to
transfer
two
18/25-pounders
another
regiment on 26 June. Eventually, seven more 25-
pounders arrived on 30 June, but then their
remaining six 18/25-pounders had to be handed
over. So the regiment now had twelve modern
guns, half the nominal strength. They were dis-
tributed on four troops with three guns each.
Two troops still had no guns.276
A motley set of guns were provided for 99
Field Regiment RA. On 23 June, the regiment
had eight 18/25-pounders, however without dial
sights. That problem was resolved quickly. Near
the regimental quarters was 125 OCTU. Dial
sights could here be borrowed temporarily and
also directors as the regiment had lost all such
instruments in France. Three 4.5-inch howitzers
were also gently put at the regiment's disposal by
the OCTU. At the same time the regiment
received six 25-pounders. Hence, they had
seventeen guns of different types.
74 Field Regiment RA told about an odder
inventory of guns. On 27 June, 60 Army Field
Regiment RA handed over two German
105-mm howitzers, complete with dial sights,
tools, ammunition, etc. They had been captured
in France by a medium regiment and trans
ported to England before the final critical days
(via Le Havre?), 278
The evacuated medium regiments could not
get any guns during the first few months. 69
Medium Regiment RA, for instance, received
guns on 4August, eight vintage 6-inch howitzers.
Another big problem was replacement of
lost vehicles. Without them, no deployment nor
ammunition transport could be done. One had
to improvise by renting or buying a few civil
lorries until proper army vehicles could be
provided. Some officers were granted permis-
sion to use their own private cars, however
without being paid for it! Neither would they
receive any petrol from the Army. Longer trans-
ports had to be done by train or civil buses
rented by the authorities. Buses were the onl
possible option for the mobile reserves set up as
part of the defence against an invasion.
communication
Personal
eculoment
equinment
(radio and telephones), special
equinment for various purposes, instruments,
spare parts and, not the least, personal weapons
had to be provided before the restoration of the
units could be considered complete.
Besides restoration, re-equinment, trainino
and much more that was going on, the artillery
units had to assume the role of infantry. which
they had no training for, (Fig. 18-2).
