GUNFIRE
combat enemv
artillery. He criticised that
officers responsible for this and other key tasks.
often were ordered out on the roads to control
and direct traffic by which they were prevented
from doing what they should do. Unclear lines
of command contributed to bad use of available
In particular.
he
criticised the
resources.
Canadians:
No C.B. [Counter-Battery] work was apparently
attempted in the Canadian Corps.~92
Before Kirkman turned to the use of anti-aircraft
and anti-tank units, which we will not look at
here, he urged commanders to avail themselves
as much as possible of liaison officers to improve
exchange of information and to ensure efficient
coordination between headquarters
Kirkman's report had a great impact. The
British doctrine had now been clarified for the
rest of the war on the best use of artillery
resources. Rapid concentration of firepower over
the battle area should be ensured. This would, as
Kirkman saw it, be accomplished by adhering to
the following rules.
Avoid fragmentation of resources by
instead allocating Command of artillery
resources to the highest tactical level prac-
ticably possible, normally the divisional
and Corps level. Tactical concentration of
all resources to places and time where they
are best needed then is secured
Make sure that the artillery will be a
strong, not to say formidable, resource for
supported infantry armour) commanders
by creating a close and trustful cooperation
between supported commander and his
artillery chief. They are to ensure together
that the artillery plan is a well-conceived
part of the overall operation plan
Decentralise Control of fire to the lowest
possible level
With this, a debate that had been going on since
Dunkirk was closed. Some had argued that
artillery resources should be decentralised to
brigades. Command of artillery resources above
the brigade level was unnecessary, they thought
That would mean that no CRAs were needed
Luckily enough, in respect of coming battles, this
group lost the debate as a consequence of
Exercise Bumber!
Now, if it was made possible to concentrate
fire from multiples of ten, not to say hundreds
of guns by adoption of an appropriate command
structure, how should it technically be accom
plished in shortest possible time? This had long
been the challenge to Parham and other fore-
sighted gunner officers. He had worked on it
since his return from Dunkirk. There were two
aspects to be recognised, he thought (Fig. 18-4)
The first one was that one had to accept that
artillery was not a precision weapon. It was a
weapon for fire against an area, and not againsi
a distinct point. Area-covering fire was normall
needed tactically and one should not bother
about the lacking precision and large dispersion
of the fire along the line of fire. Waiving of
precision could be done if compensated by a
larger number of guns and after rearmament
these would be available. Another requiremen
was availability of much ammunition. Strategi
Fig. 18-4 After return from until Prior later
Major General) Hetman in Dunkink Brigadier one of the
Artillery gunnery methodentia reformers of lues (RAHT)
most important and influential reformers of Roya
224
FROM IMMINENT INVASION THREAT TO OFFENSIVE TRAINING
cally, this was not a problem either. When
industry had geared up, there would never
strategically be a shortage of ammunition on the
British side.
In certain tactical situation a
shortage might appear locally, but this did not
change the general picture, as Parham saw it
His second point was 'SIMPLICITY'! He
used to write it like this, in capital letters,
Whenever he talked about gunnery procedures
and the need for reforms. One of his ideas was a
simple categorisation of targets, or rather the
number of guns to be employed against a
specific target. If a FOO wanted all the 24 guns
of a regiment to be employed, he was to order
'Mike Target', and if it was an even larger target
he ordered 'Uncle Target', meaning that all the
divisional artillery was wanted, 1.e.
72 guns. And
the real 'club' was 'Victor Target' implying fire
from all available guns of a Corps, i.e. several
hundred guns. It was realised by all that this was
an elegant method for simplifying communica-
tion between FOOs and batteries, so it was soon
adopted officially.
It was also necessary to have a simple system
for radio communication. A minimum require-
ment was to have all batteries of a regiment
connected to the same network, i.e. using the
same frequency. Parham even argued that all
three regiments of a division could be signalling
on the same network provided all adhered to
strict traffic rules and standardised ways for com-
munication, e.g. when fire was ordered and
observed. Much training was needed to get
through with messages in particular when trans-
mission for any reason was hampered. One-way
around difficulties was relay signalling, for
instance when transmission distances exceeded
the range of the wireless sets. This could be
arranged by having an extra signaller with a set
on the same frequency as the sending and
receiving party. He could receive a message from
the sender and then transmit the message by
calling the receiving station. Relay signalling
COnla
also be
arranged when sending
receiving parties used wireless sets No. 22. Two
sets could be connected together via a short
cable. When one of them received a message, this
was transmitted automatically by the other set to
the ultimate receiver. But innovative signallers
and their officers were capable of finding other
tricks to overcome transmission problems. Jack
Parham was a strong believer in radio communi-
cation as a means for concentration of firepower
The technical procedures at troop and
battery command posts also had to be developed
and made simpler and more efficient. This took
place these years. And much practice gave good
results.
A procedural area where Parham's quest for
simplicity did not work well was his idea that the
same procedure for changing the point of impact
as used when a troop or battery was ranging:
could be used also when many units were
engaged. Ordering for instance 'plus 2 degrees.
add 300' to all would not work when units were
deploved far from each other. Parham had expe-
rienced that himself when running one of his
demonstrations of rapid concentration of the fire
from all guns of his division, which he made for
many spectators in 1942. After having ordered a
change, the
next rounds from one of the
batteries tell very close to a group of high-ranked
spectators and splinters hit ground very close to
himself
Instead of giving changes relative the zero
line and range of one battery irrespective of the
position of all other guns. a better method now
found necessary was the 'cardinal method". As
we have seen in one of the previous Chapters
this meant that changes of impact should be
given using compass bearings, for instance all
guns were ordered to go 'west 200, north 300'
What it meant for the individual gun was left to
the command posts to calculate. This method
became standard for the rest of the war when
many different units were emploved.
Parham wrote a report about the very first,
as he believed it to be, large concentrated fire
based on simplified procedures. It took place
during an exercise on 15-16 December 1941
with the divisional artillery of the 38th (Welsh
Infantry Division, around 70 guns. According to
the plan all three regiments marched in the
evening to the range and were denloved at 22. 00
hours. He wanted to train the regiments in dis
ciplined march with much reduced lights and
deployment in the dark so that a surprise barraoe
could be opened at 07.00 in the morning next
day, 16 December. The barrage was prenared
during the night by command posts and was
executed to the satisfaction of Parham. Opening
of fire at the right time was an important indica-
tion of qualitv. Anthing else was inexcusable
but here his gunners did not let him down.
Later in the morning Parham wanted to test
his ideas about rapid concentration of fire in
