decision by the Duke of Marlborough in 1716.
Two regular artillery companies were set up at
Woolwich, Southeast London. These constituted
'The Royal Ordnance'
Each company had 5
officers
99
NCOs and ORs.
Commanding Officer was a Captain. A few
vears later, in 1722, two independent companies
were attached, one of them at Gibraltar. The
formations were now given the name the Roval
Regiment of Artillery; today and at earlier times
just known as the Royal Artillery or by the
acronym RA.
The first Colonel of the regiment was an old
very experienced officer born in Denmark.
Albert Borgard. Fig. 1-3 illustrates his bust,
which
was
inaugurated in the Danish city
Holbœk in 1947. His original Danish name spelt
with 'aa' is there used, but I will here use the
name as it is spelt in Britain, i.e. with one 'a'.
To some extent Borgard was familiar to the
Swedes of his time. He commenced his military
career by participating in the fierce Danish-
Swedish battles in 1676 in the southern province
Fig. 1-3 The veteran artillery officer Alfred Borgard, a
Dane by birth, was the first Commander of Royal
Regiment of Artillery. He assumed command at the
age of 63 years in 1722 (RAHT)
GUNFIRE
of Sweden, Skane [Scaniae], including the siege
of the fortress at Kristianstad on 25 August and
the decisive battle at Lund on 3 December.
Borgard has written about his long gunner career
and tells us how he became a gunner in Sweden:
In the Month of September several young Men
that were all recommended were taken out of the
Foot Regiments to be made Gunners of the
Artillery of which I was one of the number &
served as such in the great Battle fought at Lund
(in the month of December) between the Swedes
and the Danes, which continued from Sun rising
to Sun setting. This was counted a drawn Batue
because both Armies' Artillery remained in the
Field that night.'
Borgard later entered Foreign Service on the
Continent, disappointed for not being promoted
at home, and in 1692 came to serve under the
English banner:
[.] I marched with the Army to the Camp at
Genep (Genappe) where in the month of July I
entered as Firemaster into the English Artillery
[...1.11
When he much later was appointed the first
Colonel of the Regiment, he had served for more
than 40 years as a gunner and had numerous
successful battles behind him. He was correctly
Known as one of the foremost gunners of his
ume
The new regiment quickly developed under
Borgard's leadership, and a special spirit of corps
was established. Borgard demanded from his
gunners that they should always fight till the end,
regardless of an enemy's superiority. They were
to continue firing their guns till the last round or
were killed on post! This spirit was well observed
and maintained over the
years and was one
important component of the legacy when the
Second World War commenced.
Woolwich was
developed into a huge
artillery centre during the eighteenth century!?
The number of companies hereted, and in
1757 there were 24 grouped into two battalions.
Recruitment of civilian horses and drivers sill
took place, when reinforerses an was needed.
Basic training was organised as was officer
training. The latter took place at Royal Military
Academy Woolwich foundace at 1741. Here, all
artillery and sapper officers were given qualified
THE PERIOD BEFORE THE FIRST WORLD WAR
training. Manufacture of ammunition had begun
at Woolwich in late seventeenth century and was
gradually expanded. Also manufacture of guns
was initiated at
Woolwich,
ana
the
place
remained as a large defence centre until the end
of the twentieth century.
In parallel with this progress, the country
was involved in many military
actons and
campaigns around the world where much
experience was gained.
It was, for instance
observed that Frederick the Great established a
more solid organisational artillery structure, in
which the Battery was the prime unit. 13 Mobility
of artillery was also to increase,
and again
Frederick the Great played an important future
role, when he created the mounted artillery for
the first
time
ane
cslablishen
special
organisation for it. His idea was
to make it
possible for the artillery to follow the cavalry in
swift attacks, in particular at the flanks. For this
fairly light guns were needed; it was also
necessary to have all the serving gunners
mounted on horses
In England, or now more correctly to say the
United Kingdom
as the
union
between
England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland now had
been created, Fredrick's ideas were found
interesting and well worth copying. In this regard
Britain had its own experience from India. This
led to the establishment of the Royal Horse
Artillery (RHA) in 1793. Two mounted Troops
were organised. RHA is, as is well known, still in
in the RA
existence and is often regarded as a corps d'élite
On the equipment side, no revolutionary
developments took place during the eighteenth
century even if new guns were supplied from time
to time, but these were all still designed for direct
fire against the enemy. Guns with flat trajectories,
as well as howitzers with high, curved trajectories,
were available. The ammunition was round solid
shells, in most cases. However, a more advanced
type of ammunition was developed towards the
end of the century. It had a high explosive core.
Simple case-shot with numerous small iron balls
spread in front of the guns had for long been used,
but only on a very limited scale. In 1783,
Lieutenant Henry Shrapnel invented a more
sophisticated version of this type of ammunition.
It contained numerous small rifle bullets, which
were spread by means of explosive powder. '4 This
type of ammunition was still being widely used at
the beginning of the nineteenth century."
Military music is part of old traditions of
the artillery. The Royal Artillery Band was
established in 1762 and still exists today; it is
considered to be Britain's oldest military band.
Before leaving the eighteenth century we
will observe another important change, which
was to become verv important during the world
wars of the twentieth century. The first artillery
formations for volunteers, Volunteer Gunners,
were established in 1797. This took place when
the country was under pressure from Napoleon
and his France, with which the country was at
war since 1793.16 These formations of volunteers
were predecessors to the Territorial Army of the
twenueth centurv and the artillerv regiments of
this army, and to which I will come back later.
Twenty-two years of war against Napoleon
The war against France, which broke out in
1793 and lasted until Napoleon was defeated
finally at Waterloo in 1815, was a war effort of
extreme scale. This war was fought at many
places outside Europe under participation of
The Royal Artillery before its culmination with
the battle between Wellington's British Army and
French armies on the Iberian Peninsula 1808-
The
Royal Artillery had
grown
impressive strength already before this war. In
1806 twelve mounted Troops were mobilised
from the Roval Horse Artillery and no less than
102 companies of field artillery organised into
nine artillery battalions.17
Napoleon himself was a commander who
ascribed a very important role to the artillery in
battle; in static positions as well as in swif
manoeuvres. He is said to have stated: ' Artillery
Fire is everything, the rest does not matter' and
'Great Battles are won by artillery.18 He strived
for physical concentration of the artillery and
had special artillery commanders nominated at
army and corps levels in order to make
concentration possible. The British did not have
as much artillery as Napoleon and had to
prioritise support for divisions. In order to
facilitate this Wellington organised his artillery in
brigades. The mounted artillery was used as a
complement to the slower field artillery and the
Troons of Roval Horse Artillery became a
decisive mobile artillery reserve for Wellington in
many
battles 19 An experience of lastine
importance was the need for a new command
structure. An established examole imolied tha
artillery commanders should be assigned to ali
