GUNfIRE
tives as to the training programmes to be run at
all levels including full-scale rehearsals with the
concerned divisions. It is interesting to see that
he emphasised the importance of getting the
soldiers used to advancing close behind a
creeping
barrage. Exercises with live artillery
ammunition thus would be arranged, even if this
might imply certain losses (which he stated he
would assume full responsibility for).309
The 'Master Plan is concluded with several
statements regarding the importance of the
strengthening of morale and fighting spirit. All
commanders here carried a large responsibility.
Montgomery stressed. 'The German is a good
soldier and the only way of defeating him is to
kill him!'
'It will be a killing match; Montgomery
went on. The soldier must be tough and hard. In
that context, he also ordered all commanders
and soldiers to commence physical training 310
Montgomery gave the order that his plan
from now on should become the basis for all
detailed planning and preparations for Operation
Lightfoot. His authority was well founded and
now undisputable and all went on without anv
"belly-aching'. The 'ball' was now passed to the
Corps commanders and their subordinates.
The planners arrived at the conclusion that
the attack in the XXX Corps area should be
conducted in two phases. The first phase would
see advance through the main minefields and
capture the foremost enemy positions. After con-
solidation and mopping up, which was assumed
to take one hour, the attack would in a second
phase proceed until the final objectives had been
captured. The brain behind this concept was the
experienced commander of the 2nd
(New
Zealand) Division, Lieutenant General Bernard
Freyberg.
personal letter
dated
21
September 1942 to 'My dear Oliver' (the Corps
Commander, Lieutenant General Oliver Leese)
he elaborated his view in an attachment on how
they were to conduct the coming battle. 31 In this,
he also expresses some interesting suggestions as
to how the artillery must be employed.
According to Freyberg, the enemy artillery
out of reach of most of the 25-pounders would
seriously
affect his
troops
when they
had
reached the Miteiriya Ridge, in particular as the
stony soil made it impossible for them to dig in.
He therefore wanted his divisional artillery to be
reinforced bv
another field regiment (25-
pounder) and a medium regiment to conduct
counter-battery fire when the divisional artillery
was firing their barrage. He wanted also the
artillery to re-deploy forwards during the firs
night into no-man's land. This would secure best
possible firepower when counter-attacks would
come in the morning.
As regards the covering fire during the
attack, Freyberg argued, this should be planned
as timed concentrations
against all located
enemy positions, and not as a barrage.
Freyberg's ideas became the norm for all the
four attacking divisions within XXX Corps and
thus influenced the detailed fire planning, as we
will see. Obviously he was in tune with Mont-
gomery, who accepted his suggestions.
The situation before the great offensive
Detailed planning of Operation Lightfoot and
production of orders gained momentum in the
second half of September. On the artillery side,
Brigadier Sidney Kirkman became army artillery
commander on 15 September 1942312
and im-
mediately felt the strong support from Mont-
gomery. He found, with relief, that most of the
divisional artillery commanders shared his and
Montgomery's opinion anders shared his and
artillery resources. One of these was Freyberg's
artillery commander, Brigadier Weir, who all the
time had been against dispersion of the divi-
sional artillery in the earlier battles.
The extensive exercises that were conducted
towards the end of the month and later gave
iMportant lessons that were to anu late bate
Montgomery and other senior commanders.
Successive changes of the plans and orders were
made, one of these was the important change
that came on 6 October when it was decided that
an intermediate gap between the initial attack
and the final outbreak by the armoured units
should be accepted. Emphasis was placed on
meeting repeated strong counter-attacks from
the Axis units and to clear the bridgehead of
enemy units. The overriding aim of this was to
wear down the enemy before the final out-break
took place. A few minor operations to consoli-
the
army
positions were also to be
conducted. Montgomery called this the dog
fight'
We can note that all major orders were
complete by 20 October 1942.
The four division and
the independent parachute brigade under
General Ramcke were now deployed along the
'IT WILL BE A KILLING MATCH' - EL ALAMEIN
German-Italian frontline, as were some support
units. As Rommel was in Germany, all Axis
forces were under command of General Georg
Stumme. Lieutenant General Wilhelm Ritter von
Thoma had assumed command of the Afrika
Korps in mid-September. 313
Deployed together with the German forma-
tions were the three Italian Corps, the X, XX and
XXI with in total eight divisions, of which two
were armoured divisions: the Ariete Division and
the Littorio Division. Another strong force was
the 185th Folgore Parachute Division. The
combined German and Italian forces were
named Panzerarmee Afrika.
In June, Rommel (now promoted General
Field Marshal), did not have much faith in the
capability of the Italian formations to resist a
decisive British attack. He therefore created a
number of hybrid units
German and Italian battalions.
comprising both
The responsibility for the northern sector of
the Axis front was given to the XXI (Italian)
Corps and the southern sector became the re-
sponsibility of the X (Italian) Corps.
armoured units were kept in reserve, in the
North the German 15th Armoured Division and
the Littorio Division, in the south the German
Division
21st Armoured Division together with the Ariete
Each division had an artillery regiment com-
prising 2-3 artillery battalions
armoured
The Italian
divisions had
an additional
SP
battalion. A capable artillery group of five inde-
pendent
artillery battalions
Were
Rommel's direct command. The total number of
guns was around 500, out of which 70 were
medium guns and 14 heavy. Their positions had
all been located by the British sound ranging and
fash-spotting troops of the 4th Survey Regiment
Patrols.
RA assisted by air reconnaissance and ground
This meant that Rommel was inferior to the
British as regards the number of guns. In terms
of medium guns the resources were about equal,
and as to heavy guns he was stronger as the
British lacked this type of resource.
Turning to the British side of the front line,
this was covered by two Corps, in the North
XXX Corps (Leese) and in the South XIII
(Horrocks). Behind the former, 80-
120km to the East stood X Armoured Corps.
South of the four attacking divisions of
XXX Corps, the 4th Indian Division was
deployed at the Ruweisat Ridge.
XIII Corps deployed the 50th Infantry
Division in its northernmost sector along with
the 1st Greek Brigade. Further to the South, the
44th Infantry Division and 7th Armoured
Division were positioned. The 1st Free French
Brigade was deployed in the southernmost
sector. A second French Brigade was also
available to Horrocks. All formations can be seen
on Map 19-3 and Map 19-4.
The Brush artillery resources comprised
three regiments per infantry division. In the
Northern sector an Army Field Regiment was
allotted to an independent armoured brigade as
well. There were thus a total of 16 field regiments
available to XXX Corps. Four of these had
however only two batteries, i.e. 16 guns instead
of the normal 24 guns. There were still 352 field
guns (25-pounders) in this sector. To these can
be added the 48 medium guns (4.5-inch and
S.5-inch guns), which were emploved
The two armoured divisions of X Corps had
five and four regiments respectively, this when
we include artillery resources of the Hammer
Force (remnants of the disbanded 8th Armoured
Division), which had been attached to the
former. One of the regiments was 11 (HAC)
Field Regiment RHA, which was the first one
equipped with the Priest SP guns. In summary,
this Corps had 216 guns (25-pounders and
'Priests'). This allotment was much larger than
that to be the norm later for armoured divisions
(one regiment with towed and one with SP
guns)
It should here be noted that 18 troops (18x4
guns) from X Corps were temporarily put under
command of XXX Corps. They were there
organised as a third troop in the same number
of batteries, which by this became 12-gun
batteries. This arrangement was to remain in
force during the first five hours of the offensive
until the attacking divisions had captured their
final objectives. The troops would then return to
X Corps and respective armoured division.
With some Army Field Regiments included,
14 field regiments were ready in the south, i.e.
XIII Corps deployment area. Six of them had
only 16 guns. One regiment was attached to the
1st Free French Brigade. This Corps had a total
of 288 field guns at its disposal.
The availability of medium guns in the 8th
Army was limited in comparison with the
allotment later in the war. Here were, as seen,
