GUNFIRE
rest of the battery, except D Troop that had been
sent to Bodö, had been engaged on the Ankenes
veninsula
supporting the Poles. 266
This
however not verified by neither the battery war
diary nor General Auchinleck's report. Only two
British guns were engaged, likely supporting 1st
Battalion in its attack towards Beisfjord. The
mistake is repeated in other books
1he allies
entered Narvik on 28 Mav
beginning at 11.00 hours. The same morning the
Poles took Beisfjord, but the Germans had
already escaped the trap
The large evacuation - a failed campaign
is over
Lord Cork and General Auchinleck were
informed by London on
4S May
that the
Norwegian campaign must be ended. All allied
forces were to be evacuated. It was now obvious
that BEF in France was in a very critical position
and must be evacuated from Dunkirk. Prepara-
tions must then be made for meeting a German
invasion on the British Isles, which in its turn
would make it impossible to build up the forces
in Norway required for meeting the set objec-
tives there. All resources were needed at home
When the evacuation orders eventually were
given, equipment and stores not needed any
longer were shipped away. All was done with the
pretext that the troops at Bodö and Mo must be
reinforced. It was also said that much material
was needed for a new base at Tromso. Those
aware of the true reasons spread false rumours
and information with the intention to reduce
risks for revelation that a total evacuation was
prepared, and it worked!
A critical decision was as to whether the
attack on Narvik still would be made, despite the
evacuation order. As we have seen, the order was
to pursue the offensive as it was considered vital
to conceal the preparations for the evacuation
Intensive staff work was initiated to organise
the evacuation immediately upon reception of
the order. It was soon decided that the evacua-
tion would be made during a period of five davs
2-7 June. It was later postponed for 24 hours 26
Each night 5.000 men were to embark troop
carriers taking as much as possible of equipment
with them, even heavy equipment. About half of
the total force amounting around 27,000 men
was to embark at Harstad. The French and
Polish forces engaged in the Narvik/Ankenes
area would be taken by fishing boats and other
small vessels from the beaches to waiting de-
stroyers. From the latter, the troops were later to
be transferred to troop carriers
And what about the gunners? How and
When would they be evacuated?268 From the plan
we can see that the section of F Troop at
Ankenes would embark first, the second day
(Series No. 47 in the plan). Their two guns had
to be left ashore. Some signallers and other ranks
were to stay on until the fourth night before
being evacuated (Series No. 97). The main body
of the battery at Harstad (Series No. 75) would
be taken aboard the third night along with thei
six guns with vehicles (Quads), but they would
have to leave the remaining around 50 vehicles
and 13 motorcycles. 26
When the
evacuation
order/plan was
devised, it was not known that D Troop arrived
at Borkenes from Bodö on 31 Mav. This contin-
gent is not included in the plan as a separate
series. An uncertain, however not unreasonable
note in the war diary says that the troop boarded
a ship with unknown destination on 4 June.
Auchinleck mentions in his report that all
special vehicles including tanks, 28 ambulances,
a large number of lorries and motorcycles were
taken aboard various ships. Some 20 passenger
cars were also loaded. In total, he states, 390
vehicles were brought back to England, but som
400, mainly 15-cwt trucks, had to be left behind
and were destroyed where they were. The French
could take 400 vehicles aboard their ships. B,
means of a special ship, the mountain units could
take some 340 mules with them!
In Auchinleck's summary it is mentioned
that '6 25/18-pdrs' were loaded as were 5 heavy
anti-aircraft guns and 21 Bofors 40-mm guns."
Air protection was a priority to the end. Much
ammunition had to be dumped too. Auchinlech
reports that 4,000 shells for '25/18-pdrs' were left
behind and not less than 10.000 shells for heavy
anti-aircraft guns and 8.000 for the Bofors guns
The loaded ships were assembled in tW
convoys for the travel to England, one slow and
one with more fast moving ships. They all lef
Norway on 8 June and this with a minimum of
escorts. Thanks to almost an unbelievable luck
they reached the homeland without any losses
Luck was also on the side of the Norwegian King
and Government, who left Tromsö in Northern
Norway on board the cruiser HMS Devonshie
After arrival home. the gunners of 203
Battery RA marched to Tedburgh, entering on 11
FAILED INTERVENTION IN NORWAY
June, and again joined their regiment, 51 Field
mobile opponent like Germany with own
Regiment RA. They came without guns and
artillery resources the outcome of the battle
vehicles and were quartered at nearby Hawick
could be just one, an embarrassing defeat.
A rear detachment of 40 men returned two days
The planners did not think in terms of con-
later. They were all granted 48 hours leave. The
centration of artillery, neither physical con-
Norwegian adventure was over.
centration nor concentration of fire. The
General Auchinleck wrote his extensive
Royal Navy on the other hand delivered
report after his return. I have included a number
concentrated fire in support of land forces
of quotations from it, and will end by extracting
several times in the Narvik area.
a few lines illustrating his fairly harsh judgment
• Concentration of fire could not be arranged
regarding the quality of the British forces he had
in Norway as battalions or companies and
commanded in Norway:"'
not higher formations fought the battle
'The distance between the fighting units
I regret to have to record that my considered
opinion is that generally the morale of our own
troops was undoubtedly lower than that of the
enemy. It is considered that this was due, first, to
our inferiority of resources as compared with
those of the enemy, particularly in the air.
Secondly, it was due to the lack of training of the
men as soldiers and a lack of adaptability, which
induced in them a feeling of inferiority as
compared with the enemy. Thirdly, their flanks
and rear were continuously threatened and they
were under a continuous probability of being
surprised owing to our having no means of
carrying out aerial reconnaissance. Nevertheless
the comparison of the standard or morale of the
two armies is disquieting. No such lowness of
morale was discovered among the French troops
was often substantial. Fragmentation of the
resources as in the past therefore took
place. Just one troop (4 guns) or even just a
Section (2 guns) was in support of an
infantry battalion, never more than that
At the operative level no artillery
commander for securing concentration of
fire existed.
Hardly any resources existed for counter-
bombardment against enemy artillery.
Hence, the German artillery could be
employed freely in the absence of the risk
for counter-bombardment.
It is remarkable that half the British battery
in the Narvik area never was engaged (The
official history of the Roval Artillery tells a
different storv). Intentions to use this
resource at Bodö/Mo never materialised
Indeed a testimony remarkably different from
those seen about the quality of BEF. Was it fair?
due to transport setbacks. An alternative
use, for instance support of the attacks at
Bjerkvik and Narvik, does not seem to
Summary of the (limited) role of artillery
in Norway
Artillery was a resource of which not
enough was allotted in Norwav. This might
have been the result of poor planning of the
campaign, frequent changes of plans and
mixed up political and military command
structures. Maybe there was a lack of belief
that artillery could play an important role in
the mountainous terrain, maybe it was due
to logistic constraints. Maybe Mackesy, and
later Auchinleck, was stuck in peacetime
thinking with artillery seen as just a comple-
ment to infantry, and not a resource for
operative and tactical decisiveness
It is particularly remarkable that the landed
forces for recapture of Trondheim came
without any artillery resources for indirect
fire whatsoever. Against a well-trained
have been on the planners' agenda. Coor-
dination of British and French artillery
resources neither took place.
No notes have been found in available
sources that smoke ammunition, despite
plentiful, ever was used, neither at the
Ankenes peninsula nor at Bodö/Mo
Wireless Set No. 11 used by the gunners
proved to imply good communication. but
General Auchinleck considered the
gunners insufficiently trained' in the use of
'heliographs'. Mavbe a natural observation
by an old India veteran?
We have seen that Norway did not imply a large
and efficient use of artillery resources. This was
largely due to mismanagement by others. The
few gunners did what they could.
213
