When Tudor [Troop Commander] first set up
his O.P., he decided to lay a telephone line for
better communication to the guns. He and his
party with the Battery commander set out, laying
line as they went. When they reached the O.P.
however the line was dead, so Dennis [Batterv
Commander left Tudor there and went back
down the line with a signaller to find out what
was wrong. When they reached the village, they
discovered that a two hundred yard length of the
line had been removed. Walking into the village.
they noticed some washing hanging on a clothes.
line of wire. Dennis saw red at this and stormed
into the cottage, making it quite clear to the
occupants that if they did not produce the rest of
the wire they would be in serious trouble. The
signaller fortunately spotted the missing length
coiled beneath a pile of logs. So, after further
threats of what might happen, they repaired the
telephone line and all was well. A case
sabotage, probably unwitting."
If the telephone lines worked, they were the best
and most reliable communication alternative
Bur this was not always the case. The cables were
normally laid direct on the ground, only occa-
sionally hung up in trees and bushes or dug
down. Hence they were regularly damaged by
enemy artillery fire or own vehicles, to the regret
no doubt of many tank commanders
Those tasked with repairing the lines were
also at high risk of being
attacked. G.W
Robertson relates an example of this
For the first fortnight these repair parties were
being sent out several times a day | ... l. It was
hoped that the breaks were caused by animals, but
there was no proof. Consequently the line main-
tenance men would have to follow the line with
caution - one eye on the cable and the other
watching out for a Jap ambush. It was a very
nerve-wracking business and although none of
our parties were trapped at this time, those from
other units in the area did suffer casualties from
either lap ambush or their fighting patrols. It was
certainly the signallers who had the toughest time
during the first weeks in action and they rose to
the occasion and did a magnificent job."
It was normal practice to double the lines if
enough cable was available. Arranging a kind of
meshed network was another alternative for es
tablishing back-up
communication. A Field
GUNFIRE
Regiment normally brought some 25km of
cable, to which came a large stock also from
attached units from Royal Corps of Signals.93
Hence, there was room for improvisation!
At command posts and headquarters the
lines were connected to manual exchanges, the
smallest for 20 lines and the largest for severa,
hundreds.
An
example of a regimental telephone
network is illustrated in Fig. 5-4
Radio was the principal artillery communi-
cation alternative when battle was imminent
This technology
meant a revolution when
compared with earlier wars. Thanks to this
means fire concentrations could quickly be
executed over a large area, even in mobile battles.
The Royal Artillery took on the opportunities
offered by the wireless technology early and was
fairly well equipped when the war broke out.
This was not the case as regards other arms.
Battle methods and procedures required the
radio system to make communication all over the
artillery hierarchy possible, but communication
directly with units to be supported must also be
established
as a FOO
Artillery
Battery A
Fig. 5-4 It was always an ambition to establish a
telephone network for the regiment. It was to be
used for orders as well as for other purposes such as
fire control. Seen here is a network for a field
regiment, which is supporting an infantry brigade
The Commander of the regiment is Commander
Royal Artillery in support of the Commander of the
brigade. The three battery commanders are acting as
artillery commanders for the brigade's battalions
(Author)
ARTILLERY GROUPING, ORGANISATION AND EQUIPMENT
commander could not always be on speaking
distance to the commander of the supported
unit. The gunner officer was keen to establish
himself where the best opportunities for obser-
vation of potential targets were offered. If he
supported an armoured unit he and his counter-
varu
were
moving
different
fighting
vehicles/tanks he also required to be in radio
communication with the supporting unit.
the
communication
systems!
required
wireless sets with different capacity and other
characteristics. Radio technology was fairly new
and many practical constraints were typical of
the time (long before introduction of transistors
and modern circuit technologies). The High
Frequency
(HF)
band was
almost totally
dominant until the last year of the war when also
Ultra High Frequency (UHF) sets were intro-
duced on a small scale based primarily on
American and German technologies. But there
were exceptions to the general HF picture. As far
as the artillery was concerned, one exception was
communication
with Army
Cooperation
Squadrons of RAF, which used the UHF
frequency band for artillery reconnaissance and
air support
Observation Post Officers needed small and
light devices, which could be easily carried when
they were accompanying the infantry or armour.
But this was at the expense of communication
range. Longer ranges required heavier wireless
sets with accompanying larger battery loads.
This made installation in vehicles necessary; if
not left at headquarters and gun positions. If the
sets were needed where motor vehicles were not
available for transport, it was necessary either to
use mules or by manhandling of the device dis-
mantled into several loads.
1he
general system of classification of
wireless sets in the British Army had ten
principal classes depending on where the sets
were used. When two digits were applied, the
first digit represented wireless type and the
second the class. The digit 1 showed that the use
primarily was within a brigade, digit 2 use at the
divisional level or higher when the range was
fairly short. For longer ranges the digit 3 was
used. Lighter sets to be carried by one man was
the class 8. Sets to be installed primarily in tanks
and other fighting armoured vehicles were in
class 9
The Roval Artillery had two sets, WS No. 8
and WS No. 11. when the war broke out. The
first one was planned to be a set to be man-
carried also by infantry. The latter was too heavy
for that and was intended for vehicle installation
or a more stationary emplacement. Both were
soon replaced
bv
types of equipment.
although the No. 11 was retained by some
artillery formations through the war. After 1942
the WS No. 18 became the standard set for Ob-
servation Officers' communication with com-
manders of units to be supported. For the
communication within the artillery regiment and
with higher formations the WS No. 22 became
the standard set thanks to its longer range. It was
however heavy and therefore it was installed in
carriers or in static positions. When necessary, it
could however be transported dismantled in
several loads by three to four men. The No. 18
set could of course also be used by the regiment
when its smaller range was sufficient.
For use in AFVs
[Armoured Fighting
Vehicles] the WS No. 19 was introduced during
the war. It had capacity for longer ranges than
the No. 22 and was therefore also used by some
high level headquarters.
The No. 18 set was further developed
during the war, for instance in Canada. Australia
and United States with the objective to reduce
weight or increase the communication range
British artillery was therefore to use also the No.
38, No. 48 and No. 68 sets. The latter was, for
instance, used by the air-landing regiments
Table 5-3. Key technical data for some wireless sets used by
the artillery
TvDe No
Transmission
Power
Range
Aeria
Mc/cl
42-751
15-30
Rod 2ml
h-9|
Rod 2m
15-30
Rod 2.4m
15-30
Rod 4m
7.3-8.8
3_52
Rod 1.3m
Rod 2m
Rod 2 2m
*) Data for the strongest versions are presented here. Earlier versions had
about half the power and half the range.
**) A more powerful version had 30 W of power and a range of 40-80km.
