GUNFIRE
units, albeit far under nominal strength after the
long battles west of river Rhine. The city Rees
turned out to be a hard nut to crack. Despite the
city was completely encircled; the resistance
could not be completely broken until 26 March.
After about a week the
objective
of
establishing a deep bridgehead for three divisions
had been accomplished, the 43rd (Wessex
Division deployed in
the
north, the
51st
(Highland) Division in the middle sector and the
3rd Infantry Division in the southern sector.
In the south, Horrock's Corps had linked
up with XII Corps' bridgehead on 26 March,
where the operation had begun as planned with
the attack by the Ist Commando Brigade across
river Rhine at 22.00 hours on D-1. The brigade
quickly captured its first objectives outside the
city Wesel, but the city itself proved to be as
hard a nut as Rees. It would take a couple of
days more until the city had been cleared from
enemy soldiers
The main attack by XII Corps, with two
brigades in parallel, was launched by the 15th
(Scottish) Division as planned on D-Day, 24
March 1945 at 02.00 hours. To the left, 227
Infantry Brigade crossed on 'Buffalos' and
assault boats and further to the right, 44 Infantry
Brigade crossed. The crossings
went well.
although some boats landed a few hundred yards
away from the planned landing sites
The
resistance met by these attackers was much
lighter than those in the North had encountered.
The objectives were taken during the night and
early morning hours. The third brigade, 46
Infantry Brigade, could also cross as planned
together with 'swimming' Sherman tanks. A few
of the latter were lost but at 08.20 hours 57 tanks
had managed to get ashore on the eastern side.
German counter-attacks came as had been
expected, but they were fairly weak and easily
broken up. Quick and very strong counter-attacks
never emerged. This was very fortuitous, as the
infantry had no available artillery support until
later in the morning. This was a consequence of
the large air-landings of Operation Varsity, which
would commence at 10 a.m.
More
ferry
connections across the river
could quickly be established and the first CL 9
FBE-bridge was ready for traffic in the evening
of D-Day. After having been in use for a few
hours, the bridge was damaged and had to be
taken out of traffic until D+1 15.00 hours
Ferries of the heavier CL 50/60type, which were
needed for taking SP-guns across, could be
opened during the evening after a short delay
due to enemy shelling. The first bridge of CL 40
Bailey bridge opened for traffic on D+1, 25
March, at 16.30 hours.
The transfer of 4 Field Regiment RHA
could not be done as soon as it was hoped.
According to a note in the war diary of the
artillery headquarters of the 15th (Scottish)
Division reconnaissance staff from 181 Field
Regiment RA
(one
of the
divisional field
regiments) crossed river Rhine at 12.00 hours on
D-Day already and a corresponding detachment
from 4 Field Regiment RHA at 17.00 hours. 49
Furthermore, it is noted that a troop of the latter
regiment was ferried across later in the evening.
The regiment could avail itself of the first CL 9
bridge when this was ready at midnight. Before
the whole regiment could cross, a section of the
bridge collapsed. A few vehicles were stuck on
the bridge, one went
down and two men
drowned. The next day, time is unclear; the whole
regiment was, however, deployed and ready to
fire on the eastern side of river Rhine, 181 Field
Regiment RA was across on the second day too,
i.e. D+1. The two regiments could deploy
southwest of Hamminkeln and could then give
support to the foremost formations.
Many artillery units graduals redeployed
Within the two Corps sectors on the eastern side
of the river, but some were left behind during the
first week. The reason was that there was a need
for almost continuous firing. There was also a
need to avoid overloading the ferries and bridges
with too many ammunition transports. Re-
supply of artillery ammunition required as we
have seen numerous lorries.
Now back to D-Day when the large air-
landings took place. Droppings were to take
place at 10.00 hours as seen.
Operation Varsity - another catastrophe?
A short
Preparatory fire programme would
precede the landings, as we have noted. This was
started as planned at 08.20 hours by the artillery
of XII Corps and went on for an hour. After a
ten minutes pause, the bombardment of anti-
aircraft positions began. Thim bardment of anu-
go on during half an hour as planned. The first
aircraft with parachute unr as planned. The irst
too early and brought the artillery fire to an end
The officer given the task to stop the firing
was the GSO2 of the Xil ask to srop the heade
THE FINAL ONSLAUGHT - THE RHINE CROSSING
quarters, Major Gilbert Heathcote (later
Brigadier Sir Gilbert Heathcote, Bart, CBE). He
was now in an observation tower near river
Rhine and after the warning notice from his
colleague further west he ordered 'cease fire' at
09.52 hours when the head of the armada
crossed river Rhine, Fig 22-10.
With this order not only the bombardment
of the anti-aircraft positions stopped but also the
direct support of the ground forces in the
bridgehead (Fig. 22-11).
Sir Gilbert has in a letter to me told me
about the unusual role he was assigned. 450 In an
extract from his (unpublished) autobiography he
tell about the agony felt by all concerned:
The significance of the crossing of this great river
was made plain by the presence of the Prime
Minister accompanied by the Chief of the General
Staf, Field Marshal Alanbrooke (Winston having
with difficulty been dissuaded from taking part in
the main assault) They were suitably ensconced
on a small eminence overlooking the scene. So was
1, for I had a lone yet significant role to play. This
stemmed from the artillery fire plan that was then
audible and visibly in full spate; the bark and
thunder of field and medium guns came from
below with, further to the rear, the rumble of
heary and super heavy artillery whilst ahead we
could just see the dust and smoke of its effect on
the shattered town of Wesel. How would this mass
of metal in the air be integrated with the imminent
arrival of the fleet of aircraft and gliders carrying
two airborne divisions?
This issue had been part of prolonged debate.
The aireraft could be routed above the trajectories
of the shells; they could risk flying through it or it
could be stopped before leading aircraft entered it.
The first was discounted by parachutists, who did
not relish becoming slow-descending targets for
100 long: The risk involved in the second seemed
loy but unpredictable and unnerving. The
airborne force chose the third alternative. This
required the simple word 'Stop' to reach every gun
but who would decide the moment and send the
order? I never discovered whether I was given this
task as prize or punishment. The certainty was cold
feet on a warm March day as I checked and
rechecked my wireles links to the guns whilst the
rash and thunder seemed to intensify. It was the
whisper from other spectators on our eminence
that focussed my binoculars on the western sky; to
see the approaching fleet looking like an ever-
widening skein of geese.
The airborne assault was to suffer heavily from
enemy flak. I live today with the sense that I stopped
the guns too soon, that the image of a flaming
aircraft and its occupants tumbling from the sky
above us distorted my judgement as it also affected
the decision not to risk flying through the trajecto-
ries. Even the Almighty may find it difficult to
decide whether the loss of life from enemy ground
fire exceeded that which might have come from our
own guns. Cold feet seem understandable.
Sir Gilbert is writing in his letter that his and his
boss' (the Corps artillery commander, Brigadier
W. Heath) opinion was that the decision to stop
the firing was to cause larger losses than if they
had taken the risk by not ordering cease fire that
some aircraft had been hit by 'friendly' artillery
fire. But they had been overruled by the com-
manders of the airborne formations.
Visibility was not the best when the airborne
formations arrived. Morning mist in combina-
tion with dust and smoke after the bombings and
artillery firing made it difficult for the pilots to
find the right places for dropping the para-
chutists and landing the gliders. The armada was
grouped in such a way that six battalions could
be dropped within approximately ten minutes.
3 Parachute Brigade arrived first and then
5 Parachute Brigade. They were transported by
243 Dakota aircraft flying at the height of 200-
300 vards 451
Fig. 22-10 Like huge swarms of birds the British and
American airborne formations passed over an anti-
aircraft battery on their way towards River Rhine on 24
March 1945. When they were around ten miles from
the river a message was sent from an advance post to
Major Gilbert Heathcote at Royal Artillery Headquar-
ters attached to XII Corps. He was the one to order all
artillery units west of River Rhine to cease fire, when
the first transport aircraft approached the river
(Drawing by J.T. Kenney, RAHT collection)
