GUNFIRE
ordered, Montgomery with his group of staff
and liaison officers and his artillery commander
crossed the border. The latter was accompanied
by his chief of staff, the Brigade Major RA, and
dispatch riders on motorcycles from 7, 33 and
76 Field Regiments
RA
and from 2 Field
Regiment RHA, the latter regiment attached to
the division. This group crossed the border at
16.00 hrs. The main part of the artillery head-
quarters left together with divisional headquar-
ters at 20.00 hrs.
Montgomery established his Tactical HOS
at Everberg just west of Louvain at 23.30 hrs.
The advance guard was deployed with a mobile
detachment on the high ground east of the river
Dyle and the main part west of the river. 2 Field
Regiment RA, which was to support the advance
guard, which
Was
deployed near the river
northwest of Louvain and arranged observation
posts together with detachments from the recon-
naissance units east of the river
Early in the morning of 11 May, Mont-
gomery
and his artillery commander recon-
noitred gun positions for the forward units but
also the rest of the divisional artillery. The order
was given to 76 Field Regiment RA to support
9 Infantry Brigade to the right and 33 Field
Regiment RA the Guards Brigade to the left
Montgomery deployed 8 Infantry Brigade as his
divisional reserve behind the
two forward
brigades. To 7 Field Regiment RA was given the
order to prepare support along the whole divi-
ional front as reinforcement of the other
egiments.
Next day, 12 May, 2 and 53 Medium
Regiments RA came under command of the
division as was a battery from 60 Field Regiment
RA, the latter a GHQ unit. The task assigned to
the battery was anti-tank defence, i.e. direct fire
from suitable gun position:
Everything was a bit more chaotic than the
above indicates. This was due to the fact that
Montgomery on arrival found that the Belgian
10th Division already was in the area. Hence, it
was found that several of the battery positions
selected after map study were already occupied
by Belgian artillery. Montgomery offered to
become subordinated the Belgian commander
and hoped that the latter would find this to be
too big a responsibility
and therefore would
prefer to continue the Belgian retreat. However.
the two generals agreed that the British artillery
was to provide some support for Belgian front
units. On 13 May, the British received from th
Belgian divisional HQS an order to this effe
"Ordre
pour l'Emploi de l'Artillerie. But the
Belgian
division
began
already the san
evening to leave the area. This retreat in com
bination with large refugee columns on the
Way
from
Louvain
blocked
westwards, which had a severe impact on ti
BEF:s transports. 202 By and by, however, all the
divisional artillery and units under command
arrived and got deployed
The other
divisions, with their artiller)
came forward and deployed during the periou
11-13 Mav.
The artillery commander of the 2nd Division
accompanied the divisional commander and his
forward headquarters detachment and crossed
the Belgian border at 23.00 hrs the first day. The
first field regiment from this division to arrive
was 16 Field Regiment RA, which was in place
the next day. 99 Field Regiment RA sent its re-
connaissance detachment at 08.30 hrs on 1l
May. The rest of the regiment marched during
the night and was ready for fire at 10.00 hrs on
12 May near river Dyle.
Often the artillery units had to get off thi
road and wait for the reconnaissance to be
completed and the road cleared. Reconnaissance
comprised 'Silent Battle Positions' and some
Active Positions' nearer to the front line for a
battery or a few troops. Some gun positions for
alternate tasks were also reconnoitred.
As regards
observation posts,
two pel
battery were established, east of river Dyle and
near the main battle positions west of the river.
The OPO/FOO immediately began drawing
Panorama sketches over their observation zones
and making 'silent registrations'. Telephone lines
were laid and the posts camouflaged. All prepa
rations were made as had been trained many
times during the 'Phoney War
Apart from
minor skirmishes between
patrols and reconnaissance units east of river
Dyle no major fighting took place until 13 May
in the northern sector, and not until a couple of
days later in the southern. But it was already
Clear that the war tempo was much higher than
anticipated when 'Plan D' was devised. Rede
ployment of the BEF to the Dyle position had,
however, followed this plan almost to the letter
The artillery deplovment at large is illus-
trated in Map 16-2, where also the nomina
number of available guns is presented. Thirteen
176
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD
- ACROSS THE CHANNEL
field regiments, out of which four were GHO re-
inforcement units (Army Field Regiments), were
deployed near the main defence hne at river
Dyle. This was about one third of the BEF field
regiments
Furthermore.
nine
medium
regiments were deployed forward, which were
two third of the total number in the BEF. The
few heavy regiments were, however, deployed far
back from the front. The allotment of GHQ and
Corps regiments did not exactly follow 'Plan D'
But it can be seen that the divisional artillery of
all the front divisions had been reinforced with
such artillery including artillery for counter-
bombardment against enemy artillery positions
As most of the medium guns were the
6-inch
howitzers with limited range.
around 10km,
the possibilities
effective
counter-bombardment in depth were limited.
Only a few 60-pounders with a range up to 14-
15km
Offered
opportunities
respect. But we can see that efficient counter-
bombardment programs against likely enemy
artillery deployment areas were planned to the
extent possible
Before we begin to look into the details of the
engagement of British artillery units, from the
commencement of the fighting near river Dyle to
the end of if at Dunkirk three weeks later, it seems
worthwhile first to look at the course of the war
at large as a general background
The BEF outflanked but avoids
encirclement
The Germans met a much tougher opponent at
river Dyle than the one they had encountered
during the initial fighting. This was obvious
during the few davs the battle was raging here.
In particular during 14 and 15 May, the
Germans made several fierce attacks against the
British lines without success.
While the BEF was on the march towards
the river Dyle and deployed there and the battle
was going on in Holland and near the Albert
Canal in north-eastern Belgium, the German
Army Group A worked its way through the
Ardennes, not without difficulties, but decisively,
purposefully and energetically. The allies had as
planned entered the trap and it was important to
take advantage of the situation. On 13 May, the
first units crossed river Meuse at Dinant. It was
Rommel's 7th Panzer Division that was in the
lead. Soon Guderian's panzer divisions came to
the south of Rommel at Sedan. On 14-15 May
large forces crossed the river and were attacking
westwards. But after this initial success, the
German High Command became nervous and
was afraid that Guderian had taken too a big risk
by exposing his southern flank and deliberations
about this caused delavs to the advance towards
the Channel. We will, however, not look into this
Just now
The Germans encountered the first serious
French counter-attack on 17 May. This was
launched south of the city of Crècy-sur-Serre by
a French armoured division under command of
Colonel Charles de Gaulle, who now became a
known figure for the first time. His attack falled.
however, and he had to withdraw
The rush towards the Channel regained its
speed and soon it became clear that the French
the 2nd and 9th Armies could not prevent it. The
risk increased dramatically that the allies in the
North with the 1st and 7th French Armies, the
BEF and the retreating Belgian Army would be
cut off and encircled by Army Group B from the
north and Army Group A from the south. Mar
16-3 illustrates schematically the German rapid
advance towards the Channel
It was decided already on 15 May that the
British would leave their positions at river Dyle
and re-deploy at a new defence line along river
Escaut the extension southwards of river
Schelde). This would be accomplished by per-
forming delaying actions at the rivers Zenne and
Dendre
There were, as we have seen, two divisions
deploved by the BEF as a strategic reserve unde
GHO. the 5th and 50th Infantry Divisions
These could be used for a counter-attack south
wards with the purpose to cut off the foremost
German panzer divisions before the slower
infantry divisions would be there to interfere
This would be an option if the French could
attack simultaneously from the south, thev too
with two divisions at least.
Such an initiative was also planned by the
French Commander-in-Chief General Wevgand
His plan was under discussion up to 26 May, but
then it was too late. The plan could not he im
plemented. Chaotic command structures on the
French side and lack of efficient communication
means between the armies and concerned Corps
(the partly destroved telephone systems in
France and Belgium made the necessary coor-
dination impossible. Things were not better
when the French commander of the 1st Armv
