Fig. 23-5 An Observation Party on its way to an ob-
servation post. This is Lieutenant D.A. Imlay with his
signaller Kebby from 8 Field Regiment RA who are
seen crossing one of the many rivers in Burma. Kebby
is carrying a No. 18 type of wireless set. Dense jungle
terrain made it extremely difficult to find suitable ob-
servation post where observations towards the enemy
locations could be made. When supporting an
infantry battalion in Burma often 6-8 Observation
Parties were needed instead of the normal 2-3
(©Imperial War Museum SE 2531)
In no
other theatre, redeployment of
complete divisions and brigades by air transport
took place as was done here, when the situation
required this. Such a situation was when the
large Japanese offensive against Imphal and
Kohima was to be met in February 1944474 In
connection with the lightning offensive by the
17th Indian Infantry Division towards Meiktila a
year later, a complete infantry brigade was flown
in as reinforcement to a just captured airfield;
this at a critical initial phase of the battle.
As regards artillery units, these large-scale air
transports offered no problems for the mountain
regiments. Neither was it a problem to those units
that had mule-carried guns, nor to those with
jeep-towed guns. These units could be quickly
loaded in the transport aircraft. Even the mules
were tranquil and accepted patiently to be taken
on board the aircraft. For batteries with 25-
pounders it was more difficult. The normal gun
version was too big for the doors of the aircraft.
Hence such batteries had to come later by road.
Guns equipped with the
Jury Axle'
GUNFIRE
removable shield were on the other hand possible
to take on board including their lighter vehicles.
The large availability of American transport
aircraft in the region, which in its turn was a con-
sequence of the American support to Chiang-
Kai-Shek's armies, made the large-scale air
transport operations possible. Occasionally he
(and the Americans) had to accept that such
resources were allotted for other purposes than
transport of supplies to China.
The last artillery battle of the war
Guns became silent permanently in Europe on
8 May 1945 when Germany finally surrendered.
Fighting continued for another three months in
South East Asia and the Far East. In Burma, the
liberation of Rangoon was followed by mopping-
up operations, which were still going on when
peace came on 15 August 1945. The cease-fire
was a bit unexpected, but came true when the
atomic
bombs
had
been
dropped
over
Hiroshima and Nagasaki and made the Japanese
forces lay down their weapons and surrender.
The final operations in Burma had as their
objective to annihilate the Japanese forces that
had been in the Arakan region and the western
part of the country. These forces tried to take
refuge in Siam by crossing the British lines from
Mandalay to Rangoon in the south. As regards
the
British
artillery, the
operations were
hampered by the ongoing monspen rains, which
flooded large areas and made roads unusable.
Gun positions had to be found at higher terrain
sections near villages and farm buildings or on
roads and railway embankments.
It was here east of Rangots. close to river
Sittang, that the Royal Agoon, close to liver
rounds in the Second World War. It has been
stated that it was a troop of 384 Battery RA who
made it, a few hours in fact after the point of
time when hostilities should cease on 15 August
1945 475
When You Go Home,
Tell Them of Us and Say,
For Your Tomorrow,
We Gave Our Today
From the 2nd Infantry Division obelisk in
Kohima.) 476
350
24. Gunners We Have Met
As mentioned earlier, units of Royal Regiment
of Artillery constituted the largest arm of the
British Army in the Second World War with
more than 700,000 men serving. This includes
all artillery units armed with artillery pieces of
any kind, i.e. field artillery, anti-aircraft artillery,
anti-tank artillery, coast artillery and units
manning guns on merchant ships. Those serving
in all these units proudly called themselves, and
were called by others, Gunners, a sort of title
even today earning high status. Their loyalty,
readiness for sacrifices and - not the least - high
standard as regards professional skills in what is
called Gunnery made the arm such a forceful
and effective resource to the benefit of the
Allies' cause.
The contributions of many distinguished in-
dividuals would be worth highlighting and pres-
entation, but that would not be possible in a book
of this kind. Exceptions will, however, be made
for some individuals whom we have met in
previous chapters. Those selected will be briefly
presented, as will their contributions and what is
behind their names.
They forged the sword
Two officers who made special contributions to
the development of the artillery and its methods
during the war will be the first to be presented,
namely the Generals Jack Parham and Sidney
Kirkman. Who were they?
Major General Hetman Jack Parham, CB, CBE,
He was born on 27 July 1895. His parents were
farmers at a small farm in Wiltshire, in Southern
England. He went to school in Sherborne before
starting officer
training
Royal Military
Academy at Woolwich, South-East London. In
November 1914, he was commissioned as 2nd
Lieutenant of the Royal Artillery and was imme-
diately sent to the British Expeditionary Force in
France.
Jack Parham served in France for one year
before being transferred to Salonika in Greece.
Large British and French forces had landed there
the year before. After the end of the war, in 1918,
he returned to England and thereafter held many
artillery positions in England and India up to
1939. He was promoted Major in 1934.
In the inter-war period, Parham got an
interest in aircraft engineering and flying, which
first came when he was a schoolboy already and
which was to accompany him throughout his
whole life. He saw, long before many others, the
possibilities to improve observation of artillery
fire by using an aircraft. He presented his ideas
on this subject in an article in 1933 already; in
this he proposed the autogiro as a suitable air
vehicle for this purpose. He himself had learnt
to fly autogiros and suggested that each battery
would have one for fire observation. An artillery
officer would be both pilot and observer. He did
not spur any enthusiasm on the idea and soon
began to think in terms of using a light winged
aircraft instead. His interest thus turned in a new
direction. He first bought a small single-engine
aircraft at a very low cost and learned flving it.
After the engine had broken down, he changed
the aircraft to become a glider.
There were several other artillery officers
interested in flying in the middle of the 30s.
Together with some of them, Parham in 1934
established the Royal Artillery Flying Club,
which was to play an important role when the
Army a few years later was prepared to create
special air units for fire observation and control.
This process has already been described, but we
may note here that without Jack Parham's en-
thusiasm on the matter nothing substantial had
probably emerged
In January 1940, Parham held the rank of
Lieutenant Colonel and was the commanding
officer of 10 Field Regiment RA, a regiment that
was sent to join BEF in France. His regiment was
there to take part in the intense fighting in May.
Thanks to his cool and determined leadership,
the regiment made a good contribution in the
battle when BEF was pushed back to Dunkirk,
from which the regiment was rescued back to
England. During the first days of the battle, when
BEF was deployed along river Dyle in Belgium,
352
