GUNFIRE
division, each with 24 guns per regiment, some
alternatives were introduced:471
1) To what was called Light Infantry Divisions
were allotted one field regiment with 24 Jury
Axle 25-pounders and two mountain regiments,
each with two batteries. Each one of them had
four mountain howitzers towed carried by
mules, and one battery with sixteen 3-inch
1nortard
An ordinary Infantry Division was allotted
one regiment with twenty-four 25-pounders of
the ordinary type, one Jungle Field Regiment
comprising two batteries, each with eight jeep-
towed mountain howitzers and one battery with
sixteen 3-inch mortars, and one mountain
regiment comprising four batteries, each with
four mountain howitzers
An Armoured Division was to have two field
regiments each comprising two battery with
eight 25-pounders each and one battery with
eight 'Priest' SP guns a complete armoured
division was however never provided for this
theatrel
To 'Attack Divisions' for amphibious oper-
ations three 'Attack Regiments' were allotted
each one comprising one battery with eight 25-
pounders of the ordinary type, one battery with
eight 'Priests' and a third battery with six
mountain howitzers.
Deployment and local protection
The terrain seldom allowed for deployment of
artillery in accordance with the 'book'. It became
necessary to find tight positions, often wheel to
wheel, or along roads with guns firing over each
other. A special problem was crests in front of
the guns. To get a free passage for the shells at
the
minimum elevation required by target
positions gun deployment often included crest
clearing. This was a task often given to Sappers
who often used explosives, instead of saw and
axe, to cut the trees
Deployment was often difficult due to heavy
rains making the bad roads muddy. Sometimes
the guns had to be manhandled with ropes and
tackles to high positions without any road or
even a footpath. An example of manhandling a
gun in muddy terrain is shown in Fig. 23-4,
although
it does
not illustrate an
extreme
situation. The challenge could be much worse!
A pre-requisite for the necessary tight de
ployment was the air superiority gained by the
Fig. 23-4 For the gunners it was a matter of honour
to follow the infantry wherever they had to fight. But
it was often extremely hard work indeed to get the
guns in place for support of them, in particular when
the monsoon rains turned all roads to mud as here
near Rangoon in May 1945 (RAHT)
Allies in 1944. There were hardly any major risks
for Japanese counter-battery bombardment. The
Japanese lacked artillery in Burma and gave
counter-battery
Tire
low priority, when
employing their scarce resources. As mentioned,
nightly infiltration into gun positios mened
Yuarters
followed by
surprise attacks with
bayonets and hand grenades was the preferred
method.472 They
were extremely skilled 1n
application of this tactics, which made local
protection of gun positions in Burma a much
more important task than it was in North Africa
and Europe
Local protection was normally arranged with
barbed wire fences and alarm mines around the
battery positions and the single gun. For gun
crews it was important to get deep slit trenches
and foxholes and other dugouts as soon as
possible. Absolute sound and light discipline
was necessary when no firing was ordered.
Unplanned rifle fire against suspected movement:
or sounds outside the fences was forbidden.
Otherwise gun and crew positions would imme
diately be disclosed. 473
Fire observation
Acting as fire observer in the jungle was not an
easy undertaking. Observation opportunities
were very limited and the possibilities to fix own
position br
map reading,
and those of the
supported unit, were verv sal inding an ob-
servation post could in itself be cumbersome
Fig. 23-5, and always-required infantry escort
FROM DEFEAT TO SUCCESS - BURMA
Despite this, there was always a risk of being
hit by a bullet through the head from a well-
hidden sniper in a tree. Once in place it could
prove difficult to establish radio communication
with the guns. Line laying was often necessary:
which in its turn exposed signallers to large risks
It was normal practice in North Africa and
Europe to have the two troop commanders of a
battery acting as fire observers attached to
forward battalions, but in Burma four or even
more observers were needed due to the terrain
Fire for effect must be placed very close to
own positions.
which required very
good
accuracy in battery and troop command post
calculations and gun laving. Fire observers had
often to put down the first rounds a bit behind
the intended target in order to be on the safe
side, and then gradually move the fire closer, say
in hundred-vard shifts,
until it was
over the
target. In order to make it easier to find out
where the first round would hit ground, a usual
practice was to have one gun firing smoke shells.
A special task for fire observers was to
pinpoint
largets for
fighter-bombers
and
bombers. An efficient method for this was to
cover the target area with coloured smoke shot
by the artillery
It must in this context be noticed that the
"Flash Spotters' of the survey regiment could not
be of any use in the jungle, as this made it very
difficult, not to say impossible, to observe muzzle
flashes or muzzle smoke from firing Japanese
artillery. Hence, there was no point in establish-
ing short and long (observation) bases. Deploy-
ment of sound ranging bases with sufficient
width was not easy, except where the terrain
opened up: the Imphal plain being an example
Before the large offensive crossing of river
Irrawaddy was launched in 1945, sound rangers
managed to locate most of the enemy artillery.
Creeping or rolling barrages
When attacks through the jungle were prepared
against fortified Japanese positions, which were
often located high up on hills and ridges or on
the back side of these, covering fire planned as
barrages or timed concentrations was of little
use. One reason was the difficulty to estimate the
speed of infantry advance in the jungle. Another
reason was that neutralising fire in accordance
with normal British doctrine and practice did not
work. The heavily fortified Japanese positions
with strong bunkers
and
shelters. all with
fortified connecting
trenches, were almost
immune against fire from light guns such as 25-
pounders and mountain howitzers
lo help the attacking infantry, destruction
of such positions by means of heavier artillery
and - not the least - air attacks was necessary.
A special task preceding an attack was
'Bunker Busting'. The practice was to have light
guns first to uncover the bunker from its protect-
ing camouflage, which normally had been done
with great skill by the Japanese. When this was
done and the bunker could be clearly observed,
a heavier piece - often a 5.5-inch gun - was used
to destroy it including its crew. T'his could be ac-
complished with direct fire at a distance of 800-
1,000 vards from the bunker, but indirect fire
over a distance of 2,000-3,000 yards could also
be applied. Around 10-15 rounds had to be fired
in the latter case before a direct hit destroved the
bunker. And a direct hit it must be! Different
fuze settings for direct bursts on ground impact
and delayed bursts were tried depending on the
type and location of bunkers
Weaker concentrations as compared with Europe
The terrain and lack of gun positions enforcing
dispersed deployment
made it difficult to
arrange large fire concentrations from numerous
guns, as was the case in other theatres. Another
factor was that the necessary surveving of gun
positions into the same grid was very difficult.
Availability of artillery was limited in Burma
When in Europe it was fairly easy to quickly con-
centrate
fire
from
500-600 guns.
well
sometimes even more, the number in Burma was
seldom above 100-200 guns. Direct support on
opportunity targets with a troop (four guns) or
a battery (eight guns)
was dominating the
artillery emnloument
In this context, it must also be noted that the
availability of artillery ammunition was much
more restricted in Burma than in Europe, which
of course affected how artillery resources could
be used
Air transport
No other theatre of war saw such a huge employ-
ment of air resources for sustained supply of
encircled large forces as Burma, the battle of
Imphal in 1944 being an excellent example
Extensive evacuations of tens of thousands
wounded and non-combatants also took place.
as were landings of large reinforcements
3511
