4. A Decisive Rearmament
Construction takes five years
The prime task of the British army was to equip
and train the British Expeditionary Force (BEF)
when the war broke out and to get it deployed in
France. Available regular regiments were the
core as far as artillery was concerned, but they
had to be supplemented with a large number of
Territorial regiments. In addition to this, it was
important to set up artillery formations for all
the 32 divisions that were planned in 1939, but
also to
establish more of army
and corps
artillerv, local defence units, defence regiments,
training regiments and various reserve units etc
Initially the situation was not good, but
Britain decisively met the challenge to rebuild
what had been destroyed between the wars, and
this systematically. It was realised that the nation
did not have the capacity to meet Hitler alone,
and neither was this needed. The fight against
Hitler was to be made by a coalition with France.
The huge resources and, as it was deemed, good
quality of these gave hope. As far as the Far East
was concerned, there were hopes to get USA as
a coalition partner, if and when Britain had to go
to war against Japan.
Which were then the personnel resources
available to secure the size of the armed forces?
First and foremost, there were the regular forces
with men who had signed up for 12 years. Before
the war, the formations were often undermanned.
but the mobilisation quickly brought them up to
nominal strength. This was possible due to
existing practice. Normally soldiers were
obliged to serve the whole i2-year period. After
5-7 years they normally left for a civilian life and
became reservists
An obligation
remained,
however, for the reservists to return immediately
to service in case of war, as now was the case. So,
September
1939 numerous
experienced
veterans were called back to the regular forma-
tions, but often also as reinforcement to Territorial
regiments. This was a good support to all young
and inexperienced recruits during this first critical
phase of rearmament. The other most important
addition of resources was all the civilians that had
volunteered for service in the Territorial Army.
Conscription had been instituted by the
Parliament early 1939 through the Militia Act.
This applied initially only for men in the ages
18-20 years, who were to be called in for six
months training in peace-time. Later during the
war conscription was extended to apply for all
men between 21 and 41 years of age. This
greatly
increased the manpower
resource.
needed for rearmament. A special clause of the
Act said that those who voluntarily went to Ter-
ritorial Army could not be forced by the author-
ities to be enlisted into a formation as ordered
by them. Many men realising what would come,
and who wanted to enlist in a formation of their
own preference,
availed themselves of this
clause. A well-known formation near the home
was often preferred to
an unknown nost
somewhere else in the country. This created a
massive inflow of recruits to old and new Terri-
torial Regiments.
On one hand, this was
positive, on the other hand however it caused
large problems due to their lack of training and
the shortage of equipment.
Even if personnel resources initially were
available in sufficient quantity, more was needed
later in order to bring up all formations to
nominal strength as required by the War Estab-
lishment. Large human resources were also
needed for all new formations gradually being
set up, the so-called War Formations. How this
gradual increase in manpower went on can be
followed in national statistics. From this, we can
see that the artillery rearmament took around
four years until it reached its maximum. This
was
despite the fact that the nation in
September 1939 was set on a 'war footing
Training and provision of equipment and
material set the limits.
As far as the Royal Artillery was concerned,
the number of men engagilery was concened,
divided into two major groups. One was Field
Artillery and the other Coast Defence/Anti-
Aircraft. The first group comprised all Field,
Medium and Heavy Soup comprised all Field,
is about, but also A Re-liments, which this book
quarters and a few others. K Regiments, Head-
A DECISIVE REARMAMENT
group were mainly mobilised initially for the
defence of the homeland, but to some extent also
to meet the needs of the field army as regards
light and heavy anti-aircraft resources.
On 31 December of each respective year the
group Field Artillery, as so defined, had the
following manpower strength:62
1939 122,017 men
1940 186,149
1941 196.0781
1942 213,993
1943 227,231
1944 237,491
When the war in Europe had ended, the number
had reached 254,103 men (30 June 1945).
We can also see that in July 1943 the two
groups together comprised almost 700,000 men,
which was 26% of the total army strength, which
was around 2,700,000 men. 63 The total strength
of the infantry and armoured forces was less
than that of the Royal Artillery!
The total strength of the Field Artillery
group as compared with the total number of
men in the Royal Artillery is illustrated in Fig.
less than 70,000 women were enlisted into anti-
aircraft regiments. Mixed units, with men and
women, served in most cases at home with a few
exceptions.
Both a large number of light and heavy anti-
aircraft regiments existed, as were quite a
number
of rocket-launching batteries and
searchlight units. When the threats from the air
and against the coast gradually declined, the
share of anti-aircraft and coast artillery in the
manpower strength of the Roval Artillery also
gradually declined, and at the end of the war it
was about the same as for field artillery.
The manpower needs for anti-tank units
was around 30,000 men. The increase of the
number of regiments of different types during
the war is illustrated in Fig. 4-2. The various
sources consulted are not always coherent,
sometimes certain regiments are missing, and
sometimes regiments had been counted twice. 64
However, although the graph may not give exact
numbers, it is considered to be correct as far as
orders of magnitude are concerned and fairlv
well illustrates trends during the war. In 1942
and 1943 many new 'war formations' were
possible to establish thanks to the increased pro-
duction capacity of the industry. Deliveries of
guns, vehicles, optical instruments and other
sorts of equipment along with improved avail-
ability of trained people made this successful
final phase of the rearmament possible.
Fig. 4-1 The strength of the British artillery 1939-1945
(Author)
From this it can be understood that there
initially was an extremely rapid growth of anti-
aircraft and coast artillery resources during the
first half of the war, which reflects the severe
threats of a German invasion and attacks by
Lufiwaffe bomber armadas in 1940 and 1941
operating against British territory. Anti-aircraft
and coast artillery resources were roughly twice
the size of the field artillery.
In this context it is interesting to note the re
markable war effort made by women. In total not
Fig. 4-2 Increase of artillery resources 1939-1945 in
terms of regimental types (Author)
During the war no new regular formations
were organised and the number of mobilised
regiments, around 40, was roughly constant
during the war. The number of territoria
regiments, inclusive of those, which had come to
existence
thronch I
conhlina
existing
regiments, did not increase much either during
the war and staved at around 100-110. The
