GUNFIRE
connection with ongoing observed shooting. Fire
from all the 70 guns against the same target was
ordered and repeated several times. The result
again was to his satisfaction. Accurate fire fell
against three different targets within 5-7 minutes
from being ordered.
Parham hoped that this example would lead
to general acceptance of his methods for the rest
of the war, and so it was. Montgomery liked to
talk about divisional artillery as a '72-guns
battery' and that it should be employed like that
as often as possible
In the
summer 1942, Jack Parham was
promoted
again,
now becoming
artillery
commander of the new lst Army (Brigadier
Royal Artillery), which was to land in North
Africa in November that year. At a conference
on 8 June 1942 at the Royal Artillery School,
Larkhill, he again lectured about his fundamental
principles for the mass use of artillery resources.
in particular gunnery procedures 293 Of six prin-
ciples discussed one was this:
There is now practically no limit to the number
of guns which can be shot by one commander.
This commander can be carried in armour or in
the air. His fire orders can be of the simplest
(Principle IV]
Another of his main principles was the need for
securing the same geodetic data for all units as
soon as possible:
The rapid building up of the largest possible fire
unit is of paramount importance. Hence the vital
necessity of concentration on quick and simple
survey. [Principle V]
His last main principle in his paper was just this
[Principle VI):
'AT ALL COST BE SIMPLE!'
The capital letters showed again that this was his
real mantra
As we have seen above, a prerequisite for ac-
complishment of rapid fire concentrations was
completed survey of all units into the same grid.
When this now was recognised, a survey detach-
ment in regimental headquarters was reintro-
duced.
During this second phase of preparations
for war at home, invasion had been seen as a rea
threat. Absolute certainty that it would not come
was not experienced until Germany had got
stuck in Russia and it was obvious that the Soviet
Union could not be defeated. Britain could
thereafter leave the defensive strategy behind
and direct further actions towards preparations
for an offensive, including landings on the
European continent.
The third phase - preparations for an
offensive overseas
During the second phase, more and more for-
mations had been transferred to North Africa
(Egypt) and the Far East, but the bulk of forces
were still at home. And the rearmament went on.
At the end of this phase, around the turn of
1941, some 5,000 25-pounders Mark II had
been manufactured. Rearming of the field
regiments
could now be completed. The
provision of the new guns made it possible to
transfer some of the obsolete guns to the Home
Guard' and local defence batteries.
But still more 25-pounders were needed.
Besides the own regiments at home, now around
130 field regiments plus training regiments,
Commonwealth
regiments
would also be
supplied with new guns in particular India,
Canada, Australia and New Zealand). War
losses had to be compensated as well. At the
beginning of what I call the 'third phase' for
instance the surrender at Singapore took place
(15 February 1942); the largest British defeat
ever. Besides more than 80,000 Britis omin
prisoners of war, around 150 25-pounders seem
to have been lost.
Manufacture of the new medium guns
4.5-inch and 5. 5-inch new mediu agung
momentum, but still only some 250 pieces had
been delivered. These were enough for the
rearming of about half the number of medium
regiments onlv.
An area of much concern was the supply of
guns to heavy regiments. No new design existed,
just a modernisation of the obsolete 8-inch
howitzers. Using the carriers and new barrels
7.2-inch howitzers were provided for these
regiments. As we have seen, the Americans later
gave a hand and supplied 155-mm guns, the
" Long Tom' (ef. Fig. 4-1). During the second
half of the war, heavy regiments thence had two
4-gun batteries of the former type and two 4 gun
batteries equipped with the latter.
self-propelled guns (SP) were provided
FROM IMMINENT INVASION THREAT TO OFFENSIVE TRAINING
from 1942 onwards. The less versatile 'Bishop'
came first; soon to be followed by the American
Priest'. The former was armed with a 25-
pounder and the latter with a 105-mm howitzer.
FOOs of regiments equipped with SP guns had
to be provided with better vehicles than the light
'Bren Carrier', or more correctly the 'Universal
Carrier', that was normal practice. A natural step
was to give them tanks for the sake of speed and
protection, but also half-track vehicles became a
common alternative.
Efficient radio
communication was
important
Prerequisite
TOr
Kirkman's
and
Parham's ideas to work. Better wireless sets were
gradually manufactured and supplied to artillery
formations.
'The number
Of sets
increased quite rapidly.
was also
At this
time,
RAF Army-Cooperating
Squadrons had at last got a modern suitable
aircraft, the American Mustang. And Air Obser-
vation Officers (AOPs) were now operative with
their Auster aircraft.
With all these improvements behind them,
and no longer with an invasion threat to meet,
the forces at home on the British Isles could turn
their full attention to preparations for offensives.
Of course gunners had to refine their gunnery
abilities all the time through training and special
exercises. They must be first class professionals
in the art of firing the gun', and that at all levels
irrespective of the task whether it was fire obser-
vation and control or command post procedures,
signalling, survey, sound ranging, vehicles main-
tenance,
transport or whatever. Organising
everything was the responsibility of the com-
manding officers, even if they sometimes could
be assisted by, for instance, instructors from
School of Artillery at Larkhill. Officers were as
we have seen from Peter Wilkinson's account
sent also to various central courses
But it was not enough to just maintain a high
level of individual training. Collective training of
must
also
take
place. ¡e
boosting
teamwork of a troop, a battery or a regiment. It
was first a matter of improving the skills in
marching and deployment, in particular in the
dark, fire preparations and firing with all the
guns of the unit. When all this worked well,
training with other units would follow, as would
all-arms training.
A special problem bothered commanders
constantly. Once they had trained their gunners
to perfection, they had often to send away some
of them as replacements to other units, at home
to new formations set up or overseas to compen-
sate for war losses.
The problem was serious, in particular when
officers, warrant officers and specialists had to
leave. Losing skilled signallers, e.g., could
become a nightmare for
commander.
ally
regimental
Albeit many problems and difficulties were
burdens to
carry, much enthusiasm
also
emerged as a consequence of the course of the
war. With no invasion threat, Germany stuck in
Russia and America having entered the war, it
became clear that Churchill's vision about a
complete defeat of Germany was realistic. Not
yet known, however, was that the fight against
Germanv
the
Channel
could not
commence for another two years. Not only a
gigantic build-up of allied resources took time,
but also the need for more large-scale training,
training and again, training must be met.
Large exercises with offensive objectives
became very frequent, not to say daily undertak-
ings. As before, exercises were short, a few days,
maximum a week, but they were tough, at least
if the chief initiator was Montgomery.
It was not difficult to keep up enthusiasm at
the beginning, but as things dragged on, people
became bored, and also felt that they knew
everything and had the required skill for any
action. For some commanders, it became a
tough challenge to maintain and boost morale
and discipline. When the D-Day eventually came
closer, a fear spread among the troops that they
might not be engaged in the coming final battle:
*We have now trained for four to five years and
we might not get the chance to fight!' This was
another challenge for commanders to meet.
At the beginning of 1944, it became obvious
that D-Day was not far away any longer
Douglas Goddard writes:
In Januarv. Gen Montgomery, who had left
England in 1942 to command 8th Army in the
Desert, returned to command 21st Army Grour
of which 43rd Div had become part. That the
invasion of the Continent was imminent was now
clear to all. He inspected the Div at Rye on 4
February in an early winter dawn with snow
falling steadily and called on the troops to
embark on a crusade'. He comnletelv cantivated
the audience. 294
