GUNFIRE
Fig. 5-5 The most common wireless sets used
by the artillery, all operating in the frequency
band 2 - 8 MHz. Range depended on type of
derial used
WS No. 38 - Observation officers supporting armoured
units and moving in a tank, normally used WS No. 38.
Here is one version of this set shown (Louis Meulstee)
WS No. 18 - Standard radio for communication
between fire observation officers and the com-
manders of infantry units to be supported.
Observe the morse key. Another alternative was
WS No. 68, which was used by airborne units in
particular. With telegraphy the range was up to
10 - 15 km, with radiotelephone communication
about half this range (Louis Meulstee)
Some technical data for the sets used by the
Royal Artillery are presented in Table 5-3.4
'R/T means
radio-telephony
communication
and 'W/T' wireless telegraphy. Range data are
approximate as they depended much on terrain
conditions.
dependent on
whether communication took
place during the day or during the night. Night
communication was
almost
impossible
ropical areas particularly; this is due to lack of
sky wave reflection. Another factor with great
impact on communication range was the type
and length of the antenna/aerial that was used
WS No. 22 - This set was standard within artillery
regiments due to its fairly favourable range, 15-20 km
with radiotelephone communication and 30-35 km with
telegraphy. It was generally fixed into vehicles, but an ob
servation party could act from a post 500-700 yards from
the vehicle by means of a remote control devise. WS No.
19 set was a version that was the first hand alternative for
AFVs (Armoured Fighting Vehicles). It was used by
artillery formations equipped with self-propelled guns. It
was also used for other purposes when its long range was
needed, e.g. by airborne units (Louis Meulstee)
which was different for ground wave and
reflected sky wave communication.
The portable smaller sets had a weight
slightly under 20kg, the larger much more. A:
mentioned, the No. 22 set required 3-4 men to
carry
dismantled.
Extra
batteries
and
sometimes a battery charger were needed when
an Observation Post Party was to be away from
the gun position for a couple of days. In such
cases 8-10 men would be needed; besides the set
and the batteries they also had to carry their
personal weapons
and belongings and in
addition to that also food and water. Under
ARTILLERY GROUPING, ORGANISATION AND EQUIPMENT
difficult terrain and weather conditions such as
those prevailing in Burma and Italy, the sig-
nallers indeed had a really tough job. If mules
were at hand, the situation became much easier.
Fig. 5-5 illustrates some of the wireless sets
most frequently used by the Royal Artillery.
Normal practice in an artillery regiment was
to establish two types of radio communication
net. One was the Battery net, which gave com-
munication between the OPOs and the Troop
Command Posts and the Battery Command
Post. The Wagon Line could also be connected
to this net. The No. 22 set was used; the No. 19
set if the regiment was equipped with self-
propelled guns.
The Troop Commanders in the regiments
of an infantry
division were transported as
mentioned in Universal Carriers in which the
No. 22 set was permanently installed. As this
vehicle often could not be taken close to the ob-
servation post, a remote control unit could be
used. By means of this device, radio communi-
cation could take place 500-600 yards from the
carrier.
The FOO used a No. 18 set or a No.38 set
for the
communication with the infantry
commander to be supported. Although the
equipment was there, it was still often difficult to
establish good communication from the obser-
vation post due to enemy fire and other means
of interference.
From an observation post established by 2
Field Regiment RA during the battle in the
Anzio bridgehead in Italy in January 1944, the
following story is related:
orders and firing was established (Fig. 5-6). As
we can see, the three Battery Command Posts on
this net were linked to the Regimental Head-
quarters. Sometimes a separate net for Admin-
istration and Supply could be established, this
when equipment and frequencies were available.
"This was a good arrangement in larger mobile
battles to secure supply of ammunition, fuel and
other stores.
Skilled signallers often got the communica-
tion lines to work well despite technical con-
straints. One method was to use a number of
extra sets as relay stations to bridge gaps in com-
munication ranges. This could be accomplished
automatically by connecting two No. 22 sets to
each other, but oral transfer from one signaller
to one or several others serving other sets was
another method often used.
• Sometimes this
required several steps. Lieutenant I-W. Widdi-
combe has the story of such an event:
Battery A
Battery d
On January 30th, one of the infantry battalions
which the regiment were supporting, came under
extremely heavy artillery fire. The remote control
cable from the artillery observation post to the
wireless set was repeatedly cut. Bombardier
Charles Ranks carried fire orders from the O.P.
to the wireless truck. Several times as he crawled
backwards and forwards shells landed within a
few feet of him: several times he had narrow
escapes from machinegun bullets. Twice he lay
out in the open, mending the cable as shells and
mortar bombs made the air hideous with noise
and flying, whirling fragments. When, at length,
the cable could no longer be
mended he
continued his message carrying.
Besides the Battery Nets a Regimental Net for
- Criment,
Fig. 5-6 Example of a regimental radio network.
Normally, there was a unique battery network for
each one of the three batteries and a regimental
network for battery headquarters and the regimental
headquarters, which could include a connection to
the artillery commander of the division as well. Other
artillery formations could also connect to this reai-
mental network (Author)
