They had also noticed that the Germans
were very skilled in quickly taking cover when
they heard the whistling sound of approaching
shells.
Throughout their
reports, they are, in
summary, praising the British gunners for most
often firing accurately and efficiently (except for
the height of air bursts).
'The scourge'
The Allies were shelled continuously by German
artillery on the beachhead. It was not at the level
of the British artillery in terms of intensity (not
to mention what the Russian could provide at
the Eastern Front). The Germans had given
priority to the air force and armoured vehicles at
the beginning of the war and never managed to
compensate for the shortage of artillery later.
What they could accomplish, however, was to
add
mortars in large
quantities,
both the
ordinary type and rocket propelled, The latter
was the much feared Nebelwerfer, or as it was also
called by the allied soldiers, 'Moaning Minnies'.
It was supplied in several versions. The most
common one was, as mentioned before, a
version of 150mm calibre, which could launch
its projectiles up to around 8,000 yards (cf. Fig
12-7). Other types with calibres of 210mm,
280mm and even as big as 320mm were
implemented. These could reach target areas up
to ranges around 9,000 yards. They all had 5-6
launching tubes attached to a simple carriage.
The Allies were exposed to mortar shelling
very frequently, which caused severe losses
The mortar threat became more serious than
the artillery shelling. The Allies expected this
threat and prepared to meet it as well as it was
possible
One objective was to improve the capability
to locate mortars. The traditional 'heavy' sound
ranging equipment had its limits and required a
long time for deployment. The solution adopted
was the 'light' equipment, the 4-pen recorder,
which had been devised to meet this specific re-
quirement (cf. Chapter 6). The microphone base
was only 1,500-2,000 yards and the recording
depth about the same. Evaluation of microphone
data could be done much faster
with this
equipment. But during the battle of Normandy,
only one prototype section existed. The first ex-
perience gained was very positive and it was
decided to provide at least three sections to each
survey regiment as soon as possible. We will in
GUNFIRE
coming chapters see how this policy turned out
later
Another measure taken was of organisa-
tional character. It was decided that a special
resource for counter-mortar combat should be
introduced. Each division was provided with a
Counter
Mortar
OUtficer
(CMO)
with a
Captain's rank. Assisting resources were alsc
provided for him. At the brigade level, it was en-
deavoured to provide an Assistant Counter
Mortar Officer (ACMO). To speed up commu-
nication when
combating
enemy
mortan
positions, special communication resources were
provided as well.
Finally - material superiority counts
After
Operation
Jupiter
and
Operation
Goodwood, the British had secured such large a
beachhead south of Caen that material superi-
ority could be secured. It was possible to bind
most of the German armoured resources and
thus
making a breakout by the Americans
feasible. This was commenced on 25 July after a
tremendous attack by strategic bombers.
The British continued with several large op-
erations in their sector, one being the decisive
Operation Bluecoat at the
end of July and
beginning of August. The objective of the plan
was to attack with VIII and XXX Corps along
the left flank of the American
sector towards
Caumont down to
Mont Pincon, which was
another dominating
hill.
"The
time of the
operation did not allow for detailed planning of
the artillery engagement; the operation plan was
built on surprise
Operation Totalize, which was Normandy mas
The final operation in Normandy was
August. It was to become the northern arm of
the pincer operation by which the Allies tried to
enclose the Germans in which the Allies tried ho
southern arm of the pincer was the responsibility
of the Americans. The operation was halted just
before a complete closure of the pocket' could
take place. By this, most of the German units
managed to escape, but their losses were signif-
With this retreat by the German forces, their
defence of Normandy collapsed, and by 17
August the battle of Normandy was over and the
Allies began their rush eastwards and north-
wards. France lay open
When the role of ho procler in
Normandy is discussed much focus is on the
A NEW FRONT IS OPENED - NORMANDY
gigantic counter-battery programmes and the
large rolling and creeping barrages, which were,
integrated parts of operation plans. These en-
gagements were of course very important and
would justify in-depth studies. One should,
however, not forget that between the major op-
erations, the battle was raging all the time at a
smaller scale. The gunners had to be in action
almost continuously. They had to deliver fire at
opportunity targets in connection with attacks,
but also counter-preparatory fire and fire against
DF targets to meet German counter-attacks. The
Germans never failed to quickly organise and
implement counter-attacks with great skill.
The firing in minor battles took place by
means of single
troops or batteries
and
sometimes as regimental concentrations. When
meeting enemy counter-attacks, larger bounces
by the entire
divisional or Corps
artillery
sometimes had to be employed too. The proce-
dures to quickly deliver fire from anything
between the four guns of a troop up to 300-400
guns of a Corps always worked well, now a well-
established routine.
As a complement to these general observa-
tions, it might be of interest to see how a FOO
experienced his
role
when
supporting
battalion. The unit to attack was
King's Royal Rifle Corps
12 Battalion
which belonged to 8
Independent Armoured Brigade, which in its
turn was under command of the 49th Infantry
Division. The division was to attack southwards
protection of the VIII
Corps attack
Operation Epsom. The objective of the battalion
was the village Rauray, south of Fontaney-le-
Pesnel west of Caen.
The FOO was the GPO of one of the
batteries of 147 Field Regiment RHA, who had
been ordered to replace the ordinary FOO this
day, i.e. the troop
commander.
After having
reported to the battalion commander, it was time
for the attack. This is what happened, on 26
Communication was not easy but I was through
on the 19 set in the carrier and it would have been
impossible with an 18 set so, as there was no other
FOO with the battalion. I thought it best to
remain by my carrier with the CO to control the
fire support. The 4/7th were getting support from
C Troop and the rest of the Regiment were
engaged on some other task so I had to do the
best I could with D Troop. The first thing was to
range on the church. Using close target procedure
I got onto the church and ordered 90 rounds of
gunfire at 15 seconds interval to support the
advance across the field. As they got bogged
down I changed the interval to 30 seconds. The
battalion attack was stopped in a fold in the
ground not far from the church. I asked if I could
have the support of the whole regiment to get
them onto the objective. This was granted
provided I ranged each battery separately as there
were other troops nearby. This I did and was
ready to fire a Mike Target when the CO said he
wanted to withdraw the battalion, so I ordered the
regiment to fire smoke instead of HE. Two rounds
gunfire followed by six rounds gunfire at 60
seconds interval from the whole regiment con-
centrated produced the most wonderful smoke
screen and the whole battalion was successfully
withdrawn without anv further casualties
It was a tough time for all gunners, an indication
of which, we can see from Douglas Goddard's
diary: 360
At this relatively static stage our first priority was
to dig in, including our sleeping trenches, and get
below ground to minimize casualties from shells.
mortar bombs and air attacks. The sleeping
trenches were frequently water laden since we
only had groundsheets for cover
First mail arrived. An illicit meal of suckling
pig from nearby deserted farm. Rations meagre
and appetite large. Moved again at night to
dangerous spot in a suspected minefield. It really
is the most trving experience careering into an
unknown blackness with the prospect of mines
blowing you up every vard
Bit of strain coping with Defensive Fire
(DF) tasks nearly all night. Slept from 3 to 7 to
the sound of our guns firing a few yards away.
The ruination we are bringing to the country is
incredible. One can't help feeling sorry for the
French whose fields are being so desecrated.
cattle slaughtered and homes ruined. Scare as
enemy counter attack came in. Watched 250 RAF
bombers dropping 1,000lbs bombs on enemy
armour. Not sure what it achieved
Hun has
moved un three ss Panzen
Divisions for counter-attack and our offensive has
been discontinued but bridgehead maintained
Our guns have been brought out of gun pits and
in anti-tank positions
against the armoured
attack. Slept from 2.30 to 4.30 am - it's quite a
