GUNFIRE
to. Training continued also in England for units
to be dispatched to France (Fig. 16-4)
Operative and tactical training were adapted
to the defensive strategy and not to mobile
warfare with
armoured units. By means of
specific exercises, the redeployment to river Dyle
was prepared as were the tactics for the defensive
battle to come there. The gunners spent much
time on preparation of complicated fire plans
including covering fire for counter-attacks. The
latter being both such based on timed concen-
trations on fixed targets and such comprising
creeping or rolling barrages against line targets.
The ordered radio silence, however, made the
signallers less efficient in radio communication.
In particular they lacked the skill that was needed
in mobile battles and when concentration of
artillery fire above the regimental level would be
tactically sound. 194
A threat causing more and more concern
during the winter was the risk for German air
landings, both as
, regards small groups
saboteurs and larger units.
9 Field Regiment RA issued in January 1940
Operation Instruction No. 12, which stipulated
how this threat should be met by the regiment.
This was related to the area, which was to be
controlled by the regiment in accordance with
an order from the artillery headquarters of the
§th Infantry Division to which the regiment
belonged. The regiment should send out patrols
n this area upon code words when immediate
threats for air landings emerged.
('HOPPER'
when air landing was imminent, 'LOCUST" if
such a landing already had taken place). A patrol
would comprise one officer and five other ranks
equipped with two light machine-guns. When
alerted, one patrol would immediately move to a
certain important bridge, the others should be
prepared to systematically survey the whole area
One patrol would be ready to go within ten
minutes, and two more not later than 30 minutes
after the alarm. A rolling scheme was prepared
in the regiment for this type of service.
parachutists
The instruction also stipulated that landing
should immediately be fired at
before they disappeared towards their goals. In
particular, it was stated that 'There must be no
question of it being 'unsporting' by firing at de-
scending parachutists!'
For communication with the regimental
headquarters, the patrols had to use the French
public telephone service. Special regulations
were issued regarding the procedures for this,
including presentation of a card by the soldiers
to prove that they were authorised to avail them-
selves of this service. 195
End of the respite - April 1940
After the trying winter, preparations for 'Plan B'
were resumed and training activities geared up
at all levels. Although inactivity was not
problem, it was important for morale that recre-
ation and entertainment were organised for the
troops; as was a programme for leave at home.
Football tournaments between the units were
another popular break from active service. Unit
commanders had a big responsibility arranging
suitable activities for their men and keeping
them alert and motivated.
Another sphere of activities, in particular for
officers, were lectures and study tours. So, for
instance, the war diary of 7 Field Regiment RA
has this entry for 8 April 1940:
Captain B.B. Storey and 2/Lieut. R.E. Candlin
went to ABBEVILLE on a 4-days attachment to
No (A.C.) Squadron Squadron R.A.F.P.O's Cox, Mason
& Watts No. 2 Squadron R.A.E arrived for a 4
days attachment. 196
This particular air squadron was one of those
organised for cooperation with ground forces. It
was equipped with Lysander aircraft. I will come
back to them later.
Other objects for study visits for the gunners
were the recce units of the divisions, where they
could admire the light scout cars, Daimler
Dingos. And sound rangers organised demon-
strations of their equipment and methods. Many
gunner officers had their own battle experience
from the Great War and acted as guides at some
of the battlefields of this war. One of the
qualified guides was the commanding officer of
7 Field Regiment RA, who as late as 21 April
1940 organised a visit of this kind. The war diary
gives the story:
A Battlefield Tour to parts of the SOMME Bat-
tlefields was conducted by the C.O. All available
Officers, Warrant Officers and senior N.C.O'S
attended. To give officers a chance of a long run
as many as possible rode motor-cycles. The day
was brilliantly fine and warm, and everyone
enjoyed the tour, and gained new ideas from it.
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD - ACROSS THE CHANNEL
On 28 April, he made another tour. This
time he guided officers from 76 Field Regiment
TA.
More
serious
things
had,
however,
happened before these tours were done. It is of
interest to me as a Scandinavian observer to see
how the artillery units reacted on messages
about the German invasion of Denmark and
Norway on 9 April 1940. It seems that they were
not really upset about the news, had they at all
been informed! Montgomery's artillery head-
quarters (3rd Division) wrote in their war diary
for this day: 'Major Brooks visited the HQS to
discuss fuel transport.
Representatives from
various divisional units participated? 197
When we look into the war diary of 7 Field
Regiment RA, we can read about another
meeting taking place at the same headquarters:
A conference was held at H.Q.R.A. 3 Div at 1015
hours to discuss problems in connection with Re-
crational and Physical Training. A helpful and in-
teresting meeting. In the evening 16/43 Bty held
a cocktail party.
But it has been added that:
It was learned in the morning that Germany had
invaded Denmark and was at war with Norway,
and that a Naval engagement was taking place off
the Norwegian coast.
99 Field Regiment RA has a very short note for
that particular day saying, 'individual training
was organised'.
However, the following day, the 10th, things
began to happen. All leave was cancelled and
units were alerted. The next day, the 11th, all
units were ordered to be ready to leave at 14
notice
and packing and loading
of
vehicles commenced as were other preparations
for a quick departure. Montgomery raised the
alertness further on 13 April for an advance de-
tachment to which the artillery commander and
his headquarters
were attached
Departure
would take place at four hours' notice. The head-
quarters staff prepared themselves by packing as
much as they could. Paperwork was reduced to
a minimum, the war diary says.
After the raising of alertness and prepara-
tions for departure to Belgium, things calmed
down a little and a period of waiting followed
suit. On 19 April, alertness was further reduced
and units could revert to their training plans.
Night marches and redeployment exercises were
again on the training agenda. Exchange and
study visits resumed. The war diaries reveal no
indications of a pending crisis, but a rough
awakening was not far away!
An interesting observation is that the 5th
Division was redeployed towards the end of
April to prepare itself for transport to Norway. I
will come back to this plan later.
'David 6 - David 6 - David 6'
Yes, here is the code word that was to be given
to all divisional units when 'Plan D' was to be
launched. The number '6' was the number of
hours when this was to take place after the code
had been received by units, i.e. the 'Z. Hour'. The
plan had a time schedule in hours and days to
which all activities were related. The first day was
called J.1', the second J.2' and so forth. 'Plan D'
had, as mentioned above, been followed by pro-
duction of detailed orders at all levels, and these
had been continuously updated during the
spring 1940. We can study the presumably final
version of the 'Operation Order' for I Corps'98
and a late version of the artillery 'Operation
Order' 199
A few extracts from these orders will illus-
trate how the initial phase of the battle against
the invading German forces was planned to be
undertaken. The Corps order comprises 17
pages and the equal number of Appendices. It
deals partly with the march to river Dyle and
partly to the deployment of forces along and
behind the river. A complementary administra-
tive order for all supply issues had also been
prepared. It is interesting to note that all units
were informed that they must also be prepared
to engage in line with 'Plan E', i.e. marching only
to river Escaut. should this be ordered
The first recce unit was to cross the Belgian
border at 'Z Hour'. This unit was a cavalry unit,
12th Royal Lancers (Prince of Wales'), abridged
12 L?. This was a GHQ unit and was to establish
itself as soon as possible along a line 7-15km east
and northeast of river Dyle.
The 'Plan D' required the forces to re-
deploy towards river Dyle in four phases. They
must, however, be prepared to meet changes of
plans for the last three phases. The four phases
were:
Phase 1 Advance of I Corps (except
48th
Infantry Division) to the right and II Corps
171
