access to dug shit trenches and shelters. Such
were normally each arranged for two men of the
gun crew around the gun pit
Then followed digging of gun pits and
sheltered pits for command posts. The gun pits
Fig. 11-3 Efficient teamwork was a must when firing.
Here is a troop command post in Burma in action. It is
dug in for protection (©Imperial War Museum SE 3360)
Fig. 11-4 When deploying guns it was always an
endeavour to get them protected behind a shelter in
a gun pit. If deployed at the same place for a longer
period gun crews had to improve the shelter as much
as they could by means of logs and planks, empty
ammunition boxes, sand bags etc. Camouflage nets
reduced the risk for enemy intervention (AWM
No.024828
GUNFIRE
were quite shallow in order not to obstruct firing,
but they still provided good protection for the
gun when exposed to enemy artillery fire or air
attacks. They were to be carefully camouflaged
by means of nets, tree branches etc. Normally,
hasty protection had to be arranged for
command posts, guns and crews, but this could
then be gradually improved if the unit was to
remain deployed for a longer period. Fig. 11-3
Illustrates a dug in troop command post in
Burma and Fig. 11-4 a well-camouflaged gun
in its dug gun-pit.
The British were strict on personal hygiene
and therefore latrines also had to be dug as soon
as possible and washing facilities
arranged.
Special 'sleeping pits' often had to be dug as well.
Sergeant Bob Cotterhill who was a gun crew
No. 1 in Burma gives his story to us about de-
ployment activities:
On reaching the new position the gun would be
got into action and Zero Lines recorded whilst
the quad would be emptied of its load of gun am-
munition, gun stores, camouflage nets and the
crew's kit. It would be driven to the Wagon Lines,
off the gun position, but close at hand. Ther
could come the call from the sPat hand. Then
jobs to be done - a man to assist the cooks, one
to dig latrines, one for digging defence posts. A
detachment would usually be left with the No.1
and two men.
The next job was to dig in. Slit trenches for
each of the six men of the detachment would be
dug to a depth of 18 inches to two feet. When
these had all been completed to this depth, they
would be dug to the full five feet depth, six feet
long and two feet wide. When these were finished
a start would be made on the gun pit. Because of
our isolated position and the fear that an attack
could come in from any direction, the gun pits
were made full size so that they were big enough
for the gun to be moved around to fire at any
point of the compass
Digging would continue throughout the day
with only brief breaks fot mue throughout the day
and biscuit snack at midday as of tea, a bully bout
17,00. It was extremely hot and a hot mealabiur
sun although stripped to t working in the baring
were always down in the low-lying ground there
was never a breath of wind. 135
As we have seen in Chapter 5 quite a lot of
resources were available for local defence. As
PREPARATIONS FOR OPENING OF GUNFIRE
protection against tanks the own guns were of
course the primary resource, but gradually also
the hand-held anti-tank weapon PIAT was
provided. Anti-tank mines were also added. Own
resources for anti-aircraft protection were a
limited number of 20mm anti-aircraft guns. In
addition to personal weapons (rifles, sub-
machine guns and pistols) local defence could
also be reinforced by means of light machine-
guns, personnel mines and alarm devices.
Protection of the own gun position was in a
modern war of extreme importance, and all were
concerned. An artillery officer in Burma wrote:
The lessons we learnt were many, but one in par-
ticular, that every cook, ammunition number, etc.
must know the defence layout and what his job is
if an attack comes in
There was never time to issue orders when
troubles began. Each man had to do his job un-
supervised, and the only motto for success on
such occasions, or indeed at any time in battle is,
keep your head and resolve to kill as many Japs as
Possible, 136
The reason why local defence was of particular
importance in Burma was the fact, that the
primary Japanese method of countering artillery
fire was infiltration into the gun positions in the
Enemy attacks by tanks on artillery deploy-
ments were a reality that one always had to take
into account, particularly in North Africa. Such
an event is described in the Royal Artillery Com-
memoration Book:137
"Tank Alert! but although we could hear the
rumbling of tanks it seemed an age before
anything happened. At last six black objects
huddled together in groups of three appeared to
the right front of the Troop. It was still very dark
and difficult to judge the range, but we set our
sights at 400 and opened fire
The first shot from No. 1 gun set the leading
tank on fire. No.2's first round lifted the turret
clean off another tank - a good start, but we had
stirred up a hornet's nest. Soon there were 15 or
more tanks firing at us with 75mms and machine
guns. We scored hit after hit, but I fancy we put a
number of shells into tanks that were already
dead. During this period two officers - the only
officers with the guns - and four other ranks were
hit. The tanks were now working round our right
towards E Troop. Just as our No.1 gun swung
round to engage them, a 75mm shell landed on
the trail, killing all the detachment and setting fire
to a box of cartridges. At the same time a gun of
E Troop received a direct hit on the shield,
disabling the whole detachment.
Another threat against deployed artillery was the
enemy's own artillery and mortars. The only
protection against this hazard was digging and
counter-bombardment, in particular forestalling
enemy fire. We will not look deeper into this
context here, but will return later.
The guns should be deployed in such a way
that shielding obstacles such as trees or buildings
did not prevent supporting artillery fire. The
centre of the area to be covered was given by the
zero line, i.e. the bearing in which the guns were
initially oriented with parallel barrels. This must
be carefully observed and the
accuracv
this orientation had a decisive impact on the
subsequent precision of the first rounds fired.
As mentioned, the required minimum and
maximum ranges would affect selection of gun
positions in respect of shielding crests. Require-
ments as regards left and right boundaries of the
area to be covered by fire must also be observed
when deciding gun positions.
Upon arrival at the new positions the guns
were first roughly laid by
means of hand
compass along the 'zero line'. As soon as possible
the exact orientation with parallel barrels would
be done. When this was done the dial sight was
oriented towards one or several reference points,
Gun Aiming Points (GAP).
The GAP could be a distant object such as
a tree, a church steeple, and the corner of a
visible building, etc. Another alternative was to
use two aiming posts, Gun Aiming Posts, often
equipped with marked crossing bars, placed near
the gun, normally 50 and 100 yards away. A
further alternative for arranging a nearby GAP
was the paralleloscope. By means of the two
latter devices deviations of required line due to
traverse or movement of the gun, as a result of
firing, could be compensated when laying the
gun. GAPs with light to be used during nights
also had to be arranged, often one for all the
guns of a troop or battery.
Orientation of the guns to get barrels in
parallel along the 'zero line' was a procedure
starting at a Battery Aiming Point (BAP), where
a director was placed. This was a 'Bearing Picket'
