command posts could analvse the result and trv
to find out whether deviations from initial laying
data were due to incorrect target data than had
been assumed, or deviations were due to change
of ballistic influences from new weather condi
tions, in particular wind direction and strength.
Of course it could be a combination. Whatever
the reasons were, it did not matter if fire for
effect was to take place immediately once the
ranging had been completed. In such cases the
target could be recorded uncorrected. If other
targets were to be engaged the same "CoM'
could be used provided a new target could be
fixed relative to the one used for the initial
ranging. If this could be done the latter used to
be called "Witness Point'
If, on the other hand, firing was to take place
later, when
a new weather
situation
emerged, the target location could be recorded
without the 'COM' used, the target was then
recorded corrected
Ranging along the 'OT' line would of course
be the best method from an observation point of
view. The problem was, however, that the OPO
still had to give the changes relative the 'GT' line
so as to save recalculations at the command post.
Some graphical and numerical means of assis-
tance to be used when ranging along the OT line
were often available, 142
In order to speed up the ranging a few alter-
native methods existed. One was to visualise the
firing line, i.e. 'GT' line, by ordering two
different ranges, one to be used by one of the
guns in a section, the other by another gun:
'Right ranging 65-58. Fire'. This implied a
round from the No. 1 gun at the range 6,500 and
five seconds later a shot from No.2 at the shorter
range, 5,800. The OPO could repeat with other
ranges if necessary. Once he had found out
where the 'GT' line was in the observation zone,
he could either continue ranging with the two
guns at the same elevation/range or he could
proceed with one gun only.
Another, even more effective, method to
visualise the 'GT' line was to use all four guns of
the troops and order 'Ladder ranging,
15
seconds, 6000, up 300', this as an example. The
method had been learnt from the Royal Navy
and was suitable, in particular, when ranging at
long distances with long time of flight should
take place. Time could be spared, by having
several projectiles in the air simultaneously. In
this example No. 1 fired at the range of 6,000
GUNFIRE
[yards] and 15 seconds later the No. 2 followed
at the range of 6,300, followed another 15
seconds later by a round from No.3 at 6,600, and
finally the No.4 completed the 'ladder' after
another 15 seconds with its elevation at 6,900.
Again, this could be repeated, for instance after
a switch of line. When the OPO was certain
about the line in the terrain, he could proceed
with an ordinary type of ranging with one or two
guns
The purpose of ranging was, as discussed,
to prepare fire for effect such that the shells
would fall on the right spot, the target to be
engaged. If there was a risk at hand that the fire
would not land there, ranging was a must. On
the other hand if the OPO during ranging found
that he could accomplish a direct hit he could
immediately stop the ranging and go to fire for
effect, or just get the target registered.
The procedures briefly
described were
applied when ranging of the OPO's own troop
or battery was to take place. But the overruling
doctrine was to concentrate fire from many more
guns when the tactical situation called for this. If
for instance the OPO wanted to concentrate fire
from all the three batteries of his regiment,
not to say all the batteries of the divisionall
artillery, how to undertake the ranging in such a
case? Obviously he could not keep track of the
'zero lines' of all these troops/batteries and
communicate switches relative to these. If fire for
effect was required before alve to thess had been
surveyed into the same grid, the situation was
even more complicated.
The
solution
far as ranging
concerned was the introduction in 1941 of the
cardinal point method. Quite simply this implied
that the OPO undertook ranging as usual with
one section or a single gun, but now gave the
switches to all participating units by giving them
an order for correction of the fire such as 'all 300
northeast' (example). The cardinal points were
eight directions around tardina ps North,
Northeast, East, Southea the compaen the fre
correction was received, the command posts had
to mark it on their artillery Comma trom which
they could determine the switch in line and
elevation applicable for their own guns. If all
units to be used in target her oment were on
the same grid, ranging was, as mentioned, done
oy means of a section of two as meor iust one. Al
other troops just had to follow the corrections on
the artillery board and rolen the cor the target
ARTILLERY BATTLE TECHNIQUES AND TACTICS
position. On the other hand, if they were not on
the same grid all units had to be ranged before
against them with a specified number of units.
1 hey were.
fire for effect. 143
It was important for artillery commanders
A target ordered as 'Troop Target' implied
and observation officers alike to understand the
engagement by the four guns of the troop
constraints but also technical options that could
A 'Battery Target' was to be engaged by the
make the fire support as efficient as possible,
eight guns of the battery
given the specific tactical situation and fighting
A 'Mike Target' was to be engaged by the
techniques to be applied by the infantry and
24 guns of a regiment (3 batteries)
armoured units supported. Ranging or not, was
• An 'Uncle Target' was to be engaged by all
one question to raise amongst many. What were
the divisional artillery, normally 72 guns
the requirements as regards accuracy? And how • A 'Victor Target' was ordered when the
far should ranging be pursued in order to obtain
best accuracy?
artillery of a Corps was required. It could
The AT Volume III advised:
imply engagement of 300-400 guns,
sometime even more
Since the time available will almost always be
An Army Group Royal Artillery (AGRA) was
limited, speed is vital. This speed in ranging will
engaged by the order Yoke Target'. Such a
not be achieved by slavish adherence to rigid
concentration could involve 80-140 guns of
rules, but only by a proper grasp of the principles
different type, mainly medium and heavy guns
set out (...]. Except when a target is close to one
If a particular target was expected to be
which has already been engaged, any attempt to
engaged several times, or was included in a
save time by opening fire for effect, without
written fire plan, it was given a number, which
carrying ranging to the degree appropriate to the
was preceded by a letter. A regimental target,
nature of target, is a gamble which is almost
'Mike', was allotted the letter 'M' and a number,
certain to result in waste of time as well as am-
for instance 'M 678'. A second letter could be
munition. Conversely, to carry ranging beyond
added if there was a need to distinguish it from
the appropriate degree may result in loss of what
other regiments' targets, for instance it could be
may be only a fleeting opportunity of inflicting
'ML 678' and MK 678'.
loss on the enemy. 144
In fire plans it was a normal practice to
Ranging by means of high airbursts, 30-50
group a number of targets under a common
metres above ground, was a special type of
name. A large fire plan could comprise several
such groups of targets given for instance names
ranging. It could be used just for determining
COM data. Another purpose could be to bring
of cities, 'Aberdeen', 'Glasgow', 'Edinburgh'
etcetera. Prepared targets for defensive fire
many units on to the same grid when time was
not available for ordinary survey. The batteries
(more about
that below)
normally
were
denominated 'DF 456', 'DF 457' etcetera. DF)
taking part fixed their positions through
intersection to a couple of air bursts fired against
was the acronym for Defensive Fire.
two or more points with coordinates calculated
It should finally be observed that whenever
fire was to be opened. either it was a matter of
by the leading unit/battery. This method was
ranging or fire for effect; the OPO/FOO was
successfully used as the only possible during the
expected to convev tactical information beside.
rapid pursuit westwards in November and
December 1942 of Rommel's army after the
the more technical data. It could be what type of
battle at El Alamein. A third optional use of high
target he intended to engage, what he could see
of enemy actions, transport etcetera. Command
airburst was when directing fire against targets
deep beyond the front line, for instance enemy
posts and headauarters were then in 2 hetter
batteries. Ranging then took place with the help
position to understand what kind of fire that was
of sound rangers.
expected from them and whether, for instance.
In order
ume was a critical factor.
The more of
• to facilitate
concentration
artillery fire from many units a standardised set
information ahout enemy activities and hattli
progress that could be conveyed also to
of terms was introduced for classification of
commandere and headauarters of units to he
targets, and at the same time ordering fire
supported, the better it was.
120
