GUNFIRE
evaluation centre via radio links instead of the
normal telephone lines. On 23 October 1942 at
13.30 hours the
'S' Troop was ordered to
establish such links for measurement in south-
westerly direction. The base was
ready
measure at 06.00 hours on the following day, 24
October. The results were not good enough: only
four batteries were located.
The troop was
ordered already on 25 October to return to its
previous line-based sound ranging base.
But the following day, 26 October, high
command wanted
them
to make another
attempt. However, this time they had to cancel
their operation the following day, 27 October,
due to empty batteries. A new base using
telephone lines was established, now closer to the
original front line. It was ready to measure at
18.00 hours
and
remained there until
November, but no enemy batteries could be
located from this base due to the battle noise. We
can see the four bases discussed on Map 19-7.
It should be noticed that the exact location of the
two radio link bases are unknown. The war
diaries obviously report wrong locations to some
extent. The bases are therefore indicated with
broken lines on my map.
Although much now was better as regards
the use of the artillery resources, one problem
bothering Montgomery and Kirkman remained.
The commanders of armoured formations were,
as seen above, not interested in coordinating
their battle with that of the infantry and artillery
(cf. Fig. 19-2).
Kirkman included in his report a section
where he discussed this problem and stated that
the infantry
could capture their
objectives
without large losses when a carefully planned
artillery support was implemented, and this
without support from tanks. He added: 'Unfor-
tunately no occasion arose when the action of
armour was supported by heavy concentrations
of artillery fire '34
Kirkman also blamed Lumsden for moving
out on the field of battle without taking his
artillery commander (CCRA) with him, this also
symptomatic. This meant that the CCRA did not
know what was going on, and could not advise
on how best the artillery could support the
armoured formations. When Montgomery heard
of this, he immediately ordered Lumsden to take
his artillery commander forward and start coop-
erating with him.
Montgomery also wrote in his diary about
the problem with lacking all-arms cooperation:
...there is no doubt these RAC Generals do not
understand the cooperation of all arms in battle.
I have had many examples of this since the battle
started.'341
What about 'simplicity'?
As we recall, Jack Parham had stubbornly
insisted that the employment of artillery must be
characterised by simplicity, both as regards
tactics and technical procedures. What about
that at El Alamein? Well, the question is best
answered by both 'yes' and 'no'.
Large barrages with a simple configuration
with straight lanes and right angles to these can
be said to meet the criteria of 'simplicity'. Large
concentrations with regiments, and predicted
concentrated fire with all the divisional artillery,
could quickly be planned and implemented, as
they were not complicated.
The covering fire plans implemented at the
beginning of the offensive were, on the other
hand, very complex. They included a very large
number of targets of varying width and depth that
would be engaged at very varying length of time,
and this sometimes with regiments sometimes
with batteries and even single troops. Such plans
cannot be said to represent 'simplicity'.
Most complicated were the fire plans for
units whose fire over-lapped the barrages, either
against targets in the same area, as the barrag
was to proceed over, or along the flanks of the
advancing infantry. As an example, we may look
at the fire plan prepared by one of the Australian
field regiments, which together with four other
field regiments and three medium regiments
were to fire such overlapping fire in operation
Supercharge.
The plan was prepared for 2/7 Australian
Field Regiment RAA and all the 217es fired in
a similar way during the nearly three hours (16)
minute) during which the attack went forward.
342 The fire plan is summarised graphically on
Map 19-8. We can sun harise graphincluded
troop, battery and regimental targets The targets
were dispersed over a large area, and the firing
was to vary much in time. As seen, a few
barrages were also part time. As se and these
Were to be executed at two different times. And
to make life even more difficult for the command
post, one of the targets was to cover a circular
target area with the radius 400 m!
But this was not enous 40Most of the targets
'IT WILL BE A KILLING MATCH' - EL ALAMEIN
mere to be engaged with varying intensity, and
the impact area was to be modified by changes
of line and range by the guns (the command was
for instance 'sweep 10' and/or 'search 100
yards). For some targets, the plan called for one
gun per troop to fire smoke rounds, which
required these guns to be laid differently
compared with the other three guns of the troop.
So, farther from 'simplicity' one could not come!
A special problem was all the DF tasks to be
prepared around captured objectives. This had
sometimes to be quickly improvised. Simplicity
was then a must, but at the time of the offensive,
good methods for this had not yet been intro-
duced.
DE targets/tasks were recorded as rectangles
and each corner had to be fixed with coordinates
in tvelve digits. This at concerned field and
medium regiments, and the latter must register
points of impact a bit further away from the
infantry positions due to longer safety distance.
Batteries and troops had to disperse the fire such
that the whole rectangle was covered. All the cal-
culations were time consuming; in particular as
meticulous controls should be done in order to
make sure that no shells fell on friendly troops.
At El Alamein a new procedure for handling
o DE tasks was invented, the "Stonk'. The idea
was to record the position of a DF target with
one cordinate only, and by a bearing order the
direction of the rectangle. The fire was to cover
a length of 1,000 yards and a depth of around
200 yards.
Different units had initially their own size of
a 'Stonk', but this was standardised in 1943. A
regimental 'Stonk' should thereafter have a
length of 525 yards and a depth given by the
natural dispersion. This meant that two batteries
would have their fire beside each other and that
of the third battery was to be superimposed over
the whole length of the 'Stonk'. The direction of
it was now to be at right angle of the direction
ordered. At El Alamein, the rectangle was still to
be oriented in line with the ordered bearing.
Many lessons were certainly learned at El
Alamein as to how procedures could be made
simpler and implementation speeded up.
One million shells
Contrary to their opponents the British had an
almost unlimited supply of artillery ammunition.
This does not mean, however, that supply
problems would not happen in given tactical sit-
uations. Difficulties in transporting ammunition
due to terrain conditions and enemy shelling
could severely hamper the supply. Such interfer-
ence made it necessary during the first two days
of the El Alamein offensive to limit consumption
in the central and southern sectors to 40 rounds
per gun per day and give priority to the northern
rig. 19.9 More than one million cartridge cases had to be taken care of after the extensive firina by the 21
pounder guns during the twelve days long battle at El Alamein lOlmperial War Mucoum £ 10077
255
