GUNFIRE
German tank could fire with accuracy up to
around 2,000 yards.
A better gun, the 6-pounder, was on the
drawing table just before the war, but a strategic
decision was made to prioritise manufacture of
the 2-pounder, a decision that proved to be a
mistake. Not until November 1941 was manu-
facture of this new gun commenced; the first
would enter service just before the battle of El
Alamein in September and October 1942. The
6-pounder had a calibre of 2.2 inch (57mm) and
could penetrate armour twice as thick as the
2-pounder, around 74mm at a range of 1,000
yards. This was increased to 146mm in 1944
when sub-calibre, high velocity ammunition,
using a Sabot projectile, was introduced for the
first time.8? The gun soon became the standard
piece, and from 1943 the 25-pounders were not
used any more for direct anti-tank fire, except
occasionally, when attacked.
An even more powerful anti-tank gun, the
17-pounder, was designed in haste in 1940 and
was ready for supply to anti-tank regiments in
1942. This took place just in time for the great
allied invasion in North Africa in November
1942. A 'teething trouble' was that it lacked its
carriage, which had been delayed. This problem
was provisionally resolved on initiative by the
Managing Director of G. & J. Weir Ltd, who was
much involved in manufacture of 25-pounders,
as we have seen. He suggested that the new gun
initially should use the standard 25-pounder
carriage. This was accepted, and the temporary
solution was called the 17-pounder Hybrid Anti-
Tank gun. On pictures from the campaign in
North Africa this gun can be seen there. See also
Fig. 4-11.
The 17-pounder had the calibre 3.0-inch
(76.2-mm)
and was capable to penetrate
231-mm armour with high velocity ammunition
(Sabot) at a distance of 1,000 yards.83
This gun was also used for the Archer Self-
propelled anti-tank vehicle and a version of it in
Sherman Firefly tanks.
Anti-aircraft guns in ground role
Anti-aircraft guns were really important during
the first years of the war as protection for
artillery units and their guns, together with RAF
fighter squadrons. The gunners had their own
ight anti-aircraft guns and machine guns, but for
fire at higher altitudes they were dependent on
support from the Royal Artillery Anti-Aircraft
Regiments. Divisions normally had one Anti-
Aircraft Regiment equipped with the famous
Bofors 40mm automatic gun. This gun was in-
troduced by the Swedish industry just in time
before the war, when most countries had started
to re-arm their armies with modern anti-aircraft
capacity. It became an amazing export success
for the Swedish manufacturer.
Britain decided in 1937 to acquire this gun
and ordered 100 pieces with ammunition, spare
paris, etc. Another 1,000 guns, along with on
million shells, were contracted to be supplied the
following year.?4 Even more guns were needed,
Fig. 4-11 The 17-pounder anti-tank gun was introduced in the middle of the war and it was the most powerful anti-
tank weapon in the British Army. The gun was installed also in Sherman tanks and in a SP-carriage, the Archer (RAHT)
A DECISIVE REARMAMENT
so Britain entered into a license agreement with
Bofors giving British industry the right to man-
ufacture the gun. As in several other countries,
the gun became standard for British Light Anti-
Aircraft (LAA) Regiments one of which was
attached to a division. Such a regiment had, as
the anti-tank regiments, 48 guns divided into
four batteries. The main task was of course fire
against enemy aircraft as is illustrated in the
drawing, Fig. 4-12. It was however soon found
that due to its versatility it could also be used for
other tasks, for instance as an anti-tank gun
Another application taken advantage of already
at El Alamein in 1942 was to fire bursts of tracer
rounds to mark boundaries between attacking
formations or to show the direction of attacks.
For fire against enemy aircraft flying at very
high altitudes, which bombers often did, the new
3.7-inch (94-mm) heavy anti-aircraft gun was
provided. For protection of Army units in the
field the guns were organised in Heavy Anti-
Aircraft Regiments (HAA), which each one
comprised of 3-4 batteries. Each battery had two
troops that comprised four guns. In total, each
regiment thus comprised of 24-32 guns. As the
air threat gradually declined, many of the
regiments were converted to other formations,
but those left got more and more involved in fire
gainst ground targets. This was due to two
important characteristics of the gun. First, its
long firing range, up to more than 20,000 yards
(18,000m) at ground targets.$ Second, its time
fuze, which was perfect when firing at such
targets. For instance, when taking part in
counter-battery firing it was easy to arrange
airbursts with good accuracy at a suitable height
over the target. A third important characteristic
was its natural ability to fire at elevations above
45°, which for instance in Burma was an asset,
but also when firing against enemy mortar
positions, which normally were dug in into
mortar pits. Fig. 4-13 illustrates the gun in a
ground role in Burma.
We will later in the book see how light and
heavy anti-aircraft guns complemented the field
artery.
Fig. 4-13 The 3.7-inch anti-aircraft gun was standard
in heavy anti-aircraft regiments for fire against aircraft
at high altitudes. Its long range and suitable fuzes
made it also very useful for counter-battery fire and
fire against other distant ground targets. Such a gun
s here seen firing in a ground role in Burma (RAHT
Fig. 4-12 The main task for anti-aircraft units was to fire against enemy aircraft. However, when the threat from
the air declined, anti-aircraft guns were more and more used in a'ground role. This was also the case as
regards the Bofors 40-mm guns, which could be supporting the field artillery in fire preparations before large
infantry attacks. They could also be used for marking attack directions and boundaries between formations by
firing tracer bursts (drawing by J.T. Kenney/RAHT)
