GUNFIRE
RAF army-cooperating squadrons, in particular
those which were equipped with Lysander
aircraft. At the outbreak of war, there were four
such squadrons; another four had Blenheim
aircraft.216 Parham was determined to take
advantage of the possibilities they offered and
made sure that the necessary radio equipment
was at hand near the front. Certainly, he had
trained his batteries for this type of cooperation.
The foremost task on the part of the
Lvsanders was
photoreconnaissance,
then
artillery reconnaissance and fire control. In
France some tests were also done to use them as
bombers equipped with small bombs under the
wings. It was soon found that the aircraft was un-
suitable for all these tasks. It was too vulnerable.
Major Gordon-Finlayson reports that one
aircraft was shot down close to one of his troop
positions on 15 May. An entry in his diary for
04.00 on 17 May states that two Lysanders were
shot down that morning by 'Messerschitts' (note
his spelling)
Jack Parham had a similar observation:
There was some heavy air fighting this day and it
was about the last day [16th May?] we saw any
quantity of friendly planes. Several Lysanders
were shot down. Apropos of this, the Regt only
attempted two air shoots, neither of which was
completed as on both occasions the aircraft was
shot down almost immediatelv.217
Parham was, as we have seen, convinced that the
artillery should have its own air observers and
have quite a different plane. He wrote in his
account on 27 Mav
There had been repeated reports of tanks
between La Bassee and Givenchy earlier but they
were hard to verify and hard to observe. Here was
a perfect example of the need for an Air O.P. Had
we only one and could it have popped up for 2 to
3 minutes only, to a height of not more than 400
feet, any time this day, before the Boche attack
we should have known what was going
between the canal and the low GIVENCHY -
VIOLAINES ridge. The high-flying Lysanders
(had there been any left) would never have got
there. We could have picked a quiet moment and
done the job.218
Maybe it was the irony of fate that one of the first
trials with adequate planes and with gunner
officers as pilots had been allocated to France
and beginning just before the breakout of the
war. It became a quick return to England on 20
May (See also Chapter 6).
The artillery is once again concentrated
The entire BEF was in place behind river Escaut
on 20 May. The deployment at large has been
illustrated on Map 16-5, which also roughly
shows where the artillery was positioned. We
have followed a few of the regiments on their
onerous way to the Escaut-line. Most of the
other army units had experienced about the
same struggle as the gunners had been through.
It was not yet clear that a retreat to Dunkink
for evacuation would be unavoidable, but some
thoughts in that direction gradually emerged. In
an additional piece of paper to the war diary of
7 Field Regiment RA for 21 May it is said:
This morning C.O. warned senior officers to have
in mind future course of operations. Might
involve falling back on coastal bridgehead -
CALAIS - NIEUWPORT: Choice might arise
between heroic annihilation and evacuation of
personnel. National eugenics and public opinion
would probably demand latter. Officers to look
out maps and consider order of priority for jet-
soning stores if ordered.
The Germans had reached the Escaut-line in the
afternoon of 20 May already, but the British
gunners were ready. They had managed to get
there despite enemy interference, traffic jams
and lack of efficient traffic control. They had
rarely arrived as coherent regiments. Instead
batteries arrived, fairly well united, sometimes
single troops came, sometimes only a group of a
few guns There are many good examples d
young subalterns and NCOs acting independ-
ently and decisively to get the artillery in place.
As we have seen, singt the artillery intende
behind to support the last infantry units retreat-
ing. Hence, when artillery fired, it was often a
matter of just firing on troop targets, sometimes
also on battery targets, seldom were regimental
concentrations firears, seldom were regimenta
units often had to fire somewhat at random
without appropriate ballistic and geodetic data.
Jack Parham gives a striking example:
Finally, we had to face a night get-away over un-
reconnoitred country a night get-away intricate
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD - ACROSS THE CHANNEL
nature. It was the most depressing evening I have
ever spent in my life. (The whole area round Bde
HQ was well and truly blocked with traffic and I
could not get the vehicles I wanted up to my
forward HQ.)
However, thanks largely to magnificent de-
termination and 'drive' on the part of Capt
Lamont and of the other FOO (Tom Mead I
believe) we got something sorted out. About 2300
hrs there was a call from the Infantry for
defensive fire - There was a long and ominous
silence from the guns!
this the worst thing that
can well happen to a gunner..
..The Brigadier
asked what had gone wrong - I couldn't say.
Then, very late but incredibly welcome,
came the sound of one Troop firing over our
heads at Gun Fire. It was the best noise I'd heard
for years.
Lamont, faced with the problem of an SOS
with a Bty which hadn't really got settled in, had
taken a chance off the 1/50 000 maps and was
pushing it over - I waited anxiously fearing the
frightful news that we were shooting into our
infantry... Or at best that they would say that the
shells were miles plus and ineffective. The phone
from the Bn's leading Coy buzzed and they said
that the fire was grand and just where required -
It was a relief almost beyond words!219
When arriving at river Escaut, the artillery was
immediately engaged in new fighting. And now
there was shortage of ammunition, at least at the
regiments supporting the frontal divisions at the
river Dyle. For the regiments of the 3rd Infantry
Division, ammunition expenditure was restricted
to 5 rounds per gun and day! They were ordered
not to fire at SOS targets with more than two
rounds per gun from one troop per battery
during the night, indeed not much for stopping
a decisively attacking enemy.
Artillery units belonging to rear divisions of
the BEF had on the other hand plenty of ammu-
nition and also took advantage of that.
The counter-attack at Arras - no role for
the artillery
The counter-attack at Arras was launched some
50km southwest of river Escaut. As we have seen
this was not big an event for the British artillery.
Only one battery was attached to each of the two
attacking battle groups. They were allotted from
92 Field Regiment RA. No overall artillery plan
was produced, neither at divisional nor brigade
level. It is striking what is said in the regiment's
war diary for 21 May, 13.00 hours:
Regt. Supported 150 I.B. in quickly planned
attack round S.W. of ARRAS. [...] Advance went
well at first, but French on right withdrew and
allowed a German tank on our right flank to pass
Btys not called on to fire until late in day. 22
The coordination with French units that were to
participate in the area was not effective, at least
not as far as the French artillery was concerned.
The weak artillery support probably was the
reason why the British attack slowed down and
eventually was stopped and the attackers forced
to retreat. This shows again that commanders at
the beginning of the war hardly had their
thoughts on
availing
themselves
or heavy
artillery concentrations. Later during the war it
became normal practice to take advantage of the
artillery forcefully.
Farndale's opinion about the role played by
the artillery is not either merciful:
The guns were not used well; not enough was
assembled and there is no evidence of a major
fireplan or plans
for subsequent artillerv
attacks. 221
Farndale is also quoting Rommel who is believed
to have said: The British attack seemed to lack
any co-ordinated artillery fireplan?222 But he is
giving the credit for his own success wher
stopping the British attack to his own artillery.
The divisional artillery commander of the
50th Infantry Division issued an operational
order after the withdrawal on 22 May by which
he tried to include French artillery in the divi-
sional plans. The Commanding Officer of 92
Field Regiment RA became the leader of an
artillery group in which no less than three
French regiments were included. The group was
to support the defence operation of 17 Infantry
Brigade. In the middle area an RHA battery
together with a few French artillery detach
ments, was given the task to support 'Petreforce'
- the garrison in Arras. To the right, 150 Infantry
Brigade was to be supported by the 72 Field
Regiment RA-Group, which included 9 Field
Regiment RA.
In the order, the Group Commanders were
assigned the task to prevare fireplans in cooper-
ation with the respective infantry commander
187
