GUNFIRE
only three medium regiments in place in
October 1942 in the northern sector. And as
mentioned, no heavy guns
at all. Scarcelv
observed in literature is that the regiment of the
1st Free French Brigade in the South had an
extra troop of four 5.5-inch guns.314
We can now provide a summary of the
British artillery resources available to the 8th
Army when the major offensive was launched on
23 October 1942:
832 25-pounders
'Priest' (105-mm guns)
4.5-inch guns
5.5-inch guns
i.e. in total 908 guns.
In addition to the guns listed, there were another
31 guns in reserve or in repair. It can be noted
also that the new 4.2-inch mortar had been
provided for the first time. These were operated
by an RE sapper company and organised in
three sections with six mortars each. Two of the
sections were allotted to the Australian division.
This was on an experimental basis and it would
be a long time before these mortars were given
their definite place in infantry units, and an even
longer time before the use of mortars was sys-
tematically coordinated with that of the artillery.
The artillery Order of Battle is presented in
Appendix 2.315 The geographical dispersion of
deployments in the evening of 23 October 1942
is illustrated in Map 19-4, along with the
German-Italian artillery resources, as had been
located by the British. We can see that the British
had a superiority of 2:1 in terms of field artillery,
but as mentioned above, in terms of medium and
heavy guns the superiority was on the Axis side.
Looking at the area in the North where the main
attack was to take place, the British superiority
in field guns was approximately 3:1
As we have seen above, the British survey
and intelligence resources were limited; only one
survey regiment was available at El Alamein. We
will later see how the scarce resources actually
were employed. Later in the war.
normal
standard to be was one survey regiment allotted
to each Corps.
The artillery of the four attacking divisions
of XXX Corps were deployed
close as
possible to the front line due to the limited range
of the field guns. The location
is shown
Map 19-6. The positions of the three medium
regiments are also shown on the map. The
enemy's light artillery (75-105mm) was in range
of these but also from some of the field
regiments. As the range of the field regiments
only was up to around 10-11km, the enemy
medium and heavy batteries were out of range
from the initial positions of field regiments. Only
British batteries with 4.5-inch guns could in
most cases be used for counter-battery fire
against such artillery,316 This made the partici-
pation of the RAF
in the battle even more
important.
The planned deployment of artillery could
not be revealed too early, but was prepared in
advance by the surveyors and through prepara-
tion of gun pits. Work had to be performed at
night. Ammunition was stocked in the gun pits
by the gun crews.. Telephone cables were laid
and dug in. All preparations were carefully cam-
ouflaged. Final deployment forwards could only
be performed the day before the attack.
Intelligence status good
During the battles that took place at El Alamein,
in August/September 1942, the survey resources
were not used at all. When the battle was over,
however, a period of intensive work commenced
to collect information about the location of the
German
and Italian positions, in particular
artillery positions. Besides extensive patrolling
by the infantry, the intelligence resources of the
artillery were used, as were air resources
1 Composite Battery RA established a
"Long Base' along most of the XXX Corps front
line. A "Short observation Base sCorp estont
lished in the XIII Corps area to be taken over by
2 Composite Battery RA when that battery had
been reorganised and was ready for action. A
sound ranging base for six microphones was es-
tablished in the North from the coast south-
wards. For unknown reasons it was a fairly short
around 6km.317
The accuracy when
measuring against most of the German and
Italian batteries was not very good with such a
short base. Only a few location swore found with
the accuracy needed for counter-battery fire
without preceding ranging. But when approxi-
mate location had been made, the locations
could be fixed exactly from air photographs.
1 Composite Battery
openea a
sound
ranging base in the XIII Corps area. This too,
was later to be transferred to 2 Composite
Battery. The length of the " Long Base' and good
240
'IT WILL BE A KILLING MATCH' - EL ALAMEIN
observation conditions made locating here more
accurate than in the North.
2 Composite Battery took over the Long
Base in the South established by 1 Composite
Battery in September. It was then extended with
two new observation towers/posts and one of the
first towers was relocated 318 Good observation
opportunities towards the enemy batteries in the
South had now been arranged.
The sound ranging base established in the
South by 1 Composite Battery in support of XIII
Corps was taken over by 2 Composite Battery
on 18 October 1942. The 'S' Troop was made
responsible. 31ยบ The troop had been trained a little
on a sound ranging concept based on radio link
communication instead of traditional use of
telephone lines between the microphones and
the evaluation centre. The troop was now ready
to use the new technique.
We can on Map 19-7 see the location of the
various observation bases. They covered the
whole front line from the coast in the North
down to the southernmost deployments. In this
context we will not forget that in addition to
these qualified intelligence resources we had also
all the
ordinary
(FOO/OPOs). These
fire
observation
were very important
sources for information about the enemy's
actions and deployments, not least the artillery
deployments. Besides direct observations into
enemy-held territory, the firing against enemy
targets, which were going on almost all the time,
was a good source for intelligence.
Observation posts established by the Flash
Spotters were in most cases arranged in high
towers built by the sappers. This had become
normal practice in 1941 at Tobruk and the
results were so good that such towers were used
at El Alamein as well (Fig. 6-10).
The open terrain and the good observation
conditions made possible by means of these ob-
servation towers made it easy to locate enemy
artillery. The Italian-German guns were at the
time normally using a propellant, which created
a distinctive muzzle flash, which acted as a
distinct advantage to the British flash spotters. A
change to flash-less propellant was, however,
already under way.
In order not to get the enemy batteries
already located to re-deploy as a consequence of
counter-battery
"silent policy'
enforced during the final two weeks before the
offensive. The implication of this policy was that
British artillery should
not be engaged in
counter-battery programmes unless this became
absolutely necessary. 320
Air reconnaissance was also an extremely
important intelligence source. Numerous air
photographs of German positions were taken. As
mentioned, these photographs in combination
with the locations fixed by the observations
resources of the Composite Batteries gave a
complete picture of all the enemy artillery de-
ployments
Improved routines for
submission of
evaluated air photographs made it possible even-
tually to give the gunners correct data for
counter-battery
Tire
within
hours as
compared with the previous 36 hours, 321
For collection of intelligence data when the
battle was already going on, it would have been
necessary to have army-cooperation resources
with adequate aircraft (Arty/R procedures), but
such resources were as yet not available. Neither
were enough fighter resources available for pro-
tection of such aircraft.
Air Observation Posts were not provided.
Such resources were implemented for the first
time by the 1st British Army when advancing
into Algeria in November 1942 after Operation
Torch landings. Jack Parham was, as mentioned,
artillery commander and was a strong advocate
of the use of AOPs with suitable aircraft.
During the coming battle, the communica
tion systems of the artillery would as usual
assume an important role for collection and dis-
tribution of information of a tactical nature.
Besides telephone lines, built with threefold or
sometimes fourfold redundancy, the gunners
had two modern wireless sets, the WS No. 18
and WS No. 19, as a complement to the older
WS No. 11 used for basic artillery communica-
tion. With these resources at hand, the possibili-
ties for good communication between the
gunners and the infantry and armour command-
ers to be supported by artillery
tire were
improved.
In summary, the intelligence status was
extremely good when the offensive was to be
launched. The accuracy of located enemy
batteries was good enough for the counter
battery
programmes
planned.
All
enemy
positions from the front line to a denth of 5-6km
were known exactly.
Survevors were to be delegated to the New
Zealand Division and the Scottish Division
