Large amounts of artillery landed
At Gold beach, XXX Corps was to land the 50th
(Northumbrian) Infantry Division.
At lunc
beach, I Corps was to land the 3rd Canadian
Infantry Division and at Sword beach the 3rd
British
Infantry Division.
The two former
divisions were each to land two brigade groups
beside each other, the latter one brigade group.
The three divisions were reinforced with one
armoured brigade each and some special addi-
tional units for clearing the beaches close to the
German beach defence positions including
mines. Special attacks were also planned for
some brigade groups with Commando units
from the Royal Marines and army commandos
These units were among the first to land on D
Day (see Map 20-2).
It was important to get much artillery on
shore the first day. It was deemed difficult to land
the normal divisional artillery under the chaotic
conditions expected, i.e. towed 25-pounders. It
was therefore decided that only SP guns should
be landed during the first eight hours. This
meant that the divisions had to exchange on a
temporary basis their normal regiments with
towed guns to such with SP guns. The grouping
thus became as illustrated on Map 20-3:
50th (Northumbrian) Infantry Division
86 Field Regiment RA, 90 Field Regiment
RA and 147 Field Regiment RHA
3rd Canadian Infantry Division
12 Field Regiment RCA, 13 Field
Regiment RCA, 14 Field Regiment RCA
and 19 Field Regiment RCA
3rd British Infantry Division
7 Field Regiment RA, 33 Field Regiment
RA and 76 Field Regiment RA
The
three
first mentioned
regiments
had
'Sexton' SP guns (25-pounders)
and all the
others 'Priest' SP guns (105-mm)
Rearmament
British
regiments
"Sextons' of all regiments with SP guns had been
commenced before the D-Dav and was to
continue during the summer and autumn 1944.
But some of the regiments above were to get
towed 25-pounders instead of their 'Priests' later
during the summer, i.e. back to normal practice
for the divisional artillery of infantry divisions.
This change was to take place when the 'Priest'
ammunition allotted for the invasion and the
subsequent battle of Normandy had
been
GUNFIRE
consumed. Their 'Priests' were then to be
stripped of their guns and become open tracked
vehicles for transport of infantry; they were
thereafter called
'Kangaroos'.
That process
started at the end of July 1944.
Besides the field regiments, 5 AGRA,
which supported XXX Corps, was to land an
American battalion, which had been placed
under
command of this AGRA. 346
artillery plan called also for landing of a first
medium regiment with towed 5.5-inch guns
late on D-Day. It was 53 Medium Regiment
RA that belonged to 4 AGRA, which was in
support of I Corps. The American battalion
and the British medium regiment were to be
followed by other units from these AGRAS
during the subsequent days.
A special artillery resource, also landed
during the first day of the operation, was the
Royal Marines Armoured Support Group. It
comprised 1 Royal Marines Armoured Regiment
under command of XXX Corps and 2 Royal
Marines
Armoured Regiment allotted to 1
Corps. To the latter was attached an independent
battery, 5 Independent Royal Marines Armoured
Battery.
This support group was equipped with 80
Centaur tanks armed with a 95mm howitzer
divided into 20 troops of the group's five
batteries.
Twenty
Sherman tanks used as
command posts were included. The batteries
were to be used for direct support of the
Commando units and had no observation
parties for indirect fire. They could, however,
link up with field regiments and participate in
indirect fire to some extent that way. see
Fig. 20-0
If we include the Centaur guns no less than
352 SP guns were to be landed during D-Day
up to the late afternoon, indeed a remarkable
resource and an impressive achievement.
These were the guns luded from the sea.
but we will also note that cantee it came by
air. The 6th Airborne
Division had a light
regiment
attached,
Air-Landing Light
Regiment RA. This was trainire on transport to
the battlefield in Horsa gliders. But a significant
shortage of such gliders still esisted which made
it impossible to transport more than one of the
regiment's three batteries to Normandy on
D-Day, i.e. only 8 guns were landed.
the latter resource was of course not suffi
cient for support of the whole airborne division.
260
A NEW FRONT IS OPENED - NORMANDY
Hence, it was planned to take advantage of the
three field regiments of the 3rd Division as re-
inforcement as these were to be landed the first
day. From their initial deployment just inside
Sword beach, these regiments would be able to
protect the bridgehead of the airborne division
against counter-attacks from the East and South.
In order to facilitate this kind of support effi-
ciently, extra observation and liaison resources
had to be provided for the airborne division. A
unique fire observation unit was therefore
organised in haste, 2 Forward Observation Unit
(POU). FOPs could be allotted to all airborne
brigades from that unit. They could communi-
cate with liaison
detachments
the field
regiments of the
3rd Division by
means of
wireless sets. 76 Field Regiment RA was the
regiment to give support first to the 'Red Berets'
under this arrangement. This
organisational
model was to be applied for other airborne op-
erations later as we will see.
lo further
increase opportunities for
efficient observation and control of artillery fire
it was an endeavour to fly AOPs from England
to Normandy as early as simple landing strips
had been secured. It was hoped that this could
take place on D-Day and that each Corps would
have a minimum resource of at least one Flight,
ie. four Auster aircraft. Observation of fire from
ground OPs was not easy due to the terrain and
dense vegetation, in particular hedges. Counter-
bombardment
against enemy
arallery
and
mortars would thus be severely hampered
without the AOPs. As things developed, the first
Austers arrived on D + 2.
It is to be noted that the artillery intelligence
resources, 'sound rangers' and 'flash spotters',
had to wait for the bridgehead to become
enlarged after a couple of days' fighting, before
they could be deployed. Survey into a theatre
grid for landed batteries was, however, given
high priority and the first surveyors went ashore
about one and a half hour after those soldiers
landing first. Another priority task for them was
to provide Landing Craft Guns with necessary
survey data when running towards the beaches
The surveyors could avail themselves of a
large
number
of easilv
identifiable
"Trig
Points' 347 The British soon got access also to a
German grid covering the whole of Normandy,
which could be used as a 'theatre grid'. Fixation
of bearings was initially done by measurement
against the sun.
'Flash
Spotting
Troops' and
'Sound
Ranging Troops' were landed gradually during
the first two weeks. 348 A first 'Short Base' was es-
tablished by 4 Survey Regiment RA near the
village St. Leger at the road between Caen and
Bayeux on D+2 already. A few days later a first
'Long Base' with four observation posts was es-
tablished. The first 'Sound Ranging Base' was in
action from 10 June 349
Now back to the landings on D-Day.
Fig. 20.2 One of the 80 Centaur tanks equipped with a 95-mm howitzer that were landed for direct support of
the Commando formations taur tanks equipped with a casionally they were attached to Field Regiments as re-
inforcement; the Marine sand the infantry divisions, oheasbelonged, lacked own resources for observatior
and control of indirect artilleport formations, to whition sledge which all landed SP guns towed when landing
on the beaches (Wikimedia)
