12. Artillery Battle Technique and Tactics
When everything that could be calculated
had been done - ranging complements
As seen one of the preparations to be done
before firing could commence was calculation of
adjustments to gun laving in order to take into
account all known factors influencing the shell
trajectorv. the
Correction of the Moment
(CoM). Despite all calculations made, however,
a remaining uncertainty as to the possibilities to
hit the target could not be avoided. Not least
quickly changing weather conditions added to
this uncertainty. Hence, a control by fire had to
be done. This could be aimed at checking the
definite value of 'CoM'. In such a case firing
could be done against a point ahead with well-
fixed coordinates, a 'Datum Point', provided it
was easy to observe the fire against it. When the
fire had been gradually corrected, so as to get the
impact right at the 'Datum Point', it was easy to
calculate backwards getting the corrections to be
used when all guns were to fire in the vicinity.
provided they were all surveyed into the same
grid. Targets to be engaged should not be too far
away from the 'Datum Point', say maximum
1,000 yards. Otherwise the CoM might be
different
Another prerequisite for a direct hit upon
the target was that its exact locations, i.e. its co-
ordinates, had been fixed. The
conditions
discussed were not always at hand. Then (fire)
ranging had to be applied. Once this had been
completed the target had been fixed and trajec-
tory corrections had been determined. All that
was needed for hitting the target by all partici-
pating guns had been done. The resulting 'CoM'
could be used for fire for effect upon other
nearby targets fixed in relation to the former.
Before looking further into
the ranging
technique, we will notice a reflection made by
Major W.P. Lunn-Rochliffe. Ranging should not
be just a routine. He presented in the Royal
Artillery Journal his view on this based on his ex-
perience from Tunisia and Italy:
The gunner is a 'rep' in direct support of another
arm must not only interpret his commander's re-
quirements for fire, but be capable of discussing
plans and suggesting solutions whenever called
upon for advice. Then, of course, the gunner
must be thoroughly proficient in all technical
matters: the O.P. officer who does no more that
follow the rules of ranging is no better than 'a
good plain cook'. A thoroughly proficient O.P
officer, with his better knowledge and wider ex-
perience, will have all kinds of tricks up his sleeve
with which to solve his problems. 141
Well, certainly a relevant comment. Ranging was
the primary method for compensation of poor
ballistic and geodetic data. However, it could be
tactically counter-productive and in such situa-
tions other methods from the palette of different
techniques had to be selected.
If surprise was the priority, it might be better
to cover a larger area with fire, which was not
accurate enough, rather than trying to obtain
maximum precision. Of course this required
good availability of ammunition. Surprising fire
without ranging was called Predicted Fire.
Ranging on to the target was always the first
choice for achieving a target round and had to
be mastered by all OPOs, not only the skilled
professionals but also the lesnot only hanging
or more normally Registration, was done in au
cordance with standard procedures, something
like this to follow.
The OPO decided which gun or guns in his
Troop that he wanted to be engaged for ranging:
Normally he selected a 'Section', i.e. two guns,
of the troop.
or only one or as a third Section, ie. wu gun,
When the first alternative was considered 10
be the best, he normally selected the right section
of his troop, as the richtmost gun, the 'pivol
gun, was one of the grishimost scion. the mo
guns were furthermore in the middle of the
battery position if they belonged to the left troop.
When the ranging commenced the OPO gave
the order troop lage rimenced the 0P0. Far
If only one gun was to be used he gave the order
troop target, Nas to be used he save thire o
126
ARTILLERY BATTLE TECHNIQUES AND TACTICS
likewise for other guns. We may now recall that
the dial sights had a line scale graduated in
degrees and minutes. The elevation scales for
different charges were graduated in distance to
target (range) and not degrees. It was an
ambition that switches, i.e. correction of line and
range, should be applied directly at the sight
obviating further recalculations.
Before the firing could commence the OPO
had to give the line to the target from the guns.
One method was map references (coordinates),
another method was ordering the line relative to
"zero line', for instance zero, six degrees, 20
minutes, angle of sight 25 minutes elevation'.
The OPO rarely was positioned just under
the line from guns to target, his observation
direction formed an angle against the firing
direction. See Fig. 12-1.
& Target (T)
Guns (G
Fig. 12-1 An example of ranging with two guns (a
Section). After each pair of rounds, as here are given
a number, the Observation Officer had to order
changes to the guns relative the guns -target bearing
(GT) and not relative his observation direction (OT).
This was not easy when the angle between these two
bearings was large. In order to facilitate the impact
location he has here changed in such a way that the
impact of the second pair of rounds is close to the
ine GT. After this he has changed along this line with
a pair of rounds on each side of the target, gradually
decreasing the width of the 'fork' around the target
until target impact has been accomplished (Author)
Despite this angle he had to give his correc-
tion of the fall of shot relative the latter direction,
i.e. the 'GT' line. As an example: 'zero, more two
degrees, add 200. The first was the change of line
and the latter change of range.
A target's coordinates and height to be
ranged were passed to the 'troop command post'
by means of its coordinates and height. Its
position was there marked at the 'Artillery
Board', from which line and range were
extracted. To these data the 'CoM' corrections
were added and laving data were then passed to
the guns. When ready the gun, or the guns
ordered, fired a first round. If the target had been
correctly fixed (coordinates) and 'CoM' also was
correct the shell impacts) would take place right
at the target apart from a deviation due to the
unavoidable dispersion. If a direct hit took place,
the ranging could be suspended and fire for
effect by all guns needed could be ordered. In
such a case the target data could be recorded and
a number given. This was called registration.
As discussed, the ideal situation was rarely
at hand. Some uncertainties in laying data
normally could not be avoided. This caused a
deviation of the impact from the correct
position. In difficult terrain such as woods or. in
particular, the jungle, it could happen that
nothing could be seen of the ground impact (fall
of shot) of the first round(s). The method then
to be applied was 'bracketing' along the 'GT" line
or across of it. In order to obtain the bracket the
OPO had to correct line and range one or a few
times till a bracket around the target had been
established, i.e. he had observed rounds on both
sides of the target This was then made shorter,
for instance halved. By such changes the OPO
ended with having the target in the middle of a
short bracket, which meant that he had fixed the
target. It the angle between his observation line
and the gun line was small it might be necessary
to 'bracket' both along this line and across it, or
making brackets along the direction of observa
tion, i.e. 'OT' in Fig. 12-1. The figure illustrates
ranging ov means of such a 'bracketing with a
section of two guns along the 'GT' line. The
number of the afterent rounds indientes how the
impacts gradually were brought closer to the
target. Rounds "4' and '5' were so close to the
target that the ranging was sufficient. It was now
bossible to tire for ettect or lust to record the
Target for use later
Unon comoletion of the
ranging. the
