GUNFIRE
of this. The 50th (Northumberland) Division was
also planned to capture an area north and east of
Arnhem including the bridge at Doesburg
Reintorcement of the divisions mentioned was to
be the role given to the 52nd (Lowland) Division
just north of Arnhem
The operation
plan was based on the
assumption that XXX Corps was able to reach
Arnhem at D+2, in any case not later than D+3
A prerequisite for this timetable was that all
major bridges, in particular the largest, could be
captured intact. If this proved not to be possible
unel
alternative plan
required
the Guards
Division to spread out along the shore of the
river where the bridges) had been blown up.
The task assigned to the 43rd (Wessex) Division
was then to attack across the river to capture a
bridgehead.
Protected by
this
a couple of
temporary bridges should be built to make it
possible for the tanks of the Guards Division to
cross the river. The Wessex Division was trained
for attacks across large defended rivers, as was
demonstrated at river Seine in August 1944. To
make it possible large stocks of bridge and ferry
material had been provided and detailed plans
drawn up as to how these resources would be
used at the different rivers. In addition to this
material, each brigade of the Wessex Division
also brought 100 amphibious vehicles.
It is remarkable however that no plans seem
to have been prepared for the relief of the 1s
Airborne Division should one or several of the
large bridges have been demolished, and the
advance of XXX
delayed.
Corps thus
been much
Operation
Market
Garden was
finally
approved by Eisenhower at a heated meeting
with Montgomery in Brussels on 10 September.
D-Day was fixed at 17 September and detailed
planning commenced immediately as was the
issuing of orders. Or more correctly, re-planning
commenced, as much had already been done by
the headquarters concerned. Operation Comet
had just before the meeting been planned but
been
cancelled. This operation was a mini
version of Operation Market Garden with only
the Ist Airborne Division and the Polish brigade
as participating actors.
And a bit earlier in
August, Operation Linnet had been planned
with the same formations participating as those
now to
be employed in Operation Market
Garden. The 1st Airborne Division had since
Normandy prepared at least 15 operations that
all had been cancelled in the last minute. So
much planning material and data were avallable
in the afternoon of 10 September. 367
'A bridge too far' became a familiar expres-
sion which also became the title of Cornelius
Rvan's
well-known
book about Operation
Market Garden, which in its turn formed the
basis for the grand Hollywood film also with the
same title from the 1970s. It has been much
debated who uttered the sentence in the first
place. Often General Browning is said to be the
'father', but many others have stated that this is
not true and nothing but a myth. Browning s
Chief of Staff has, however, emphatically stated
that his boss at a meeting with Montgomery
when
asked
what he
thought about the
operation had said that it was feasible, but that
he was afraid that it was 'a bridge too far' 368 It
may be as it was, but it later turned out to be
correct, as realities have shown. Now, let us look
at the artillery planning of the two separate sub-
operations.
The artillery plan - Operation Market
It might be worthwhile first to recall that a
British airborne division had one light artillery
regiment
with
24 mountain howitzers of
American manufacture,
Or, if vou like.
landing howitzers. The British transported the
guns in gliders, which had the capacity to carry
also the towing vehicles, one Jeep per gun, and
ammunition trailers. The regiment had the
normal organisation with three batteries, each
with two troops, i.e. 24 guns in total. On the first
day of this operation the regimental commander
with staff and two batteries were to be landed,
using 57 Horsa gliders for the transport to the
battlefield. On the second day the remaining
third battery and a few other regimental
resources would come in 33 thor regimental
thus 90 Horsas were needed for the artillery
exclusive
anti-tank
anti-aircraft
resources. The regiment was co antiaircra
Lieutenant Colonel W.FK. 'Sheriff' Thompson
(Fig. 21-2)
On the first day 1 and 3 Battery should be
landed. Both of them were under command of
the divisional artillery comme ander comma Lit of
tenant Colonel Robert Loder-Symonds, who
had decided to keep the regiment under his
command when all were in position. 369 But he
ordered 1 Battery to suppositi nicanding
Brigade and 3 Battery to support i Parachute
Fig. 21-2 Lieutenant Colonel W.F.K. 'Sheriff'
Thompson, Commanding Officer 1 Airlanding Light
Regiment RA (RAHT)
Brigade. When 2 Battery arrived later on D+2 it
was ordered to support 4 Parachute Brigade.
When Loder-Symonds
presented
his
artillery plan on 12 September it was based on
the assumption that the airborne division had
captured not only the road bridge at Arnhem but
also a large part of the city area, as shown on
Map 21-2. The only arillery regiment available
had to be deployed at a fairly central position
with its fire zone covering 360°, i.e. around the
horizon. The site selected was just north of the
shore of river Rhine where the railway from
Niimegen was turning eastwards towards the city
centre (on the Brigade order the coordinates
Were given as 712777). During the initial phases
of the battle a few more deployments would be
needed, the first one just east of the landing
zones, near Wolfheze.
Although Loder-Symonds wanted to keep
all the regiment under his command it was
necessary first to put 3 Battery under command
of 1 Parachute Brigade during the brigade's
advance to the road bridge at Arnhem. The guns,
with a maximum range of around 9km, would
otherwise be unable to reach targets near the
1 Battery should remain deployed near the
landing zone and suppem A reading neig the,
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
which was given the task to protect parts of the
landing zones until 4 Parachute Brigade had
arrived on D+1.
Also under Loder-Symond's
command
there were two anti-tank batteries with 12 and
16 6-pounder guns respectively. Both batteries
also had eight 17-pounder anti-tank guns to be
kept as a reserve near divisional headquarters.
Initially, command of the batteries was to be
decentralised but gradually centralised later
in order to
establish a coherent and well-
coordinated defence against tanks.
As it was expected that the airborne division
would be relieved within 2-3 days it was not
anticipated that very much artillery ammunition
(75-mm) had to
be brought to Arnhem
particularly as daily re-supply from air (by
means of
parachutes)
was planned. These
considerations resulted in the decision that each
gun would bring 137 rounds, most of which
were high explosive (HE). Only 6 anti-tank and
6 smoke rounds per gun were included. 370
The fire observation and control resources
were limited due to the regimental organisation
and only one divisional regiment being available.
Normally troop commanders performed this
role. While an ordinary infantry division had
three regiments and thus 18 troop commanders
to be engaged as FOOs for all the battalions, the
airborne division here had only six. As we have
seen (Chapter 7 and 20) it had been decided that
airborne divisions should be allotted extra fire
observation resources organised as Forward
Observation Units (FOU) comprising several
observation and liaison parties. The latter were
employed at headquarters and artillery units
expected to be available for support from the
outside. The FOUs were allotted when airborne
operations had to be launched. Observation
parties
tor
parachute
battalions
were
accompanying them and thus dropped by
parachute. Others were transported to the
battlefield by gliders.
The FOU-resources were mainly needed for
securing efficient radio communication between
the air-landed units and the external artillery
units when these came close enough to be in
range for support.
In the plan for Operation Market Garden
the 1st Airborne Division was allotted eleven
FOOs from 1 FOU.371 Another four and the
commanding officer of 1 FOU were positioned
for liaison with the artillery headquarters of
