Major Munford sent the message:
We have been blown off the top Storey. We are
quite O.K. We have killed 300 or 400 Germans
for the loss of 30. The bridge is blocked with
German half-tracks, armoured cars etc. We need
small arms ammunition.?
This was the last contact with the bridge. The
fighting there ceased during the night and the
bridge was once again in German hands.
At the same time as the regiment engaged
targets near the
road bridge, fire was also
requested in support of 4 Parachute Brigade and
1st Air-landing Brigade to the Northwest. These
calls were answered as well as possible with
regard to the limited availability of artillery am-
munition. Both pre-planned fire and repeated
fire against opportunity targets were executed in
support of these units doing their best to press
on towards the Arnhem bridge
When the attacks from the western side
increased during the following days the guns
were mostly firing in that direction, in particular
to help the Border Regiment battalion engaged
there. The light regiment also had to fire a lot to
GUNFIRE
protect its own positions. In addition this was
needed to defend the positions where glider
pilots were engaged. Much of manhandling of
the guns was needed when firing around the
horizon was necessary. An earlier diorama at the
Airborne Museum, Ooosterbeek, Fig. 21-1,
illustrated gunners in action near the Oosterbeek
Church.
No external survey resources had been
flown in, so the regiment had to take care of all
survey actions themselves. With the tight deploy-
ment near Oosterbeek Church this was not a big
problem, and the church must have been an
excellent 'trig point' for quick fixing of the gun
positions and bringing the guns parallel relative
the zero line. The accuracy of fire has been much
testified, which in this battle was extremely
important as the points of impact were always
very close to the positions of own troops. Good
maps contributed to the good results. Topo-
graphical maps available in the scale 1:25,000
proved to be very accurate. Getting correct co-
ordinates of targets was not a problem, at least
not because of map quality.
Shortage of ammunition gradually increased
when re-supply flights failed.
Most of the
Fig. 21-8 Most of the re-supplies of artillery ammunition were, as other types of re-supply, dropped at wrong
Foc. 21-8 Most of the re-supplies of artillery ammunition were, as other types of restact the attention of suppy
aircraft pilots (©Imperial War Museum BU 1119)
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
supplies were dropped on pre-planned dropping
zones, which now were in German hands. All
attempts to draw this to the attention of the
Royal Air Force failed. The consequences
became severe both for the aircraft and the
batteries in much need of more ammunition,
food, and spare parts etc. (Fig. 21-8).
In total large amounts of 75-mm shells, fuzes
and cartridges were flown in. But large quantities
of wrong type of
75-mm shells were also
dropped. Due to flight restrictions and bad
weather almost nothing could be dropped during
the final four days. In total 1,220 shells of the
correct type were taken to Arnhem during the
first four days and on the sixth, out of which 120
were smoke shells and 90 anti-tank shells. 390
The
quantities that could be collected during the
various days were as follows:
18 September
80
19 September
250
20 September
21 September
22 September
400
23 September
24 September
160
25 September
Total
1.90
As we have seen before, each gun had brought
137 shells to Arnhem, so with the re-supplied
shells, around 190 shells could be fired by each
gun during the nine days of battle. For the final
days only around 45 shells per gun were left.
At their positions near Oosterbeek Church
the gunners were exposed to almost continuous
shelling from enemy artillery and mortars day
and night. Towards the end they were also under
fire from tanks and tracked assault guns, not to
mention infiltrating snipers. Despite this they
managed to maintain their own activities at the
guns and command posts. When not firing the
guns they fought as infantry and also took part
in the hunting of enemy armoured vehicles
among houses and gardens. Besides their anti-
tank guns, many carried anti-tank weapons of
the 'PIAT' type.
Special actions had to be taken by the
commander of the light regiment, Lieutenant
Colonel W.F.K. 'Sheriff' Thompson. Surviving
soldiers from the battalions that had tried to
reach the road bridge but been stopped in the
heavy fighting retreated back in groups, often
demoralised and without any commanding
officer or NCO. On approaching the church
they
were
decisively
halted
Sheriff
Thompson, sometimes at point-blank threat by
his Sten Gun. He sorted them into units they
belonged to and deployed them in defence
positions facing East. He then arranged for them
to get food and water from the light regiment's
stock in the church. This improvised defence
force was called Thompson Force and later,
when he was wounded, Lonsdale Force after the
officer then taking over as commanding officer.
What had happened further south?
The Guards Division head north
On the second day, Monday 18 September, the
Guardsmen fought their way into Eindhoven
where the American parachutists had now
arrived. This made it possible to bring forward
material for a field bridge at Son, where the con-
struction immediately commenced. This was
ready for tanks to pass at 06.00 hours 19
September. This in its turn made a quick
advance possible via Veghel and Grave to the
southern edge of Nijmegen. The Irish Guards
reached it in the evening of this day. But the
Germans had had time to bring forward rein-
forcements and very hard fighting followed. To
advance into the city itself became impossible.
The leading units of XXX Corps had now
covered around 85km and 'only' 15 remained to
Arnhem. A critical obstacle was the large road
bridge at Nijmegen, which was in German
hands. Also the second important bridge, the
railway bridge, was controlled by the Germans.
After a night of preparations the Grenadier
Guards Group launched an attack on the city
defence well coordinated with the American
505th Parachute Regiment. In order to capture
not only the city but also the two vital bridges, a
spectacular crossing of river Waal was part of the
plan. The 3rd Battalion of the 504th Parachute
Regiment paddled across under murderous
shelling by German artillery and mortars. Many
casualties were the price. British tanks supported
the American, as did the still small artillery
resource avallable. In the evening both bridges
were in the hands of the Americans and the
British. And remarkably enough, they were
intact!
This was the result of an attack executed de-
cisively and with force, but it was blessed by
great luck. The bridges were prepared for dem-
