to special staff briefings to clarify the latest
situation and what actions that were needed
This had to be done when the battle was raging
and the tactical situation changed repeatedly.
Those best to inform were representatives from
a skilled intelligence group that worked system-
atically. When deemed appropriate, the group
would be supported by officers responsible for
planning and production of orders
From the information about the current
situation, the intelligence officers had also to look
ahead and try to understand what the enemy had
in mind. It was necessary to find out what his
next tactical intentions might be, and what
resources he had gathered and what alternatives
for their use that could be seen. Those making
the best judgments were those with in-depth
knowledge about the
enemy's organisation.
tactics and weapons, and who had the ability to
see not only details, but also the broader overall
perspectives
Brigadier
Hallifax
used
emphasise this as a good talent in general, when
he talked to young officers: 187 To command one
must have perspective. In a technical arm one
cannot gain
perspective
Without
complete
mastery of technical job, which must be second
nature.
Coordinated planning and order produc-
tion - keys to success
An element of the British doctrine was, as seen,
that
the
artillery
commander
and
the
commander of the unit to be supported should
work close together, this at all levels. The artillery
plan could then be part of the overall operation
plan and the artillery resources could be used in
the best way, often a prerequisite for success in
battle. How the cooperation between the two
commanders was to take place, and how their
headquarters were to do their job, can partly
only be understood from looking at the organi-
sation. Even when this was the same, the tactical
situation would significantly influence the work,
as would the personalities of commanders and
staff members. Hence, the 'informal' organisa-
tion was as important as the 'formal'
It is
very obvious, when looking at the
highest levels, how the way in which command-
ers acted influenced very much the work that
their staff had to execute.
Eisenhower, for
instance, wanted his staff to prepare a number
of alternate plans and present them to him. After
review of them, he selected one of them as the
GUNFIRE
best one in his mind. His headquarters then had
to work out all the details to a complete opera-
tional order.
Montgomery on the other hand, worked dif-
ferently. He had strong opinions regarding the
objectives of a
coming operation
and the
methods needed to reach them. He used to write
down this in a long list with numbered points.
His staff then had to convert all these points into
plans and orders.
Only one
person could
sometimes get him to change his ideas a little. It
was his Chief of Staff, Major General Francis de
Guingand, who Montgomery much respected.
He had himself recruited de Guingand after
having taken command of Eighth Army In
August 1942. But once he had made up his mind
it was indeed not easy even for de Guingand to
get Montgomery to abolish his conviction about
the ways the battle should be launched.
A high-ranked officer working more along a
line between the above two extremes was Field
Marshal William Slim. He has in his much-
appraised book Defeat into Victory given an inter-
esting account of his way to act when a new
operation was to be planned and prepared. 88 He
states that all his operational plans were based on
a few fundamental principles:
The ultimate goal must be offensive
The plan must be simple
The goal and the idea of the operation
must be very clear and everything must be
subordinated to this
The plan should include a certain amount
of surprise
He writes that he used to start the process by
himself considering a number of main alterna-
tives followed by informally discussing these with
the two senior staff officers closest to him. These
were the Brigadier General Staff (BGS) and the
Major General Administration (MGA), i.e. the
two highest staff officer responsible for planning
of operations and administration. The latter had
the highest rank as the supply of the army in this
theatre was of extreme importance and complex-
ity. Slim also consulted the highest air force
commander (who had the same formal position
as he himself. Together they agreed on at least
two, often three to four, alternatives. These were
put into the hands of a group of specially selected
staff officers (BGS nominated them), to which
team also air force officers were attached.
SUCCESS REQUIRES EFFICIENT STAFF WORK
This team made a first quick analysis of the
presented alternatives to find advantages and
disadvantages. They were free to come up with
own ideas and suggestions for improvements.
They were also allowed to 'pick raisins from the
cake' and combine parts from the different alter-
natives, thus making a completely new one. In
this respect Slim was absolutely free from own
prestige (cf. Montgomery). The team presented
their results in a list of 'bullets' and tables with
short comments. After this, a new 'consultative
round' took place to arrive at the best alternative.
This involved representatives of all arms at the
headquarters and the heads of supporting arms,
amongst them the artillery commander.
During these
consultations,
major
problems were identified and what decisions that
had to be made to get around them. A final
agreement with the air force commander was
made at this state about the participation of
bombers, fighters, air reconnaissance and - not
least - air supply resources. After this detailed
staff work for the production of army orders
took place. This was also done by the artillery
commander and his staff.
Slim informs that a dozen orders for large
operations were issued during the war in South
East Asia in his name. He writes that one clause
of every order he always wrote himself -
Intention. This clause was often the shortest of
all in the order, but it was the most important,
Slim stated. It expresses, or should express, what
the Commander wants to achieve. This is the
overriding point of the order under which all
others are subordinated. It must be understood
and followed by every man in the army. Hence,
it should be formulated by the Commander
himself. And this was how Slim acted.
Based on the operational orders from the
high commander, in this case the Commander
of XIV Army, a similar process followed at the
next lower level, the Corps level, and so it
proceeded on down the hierarchy. As mentioned.
it was important to have well-coordinated oper-
ational orders and artillery orders at all levels in
order to make sure that artillery resources were
used in the best possible way
(cf. General
Farndale's statement before Part 1). At the divi-
sional level, the commanding officer and his
artillery commander had to work close together.
In Fig. 14-2 we can see an example.
When the Intention and other key elements
had been fixed all other parts of the order could
be worked out, normally with all disciplines par-
ticipating. The divisional artillery commander
engaged his own staff to do the 1ob as far as the
arullery.
support of the
division
was
concerned. A standard structure model for such
an order had the following clauses:
Information
- Enemu
- Uwn troops
Intention (the overall role of the artillery)
Tasks
- Allotment of artillery
- Reconnaissance
- Deplovment areas
- Alternative gun nosition‹
- Fire observation resources and liaison
- Allotment of AOP resources
Fig. 14-2 In order to make best possible use of the
- Fire zones
artillery resources, the artillery plan must be well coor
- Special plans for ranging and registration
dinated with the plan made by the commander of the
- Local defence
formation to be supported. Here is the Commanding
• Fire plans
Officer 78 Infantry Division, Major General V. Evelegh,
- Attacks
conferring with his Commander Royal Artillery
- Derence
Brigadier J. Maxwell, before an attack in Tunisia in
- Advance/Marchi
April 1943 (Imperial War Museum NA 2242)
- Ketreat
Survey
