GUNFIRE
TWILIGHT - WAR AND MOBILISATION
and a marching-out took place from the job sites.
Many found it exciting. While the mobilisation
went on, the last dramatic contacts at the diplo-
matic levels took place between Britain and
France on the one side and Germany on the other.
After he had entered into the Non-Aggression
Pact with Stalin on 23rd August, Hitler had
decided to 'resolve' the 'Danzig Issue' by imple-
menting military means, and the issue regarding
a corridor to East Prussia in the same way. Ne-
gotiations with Poland were out of question.
Hitler had also rejected the proposal by the
French Premier Daladier about further negotia-
tions. Britain had on 25 August reaffirmed its
intention to protect the independence of Poland
On 28 August the British Ambassador to
Germany, Sir Neville Henderson, returned to
Berlin with the message from the British Gov-
ernment that it would stick to this and that any
form of aggression was
unacceptable. Then
followed the fatal day, Sunday 3 September
1939. At 11.15 a.m. Chamberlain opened his
speech to the nation in a BBC broadcast. His
voice was grave and he spoke slowlv:
This morning, the British Ambassador in Berlin
handed the German Government the final note
stating that unless we had heard from them before
eleven o'clock where the declare that they at once
will withdraw their troops from Poland, a state of
war will exist between us. I have to tell vou now
that no such undertaking has been received, and
consequently this country is at war with Germany
You can imagine what a bitter blow this means to
me after my long struggle for peace [...]. 58
When the war broke out Britain was militarily a
weak
and
lacked the
resources for
meeting its obligations. It is a good example of
a failed, not to say non-existent, coordination of
foreign policy and national strategy. Appease-
ment turned out to be a failure
and when this
at the beginning of September 1939 was realised
by the politicians, it was too late. Certainly they
had decided to double the Territorial Army, and
also to introduce conscription, but it was not
realised that any rearmament, worth its name,
Would
take
several vears
The
transfer
of
industry
from
peacetime production
wartime footing with a capacity to provide all
the
old and new
military formations
with
modern equipment was an immense challenge
which certainly could not be met overnight.
Furthermore, training of all officers and men
that was required for getting all formations
ready for war was indeed another significant
challenge taking a long time to meet.
The situation in September was such that
Britan could mobilise less than a million men to
compare with the five million in France. In the
spring of 1939 the British Government had
decided to plan for an army comprising 3)
fighting divisions (15,000 to 20,000 men per
division), these were to be established by all
Commonwealth countries
cooperanon
Britain's own share was to be 32 divisions. The
build-up should be completed by September
1941, i.e. after about two and half years. The
number was reduced in February 1940 to a total
of 36 divisions, 59
The Commander of the British Expedi-
tonary Force (BEF) sent to France, Lord Gort,
estimated that 19 divisions would be needed. The
day after the war had commenced he was ordered
to start the preparations for a build-up in France.
At his disposal that day only 3-4 divisions were
available. In the Middle East and North Africa 6-
7 divisions could be mobist and North Africa 6-
divisions. In South East Asia (Malava) there were
two brigades
Luckily enough, there was only one enemy
at the beginning, Germany, and, furthermore,
the country thanks to the period known as the
'Phoney War' did not have to commence
fighting for another eight months. Launching
any offensive was out of the question. It would
be almost a year before British & Common-
wealth forces were in action against Italian
forces. Where Britain was weakest, in South East
Asia, the respite was slightly more than two
years. As far as artillery is concerned, the regular
organisation comprised 37 Field Regiments,
Medium Regiments and one Heavy regiment.®
In addition to these formations there were in
1938 54 Field Regiments in the Territorial
Army, 9 Medium Regiments and 14 Heavy
Regiments. As mentioned, all these regiments
were to be doubled. To the Territorial Army also
a few converted Yeomanries came. As seen not
all new regiments were in place when the war
broke out, and many of the TA formations were
not ready for war. When we summarise all for-
mations (regular and territorial) we find that the
Royal Artillery went to war with roughly the
following numbers of regiments:
• Field artillery
• Medium artillery
• Heavy artillery
116 Regiments
25 Regiments
5 Regiments
The number of heavy regiments is uncertain
Most of the heavy regiments of TA in 1938 do
not seem to have been mobilised. On the other
hand a few new regiments were established
during the autumn 1939. The number here
given is to be seen as the order of magnitude.
Besides those in the list, a number of inde-
pendent batteries of various type existed. It
might be of interest also to take note of the fact
that some infantry battalions had been converted
to ant-aircraft units during the 1930s
On 31 December 1939 the total strength in
manpower was 122,017. In this number some
Anti-Tank Regiments and depot units are
included as well.
