MAPs
HOLLAND
Map 16-3 On 13 May 1940 the German Army Group A commenced its 'Blitz' offensive with four armoured
Corps south of the allied positions in Belgium and on 20th May the first units reached the Channel. Thereby
were the supply lines of BEF cut and an evacuation at Dunkirk was made unavoidable, in particular so as the
German Army Group B pressed very hard from north and northeast. The map shows the approximate front lines
at different dates during the gradual retreat into the final bridgehead at Dunkirk in late May.
Mom 164 On 26 May the situation became extremely critical for the allied forces when under extreme pressue
trom Army Groups A and B. Further north a Belgian collapse was imminent which would imply a completel
openedright flank of BE as a consequence. The artill ate was so Dis which mule were hastly redeployed
up towards Ypres to fill the gap. They were followed a dav later by Montgomer's 3rd Division which made ar
enclosed and had to capitulate
exceptional redeployment during the night behind the former divisions In the Southeast French 1 Army wa
MAPS
Map 16-5 At a defence line along River Escaut the retreating divisions, with support from BEF's strategic reseve,
were to make a final stand. However, when they risked to be circumvented around both flanks they had to give
up and continue the retreat towards Dunkirk. As we can see from the map all divisions had plenty of field guns as
well as medium guns (The map is a revised and simplified version of a map from Farndale: The Years of Defeat).
Map 16. The artillery commander of the Sth Infantry Division and his staff managed to prepare a fire plan after
the hasty redeployment offender of the 26 May 1940 to the pres region, just before the decisive battle on
27-28 May commenced of the division din 26 at t ly could do with the limited resources til vailable. This
oved the situation. 'CP' means nerser Preparation Fire and 'DF' Defensive Fire where the Germans were to
be stopped finally. The regiments that planned fire against the respective targets are indicated by their numbers
within the broken circles. 'FR' means Field Regiment and 'MR' Medium Regiment.
