Fig. 21-6 In connection with the break-out by the XXX
Corps from the bridge-head at the Belgian-Dutch
border on 17 September extensive air attacks with
Typhoon fighter-bombers were launched against
German positions. The aircraft was armed with
automatic cannons and rockets. Observe the barrel-
formed air-cooler under the engine that gave the aircraft
a typical look (©Imperial War Museum CH 13344)
As we have seen, the battle group from 5
Guards Brigade, Irish Guards Group, was in the
lead. Their first nine tanks destroyed were
victims, according to the literature, of an anti-
tank platoon, which had been dug in with their
Panzerfausts close to the road. If so deployed, it
seems not unlikely that they had survived the
barrage, as this was not very tight nor intensive.
At this part of the advance route only 25-
pounders were engaged. Their shells were good
for neutralisation but not for destruction of
battle-experienced troops well dug in. Neither
can it be ruled out that German anti-tank guns
with their long range were employed as well (as
is shown in the film A bridge too far).
When the tanks were hit about ten minutes
had passed. At the same time the barrage fired
by the medium regiments ended. Another five
minutes later
all the concentrations at flank
targets ended. But the rolling barrage fired by the
six field regiments continued. According to the
fire plan it would proceed another ten minutes
along the road, with 200 yards lifts every minute
This was now to no use as the advancing column
had been stopped.
While
the
infantry
disembarked and
attacked the enemy, fighter-bombers were also
called in to fire their rockets against the German
positions, a strong complement to the artillery.
The Typhoon fighter-bombers belonged to
83 Group RAF and were directed from the
GUNFIRE
ground by a liaison detachment with radio
travelling at the head of the Guards column. The
aircraft came in groups of eight aircraft attacking
every five minutes during the first 35 minutes
and then eight aircraft every ten minutes. Later
these aircraft were available for further attacks
whenever needed. The fighter-bombers flew in
at low height over the first vehicles and aimed
their rocket attacks against targets around 50
yards on both sides and around 200 yards ahead
of these vehicles. 387
The battle went on for a couple of hours and
at around 5 p.m. the medium regiments were
ordered to repeat their barrage a second time,
just as had been planned. The firing started at
17.35 hours and ended twenty minutes later.
Behind it now followed the Guards battle group,
which had been able to re-commence its
advance. But this could not continue because of
renewed enemy interference, which delayed it
further. As already mentioned, they managed to
reach Valkenswaard around 7 p.m. where they
halted for the night.
So they failed to reach
Eindhoven 5km ahead as General Horrocks had
hoped. The fact that his troops did not rush on
in force during the night to capture the city has
raised some criticism over the
vears
Kurther
nightly halts would follow later, and this with
even more serious consequences.
When the head of the
Valkenswaard no artillery
column reached
unit had passed the
start line. 153 Field Regiment RA that was to
support the Guards group initially had some 600
vehicles ahead. If the ambush of the first tanks
had not occurred, the regiment had been 20-
25km behind the leading vehicles and would have
passed the border during the evening of D-Day
The new situation with
leading unit at
Valkenswaard 10km non the leading unit at
more fighting meant that the ordered march had
to be changed. The regiment was ordered to
advance northwards at 15.00 hours and went into
bivouac just north
of the border at 22.00
hours, 38 With them followed, as we have seen, a
section (2 guns) from 84 Medium Regiment RA.
The fighting north of the Rhine intensifies
On the second dav. D+1. the enemy resistance
at Arnhem increased when strong my erom too
SS Panzer divisions had reached the area. This
definitely stopped all attempts to advance to the
Arnhem bridge by attempts to advance to th
Parachute Brigade that Krafft's men had halted.
'BERLIN TONIGHT' - ARNHEM
Progress by the 1st and 3rd Parachute Battalions
failed when they reached halfway between
Oosterbeek and the bridge.
This
forced the
British to change from attack to defence. The
pressure from the West now also increased when
Kampfgruppe von Tettau comprised of several
diverse units, began to assemble on the scene.
The same fate struck 4 Parachute Brigade,
which, after having landed on the second day,
was to proceed along Arnhem - Ede Road and
the railway towards the northern part of Arnhem
city. The brigade was soon stopped and had to
withdraw down south of the railway. During the
next days, the main parts of the British division
were pressed more and more into a perimeter at
Oosterbeek
down to river
Rhine. Frost's
Fig. 21-7 The air-landed light regiment was the only
artillery available up to day D+4 for the hard-pressed
red berets at Arnhem. During the final days the guns
were deployed near Oosterbeek Churh as was illus-
trated in this former diorama at the Hartenstein
Airborne Museum Oosterbeek. Note the fuze key
used by the gunner in the centre (Author's collection)
battalion at the bridge fought bravely during four
nights and three days before it was forced to give
in. By then, they had fought for twice as long as
had been planned.
What had the gunners done?
On Monday
18 September (D+1), 3
Battery was ordered to re-deploy ahead and was
ready for action near Oosterbeek Church at 10
a.m. It had not been possible to advance to the
originally planned position at the eastern side of
the Rhine near the railway crossing of the river,
but the battery could now reach targets around
the Arnhem road bridge, Map 21-4. The battery
commander, Major Dennis Munford, had ac-
companied the parachute brigade headquarters
and the 2nd Parachute Battalion to the bridge
and could now observe and control fire at
numerous targets on both sides of the river.
On Tuesday afternoon (D+2), the whole
regiment was deployed with the three batteries
together close to Oosterbeek Church. They were
ready to fire at 18.30 hours and continued to
support the 2nd Parachute Battalion for another
dav, but at around 7 p.m. on Wednesday 20th
