GUNFIRE
when the battle commenced. The task was given
to 'Y Troop of 1 Composite Battery RA which
was split into two sections. I he intention was to
allot these sections to the armoured units when
passing through the infantry, one section to the
1st Armoured Division and one section to the
10th Armoured Division. By this arrangement.
survey of the divisional artillery into the same
Corps grid when redeploying forwards could be
facilitated. As a starting point, the survevors
WOuld
themselves
11X
their
positions
by
measuring against two or several observation
towers backwards. Certain "trig points' with
known coordinates were made available also for
this kind of initial survey. Once this was done
the surveyors would extend the Corps grid
westwards by triangulation, and survey the field
artillery when redeployed forwards. It was con-
sidered possible to fix the batteries with an
accuracy of 2-3 yards (Fig. 9-1).322
No ammunition shortage
The week before D-Day, 23 October, large
amounts of artillery ammunition were dumped
at the prepared gun positions and nearby depots
This was camouflaged by various means. The
volumes were large: 32:
Divisional artillery
400-760 rounds
per gun
Artillery from 10 Corps
500-920 rounds
per gun attached
to attacking
divisions of XXX
Corps
• Medium artillery
400-500 rounds
per gun
In addition to these volumes, several hundred
rounds were loaded on supply trucks and at rear
depots. It would by this arrangement be possible
to re-deploy the artillery quickly without having
to wait for ammunition.
For the
divisional
artillery, i.e. the 25-
pounders, percussion fuzes as well as fuzes for
smoke rounds were available. In the numbers
given above were included
50-100 smoke
rounds per gun. The medium guns had time
fuzes (20%) besides the ordinary percussion
fuzes (80%)
The highest numbers above applied for the
artillery of the Australian division inclusive the
troops attached from X Corps. The smallest
volume was dumped for the 4th Indian Division
at the southern/left flank of XXX Corps.
This huge stocking of artillery ammunition
before a major attack was to become the norm
for the rest of the war
We will later see the real ammunition con-
sumption during the twelve days of battle at El
Alamen.
The coordinated fire plan
The artillery commander of XXX Corps was to
retain the overall command of the artillery
resources in the area of attack. With this arrange-
ment, he was responsible for coordinating the
fire planning by the divisions to secure concen-
trated firepower.
Assisting him temporarily was a Counter
Battery Officer with staff assigned to his head-
quarters. With the older denominations he was
to act as Commander Corps Medium Artillery
(CCMA) albeit with extended authority to
include all artillery irrespective of calibre to be
used for counter-battery fire. In reality, this was
a precursor to the Commander of an Army
Group Royal Artillery (AGRA) to come later.
it was a joint undertaking by the CCRA.
CCMA and the CRAs to lead the preparation of
fire plans with the CCRA as coordinator, the
latter having the ultimate responsibility.
The fireplan for the main attack was influ-
enced by the aspects put forward by Freyberg
and had the following conceptual design; times
siven are
relative the time of attack on 23
October 1942, i.e. Z hour:
Z-20 to Z-5 min: All artillery take part in counter-
battery programmes under CMA
- to Z+7 min: All artillery combat the enem
forward positions. 7 Medium Regiment RA and
one battery from 64 Medium Regiment RA
support 9 Australian Division (in addition to the
divisional artillery). The artillery regiments of the
three other divisions were reinforced by one
battery each from 64 Medium Regiment RA and
69 Medium Regiment PA
Z+7 to Z+115 min: All field artillery (25
pounders) are engaged in divisional covering fire
programmes under respective CRA. Medium
batteries continue combating enemy artillery
positions under CCMA
Z+115 to Z+175 min: Divisional artillery firing
at enemy positions in accordance with CRA plans
auring the
attackers' pause. The mediun
240|
'IT WILL BE A KILLING MATCH' - EL ALAMEIN
regiments and four field regiments conduct
counter-battery firing under the CCMA.
Z+175 to Z+185 min: All artillery firing at the
enemy's main positions
Z+185 min and onwards: Continued firing under
respective CRA. Continued counter-battery
firing with 64 Medium Regiment
RA.
69
Medium Regiment RA and 2/8 Field Regiment
RAA. 7 Medium Regiment RA supports 9 Aus
tralian Division
Phase I of the attack, as proposed by Freyberg,
was to conclude at Z+115 min at which time a
pause of one hour was to follow for reorganisa-
ton and preparations for the next phase of the
advance, Phase II. The field regiments were to
continue firing during the pause, but at low
intensity, 1-2 rounds/ min.
Counter-battery
firing was to continue by the medium batteries
at normal fire intensity
The fact that priority was given to the north-
ernmost sector is indicated by the order to con-
centrate counter-battery firing against enemy
artillery
north and west of the Australan
division. This engagement was to take place
When the armoured divisions were expected to
pass through cleared lanes in the minefields.
The time for the attacking divisions to reach
their final objectives varied a little depending on
the dispersion of enemy
positions. On an
average, it was assumed that it would take abou
five hours. The artillery was to fire continuously
during the whole period, albeit at varying
intensity.
lo meet expected counter-attacks when the
final objectives had been captured DF targets
were prepared in front of these as usual. The
Corps artillery order gave directives as to how
the resources for such firing would be employed
In the
drea
allotted to
the
Australian
Division one regiment from the 51st (Highland)
Division and one from the 2nd (Ns) Division
were to be engaged in addition to the division's
own regiments. Furthermore, CCMA was in-
structed to prepare defensive fire with one
medium regiment in this area
Three to four regiments from neighbouring
divisions were to plan in the same way defensive
fire in addition to the divisional artillery of re-
spective division. The CCMA was to prepare
defensive fire with one medium regiment in
front of each division. DF targets were to be
engaged for two minutes with highest intensity
to be followed by normal intensity for another
three minutes. In accordance with the book, fire
against the most critical target, denominated
'SOS, would be
prepared and guns
otherwise engaged were to be laid on this. Fire
could be ordered via line (telephone) or radio
but also by using signal pistols (Very flares). The
latter was planned to be one signal comprising
three white 'stars'. Such requests for SOS fire
were to be answered by respective divisional
arullery onlv.
Where are we? Finding the way ahead
Although the attack was to take place in
moonlight, it was not easy due to the flat terrain
and lack of distinct identifiable objects to know
exact positions in respect of the planned
direction of advance.
Clouds of dust from
numerous vehicles and bursting artillery shells
did not make it easier. Besides keeping track of
direction, it was also necessary to identify the
attack objectives and terrain sectors where to
pause to allow units regain order once again. It
became a task on the part of the gunners to assist
in the navigation. This was to be achieved br
different methods.
Artificial light
It was not iust a matter of direct illumination of
the battlefield. Anti-aircraft searchlights with
known coordinates were used to send a vertical
beam upwards into the sky. By means of inter-
section of lights, the exact position of (for
instance) an advancing infantry unit could be
found on a map. It was also decided that crossing
beams from two searchlights would indicate the
time between Phase I and Phase II.
As we have seen, another practice was to
have towers of the observation bases illuminated
from time to time, this giving opportunities als
for finding position by simple survey methods
The observation posts could be used the other
way around. These could determine the directior
of flares from Very pistols fired by the infantry
Combining the results from different towerch
servation posts would give the coordinates of the
infantry location, which could then be transmit-
ted to them by radio.
Smoke
The possibilities on the part of the gunners to
fire smoke were used in many wavs. One method
was indicating boundaries between attacking
