GUNFIRE
Behind the former the 53rd (Welsh) Infantry
Division would pass. Numerous artillery units
would gradually cross the river.
In the XXX Corps sector in the north, the
51st (Highland) Division would attack, here too
with two brigades beside each other, one on each
side of Rees. After them, the third brigade and
the attached 9 Canadian Infantry Brigade would
be engaged east of the river too. The divisiona
attack would, as mentioned, be launched a bit
earlier than the attack by XII Corps, this for the
reason of deception. H Hour was here set at
21.00 hours on D-1
The 51st (Highland) Division was to be
followed as soon as possible by a Canadian
Division the task of which was to attack along
the left (northern) flank and capture Emmerich
This division would then return to II Canadian
Corps after a couple of days.
The 43rd (Wessex) Division was planned to
cross the river Rhine downstream
of Rees.
starting on 25 March. Later the 3rd Infantry
Division, the 11th Armoured Division and 8
Independent Armoured Brigade would enlarge
the bridgehead and prepare for a break-out.
Much artillery would cross the river also in this
sector.
Map 22-3 illustrates briefly the primary
objectives on D-Day for the attacking divisions
of the two Corps. There is shown also how the
boundaries of the 18th US Airborne Corps were
located. And the formations to follow after a
couple of days are indicated as well
The techniques of crossing the river were
developed by XII Corps, together with the 79th
Fig. 22-3 The first wave of attackers across the River
Rhine had to use amphibious vehicles, here 'Buffalos'
leaving the Western bank of the river (AWM No. SUK
13979)
Armoured Division (Major General Hobart).
The 79th Armoured Division put numerous
pieces of special equipment at the disposal. In
the first wave of attack, the infantry would be
transported by tracked amphibious vehicles -
Buffalos, - which can be seen moving into the
river in Fig. 22-3.
More infantry would then cross by means of
small assault boats 'DD-tanks' would "swin
across early, as mentioned.
When a first bridgehead had been secured,
ferry routes could be established. These would
first comprise of assault boats and 'Buffalos', but
wheeled amphibious vehicles of the DUKW
type as well. Larger ferries would then come,
ferries that could carry light vehicles such as
Jeeps and Universal Carriers. These were the Cl.
9 ferries/rafts. The figure gives the load capacity
in tons. The plan was to have the first one in
operation five hours after H hour.
Later the first day, ferries with capacity to
carry tanks, artillery pieces and other heavier
vehicles would come, 50/60 ferries/rafts. A rapid
build-up of strength on the eastern side of river
Rhine required much more capacity than that of
the ferries although many of these were in action.
More than 5,000 vehicles would be taken across
in the XXX Corps sector during the first two
days, this according to the plan. After six days
no less than 35,000 vehicles would be over.
order to
accomplish the required
capacity, bridges had to be built as soon ai
possible. The first type of bridge to be estab-
lished was the FBE Bridge (Folded Boa
Equipment), type CL. 9. It was hoped in XII
Corps that the first bridge of this kind would be
in operation towards the evening of D-Day
already.
Heavier Bailey-bridges were to be built on
larger pontoons. Three classes were available, i
12, Ci 40 Tactical and Cl 40 High Level All
Weather. The length of the bridges would be
300-600 yards. Most of the artillery was to cross
the river for deployment east of it using such
bridges, Fig. 22-4.
To make the traffic work, large resources
from Roval Engineers
were needed. Each
division had around 20 Sapper Companies for
establishing the ferries and bridges. 28 Special
resources from the Royal Navy and others were
also provided
As to the wanted surprise, this could not be
accomplished as regards the location of the
THE FINAL ONSLAUGHT - THE RHINE CROSSING
and such attacks went on over D-Day. Each day
some 1,400 bombers were engaged. It was
important to make sure that enemy air resources
would not interfere with the large airborne
armada with its all slow-moving gliders.
Heavy bombers were, once again, to be
employed in direct support of the ground forces.
This time, the target was the city Wesel, which
was to be completely bombed to pieces in con-
nection with the attack by the 1st Commando
Brigade during the evening and night D-1. 27
heavy bombers were to make an initial attack just
before dark, later
no less than
200 heavy
bombers would follow suit attacking the city and
fortified positions near the city. The bombers
would arrive at 22.45 hours, i.e. 45 minutes after
the time when the Commandos commenced
their attack across river Rhine. The brigade was
planned to have secured its bridgehead at this
time and was prepared to attack the city.
Another important task on the part of fighter-
bombers and medium bombers was to comple-
ment the counter-battery bombardment launched
by the allied artillery. Enemy artillery and anti-
aircraft gun positions just out of range of the
artillery were the targets, basically east of the
motorway (Autobahn) under construction. This
runs in parallel with river Rhine (cf. Map 22-3)
When the attacks were well under way, the
air resources were to be available for direct
Fig. 22.4 Artillery units were redeployed east of River
Rhine as soon as ferry lines had been organized and
bridges built. The capacity of bridges was limited,
causing long queues, with vehicles having to wait for
hours before getting the opportunity to cross the river
(AWM No. UK 2808)
crossings. The timing could on the other hand
be kept secret to the last minute by carefully con-
celing the assembly of troops, stocking of am-
munition and other commodities etcetera. The
attacking units were deployed west of river
Meuse till the very last days and nights. The
ailery gun positions were prepared during the
rights and the guns brought forward during the
final night (cf. El Alamein).
A large
programme for deception was
initiated by 21 Army Group. The programme
included a number of different measures. Faked
radio traffic and other measures all aimed at
giving an impression that the main attack would
come within the area held by 1 Canadian Army
near Nijmegen-Arnhem. In other words: an
atack much further to the north than the selected
section of river Rhine. Large-scale deceptive
atacks, with complete artillery support with live
ammunition, were executed by the divisions
defending the western shore area as well.
In order to further reduce the risk that attack
reparations were revealed in their details be-
forehand, smoke screens were operated along the
river during the final week. These were estab-
ished by units of Royal Engineers, equipped
nich smoke generators and covered up to some
80km along the river (Fig. 22-5).
Coordinated with Operation Plunder was a
massive air campaign by the allied air forces.
aimed at acquisition of air superiority over
the whole operational area. A large number of
German airfields were bombed beginning D-3
Fig. 22-5 Smoke belts along River Rhine concealed
during two weeks the preparations for the crossing.
This did not stop the sound rangers from locating
enemy artillery and anti-aircraft deployments, but for
observation bases (Flash Spotters) it was much more
difficult (Olmperial War Museum BU 1951)
321
