GUNFIRE
Although resources for supply of fuel, water,
food, medicine, spare parts etc, were not needed
directly for the artillery fire, they were necessarv
for securing sustainability of the formations. I his
includes numerous vehicles to meet capacity re-
quirements
The 'indirect fire system needs of course
human resources as well. These must be well
trained and motivated if to secure a well-func-
tioning system. And an appropriate organisation
of all resources must be established; and this
must be
under
competent
command
control. Before going into details regarding or-
ganisation and structures, we will have a brief
look at
the overall
artillery grouping and
command structure
Artillery grouping and command
structure
As alreadu
mentioned
aruillery
formations
mostly comprised of regiments. The following
types were the normal arrangement:
Formations with light guns (<114-mm, 4.5")
Field Regiments with towed guns
Field Regiments with self-propelled guns
Airlanding Light Regiments
Mountain Regiments
Assault Regiments
Jungle Field Regiments
The two last mentioned types were organised
only in Burma as complement to regiments of
the normal type, i.e. the two first mentioned.
Formations with medium guns (114-mm-140-
mm, 4.5"-5.5"), heavy guns (150-200-mm,
6"-8"), super heavy guns (>200-mm, 8")
Medium Regiment
Heavy Regiment
Super Heavy Regiment
The main task for all artillery formations was to
support infantry and armoured units and to
combat and destroy enemy artillery. They could
be permanently
attached to the unit to be
supported, thus being an organisational part of
the latter. They
specifi.
could also be attached for a
operation,
for marching and other
temporary purposes. Often a combined grouping
was chosen, as we will see several examples of
later in Part 3 of the book.
Only Field Regiments were permanently
attached to the infantry and armoured units, most
of them at the divisional level. An infantry division
normally had three regiments and an armoured
division two regiments, one with towed guns and
one with self-propelled guns. The regiments con-
stituted the 'divisional artillery', a denomination I
will refer to many times. In this context we must
not forget the artillery regiments attached to
airborne
divisions.
the few
mountain
regiments supporting various types of formation.
This grouping of field artillery was due to
the fact that an infantry division normally
comprised of three infantry brigades and the
armoured division of one infantry brigade and
one armoured brigade.8 The towed guns were
to support the infantry brigade and the SP guns
the armoured brigade (compared with mounted
artillery supporting the cavalry in earlier years).
When a division was to take part in a large
operation it was normal practice to organise
support also from external regiments, as we will
see later in the book
Brigades normally lacked their own field
regiments, i.e. 'under command'. Regiments
could be attached and given the role to be 'in
support' depending on the operational and
tactical situation. The divisional level was thus
the lowest level as regards permanent allocation
of artillery resources.
A British Army or Corps did not have a
permanent,
fixed
organisation.
Thev
were
organised on a temporary basis with a structure
chosen to meet the requirements of a specific
operation. This was also the case as regards
medium and heavy regiments. Their role was to
reinforce divisional artillery or to execute special
tasks, for instance bombardment of enemy
artillery. Hence, they could normally be regarded
as 'army artillery' or 'corps artillery'. At these
higher levels a few field regiments were also
found, called 'Army Field Regiments'. Their role
was to reinforce other artillery units.
Soon after the Battle of El Alamein in
October/November 1942 a new permanent
organisation was introduced for reinforcement
of artillery at these higher levels. 'Army Groups
Royal Artillery', or just 'AGRAs' for short, were
established. The composition of such groups
varied, but normally they comprised:
1-2 Field Regiments
3-4 Medium Regiments
1-2 Heavy Regiments
ARTILLERY GROUPING, ORGANISATION AND EQUIPMENT
Even if the denomination 'AGRA' suggests that
the 'Group' operated at the highest level, the
Army level, an 'AGRA' normally was attached to
a Corps, hence they can be regarded as Corps
formations. From 1943 and onwards ten such
formations were established.
Besides all its divisions the British Army
included also a number of independent infantry
and armoured brigades. Not even these had a
permanent stock of
arallery.
but
a Field
Regiment could be attached for shorter or longer
periods as support to a brigade.
The general methods of allocating artillery
to infantry and armoured formations was,
mentioned, to either order an artillery unit to
come "under command' or be 'in support of the
suoject formation. The first expression meant
that the infantry/armour commander had the
artillery formation at his full disposal, and that
ho was authorised to give tactical orders in all
aspects. It meant, on the other hand, that he was
made responsible also for the artillery unit as
regards march, protection, supply etc.
The expression 'in support' meant that the
artillery formation was at the infantry/armour
commander's disposal just as a tactical fire unit.
No other
responsibility
was laid on the
mmander's shoulders. This of course did not
exclude that assistance and supply could be
seven when needed. Forward Observation
Parties, dispatch riders, liaison officers and
others vital for the fire support to function well
must of course always be taken good care of as
if they had been part of the commander's own
organisation.
The method of ordering 'under command'
could be applied on parts of a regiment, for
instance one of its batteries or just a troop, which
could be allocated to an infantry battalion. One
aruillery
unit could also be
placed 'under
command' of another artillery unit, for instance
when a long march was to take place. The latter
type of arrangement was more common during
the first years of the war than later.
'System management' and command
The 'indirect fire system' must, as all systems, be
managed efficiently. Often it was not a matter of
one system only, but several linked together.
Support of a battalion attack required one type
of system, a divisional attack a different, much
larger and more complex one. In common they
comprised functions such as 'intelligence', 'fire
observation and control', fire unit(s) etc. as
described above. It was important that the
system was flexible enough to meet suddenly
changing battle circumstances.
As an example we can imagine a situation
where a Troop Commander as Forward Obser-
vation Officer
supporting
infantry
company by means of the four guns of his own
troop. Suddenly the tactical situation changes,
and support from all the 72 guns of his division
or even many more is required. This required
well-established procedures and efficient system
management' in order to face this situation and
adapt artillery support efficiently.
"The indirect fire system' was based on or-
ganisational units with competent and well-
trained men with adequate equipment. It was a
matter of regiments, batteries and troops etc.
Tactical and technical "system management' was
imperative, but not sufficient alone. Ordinary
command and administrative procedures as such
were also required at all organisational levels.
In the British Army two types of manage-
ment were established. On one hand, command-
ers of the various units were to command their
units as usual. On the other hand, nominated
'artillery commanders' were acting at higher
levels as advisors to the infantry or armoured
units to be supported. This implied normally
certain authorities to decide how to use artiller
units even when not 'under command'. The task
and responsibility of an officer acting as 'artiller
commander'
was to ensure efficient overall
tactical and technical management of the
artillery resources, i.e. 'system management'.
This was one lesson learnt during the Great War;
'artillery commanders' were required at all op-
erational and tactical levels.
Certain artillery commanders with head-
quarters were permanently detached to higher
formations such as divisions, corps or armies. At
lower
levels, brigade,
battalion
company.
artillery commanders were allocated on a case-
by-case basis depending on the role and task of
these. As a normal arrangement, a regimental
commander
was acting as brigade
artillery
commander and under him battery commanders
were assigned the role to act as battalion artiller
commanders. Troop commanders, sometimes
young
subalterns,
were normallv
acting as
detached company artillery commanders
An overall view of the artillery command
structure is given in Table 5-1 as it was from
