GUNFIRE
anyone to wake him up during the night. But in
this situation, de Guingand dared to challenge
the rule
It became a tense meeting during which the
Corps Commanders in turn gave their view on
the tactical situation and recommended Mont-
gomery stop the advance and withdraw the
forward armoured units. After having listened to
them, Montgomery stated that the plan was to
remain in force, despite the difficulties and losses
encountered. He mobilised all the authority he
could demonstrate. After the fairly short meeting,
he took Lumsden aside; he was the main problem
not Leese. Montgomery once again made it clear
to Lumsden that he was to be relieved from his
command if he did not believe in the plan and
hesitated in delivering his part of it.
It has been said that Montgomery became
very angry when he learnt that the commander
of the 10th Armoured Division, Major General
Gatehouse, began to weaken his position and,
furthermore, was leading the battle some 10
miles behind the front. At the request from
Lumsden, Montgomery called him, and in
'forceful' words ordered him to move up to the
front to lead the battle from there.
After the nightly meeting, de Guingand
wrote short Minutes, which had three parts (he
writes that the meeting took place on 25 October
at 02.30 hours):328
The tactical situation at the time of the
conference
The Army Commander's view on the
situation
The tasks of the two Corps
Under the first point, it is noted that the ist
Fig. 19-7 After the initial attack on 23 October 1942 much fichting remained to maul down German/Italian re-
sistance before the final break-out could take place. Montgomen called it ehe dog-fight. Here Australians are
attacking a German stronghold (Wikimedia)
'IT WILL BE A KILLING MATCH' - EL ALAMEIN
Armoured Division had got through the mine-
fields whereas 24 and 8 Armoured Brigade from
the 10th Armoured Division and 9 Armoured
Brigade from the New Zealand Division were
struggling to get through. In the south, the 7th
Armoured Division (XIII Corps) was moving
westwards and had passed minefield JANUARY'
It is also noted in the Minutes, maybe to
show some understanding of Lumsden's diffi-
culties, that a new 'element' was heavy attacks by
chemy bombers against forward areas and
against areas further back as well. These had
caused a certain amount of 'disorganisation' in
the forward area. Gaps in minefields were also
continuously shelled by enemy artillery.
In the second point of the Minutes clear
directives are given:
The Army Commander gave as his opinion that
the situation was developing as well as could be
expected, and that there was a great need for de-
termination and resolution, and that he was quite
decided that the original Army plan of battle
should be proceeded with.
After this clear statement the two Corps were
given the following orders:
XXX Corps to:
(i) Re-organise and hold the bridgehead gained.
11) Operate
With
N.Z
Division
south.
westwards from the MITEIRIYA Ridge in
accordance with the original Army plan.
(il) Endeavour to reduce transport in the
forward battle area in order to minimize casualties
from bombing and shelling.
X Corps to:
i) Get the armoured divisions clear of the
minefield area and out into the open where they
can manoeuvre, using whichever gaps are most
suitable for the purpose.
(i) Recce. Find and manoeuvre with a view to
destroying the enemy's armoured battle gps
(ji) Ensure that
the N7
Div
operations
southwest from Miteiriva Ridge are not interfered
with enemy armoured action from the west.
moment did
The fact that Montgomery at this critical
not give way had
importance. He had once again shown that final
plans and set goals were fixed.
decisive
If plans were to be changed, only the Army
Commander and no one else could do that
Once again on the same day, Montgomery met
the two Corps commanders, this time at the
headquarters of the New Zealand Division and
gave new orders 329
The 'crumbling' Operations should now be
directed towards the north. The 9th Australian
Division was to attack towards the coast. The
remaining formations of XXX Corps should
hold the Miteiriya Ridge firmly, and the New
Zealand Division should not try to attack in
southwesterly direction.
X Corps with the 1st and 10th Armoured
Divisions was still expected to attack westwards
and in northwesterly direction from the bridge-
head. This attack was to be slightly delayed
however. Montgomery ordered all three Corps
to patrol actively enemy-held land in order to
find out as to whether the enemy had begun to
withdraw.
The fighting became hardest in the north
and northwest during a week. The Australians
managed to extend the bridgehead to the north,
although not as far as to the coast (Fig. 19-7).
It was here
the
strongest German-Italian
counter-attacks had to be met.
An early breakout to the west did not mate-
rialise. Instead Montgomery withdrew the New
Zealanders and the 1st Armoured Division for
rest and recovery in order to later use them in
the definite attempt to break out.
In the South, the 7th Armoured Division
also failed to break through as had been planned.
Various other attacks including diversionary
attacks by the 44th and 50th Infantry Division
did not improve the situation. XIII Corps was
ordered to stop its offensive in order to reduce
losses, in
parucular tanks
Later the
Tth
Armoured Division was withdrawn for recovery
and to become part of the reserve before the
final breakout in the North.
Montgomery demonstrated his exceptional
leadership by stopping the attempts to breakout
to the west as originally planned. When the
situation made
this impossible he attacked
instead northwards with the Australian Division,
this without losing the initial goals.
The final breakout was to take place
between the German formations in the north
and the Italians with Freyberg as the main actor.
Besides his own division, he was allotted a
brigade from the Scottish division and another
from the 50th Infantry Division, the latter being
part of XIII Corps.
248
249
