GUNFIRE
Table 5-1. Artillery Command Structure
Formation
Theatre/Regional Command
Army Group/Army (>500,000 men)
Artillery Group Royal Artillery (AGRA)
Artillery Commander
Commander Royal Artillery
Commander Royal Artillery
Commander AGPA
Corps (50,000-100,000 men)
Corps Commander Royal Artillery
Infantry Division (15,000-20,000 men)
Commander Royal Artillery
Armoured Division (14,000-15,000 men) Commander Roval Artillery
Airborne Division (10,000-13,000 men) Commander Royal Artillery
Brigade
(3.000-5.000 men)
Battalion (700-1,000 men)
Company (100 - 150 men)
Brigade Artillery Commander
(assigned for a specific operation)
Battalion Artillery Commander
(assigned for a specific operation)
Company Artillery Commander
(assigned for a specific operation)
1943 to the end of the war. A few comments
might be worthwhile.
The artillery commanders at the highest
levels, i.e. theatre of war, army group or army,
were not normally engaged as commanders of
operations. They can be seen as responsible for
provision of adequate resources
and generol
support. They had ranks such as Major General
Royal Artillery Middle East, Major General
Roval Artillery 21st Army Group etc.
An army artillery commander could have a
similar role, but often also had an operative role as
we will see examples of later in the book, Part 3.
It should also be noted that there were two
commanders at the Corps level during the first
years of the war. The one with the principal role
was
the Commander Corps Royal Artillery
(CCRA). He had the rank of Brigadier. But a
second Brigadier was the Commander Corps
Medium Artillery. The role of the latter was to
counter-battery commander, but the
medium guns were also to reinforce divisional
artillery and thus the risk for 'twin-command'
was obvious. Hence, after a couple of years this
position was changed when the AGRA was in-
stituted (see above). The commander of such an
army artillery group was automatically subordi-
nated the CCRA as an AGRA normally was
Kank
Acronym Number of regiments (number of guns)
Major General
Brigadier
Brigadier
MGRA
CAGRA
Brigadier
Brigadier
Brigadier
Great variation (1,000-2,000)
txamnle.
2 Army Field Regiments,
4 Medium Regiments
1 Heavy Regiment
112811
Great variation (300-600)
3 Field Regiments (72)
1 Field Regiment, towed guns,
1 Field Regiment, self-propelled guns
Lt. Colonel
Brigadier (from 1944)
Lt. Colonel
(a Regimental Commander)
Major la Battery Commander) -
1 Light Airlanding
Regiment (24)
Temporary allotment, normally one of
the divisional Field Regiments (24)
Temporary allotment,
normally a Battery (8)
Captain (a Troop Commander) -
lemporary allotmen
normally a Troop (4)
attached in support of a Corps.
Finally, it is again stressed that the British
doctrine was that artillery fire was to be concen-
trated from as many guns as possible irrespective
of normal organisational affiliation, temporary
grouping or boundaries between formations
Hence, when looking at Table 5-1, an artillery
commander in the lower part of the Table could
often take advantage of all artillery as of the
upper part of the Table. We will now have a
closer look at the details of regiments' organisa-
tion and equipment.
Organisation of the Field Regiment
As mentioned above, the 'Regiment' was re-in
troduced as a substitute for [Artillery] 'Brigade
in 1938, which had been used historically. At the
same time the 'Regiment' took over most of the
tactical and administrative role that the 'Battery
traditionally had had for long. The "Battery' had
been introduced in the middle of the nineteenth
century as a substitute for 'Company' and had
since then had a very important role in the
British Army in respect of the frequent need for
'policing' around the outskirts of the Empire.
The enormous expansion of the artillery during
the Great War can be seen as a special exception
from the traditional role of British artillery.
ARTILLERY GROUPING, ORGANISATION AND EQUIPMENT
I have in this book consequently stuck to the
denomination
'Regiment
andi
not
used
'Battalion' or 'Artillery Battalion'
which are
normally used in most armies. Their tactical role
was about the same, but the British formation
had more guns than its international counter-
parts, still grouped in a number of batteries as
the latter.
Until 1938 the Field Regiments (former
Brigades), i.e. the divisional artillery, had four
six-gun Batteries. Now this was changed to two
twelve-gun
Batteries, which
their
lurn
comprised three four-gun Troops. The change
took time to implement and was not completed
when the war broke out in September 1939
However, most of the regiments sent to battle in
France with the British Expeditionary Force
(BEF) had this organisational structure. The
artillery sent to Norway in April 1940 also had
been re-organised the same wav. Later, as we will
see, this regimental organisation did not meet the
requirements of a modern, large-scale war.
The infantry divisions normally had three
brigades. The usual allocation of artillery 'in
support' was one field regiment for each one.
For cooperation at the battalion level with three
intantry battalions in the brigade, and only two
batteries available in an artillery regiment, one
infantry battalion therefore lacked an artillery
support unit; this was the consequence of the
1938 organisation. It was also to be clearly seen
in France that a twelve-gun battery was too com-
plicated to manage and supply, in particular
when the battle was very mobile. It was therefore
decided in the autumn 1940, after Dunkirk, that
the 24 guns of the Field Regiment should be
divided into three Batteries instead, each one of
these comprising two four-gun Troops. This
change could not be implemented quickly
however. Shortage of equipment and trained
staff delayed the process. Towards the end of
1942, the new organisation was fully imple-
mented, and it proved to be adequate throughout
the war. Only minor adaptations were sometimes
needed. Under the very specific conditions pre-
vailing in the Burma theatre of war, a few
variants of the normal structure had to be intro-
duced, however, not in large numbers.
When now turning to the details of the or-
ganisation of a Field Regiment and its three
Batteries, we will refer to the one prevailing from
1943 and onwards. The starting point is the
official specifications
of
organisation
and
equipment given by the [Unit] War Establish-
ment (WE) and the Unit Equipment Table.
These
documents
illustrate
the
resources
available, but as we will see, the organisation
applied in the field was different from the official
organisation specified in the WE. The former
was called Organisation for Manoeuvre.
It must also be observed that the Field
Regiment had a fixed allocation of resources
from other arms and corps. lo regimental head-
quarters and headquarters at higher levels.
signallers with commanding officers from Roval
Corps of Signals were provided. Signallers in
batteries were, however, Royal Artillery staff
Technical staff for maintenance and repair of
equipment came from Royal Army Ordnance
Corps. In 1942 a new Corps was formed - the
Corps of Royal Electrical and Mechanical
Engineers, to fulfil this role. Cooks came from
the Army Catering Corps when this entity was
established in 1941. The Regimental Medical
Officer was allocated from Royal Army Medical
Corps.
The main parts of the regimental organisa-
tion are summarised in Fig. 5-1
Fig. 5-1 The principal organisation of a Field
Regiment (Author)
