After ranging - fire for effect
When ranging a target to be engaged had been
completed fire for effect was ordered by the
OPO/FOO. As long as this was to include only
his own troop, a few standardised order alterna-
tives were available: 145
Gun fire
Section fire
Troop fire
Troop salvo
The first one meant that guns engaged fired
independently as soon as they had been laid. As
an example: 5 rounds gunfire required the
guns) to fire the five rounds as quickly as
possible. This was often used when a target had
been ranged, or been registered earlier, and
observed fire was to come. If the OPO/FOO
wanted to start the engagement with onlv two
guns he could order: 'Right Section, 2 rounds
gun fire', which meant that Guns Nos. 1 and 2
each should fire two rounds as quickly
possible. But an interval between the rounds
could alternatively be ordered.
'Section fire'
was ordered when
That
OPO/FOO wanted each section of the troop to
take part. The guns were then fired in succession
from right of each section. It could be like: '4
rounds section fire, 20 seconds', by which order
No. 1 and No. 3 guns opened and were then
followed 20 seconds later by No. 2 and No.4,
and then another 20 seconds later No. 1 and No.
3 fired again etcetera, until all guns had fired
four rounds.
The order "Troop fire, 15 seconds' implied
that the four guns fired, starting from right, with
a time lap of 15 seconds between them.
If surprise was required the OPO/FOO
could order a 'Salvo'. Following the order all
guns were loaded and reported "ready' to the
command post. They all then fired simultane-
ously upon a signal or order from the latter.
The OPO/FOO could if necessary stop
firing or change the ordered interval between
rounds
It was often the 'quick-firing' method, i.e.
'gun fire' that was applied when concentration
of fire from one or
several regiments
Was
required. In order to obtain surprise the final
order for effect could be given when all were
ranged and the target registered. This had been
prepared by the order 'fire by order' from the
GUNFIRE
OPO/FOO. A more refined order could be:
'Target Uncle seven, scale four, all engage at
1400 hours'. An even more refined version was
to take into account the time of flight from re-
spective gun position to the target and giving the
time when all shells were to hit the target. The
order for this alternative was 'time on target
This alternative required more of preparations
at the command posts and thus often delayed the
fire for effect. It was not applied very often in
connection with observed fire as speed often had
highest priority.
An important factor indicated by the above
orders for concentrations from several units was
that in the British Army an OPO/FOO could
give order to all units that he wanted to engage
without first requesting permission to do so. A
troop commander always was authorised to
engage his own troop, a battery commander his
battery and sometimes also the whole regiment
etcetera upwards in the hierarchy.
Even if not authorised to engage the whole
regiment,
troop
commander
aching as
OPO/FOO could order Mike Target'. His order
was then communicated via his own command
post to the regimental headquarters, where the
final decision was made as to whether the
regiment was to fire. Before accepting the order
the commanding officer or his representative
had to ask a few additional questions about the
tactical situation in order to get convinced that
the order was justified. If this was the case, it
might still happen that not all batteries could
participate due to other tasks. This could then be
compensated by an additional order to the two
battery by
other batteries to make up for the missing third
firing
additional rounds. If for
instance the OPO/FOO had ordered scale four,
this implied that all guns were to fire four rounds
if all of them in the regiment would participate,
i.e. 4x24 rounds in total, i.e. 96 rounds. If, as in
our example, only two batteries were available
they had to each fire six rounds per gun (6x16
= 96 rounds). The command 'scale' could also
imply immediate compensation for guns not
available due to damage or crew rest, etc. Hence,
this command gave excellent flexibility and was
normally used by OPO/FOOs wanting to fire
with more than his own guns as he/they rarely
could know
available.
exactly
the
number
of guns
A method to bring authorisation closer to
the OPO/FOOs, or a subordinate
artillery
130
ARTILLERY BATTLE TECHNIQUES AND TACTICS
commander's tactical headquarters, and thus to
Artillery was best suited for area targets
speed up execution of larger engagements, was
It was easy to vary the size of the area to be
delegation of authorization from, say a divisional
covered with fire
artillery commander to an officer acting as his
Comparatively long ranges made effect
representative, a
CRA Representative.
This
possible over a large area with redeploy-
could for instance be worthwhile when the whole
ment of the guns
divisional artillery was made available for the
Artillery fire could be concentrated and
support of a brigade attack. The 'CRA Rep' went
moved over a large area within a few
to the brigade commander for direct liaison. In
minutes
the same way a regimental commander could
Artillery fire concentration was a means to
authorise a battery commander to act as his
accomplish local tactical superiority
representative.
Artillery fire was an effective means to
When engaging enemy targets the fire in
react on a crisis and thereby protecting
most cases was directed to a single point. The
own forces
natural dispersion still made the artillery fire to • Remote engagement without own troops
cover an area, the size of which was dependent
was possible
on the number
of guns engaged. A troop •
"The system indirect fire' offered a
normally covered a 100x100 yards area, a
complete intelligence system with wide-
regiment maybe 250x250 yards.
Sometimes a
spread coverage
bigger area covered was required. Two methods
Although indirect fire was the prime task,
to accomplish this were at hand. One was to have
this did not exclude direct fire over open
the engaged troop or battery to increase the
sights, e.g. against attacking enemy tanks
impact area by increasing the width of the fire
Contrary to air forces, artillery could be
by ordering a switch of line by the command
used day and night under all weather con-
'Sweep'
and/or a change of range by
the
allions
command 'Search'. The switch of the line was
given in degrees and minutes relative the target
centre line. And the change of range was given
in yards. Thus the coverage area could be
extended to fit the tactical requirements
The second method was to order the various
batteries apart such that, as an example, one
battery was aimed at a point 200 yards northwest
of the ranging point,
and
another
over a
dangerous area
some 100 yards east of the
ranging point. A large area to be covered with
artillery fire could be covered by dispersing a
number of 'Mike' targets (regimental targets)
over it.
An important question to raise is: How
much ammunition shall be used? The answer
depends on the tactical situation and battle
techniques to be employed by the artillery. I will
discuss this later, but first a few general aspects
regarding battle techniques.
Battle techniques - general factors and
dilemmas
The battle techniques applied by the British
artillery were influenced by technical factors
discussed above, but were also based on the
general nature of artillery fire of the time. Some
of these were:
The technical constraint most affecting the battle
techniques was lack of precision, which was the
reason for the first observation in the list above.
The effect over an area was reinforced by the use
of high explosive shells spreading a large number
of lethal splinters over the area where the impact
came. Thus its characteristics as a weapon for
area coverage could be turned into tactical an
advantage in many situations, often a decisive
one
The battle technique to be applied must take
into account the fact that it often was very
difficult, not to sav impossible, to fix the target
exactly in relation to the guns. Furthermore one
had to take into account that the exact location
of the enemy positions might be unknown. Nor
was it alwavs obvious where the enemy would
emerge and what his intentions were.
A classic dilemma on the part of the gunners
therefore was whether the best method to engage
the enemy was with predicted fire without
having first ranged the potential target. This
meant taking advantage of surprise.
But it could
be argued that ranging was to take place first in
order to become certain that the fire for effect
went down exactly where its effect could be
maximised. Hence, what is best from a tactical
1311
