GUNFIRE
When observing the nature of gunfire dis-
persion it is realised that fire from a large
number of guns towards the same geographic
point would be dispersed over a fairly large area,
the shape of which was affected by the deploy-
ment of the guns and the difference between
them in terms of range and line. Artillery of the
time was not a precision weapon but a wide-area
hitting weapon. This was both an advantage and
a disadvantage depending
on the
tactical
situation and thus had to be taken into account
when the best battle technique had to be applied.
The following data illustrate in approximate
numbers the size of the area within which
planners had to expect the fire to be effective: 12€
Troop 100x100 yards
Battery 150x150 yards
Regiment 250x250 vard
Divisional artillery 350x350 vards
Divisional artillery + an AGRA 400x400
yards
As we will see later it was not always a matter of
having all the guns aiming at the same spot. Battle
techniques and the tactical situation could make
it more appropriate to take advantage of the
system characteristics and spread the fire, from
for instance a number of batteries or regiments,
over a larger area or along a line target by having
the guns to aim at different points/coordinates in
a controlled manner. Instead of the normal
practice to have the guns of troops or batteries to
fire with parallel barrels the fire from them could
be more concentrated or spread out by means of
individual aiming data. There were indeed many
options! Skilled and innovative gunners did not
want to get into a rut
Tactical advantages of different charges
and fuzes
As if it was not enough with options for variation
of the location and area of the fire impact,
opportunities for changing the trajectory profile
were also included in the tactical 'tool box'. This
could be done by firing with different charges
Most guns with a calibre less than 105mm
were in Britain called Quick Firing Guns (QF),
a term introduced already in the last vears of the
nineteenth
century
implied
that
gunpowder (propellant) was contained in a brass
cartridoe
case.
Before
firing a number
propellant filled bags were placed inside the
cartridge case. Each 'Charge' had its number of
bags. In order to reduce the risk for mistakes the
bags had different colour. The projectile was first
rammed into the barrel and then the cartridge
case was inserted before the breech was closed.
For certain guns such as the modern anti-tank
guns the projectile and the cartridge case was
loaded as one entity.
When rammed into the barrel the driving
band of the projectile fitted into the rifling of the
barrel by which it would rotate upon ignition of
the propellant. Another purpose was to prevent
any gas leakage between the barrel and the
projectile. Besides being a container for the
propellant bags, the primary role of the cartridge
case was to prevent gas leakage backwards
through the breech, which for the QF 25-
pounder was of the sliding block type. For
ignition the case was fitted with a base primer.
The first versions of the QF 25-pounder
had as we have seen three different charges and
a fourth came later, the Super Charge. The latter
became available for the first versions once these
guns had been equipped with a muzzle brake
and was used for extension of the range, but
could also be used when the gun was in an anti-
tank role firing directly towards enemy tanks
with armour-piercing projectiles. The need for
firing in elevations above 45° (upper register) in
mountainous terrain as in Burma and Italy,
made it necessary to introduce not only a revised
carriage but also additional charges, intermediate
charges, often called just incremental bag®
which were added to the base increme Wal bags,
25-pounder
could use
seven atteren
charges, i.e. it was a real gun-howitzer'. This was
typical for howitzers and gun-howitzers. The old
QF 3.7-inch mountain howitzer could use up to
six charges. Several versions with different types
of breech existed during the war.
The medium and heavy guns were classified
as Breech Loading Guns (BL) the propellant
cloth bags were not contained in a brass case but
were inserted directly into the barrel once the
projectile first had been rammed into position
and obturation forwards had been secured. To
prevent leakage backwards the breech was of the
screw type with interrupted threads. A special
primer was used for ignition of the propellant.
the BI
Charged
5.5-inch gun-howitzer
used four
During the war many different types of pro-
pellant were devised. Various types were tested in
HOW TO HIT THE TARGET - TECHNICAL GUN CHARACTERISTICS
Elevation 25-pounder
Fig. 8-5 When planning firing one has to select an
adequate charge so that the shell does not hit any
hindrance in the upward part of the trajectory, neither
in the downward part of it. Such a hindrance could be
buildings or some trees behind which a concealed
deployment has been made (Author)
order to find optimum relations between the
chemical composition and released chemical
energy per weight unit, rate of burn, etc. Different
additions to the propellant for reduced barrel
wearing and muzzle flame were tested as well.
The reasons for using different charges in
the field were twofold. First, it made it easier to
conceal the guns after deployment behind trees,
hills, and buildings etc., thus preventing direct
observation from the enemy side. It was then
necessary to select a charge that made the tra-
jectory pass over the obstacles taking
into
account the distance between the guns and the
obstacles. Similarly a steeper trajectory with
higher descent angle could make it easier to
avoid obstacles near the target (Fig. 8-5). A
steeper trajectory required higher
elevation,
which in its turn required a lower charge. This
meant a shorter range, which could be a trouble
tactically.
The other reason for using different charges
was related to the impact of the projectile. A tra-
jectory with higher descent angle could be an
advantage if the enemy was dug down in
trenches or the like. Again, this called for a low
charge number. In other situations a flat trajec-
tory was preferred, even if the range was
reduced, for instance when the gun was used in
an anti-tank role or when fire against bunkers or
other types of fortification was required. The
former situation was quite common in North
Africa before replacement of obsolete anti-tank
guns had taken place. The latter situation was not
an unusual task for the gunners in Burma.
Fig. 8-6 illustrates the elevation of a 25-
pounder as a function of the range. As can be
seen various charges can be selected if the range
to the target is, say, less than 7,000 yards, but
above 10,000 yards only Charge 3 and 'Super
Charge could be used, the latter giving the
maximum possible range. It should be noted that
Fig. 8-6 Elevation for different charges of a 25-pdr
Gun as a function of the range to the target (Author,
data from Range Tables Part 1 for QF 25-pdr Guns,
Mark | and II, 1944)
normally only some 20-25% of the projectiles
supplied in the field could be fired with the
highest charge, 'the Super Charge'. This was a
factor not to be overlooked when planning for
an operation and deciding where to deploy the
guns, particularly not in mobile battles. Artillery
out of range due to lack of appropriate stock of
charges when needed is useless!
Now turning to types of bursts and how
these were accomplished by means of various
tuzes. See Fig. 8-7
When the war broke out there were not
different types of fuze to consider
Shrapnel shells with their type of fuzes had been
removed from service in
the middle of the
1930s. They were replaced by 'High-Explosive'
shells that, upon bursting, gave a large number
Fig. 8-7 By means of different fuzes and the setting of
these the shells can be brought to burst as is best in
respect of the tactical situation. Percussion fuze
which implies direct impact burst when the shell hits
the ground, were most commonly used (Author)
