GUNFIRE
Interesting in this context is to note that the
to increase to 100 rounds per gun for the 25-
use of the divisional reconnaissance regiment's
pounders, i.e. 6-7 rounds per gun and minute,
mortar troop, which was equipped with 4.2-inch
and 60 for the medium guns whereas the heavies
mortars, in this operation was fully coordinated
would continue firing 30 rounds per gun.46
with the artillery regiment. By this, all regimental
An interesting detail was that VT fuzes (radar"
FOOs could use this additional resource when
fuzes) would be used this time. Many targets were
the range of the mortars so permitted.
located close to, or on, the planned landing zones
The 'RA
Support Net' was
the
most
for gliders. In order to avoid craters there the fire
important net needed in order to make concen-
against these targets would be airbursts by means
trated artillery fire possible from the airborne
of this type fuze. The decision was not obvious.
division's own resources and all those made
This new type of fuze suffered still from 'tething
available west of river Rhine. This and other nets
troubles and was thus not very reliable.
here discussed are illustrated in Fig. 22-9
The initial task given to 53 Airlanding Light
The principal station in this net was initially
Regiment RA with its
temporary two battery-
a special Set-up Station located near the western
organisation was preparation of defensive fire
shore of river Rhine. As soon as the divisional
(DF) as protection for the landed troops. A
artillery commander and his staff had landed
second task was harassing fire in depth where the
and established the headquarters they were to
enemy could be
expected to advance for
take over as the principal station in the network
counter-attacks.
Targets would be bridges, road
We may also note that the intended early
junctions, and concentration of buildings, etc.
support from 4 Field Regiment RHA had com-
It was important that the incoming aircraft
munication-wise been prepared.
As it was to be proved, all the well-conceived
would not be exposed to friendly artillery fire
Detailed safety
instructions were prepared to
preparations regarding radio communication
were a success. The large 'RA Support Net'
reduce this risk. The responsibility was delegated
could be opened already an hour after the first
down to the individual batteries and troops. But
landings, around 11 a.m. and it seems likely that
the prime responsibility was on the shoulders of
Officers
from
the XII Corps artillery
all stations were on the net around 12 a.m.
headquarters. One of them would be placed 10-
A short but intensive artillery fire
12km west of river Rhine and via radio pass over
preparation before the air-landings
a warning order that the armada racion is way.
The airborne armada was planned to arrive with
The second, positioned in a tower near the river,
first aircraft at 10.00 hours on 24 March 1945.
was the one to give the final order to all guns to
This was 'P' hour in the plans. The fire plan had
stop firing when the first aircraft reached the
two parts. The first was a preparatory, softening
river, undeniably a unique role!
fire against targets selected by the two airborne
When 'cease fire' was ordered, all the aircraft
divisions.
This was coordinated with further
were without any protection. As we have seen the
attacks bv
medium bombers
and fighter-
bombers. Responsible for this was the artillery
Table 22-7. Fire plans in support of air-landings
commander of XII Corps. Basically all the Corps
artillery was to be engaged, but for an hour only.
Day, time
Fire Plan
Number of guns, types
After a ten minutes pause, the second part would
follow which was aimed at combating enemy
D, 08.20-09.20
CLIMAX
Z16 25-nounder.
176 medium (4.5-inch/5.5-inch)
anti-aircraft units near the planned dropping and
landing zones. The time for this part of the fire
24 heavy (155mm/7.2-inch)
plan was 30 minutes
4 super heavy (240mm)
and should be stopped
36 American heavy (155mm)
when the first aircraft arrived on the scene.
24 heavy anti-aircraft guns (3.7-inch)
In summary the fire plans in support of the
airborne troops were as seen in Table 22-7.
D, 09.30-09.45
CARDET
264 25-pounders
During the second part, 'CARPET', the 25-
Other guns as above
pounders
were planned to fire 60 rounds per
D. 0945-P
214 25-pounders
gun and the medium and heavy guns 30 rounds
bombardment Other auns as above
per gun. In the final phase, the fire intensity was
P = Arrival time of airborne armada
334
THE FINAL ONSLAUGHT - THE RHINE CROSSING
landings would last for 70 minutes for the British
units to be dropped by parachute and landed
with gliders, the Americans would need 210
minutes. It was necessary to take into account
also the time needed for the 240 heavy bombers
to drop supplies to the landed troops, beginning
at P + 220 minutes, this concentrated to the
British sector. The long postponement
of
arillery support to the troops on the eastern side
of river Rhine would imply severe consequences,
as we will see later.
A good start - the plans for Operation
Plunder take effect
Preparations went on to the last minutes. But at
17.00 hours on D-1, 23 March, it was a huge
roaring start along the whole XXX Corps front,
and an hour later along the front of XII Corps.
Minor counter-mortar
bombardments
and
softening fire against enemy positions had
commenced already at noon that day. Within the
both Corps sectors the gunners from now on
had to fire almost continuously for several days.
The Ith US Army began its Rhine crossing
further south. One of the largest artillery con-
entrations in Northwest Europe was launched.
The presentations here are mainly based on
peration orders and plans issued by the partici-
pating formations. But changes of these could
come very late through new oral orders. Such
orders are seldom well documented and are often
completely missing. In this case, however, we can
get a good picture of what happened. It is an
account
about
counter-bombardment
Programme. The CBO of XXX Corps, Major
WG. Edwards, who obviously was a meticulous
person, wrote a detailed report after the operation
about the Corps counter-bombardment actions, 47
From this report, we can see that the first
pat of the initial plan, DIAl, was never fired.
The main part, DROOP I, was executed exactly
as planned between 17.00 and 18.00 hours, but
the employed units had been reinforced. Instead
021625-pounders 160 were engaged, but this
reduction was much compensated by engage-
ment of 240 medium guns instead of planned
basicaly fired as of the initial plan.
following sub-programmes
Edivards also informs that all targets were
engaged four times and that in DROOP I' three
up to forty guns were concentrated against each
they gun. The hour-long programme implied
that around 26,000 shells were fired by 512
guns. For all parts of the programme some
45,000 shells were consumed. The
Corps
Commander,
General
Horrocks,
can
be
presumed to have been satisfied with his 'milk
round'. He noted that the enemy artillery was
very passive during the critical initial phase of
the attack across river Rhine.
At 21.00 hours D-1, the first amphibious
vehicles moved into the water opposite Rees. The
BBC|
reporter
Wynford
Vaughan
Thomas
described vividly in a recorded report how he ex-
perienced the crossing of the Rhine when ac-
companying
the commander of
one of the
attacking battalions. One can hear the sounds of
bursting shells at the other side of the river. A bit
further away, the weaker but demanding sounds
of the Scots' pipers could be heard. The engines
of all the Buffalos geared up with a mighty roar
when all vehicles went towards the eastern shore.
Halfway across excited comments about the
crossing can be heard such as: 'We are racing
across Rhine., 'We are waiting for the enemy
to open fire', and
...'Around us all Buffalos
which seems an irresistible power? 448
The first British soldiers ran ashore at the
city Rees after the crossing that took about seven
minutes. Others followed suit and soon the first
battalions of the 51st (Highland) Division were
across on both sides of Rees. They were soon re-
inforced by 'swimming' Sherman tanks, some of
which, however, failed to climb the shore.
Crossings then went on for several days,
although short breaks had to be done when the
riverbanks were shelled by German artillery and
mortars. These breaks delayed the establishment
of ferry connections for heavier vehicles and -
not the least - construction of bridges. The
ferries (rafts) had capacity only for a limited
number of vehicles per hour, so the bridges were
of critical importance for the planned build-up
of resources in the bridgeheads.
In order to get tanks and artillery over the
river, ferries and bridges of the 'CL 40' or
'CL40/50' classes were required (numbers give
capacity in tons). During the first 24 hours the
capacity was restricted as only 'CL 9' classes were
then available. This capacity was sufficient for
transfer of light supply transports, general carriers
and much more, by which a first-hand need of
ammunition, fuel, foodstuffs etc., could be met.
The fighting in the XXX Corps sector was
hard. The British there had to meet battle-
experienced parachute troops and armoured
335
