GUNFIRE
Fig. 17-2 During the chaotic first days after the German invasion a Nonwegian division crossed the border to
Sweden where it was interned. Further to the North some other Norwegian resources were transferred to
Sweden thus preventing the Germans to get their hands on them. Here is long column of Nonwegian lorries
waiting on the Swedish side of the border (RAHT)
force. A well-conceived strategy lacked. No
ability to thoroughly revise plans for the new
situation was at hand. This led to allocation of
too small resources and these lacked proper
training and equipment for the tasks assigned to
them in Norway; altogether this made things
even worse
This was in particular true as regards the
British part of the allied Expeditionary Force.
French units and the Polish attached to them
were to prove more suitable and better trained
for the fighting to come.
Now, in this situation,
what were the
decisions made and what could be done?
The allies give priority to northern
Norway
Norway was to be given help, but where and how
was basically determined by the earlier strategy.
Narvik must be the prime target! It was here that
the iron ore traffic to Germany must be stopped.
And in the background were still hopes that the
Swedish ore fields could be occupied, or at least
brought under allied control. Soon a new reason
for a thrust in the North arose. The Norwegian
King and Crown Prince were on flight north-
wards together with the Government and even-
tually arrived at Tromse. Therefore the allies
should try to prevent the Germans from
occupying the northernmost part of the country.
Hopefully this part could be kept as a free zone,
from which the King and Government could
continue fighting for their country.
The task for retaking Narvik was assigned
to the retired British Admiral William Boyle, 12th
Earl of Cork and Orrey, here further on called
Lord Cork. He was to be assisted by Major
General P.J. Mackesy as commander
of the
British
ground
forces.
A nioine
broadier
Béthouart was appointed commander of the
French forces.
With Lord Cork, the Expeditionary Forces
got a strong and ener the Expediander y Fines
towards offensive actions. He was a worthy repre
2001
FAILED INTERVENTION IN NORWAY
sentative of a several hundreds of years long
tradition in the Royal Navy to act offensively and
boldly. Mackesy was a different personality. He
was not willing to take risks and was definitely not
a man who wanted to catch a moving opportunity.
While Lord Cork wanted to recapture
Narvik as
soon as
possible with resources
available, Mackesy first wanted to establish a
strong base at Harstad. When this was done, an
attack could be made from this place. Further-
more, he was also of the opinion that the allies
should wait till the snow had melted away nearer
the pending summer.
Orders were given in England to the units
that had disembarked to get on board again for
transport to Norway. As mentioned, one of the
brigades of the 5th Infantry Division in France,
15 Infantry Brigade, had left BEF to be attached
to Expeditionary Force for Norway.
245 From
England 24 Guards Brigade was sent to Harstad
with its three regular battalions, consisting of the
1st battalion Scots Guards, Ist battalion Irish
Guards, and 2nd battalion
South
Wales
Borderers. A Territorial Brigade, 146 Infantry
Brigade, was to be shipped to Harstad as well.
Other units were prepared for transport, amongst
them 147 Infantry Brigade, which was another
Territorial formation. In parallel with these
troops, transports, equipment, supplies, ammu-
nition and much more were shipped together
with supply units for the larger force to be built
up gradually with Harstad as its main base.
In France, the Ist Light Division, with two
Half-brigades each comprising three battalions
of Chasseur Alpins, mountain infantry, and a
Half-brigade from the Foreign Legion, was
alerted and had been ready for the intervention
in Finland since the planning for this engage-
ment had commenced. Attached to the division
was also a Polish Brigade with four battalions
divided into two 'Half-brigades'. These units
were ready also to go to Norway without delay.
In the French force were also a few batteries with
important 75-mm mountain guns included, 2e
Groupe Autonome d'Artillerie Coloniale.
While these forces were on their way to
Norway another confusing discussion broke out
in London. The new Norwegian Commander-
in-Chief, Major General Ruge, argued that the
allied intervention should in the first place be
done in the Trondheim region. Here the chances
were best for halting definitely the German
advance northwards
Ruge's arguments made an impression.
Eventually even Churchill, at first a bit reluc-
tantly but later with more enthusiasm, accepted
the idea that Trondheim should be captured. The
city should be held and all communication lines
northward
and to the east towards Sweden
should be secured. 246 Taking Trondheim would
not only give best opportunities to stop the
Germans as Ruge argued, it would also mean
that the allies got hold of a harbour large enough
for supplying an Expeditionary Force of at least
50,000 men.
At the nearby airfield, large air
resources could be based by which the German
air superiority
could be broken, so was the
al cument
1 here
were definitely good reasons for
taking Trondheim, but against it was the negative
effect of dispersion of resources which would be
a consequence. Additional resources required
were lacking, at least in the
short term
Resources aimed for the Narvik campaign must
be reduced.
Now it was necessary to quickly devise a
plan for the capture of Trondheim. It was
decided that the attack should come from the
sea. The Royal Navy was to land two Canadian
battalions to silence the coast artillery batteries
outside the city. Then, the forces would proceed
towards the city itself where 15 Infantry Brigade
would be landed. 147 Infantry Brigade would be
the reserve in England. At about the same time
the 146 Infantry Brigade and a half-brisade of
French mountain soldiers would, as it was said.
make a deceptive attack at Namsos further to the
North, the Mauriceforce. This attack was imple-
mented on 17 April. The infantry brigade had
been on its way to Narvik but was suddenly redi-
rected towards Namsos. A small detachment of
marine infantry had already landed there on 14
April in order to establish contact with the
Norwegian forces.
The transport with heavy equipment for the
brigade and vehicles could not be redirected, un-
fortunately. But even more critical: no anti
aircraft or artillery units were available for
support of the brigade in the coming battle. 247
On 17 April, 700 marine soldiers and a body
of other soldiers
were landed
south
Trondheim at Andalsnes.
They were soon
followed by 148 Infantry Brigade, a Territorial
brigade. Even here neither artillery nor anti
aircraft guns were accompanying them. The
force was given the name Sickleforce.
