GUNFIRE
valleys between the latitudes of North 38 and 48.
Units allotted for counter-bombardment would
therefore be deployed and directed in such a way
that they could combat enemy artillery in this area.
The importance of harassing fire in depth is
stressed and this task will be coordinated by the
CCMA. The CRAs should, however, themselves
plan for 'Defensive Fire' and 'Counter Prepara-
tion Fire'. These plans were to be well coordi-
nated with brigade
commanders and then
presented to the CCRA for final coordination.
Requests for inclusion of Corps units in the di-
visional fire plans should be addressed to him. It
was stressed that survey was to commence as
soon as possible
It was still believed before the war that fire
observation and control from the aircraft of RAF
Army Cooperation Squadrons would be an
efficient complement to the ground resources
This was therefore much dealt with in the
artillery order. Areas where to fly, call signs, fre-
quencies are regulated as were the types of target
to qualify for this type of bombardment (artillery
positions.
large
marching
columns, tanks.
infantry assembling for attack, etc.), all prov-
sions to be found in a separate Appendix. It is
also stipulated how much artillery that was to be
ready to respond on calls from the aircraft.
Generally, it was a matter of 2-3 troops per
division equipped with 18/25-pounders and one
troop equipped with 6-inch howitzers or 60-
pound guns. Sometimes even a section (2 guns)
of the heaviest guns could be made available.
The detailed order for the march and de-
ployment implied that all Corps and attached
GHQ artillery was to be ready to fire latest the
night between the fourth and fifth day, about half
of the regiments one day earlier.
At 04.00 hrs on 10 May 1940, the Germans
attacked the Netherlands and Belgium. German
reconnaissance aircraft could soon be seen over
the British positions around Lille and other places
in Northern France where the BEF was deployed.
Around 07.00 hrs the code word 'David 6' was
transmitted to all BEF units. Reconnaissance de-
tachments and scouts were alerted to be ready to
go on two hours' notice. The 'Z. Hour' was deter-
mined to be 13.00 hrs this day.
Impress on the troops that this is the real
thing and not a Divisional Exercise'
The 'Phoney War' was over and it was followed
by a Blitzkrieg quite different from the one all
had prepared for. The heading of this section
refers to Montgomery's concluding words when
giving his orders at his headquarters at 10.00 hrs
on 10 May for the launching of *Plan D': The
course of events had so far followed the 'manu-
script', 200
After the German plan for the attack, Fall
Gelb, had been revealed when a German officer
had crashed in Holland with the plan in his
briefcase, the French had been strengthened in
their belief that the German concentrated attack
would come
• towards this country and Belgium.
They did n
see the neutrality of these countries
to be any p
ection against a German attack. A
request frot
the Belgian government to the allies
to put 'Plan D' in effect was expected to come
at once, when the Germans crossed the border.
What they did not kno
however, was tha
the plan had been
changed on
initiative of the
chief of staff at von Rundstedt's Army Group A,
General von Manstein. He had proposed that
the attack car
through the Ardennes with the
purpose to sti
rike
south of the allied main forces
the shortest way to the Channel. Hitler found the
revised plan
attractive
and
immediately
approved it. The risks were high, but were
deemed to be acceptable if the allied forces first
had been tricked into the trap, and actioned a
quick redeployment into Belgium. The plan was
based on surprise and speed. Surprise was to be
accomplished by the launching of a first attack
into Holland and the northern part of Belgium,
which would at the same time make the allied to
move towards river Dvle. The main attack would
then follow suit through the Ardennes.
The speed necessary for this main attack
was to be achieved by having panzer divisions
and motorised infantry divisions in the lead,
while the majority of infantry divisions would
come later
These were to a large extent
equipped with horses and thus unable to keep
pace with the mechanised forces. Another step
for reducing the risks was close cooperation
between the
army
and the
alr Torce.
Luftwaffe, in particular their JU 87 Sinka dive-
bombers. These had to replace initially artillery
during the fast advance towards the Channel.
If reaching the Channel quickly, the allies in
the North would be deprived of all their supply.
The British supply lines, which came from ports
south of river Somme, in particular Cherbourg
and Le Havre, would be cut off. The German
Command believed that
they would
174
ARTILLERY TO THE FIELD - ACROSS THE CHANNEL
quickly encircle the allies. These would then have
to give up the battle due to lack of ammunition,
fuel and other necessities. The Germans could
never imagine an evacuation to England to be a
strategic option on the part of the allies.
For the German assault in the north, Army
Group B under General Feder von Bock had
been assigned. It comprised 29 divisions, of which
three were panzer (armoured) divisions. The
divisions were grouped in two Armies, the 6th and
18th Armies. South of these undertaking the main
thrust was Army Group A under Generaloberst
Gert von Rundstedt. At his disposal were no less
than 45 divisions, seven of them panzer divisions,
i.e. the major part of the armoured resources. The
divisions were grouped in three Armies, the 4th,
12th and 16th
Armies. Further to the South,
finally, was Army Group C under Generaloberst
Wilhelm Ritter
von Leeb. He had no panzer
divisions but 'only' 19 infantry divisions grouped
in two armies, the Ist and 7th Armies.
It should be particularly noted that von
Rundstedt's
seven panzer
divisions
Were
grouped in three Armoured Corps. Of these, the
XIX Corps with three divisions was under
command of the
creator of the German
armoured strategy, General Heinz Guderian.
Another well-known armoured specialist was
Major General Erwin Rommel who commanded
the 7th Panzer Division, which belonged to XV
Armoured Corps under General Hoth. The XLI
Armoured Corps was commanded by General
Hans Reinhardt.
On the allied side, the Belgian Army was
deployed in the North along the Albert Canal.
Along the northern border of France was, as
mentioned, the French 7th Army deployed in
the north-western sector beside the BEF which
on its right side had the French 1st Army. Then
followed the 9th and 2nd Armies. These armies,
and the
BEA
were
commanded
commander of 1 Army Group, General Bilotte.
Further to the right along the border down to
Switzerland four
deployed, the 3rd, 4th,
more French armies were
5th and 8th Armies,
which were grouped in 2 and 3 Army Group.
These armies
Maginot Line.
Were
deployed behind the
When Plan D' was put in operation, the 7th
French Army would march to the area between
Breda and Antwerp while at the BEF at the same
time moved to river Dyle. South of the BEF the
Ist French Army would deploy by turning right,
having its left flank beside the British I Corps
and the right flank close to river Sambre, just
north-east of the city Charleroi where the 9th
Army then c
ame. The other French armies were
to remain in their initial positions.
This
the situation when the
game
commenced in the morning of 10 May. This is
illustrated at large in Map 16-1.
No political decisions were needed for this
redeployment of the allied forces, the BEF was
free to immediately cross the Belgian border, and
everything was well prepared in advance. As we
have seen, reconnaissance units and units for
protection including advance guards, were the
units to go first. These were followed by head-
quarters detachments and resources for recon-
naissance of artillery deployment. The BEF was
deployed with the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Infantry
Division beside each other behind river Dyle.
The 4th Infantry Division was after some time
deployed within the area given to II Corps
further to the north as a Reserve just northwest
of Brussels. The 46th Infantry Division was
deployed as Corps Reserve within the area given
to I Corps. Further back the 5th and 50th
Infantry Divisions, which belonged to Brooke's
Il Corps, were deployed as GHQ Strategic
Reserve.
Even further back. the
two TA
divisions, the 42nd and 44th Infantry Divisions,
were deployed in accordance with the plan. They
belonged to III Corps and deployed near river
Escaut to increase the depth of BEF defence.
The respite of two weeks assumed for 'Plan
D' never materialised. The fighting was in full
swing before all units had been redeployed.
Montgomery's headquarters
Infantry Division) sent a message at 07.00 hrs
on 10 May to the artillery commanders' head-
quarters that Holland and Belgium had been
invaded by German troops the same morning.
The division had been alerted and ordered to be
prepared to march at four hours' notice. The
advance detachments were to leave at two hours'
notice. 201 At 10.00 hrs followed a staff confer-
ence, When Montgomery gave his orders to the
subordinated
formations
commanders
including the divisional artillery. It was now
decided that the advance staff detachments were
to cross the borders at 14.30 hrs. Much activity
followed with packing up of vehicles and
personal kits and disbandment of unnecessary
equipment. Documents not to be kept by the
staff were burnt or destroyed. Exactly at the time
