13. Train, Train, Exercise, Exercise..!
Fast-track training
When the war broke out, an enormous need for
training of soldiers and officers arose. It was a
matter of supplying all the mobilised and new
regiments with manpower. Rearmament was, as
we have seen, a process going on for around
four vears from the day when mobilisation was
ordered in September 1939. After this period.
the demands lessened but never ceased entirely
due to battle losses and various other reasons
a challenge becoming more and more difficult
to meet
Problems with
manpower
supply
anal
training became acute already in 1938 when the
sudden change of the willingness to prepare for
war came as a consequence of the serious
political changes in Europe. The rush to the re
cruitment offices of the Territorial Army (TA)
was enormous. Many of the formations had for
long been under nominal strength, but now
people willing to enlist, often had to be referred
to waiting lists. That year more than 60,000
recruits were registered. 171 The training needs
became even more drastic, when the Govern-
ment on 23 March 1939 decided to double TA
The decision about a month later to introduce
conscription of all men at the age of 20 years,
made the situation even worse.
The Royal Artillery met the 'doubling'
decision by creating a new TA regiment for each
of the existing
ones; a kind of
'daughter
regiment was quickly formed. From the 'mother'
about half of the officers and NCOs were trans
ferred to the new formation, a consequence of
which was a shortage at each of them. No
equipment was initially available for the new one,
neither could uniforms be provided. Training
with borrowed equipment had to be improvised,
at first focused on personal training. Training at
unit level had to come later
Vehicles were gradually provided, starting
with the 'Fishmonger's', the 'Plumber's' and
other civilian vehicles that were requisitioned by
the authorities for military use. The few guns
made available, besides borrowed ones, were
often vintage. At the most these could be used
for formal gun drills, i.e. laving, loading, deploy-
ment etc., they were labelled 'for drill purposes
only'. Rifles and other personal weapons could
not be given to everyone. The few available had
to be used by sentries and security squads
True to British Army traditions, command
ers emphasised personal smartness, hygiene and
cleanness.
'Spit and polish' was the required
standard! Daily parades and marches, under the
command of zealous Sergeant Majors and othe
NCOs imposing strict discipline and correct
marching order, became routine. Parades and
marches to the church on Sundays were also
routine, i.e. Church Parades.
It would take a year or so until the new TA
regiments had been equipped and trained
enough to be ready for practice firing with guns
for the first time; and their staff to shoot the first
few rounds with their personal weapons at a
shooting-range
Commanders at all levels were responsible
for the training of their units. This was a big
challenge on the part of regimental and battery
commanders. Their skill in this respect was really
put to the test. The room for private initiatives
and creativity was always large. In particular, this
was the case when personal skill of the gunners
in their basic roles had been accomplished and
the training began to focus on teamwork, either
for a troop, a battery or the whole regiment. "
For practicing gun firing with field artiller
several practice camps were available in 1939:
No. 1 Practice Camp, Larkhill/Tilshead
No. 2 Practice Camp, Okehampton,
Dartmoor
No. 3 Practice Camp, Redesdale,
Northumberland
No. 4 Practice Camp, Trawsfynydd, Wales
Two new camps came in 1940:
No. 5 Practice Camp. Otterburn, Northum-
berland
No. 6 Practice Camp, Sennybridge
Redesdale, Northumberland
TRAIN, TRAIN, EXERCISE, EXERCISE..
Fig. 13-1 Direct fire against attacking tanks was much
practised during the first years of the war, not least at
locations along the coasts of England (Olmperial War
Museum H 10910)
In 1942 the Westdown (part of Larkhill) and
Okehampton ranges were handed over to the
Americans, now in Britain.
As the demands on safety could be lessened
a ittle in wartime, firing with live ammunition
took place also outside the practice camps.
Other training areas with live firing facilities
were also set-up e.g. the South Downs in
Southern England is an example. Also practice
firing in areas such as Scotland took place and
became routine.
Practices to
improve the
capability to
combat enemy tanks by means of direct fire from
the guns were arranged at many places along the
coasts, one being Lydd in Kent. At these places
firing against a moving, towed target
was
practiced (Fig. 13-1). 174
Basic training of the mobilised units was not
enough; more resources were required. Hence, a
fairly large number of Training Regiments were
established from autumn 1939. Twelve of these
were organised to meet the training needs of field
regiments as well as the needs of medium and
heavy
regiments.
Furthermore.
such
regiments were established for training
artillery signallers and two for survev units
However, a few of these training regiments could
in 1940 be disbanded and most of them were
closed in 1943, when the rearmament was
almost completed
Training regiments had the task to provide
training in basic soldiering and gunnery skills
needed bv gun crewmembers. lavers. fire control
and command post assistants, driver's etc.
before being posted for active service. During
the very first years of the war, not much more
than six weeks of primary training, marching
and arms drilling could be done before the
recruits were posted. The situation graduall
improved, and when in 1943. the worst crisis
had been overcome; training programmes for re-
placements had been extended as follows: 17:
T'rimary traming for all, 6 weeks. followed
by further training depending on positions
(runners. & weelze
Drivers, 12 weeks
onecialists. 12 weeke
Signallers, 18 weeks
Before being posted, some additional training
could take place at one of the Reserve Regiments
which were established to provide five weeks of
151|
