GUNFIRE
Additional corrections in line and range
could be given to the gun layers, who had to set
them on the dial sight. When ranging, changes
in line and range were similarly ordered to the
guns.
The British guns were designed for a
maximum elevation of 45º. In mountainous
terrain as the Gunners met in Italy and Burma
runs
sometimes
had to be fired, as
mentioned, with higher elevation in order to get
a suitable trajectory with steep descent; this was
called the Upper Register, 132
Improvisation was then needed to raise the
front part of the gun by raising the wheels from
the ground. We can see in Fig. 10-7 what it
could look like. Later during the war a revised
sight carrier was introduced to facilitate laying.
As seen above Incremental Charges were also
provided to make firing easier in this Upper
Register'
Fig. 10-6 Laying of a 5.5-inch gun-howitzer. Medium
guns had the same dial sights as the 25-pdr. The sight
objective is in this example directed forwards to an
aiming point in front of the gun. Firing range was set
against graphic scales on a quadrant. We can here
see the ruler with its five markers for different
charges. The sight clinometer with its bubble levelis
to the right behind the quadrant (RAHT)
Fig. 10-7 British guns
were not desianed fol
firing at elevations above
45° (Upper Register).
With the 25-pdr this
could be overcome by an
improvised support
placed under the wheels
as shown here. By means
of this arrangement and
introduced incremental
chardes it was possible 10
fire above high
mountains and hit targets
behind them in e.g. deep
vallevs (Olmperial War
Museum NA 20531)
11. Preparations for Opening of Gunfire
Deployment and gun orientation
British artillery was normally deployed with the
two troop positions of a battery some 300-400
yards from each other. The four guns of a troop
were positioned with a gap of 25-35 yards
between them. With parallel barrels this meant
that the width of fire from a troop was 75-100
yards. Fire control for the troops was the
responsibility of the Troop Command Post
(ICP). This was deployed fairly centrally
behind the guns. Between the two troops the
Battery Command Post (BCP) was deployed.
The normal deployment scheme is illustrated in
Fig. 11-1.
The geodetic position of the battery was, as
mentioned above, the coordinates of the 'pilot
gun' in the left troop, i.e. the fourth gun to the
right.
If a concentration of the fire against one
point was ordered instead of having the troops
to fire with parallel barrels, deployment correc-
tions could be given to each gun. A graphic tool
was available for the calculations, the Sand
Graph.
Once the guns had arrived and been
deployed it was important to move all vehicles
away to a special parking area, the Wagon Lines,
some 500-1,000 vards behind the gun positions
This was also the place for technicians and
supply groups. Extra ammunition could also be
stocked up here
Keconnaissance
and
vicodradon
of
alternative gun positions was another important
task in connection with redeployment. The
Commanding Officer of 136 Field Regiment RA
in Burma. Lieutenant Colonel Armstrong wrote
in a newsletter about some lessons learned. One
Fig. 11-1 Normal deployment of a battery, 20-30
yards between the guns, 200-300 yards between the
troops. If the terrain was difficult, e.g. dense jungle,
guns sometimes had to be squeezed into a very
narrow area. This was often the case in Burma. Ar
advantage, however, was that local defence of the
deployment then was facilitated (Author)
The value of pre-reconnoitred alternative gun
positions was unquestionable. Bad ones were
better than none. Three times I had to move guns
at night because enemy parties were over-looking
them and preventing them doing their job by
day. 133
Special gun positions sometimes had to be re-
connoitred where direct fire against enemy tanks
could be fired. In order to avoid revealing the
gun deployment in connection with ranging, one
or two guns could be moved to temporary
positions away from the main battle position for
such tasks.
The other batteries of the regiment were
deploved in the same way as has been here
described for one of the three batteries. The
distance between the three should, however, not
exceed sav 2-3km in order to make it easier to
concentrate fire from them against the same
target. Another reason for not spreading out the
batteries too much was to facilitate telephone
and radio communication between the batteries
and the regimental headquarters.
The normal deployment pattern could not
alwavs be observed. Sometimes, as in Burma
dense jungle terrain could make it impossible.
Mountainous terrain without good roads as on
Sicily could also make it necessarv to improvise
and make the best out of the situation and deplov
guns much tighter than normally. During the
