Лучше ЧЕСТНАА СМЕрТЬ,
ЧеМ ПоЗорНАА Жизни.
Дм. Донской.
ПУСТЬ ВДохновЛЯЕ
ЭТОЙ ВОЙНЕ
НАШИХ ВЕЛИНИХ ПРЕДНОВ".
SIEG
oder
BOLSCHE
WISMUS
Saving Mother Russia: here Soviet propaga
married together the drive against the Gen
invader in 1942 and the legendary defeat:
Teutonic Knights in the thirteenth century!
Prince Alexander Nevsky.
When the German war effort turned sour in 19
Geetiers
played upon popular fears of
- portrayed here with a Jewish ta?
apulation fighting.
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
period of consolidation before the final push into the Reich. The pause gave
German forces just sufficient time to regroup for the last defence of the
fatherland. A series of spoiling actions, culminating in the Ardennes
offensive in December, in which Hitler repeated the mistaken strategy of
throwing his last reserves of tanks and aircraft forward against hopeless
odds, slowed up the advance of Allied armies. But after the defeat in the
west, the final defeat of Hitler's Germany was only a matter of time.
Pounded relentlessly from the air, threatened by a heavily armed host from
west and east, German forces fought to the bitter end. On 30 April, in his
bunker in Berlin, Hitler killed himself. When Albert Speer heard the news
the following day he wept uncontrollably; 'Only now was the spell broken,'
he wrote in his memoirs, 'the magic extinguished."3 To the end Hitler
blamed everyone except himself for German defeat - Jews, Bolsheviks,
even the German people, who died in millions for a man so obsessively self-
centred that he wanted them to 'struggle to the death', 'to hold out to the last
drop of blood' to prove his racial fantasies. °4
The German people did not commit collective suicide, though many
who had served Hitler did kill themselves. Rommel and von Kluge
took cyanide in the autumn of 1944 to avoid dishonour. Field-Marshal
Model, after disbanding his defeated Army Group in April 1945, walked
into a nearby forest and shot himself rather than face Allied vengeance.
After Hitler's death German surrender quickly followed. On 2 May Ger-
man forces capitulated in Italy. After a confused period of negotiation in
northern Germany, as individual German commanders tried to surrender,
the German Supreme Command finally signed the act of surrender at two
o'clock in the morning of 7 May. The terms were to come into effect on
all warring fronts at midnight 8 May. A formal surrender ceremony was
held in Berlin on the night of 8/9 May. Air Marshal Tedder signed as
Eisenhower's deputy; the hero of Stalingrad and Kursk, Marshal Zhukov,
signed for the Soviet armies. In Britain the 8th and gth of May were
declared public holidays. At midnight on 7 May all the ships, large and
small, around Britain's coastline set off their sirens and whistles in noisy
celebration.
announced on 9 May; the authorities
waited another two days before
allowing celebrations, for fear that German resistance might flare up again
from the embers. That night a thousand guns fired a salute in Moscow, and
hundreds of aircraft released red, gold and violet flares over the city. Hung
from balloons, a giant red flag hovered over the Kremlin.
Stalin, who had never allowed Soviet casualties to be announced, spoke
in a faltering voice of 'countless losses'. 95
