250
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY ...
meetings the two leaders argued out Allied strategy and coordinated their
productive and technical efforts. By November 1942 Churchill confessed to
his Foreign Secretary, Anthony Eden: 'My whole system is based upon
partnership with Roosevelt.17 There were strong differences of opinion;
neither statesman was entirely candid with the other. The warmth of the
relationship is easy to exaggerate, and Roosevelt for one seems to have seen
through Churchill's florid personality and mercurial intelligence. 'He has a
hundred [ideas] a day, and about four of them are good,' he told his
Secretary for Labour.
18 He teased Churchill ruthlessly, and remained wary
of climbing into bed with a Tory grandee. Both men continued to defend
national self-interest throughout the war, but the chief among those
interests was the common pursuit of victory.
Anglo-American collaboration
took its lead from Roosevelt
and
Churchill, but it soon developed a momentum of its own. At every level the
two states combined their activities. In December 194T it was agreed to hold
common strategic discussions in a Combined Chiefs-of-Staff Committee.
An intricate network of bodies for sharing intelligence and technical
information and for pooling industrial and shipping resources was estab-
lished during 1942. By the end of that year there were over nine thousand
British representatives in Washington, reproducing there the pattern of
Whitehall deliberations, with which the American administration was much
less familiar. This produced a good deal of friction, since British officials
were generally much better briefed, and much more versed in detailed
committee work. General Dykes, acting for the British Chiefs-of-Staff in the
American capital, found his opposite numbers 'completely dumb and
appallingly slow', " American representatives found the British patronising
and elusive. A Senate report in 1943 painted a lurid picture of 'smart, hard-
aheaded Britons, daily outwitting, ousting and frustrating the naive and
inexperienced American officials' 20 Even Roosevelt complained that he
came away from any discussion with his ally with 20 per cent, while they kept
Son ever the course of the war American negotiating skills improved with
the establishment of effective secretaries and a fuller domestic committee
structure. By the time of the Teheran Summit American officials felt they
were at last a match for the British.? By 1944 the balance in the alliance
tilted more obviously towards the United States as its military power and
political experience ripened.
If the two partners squabbled and bickered, their marriage survived none
the less. With the Soviet Union marriage was out of the question. It was
difficult to find a more unlikely associate. Diplomatic relations between the
three states in the 1930s were tenuous. The legacy of the Russian Revolution
threw up a barrier between communist east and capitalist west that was
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
251
difficult to penetrate even in the name of expediency. When Stalin made his
pact with Hitler in August 1939 the western democracies added the Soviet
Union to the number of their potential enemies. The Soviet war on Finland
in December 1939 provoked a 'moral embargo' on all trade with the Soviet
Union. In the six months before Barbarossa relations between the United
States and the Soviet Union were, according to one Soviet view, 'growing
worse and worse' 22 Stalin remained impervious to all warnings from the
west of impending German attack, assuming that Britain was trying to
provoke a struggle between communism and fascism, hoping to profit by
it. When Germany actually invaded, Stalin was completely uncertain how
Britain would react.)
The immediate response from the west was, under the circumstances,
surprisingly favourable. Churchill, one of the most outspoken critics of the
Soviet system, who had sent British troops in 1919 to help the counter-
revolution, gave an immediate pledge of support. It was a very personal
gesture, made, he told his private secretary, only because his single purpose,
above all others, was the destruction of Hitler. On the evening of 22 June he
broadcast his decision without even showing the text of his speech to the
Foreign Office. He did not disavow his unalterable hostility to communism
but he spoke instead of the innocent Russian people battling against
Hitlerism.
He
promised all the economic and technical assistance in
Britain's power to provide. 23
Roosevelt's response was just as personal. Though no friend of com-
munism, his close associate, the wealthy lawyer Joseph E. Davies who was
American ambassador in Moscow from 1936 to 1938, gave him glowing
testimonials on the young Soviet society and its remarkable leader. When
news of the invasion arrived Roosevelt told his cabinet that the priority was
'to give help to the Russian people'. Unlike Churchill he did not publicly
announce the commitment from fear of popular hostility but he worked hard
to begin an active aid programme against the strong advice of many of his
close colleagues and his military leaders.24 Without the
whole-hearted
support of Churchill and Roosevelt neither the economic aid nor moral
comfort given to the Soviet Union would have been possible. They insisted
on the commitment in the face of strong opposition. )Neither the British
Foreign Office nor the State Department was happy with their new co-
belligerent in the early weeks of war. The British censors were instructed
that the Soviet Union was to be described for the time being not as an ally,
but as an associate.25 General Pownall, chief of the Home Army, confided
to his diary his view of the Russians: 'a dirty lot of murdering thieves
themselves, and double crossers of the deepest dye' ? The prevailing view
was that the Soviet Union would collapse in a matter of weeks, and that any
