I12
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
each one. Bomber Command experienced rising losses - 492 bombers in
1940, I,034 in 1941. Not all of these losses came from fighter attack. German
anti-aircraft guns accounted for a third of them. The manifold dangers of
night-flying, often in cloud and with poor navigation equipment, took a
depressing toll, even when aircraft had survived the German defences? On
14 July 1941 six aircraft set out for Hannover from Oakington airfield near
Cambridge. They all succeeded in returning but found East Anglia shrouded
in cloud. Only one made it back to base; another ran out of petrol near the
coast, one crashed in the town centre of Northampton, and two more were
damaged landing on other airfields.33 By the end of the year losses were
running at such a rate that Bomber Command was facing difficulty in
replacing aircraft. It seldom had more than a hundred operational at any one
time. By the last months of 1941 the bombing offensive was petering out.
(The fortunes of the campaign were revived dramatically in the spring of
1942? It is usual to attribute this renaissance to the extraordinary impact of
the man appointed as Commander-in-Chief of Bomber Command on 23
February that year, [Air Marshal Arthur 'Bert' Harris. Though there are
other explanations of a technical and tactical nature, there can be little doubt
about the striking effect that Harris's arrival had on the force. He was fifty
years old when he assumed command, the son of a civil servant in the India
Service. He began his military career, improbably, as bugler in the ist
Rhodesian Regiment, established in 1914 with the onset of the Great War.
He later joined the Royal Flying Corps, survived, and continued as a career
airman between the wars. He was an enthusiast for bombing in the 193os,
helping to steer the plans for what became the first generation of heavy-
bombers, the Wellington, Stirling and Halifax. At the outbreak of war he
held the conviction that 'the surest way to win a war is to destroy the enemy's
war potential', and that this could only be done with the heavy-bomber,
Comentrated in great numbers.* He had a clear grasp of the limitations of
bombing, particulary as it had been conducted since 1940, combined with a
resolute belief in its ultimate vindication. It was this quiet confidence that
perhaps explains his effect on the Command, for he was not a flamboyant
man. Very few flyers ever got to see him; he was reserved, even dour; he
suffered fools not at all. From the moment he assumed office he doggedly
defended bombing strategy from its detractors, while he patiently set about
creating a force of sufficient size, operational effectiveness and technical
sophistication to carry out the task for which he felt Bomber Command was
best equipped, the destruction of Germany's industrial areas.
( Much has been written about Harris's responsibility for the so-called 'area
bombing', the practice of attacking whole cities rather than specific
targets. JAfter the war he carried the blame for launching a campaign of
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
II3
indiscriminate terror-bombing
against Germany's urban areas in
the
pursuit of a strategic chimera, the critical fracturing of morale. Neither
of these accusations carries conviction. The strategy of area bombing was
already in place months before Harris took command. It was the product of
operational reality. The inaccuracy of attacks on single factories or rail
centres forced Bomber Command to adopt a policy designed to cause
general disruption and the demoralisation of the factory workers In May
1941 Lord Trenchard, Chief of Air Staff until 1930, sent Churchill a
memorandum on how best to conduct air warfare, which reiterated
his hoary dictum that morale was what mattered most, spiced up with
the view that Germans were particularly prone to 'hysteria and panic'. The
report was read approvingly by the service chiefs, and in July Bomber
Command was directed to attack 'German Transportation and Morale'. 35 In
February 1942, a week before Harris's appointment, Bomber Command
was formally directed to concentrate all its efforts on the morale of the
enemy civil population' 36 Harris, then, inherited a commitment to area
bombing; he did not originate it. Neither did Harris have the slightest doubt
that 'morale' was a hopelessly ill-thought-out objective, a 'counsel of
despair', he later recalled. He had no confidence that German morale was as
brittle as his colleagues hoped, and even if it was he doubted that any
strategic good would come of its collapse, 'with the concentration camp
round the corner' 37 Harris stuck to his view that Germany's material ability
to wage war was what counted, and this could be undermined only by heavy
and persistent bombing of industrial centres - factories, transport facilities,
supporting services and workers' housing. Demoralisation was, in Harris's
view, a by-product of the war of attrition against the German economy.
This was the campaign that Harris waged. It involved civilian deaths,
though few people, Harris included, would have found this as unacceptable
in 1942 as it appears to the liberal conscience today.| Indeed Harris's choice
of targets and the new technology which at last became available in 1942
made a high level of civilian casualties - collateral damage, in modern jargon
- unavoidable] For Harris took up his appointment in Bomber Command at
just the time that the new heavy-bombers, at whose conception he had
played a key part, came of age. In February 1942 there were just 69; by the
end of the year almost two thousand had been produced, including 178 of the
new four-engined Lancaster,
which became the mainstay
of Bomber
Command for the rest of the war. The 'heavies' made it possible to carry very
much larger bomb-loads very much farther, and to concentrate a great
weight of both high explosive and incendiary bombs against a major
industrial centre. It was concentration of force that Harris wanted to
achieve. Just before he assumed command a new radio navigation device,
