182
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
its coal and steel. In the year leading to the siege of Stalingrad Germany
produced four times as much steel as the Soviet Union. During the crisis
months of 1942 and 1943, when the tide was turned on the eastern front, the
balance of resources and weapons had not yet moved in favour of the Red
Army. Even with the entry of the United States the situation was not
transformed at once. The Battle of Midway was won with overwhelming
naval strength on the Japanese side. After years of disarmament and
isolation, the United States was not a major land power, and German
diplomats reported to Berlin their conviction that it would take years for
America's economic potential to be realised in large, well-armed forces. In
reality the transformation took only a matter of months; so rapidly was
America's consumer economy mobilised that by 1943 a substantial transfer
of resources from United States production to help her allies became
possible.
By 1944 the balance of weapons did swing massively in the Allies' favour.
* But this widening gap was not a result simply of the possession of greater
quantities of manpower and raw materials, In the Soviet case 8 million tons
of steel and 90 million tons of coal in 1943 were translated into 48,000 heavy
artillery pieces and 24,000 tanks; Germany in the same year turned 30
million tons of steel and 340 million tons of coal into 17,000 tanks and 27,000
heavy guns. 'if the Soviet Union made the most of its attenuated resources,
the new German empire failed to make the most of its economic advantages.
This was partly a result of economic warfare. The Allies tried to deny their
enemies the use of critical resources, oil in particular. Bombing seriously
restricted the scope of Axis production from 1943. Unconstrained by enemy
action, Axis production in 1944 and 1945 would certainly have been higher.
The key years were earlier in the war. It was in 1942-3 that the disparity
between the two sides was created by Soviet industrial revival and American
rearmament. Neither could be taken for granted. Success on these two
economic battlefronts shaped the military successes, at Stalingrad and
Kursk, in the Atlantic Battle, and in France.
In 1941 the Soviet economy was threatened with complete collapse. In a
matter of months German forces conquered the main industrial and
agricultural regions of the Soviet economy. The rich grain lands of the west,
the Soviet 'bread-basket', passed over to the enemy. In 1942 grain supplies
fell by half for the 130 million Soviet citizens in the unoccupied zones; meat
production fell by more than half.® One-third of the Soviet rail network was
lost, and 40 per cent of electricity generating capacity. The life-blood
of modern industry - the supply of iron ore, coal and steel - was cut by
183
ECONOMIES AT WAR
three-quarters. The availability of vital resources for modern weapons -
aluminium, manganese, copper - fell by two-thirds or more.'
The Soviet state was for the moment reduced from being the world's third
largest industrial economy, behind the United States and Germany, to the
rank of smaller economies, such as France, Italy and Japan. Formerly
resource-rich, the Soviet economy was now poor in almost everything
except oil, timber and lead Another government might have given up the
struggle there and then, or, like the Tsarist economy in World War I, limped
on from one disaster to the next. The figures alone can scarcely convey the
extent of the catastrophe, as a confused mass of officials, workers and
equipment fled before the invading armies into the vast, predominantly
rural hinterland, there, with a shrunken fuel supply, deteriorating transport
and a hungry workforce, to rebuild Soviet industry and keep over two
hundred Soviet divisions in the field.
Against every reasonable expectation, the Soviet economy repaired the
fractured web of industry, transport and resources and in 1942 produced
more weapons than a year before, and more weapons than the enemy.
*
Moreover many of these weapons were of improved quality, reversing the
uneven technical confrontation of 1941) It proved impossible to make good
all the losses of coal, iron and steel, but Soviet factories were able to use
the iron and steel that could be produced solely for the most urgent war
production. In 1943 the gap between Soviet and German
production
widened further. In the middle years of the war Soviet factories produced
three aircraft for every two German, and almost double the number of
tanks. The balance of heavy artillery was three to one. The Soviet economy
outproduced the German economy throughout the war from a resource base
a good deal smaller and with a workforce far less skilled.®
This was a remarkable achievement by any standard, but it is easier to
describe than to explain/The simple answer might be that the Soviet Union
operated a command economy, directed by the state and centrally planned.
There is certainly something in this. The Soviet authorities did not have to
collaborate with private capitalist interests, or reach compromises with
labour. The economy was governed by decree and reluctant workers or
incompetent managers filled the swelling population of the labour camps,
the Gulags, where they worked for the war effort behind barbed wire.' But
(Stalin could not simply command the economy to produce, any more than
Canute could stop the tide. Coercion was never enough on its own to distil
weapons from the disordered industrial rump left in 1942. Soviet economic
achievements owed more to planning?
The Soviet Union epitomised the cult of planning that gripped a whole
generation of Europeans and Americans after the Great War.
Soviet
