DEEP WAR
74
for the Stalingrad confrontation. He was a quiet, subdued man who loved
Beethoven. Tall, almost ascetic, he took an obsessive interest in his personal
appearance and would be found each morning with a bright white collar and
highly polished boots. During the approach to Stalingrad the heat made
him tired and listless. His health deteriorated with bouts of dysentery,
the 'Russian sickness'. As conditions in the city grew worse, he became
increasingly depressed about the toll on those under his command. '7
When Chuikov assumed command of the 62nd army, Stalingrad was
unrecognisable. 'The streets of the city are dead, he wrote. 'There is not a
single green twig left on the trees; everything has perished in the flames. All
that is left of the wooden houses is a pile of ashes and stove chimneys sticking
up out of them ..1& Only the concrete and iron structures of factories, and
the larger stone buildings of the city centre, remained standing above
ground level, roofless, the interior walls crumbled away. Every ruin was
again contested, until it, too, collapsed into rubble. On Chuikov's first day of
command. 13 Sentember, German forces gathered for a final concentrated
effort to drive Soviet troops into the Volga. The following day they captured
the central Railway Station and the heights of Mamayev Kurgan. Chuikov
was forced to move his headquarters from a rough mud dug-out on the hill to
a safer bunker on the banks of the river Tsaritsa, near its junction with the
Volga. From here he directed his dwindling forces to retake strongpoints, or
in small groups to base themselves in buildings in front of the German
advance, where they were to fight to the last man and the last round. It is
testimony to the extraordinary nature of the contest that many did so. Over
the following three days the Central Station changed hands fifteen times; on
Mamayev Kurgan first one side, then the other, fought for the summit.
Greatly outnumbered, and subject to constant aerial bombardment, the
62nd was slowly pushed back. By the 14 September the situation was at its
most desperate. At Stalin's headquarters the decision was taken to throw in
the only reinforcements to hand, the 13th Guards division led by Hero of the
Soviet Union Alexander Rodimtsev.
For Stalin, Rodimtsev's men were to play the part that the 'Steel Division'
played at Tsaritsyn a quarter-century before. It was a race against time.
Small groups of staff officers from Chuikov's headquarters were posted to
hold the road leading to the jetty where the reinforcements were supposed
to disembark. With only fifteen tanks between them they held the position
until the first of the ten thousand guardsmen could be ferried across. They
were thrown straight into combat from a gruelling forced march. One
thousand of them had no rifles, and the rest were short of ammunition.
Chuikov sent them straight into the heart of the battle for the central area of
the city. They lacked knowledge of the terrain, and were inexperienced in
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
75
city fighting, but they did succeed in stemming the German thrust, and gave
valuable time for more reserves to be brought in, and for Chuikov to regroup
his forces. The division took casualties of almost 100 per cent in the process,
and had to be withdrawn. It took little serious part in the remainder of the
battle, but Rodimtsev's men became part of the folklore of Stalingrad. 19
Over the next few days the oth army captured new stretches of the central
district, including the giant Univermag department store on Heroes of the
Soviet Union Square, where the Soviet defenders fought to the last in the
basement. Paulus later made the building his headquarters. Farther to the
south a fierce battle raged around a giant grain elevator, where a small
detachment of Soviet soldiers held out for 58 days against tanks and artillery
fire. A final push by the German forces secured the central landing stage on
the river itself, but a wall of artillery and rocket fire from the far bank
prevented them taking advantage of it. The Soviet front line now consisted
of ragged pockets of resistance, with their main strength contained within
the broad industrial area in the north of the city. Some units were isolated
behind the German front, from where they stole out at night to harass the
enemy. On 25 September Paulus turned his forces towards the factories.
Three infantry and two Panzer divisions attacked on a 3-mile front. For over
a month the same pattern was repeated, German attacks by day, Soviet
counter-thrusts by night, hand-to-hand fighting for every workshop and
every house. Soviet forces were overwhelmed by enemy firepower. One
after another the giant factories fell, until the 62nd held only the Barricades
plant, on the banks of the river.
[Why did Paulus fail to take the city, which was held for two months by
forces constantly short of supplies, suffering debilitatingly high losses,
perched
dangerously on the very edge of the Volga? German forces
certainly declined in fighting power as they moved farther eastward; tanks
and aircraft were difficult to maintain and all units suffered very high loss
rates. The morale of German forces slumped as the tempo of battle
increased. "Stalingrad is hell on earth,' wrote a German NCO to his mother
in September. 'It is Verdun, bloody Verdun, with new weapons. We attack
every day. If we capture twenty yards in the morning the Russians throw us
back again in the evening. '20 German troops found it unsettling to move
from large-scale, fast-moving operations to a narrow front of close fighting,
where it was difficult to make sheer numbers tell so effectively. But above
all, Soviet forces exploited the urban battlefield to full advantage.
Under Chuikov's command the Red Army developed a whole range of
tactical innovations to hold the enemy at bay. Most postwar accounts of the
fighting on the eastern front take an uncharitable view of Soviet tactical
performance, but it is hard not to conclude that tactics played a key part in
