308
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
Colonel Count Claus Schenk von Stauffenberg. From a devout Catholic
background, Stauffenberg was an unconventional soldier. In his youth he
was brought under the spell of the German symbolist poet Stefan George,
whose spiritual rejection of the modern age and its soulless materialism, his
mystical appeal to the eternal values of German culture, linked the young
soldier with traditions of chivalric behaviour and patriotic duty. He came to
see the killing of Hitler as an act of spiritual redemption, St George slaying
the dragon.ºº
He was none the less not an ideal assassin. He had been badly wounded
in North Africa, where he lost an eye, his right hand and two fingers of his
left hand. He refused to abandon his military calling, and a few months after
his injuries he returned to active duty in Germany as Chief-of-Staff for the
General Army Office in Berlin, organising recruitment and training. While
he helped to coordinate the plans for a coup, the resistance attempted again
and again to kill Hitler. A second consignment of the British explosive,
shipped to East Prussia, mysteriously exploded in its hiding-place. Then it
was planned to use a display of new uniforms as the opportunity for the
assassination. A soldier modelling the new kit, primed with explosives,
was to throw himself on the Führer and detonate the bomb, killing them
both. Though the event was scheduled three times, Hitler never had time to
inspect the new outfits. Finally in desperation it was agreed that Hitler
should be lured to army headquarters in Russia, and there, like Caesar in the
Senate, be done to death by the circle of men around him. But Hitler never
went.
The conspirators became increasingly disillusioned. Some argued that
they might just as well wait for the Allies to finish the job for them. Finally
von Stauffenberg undertook to do the deed himself. Twice in July 1944 he
arrived at conferences carrying in his briefcase a time bomb which he had
learned to prime with his remaining three fingers. At the first Himmler was
not present and Stauffenberg preferred to wait until he could kill him too. At
the second meeting Hitler left before the bomb could be detonated. Finally
on 20 July at Hitler's East Prussian headquarters at Rastenberg Stauffen-
berg succeeded in smuggling his bomb through the three security zones
surrounding the buildings, and into the conference room itself. Instead of
holding the meeting in the usual heavy concrete bunker, where the blast
would have been deadly, it was held that day in a small wooden building.
The bomb was primed, and Stauffenberg slipped it under the large oak map
table, inches from Hitler. He left the conference to answer a fictitious
telephone call, too soon to notice another officer, having bumped his legs on
the briefcase, push it farther under the table, behind the large oak support.
When the bomb exploded the hut was torn apart. Stauffenberg, crouched in
THE MORAL CONTEST
309
hiding outside, saw bodies hurled into the air. Satisfied that Hitler must be
dead he bluffed his way through the security net, and flew to Berlin to seize
power from the Party. The bomb blast had not done the job. The thin
wooden walls released the impact, throwing most of those present out of the
room. Four people were killed, but Hitler was shielded by the thick oak
table. He emerged shaken and grazed, his trousers torn to shreds, consumed
by a livid rage against the traitors. Within hours of arriving in Berlin
Stauffenberg was arrested by fellow officers and executed in the courtyard
of the War Ministry.91
The failure of the assassination attempt on 20 July had dire consequences
for the opposition to the war. Hitler took the opportunity to exact a savage
revenge. Thousands of senior soldiers, ministers, and officials were rounded
up and subjected to torture, imprisonment and, for many, a grisly death.
Confessions were extracted with all the apparatus of a mediaeval dungeon -
thumbscrews, the rack, the iron maiden. The heart was torn out of the
resistance.
The Party and all those who followed willingly in its wake
reaffirmed their fanatical loyalty to their leader; even those hostile to the
regime, and conscious of Germany's imminent defeat, were forced into line.
Himmler's SS were unleashed in a wave of lawlessness across Germany. Any
hint of defeatism or demoralisation was punished with a brutal indifference.
Between July 1944 and the end of the war, the full apparatus of terror and
barbarism practised in the east was turned on the German people. Caught
between a remorseless enemy and a vicious despotism the population con-
tinued to fight and work in conditions of increasing desperation. All but a
fraction accepted that the war was lost. Post-war findings suggested that by
the end of 1944 almost three-quarters of Germans wanted to give up the war
at once. The proportion willing to fight to the very end, 29 per cent, may not
all have been Nazis, but the figure was close to Hitler's share of the vote in
the last free elections, in November 1932.º2
In both Germany and Japan confidence in victory ebbed away long be-
fore the final battles. In both states important sections of the ruling class
were hostile to the war. Popular enthusiasm was muted. A hard core
of committed supporters kept the war effort going despite the widespread
demoralisation on the home front. Soldiers and civilians alike were sub-
jected to ever harsher discipline to keep them fighting and working in con-
ditions of terrible hardship.
Yet both states continued their defence right
up to the point where further resistance was no longer possible. As the end
drew nearer both peoples were consumed with a dread at what might happen
to them after their defeat. In Japan the official line made it clear that the
enemy was bent on annihilation and oppression. When Japanese were asked
after the war what they expected the Americans to do to them, more than
