46
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . •
Dönitz shared his chief's conviction that the Anglo-Saxon powers would
be defeated 'only at sea'. 51 The son of a Berlin engineer, Dönitz joined the
navy straight from school in 1910, and rose during the Great War to
command a submarine until captured by the Royal Navy shortly before the
war's end. He was regarded by all his superiors as an outstanding officer,
dedicated, cool-headed and sociable. He bitterly resented Germany's defeat
and welcomed the revival of German strength under Hitler. In 1936 he was
appointed Führer of the German U-boat arm and dedicated himself
singlemindedly to the task of building up a sufficient force of submarines to
alter German prospects decisively in a renewed naval war with Britain.52
He always regarded three hundred as the optimum number of submarines
to make Britain's sea-lanes unnavigable, and by 1942 he had all but achieved
this figure. This did not mean there were three hundred submarines in action
at any one time, for large fractions were always in transit, refitting or
training; but it did mean eighty or ninety were operational at any one time,
most of them in the Atlantic. The bulk of the boats were the Type VII,
weighing approximately 750 tons, with a maximum speed of 17 knots, a
radius of 8,000 miles and an armament of eleven torpedoes. In 1942 they
were supplemented by the Type IX boat, of I, Ioo tons with a cruising range
of 13,450 miles and 22 torpedoes. 53 The boats were organised in groups of
three, and were formed into the wolf-packs only when a definite convoy
sighting had been made. A control room in France tracked the progress of
both U-boats and merchant ships, directing the boats to the contact point by
brief radio messages. Some U-boats were sent to the coast of Africa or to the
Indian Ocean, returning after eighteen-month voyages with crews parched
by the sun and bearded almost beyond recognition. But Dönitz preferred
the principle of concentration of force against the richest pickings on the
Atlantic trade lanes. Submarines followed the ships.
In the early months of 1942 there was no doubt about the target. With
American entry into the war the submarines were sent to the far side of the
Atlantic to attack the concentration of shipping on America's vulnerable
eastern seaboard. The submarine packs were given suitably predatory
names - Leopard, Panther, Puma etc - and ordered to begin Operation
'Paukenschlag' ('Drumbeat'). For the submariners it was the start of
"fortunate times' once again. From the middle of January they began to reap
a remarkable harvest. The Americans sent merchant ships and oil tankers
without escort, unconvoyed, using radio so openly that the submarines had
no difficulty in closing on the isolated vessels as they each betrayed their
position. When the submarines surfaced near the coast they met an
extraordinary sight. The seaboard cities were a blaze of light, illuminating
the silhouettes of slow-moving ships passing along the familiar peacetime
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
47
routes, their own lights still shining. The submarines fired at will. In four
months I •2 million tons of shipping was sunk off the American coast alone.
The Allies lost 2•6 million tons of shipping between January and April, more
than had been lost in the Atlantic in the whole of 1941. U-boat losses in
January were only three, in February only two.54
This situation could not last. The American navy had encouraged cargo
ships to sail independently, without escorts, because of what it had seen of
damage to the convoys in 1941, when British and Canadian escort vessels
had been unable to cope with the submarine once it had sighted its prey. The
navy's offensive traditions inclined it to try to hunt down the submarines
using specialised naval groups along the coast, but the patrols were
ineffectual, looking for a needle in a haystack. Not surprisingly, few contacts
were made, while the wolf-packs gobbled up the defenceless merchantmen.
Only a shortage of submarines prevented an even worse disaster, for at just
the point that Dönitz hoped to tighten the screw Hitler ordered U-boats to
Norway to prevent what proved to be a phantom invasion. By the time the
submarines were available in strength there had occurred a revolution in
American tactics. Convoying was instituted, together with a blackout and
radio silence. Continuous air patrols forced the submarines away from the
coast, down to the Caribbean and farther out into the Atlantic.
Here there were still plenty of opportunities. During 1942 the submarine
force had the benefit of a vital edge in the intelligence war. The German
naval intelligence service, the B-Dienst, successfully broke the British Naval
Cypher No. 2 in September 1941, and three months later was able to read the
new Cypher No. 3, which was used by the British, Americans and Canadians
for controlling the movement of all trans-Atlantic convoys. In February
I942 the Allies lost their newfound ability to read the German Enigma traffic
- machine-enciphered signals thought by the Germans to be impenetrable
(known as Ultra on the Allied side) - when the Triton cipher was altered.
This intelligence black-out lasted until the end of the year. It was now
possible for German submarines to be directed accurately into the path of
oncoming convoys, but extremely difficult for the Allied navies to know
exactly where the wolf-packs lay in wait. 55 Other advantages piled up. New
supply submarines of 2,000 tons - nicknamed 'milch-cows' - were sent out to
enable the smaller boats to refuel and rearm without having to make the long
trip back to the submarine bases in Europe, during which time they were
completely ineffective.
The radio messages
which held the wolf-pack
together and directed it to the target were converted to a concentrated form
to make their duration as brief as possible, in order to avoid detection.
Yet for all the tactical sophistication the submarines remained vulnerable
to the well-managed, heavily-escorted convoy, or to air patrol by converted
