44
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . . .
the United States navy had prepared for twenty years. Victory in the mid-
Pacific was the first leg in the long haul back to Allied command of the seas.
The desperate efforts to stem the tide in the Pacific had immediate
repercussions for the war against Germany and Italy. Although the
American service chiefs wanted to send an army into Europe as soon as
possible in order to get to grips with the enemy they regarded as the most
dangerous, they were compelled to accept that not everything could be done
at once. There were shortages of ships, trained men and equipment of every
kind. So generously provisioned was each American division with food,
vehicles and services that it required 144,000 tons of shipping space to move
just one infantry division, and almost a quarter of a million tons for one that
was armoured. *S By October 1942 only one and a half American divisions
had reached Britain. With great reluctance Admiral King, and his army
colleague General George Marshall, had to accept that no invasion of
continental Europe was possible in 1942, though they pressed all year for a
firm commitment that some kind of amphibious assault would take place in
1943 against German-held territory. 46
The British had recognised sooner than their new ally that it was foolhardyto
attempt an assault on Europe without adequate numbers and prolonged
preparation. Their preference was for limited seaborne operations in the
Mediterranean theatre, where British Commonwealth troops were already
engaged in a holding operation to prevent Italian and German forces from
reaching the Suez Canal and the oilfields of the Middle East. American leaders
found British preoccupation with the Mediterranean hard to understand.
American military doctrine was straightforward: take the offensive with all
available force against the main force of your adversary. British strategy
was less direct, more subtle, honed by years of experience in fighting larger
powers with small resources. British leaders knew that they faced disaster it
they pitted an inadequate land army against Germany in 1942; they had been
defeated in just such an attempt two years before, with the whole French army
at their side. Naval power allowed them the luxury of picking easier fields of
combat, against the weak links in the enemy's armour. There was nothing
particularly special about the Mediterranean. Britain had no large settler
community there; from Gibraltar to Aden she had only a few thousand colonial
officials and traders. There were no vital economic interests at stake.
Although she hoped to deny Middle Eastern oil to the Axis powers, almost
all the oil used in Britain came from the New World by 1942.47 The chief
argument for Allied presence in the Mediterranean was that here they were
fighting a corner of the war that they could win in 1942, against weak Italian
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
45
forces, spiced up with a handful of German divisions and air squadrons.
It was not a glamorous alternative, but it was a realistic one. Against the
strong advice of his military chiefs Roosevelt agreed in July 1942 to a
diversion of scarce shipping and equipment to supply an invasion of north
Africa, codenamed 'Torch'. Churchill hoped that the decision would lead to
great things: the defeat of Italy, the reopening of the Mediterranean to
Allied sea traffic, and the cutting of a route into the 'soft underbelly' of Axis
Europe, through the Balkan peninsula, or Yugoslavia or southern France.
For the Americans it was the least they would consider doing. They refused
to regard Torch as an alternative to the invasion of northern Europe, and
accepted it only on the understanding that the larger enterprise would not be
long postponed. 48
The joker in the pack was the German submarine, or U-boat ('U' being
short for Untersee). No Allied strategy was possible across the Atlantic
Ocean without the defeat of the submarine. The supply of goods and oil to
Britain and the Soviet Union was threatened on every route, from the Arctic
convoys to Murmansk and Archangel, to the long hauls from Trinidad or
around the Cape of Good Hope. Any operation, whether in the Libyan
desert, in north-west Africa, or across the Channel, relied on securing the
sea-lanes first. Almost immediately on American entry into the war the
advantage in the Battle of the Atlantic swung towards the submarines, and
Allied naval power faced its most severe test.
After the successes of 1941 the German navy was no longer the Cinderella
of the German armed services. From only a handful of U-boats in 1939, the
submarine arm was now being supplied with thirty new boats a month; it had
almost three hundred in total at the beginning of 1942 and almost four
hundred by the end. The German Commander-in-Chief, Grossadmiral
Erich Raeder, now saw the submarine as the key to 'decisive victory'. Even
Hitler, whose grasp of naval affairs was rudimentary, came round to the
view in April 1942 that 'victory depends on destroying the greatest amount
of Allied tonnage'. By June he was completely converted: the submarine
will in the
end decide the outcome of the war.49 The strategy was
unsophisticated. U-boats were ordered to sink Allied shipping when and
where they could, merchant ships for preference, naval vessels if they found
themselves under attack. The commander of submarines, Admiral Karl
Dönitz, estimated that a monthly sinking of 700,000 tons would be more
than enough to erode combined Anglo-American shipping capacity and
slow down or even stop Allied operations. The aim was to maintain sinkings
at at least 4-500,000 tons a month, the level achieved in December 1941. The
submarine war was a war of closely calculated attrition, its success measured
not in any one engagement but in the calendar of stricken tonnage. So
