212
A WAR OF ENGINES
The new Soviet tank armies were equipped almost entirely with the new
generation of tanks, the versatile, hard-hitting T-34, and the heavier kv-1.
The T-34 provided mobility, the slower kv-1 firepower against enemy
strongholds or tanks. During 1942 they were converted to diesel engines,
which improved the tanks' radius of action by a factor of three; they had
wide tracks, unlike most German tanks, to cope with the autumn muds and
the winter snow; and during 1943 the greatest defect of the Soviet tank arm
was made good with the gradual introduction of two-way radio. At a stroke
this improved the battlefield performance of the tank arm. Air support could
be called up, and tank commanders could communicate with each other
quickly to bring armour to bear where it was needed. The use of just two
tank types throughout the war (the kv-I was phased out as too slow in 1943
and replaced with the 'Tosef Stalin' is-2 in 1944) simplified problems of repair
and maintenance. Teams of engineers accompanied the armoured corps,
travelling with lorries full of equipment and spare parts. When Rotmistrov's
5th Guards tank army drove 150 miles in 48 hours to help at the battle of
Kursk along roads so choked with dust that the red circle of the sun was
barely visible through the shroud. mechanics performed miracles keeping
hundred tanks. but 112 were returned by the repair crews within hours 10
almost all the tanks going. In two days of heavy fighting the Guards lost four
The Red Army learned quickly from its mistakes; critical improvements
were made.
1941 and
1942 Soviet armoured forces lost six or seven
vehicles to every one German; by the autumn of 1944 the ratio was down to
one to one.
( The modernisation of the Soviet air force was just as essential. The reform
of the tank arm would have achieved considerably less without air support )
In 1941 Soviet aircraft suffered the same fate as Soviet armour. Most of the
estimated eight thousand aircraft facing the German assault were wiped out,
either where they stood, invitingly unconcealed, on open airfields, or in
hundreds of uneven tournaments in the air between Soviet II-15 and II-16
fighters and German Me-100s. Soviet air tactics were stuck in the First
World War. Fighters flew in tight formations of three aircraft abreast. They
were no match for German pilots who operated in pairs or fours, flying in
loose vertical formation with good air-to-air communication.
The feeble
fighter shield left Soviet ground forces open to the same demoralising
pounding from German medium-bombers and Stuka dive-bombers that had
helped to break Polish and French resistance earlier in the war."1
Air force reform ran alongside the reform of ground forces. The Soviet
authorities rightly saw concentration of air attack and close support for
ground operations as the core of German success. This persuaded
them to put their effort into winning local air supremacy over the battle-
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
213
field, and using aircraft as part of the battering ram to penetrate the enemy
front. The vast area of the eastern front, and the short combat range of most
fighter aircraft, made it imperative for them to concentrate air forces at the
critical point of attack, rather than dispersing the aircraft all along the
front as they had done in 1941/ The Soviet air force borrowed and refined
the German strategy with striking results. During 1943 air superiority over
the battlefield passed to the Soviet air force.)
The architect of Soviet revival in the air was a little-known general,
Alexander Novikov. A veteran of the Civil War, and a Communist Party
member, he survived the army purges of the 1930s to become head of the
Leningrad District air forces in 1941. Like his chief, Zhukov, he won
promotion on his performance in battle. In February and March 1942 he
organised the air defence of Moscow and Leningrad, but he did so by
grouping all his aircraft together into a powerful offensive instrument to
carry out the first concerted massed air strikes against German targets. A
month later his success was rewarded with nothing less than his appointment
as Commander-in-Chief of all Soviet air forces.
At 42 he was four years
Zhukov's junior, but looked younger. Handsome, forthright, energetic, he
came to his new office with a self-driven mission to modernise Soviet
aviation. His abilities brought him appointment to a new rank of Marshal of
Aviation in 1943, but like Zhukov he fell foul of the renewed wave of
Stalinist purges after the war. Incarcerated in 1946, he was released and had
his honours restored only on Stalin's death, in March 1953.
(Novikov's reforms were comprehensive. Starting at the top the air force
was placed under central direction, instead of being parcelled out to each
front-line army or division. Aircraft were organised like German air fleets
into large 'air armies' made up of fighters, bombers and ground-attack
aircraft. The air armies were then assigned to critical points of the front,
where they came under direct command of local front commanders in
order to achieve the closest possible collaboration between army and air
forces. The air armies, like the tank armies, were set up to follow the
strategy of concentrated offensive. Their task was to attack enemy air
power and smash a path forward for the armoured forces below.
To
enhance this striking power the Supreme Command built up a strategic
reserve of air corps which could be sent to critical points of the battle to
reinforce existing air armies. Though the strategy of reserve-building,
insisted on by Stalin himself, sometimes left parts of the front denuded of
air support, it did allow the Red air force to impose irresistible force where
it mattered most, at the front of the main axes of advance. 13 During 1942
each of the seventeen air armies could muster only 800-900 aircraft; but by
1943 they averaged 1,500 aircraft. By the end of the war air armies of
