26
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT. • •
action. He read Captain Hornblower R.N.; in the evening the mess cinema
showed Lady Hamilton, the story of Nelson's mistress.3
Though trained as a cavalryman, Churchill's links with the sea had deep
roots. In the Great War he was First Lord of the Admiralty until forced to
resign over the fiasco at Gallipoli. When war broke out again in September
1939 he was recalled to the same office and searched restlessly for naval
action. Another catastrophe, the failed Norwegian campaign in April 1940,
this time brought unexpected promotion rather than disgrace. As Prime
Minister the naval war absorbed a great deal of his time. When he began his
five-year correspondence with Roosevelt he coyly signed himself 'Former
Naval Person' as a thinly disguised codename. Roosevelt shared his
enthusiasm for sea warfare. He too was a former naval person, Assistant
Secretary for the Navy from 1913 to 1920. As President he kept in close,
almost daily, touch with naval affairs. Sea power exercised a special
fascination for him throughout the war. He too rode to their meeting in a
modern warship.
On the morning of 9 August the Prince of Wales reached her destination
concealed from the world, at Placentia Bay, on the south Newfoundland
coast. The British flotilla was early: clocks had been adjusted to the wrong
time. Churchill rose before the ship's company, and nervously paced the
deck. At 7.30 in the morning the American cruiser Augusta came into view,
with the President seated on the deck. Amidst the cheering and band-
playing Churchill was ferried
across the bay to the American vessel.
[Protocol dictated that Churchill, a chief minister, should first pay his
respects to Roosevelt, a head of state. The two men greeted each other with
great cordiality, and then got down to business.
There was much to discuss. The situation for both states was critical.
German armies were now deep in Russian territory, within striking distance
of Leningrad and Moscow. In the Far East Japan had recently occupied
French Indo-China and now threatened the whole of south-east Asia and the
southern Pacific. Since 1939 Britain had lost over two thousand ships
totalling almost 8 million tons to enemy submarines, aircraft and merchant
raiders. The Atlantic run, which Churchill had just experienced first-hand,
was Britain's lifeline. By 194i a stream of vital foodstuffs, machinery and
raw materials flowed from the New World, including most of Britain's oil
and aluminium. Without these supplies Britain's war effort in 194I could not
have been sustained. Both men knew how much control of the sea mattered
to the democracies. Churchill told Roosevelt in December 1940 that
shipping was the crunch of the whole war'; in May 1941 Roosevelt suggested
to Churchill that the war 'would be decided in the Atlantic' and if Hitler
could not win there 'he cannot win anywhere in the world in the end'. 4 At
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
27
Placentia Bay naval power was uppermost in both their minds. Roosevelt
agreed to give any help short of war in the Atlantic struggle. Both leaders
agreed to warn Japan in the sternest tones to encroach no further into
the Pacific. Both agreed to do what they could to ship supplies to the
beleaguered Soviet Union. Roosevelt could report the onset of American
rearmament on the largest scale, but he could not promise belligerency.
[For public consumption the two leaders concocted a common declaration
of principle, the Atlantic Charter, for which the meeting became famous.
The document was not a treaty; neither party was bound by its terms. It was
a very public statement of democratic solidarity, expressed in recognisably
Churchillian prose, defining the hopes of both men for a 'better future for
the world' through democratic politics, national self-determination and
open trade. The Charter was testament to how well the two men got on.
Churchill need have had no worries. 'The President is intrigued and likes
him enormously, wrote Harriman to his daughter in London. The two men
parted with genuine warmth. In grey damp weather the Prince of Wales
slipped from her moorings late in the afternoon of 12 August for a second
Atlantic run. Three days later the battleship overtook a convoy of 72
merchant ships steaming eastwards. Churchill had never seen a convoy and
was overcome with excitement and sentiment. The signal flags for 'church'
and 'hill' were flown from his ship. The crews aboard the armada of tankers,
liners and tramp ships cheered with passion and Churchill waved and
cheered in return. The thirteen columns of ships with funnels smoking
looked almost like a town'. Churchill then asked the captain to go round
again, and the battleship performed a wide arc back through the convoy
before pulling away. Churchill stood on the deck and watched until the last
smoke disappeared behind the horizon."
The Prince of Wales made only one more voyage. Japan ignored the
warning sent after the Atlantic meeting, and on 7 December attacked the
American Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor and British possessions in the Far
East. Churchill, confident that battleships could still defend themselves
against air attack, sent the Prince of Wales and Repulse to Singapore. Both
were caught by Japanese torpedo bombers in the South China Sea on 9
December and sunk. Admiral Phillips and Captain Leach stood at salute on
'In all the
war', Churchill later wrote, 'I never received a more direct shock.' After the
Japanese attacks there were no major British or American warships in the
whole of the Pacific or Indian Oceans. 'Over all this vast expanse of waters',
he continued, 'Japan was supreme, and we everywhere were weak and
naked."
