122
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
production impossible, the daylight bombers returned. The Schweinfurt
battle of 14 October 1943 was a victory for the Luftwaffe. Almost three
hundred B-17s left Britain in two separate streams, 30 miles apart. The
escorting fighters left them at Aachen, and almost immediately the German
fighter forces pounced. Rocket fire, air bombing from above the bomber
stream, and heavy cannon fire broke up the bomber formations. Then the
fighters hunted in packs, waiting for the injured or straggling prey before
moving in to the kill. They had perfected their tactics. Although 220
bombers managed to reach Schweinfurt, and to inflict heavy damage, the
force lost sixty bombers and suffered damage to a further 138. These were
catastrophic losses. The 8th air force suspended attacks into Germany. The
Combined Bomber Offensive reached a critical impasse.
In the winter of 1943-4 the two bomber forces were compelled to rethink the
campaign. Schweinfurt for the Americans, Berlin and Nuremberg for the
British, showed the limitations of bombing, even though the defence had
been stretched to the limit. It gradually dawned on the western forces that
one thing, and one thing only, would secure the skies over Germany:
the defeat of the German air force. They had ignored Clausewitz at their
peril. Concentration of force against the armed forces of the enemy was
not mere dogma; it was proved again and again in the harsh crucible of
To be fair, American service chiefs saw this sooner than the British. When
bombing plans were first drawn up in August 1941, American planners
pointed to the Luftwaffe as an intermediate priority, whose destruction
would permit uninterrupted assault on the economy. But British airmen had
always dismissed attacks against an enemy air force as a waste of time. The
targets were regarded as too dispersed and too small, and, as they had ably
demonstrated in the Battle of Britain, recuperation from attack
was
relatively easy. When the 8th air force began operations in the summer of
1943, the Combined Bomber Offensive directive (codenamed 'Pointblank')
placed the undermining of German air power as a top priority. American
attacks that year did have some success in limiting the expansion of German
fighter production; the attack on Schweinfurt on 14 October reduced ball-
bearing output by 67 per cent. But the defeats suffered in these attacks
were a reflection of the complete failure to confront the direct sources of
German air power, the fighters, pilots and airfields of the Luftwaffe.
The defeat of the German air force became a matter of urgency. Without
that defeat the projected invasion of Europe in the late spring of 1944,
operation 'Overlord', would be placed in jeopardy. Without the bombing
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
123
offensive, which was supposed to weaken German resistance to invasion and
re-conquest, the western Allies faced a long and bloody contest. There was
no alternative but to defeat the Luftwaffe if western strategy was not to be
thrown into disarray On New Year's Day 1944 the Commander-in-Chief of
the American air forces, General 'Hap' Arnold, sent the following to his
commanders in Europe: 'My personal message to you - this is a MUST - is to,
"Destroy the Enemy Air Force wherever you find them in the air, on the
ground and in the factories." 152
Here, crudely expressed, was the central issue of this zone of conflict. It
was resolved not by some revolution in air warfare, but through a tactic of
remarkable simplicity: the introduction of additional, disposable, fuel tanks
on Allied fighters. It might well be asked with hindsight why it took the
Allies so long to recognise that they needed fighters to fight German aircraft,
and that their range could only be increased by giving them more fuel. The
straight answer is that no one thought it was possible without sacrificing
speed and manoeuvrability. It was a technical possibility quite early in the
war, but neither the Allies nor the Germans saw any real gains in pursuing it.
For too long it was assumed that heavily armed bombers could defend
themselves. In fact the bombers were like unescorted merchant ships: to
deliver their bomb cargoes they needed to be convoyed.]
hand. The
By good fortune more than by sound planning the convoy vessels were to
hand. The standard American fighter aircraft, the P-38 Lightning and the p-
47 Thunderbolt, had been fitted with extra fuel tanks under the wings when
they were ferried long distances. By repeating this simple expedient the
escort range of both fighters was increased from 500 miles to 2,000 miles. But
the attention of the bombing commanders became focused on a hitherto
neglected fighter, the P-51
Mustang.
Built originally for the RAF in
American factories, the marriage of an American airframe and the British
Rolls-Royce Merlin' engine produced a fighter of exceptional endurance
and capability, even when loaded with heavy supplies of extra petrol. The
first group of adapted Mustangs joined the 8th air force in November 1943,
and flew a mission to Kiel and back in December, the farthest any fighter had
yet flown and fought in
Europe.
A crash production programme in
American factories turned out enormous quantities in a matter of months.
By March 1944 the P-51, with a maximum armed range of 1,800 miles, flew
with the bombers all the way to Berlin and back. 53
The long-range escort fighter transformed the air war overnight,? When
Thunderbolt fighters were shot down over Aachen in September 1943
Göring refused to believe they could have flown that far, insisting instead
that strong westerly winds had somehow blown the damaged aircraft to the
east. But high and rising fighter losses in the last months of 1943 showed
