286
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
war effort was sustained by the powerful sense that the Allies were prosec-
uting just war.
(The belief that their cause was on the side of progress in world history gave
a genuine moral certainty to the Allies, which the Axis populations largely
lacked. Popular commitment to war in the aggressor states was half-hearted
and morally ambiguous. In the Allied communities, on the other hand, there
was a powerful crusading rejection of the forces of fascist darkness. This
helped to mask the deep doctrinal and political differences between the
three major Allies, and encouraged the greatest of efforts, particularly from
the Soviet people, in destroying their enemies. The moral forces at work on
the Allied side kept people fighting in a common cause; but as the war went
on Axis populations suffered a growing demoralisation, a collapse of con-
sensus, and increasingly brutal regimentation of the home front. It is this
contrast that helps to explain the eventual outcome of the war. )
Hatred of Hitler and 'Hitlerism' was the moral cement of the Allied war
effort.)In the same speech in which Churchill bracketed communism and
Nazism together, he gave overriding priority to the German threat: 'We
have but one aim and one single, irrevocable purpose. We are resolved to
destroy Hitler and every vestige of the Nazi regime. 12 These sentiments
were not just for public consumption. Churchill developed a deep personal
loathing for Hitler; his defeat became an obsession,
'the destruction of
Hitler' the driving force of his war effort. I3 When the Soviet ambassador to
Washington, Maxim Litvinov, was asked to report to Moscow on the
attitude of the western Allies to the war in 1943, he concluded that 'the
struggle against Hitler' was the defining aim. Roosevelt, he found, hated
Hitler, was a 'staunch anti-Nazi' and surrounded himself with advisers who
wanted simply 'to eliminate Nazism'. 14
(Hitler exerted a special power in binding his enemies together. On the
surface the reasons for this are clear. Hitler's unquenchable, unpredictable
appetite for conquest was a threat to every other state and way of life. Yet
the issue is more complex than this. Hatred of Hitler and Hitlerism long
pre-dated the final evidence of the Holocaust and the catalogue of crimes
exposed in 1945.)Its roots go back to the 1930s, even before the outbreak of
war, when Hitler was singled out from other dictators - Mussolini, Stalin
- as the greater force for evil, and German aggression was feared far more
than that of Japan and Italy, though both had actually waged particularly
brutal wars in the 1930s, unlike Germany. Stalin's rule in the 1930s was
atrocious by western standards, but Stalin was not demonised like Hitler
until after the war. The English novelist George Orwell believed that most
THE MORAL CONTEST
287
'dictatorial methods,
side'. Even Orwell, whose own denunciations of Soviet oppression swam
against the general current, thought Stalin's dictatorship 'a more hopeful
phenomenon than Nazi Germany' 15 When the American public was asked
by pollsters in the summer of 1941 to choose between the Soviet Union
and Nazi Germany, 4 per cent favoured Germany and over 70 per cent the
Soviet Union. 16
The threat that a Hitler-led Germany represented eclipsed every other
menace faced by the Allies. It has been the general view, both then and
since, that the war was Hitler's responsibility and the defeat of Hitler the
Allies' primary purpose. As Churchill confessed,
'his
life was much
simplified' by seeing the war in personal terms.
Unlike many of his
countrymen, Churchill made a distinction between Hitler and Nazism on the
one hand, and Germany on the other. He had an unlikely ally in Stalin, who
wanted to smash
German fascism, but not necessarily to eradicate a
potentially communist Germany. 17 Roosevelt was much more inclined to
see Hitler as typical of the German people as a whole. He displayed a deep
prejudice against Germany, rooted in his childhood, when he was sent to
school in Baden on one of many trips to German spa towns with his ailing
father, who was strongly anti-German. The young man developed a strong
dislike of German militarism, of German 'arrogance and provincialism'. 18
His later attitude to his childhood hosts was anything but Christian. At the
time of Munich he told his Cabinet that all Germany's neighbours ought to
combine to batter the German population from the air until their morale
cracked. During the war his private comments on the German fate betrayed
an unusual brutality. He favoured the punishment of Germany advocated by
the Treasury Secretary, Henry Morgenthau, which was to turn Germany
into an agricultural state, whose impoverished population would have to live
from army soup kitchens. More than once Roosevelt suggested some form
of extreme population control - castration was his recommendation, though
it is difficult to take seriously - to prevent the reproduction of this militarised
people.l9 Even the mild Eisenhower exhibited the most pronounced
Germanophobia. At lunch with Lord Halifax in July 1944 he announced that
he would recommend liquidating the German General Staff, the Gestapo
and any Nazi officials above the rank of mayor. His treatment of German
prisoners in American hands was brutal and neglectful. 20
( Among the wider Allied populations hatred of Hitler, Nazism and
Germany was powerfully instilled. In 1942 the Soviet regime launched a
formal campaign of hate against the aggressor. Hitler was shown in countless
cartoons and posters as a scavenging animal - a hyena, a rat, a vulture - or a
