186
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
which was appended untidily during 1942. The whole vast complex
employed 45,000 people.
Magnitogorsk was dominated by the steelworks; a perpetual dark haze
hung over the city. Around the barracks and houses of the workers lay a
patchwork of small allotments where they grew potatoes to supplement the
meagre meals served in the vast works canteen. By American or even
European standards, the plant was not very productive. It was untidy and
dangerous. When the president of the American Chamber of Commerce,
Eric Johnston, visited it in 1944 he found a vast inferno, filled with choking
fumes, with canals of unprotected molten metal, and piles of slag and iron
scrap cluttering the roadways between each workshop. In the part of the
plant making shells the absence of a moving conveyor belt was compensated
for by the use of long inclined wooden racks down which the shells were
rolled on their way along the production line. But throughout the plant,
directed by a 35-year-old blacksmith's son, Gregor Nesov, the Americans
found a constant bustle and drive. Clean premises were not a priority for the
war effort. '5 Magnitogorsk concentrated everything on production. Over
the whole course of the war vast, dirty, ill-lit plants all over central Russia
were worked day and night using standard equipment and simple pro-
cedures. While the rest of the economy remained at the crisis point reached
in 1941, the output of each worker in Soviet war industry increased two- or
three-fold over the course of the war. 16
In the other Ural cities around Magnitogorsk Soviet planners sited other
giant factories. At the Ural capital of Sverdlovsk, set amid rich pine forests
which provided much of the fuel and building materials, there grew up a
major machine tool production centre, known in Sovietspeak as 'Uralmash'.
Home to a million people by the time of the war, the city became a major
centre for tank and artillery production. With an increase in the size of the
workforce in the gun plant from six thousand to ten thousand, the output of
heavy artillery increased six-fold between 1941 and 1944. At the neighbour-
ing city of Chelyabinsk, a vast tractor works set up during the collectivisation
drives of the 1930s was turned over to the mass production of t-34 tanks.
Equipment from the tank factories at Leningrad and Kharkov was married
to the existing plant. The whole complex became known as 'Tankograd',
'tank city'. In three giant plants in the east two-thirds of all Soviet tanks were
produced. Improvements in the production process - the tank turrets were
stamped out by huge presses, rather than cast, and automatic welding
replaced handwork - reduced the man-hours on each tank from eight
thousand in 1941 to 3,700 by 1943.'? Wherever possible scarce skilled labour
was replaced by machines, and production standardised and simplified. The
resulting weapons looked rough-hewn by western standards but refinements
ECONOMIES AT WAR
187
were an unmerited luxury. Mass production, borrowed from American
practice in the 1920s, developed in the 1930s to accelerate Soviet develop-
ment, was the key to the wartime production record.
(The real heroes of the Soviet Union's economic revival were the Soviet
people themselves, managers, workers and farmers. The war made quite
exceptional demands on the civilian population. The great majority of men
between 18 and 50 were conscripted into the armed forces during the war.
One million Soviet women joined them in uniform. This left a workforce
made up of women, old men and teenagers, By 1943 women made up just
over half the industrial labour force. On the collective farms their share was
almost three-quarters. By 1944 able-bodied males made up only 14 per cent
of the workers on state farms. There was nothing new about female labour
in the Soviet Union - women made up two-fifths of the labour force in I940
- but what was new were the appalling conditions in which all workers
laboured in wartime Russia. 18
The gruelling regime of work imposed on the Soviet people was not
deliberately inflicted but was the product of the sudden crisis following the
invasion.) All holidays and leave for workers was cancelled indefinitely for
the duration. Hours worked were fixed at twelve to sixteen per day; three
hours compulsory overtime was introduced. On Stalin's exhortation to turn
the Soviet Union into 'a single war camp', large sections of the workforce
were placed under military law, first the country's building workers, then
munitions workers, and, finally, in April 1943, the railway workers. l" When
the cavalcade of limousines drove the director of the Magnitogorsk plant
and his American guests through the 'teeming, unpainted slums' of the city,
they passed a long column of workers, marching four abreast towards the
steelworks. At the front and sides of the column were military guards with
fixed bayonets. The workers turned out to be hundreds of 'ragged women in
makeshift sandals' 20 For these women and for millions of other Soviet
workers, the factory became a battlefield. Absenteeism and lateness were
treated like desertion. Repeated offences meant the labour camp, though
the conditions of everyday life were so drear for most workers that life in the
camps and outside them became increasingly difficult to distinguish.
The greatest source of hardship was the food supply. Though the
authorities managed to organise a nationwide rationing system, it did little
more than impose malnutrition equitably across the working population)
For the miners and metalworkers, engaged on heavy war work, there were 2
pounds of bread a day, eked out with a meagre 5 pounds of meat, a pound of
sugar and a pound of fats each month. For the average consumer a pound of
bread a day, and scraps of fat and meat, were all that could be spared. This
was a quarter of German rations, one-fifth of British, for a work day that was
