76
DEEP WAR
the survival of the 62nd army from August to November. Chuikov observed
the German approach to warfare very carefully. He noted the German
reliance on mass air and artillery attacks to push the infantry through, and
the reluctance of German soldiers to engage in close combat without the
protection of tanks. To reduce the impact of German firepower he insisted
that the two fronts should be no farther apart than 'the throw of a grenade,
making it difficult for German bombers to attack without fear of hitting their
own side. He relied much more than his enemy on combat at night, and on
hand-to-hand fighting, with daggers and bayonets, which suited the tough
Siberians, Tartars and Kazakhs in his army more than tank and artillery
warfare. Soviet forces became adept at camouflage and surprise, keeping
their German enemy constantly on the alert and in fear. A sniper battalion
found the ruined landscape a rich field for killing. Hidden in the rubble, with
high-powered rifles and telesconic sights. they shot anthing that moved,
'Bitter fighting,' wrote another German NCO in his diary. 'The enemy
is firing from all sides. from everv hole You must not let vourself
be seen ...21 At night specially organised 'storm groups' would attack
German bunkers well away from their own lines. As Soviet troops threw
grenades and gave voice to the chilling 'Hurrah' that signalled an attack,
bewildered German soldiers would wake to find automatic gunfire all
around them. At dawn the storm groups would melt away, back to their
dugouts and foxholes. With them they brought up-to-date information on
German strengths and dispositions. Unlike many Soviet generals, Chuikov
insisted on good intelligence so that he could use his depleted forces as
efficiently as possible.
As the battle went on the and army received growing help from artillery
and air power. On the far bank of the Volga three hundred guns were trained
on the closing German forces. They were supplemented by a weapon even
more feared by German infantrymen, the Katyusha multiple rocket-
launcher. First developed in 1940, the B-13 rocket-launcher earned its nick-
name from a popular song at the time, 'Katerina'. It was capable of delivering a
salvo of over 4 tons of explosives into a 10-acre area in seven to ten seconds.
Its very inaccuracy was its strength, for enemy troops could barely hear the
rockets coming, and could never predict where they would fall. Chuikov
used rocket-launchers, mounted on the backs of ordinary trucks, right at the
front line. When his forces were pressed back to the very edge of the river,
the lorries were suspended over the bank, their back wheels above the
water, in order to achieve the necessary trajectory. 22 To shells and rockets
were added bombs. The 8th Soviet air army gave growing support to the
defenders of Stalingrad, while German air activity, in deteriorating weather
conditions, with mounting losses, slowly declined. There were definite
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
77
improvements on the Soviet side in both equipment and tactics. By
November there were 1,400 aircraft on the Stalingrad front, three-quarters
of them modern combat planes, including numbers of the new Yak-9 and
La-s fighters, which could hold their own at last with German aircraft. An
intensive programme of night-flying training permitted more sorties under
cover of darkness against German positions. Soviet air forces were dogged
with poor communications which made it difficult to control large air
operations, or to direct aerial strikes accurately. From September 1942 the
commander of the Soviet air armies, A.A. Novikov, began an experiment
with radio control of air forces on the southern front, which made it possible
to marshal and direct aircraft just as the Luftwaffe did! Soviet air power had
a great deal of ground to make up, but the gap between the two air forces
began to narrow in the critical months covering the defence of Stalingrad. 23
A further bonus for the Soviet side was Chuikov himself, who continued
to lead a charmed life. In September he narrowly missed death when a bomb
scored a direct hit on his command bunker. On 2 October air attack
destroyed large oil tanks above his new headquarters near the river bank,
bringing a cascade of burning fuel flooding into the dugout. Somehow he and
his staff escaped from the midst of the flames, which gradually slid down on
to the Volga itself, floating away on the current. For much of the last weeks
of battle his command base was never more than a few hundred yards from
the nearest German forces. From here he directed his scattered, exhausted
troops, from one last-ditch encounter to the next. After the bitter defence of
the factory district, which brought both sides to a standstill by late October,
Paulus marshalled his forces for one final attack. Hitler was in Munich,
attending the annual ceremony to commemorate the abortive Nazi coup of 9
November 1923. Before the Party faithful he pledged that he would shortly
be 'master of Stalingrad'.24 The same day, in the cold early hours of
morning, five German infantry divisions and two Panzer divisions, all well
under strength, launched the last German offensive in Stalingrad. By the
end of the morning the 62nd army was split, and German forces seized a
500-yard stretch of the bank of the Volga. But elsewhere the attack made
little progress Chuikov organised an active defence, ordering local counter-
attacks and ceaseless harassment. By the 12th the offensive petered out. A
few days later Soviet storm groups began to win back what had just been
conceded: the factory district, the slopes of Mamayev Kurgan, blackened by
artillery fire in the otherwise snow-covered city, and the few large buildings
in the city centre still standing. On 18 November Chuikov and his staff were
gathered in his bunker to discuss further operations when they received a
cryptic telephone call from the Front headquarters, telling them to expect a
special order. At midnight it arrived: the following day armies on the
