230
A WAR OF ENGINES
by a truck engine, and primed with high explosive - were gathered in Japan
for the last-ditch defence of the home islands. They needed little fuel, and
there was little to be had. The last barrels of carefully hoarded oil were
hidden in caves and storerooms to power the suicide forces on their one-way
passage. 54
In Germany the decision was taken long before the war to find a substitute
for natural oil. Although Germany produceed a small quantity of oil from
her own wells - about one-fifth of German consumption in 1939 - most
German oil, like Japanese, came from the New World in the 1930s. One
resource Germany did have in abundance was coal. In 1909 the German
chemist Friedrich Bergius discovered a way of producing oil from coal by
combining it with hydrogen under pressure. The process was known as
hydrogenation. Though Bergius could produce oil in the laboratory, he
could not find a way to extract it in quantity. During the 1920s the German
chemical giant IG Farben bought up the Bergius patents and began a long
and costly attempt to produce synthetic oil commercially. Though oil was
produced in quantity it proved impossible to market: the synthetic material
was six times more expensive than natural oil.
The project was saved by Hitler and the German armed forces. Even
before Hitler came to power in January 1933, he had met with directors from
IG Farben to assure them that a Nazi government would do everything to
promote hydrogenation in order to render Germany immune to the threat of
embargo or blockade. The new German armed forces in the 1930s needed
oil as a top priority. In December 1933 the Hitler government signed a deal
with IG Farben: the state
promised to subsidise synthetic oil if the
company committed itself to a four-year oil project. In 1936 the regime
finally set up a programme to make Germany virtually independent of
external sources of oil if war broke out. The programme was boosted by the
seizure of the Sudetenland from Czechoslovakia in 1938, for the Sudeten
areas contained rich deposits of lignite, or brown coal, which was far more
suitable for synthetic production. By 1939 Germany produced just over
one-third of her oil needs; by 1943 the figure was well over 7 million tons,
three-quarters of all the oil she used. " Almost all the requirements of high-
octane aviation fuel were met from the synthetic plants. What could not be
produced at home was supplied from the Romanian oilfields at Ploesti, once
Romania had become a virtual satellite of the Third Reich in 1940. Small
quantities - about 10 per cent of German consumption - were provided in
1940 from the Soviet Union under the terms of the Nazi-Soviet Trade
Agreement of 1939.56
*
If Germany had enough oil to fight with, the margin was slim indeed. The
home front was starved of oil. Cars and lorries were compulsorily converted
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
231
from petrol-driven to gas-driven motors. Those still permitted for non-
military use were driven through the streets with large canvas gas bags
attached, like so many small Zeppelins. The horse once again was in demand
to haul goods and supplies. German inventors scoured Europe's flora for
fuel substitutes. The acorn harvest, traditionally fed to pigs, was com-
mandeered to produce a usable oil which was capable of fuelling haulage
vehicles. European nuts were transformed chemically into a good-quality
fuel to be used in tanks and trucks, and the residue was used as cattle-feed. A
rich yellow oil, good to smell and taste, was pressed from the grape waste of
French vineyards and was used as a machine lubricant. 57 None of these
expedients could cope with demand from the armed forces and from
industry. Fuel shortages slowed up progress in Russia in 1941; Rommel in
north Africa was plagued by oil supply problems, though Axis forces drove
back and forth across the undiscovered oilfields of Libya. While Allied
forces could draw on the oil supplies of the Middle East, delivered by
Pithe diddle Bas
pipeline to the eastern Mediterranean, Axis oil supplies had to be carried on
the dangerous convoy routes to Libya and Tunisia. They then had to be
transported long distances from the ports with a severe shortage of tankers
and trucks, under increasing air attack. Low mobility restricted the Axis
drive to capture the very oil they needed. 58
The alternative to acorns and nuts lay in the large oilfields of southern
Russia. It is arguable how important oil was when Hitler planned Bar-
barossa.) But by the winter of 1941-2 the oil question was central. The
assault on Moscow was held up for six weeks while Hitler insisted that the
drive to the Caucasus had priority. In the event neither was captured, but
Hitler was convinced, against the forceful protests of his generals, that the
oil question could decide the war. The capture of the Caucasus would kill
two birds with one stone: the Soviet armies would be deprived of the oil
needed to fight, and Germany would capture the oil she required to combat
Britain and the United States. Hitler's directive for the summer campaign of
1942, Operation Blue, published on 5 April, placed the main weight of the
German offensive in the south, 'in order to secure the Caucasian oilfields'. 59
By July German forces had swept through the Crimea and across the Don
and were within striking distance of the first oilfields and the Soviet oil life-
line up the Volga, past Stalingrad.
(The oil campaign was a chapter of disasters. German forces were divided
and weakly spread over a vast geographical area. Shortages of fuel meant
resort once again to large numbers of horses. When the first German forces
reached the oil-town of Maikop, with its annual supply of over 2 million tons
of light crude oil, they found the
wells and
refineries burning and
demolished. German forces never reached Grozny but were stopped 100
