226
A WAR OF ENGINES
used in the North African campaign in 1941 and 1942 it proved a dismal
failure. The solution arrived at was not dissimilar to Novikov's reform of the
Soviet air force that same year. The RAF placed mixed forces of bombers,
fighters and fighter-bombers under a central tactical air commander who
coordinated attacks closely with the requirements of the army command. At
the front line, mobile control centres, with radar and radio communications,
kept contact with aircraft in the air and the army in front. The bombers
attacked rear areas and disrupted communications; fighters kept the enemy
air force at arm's length; fighter-bombers attacked battlefield targets. and
tanks. " These tactical changes were sufficient to blunt Axis air power in the
desert, which had never been strong. In the weeks before El Alamein
Rommel had a foretaste of the devastating air power he would witness in
France - 'the paralysing effect which air activity on such a scale had on
motorised forces'. 'Anyone', he ruefully reflected, 'who has to fight, even
with the most modern weapons, against an enemy in complete command of
the air, fights like a savage against modern troops ...
The American air forces assigned to the north African campaign were still
in their tactical infancy. The cumbersome command structure that evolved
in 1941 had predictable effects: army units found that air support took so
long to arrive that there was little point in requesting it. Airmen and ground
troops had difficulty distinguishing enemy from friendly forces. Attacks
were made at the front line, but little attempt was made to counter Axis air
power in the rear, or to attack supply and reinforcement areas. The ability of
ground and air to work in combination, which was central to the new form of
warfare, was conspicuously absent. The humiliation in Tunisia forced a
major reassessment of how American tactical air forces were employed.
They were assigned
to
an
independent central air command which
worked in tandem with the army commanders. Their mission was to neut-
ralise enemy air power first, then to attack supplies and troop movements,
and finally to attack critical points on the battlefield. During the Italian
campaign the system was improved with the introduction of 'Rovers' -
pairs of air controllers and army liaison officers who literally roved the
battlefield calling up fighter-bomber strikes - and 'Horsefly', a small light air-
craft acting as a forward air controller for directing bomb attacks on enemy
artillery and transport. By the time the Allies deployed overwhelming air
power over Normandy they operated a sophisticated system of air-ground
cooperation that could cope with everything except poor weather.
By the time the western Allies brought their mechanised armies and
tactical air power to bear in France in 1944 much of the damage had already
been done to German forces. The bombing offensive diverted and destroyed
the better part of German air power, so that the tactical air forces had little if
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
227
no opposition. They were free to roam far and wide over German-held
areas, destroying equipment and vehicles in order to accelerate the decline
in German technical resources.
Bombing also interrupted the German
supply of fuel, tanks and ammunition to the French front, making a difficult
supply situation worse. When it was turned on the front line itself, as it was
on the Panzer Lehr division, it could turn the tide of battle. 'Utilisation of
the Anglo-American air force is the modern type of warfare,' commented
Rommel's deputy, Friedrich Ruge. Under these circumstances the Allies
could afford a higher margin of error than the enemy. The application of
technological strength through air power compensated for the difficulties in
turning civilians with little experience of military life into effective soldiers.
Western forces preferred the bomb to the bayonet. German soldiers wrote
disparagingly of the poor fighting qualities of American and British Empire
troops, particularly at close quarters. The effective deployment of modern
technology, against an enemy forced to fight with little air cover, few tanks
and dwindling quantities of trucks and guns, made the difference between
victory and defeat.)
The campaign in Normandy destroyed what was left of the German
mechanised army after its mauling on the eastern front. The 7th and 15th
armies facing the French coast relied for their mobility on 67,000 horses.
There were only 14,500 trucks for the whole front, and severe shortages of Oute
fuel and tyres. During the fighting in Normandy half the horses were lost and
most of the trucks.47 Out of 2,300 tanks only a hundred survived. The
Math
soldiers fought with declining mobility and firepower
against armies
overflowing with resources. 'If I did not see it with my own eyes,' wrote one
German division commander, 'I would say it is impossible to give this kind of
support to front-line troops so far from their bases.
48 Hungry, exhausted,
outnumbered in the air and on the ground, German forces none the less
fought with all their traditional operational and tactical skill. Hitler expected
them, like Japanese soldiers, to fight to the last man. Most did not, but they
fought with a desperate competence as long as it was possible to do so. It is
widely accepted that man for man, German forces were
generally more
skilled than the enemy, east or west, for most of the war. But it was a margin
that narrowed each year as the Allies reformed and modernised their forces,
and as the slow process of de-modernisation set in for large parts of the
German army. When the Allies sat on Germany's borders in January 1945 to
deliver the coup de grâce, the technical gap was beyond redemption. The
western Allies mustered 25 armoured divisions and six thousand tanks
against a thousand German tanks; on the eastern front over fourteen
thousand tanks faced 4,800 tanks and self-propelled guns. Soviet forces were
backed by 15,500 combat aircraft against 1,500; the United States alone had
