Preface
WHEN PEOPLE HEARD that the title of my next book was to be 'Why the
Allies Won', it often provoked the retort: 'Did they?' There are many
ways of winning. With the passage of time it has become possible to argue
that none of the three major Allies - Britain, the United States and the
Soviet Union - won a great deal. Britain lost her empire and her leading
world role; the United States found that they had traded one European
enemy for another, an 'evil empire' more dangerous and unfathomable than
Hitler's; as for the Soviet Union, the cost of sustaining the super-power
status won in 1945 eventually produced a crisis in Soviet society which led to
its collapse in 1991. The three Axis states - Germany, Italy and Japan - have
made no attempt to become big military powers again, but they have all
become economic success stories instead. Germany and Japan are the super-
powers of the world market, and their citizens a good deal richer than the
British, whose war effort almost bankrupted what had been one of the
wealthiest economies in the world in 1939. When people ask 'Did they?',
these are the things they have in mind.
The Allies unquestionably won the military contest in 1945, and it is with
victory in this narrower sense that this book is concerned. I have not tried to
provide a general history of the war - there are plenty of those already. The
focus of the book is to explain the outcome, rather than to describe its
course. I have restricted the narrative to those parts of the conflict I regard
as decisive, first the areas of combat, then the other elements of the war -
production, technology, politics, and morale. As a result, many familiar
aspects of the story are dealt with only briefly. The eastern front has been
given a prominence it surely deserves, but the battles in the Pacific and the
war between Japan and China here must take a back seat. It is fashionable to
see the use of intelligence as a critical difference between the two sides, but I
am not sufficiently persuaded of this to give the subject a chapter of its own.
Where intelligence clearly had special significance, its story has been woven
