138
ALONG A GOOD ROAD . • •
that at some time western forces would need vast army and air equipment
for re-entry to the European continent. Once the United States was at
war Roosevelt's Chief-of-Staff, General George C. Marshall, predicated
American war planning on a European invasion as the only sure means of
bringing German forces to defeat. His head of War Plans, Colonel Dwight
D. Eisenhower, who had spent much of his military career in the Pacific, was
an early convert. 'We've got to go to Europe and fight... a land attack as
soon as possible (sic),' he wrote in his diary in January 1942. Marshall was
all haste for an attack in July 1942 and Roosevelt reacted with sympathy.
(When it became clear that the material resources and trained men could
not be procured in time, the American Chiefs-of-Staff agreed on a build-up
of forces in Britain ('Bolero'), with a view to mounting a cross-Channel
assault in the spring of 1943 ('Roundup'), or an emergency landing late in
1942 if the Soviet Front cracked ('Sledgehammer'). To this the British
half-heartedly agreed.)
British leaders were always more cautious about invading across the
Channel. They rejected the prospect of any serious attack in 1942. In July
they succeeded in persuading Roosevelt that the invasion of North Africa
would at least see American troops in action that year, and nothing
the dismayed American Chiefs-of-Staff could do would dislodge their
President's commitment. The British agreed to begin preliminary invasion
planning, but not until April 1943 was a staff established with a clear brief to
explore the prospect for a frontal assault on Hitler's Europe. A British
general, Frederick Morgan, was put in charge of planning on behalf of a
Supreme Allied Commander who had yet to be appointed. Morgan found
the Americans 'all in fayour', the British 'cautious'; he thought the risk
of invasion 'appalling'. British leaders favoured a more indirect route to
the defeat of Hitler, through the Mediterranean and the bombing of
the German homeland. They stressed flexibility, and regarded American
fixation with invasion as a mortgage on the future development of the war.
During the course of 1943 the gap between the two sides grew wider. At
the Casablanca conference in January 1943 no clear commitment to invasion
was given. It remained one option among a number: Churchill was keen to
exploit the Allied presence in North Africa by pressing into Italy and the
Balkans; Roosevelt neither rejected nor confirmed this approach. Their
respective staffs were left with no very clear impression of future plans. An
invasion at some point in 1943 was not ruled out entirely, but both sides saw
that with the current situation of forces heavily committed in North Africa
and the Pacific, and with the submarine war at its most dangerous, invasion
was a last resort. It was impossible to ignore the difficulties. The build-up in
Britain of forces convoyed from America was much slower than anticipated.
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
In January 1943 there were only 390,000 American servicemen in Britain,
but well over half a million in the Pacific. By September that year the
American army had 361,000 men in Britain, but 610,000 in the Mediter-
ranean and over 700,000 fighting the Japanese.® The balance of forces was
dictated by the circumstances of war, but it made invasion in 1943 unlikely.
The shortage of men was compounded with a serious lack of the means to
transport them across the Channel. This could only be done in purpose-built
landing craft: large landing ships to transport stores and troops to the
invasion zones, and smaller landing craft to carry tanks, guns and men on to
the invasion beaches. Neither ally had attached much significance to the
production of landing craft, but during the course of 1943 the issue came to
dominate the whole invasion plan. In the spring of 1943 most landing craft
were in the Pacific supporting the island-hopping campaign. In the Atlantic
theatre, the American navy had only eight converted merchant ships
suitable for the task and the British just eighteen. The remaining craft were
supporting the Allied forces in the Mediterranean. When the deficiency
finally dawned on the Allies a crash programme of production was ordered
from American shipyards. By April 1943 8,719 had been built, from 4,000-
ton ships to carry eighteen tanks or 33 lorries, to small beach-craft of 7 tons
that could move one lorry or 36 men on to the beaches.' Over the following
year another 21,500 were procured from American shipyards, most of them
smaller vessels. It was an extraordinary production achievement, but in the
event it only just sufficed. All three areas of Anglo-American combat
involved amphibious assault. Most landing craft went to the Pacific. When
Morgan's planners did the shipping sums there was little left for the cross-
Channel assault, but each month the attack was delayed more landing craft
left the shipyards for the training waters along the St Lawrence river. 10
The American military chiefs argued that more could have been done
without the diversion of men and shipping to the Mediterranean, and this is
no doubt the case. They deplored what one American general called a
strategy of 'scatterization'. They recognised sooner than Roosevelt that the
Mediterranean campaign once begun would be difficult to scale down.
Having reluctantly agreed the first step it became progressively more
difficult for them to argue against the proposal to attack first Sicily, then the
Italian peninsula. But the effect of each step was to make the invasion of
northern Europe a more distant prospect. The most to which the British
would agree, when the two sides met at Washington in May 1943 for another
round of strategic argument, was to develop a plan for possible cross-
Channel invasion in May 1944. It was not a firm commitment, and American
chiefs continued to doubt British good faith, but it did allow them to set in
motion at last large-scale programmes of training and production with an
