302
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
found the sudden escalation of the war difficult to accept. A security service
report showed the initial reaction as one of 'bewilderment' leavened with
'sober confidence'. Even Hitler's propaganda supremo Joseph Goebbels
found it difficult to switch on hatred for the new enemy with real plausibility.
The party line was to stress 'the treachery of Bolshevist leaders'. As the
campaign dragged on into the winter of 1941 there was every evidence that
popular confidence in the war effort was ebbing, not least, as Goebbels told
his own staff, because the official propaganda made no mention of reverses
and was simply not believed. 72
For Hitler himself the war with the Soviet Union was the one he had been
waiting for throughout his political career. Though there were practical
reasons for the campaign - to deny Britain an ally on the Continent, and to
forestall any Soviet moves in eastern Europe - Hitler's main aim, as he told
Hitler made no pretence that he was fighting a virtuous war, despite the
Goebbels, was finally to eliminate 'the Bolshevik poison' from Europe.
strong moral antipathy to communism evident throughout Europe. Three
days before Barbarossa was launched Hitler had a revealing discussion with
Goebbels, later recorded in the minister's diary. 'Right or wrong', Hitler
told him, 'we must win. And once we have won, who is going to question
our methods? In any case, we have so much to answer for already that
we must win ... 73 Hitler gave deliberate instructions that the campaign
should be waged with unremitting brutality. The harsh treatment of popul-
ations in the east began with the invasion of Poland in 1939, when the
murder of Polish intellectuals and leaders, and Polish Jews, had been
sanctioned by the regime. The legitimisation of savagery developed its own
momentum.
Army discipline
deteriorated
during the
Polish campaign.
Efforts by regular soldiers to prevent the brutalities were swept aside by
Himmler's army of officials and policemen.
Atrocity was permitted in the
name of the 'higher' law of racial survival.
Hitler revelled in his rejection of conventional morality. He poured scorn
on what he termed the 'beatific liberalism' of the west.?4 The war with the
Soviet Union was not only a war of ideologies, but also a struggle for
survival, a conflict of nature. Before the campaign the old laws of war were
torn up. The army was issued with the 'Commissar Order' which permitted
the murder of any Communist Party functionary found with the Red Army.
In June 1941 the German army was freed by the regime from any restrictions
under the 1899 Hague rules on the conduct of land warfare. The security
services under Himmler were prepared to follow the armies into the Soviet
Union specifically to murder anyone defined as an enemy of Germandom.
Himmler asked his forces to behave with merciless violence against the races
of the east who know 'with animal instinct why they are fighting'. In July
THE MORAL CONTEST
303
1941 Himmler's instructions to the security forces were to act against any
populations defined as potentially anti-German or racially
shooting indiscriminately all males, deporting the women and children,
seizing food and valuables and burning the villages to the ground. Hitler
sanctioned even the murder of women and children if it served his principle
of preserving at all costs the lives of German soldiers. 75
At every level, from the chief of state down to individual army units in the
field, the war was fought as a racial conflict of the most savage kind in which
any methods, criminal or otherwise, were sanctioned. The armed forces
were given a general amnesty before the campaign for anyone guilty of
murder or looting. German commanders accepted the criminalisation of
warfare because of the special nature of the enemy they believed they faced.
In June 1941 the armed forces' 'Information for the Troops' backed up the
order to murder commissars: 'anyone who has once looked into the face of a
Red Commissar knows what Bolsheviks are ... It would be insulting
animals if you described those mostly Jewish features as animal-like.' Not
surprisingly the ordinary soldiers soaked up the constant dehumanisation
and demonisation of the enemy. 'Hardly ever do you see the face of a person
who seems rational and intelligent, ran one letter from the front; 'these sons
of the steppe, poisoned and drunk with a destructive potion, these incited
' ran another; 'We have seen the true face of Bolshevism
•.. communist scoundrels, Jews and criminals.?76
The result of the indoctrination of the troops with the image of a bestial
enemy was to give licence to a wave of barbarisation in the east that could
not be controlled by those soldiers or officials with more
scruples or
humanity. Many were outraged by it, but the war soon developed its own
savage codes on both sides which nothing could reverse. Millions of Soviet
prisoners died in the first winter of the campaign from studied neglect.
Thousands more soldiers were simply shot down as they found themselves
behind the lines of their rapidly advancing enemy. Within weeks of arrival at
the front line troops or police with no previous experience of violence or
crime became infected with the barbarous virus. Group solidarity explained
some of it.
One unit of ordinary police from Hamburg assigned to the
routine shooting of Jews in the east produced a small number of dissenters.
When interrogated after the war none of them expressed moral revulsion at
what they had been asked to do, but they did reveal a deep sense of shame
for letting down their fellows, who had had to do their dirty work for them.
The lead was taken from the top. Hitler's utter lack of conscience, his view
of war as a lawless state of nature, his moral detachment which always
succeeded in making the victim seem the perpetrator, set the tone through-
out the whole war effort. The war was never presented as a moral crusade.
