1I6
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
western Europe, sceptical eyebrows were raised. A later report reduced the
claims to 25 definitely destroyed. The number was in fact two. The spurious
claims were used to vindicate the concept of the 'fighting' bomber, just as the
occasional hit on the centre of the designated target was used to justify the
choice of precision bombing. After four months of hard training, the 8th air
force was keen to take the fight to Germany.
By the end of 1942 both bomber forces were poised to mount a much more
dangerous and effective campaign than anything they had carried out
hitherto. Yet even at this late stage, with large resources mortgaged to the
endeavour, it was far from clear what strategy bombing was supposed to
support. For much of the autumn and winter of 1942-3 the bombers were
directed to attack targets to help in the Battle of the Atlantic, which was
reaching its desperate finale. Wave after wave of heavy-bombers all but
obliterated the French ports of Lorient and Brest where the German
submarine pens were based, without once inflicting serious damage on the
reinforced concrete structures that protected the U-boats. 40 And while the
arguments continued about opening a Second Front in Europe, bombing
was generally regarded by the military chiefs on both sides of the Atlantic as
a mere adjunct to that greater enterprise, a means of weakening the enemy
before invasion. The decision to embark on Torch rather than invade
mainland Europe in the foreseeable future, left the bombing offensive in
limbo once again, with no clearly defined objective.
The turning-point for the bombing effort came in January 1943 when
Roosevelt and Churchill at last agreed to give priority to the bombing
campaign? The decision was taken when the two men met at Casablanca, in
Morocco, in January 1943. The meeting was called to decide the basic pattern
of western strategy. The location was Roosevelt's doing. Churchill had
travelled all over the world in his months of premiership. Against the advice of
his staff the President wanted to match him, by making a trip of his own. Not
only that, but he insisted on going by plane, the first time he had flown since
becoming President in 1933. His personal adviser, Harry Hopkins, recalled
that his boss 'was sick of people telling him it was dangerous to ride in
airplanes'. He left Washington by train on 9 January, and flew from Miami in
the famous Pan-Am Clipper flying-boat, first to Trinidad, then to Brazil. He
was so excited by the experience that 'he acted like a sixteen-year-old'. From
Brazil there followed an exhausting eighteen-hour flight across the south
Atlantic, arriving in Bathurst (now Banjul), capital of The Gambia. A crudely
converted c-24 army transport took the presidential party the last seven hours
of the trip, flying, on Roosevelt's insistence, high over the Atlas mountains.
Once in Casablanca he was driven in a limousine, with windows blacked-out
with mud for extra security, to a comfortable villa, 50 yards from Churchill's. 41
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
II7
[At Casablanca the two leaders agreed to postpone the Second Front,
almost certainly until 1944, and to continue with the Mediterranean strategy
of attacking what Churchill called the 'soft underbelly' of the Axis
'crocodile'. To bridge the now widening time-lag between Torch and the
invasion of northern Europe the two leaders agreed to intensify the air
campaign with the 'heaviest possible bomber offensive against the German
war effort'] Though neither leader expected bombing to bring Germany to
defeat on its own, the task it was allocated at Casablanca went well beyond
anything yet asked of it. On 21 January the Combined Chiefs-of-Staff issued
a directive to the air forces to bring about 'the progressive destruction and
dislocation of the German military, industrial and economic system, and the
undermining of the morale of the German people to a point where their
capacity for armed resistance is fatally weakened'. 42 The go-ahead was given
to see what bombing could do; a high priority was given to the production of
the tools for the job! The two leaders touched at Casablanca on the issue of
atomic weapons, though no decision was taken,
and precious little
information was exchanged about the progress of what was now largely an
American project. But Roosevelt had in prospect a weapon that made his
call for the 'unconditional surrender' of the Axis powers, expressed off-the-
cuff at the final press conference at Casablanca, appear more than mere
rhetoric.
In post-war arguments about the morality of bombing a great deal has
always been made of the unequal nature of the contest between bombers
and defenceless civilians, and there is no disguising the fact that the collapse
of German civilian morale was one of the objectives agreed when the
Combined Bomber Offensive was launched at Casablanca. But the actual
combat was not between bombers and ordinary people, but between
bombers and the defensive forces of the enemy, the fighters and anti-aircraft
fire. When the bombers streamed into Europe, their crews knew that they
had to fight their way to the target and fight their way back. They sat in
uncomfortable, surprisingly noisy, vulnerable aircraft, cold and cramped.
They had to avoid heavy anti-aircraft fire from the massive concentration of
fifty thousand anti-aircraft guns in the German defences; with the constant
refinement of the Kammhuber Line and German fighter tactics they faced
periods of brief but fierce engagement with an enemy who held all the ad-
vantages of timing and manoeuvrability. On the return flight poor weather,
fuel shortages, or damage from anti-aircraft fire added to what hazards the
enemy could still supply. If it now seems disingenuous of surviving crewmen
to claim, as they often do, that they were too absorbed with battle against the
