236
A WAR OF ENGINES
December 1939 Werner Heisenberg, Germany's outstanding theoretical
physicist, submitted to the research team a paper that outlined in detail how
a nuclear reactor worked, and the possibility of an atomic bomb. 2
Over the next two years the research teams pursued the practical issue of
turning theoretical insight into a usable product. Nuclear fission required
processes of exceptional complexity and expense. Uranium, the heaviest
known element in 1939, contains two isotopes. The first, u238, makes
up 99•3 per cent of the metal; the other, u235, a mere 0•7 per cent. The
preponderant isotope absorbs free neutrons in the element and keeps it
stable, but neutrons can divide U235 and create a chain reaction, which
releases enormous kinetic energy. To create a bomb it was necessary to
increase the number of unstable isotopes until a sufficient mass of fission-
able material was available to cause an explosion. Uranium, when bom-
barded with neutrons, also produced a new artificial element made up of
u239 isotopes. This new element, numbered 94, was christened plutonium.
It was found to be as fissile as U235, and promised an alternative source
of material for bomb-making. Both the production of additional u235 iso-
topes and of plutonium were examined, but the army opted for enhanced
uranium, and so this was where most of the German research effort was
concentrated until 1945.
There
were several ways of producing more u235. It could be done
electro-magnetically, as it was at the Oak Ridge facility in the United States
later in the war. Or it could be produced by adding a moderating material
which could slow down the neutrons in uranium without absorbing them.
This allowed the neutrons to avoid the U238 isotopes, which absorbed them
only when they moved at higher speeds, and to divide the U235 isotopes
instead. Heisenberg suggested a number of moderators: pure graphite was
one, and another was so-called heavy water (D,0 or deuterium
oxide),
produced by removing hydrogen atoms from ordinary water by electrolytic
conversion. Graphite was required for the army's rocket research pro-
gramme, and so by default the choice fell on heavy water.
effective electro-magnetic method was ignored. Europe's only source of
he home an on her
The more
heavy water lay in Norway, at the Norsk Hydro plant at Vermork.
Production was time-consuming and costly. In February 1943 the plant was
successfully sabotaged by the Norwegian resistance. By the end of the war
German scientists had 2½2 tons of heavy water, only half the quantity needed
even to begin serious production of fissile material. 73
In early 1942 the army gave up on the project. The prospect of producing a
weapon in time for it to be used seemed remote. The Education Ministry
once again assumed responsibility; atomic physicists were ordered to use
their time for more immediate war-work, and neither a nuclear reactor nor
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
237
adequate quantities of enhanced uranium were ever produced. Research
work continued, interrupted by bombing and evacuation, but/when Allied
intelligence teams scoured Germany in 1945 for scientists and laboratories
they found that Germany was still years from producing an atomic weapon.
Some German scientists blamed the system with its excessive compart-
mentalisation and political interference; others, Heisenberg among them,
argued that they had deliberately dragged their feet to prevent nuclear
weapons falling into Hitler's hands.
* The truth is more complicated. Whatever the views of Germany's
scientists, Hitler remained hostile to the whole project) Without the whole-
hearted support of the political leadership the atomic programme was
unable to generate the huge resources of labour, materials and brain power
necessary. Though Hitler saw himself as an expert on guns and tanks, he
found the principles of modern physics hard to grasp and disliked discussing
them. Party scientists branded much of the new work as non-Aryan, 'Jewish
physics'. When Speer tried to talk to him about the research Hitler
condemned it as 'a spawn of Jewish pseudo-science'. He retained the fear
that nuclear explosions would prove incapable of control, and might burn up
the hydrogen in the atmosphere, destroying the globe. Nothing that was
presented to him during the war carried sufficient conviction about the
short-term feasibility of atomic weapons to disperse that scepticism.
Hitler did not bring nuclear physics to a halt, but the research lacked the
urgency of other more pressing armament projects. The potential scale and
expense of the task, given the uncertainties still evident in atomic physics,
weighed heavily
against committing resources to it.
Though German
scientists knew of American research they remained reasonably confident
that they were ahead in the atomic race throughout the war, despite its low
priority. This arrogant assumption, shared, it should be added, by the
anxious enemy, was the product of a science establishment heavily weighted
towards pure theory. When the theoreticians turned to the practical
development of the ideas they ran into difficulties.
The experimental
physicists were looked down upon, and the practical problems in producing
atomic energy were neglected. Lacking a solid experimental foundation,
Heisenberg undermined the whole development by insisting that a uranium
bomb needed only a small amount of u235 to achieve critical mass (the
American project required 30 pounds), and by arguing that a chain reaction
could not be controlled. There were practical researchers who by the middle
of the war had discovered that one of the best ways of producing fissile
material was to employ extremely low temperatures (at
Oak Ridge the
Americans used liquid helium to achieve this). Harteck realised in 1941 that
low-temperature reactors would solve the production problems, but was
