170
ALONG A GOOD ROAD . . .
of bombs, and the constant attacks by fighter-bombers, ate away at precious
manpower and tanks. The day after the end of the battle von Kluge wrote a
long letter to Hitler, enclosing a memorandum from Rommel, penned two
days before his accident. Neither man pulled his punches. 'The force is
fighting heroically,' wrote Rommel, 'but the unequal combat is nearing
its end. Von Kluge added his own voice: 'I came here with the fixed
determination of making effective your order to stand fast at any price ... In
spite of intense efforts, the moment has drawn near when this front, already
so heavily strained, will break.' Since D-Day German forces had lost 2,117
tanks and 113,000 men; in return only 10,078 men and seventeen tanks had
been sent to replace them. Despite heavy Allied losses the balance of tanks
lay heavily in their favour, 4,500 in late July against 850 German. Allied
reinforcements since D-Day exceeded one and a half million men and
330,000 vehicles.82
The decision to terminate Goodwood coincided with a further delay in the
west. Bradley needed more supplies and ammunition before he could launch
Cobra. All of this proved too much for Eisenhower. 'Blue as indigo' at the
delays, he insisted on getting across to France on 20 July in weather so bad it
had grounded all other aircraft that morning. When he met Montgomery
and Bradley he upbraided them for their lack of vigour and drive. He wanted
offensives up and down the line, and simply could not grasp Montgomery's
purpose. The following day he wrote again to his ground commander: 'Time
is vital'. He flew to watch the launch of Cobra which had been postponed to
the 21st, but was disappointed again. Bad weather forced yet another delay.
Relations between Supreme Headquarters and Montgomery could hardly
be worse. 'Ike and I were poles apart', Montgomery wrote in his memoirs,
'when it came to the conduct of war. 83 But Montgomery had no one but
himself to blame. He exuded infallibility when a modest realism would have
been more politically prudent.
He isolated himself from Eisenhower's
Supreme Headquarters. The two men met only nine times throughout the
campaign, and on these occasions Eisenhower found it difficult to create the
opportunity to confront his ebullient subordinate.
In the end Eisenhower did nothing to interfere with Montgomery's
handling of the situation but the myth took root that Montgomery had failed
in Normandy and had to be rescued by go-getting Americans. The truth
could not have been more different. The delays to the breakout were
unavoidable. Bradley could not punch decisively without supplies; once he
was provisioned, nothing could be done about the weather. British and
Canadian forces fought against the bulk of German armoured divisions in
France, against bitter resistance and with a declining rate of reinforcement.
But when the breakout finally came, the long weeks of attrition around
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
171
Caen bore out Montgomery's aims. The victory in Normandy was secured
in the grim, unglamorous erosion of German fighting power in June and
July.
On the morning of 25 July the sun shone at last on Allied endeavour.
Operation Cobra began at 9.40 in the morning. It was the fruit of much
careful preparation. At Montgomery's prompting Bradley abandoned the
strategy of the broad offensive, which had proved slow and wasteful of
American resources, in favour of a concentrated blow with aircraft and
tanks to pierce and turn the weak German line. Tactical experience had
demonstrated the great advantage of rolling forward behind air bombard-
ments laid down in box formation
on the enemy
defences.
The real
problem was still movement through the bocage. For this the Americans
turned to the ingenious invention of Sergeant Curtis C. Culin Junior. To
the front of a Sherman tank were welded eight steel teeth, 2 feet above
ground level. Moving at 10-15 miles an hour, the tank could drive into the
hedgerow, cut the roots and plunge through with little loss of speed. The
'Rhinoceros', as it soon became known,
transformed the mobility of
American armoured formations. No longer tied to the roads, they could
now make rapid progress across country. During the middle weeks of July
Bradley's forces were brought up to strength. He had fifteen divisions in
the ist army, reinforced by a reserve of four divisions which were to form
the nucleus of a new American 3rd army under General Patton, whose
FUSAG role had run its successful course. Against these forces the German
7th army could field only nine weakened divisions and 110 serviceable
tanks. The stage was set for the final act.84
When the collapse of German resistance came it was sudden and
complete. On the morning of 25 July almost 1,500 heavy-bombers laid a
carpet of bombs over the Panzer Lehr division which lay directly astride
the corridor that Bradley was to drive through the German line. Resistance
was bludgeoned out of the forward defences. Over the next three days the
forces drove on with growing momentum. While German tanks and self-
propelled guns had to stay on or close to the roads, where they fell prey to
fighter-bombers, the American forces developed fast mobile columns of
Rhinoceros tanks, bulldozers and engineer battalions to bypass obstacles
and plunge across fields and orchards.
The costly advance from one
hedgerow to another was abandoned. Armour pressed on, leaving pockets
of German resistance to be mopped up
by infantry. Each advancing
column was followed by a constant patrol of Thunderbolt fighters, directed
by an air controller in the front tank formations to attack strongpoints
