UNPREDICTABLE VICTORY
divisions could not defeat the 281 of the Allies. Instead the German powers
admitted defeat six months later with the balance of divisions 325 apiece.4
Of course in World War I there were other factors at play: the Allies had
more tanks and aircraft, and in 1918 there came a flow of vigorous American
armies across the Atlantic; German and Austrian forces were hampered by
collapsing home economies and declining enthusiasm for war; and so on.
The basic figures are presented here only to illustrate the dubious value of
relying on plain numbers to explain the outcome of wars.
Such simple analysis is particularly inappropriate in the case of the Second
World War, when the material balance changed sharply several times during
the course of the conflict. Up to 1942 the balance favoured the aggressor and
might well have allowed them to win before American economic power
could be placed in the scales. German victories brought the vast spoils of
Continental Europe and of western Russia, turning the German empire in
two years into an economic super-power, capable of turning out twice the
quantity of steel that Britain and the Soviet Union together could muster.
Japan's seizure of the rich resources of northern China and of south-east
Asia vastly improved her strategic position by 1942, while denying vital
supplies of tin, rubber, oil and bauxite to the Allies. Even when America
entered the war it took time before her enormous capacity could produce
significant quantities of weapons, or, for that matter, the trained forces to
use them. If the eventual outcome of the war owed something to the great
Allied preponderance in material produced by American industrial
strength, we still have to explain why the Axis states failed to use their
* economic advantages when they had them.
What gradually swung the balance of resources back in the Allies' favour
were two factors: the sheer speed and scale of American rearmament, which
dwarfed anything that the Germans and Japanese, or even the British, had
thought possible; and the swift revival of the Soviet economy after the
mauling it received in 1941, when it sustained losses so severe that most
pundits assumed the worst. Without the extraordinary exodus of Soviet
machinery and labour from the war zones of the western Soviet Union to the
harsh plains of Siberia, Stalin's armies would have been like the Tsar's in
1916, the soldiers in the second rank picking up the guns and boots of their
dead vanguard as they scurried into battle. Against every expectation Soviet
society worked feverishly to turn out the tanks and aircraft their soldiers
needed. With only a quarter of the steel available to Germany, Soviet
industry turned out more tanks, guns and planes throughout the war than
her enemy.
This surprising outcome also tells us something about the organisational
capacities of the Axis powers. The huge disparity in weapons was due not
EXPLAINING WORLD WAR II
5
only to American rearmament and Soviet revival, but also to the inability of
their enemies to make the most of the resources they had. Some of this
deficiency could be put down to the circumstances of war. Japan never got
what she wanted from the oil-rich southern islands because American
than Hitler wanted from the captured areas of the Soviet Union because
Soviet forces torched anything they could not carry away before the
Germans arrived. The rain of bombs on German, Italian and Japanese cities
slowly eroded once flourishing industries. By 1944 bombing reduced
German output of aircraft by 31 per cent, and of tanks by 35 per cent. To all
these external circumstances were added homegrown failures. Italian war
production was riddled with corruption and administrative incompetence;
Japan's economic effort was stifled by tensions between her soldiers and her
businessmen, and a debilitating rivalry between the navy and the army;
German industry and technology were the victims of ceaseless rivalry
between the Nazi satraps and a military establishment whose technological #
fastidiousness made mass-production almost impossible. If these internal
weaknesses had been resolved, the Axis by 1942 might well have proved the
irresistible force.
Even when the balance-sheet of resources is broken down, the crude
quantities tell us nothing about the quality of weapons produced from them.
In fact there existed wide differences in levels of technical achievement
between the two sides. The large forces of the Red Army in 1941 were a less
formidable asset than they looked on paper because they lagged in the main
behind German standards. But in 1942 the famous T-34 tank began to pour
in large numbers from Soviet factories, and the quality of Soviet fighter
aircraft improved sufficiently to make combat less one-sided. There were
significant gaps on the German side too. The new generation of aircraft
designed to replace the ageing models developed in the mid-1930s failed to
materialise in the first years of war for a whole host of reasons, and the
Luftwaffe was stuck for the duration of the conflict flying the models with
which it started the war. The balance of air technology, in which Germany
enjoyed an enviable lead in 1939, swung the Allies' way largely for reasons of
Germany's own making. Even more striking was the reality of Germany's
famous mobile forces. Though her scientists could produce rockets and jets by
the end of the war, Germany failed to build the simpler trucks and jeeps needed
to keep her armies on the move. By 1944 American and British forces were
fully motorised, but the German army was still using one and a quarter million
horses. When Hitler's massive invasion force stood poised on the Soviet
frontier in June 1941, it deployed 3,350 tanks and 650,000 horses.®
