294
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
death rate - long-range bombing, for example - were staffed entirely by
volunteers.4 On the home front it was necessary to establish some kind
of moral consensus. It was not difficult to paint the enemy in the black-
est terms. But it was necessary to paint over the war effort of Britain
and America with a thick moral gloss as well, to make it clear that the
democracies were, on balance, fighting a liberal war. Since their major ally,
Soviet Russia, was anything but democratic the presentation of the wider
Allied cause had to be delicately handled.
‹ The moral commitment of the home populations was easy to mobilise
when there was a direct and violent threat. The Battle of Britain and the
Blitz repaired Britain's dented morale after the defeat in France. They
provided the core myths of invincibility and steadfastness for the remainder
of the war. The period of bombing saw the creation of a war effort more
united than it had been in the first months of war. 45 In the United States the
attack on Pearl Harbor had a galvanising effect on domestic opinion. Hatred
towards the Japanese, drawing on decades of anti-Asian racism, was
immediate and general. The Japanese were regarded as sub-human, racially
and physically inferior, fanatical and heathen. Public loathing for Japanese
forces was almost certainly stronger than anti-German feeling, until the
unveiling of the horror of the camps in 1945, after the German surrender.
Even the mild General Marshall talked
publicly of the 'treacherous
barbarians' of the East, and had no compunction about contemplating the
fire-bombing of Japanese cities. 46 In opinion polls during the war a tenth or
more of those polled favoured the physical extermination of the Japanese
race. What is startling is not so much the savage response as the fact that the
question was put at all. A comparable poll on the German enemy excluded
the extermination choice. 47
Despite the priority given to the European
theatre, vengeance against the Japanese was a core element in popular
attitudes to the war, fuelled by a diet of atrocity stories which helped to dull
resistance to the indiscriminate destruction of Japanese cities and the
eventual use of the atomic bomb.
Both the Blitz and Pearl Harbor came at the onset of hostilities. After that
the direct threat of invasion receded. British and American forces were only
intermittently in heavy combat. The battlefields were for the most part
remote from the home populations. For the first years of war there were long
periods of reverses or stale inactivity which
made it more difficult to
maintain popular enthusiasm. Though the news was carefully filtered, it was
impossible to disguise the reality of the war, or to stifle criticism. Even when
the tide of war had turned in the Allies favour, moral commitment needed
sustenance. During 1944 and 1945 when victory appeared certain the
willingness to accept sacrifices for a cause already secure began to weaken.
THE MORAL CONTEST
295
In Britain and the United States war production was eased off during 1944,
and larger numbers of consumer goods began to reappear in the shops. The
partial relaxation of the domestic war effort coincided with the period of the
highest western casualties of the war, a juxtaposition that was hard to
reconcile for those still doing the fighting. The Allies by then had little choice
but to fight to the finish. Since most of the war had been spent presenting the
enemy as an
abomination, there was no question
of negotiation or
compromise. Roosevelt's call for unconditional surrender, though made
casually at the Casablanca conference, without reference to anyone, was
the logical outcome of the Allied view of the enemy. The moral chasm bet-
ween them had been made too wide to bridge.
(British and American propaganda was chiefly concerned to reinforce the
positive moral stance from which it was argued victory would spring. This
was expressed in the conventional language of freedom against tyranny,
barbarism crushed by civilisation. We wanted to make the world safe for
democracy - and protect the Four Freedoms, Wrote the American General
Wedemeyer after the war.48 When the film producer Frank Capra was
recruited by General Marshall to produce a series of documentaries on Why
We Fight, to help educate American opinion, Capra took as his working
theme the 'enormity' of the enemy's cause, 'and the justness of ours'. The
western war was presented as a decent war, as the 'good war' 49 This was not
difficult to do in the light of Japanese and German atrocity, and the vicious
and illiberal regimes that ran the Axis war effort. It was more difficult when
explaining morally complex issues such as western policy on bombing enemy
civilians, or the fact that the west was fighting for democracy and freedom at
the side of the Soviet Union.
The ethical issues raised by bombing were never clearly in focus during the
war years. What criticism there was came from the belief that the western
states should maintain
the values of liberal decency in the way they
conducted the war. The authorities were concerned enough with avoiding
such criticism to highlight the military nature of the targets they attacked,
even when those targets were whole industrial cities. The attacks on the
enemy war economy
stretched the term
recognition, but everything possible was done to ensure that the two western
states were not seen to be engaged in indiscriminate terror-bombing, of the
kind Germany was alleged to have carried out against Warsaw, Rotterdam
and Coventry, or Japan against Nanking. The American emphasis on the
precision bombing tactic, though its results were known to be exaggerated,
was publicly promoted to create the illusion of good bombing against bad.
These efforts reflected serious public conceri. Londoners polled during the
Blitz were almost evenly divided on the question of whether to give the
