5
ALONG A GOOD ROAD...
The Invasion of France
'We are going along a good road... The history
of war never witnessed such a grandiose operation.
Napoleon himself never attempted it. Hitler envisaged
it but was a fool for never having attempted it.'
Stalin to Averell Harriman, 10 June 1944
ATE IN MARCH 1942 a small convoy of ships steamed south from the
L Clyde estuary in Scotland destined for the invasion of French territory
Convoy ws17 carried two thousand Royal Marines and a wide assortment of
naval and military supplies. The ships were a motley collection, small armed
escort vessels swaying side by side with smart passenger liners crudely
converted to the dull costume of war. Mercifully unattended by submarines,
the convoy ploughed on, past the continent of Europe, past the Azores and
on into the South Atlantic. On 19 April the convoy arrived in Cape Town
where it met up with the rest of the invasion fleet, the aircraft carriers
Indomitable and Illustrious, an ageing battleship and two cruisers. The 34
ships left for Durban, on the east coast of South Africa. In the last week of
April they sailed in two separate groups to take part in Operation 'Ironclad',
the invasion of Madagascar.
Their destination was the northernmost tip of the island, Cap d'Ambre,
which was almost separated from the rest by a deep inlet that formed the
natural harbour of Diego Suarez. This large sheltered anchorage was used
by the French as a naval base. It was overlooked by the small port of
Antsirane, where the French garrison and a handful of aircraft were
stationed. This colonial backwater might well have remained untouched by
the war save for the threat from Japan. Following the rapid Japanese
conquest of south-east Asia and the East Indies it was feared that Japanese
forces would fan out into the Indian Ocean, seizing Ceylon or Madagascar in
order to cut the vital shipping lines that sustained Britain's fragile war effort
in the Middle East and India. Madagascar suddenly became the key to
British survival, and Churchill signalled his strong approval of its occu-
pation.
Ironclad was a tricky operation. The island was protected in the north by
natural fortifications of shoal and reef. The harbour itself was dominated by
large naval guns set in coastal fortresses, and its long winding entrance was
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
135
easy to defend. Armed with the element of surprise, the task force was
detailed to land on the undefended western coast and attack the port from
the rear. D-Day was fixed for 5 May - every operation had a D-Day and H-
Hour to signal its beginning - and the flotilla arrived punctually off the coast
at two in the
morning. Minesweepers marked a channel through the
treacherous waters and the small transport vessels gingerly steered past the
buoys to reach the undefended beaches of Courier and Ambararata bays.
Three mines exploded in the approach but no one on the shore noticed. The
landings were carried out unopposed, for the French regarded the western
shore as unnavigable. Not until the marines had advanced 3 miles towards
the port did they suddenly meet stiff resistance. Any hope that the defenders
would come over to the Allied cause evaporated. For most of the following
day the British were pinned down with heavy casualties. The operation was
rescued from disaster only by an act of desperation. The destroyer Anthony
was sent with fifty marines aboard to run the gauntlet of the harbour guns
and seize the port under the noses of the French forces. In darkness and in
swirling seas Anthony rose to the occasion; the marines were disembarked
on the jetty and seized the naval depot and the commanding general's house.
Attacked from the rear the startled garrison began to crumble. By 3 a.m. on
7 May resistance was almost over. The port was surrendered. A brief naval
bombardment the following morning silenced the harbour guns.'
The seizure of Diego Suarez effectively forestalled the Japanese. It was
the first successful amphibious assault of the war for the Allies, and the
first genuinely combined operation,
using
aircraft, ships and
soldiers
working together. It came at a dark time in the war for the Allied cause and
was, Churchill later recalled, the only bright spot in Britain's war effort 'for
long months'? But it was small comfort. The whole operation had come
close to disaster. The ships supporting it had almost run out of fuel and
water by 7 May; casualties were surprisingly heavy, 107 killed and 280
wounded,
some
20 per cent of the
attacking force; and contrary to
expectations the French governor of the island not only refused to surrender
but continued hostilities.
The doughty Monsieur Masset retreated south
with his forces leaving behind a trail of blown bridges and booby-trapped
roads. He survived the fall of his capital in September. South African forces,
depleted by illness and plagued by clouds of dry red dust, finally cornered
the remnants of the French army in the very south of the island. Here the
governor solemnly surrendered on 5 November, exactly six months and one
minute after the onset of hostilities in May. Under French law the island's
defenders were now entitled to higher pay and awards for enduring more
than half a year of combat.3
It would be unkind to argue that Ironclad was the best the Allies could do
