156
ALONG A GOOD ROAD • • •
there were too few mobile divisions in the reserve to have the punch effect
Rundstedt wanted, and too few of them near the coast to fight the invaders
on the beaches. 52 The Allies could not have disposed German forces more
favourably if they had done it themselves?
(German strategy in France was hamstrung by the inability to predict
where the main weight of Allied attack would come. Neither was there any
firm information about the precise date of attack? 'I know nothing for certain
about the enemy, complained Rommel. 53 By April there was an evident
edginess among German forces in France. Constant patrols were ordered
on the coast throughout day and night; sentries walked up and down for
two hours at a stretch, forbidden to talk for fear of losing concentration.
The pattern of Allied bombing - heavy in north-eastern France, light in
Normandy - suggested an imminent invasion of the Pas de Calais in mid-
May, but the crisis passed. 4 Talk at Hitler's headquarters was of invasion
from mid-June, possibly not until August. There was even speculation that
the whole invasion was a hoax. The one glimmer in the darkness arrived by
chance. Routine interrogation of French Resistance prisoners in Brittany in
October had revealed the meaning of coded messages sent through the BBC
to French saboteurs. These included a verse from a poem by Paul Verlaine
('The long sobs of the violin ...') which was to be broadcast in two parts, the
first on the ist or Isth of the month in which the invasion would take place,
the second 48 hours before the invasion itself. German counterespionage
succeeded in concealing their knowledge of the message, which remained in
force right up to D-Day. German wireless operators on the French coast
were instructed to listen out for the one real clue among the babble of signals
that would tell them the Allies were on their way. 55
On 15 May Eisenhower and Montgomery hosted a meeting of senior officers
to outline the final plan for invasion. Churchill was invited, and King George
VI. Soldiers and politicians filed into the model room of St Paul's School,
where Montgomery had set up his headquarters, and sat on rows of hard
wooden benches like so many eager schoolboys, listening to the com-
manders, who one after the other explained how Overlord would work. The
plan was little different from the one proposed by Montgomery in January.
Thanks to Ultra intelligence the German order of battle was known with
more than the usual degree of accuracy, and this had helped development of
the strategy. The Allied attack would be undertaken by five divisions in the
first wave. To the west, at the eastern edge of the Cotentin peninsula, the
American ist army under General Omar Bradley would invade on two
beaches codenamed 'Utah' and 'Omaha'; to the east, between Arromanches
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
157
and the Orne river, the British 2nd army (with two British divisions and one
Canadian) under General Miles Dempsey was to attack on three beaches,
'Gold', 'Juno' and 'Sword'. On both flanks paratroopers would be flown in
during the invasion night to secure bridges and cut German communica-
tions: the British 6th airborne division on the eastern flank, the American
82nd and loist airborne divisions in the west. The invasion had the sup-
port of over twelve thousand aircraft to ensure air superiority over the
beachheads, and 1,200
naval vessels, including seven battleships and 23
cruisers. Once ashore the object was to seize the city of Caen in the first 48
hours and then to use the area at the eastern end of the assault to pin down
German forces in order to facilitate a long wheeling breakout by the
American army in the west, through Brittany and then eastwards to Paris
and the Seine. Montgomery gave his forces ninety days to reach the French
capital. When the formalities were over the King gave a short exhortation,
and Churchill, who only a few days before had confided to Harriman the
oppressive doubts he still harboured about invasion, took the opportunity to
tell the assembly that at long last, three weeks before D-Day, he 'was
hardening towards this enterprise. ST
A few days before, Eisenhower had confirmed that 5 June was invasion
day, all being well. Now that the plans were finalised and approved the
operational orders were sent out on 25 May. Every one of the ships' captains
received a book of seven hundred foolscap pages of instructions; the United
States forces distributed 280,000 charts of the invasion area, and 65,000
operational booklets.58 The Allies now faced a security nightmare. The
anxiety made Eisenhower tetchy and nervous; one of his staff observed how
'worn and tired' he looked. Every effort was made to conceal the date from
the enemy. Against vigorous protest, all diplomatic traffic was suspended on
17 April, and diplomatic correspondence censored; a 10-mile exclusion zone
was set up around the British coast from Cornwall to Norfolk; from 25 May
all letters from American troops were suspended for ten days.
All trans-
Atlantic communication by cable, radio and telephone was cut. During the
second half of May troops were moved into transit camps and denied contact
with the population outside. On 28 May all seamen
were sealed in their
vessels. The more daring stole a last visit to the cinema, or the local bars, but
by early June three million servicemen were locked away from a population
whose realisation of imminent invasion was hardly less than that of the
troops. Cities which had bustled with uniforms and lorries fell suddenly
silent; throughout the night the constant hum of engines on the roads of
southern England betrayed the secret mustering of forces. If Germany had
possessed a single spy in the south the secret could hardly have survived. 59
Now that the timetables had taken over, the whole Overlord force was
