192
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
not just result from America's great wealth of resources, but reflected a
genuine fear of military inferiority. In four years these plans turned Amer-
ica from military weakling to military super-power.) American industry
provided almost two-thirds of all the Allied military equipment produced
during the war: 297,000 aircraft, 193,000 artillery pieces, 86,000 tanks, 2
million army trucks. In four years American industrial production, already
the world's largest, doubled in size. The output of the machine-tools to make
weapons trebled in three years. The balance between the United States and
her enemies changed almost overnight. Where every other major state took
four or five years to develop a sizeable military economy, it took America a
year. In 1942, long before her enemies had believed it possible, America
already outproduced the Axis states together, 47,000 aircraft to 27,000,
24,000 tanks to 11,000, six times as many heavy guns. 3' In the naval war the
figures were more remarkable still: 8,800 naval vessels and 87,000 landing
craft in four years. For every one major naval vessel constructed in Japanese
shipyards, America produced sixteen. 32
(Production on this scale made Allied victory a possibility, though it did
not make victory in any sense automatic. For all the obvious advantages of
resources and remoteness from the field of battle, the arming of America on
this scale and with such speed could not be taken for granted? In the first
weeks of war the administration struggled to produce a coherent picture of
where and when military goods could be supplied. On 5 January 1942 the
automobile industrialist, William Knudsen, appointed by Roosevelt to run
the pre-war rearmament agency, the Office of Production Management,
resorted to the extreme of calling together a room full of businessmen where
he read out a long list of military products and simply asked for volunteers to
produce them." For all its curious informality this was an approach more
calculated to work with an industrial community that disliked taking orders
and thrived on technical challenges. The urgency of mobilisation left the
government with little choice but to rely on the initiative and technical flair
of American business. The strengths of the American industrial tradition -
the widespread experience with
mass-production, the great depth of
technical and organisational skill, the willingness to 'think big', the ethos of
hustling competition
- were just the characteristics needed to transform
American production in a hurry.)
Even before the outbreak of war Roosevelt had begun to mend the
bridges between his Democrat administration and the largely Republican
business elite. The liberal, pro-labour stance of Roosevelt's government was
played down. He needed the political cooperation of business, for he knew
that he could not just impose a state-run war economy. When war broke out
he sought their support by building a structure for wartime planning and
ECONOMIES AT WAR
193
supervision largely run by business recruits. This made practical sense.
Corporate bosses had as much, if not more, experience of the kind of
planning and coordination needed in a wartime economy than did govern-
ment officials, whose only real experience was the ill-starred New Deal.
They preferred a strategy where
business was given a good deal of
responsibility to get on with the job. The new agencies - the War Production
Board under the Sears-Roebuck director, Donald Nelson, the Controlled
Materials plan, the Manpower Commission - dealt only with those issues
that the marketplace could imperfectly direct in wartime. 34
There was a scramble of volunteers for war contracts, in which the
largest corporations were in a strong position, not least because co-opted
directors sat side by side with the officials placing the orders. By the time
the first rush was over four-fifths of all war orders had been given to the
country's hundred largest businesses. American industrial plants eclipsed
in size even the gigantic factories of the Urals. Some of them were so large
that they were able to undertake war tasks on a scale no other economy
could match. The General Motors Corporation alone supplied one-tenth of
all American war production, and hired three-quarters of a million new
workers during the war to produce it. 35 The great scale of American pre-
war output, made possible by the size and wealth of its domestic market,
allowed the widespread use of the most modern techniques of mass-
production. Though there existed some scepticism in military circles about
the feasibility of manufacturing technically complex weapons with the
methods used for Cadillacs, even the largest equipment, heavy-bombers
and shipping, ultimately proved amenable. No story better exhibits that
genius for mass-production' summoned up by Roosevelt than the story of
the Liberty Ship.
In 1940 the British government ordered sixty cargo vessels from American
dockyards to make good losses from submarine warfare. Working from the
original British designs, American shipbuilders came up with a standard
vessel, 420 feet in length, capable of carrying 10,000 tons of cargo at a
plodding 10 knots. It was a plain, workmanlike vessel. Roosevelt thought it a
'dreadful-looking object'; Time magazine christened it the 'Ugly Duckling',
and the name stuck until the US Maritime Commission, which was in charge
of the building programme, insisted that what they were making amounted
to nothing less than a Liberty Fleet. When the first ship was launched in
September 1941 from the brand-new Bethlehem-Fairfield shipyard in
Baltimore, the President himself lent dignity to the occasion. It was a gala
celebration; the ugly duckling became overnight the Liberty Ship. 36
Over the next three years the initial order for sixty ships swelled into a
programme for 2,700. Each new demand placed an ever greater burden on
