254
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . • •
refuse further Lend-Lease supplies. Throughout the period of the coalition
relations between the three states were strained by mutual distrust and
prejudice. Teheran eased the tension but it did not eradicate the deep
political gulf between east and west.
The proverbial man from Mars, observing such a coalition, might well ask
how he should distinguish friend from foe. The common denominator for
the Allies was hostility to Hitler's Germany. Only the German threat was
sufficiently powerful to hold three such unlikely partners together through
so many disagreements. Each had an interest in the others' continued
hostility to Germany, and each worked to prevent a separate peace. Their
options were in reality exceptionally narrow. Before Barbarossa, Roosevelt
interpreted America's prime interest as everything we can do, short of war,
to keep the British Isles afloat'. After the German attack in the east his
priority was to keep both Britain and the Soviet Union fighting. Stalin in his
turn needed to be confident that the west was really committed to the war,
and not just hoping that fascism and communism would batter each other to
a standstill. He watched hungrily for any evidence of western good faith. In
June 1943 the Soviet ambassador to Washington, Maxim Litvinov, sent back
to the Kremlin a very full report on American attitudes to the war.
Everything he had seen or heard confirmed what Stalin wanted to know: 'the
most important strategic task of the United States is the struggle against
Hitler! Though the coalition fought what the British politician Stafford
Cripps called 'two relatively unrelated wars', their joint commitment to the
defeat of the Axis was scarcely in doubt. 39)
(The temporary confluence of interest was sustained throughout by
American economic aid, which bound both Britain and the Soviet Union
willy-nilly to the coalition. Over the course of the war the United States
supplied Britain with one-fifth of all military equipment, and large quantities
of food, oil and machinery. The Soviet Union received much less in the way
of weapons, but was sent large amounts of vital industrial equipment and
materials to enable Soviet factories to produce their own military equip-
ment. One-fifth of supplies to Russia consisted of food, enough to provide
every Soviet soldier with a daily ration. The ubiquitous tins of Lend-Lease
spam were nicknamed 'Second Fronts' by the Soviet soldiery. 40 Without
American aid neither Britain nor the Soviet Union could have fought so
effectively. The recipients were not particularly grateful for this wartime
dependence, Churchill once remarked that he had no intention of paying it
back, while the Soviet regime complained constantly at the delays in
delivery or the quality of goods supplied. A generation of postwar Stalinist
writing ignored altogether the role of Lend-Lease in Soviet victory.
There was little idealism about the future of collaboration to bind the
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
255
three leaders together, and what there was has long been
discounted by
historians as misplaced. Little of it touched Stalin, who for most of the war
thought the worst of his allies but remained impressed by Hitler, 'a very able
man' he informed Harry Hopkins at Teheran.* Churchill was quite realistic
about the limitations of the coalition. To one Soviet complaint, late in 1941,
he retorted: 'We in this island did not know whether you were not coming in
against us on the German side ... we never thought our survival was
dependent on your action either way?42 Roosevelt was more of an optimist.
He seemed genuinely to have hoped that cooperation with the Soviet Union
would create a foundation both for greater freedom in the communist world
and for international peace. The 'close personal relationship' he believed he
had with Stalin mattered to him perhaps more than the certainty of
Churchill's loyalty. Roosevelt's motives in extending help to Britain and the
Soviet Union stemmed from a real desire for a more hopeful international
order after the war, based on a genuine warmth between the leaders of the
coalition. National interest nevertheless prevailed. When the three Allies
began to address the political issues that were raised by the imminent defeat
of Germany and Japan in 1945, the wartime friendship rapidly evaporated,
to be replaced by the incipient antagonisms of the Cold War.
The account of the personal efforts made by the three Allied leaders to
secure and sustain a coalition that could defeat the Axis prompts the
further question of how important leadership
was in explaining the
outcome of the war.) There has never been much doubt that it mattered a
great deal in Hitler's case.
The defects in his leadership contributed to
Germany's eventual defeat in ways that can easily be demonstrated. But in
the Allied
case the issue
is more complex. (Two of the leaders were
democratically elected; Stalin was a dictator like Hitler. None of them
expected to be called upon to lead his nation in war, whereas Hitler made
war a central ambition of the regime he led. In the event all three Allied
leaders in their different ways, and from their very different backgrounds,
became wartime leaders of real substance. Hitler, on the other hand, failed
the test of war.)
Unlike the Allied leaders of the First World War, who left the fighting to
the generals, Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin dominated the whole process
of waging war. Throughout its course they were closely involved both with
military operations and with the mobilisation of the home front. Though
only Stalin was a dictator, all three men were able to exert considerable
personal authority. Each acted as commander-in-chief of his respective
forces.)This was Roosevelt's prerogative as President of the United States.
