222
A WAR OF ENGINES
tanks; others were positioned in foxholes in the ground holding bombs over
their heads to detonate when tanks rumbled above them.
Much other
Japanese weaponry was obsolete. The main infantry rifle dated from 1905; it
was difficult to fire rapidly, and was accurate over only relatively short
distances. The heavy machine gun was a 1914 Hotchkiss model. The
standard infantry artillery pieces dated from 1905 (a 75-millimetre gun) and
1922 (70-millimetre), but there was nothing to match the Allied artillery
barrage. The key infantry weapon was the light machine gun, also a
1922 model. Japanese soldiers were encouraged whenever possible to use
their bayonet, a 15½-inch blade kept on the rifle at all times. Officers
used their swords, sharp enough to cut through a man's body at the first
stroke.36
Once the United States brought the weight of its new technology to bear in
the Pacific war the contest became very one-sided. On the ground, in the air
and at sea America enjoyed a wide lead in both quality and quantity.
Japanese industry provided obsolescent material in substantial quantities
until the blockade began to bite in 1944, but it suffered exceptional levels
of attrition, leaving Japanese forces short of air cover, naval equipment
and fuel. (The demodernisation of Japanese forces threw them back on
the one resource they had left: exceptional levels of endurance and moral
commitment. Training and discipline in the Japanese forces was harsh by
western standards. In 1934 a young American infantry lieutenant, Harold
Doud, spent a year with a Japanese regiment. He observed at once a regime
of strict obedience and elaborate protocol; the most minor transgression
brought instant and violent punishment. Training pushed men to the very
limit. Forced marches in the hottest parts of the day were supplemented by
hours of bayonet practice. On an exercise he marched almost continuously
for 29 hours without sleep. The men slept on long wooden platforms in
barracks and lived mainly on a diet of rice and daikon, a pickled turnip. Each
mealtime was accompanied by a long lecture on tactical or technical
questions. Idle time was unknown; in the field soldiers were posted on sentry
duty or patrols to keep them active.
'Holidays' to mark past Japanese
victories were regarded as days on which training efforts were redoubled
in honour of dead comrades and the Emperor. 37
Military culture in Japan demanded the highest sacrifices from soldiers,
even a willingness to kill themselves, flying aircraft packed with explosive
into enemy ships, or making suicidal attacks on tanks and enemy positions.
To retreat or be taken prisoner was an act of profound dishonour. Military
codes were savagely enforced. The unwillingness to surrender, and the
ability to survive for long periods of time
in conditions of appalling
deprivation, made the Japanese soldier a difficult enemy to defeat. That the
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
223
long retreat through the islands of the South Pacific was so hard fought was
not explained by the firepower or technology available to the Japanese
garrisons. It owed more to the value-system of the military in Japan, and
to high standards of tactical training. Nevertheless, fighting to the death
was a self-defeating virtue. Japanese forces were drained of their best man-
power early in the conflict.) Levels of attrition were far too high to build up
adequate reserves, and left Japan with a low ratio of military technology to
manpower. Japan began the war with 232 serviceable naval craft; by the
beginning of 1944 there were 180 and by the start of the following year only
95. The loss rate of Japanese naval aircraft in the first eighteen months
of the war was 96 per cent. 38 The weaknesses of the Japanese economy
and the constant interruption of supply lines by enemy aircraft and sub-
marines made it impossible to reverse the cycle of attrition, and condemned
Japan to fight an old-fashioned war against an enemy whose technology
and fighting power constantly expanded.
That such an imbalance should exist might be regarded as entirely
predictable. (Japanese fighting power reflected both the strengths and
weaknesses of Japanese society. America's abundant use of military
technology was in turn a reflection of a culture fascinated by technical
progress and invention, with a great depth of technical skill and experience.
America was the world's leader in the application of the internal combustion
engine, on the ground and in the air. In a very general sense the advantages
of technical familiarity were carried into America's war effort. But they
needed to be translated into effective use on the battlefield. In 1940 there
were no American armoured divisions; the air force had given little thought
to its role in offensive warfare. American military technology compared
poorly with the best available in Europe. The defeat of the Panzer Lehr
division four years later depended on America's ability to forge a modern
armed force out of the raw manpower and technology to hand.
In the 1930s the only mechanised force in the American army was the 7th
Cavalry Brigade. It mustered 224 light tanks and a few self-propelled guns.
The success of German forces in Poland and France forced American
military leaders to rethink the whole shape of their army. In July 1940 the
first two armoured divisions were created under the command of a separate
Armored Force; in 1941 three more
were activated.
The Victory Pro-
gramme planned a final force of 61 armoured divisions. The first divisions
were built in what was mistakenly thought to be imitation of Panzer forces,
with an overwhelming preponderance of tanks rather than a mixed force.
But field exercises held in 1941 showed the disturbing evidence that modern
anti-tank weaponry could
destroy massed tank attacks.
Soviet armies
learned the same lesson the hard way in 1941. In 1942 the structure of the
