9
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
The Moral Contest
The chief reason why we are at a serious disadvantage compared with the
Nazis over this business of "big ideas" is that the evil things for which they
stand are novel and dynamic, whereas the excellent things for which we
claim to be fighting may seem dull and uninspiring.'
British Directorate of Army Education, Booklet i, November 1942
N WAR the gods are always on your side. Even in the Soviet Union, where
God had been officially proscribed, religion was revived by the war. On
the day of the German invasion Metropolitan Sergei, head of the Russian
Orthodox Church, persecuted for years by the authorities, hounded by
Emelian Yaroslavsky's League of the Godless, appealed to the Soviet
faithful to do everything to help the regime: "The Lord will grant us
Victory!"' In the Soviet Union an estimated half of the population were still
Orthodox Christians, forced to live a religious half-life under a thoroughly
secular regime. The number of priests was reduced by the 1930s to a few
thousand.
The churches were destroyed or in disrepair. No Patriarch,
supreme father of the Church, had been permitted since 1926.
With the coming of war everything changed. Stalin wanted national unity.
Propaganda emphasised patriotism and tradition. In this the Church had a
part to play. Stalin stamped out the crude anti-Christian activities of the
Party zealots. Money was made available to restore churches; religious
observance was openly encouraged. A commissariat was set up for Church
affairs, popularly nicknamed 'Narkombog', People's Commissar for God.
In 1943 Stalin finally approved the restoration of Church authority. Break-
away sects - particularly the so-called 'Living Church' of Father Vvedensky,
previously supported by the Party as a counter to tradition - were closed
down; church leaders in the German-occupied territories who collaborated
with the invaders were deposed and excommunicated. The Patriarchate
was restored in September 1943. Stalin, the ex-seminarian, permitted
reopening of seminaries, and the Church was legally allowed to
own property.
When the first Patriarch, Sergei, died in May 1944, he
was succeeded by Metropolitan Alexei of Leningrad. Moscow hosted a
magnificent coronation.
Russian Orthodox leaders came from all over
the world, even Metropolitan Benjamin Fedchikov of the Aleutians
and North America, who ventured the hope that Moscow might now
THE MORAL CONTEST
283
become a 'Third Rome' behind Constantinople and the Holy City itself.2
The faithful responded to the revival. By 1943 the churches of Moscow
were so crowded at Eastertime that the congregations spilled out into the
surrounding streets. Though Stalin did not go so far as to allow chaplains to
accompany the troops, it was noticed that soldiers on leave began to use the
churches in large numbers too. Priests incanted prayers for Stalin, who was
treated as 'an anointed of the Lord'. The church gave 150 million roubles to
the war effort collected from its congregations. Sergei presented the Red
Army with a battalion of tanks paid out of church funds. It was named the
Saint Dmitry Donskoi battalion, after a fourteenth-century Russian prince
who routed the Tatars at Kulikovo. At the formal ceremony of presenta-
tion, the church's representative spoke of Russia's 'sacred hatred of the
fascist robbers' and described Stalin as 'our common father'.?
Much of this was for foreign consumption. Stalin knew that anti-Soviet
feeling in the United States was linked with the Soviet persecution of the
churches. Soviet spokesmen were sent to the Allied powers to provide
assurances that communism had turned a new leaf. Foreign churchmen were
encouraged to visit Moscow. Stalin told the British ambassador that, in his
own way, he 'also believed in God'. In Britain the Anglican Church sprang
to support the Soviet alliance. From his pulpit in Chichester Cathedral,
Bishop Bell called on his flock to 'thank God for the heroic resistance of our
allies in Russia'. At the pageant for the Soviet Union in the Albert Hall on
New Year's Day 1942 the Archbishop of Canterbury spoke of 'a beacon
shining through the vast clouds of destiny', the burning light of Russia's
indomitable faith'. 4
It would be a simple matter to argue that Stalin's conversion turned the
war into a Christian war, a latter-day crusade, right against wrong, the
faithful confronting the heathen. Yet nothing illustrates more the ambigui-
ties in any moral explanation of the conflict than the position of Christianity.
Few American Christians took Soviet policy at face value. Roosevelt did
believe in God, devoutly so. His faith carried him through the terrible years
of illness. A lifelong Episcopalian, his religious conviction was strengthened
by his struggle with his disability, the successful outcome of which he
attributed to Divine Providence. The first official statement following
the outbreak of the German-Soviet war, approved by Roosevelt and
broadcast on 23 June, made no distinction between Nazi Germany and
Soviet Russia on the question of 'freedom to worship God'. Both states
denied this 'fundamental right'. The atheistic principles of communism
were 'as intolerable and alien' as the doctrines of Nazism. There existed
a strong religious lobby in the United States, including another break-
away Orthodox sect, the Theophilites, that was never full reconciled to the
