154
ALONG A GOOD ROAD . . •
Georgians - were drafted in. By the time of the invasion the German 7th
army deployed in Normandy had a sixth of its numbers recruited from such
units. *(On 15 January Hitler appointed Field Marshal Erwin Rommel, a
flamboyant tank commander who grew into a popular legend with the
success of the Afrika Corps in 1941-2, as commander of the forces facing the
invasion threat, designated Army Group B. A man of
impetuous, brave to the point of foolhardiness, Rommel was a particular
Chard es. Romme f great
great energy,
favourite with Hitler. His choice as commander of the invasion front had a
political edge to it. Hitler wanted to be able to exercise a close watch on the
new campaign preparations, and saw his relationship with Rommel as a way
of by-passing the Commander-in-Chief in Paris. Rommel shared his
master's view that the decisive moments in the invasion would be the first
hours on the beach. Unusually for a man who had made his reputation as the
master of mobile warfare, he favoured a water-line battle from static
defences. This meant a considerable strengthening of the Atlantic Wall. He
ordered the construction of armed concrete bunkers, or resistance nests',
along the coast; he demanded fifty million mines along the shore, and heavy
mining of the coastal seas; he accelerated the erection of obstacles of all
kinds on the beaches to obstruct a landing at high tide. Some of this was
certainly achieved, but mostly in the area already more strongly defended,
in north-east France. The three new minefields laid at sea were all along
this stretch of coast. The resistance nests were neglected farther west; only
one out of a planned 42 was built on the Cotentin coast. And instead of
fifty million mines, he got only one-tenth this number. 48
To man these defences Rommel had two armies? in the Normandy and
Brittany area 7th army under General Dollmann; from Le Havre to the
Dutch border 15th army under General Hans von Salmuth.
Between
January and June 1944 the number of divisions in the whole of France and
the Low Countries was raised from 46 to 58. A number of new divisions with
younger manpower and enhanced weaponry were assembled to add strik-
ing power to the defences.
The elite 3rd parachute division was sent to
the western army, generously equipped and with a full complement of
seventeen thousand men, but the bulk of new divisions, including the Panzer
units, were well under strength in both troops and tanks. Even in May there
were fewer tanks available than the German armies had mustered for the
invasion of France four years before, and shortages of spare parts and repair
facilities reduced operational effectiveness. The bulk of divisions made up
the static formations, dug into bunkers and resistance nests in a long thin line
along the coast. Because it proved impossible to get accurate intelligence on
Allied intentions, Rommel had no choice but to spread his forces across the
whole of northern France. By June, 7th army had fourteen divisions, six of
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
155
them static; in the area where the main thrust of the invasion was expected
there were twenty divisions, fourteen of them static. There were no reserves
to speak of. 49
Given the limited resources of manpower and equipment, a great deal
rested upon how effectively they were deployed. Every military instinct
demanded mobility and concentration of effort. These were the trademarks
of German success. Rommel's static defensive crust was foreign to the
battlefield traditions he had previously helped to sustain./ His insistence on
a shore-line battle provoked a bitter strategic argument about how best
to meet the invasion when it came. The Commander-in-Chief West, von
Rundstedt, was convinced that the outer shell would be easily pierced
whatever Rommel did, and he deplored the idea of scattering German
forces in a 'thin-water soup' along the coast. He was strongly supported
by the commander of the Panzer forces in France, General Geyr von
Schweppenburg. (Both men wanted to absorb the initial invasion and then
counter-strike with a powerful mobile reserve that would smash the enemy
beachhead on ground more suitable for armoured warfare. They feared that
armoured divisions placed piecemeal along the coast would be obliterated
by Allied naval fire and air power and would be a wasted asset as a result.)
Moreover both men were convinced that the Allies would land at Calais,
where the terrain favoured German tank armies. It made little strategic
sense to them to place German divisions out of reach of the main battle when
speed of response to the invasion was of the essence. So
(Rommel was convinced that the invaders were at their most vulnerable at
the very early stages of the operation. No mobile reserve would arrive at the
beaches in time to have much impact, especially as the Allied bombers and
the French Resistance between them made travel by rail a hazardous
business. On the issue of air power he knew that the Allies would have air
superiority, but having fought in Africa for months without effective air
cover he was willing to run the risk in France. 51)
The argument could only be
resolved by Hitler, who imposed a
compromise solution that satisfied nobody. Hitler, like Rommel, arrived at
the conclusion that a diversionary assault on Normandy or Cherbourg was a
strong possibility, and agreed with Rommel's distribution of forces along the
whole coastline. But he could also see the force of the argument about
reserves. In early May he divided the armoured divisions between the two
protagonists.) A reserve under his direct control was set up under von
Schweppenburg consisting of four of the divisions, held well back from the
coast. The remainder were placed at intervals at or near the coast; only one,
21st Panzer, was assigned to the Normandy front, while four were scattered
in southern France. Hitler's decision made a fragile defence yet feebler:
