266
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . . •
Churchill disarmingly replied that if the Germans invaded, 'I shall take a
rifle (I'm not a bad shot with a rifle) and put myself in the pillbox at the end of
Downing Street and shoot till I've no more ammunition.' Halifax had his
doubts, but Churchill said very much the same to Harriman two years later
on a voyage across the Atlantic on the Queen Mary, when he disclosed that
his lifeboat was to be fitted with a machine gun if they were torpedoed: 'I
won't be captured. The finest way to die is in the excitement of fighting the
enemy.'67
(No one ever doubted Churchill's bravery, nor the energy and impetuosity
that he brought to the war effort. But there was a darker side to his
character. He had a group of intimates with whom he shared his extrava-
gant, almost bohemian lifestyle, the sybaritic habits of that louche nobil-
ity into which he was born, but he was otherwise cut off from people.
His wife regarded him as selfish and egotistical, like Napoleon', 68 He was
a difficult man to cross; he would pursue his point of view to the length of
obsession. He was temperamental and petulant, though, by all accounts,
not mean-spirited. Beneath the blustering exterior lurked a more sensi-
tive and insecure individual, prone to bouts of deep depression,)the 'Black
Dog'. During the Teheran conference Churchill's doctor found him
unusually gloomy and desperate: 'we are only specks of dust, that have
settled in the night on the map of the world . . .
Few people have doubted that in 1940 the hour found the man.
The
defeat in France and the threat of invasion brought close the collapse of
Britain's war effort. A peace with Hitler was a possibility, as Churchill
told his ministerial colleagues at the time of Dunkirk. But he recognised,
as the French discovered, that peace on Hitler's terms would be shortlived
and one-sided. Had Churchill made peace, German domination of the
Continent would have been assured. There would have been little prospect
of rousing the British public for a second war against Hitler's Germany if the
peace turned sour. But Churchill did not think that agreement with Hitler
was compatible with 'his own conscience or honour'. No one seriously
challenged this view, and Churchill's personal defiance came to stand for
that of the whole nation. Churchill was the least likely figure to abandon
the contest; he saw himself as a leader chosen to run the war, not to make the
peace. The British decision to fight on in the summer of 1940 owed a good
deal to the nature of Britain's new helmsman.
¿ Churchill's main contributions in the first months of his premiership were
not only his resolute will to fight on, but also his construction of a clear,
centralised system to run the war. His memories of the First World War, of
political crisis and military confusion, inclined him to fuse political and
military responsibilities in his own hands. As Prime Minister and Minister of
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
267
Defence Churchill, like Roosevelt, could oversee the whole war effort. He
set up his own political and military secretariats to keep him in close touch
with the detailed movement of events. The Chiefs-of-Staff Committee was
quickly established as the main forum for the formulation of strategy, while
a small War Cabinet discussed the wider political issues of war. Churchill
introduced the novelty of communicating quickly by personal and often
peremptory notes, sent directly to ministers and generals rather than left to
wind their way through the usual bureaucratic channels. Churchill, again
like Roosevelt, preferred informality to protocol. He disliked what he called
the 'official grimace'. He saw it as his role to prod officials into action, to
energise and invigorate, to expedite policy."
(Churchill's real interest was in strategy, and it is here that his leadership
was at best a mixed blessing however generously it is assessed. His habit was
to pursue every project that occurred to him if it seemed to promise swift or
dramatic results. His instincts were all for the offensive, as if every operation
were a cavalry charge.) His long-suffering army Chief-of-Staff, General
Brooke, found him 'erratic' and 'impulsive', working through intuition
rather than analysis. 2 The one merit of this approach was that it kept
subordinates on their toes, arguing against his more hare-brained schemes
and thoroughly preparing their objections. If the case against was sensible,
recalled one of his private secretaries, 'you had a fair hearing, and he was
open to argument'. Churchill never overruled the Combined Chiefs-of-Staff
if they were against him, though he would complain bitterly if he did not get
his way,? He once ruefully observed that he did not have 'autocratic
powers' like Stalin or Hitler, but Britain's war effort was almost certainly the
better for it.
(On two issues he was clear-sighted: his pursuit of American assistance and
his support for air power. He had proposed the same strategy in the Great
War: 'There are only two ways of winning the war', he announced in 1917,
and they both begin with an A. 4 In 1940 there were few other options. No
major state could provide effective help for Britain except for America; the
war could only be brought home to Germany through bombing. The pursuit
of both in 1940 and 1941, though results at first were meagre, proved in the
long run to be of inestimable value in the defeat of Germany. But on almost
every other strategic issue Churchill's judgement was questionable, The
Norwegian campaign was a disaster; Churchill was all for sending more
aircraft to France in June 1940 to be frittered away in an unwinnable battle;
and in the spring of 1941 he explored the possibility of laying on an 'air
banquet', drawing together every available aircraft in Britain, even from the
training schools, to launch a single all-out air attack against Germany.?5 It
was Churchill who sent the Prince of Wales and Repulse to the Far East on
