38
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . • •
threat. American naval aircraft were sound, but the torpedoes were slow
and inaccurate. Fighter protection for the dive-bombers and torpedo-
bombers was still insufficient to cope with the numerous shipboard fighters
of the Japanese carrier force. American ships had radar, which their enemy
did not, but against mass air attack even radar warning was of limited value.
All Nimitz had for Midway were two carriers and partial but accurate
intelligence of Japanese intentions; that, and the knowledge that here was a
battle he did not dare to lose.
Two carriers were better than none. The Hornet and the Enterprise had
sailed briefly for the Coral Sea, but returned when it was clear that they
could not arrive in time. The pugnacious commander of the carriers,
Admiral William Halsey, who rallied his men with the slogan 'Kill Japs, kill
Japs, kill more Japs', had to be hospitalised with a serious skin disorder, and
his place was taken by Rear-Admiral Raymond 'Electric Brain' Spruance. 33
He earned his nickname because he could think on his feet in tough
situations with a calm, remorseless logic. He was very different from Halsey,
but was almost certainly the better man for the difficult task in hand. It was
no mere chance that placed aircraft carriers at the centre of the American
task force. Ever since General Billy Mitchell had demonstrated twenty years
before that warships could be bombed successfully from the air, the US navy
had been alive to the significance of naval aviation. In the 1920s the navy
commissioned the carriers Lexington and Saratoga, the largest ships afloat
until the war. Under Admiral King's leadership in the 1930s naval aviation
made great strides in tactics and training. King's own career was linked with
naval aviation. He taught himself to fly when he was well over forty, and was
commander of the carrier forces in the late 1930s. He was not a big battleship
sailor; certainly not the man to pick up Yamamoto's challenge to a fleet
duel. 34
The one solid advantage enjoyed by the American navy over its opponent
was intelligence. The Japanese were able to intercept American radio
trafic, but could not decode it. Fortunately for Nimitz a telegraph cable had
been laid early in the century from Hawaii to Midway and a great deal of his
communications could be sent down the line, entirely secure from the enemy.
Japanese radio communications were leaky by comparison. The Fleet Radio
Unit Pacific, stationed at Pearl Harbor, was able to read about one-third of
the Japanese naval code, JN25. The task of decrypting it was doubly difficult,
as each message was not only placed in code, but was also then enciphered
on a table of 100,000 five-digit numbers mixed at random - the cipher had to
be stripped away even before the task of decoding the message. The Unit,
led by Joseph Rochefort, was based in a cramped, disorganised bunker.
With a small staff, Rochefort worked day and night, sleeping for brief spells,
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
39
living off sandwiches and coffee. The Unit was the very opposite of naval
spick-and-span, but it did what Nimitz wanted by dint of exhausting effort.
By early May he knew that a major operation was planned for the Hawaiian
area. By mid-May the Unit identified Midway as the most likely target, with
the Aleutians as a diversionary operation. The target code was the symbol
'AF', but the Unit needed to be sure that this was Midway, and not Hawaii
itself. A radio trap was laid. A transmission was sent en clair from Midway to
Pearl Harbor announcing that the freshwater distilling plant on the island
had broken down. This was duly intercepted by Japanese intelligence and
relayed in code back to Tokyo. The symbol they used for Midway was
indeed 'AF'.
This was 21 May. A few days later the Unit told Nimitz the exact date for
the invasion: 3 June in the Aleutians, 4 June at Midway. The intelligence
picture was vital for the Americans, for they knew that their forces were
much smaller than those of the enemy. The only way this margin could
be reduced was by deploying the carriers in exactly the right place for maxi-
mum effect. On 27 May Nimitz issued his battle plan. The two carriers and
a small screen of cruisers and destroyers were to sortie from Pearl Harbor to
a point north-east of Midway, out of range of Japanese search aircraft and
beyond any submarine screen that the Japanese might establish around
Hawaii. Here the carriers were to wait until land-based planes from Mid-
way could tell them exactly where the Japanese carriers were, and then
American aircraft were to wage a war of attrition against enemy vessels. On
no account were Spruance and his fellow commander, Admiral Fletcher, to
expose their small force to the full weight of Japanese fleet attack. On 28
May the American force sailed. Sitting in the harbour was the damaged
carrier Yorktown, scheduled for a ninety-day refit after her exertions in
the Coral Sea.
Against all expectations an army of shipworkers, 1,400
strong, swarmed over the ship making good the damage in 48 hours, work-
ing round-the-clock, improvising where they had to. It was a triumph of
American technical skill; on 31 May she was ready to sail back into combat.
Against Yamamoto's 4 fleet carriers, 7 battleships, I2 cruisers and 44
destroyers Nimitz now had 3 carriers, 8 cruisers and 15 destroyers. 36
On 29 May Yamamoto's forces, a vast flotilla of warships, fuellers, supply
ships, seaplane carriers and minesweepers, sailed out of the main Japanese
naval base at Hashira Jima, through the Bungo Strait between the islands of
Kyushu and Shikoku and out into the Pacific. At the centre of the fleet was
the giant battleship
Yamato, a 62,000-ton monster launched two years
before, bearing the sacred name of the Japanese race itself. From here
Yamamoto directed the operation, surrounded by his staff. The whole fleet
was under orders to maintain the strictest radio silence. Ships communicated
