& allled state.
• Italian-occupied area
m Vichy France &
French Emoire
advance 1942
U.S.S.R.
Axis expansion in Europe 1938-42
Sakha
Wake i.
KEVI
l Japanese-occupied states
• 1931 boundar
- Limit of Japanese advance
2 Japanese expansion 1931-42
Pearl Harhor%
EXPLAINING WORLD WAR II
17
September 1944; Saudi Arabia and Syria in February 1945; Romania
changed sides in August 1944, from the Axis to the Allied cause. The
embattled democracies of 1939 led a world crusade six years later.
* *
Somewhere in the changing fortunes of war between 1942 and 1944 lies the
heart of the answer to our question of why the Allies won. So dramatic was
the transformation that it is hard not to assume that there was a particular
turning-point, some uniquely significant battle like Waterloo, a decisive
error of judgement, a moment of strategic hesitation which cost the Axis the
war. Of course there were important battles, and human error explains
much on both sides. But the war was fought worldwide for six long years.
The chances of a single battle or decision seriously explaining its outcome
are remote. For much of the war the chief campaigns were based on
attrition, for months or years on end - in the Atlantic Battle, in the air war,
on the eastern front, in the slow erosion of the German foothold in western
and southern Europe or the Japanese hold on the islands of the south
Pacific.
The explanation of Allied victory requires a broad canvas and a wide
brush. The war was unique in its scale and geographical extent. Colossal
resources were mobilised over vast distances. The battlefield was a world
battlefield in a very literal sense. For the Allies there was no question of
winning the war in some defined area of engagement - it had to be won in
every theatre and in every dimension, land, sea and air. This made the
pursuit of victory costly, extensive, and above all time-consuming. The war
made extravagant demands on warring states of both sides. They each
pitched a third (or more) of their manpower into battle, and converted up to
two-thirds of their economy to feed the insatiable demands of the front-line.
This
was warfare on a scale the nineteenth century could not have
contemplated, indeed on a scale hardly possible today, and it drew its
justification from the desperate, Darwinian view of the world peddled by the
doom-mongers of the 1930s. All states, fascist, communist, democratic,
shared the common but terrifying assumption that war had to be 'total', what
Mussolini called a 'war of exhaustion', to win the struggle for survival. 17 The
outcome of war depended as much on the successful mobilisation of the
economic, scientific and moral resources of the nation as it did on the
fighting itself. This may not be as glamorous an explanation as one of simple
battlefield performance, but it was a civilian's war as well as a soldier's.
Allied success in the long campaigns of attrition can be convincingly
explained only by incorporating the role of production and invention.
In the discussion that follows a rough balance has been kept between two
