256
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . . .
Stalin acquired the title on 8 August 1941, though it was not widely
publicised at first because Stalin did not want his name to be identified with
defeat. 43 Under the British constitution the King was formally Commander-
in-Chief, but Churchill informally assumed the role. As Prime Minister,
Minister of Defence and chairman of the Defence Committee he was
uniquely placed to act the military chief, though it was never entirely clear
whether he could constitutionally compel the armed services to obey his
commands. 4* All three leaders encouraged the centralisation of the Allied
war efforts around their own person. Here the similarities end. Roosevelt
and Churchill had some things in common beside language, though less than
the rhetoric of 'special relationship' might suggest. But with Stalin, the
artisan's son from Georgia, the contrast was complete.
Any assessment of Stalin's leadership during the war has to steer between
two extremes. Soviet propaganda presented Stalin uncritically as the saviour
of his people and the architect of victory) In unravelling this distorted image
the temptation is to highlight the weaknesses and errors in Stalin's conduct
of the war, and to diminish the contribution of his personality. Neither
approach does justice to its subject. Stalin's was an extraordinary story.
Born in 1879 in the small Georgian town of Gori, his early life was spent in
conditions of urban squalor; he was beaten mercilessly by his father, a failed
and drunken cobbler. At six he survived smallpox, but he bore its facial scars
for the rest of his life. An infected ulcer left him with a slightly withered arm.
His tough upbringing produced in him, a childhood friend recalled, a
personality both 'grim and heartless', 45 At school he excelled, thanks to a
phenomenal memory. He was transferred to a seminary in Tiflis where he
first made contact with Russian Marxism. He became an active revolu-
tionist, and moved in and out of Tsarist jails. In 1917 he was prominent in
the inner circle of Bolshevik leaders working to turn the overthrow of Tsar-
dom in February 1917 into a communist revolution. When Lenin's coup
succeeded in October, Stalin was rewarded with his first taste of office, as
People's Commissar for the
Russian Nationalities. In 1922 Stalin was
appointed General Secretary of the Party. It was a fateful appointment, for
this ambitious, secretive, devious revolutionary, both more plebeian and
more brutal than the committee of intellectuals who ran the Party, used the
new office as the instrument to create an unassailable power-base. By the
late 1920s Stalin - 'man of steel' - dominated the Soviet state apparatus and
his own party.
(In the decade before the war Stalin was the driving force behind the rapid
state-imposed modernisation of Soviet industry and agriculture, and the
build-up of the largest armed forces in the world. This 'revolution from
above', with its ceaseless chaos and emergencies, permitted him to
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
257
centralise power even more completely in his own hands. The apparatus of
propaganda lionised Stalin as the genius of socialist reconstruction and
father of his
people. The reality was grotesquely different. Stalin was
obsessively distrustful of those around him and used the machinery of state
terror to insulate himself against enemies real or imagined. The massive
problems of social dislocation thrown up by forced modernisation were
viewed by Stalin as so much sabotage, to be punished with deportation or
death. Stalin appeared to those who met him in public unassuming, almost
timid, quiet-spoken but firm, with little of the monster about him. In private
Stalin revealed a coarseness in his nature; he was vindictive and bullying,
given to bouts of red-faced fury. His colleagues learned when to talk and
when to stay silent. After Stalin spoke in committee all those present
applauded.)
Stalin travelled a long road from early poverty and obscurity to the dizzy
heights of state power. He was above all a survivor, who created his
dictatorship through a combination of hard work, political acumen and an
almost complete lack of moral scruple. Though hardly a charismatic figure,
the possession of absolute power gave him a distinct presence in any
company, enhanced by the public demeanour of imperturbability.)Harsh-
tongued, brutal and cynical, he was well-informed on
all issues and
trusted no one. Given such a personality it was
all the more discon-
certing that Stalin should have been caught so completely by surprise
when Germany launched the Barbarossa campaign on 22 June 1941. The
German attack provoked the most serious crisis in Stalin's leadership. He
did not address the Soviet people for two weeks. Witnesses remember
a quite different Stalin, ashen-faced, shaken, unable to absorb the shock
of the early defeats. The temporary collapse of Stalin's will left a vacuum at
the centre of Soviet decision-making. In a speech in May 1945 he took
the curious step of thanking the Soviet people for not saying to him at that
point of crisis 'Go away, we shall install another government'. 46 There was
no coup in 1941, but the government and military were left for the first vital
weeks of the German attack with no central direction. On 30 June Molotov
and his fellow commissars went to find Stalin in his summer retreat at Kunt-
sevo, there to invite him to form a state defence committee to hold the
crumbling war effort together. When he realised that they had not come to
arrest him, he threw off the mask of despair and finally sprang back to life.
That same day the State Committee for Defence was formed. On 10 July
the Supreme Headquarters was set up, based at Stalin's modest apartment
in the Kremlin building. Stalin now took over running the war. He assumed
the role of Commissar of
Defence
and appointed himself Supreme
Commander-in-Chief. He had no scruples about easing his party crony
