268
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . •
the grounds that battleships could still fight their way past air power; Dakar,
Greece, Crete - a positive gazetteer of poorly prepared, poorly supplied
operations. Finally, Churchill's single-minded pursuit of the Mediterranean
option, and his obsession with Turkey and the Balkans - again a hangover
from the First World War - might well have inflicted serious damage on
western strategy if he had won his way. Hemmed in by the Alps and the
Balkan ranges, at the end of long supply lines, the western Allies would have
inflicted much less damage on Hitler than they did in France, while the
Soviet advance in the east would have been slowed up, as Stalin fully realised
at Teheran. On these issues Churchill showed himself at his worst, angrily
convinced of his own strategic insight, unable to concentrate on other issues,
bullying and cajoling by turns. He remained certain at Teheran that he was
right about the 'shining, gleaming opportunities in the Mediterranean', but
he could carry neither his allies nor many of his staff with him.?" It was a
conviction all the more difficult to understand in the light of Churchill's
failure at Gallipoli, and the insignificant part the Balkans and Middle East
played in the defeat of the Central Powers in 1918.
(It is difficult not to conclude that Allied strategy succeeded despite
Churchill, though his pugnacity and spirit remained a valuable symbol of the
Allied will to win. Both his allies and his military staffs soon learned how to
cope with their mercurial companion by diverting and ignoring his interven-
tions. He was a poor administrator, and left much of the machinery of war,
once it was established, to run itself, He grew out of touch with policy on the
home front. In military affairs he met his match in Brooke, who managed
to blunt his excesses.
His notorious habit of interfering with front-line
operations, and sacking generals and admirals he did not value, was curbed
with the emergence of strong military personalities - Alexander in the
Mediterranean, Montgomery in Europe - who ensured his bark remained
much worse than his bite. By 1943 his influence on the war effort was much
reduced; at Teheran he confided that he was 'appalled by his own im-
potence'." Despite the postwar mythology, his popularity with the popul-
ation was not as secure as he would have wished. In early 1942 opinion polls
showed fewer than half of those asked in favour of his premiership. In July
1942 he was subjected to a Parliamentary vote of no confidence, though he
survived it comfortably. However in 1945, two months after the victory in
Europe, Churchill was heavily defeated in the General Election, 'immedi-
ately dismissed by the British electorate' he remarked in his memoirs, his
bitterness scarcely concealed. Churchill had been the man for the hour, but
for no longer. 'Don't you feel lonely without a war?' he asked his doctor a
decade later. 'I do. 78
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
269
/There is no ideal war leader. For all their many strengths the coalition
leaders had their share of flaws. What is striking, as the war effort went on,
was the ability of the wartime apparatus to cope with those flaws. In each
case the personal role of the leader moved from a deliberate prominence at
the start of the conflict to a more subdued participation by its end. This was
an inevitable product of the war, even for Stalin. No one man could hope to
master every area of activity; delegation was an absolute necessity. The
western war effort was run by large committees staffed by both Allies. These
committees formed the apex of a pyramid of staffs and offices where the
routine work of the war effort was conducted. The war was not so much led
as administered.)
(What such systems needed were managers, and it is to the credit of all
three Allied leaders that this was quickly recognised. Behind each leader
there emerged a cohort of military managers and civilian officials who took
on the real responsibility of running the war. In general these tasks were
carried out by professionals, whose experience and qualities singled them
out for office. The Allied wartime administration was on balance surpris-
ingly free of political stoodges and dud appointments; incompetence at the
highest level was difficult to conceal. Functional effectiveness rather than
political loyalty governed promotion, and resulted in a valuable degree of
stability and continuity at the higher levels of leadership of all three states.)
Three examples may serve to demonstrate the force of this assertion.
Each one illustrates the way in which Allied leadership came to be shared
between commander-in-chief and professional specialist. The first is the case
of Alan Brooke.) A career soldier from Northern Ireland, Brooke made
his reputation early in the war rescuing the defeated forces from north-
east France. He was promoted on his return to head the Home Army, and
set about the reorganisation and training of forces to repel invasion. In
December 1941 he replaced Sir John Dill as Chief of the Imperial General
Staff, the most senior military appointment. Dill was a clear-sighted and
energetic chief, but he had not been able, on his own admission, to cope with
the nervous strain of constantly arguing with Churchill. Brooke had no such
qualms. He had a quick temper and a strong streak of stubbornness and was
happy to argue issues out face to face with Churchill. He did so from a
position of great strength. He was much more closely in touch with the war
effort than Churchill; he had a quick mind and was able to grasp the strategic
effort as a whole, to weigh means and ends precisely. His manner was terse
to the point of rudeness; subordinates found him severe, demanding, and
aloof. He worked hard and efficiently and expected nothing less from those
around him. He was the very opposite of Churchill, sceptical where his
chief was enthusiastic, consistently sensible rather than erratic, a thorough
