310
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
two-thirds believed they would suffer starvation, enslavement or annihila-
tion, and only 4 per cent expected to be treated humanely. One munitions
worker explained that at school young Japanese
were told that the
Americans would torture and murder them: 'I thought it would be better to
be dead than captured. 93 In Germany the war effort in 1944 and 1945 owed
a good deal to popular dread, fuelled by the propaganda machine and
rumours from the east, of what would happen when the Soviets arrived. A
mirror image of German atrocity was projected on to the advancing enemy.
Most anti-Nazis were united in the view that they did not want to be ruled by
Stalin any more than by Hitler.
The effect of being caught between terror on the home front and a terrible
enemy was to produce a pronounced fatalism among both peoples. As the
end neared there developed a do-or-die mentality among the troops.
Japanese society prepared for the last stand, or kessen, when thousands of
their number were to perish in suicidal attacks on the invading enemy. The
military wanted to fight with everything to hand, to die with honour. Faithful
to his view that the war was a sacred conflict, Admiral Ugaki refused to
accept Japan's surrender. On the day it was announced, he arrived at an air
squadron headquarters, commandeered an aircraft, and set off to crash into
the American fleet at Okinawa. He left a suicide note behind: 'I am going to
ram into the arrogant American ships, displaying the real spirit of a Japanese
warrior.
›94 A young German student later recalled the odd air of calmness in
the young men she knew preparing to leave for the final battles of the war:
'There was nothing morbid about the way they accepted their fate, although
none of them wanted to die for one man's insanity. When they left, they
knew that soon. they would be killed, and that the war was already lost
for Germany' They were sustained by the view that their death would in
some sense atone for the cruelty and folly all around them. Not one of
them survived 95 While German soldiers came to terms with the reality of
death and defeat, their masters prepared to abandon them. Thousands of
Nazi functionaries began to flee the threatened areas of Germany. When the
war ended thousands more committed suicide.
Among their number was
Heinrich Himmler, the man whose empire of genocide and terror had
turned Germany into a moral desert.
He
disguised himself in a police
sergeant's uniform and took the papers of another sergeant shot for 'defeat-
ism'; his familiar moustache was shaved off and he wore a black patch over
one eye. Two weeks after the end of the war he was caught at a British
checkpoint, though no one at first recognised who he was. A few days
later he declared his identity. In the middle of a strip search by British inter-
rogators he bit on a phial of cyanide and could not be revived.%6
THE MORAL CONTEST
31I
The Allies' moral coalition lived on after the war. The remaining Nazi Party
leaders and military chiefs, together with a host of lesser officials, soldiers
and businessmen, were taken into custody to await trial as war criminals.
The decision to indict the leaders of the Nazi state was taken late in the
war. Up to the last months the predominant view was in favour of sum-
mary execution by military firing squad, an idea proposed by the British.
To their surprise Stalin strongly opposed the suggestion, on the grounds
that the Allies would be accused of being afraid to give their enemies a fair
trial. Roosevelt did not reject the idea of treating German leaders harshly,
even of finishing the job swiftly in 'kangaroo courts'. But his successor as
President, Harold Truman, was horrified by the suggestion that a liberal state
should be engaged in lawless killing. In May 1945 he insisted that war
criminals should be brought before an international tribunal, to answer
for their crimes at the bar of world opinion.
This was easier said than done. There were arguments about who was, and
who was not, a war criminal. There was widespread unease at the absence of
any precedent in international law - bar the exile of Napoleon to St Helena -
for formally imposing the victors' justice on the vanquished. There was the
vexed question of what precisely the leading war criminals could be accused
of. The decision to indict them for 'Crimes against Peace' and 'Crimes
against Humanity' was regarded in some quarters as a mockery as long as
Soviet judges sat on the bench, while its legal propriety was clearly
questionable. The trials finally opened at Nuremberg, spiritual home of the
Nazi movement, on 20 November 1945. The opening statement by the
American justice, Robert H. Jackson, indicated the wider moral purpose of
the trials, which was nothing less than to set on record, for all the world to
see, the contrast between 'imperilled civilisation' and the evil cause she had
fought: 'Against their opponents... the Nazis directed such a campaign of
arrogance, brutality and annihilation as the world has not witnessed since
the pre-Christian era ...
,97
The tribunal took nine months to demonstrate the justness of the Allied
cause. The Soviet judges treated the occasion like a Stalinist show trial,
bullying and hectoring the defendants. At a dinner in honour of the Soviet
deputy Foreign Minister, Andrei Vishinsky, who had been Stalin's chief
prosecutor during the Moscow show trials of 1936-8, Vishinsky proposed a
toast to the defendants: 'May their paths lead straight from the courthouse
to the grave!'" The trials gave more opportunity than their instigators could
ever have intended for the chief war criminals to argue their side of the case.
The prisoners reacted to their moral indictment in
different ways. Some
showed no remorse. Göring stood by everything he had done and tried to
force the other prisoners to do the same. Speer on the other hand admitted
