UNPREDICTABLE VICTORY
champions in terms of fundamental human values, in a language of moral
decline and moral renewal. The spirit of the age was of crisis, decay,
This spirit was expressed internationally in the growing division between a
small number of states anxious to preserve the existing balance of power and
a larger number who sought to revise it. The defenders of the existing system
were few indeed. At their forefront stood Britain and France. Both states lay
at the centre of global empires which together covered one-third of the
world's surface. Neither state had enough money or military resources to
defend its world-wide interests, and each knew it. No other major power had
much interest in the survival of the Franco-British world order. Other
nations could see a gap widening between the apparent and the real strength
of Britain and France. Less than a generation separated the two major world
powers of the 1930s from the humiliating débâcle at Suez in 1956. The
United States shared the liberal politics of western Europe, but was hostile
to old-fashioned colonialism, and deeply distrusted what American leaders
saw as a reactionary and decadent Europe. The Soviet leadership saw the
old imperial states as historically doomed, and, though the Soviet Union did
little in the 1930s to hasten their demise, Stalin looked in the long run for
what he called a 'new equilibrium'? There was no hint in the 1930s of the
later wartime coalition.
The chief challenge to the existing equilibrium came from Germany,
Italy and Japan. All three had been democratic states after the Great War,
but their democracy turned sour in the heat of economic crisis and popular
authoritarian nationalism. In 1922 Mussolini came to office in Italy at the
head of the first fascist party to gain power; in 1931 Japan came gradually
under the domination of the military; in 1933 Hitler's Nazi Party, profiting
from the social and political chaos generated by the slump in Germany,
stormed the ramparts of respectable politics and imposed single-man,
single-party dictatorship with a little over one-third of the popular vote. All
three states were united by resentment. They were, Mussolini argued, the
'proletarian states', dominated by the wealthy plutocracies, Britain, France
and America. The fashionable view that empire was a source of political
strength and economic nourishment, particularly for states that were over-
populated and weak in natural resources, led all three to the conclusion
that in the crisis-ridden 1930s their only hope of salvation lay in acquiring
empires of their own. The term everyone used was 'living-space'; since the
globe's territorial resources were finite, such space could be acquired only
at the expense of someone else, and violently. The evident weakness of
Britain and France and the unwillingness of either the United States or the
Soviet Union to take their place in world politics, exposed a temporary
EXPLAINING WORLD WAR II
9
window of opportunity, through which the three 'New Order' states
hesitantly climbed.
In the space of half a dozen years the fragility of the old order was made
transparently clear. In 1931 Japan invaded and occupied Manchuria, the
industrially rich province of northern China. An uneasy truce followed.
Japan refused to abandon her conquest in the face of western disapproval
and no one had the strength or willingness to expel her by force. In 1937 a
full-scale war broke out between Japan and China. Japanese leaders dec-
lared an Asian New Order and set out to conquer China's Pacific provinces.
The attempt lasted to 1945 and Japan's defeat at American and Soviet
hands. In 1935 Mussolini attacked Abyssinia to extend Italy's colonial
empire, and to lay the foundation for Italian domination of the Mediter-
ranean and northern Africa. Again western protests did nothing to reverse
the aggressor. By May 1936 Abyssinia was conquered. In July that year
Italy sent forces to help Franco in the Spanish Civil War. Long before the
onset of world war both Japan and Italy had abandoned any idea of peaceful
settlement. They fought for their living space, and calculated correctly that
none of the other powers would be willing to expel them by force.
Germany was the most dangerous component of the Axis, though
German forces, unlike Japanese or Italian, did not fire a shot in anger until
the invasion of Poland in September 1939 which launched world war. The
source of the German threat was Hitler Other German nationalists wanted
Germany to reassert herself as a major state in the 1930s following years of
enforced subservience to the victor states of 1918. Few Germans of any
political shade had accepted the Allied demands for reparations and
German disarmament, or been reconciled to the loss of territory to Poland,
Czechoslovakia and France. But very few Germans wanted to run the risk of
war again. Hitler's outlook was quite different. Any account of the origins
and course of the Second World War must give Hitler the leading part.
Without him a major war in the early 1940s between all the world's great
powers was unthinkable.
Hitler began life in 1889 in the small Austrian town of Braunau-am-Inn,
born into the vast multi-racial Habsburg empire, ruled by the grand old man
of the dynasty, Emperor Franz-Joseph. He was the third son of an Austrian
customs official. He was indulged by his parents, perhaps to compensate for
the death of all but one of their other children. Hitler's parents both died by
the time he was eighteen. The year his mother died, in 1907, Hitler failed to
gain entry to the Vienna Academy where he had hoped to pursue painting,
the one thing in which he was interested. Over the next six years he did little,
living off a legacy from his mother, painting when he could, escaping from
the Austrian authorities who wanted him to do military service. He had no
