204
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
centrally planned, and in response to Hitler's efficiency decree industrial
rationalisation became the driving force of the new structure. A remarkable
amount was achieved in three years. By 1944 the number of weapons had
been reduced to a few chosen types;) 42 aircraft models became five; 151
lorries gave way to just 23; a dozen anti-tank weapons were replaced by just
one; and so on through the whole range of German weaponry. " The shift to
mass-production, though far from universal, brought an instant increase in
efficiency. Weapons output trebled in three years; the productivity of
German manpower doubled. Large factories were expanded and small ones
closed down. The Messerschmitt-109 fighter was produced at the rate of a
thousand a month in three giant plants in 1944, where once 180 had been
produced in seven smaller plants. Industrialists now revelled in the freedom
to work without the constant fear of military interference?
Under Speer the German economy at last promised to deliver the sort of
numbers produced in the Soviet Union and America. It was a promise still
difficult to redeem. The military continued to disrupt long production runs
and standardisation. The army procurement officers regarded Speer as an
'inexperienced intruder'. Speer recalled ruefully in his memoirs the survival
of 'excessive bureaucratisation', which he fought 'in vain' 60 Göring kept a
jealous hold on aircraft production until the spring of 1944, when real mass-
production was introduced at last. The one thing that kept Speer going was
Hitler's backing, but the war economy always threatened to return to the
unrationalised, disordered mêlée of its early years. For all his enthusiasm
and sense of urgency, Speer was unable to reap an early harvest. Not until
the summer of 1943 did the reforms begin to bear real fruit, long after the
Soviet Union and the United States had mass-production established. At just
the point when German potential was on the point of being realised in the
large, mechanised, centralised assembly plants, bombing began in earnest
Bombing was the enemy of rationalisation. Speer's deputy responsible for
tank production explained to his postwar interrogators that bombing forced
measures that contradicted mass-production: 'the breaking down and
dispersal of plants, starting up factories on account of their geographical
position instead of their technical capacity ...
161 As German factories
moved into smaller, camouflaged premises, into woods or even under-
ground, it became progressively more difficult to expand production. There
was enough momentum in the Speer reforms to carry German industry to a
peak in September 1944, but bombing made it impossible for managers and
workers alike to achieve the maximum. By the autumn of 1944 the war
industries were living off accumulated stocks of materials and components.
Under the impact of bombing, conditions on the home front deteriorated
rapidly. More and more of the workforce was made up of unwilling
ECONOMIES AT WAR
205
labourers forced from their homes across Europe to fill the German
workhalls. By 1944 seven million of them - a quarter of the workforce - lived
and worked in squalid conditions on low pay, regimented by the Nazi
authorities, bullied and victimised by German workers whose own con-
ditions in the industrial regions of the Reich were growing steadily worse.
Food supplies declined and urban amenities were strained to breaking point;
millions of Germans were made homeless and could not be satisfactorily
rehabilitated. Hundreds of hours were spent huddled in shelters and
absenteeism rates soared. (The more bombing affected the willingness to
work, the more the regime resorted to draconian methods to extract the
labour, The SS mobilised the population of its empire of concentration and
extermination camps, which was literally worked to death. Workers caught
pilfering or slacking were taken into the camps or sent on 'work education
weekends' organised by the Gestapo; even industrialists who displayed
defeatism or obstructed the growing number of SS officials recruited to run
the bombed economy could follow their employees behind barbed wire.
Work was kept going on a basis of fear: dread of the Soviet enemy as the Red
Army neared the borders of the Reich and dread of the rule of terror at
home. 62
The German wartime economy was a paradox. Germany possessed a
wealth of resources, a large class of competent entrepreneurs and engineers
and a highly skilled workforce, all at the disposal of an authoritarian system
that brooked no opposition, led by a dictator with delusions of super-power
grandeur. This was a rich mixture, which promised a great deal more than it
could deliver. The German economy fell between two stools. It was not
enough of a command economy to do what the Soviet system could do; yet it
was not capitalist enough to rely, as America did, on the recruitment of
private enterprise. Only too late was an effort made to do both these things,
to coerce more ruthlessly and at the same time to give industry more
responsibility for production. Before that German mobilisation was hostage
to the ambitions of a highly professional and exclusive military elite which
saw war in all its elements as a military affair and clung on to that prerogative
with stifling effects on Germany's industrial effort.
Hitler had little respect for American economic power. 'What is America',
he asked, 'but millionaires, beauty queens, stupid records and Hollywood?'
He had even less for the Soviet Union. On the eve of Barbarossa he told
Goebbels that between German and Soviet strength there was no compari-
son; 'Bolshevism will collapse like a pack of cards. '63 These turned out to be
profound misjudgements, though who, in the summer of 1941, could have
