324
WHY THE ALLIES WON
(Even then, complete victory was not attained just through the reform of
Allied fighting power, and its effective exploitation on the field of battle.
The will to win, to continue through periods of intense crisis, stalemate or
defeat, to keep
the prospect of victory in sight and to mobilise the
psychological and moral energies of a people under threat, proved to be
inseparable from the ability to fight better) There is no doubt that at times in
the war moral confidence was badly dented; in each Allied state enthusiasm
for war had to be actively maintained. Individuals reacted to the demands
of war in so many different ways that easy classification is defied. But on
balance the commitment of both leaders and led to prosecuting the war to
the finish, despite high levels of sacrifice and, in the Soviet case, exceptional
losses, proved to be a positive element in the Allied cause. This had little to
do with Gross Domestic Product, even if most soldiers had known what it
meant. To those in battle the facts of aggregate economic strength were
meaningless. People fought for many reasons, from fear, from hatred, from
some sense of moral or racial superiority, from loyalty or patriotism. They
did not fight to prove the statistics right, but from an effort of will.
(There have been ample opportunities since 1945 to show that material
superiority in war is not enough if the will to fight is lacking) In Algeria,
Vietnam and Afghanistan the balance of economic and military strength lay
overwhelmingly on the side of France, the United States, and the Soviet
Union, but the will to win was slowly eroded. Troops became demoralised
and brutalised. Even a political solution was abandoned. In all three cases
the greater power withdrew. The Second World War was an altogether
different conflict, but the will to win was every bit as important - indeed it
was more so. The contest was popularly perceived to be about issues of life
and death for whole communities rather than for their fighting forces alone.
They were issues, wrote one American observer in 1939, 'worth dying for'.
If, he continued, 'the will-to-destruction triumphs, our resolution to pre-
serve civilisation must become more implacable ...
mount'. 24
our courage must
Words like 'will' and 'courage' are difficult for historians
to
use
as
instruments of cold analysis. They cannot be quantified; they are elusive of
definition; they are the products of a moral language that is regarded
sceptically today, even tainted by its association with fascist rhetoric. Yet in
war these are the qualities, this the language, generated by conflict. German
and Japanese leaders believed that the spiritual strength of their soldiers and
workers would in some indefinable way compensate for their technical
inferiority. When asked after the war why Japan lost, one senior naval
officer replied that the Japanese 'were short on spirit, the military spirit was
weak . .•2s
and put this explanation ahead of any material cause. Within
WHY THE ALLIES WON
325
Germany, belief that spiritual strength or willpower was worth more than
generous supplies of weapons was not confined to Hitler by any means,
though it was certainly a central element in the way he looked at the world.
The irony was that Hitler's ambition to impose his will on others did perhaps
more than anything to ensure that his enemies' will to win burned brighter
still. The Allies were united by nothing so much as a fundamental desire to
smash Hitlerism and Japanese militarism and to use any weapon to achieve
it. This primal drive for victory at all costs nourished Allied fighting power
and assuaged the thirst for vengeance. They fought not only because the
sum of their resources added up to victory, but because they wanted to
win and were certain that their cause was just.
The Allies won the Second World War because they turned their
economic strength into effective fighting power, and turned the moral
energies of their people into an effective will to win. The mobilisation of
national resources in this broad sense never worked perfectly, but worked
well enough to prevail. Materially rich, but divided, demoralised, and
poorly led, the Allied coalition would have lost the war, however exag-
gerated Axis ambitions, however flawed their moral outlook. The war made
exceptional demands on the Allied peoples. Half a century later the level of
cruelty, destruction and sacrifice that it engendered is hard to comprehend,
let alone recapture. Fifty years of security and prosperity have opened up a
gulf between our own age and the age of crisis and violence that propelled
the world into war. Though from today's perspective Allied victory might
seem somehow inevitable, the conflict was poised on a knife-edge in the
middle years of the war. This period must surely rank as the most significant
turning-point in the history of the modern age.)
