242
A WAR OF ENGINES
of 1943. But even with strong political and military backing,
generous
resources, a large international team of scientists and engineers and no
disruptions from bombing or sabotage, there was still insufficient uranium to
produce a bomb by the time the war in Europe was over.
Not until 16 July 1945 was it possible to test the new weapon. Both a
plutonium bomb and an enriched uranium bomb were planned, but the
test used a plutonium warhead, which generated less fall-out. Early in the
morning the Los Alamos scientists made their way to a position some 10
miles from the Alamogordo Air Base site where the detonation was to
take place. The weather was poor, and the test, planned for 2 a.m., had
to be postponed for three and a half hours. All personnel were instructed
to lie face down on the ground with their hands over their eyes until the
flash of the bomb was past. At 5.30 a.m. the bomb went off. Otto Frisch,
the German emigré who in 1939 helped to calculate the necessary critical
mass of u235 to cause an explosion, stood 20 miles away, behind a radio
truck for fear of ultra-violet rays. The hills around him were flecked with
faint dawn. Suddenly, soundlessly, the hills were glaringly illuminated
"as if somebody had turned the sun on with a switch' 81 When he looked
over the truck he saw a 'pretty red ball, about as big as the sun' connected
to the earth by a grey stem. One of the technicians who had been placed
in a dugout 5 miles closer to the explosion, arrived back at the main
group. He said simply: 'The war is over.' General Groves, the military
head of the project, replied: 'Yes, after we drop two bombs on Japan. 82
(Both were wrong. Atomic weapons did not win the war, for they came far
too late to affect the outcome. Japan was on the point of surrender by the
time the two available bombs were used. The technical triumph helped to
illustrate how intimately technology and war-making were linked in the
western war effort. The war accelerated the technical threshold, and
brought the weapons of the Cold War within reach, but no state, even the
most richly endowed, was able to achieve a radical transformation of
military technology before 1945. The war was won with tanks, aircraft,
artillery and submarines, the weapons with which it was begun.)
The fate of German military technology provides one of the central
paradoxes of the war. Germany was without doubt a modern state by the
standards of the 19gos, but her forces were stage by stage deprived of the
modern weapons they needed. While German scientists pioneered the
world's most advanced weapons - rockets, jets, atomic weapons - German
forces lacked adequate quantities of the more humdrum
petrol-driven
equipment. Only later in the war was an effort made to change this balance,
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
243
but by then the attrition ratio was too far in favour of the Allies to be
reversed. Billions of marks were spent on projects at the very frontiers of
military science which brought almost no strategic advantage whatsoever?
The paradox can be explained in part by the warped outlook of Germany's
leaders, who persuaded themselves as the war began to turn against them
that German science could conjure up a new generation of fantastic
weaponry that could reverse the war's course at a stroke. 'Retribution is at
hand, Goebbels told Party leaders in February 1944. 'It will take a form
hitherto unknown in warfare, a form the enemy will find impossible to
bear. '83 Towards the end of 1944 Himmler tried to revive atomic bon
research, and to develop a new chemical weapon, the new incendia
material' that was literally inextinguishable. All these projects al
men and materials that would have been much better spent in conv
fields, but the fantasy of secret weapons helped to cushion the re
impending defeat.
There is a second
explanation: the German
armed forces pui
technical excellence for its own sake. By the late 1930s they
the weapons that would in the main be used to fight th
War. They were now keen to move on to the next techn
Wor
Id 1
keep ahead in the arms race. At the outbreak of the war th
at the very starting edge of the world of jets and missiles.
came they tried to speed the process of development up,
with the weapons of the 1950s. The result was a technical dis
ages of resources, constant political interference, the inheren
of accelerating research work at the forefront of science, all n
German forces got little in terms of performance from the new
to match the great expense of producing them. The Allies - ex
the Manhattan atomic project - stuck with the weapons of the late
and pushed them successfully to their limits, in most c
performance of Germany's more conventional weaponi
war they came to develop missiles, jets, advanced subma.
and a host of other vanguard equipment, they simply took Ge
and blueprints.
By contrast with Germany, the Soviet Union was far less mo
the difference is often prone to exaggeration. But over the cour!
very great strides were made in all fields of advanced technology.
of thousands of poorly-educated, technically illiterate Soviet citiz
trained to drive trucks and tanks, or fly some of the world's fastest
The Soviet Union had nothing to lose and everything to gain by ups
her manpower and equipment) For twenty years Soviet communis
preached the virtues of modernisation as the answer to all the cou
