274
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . ..
Churchill. But he remained a self-effacing hero, the model of the citizen-
soldier, the manager in uniform. Churchill regarded him as 'a magnificent
organiser', but he was not a Churchillian soldier. There was nothing
flamboyant, daring, or even very courageous about Marshall. He was the
personification of a managerial culture absorbed by the business of war.
Superficially Hitler's wartime leadership bore some resemblance to that of
his enemies. He too was Supreme Commander of the armed forces, a post
to which he appointed himself in February 1938. He concentrated civilian
and military power in his own hands. He interfered ceaselessly in the
conduct and planning of operations, as Stalin and Churchill did. He was
not happy with routine administration, and preferred the private interview
to the large committee, like Roosevelt. But between Hitler and the three
Allied leaders there was one very great difference. Hitler took his posi-
tion as Supreme Commander literally. He alone devised strategy; he de-
cided on all major operational questions. The delegation of responsibility
in any meaningful sense of the term was quite foreign to him. He had no
sense of his own limitations. Indeed as the war went on he became ever
more convinced that he, the humble veteran, knew more about the con-
duct of war than the generals.)
Assessing Hitler's achievement as a military leader has never been easy.
(German generals after the war clamoured to demonstrate that German
defeat was the product of their commander's ineptitude. Their testimony
has never been regarded as entirely reliable. To set against the later failures,
there is the awkward evidence of German successes up to the autumn of
1942, all of which were achieved under Hitler's command as well. The
temptation exists to argue that he outdid the military leaders at their own
game, that he possessed a naive but intuitive grasp of military strategy:
There were certainly serious-minded soldiers in 1940 who suspended their
disbelief and hailed the Führer's genius. But it is a temptation that should be
resisted. Hitler's credentials both as a strategist and as a commander were
negligible. He had had no professional military education or staff training.
Though Hitler regarded
his experiences in the trenches as a harsh
preparation for life, they hardly qualified him for supreme command. He
had only a rudimentary familiarity with military affairs before 1938, and had
a buff's eye view of military technology. His staff found him profoundly
ignorant of the basic principles of command and of the art of war. In the view
of General Walter Warlimont, deputy for operations at Supreme Head-
quarters, Hitler lacked any appreciation of the relative strengths of two
sides, the factors of time and space'." He was at best a half-hearted
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
275
administrator. He brought to high command two principles of his own:
pursue the offensive whatever the circumstances, and fight to the death
rather than abandon ground. This was more Custer than Clausewitz.
On one thing Hitler's military critics agree: he exercised high
mand with exceptional willpower, the same quality he had shown in his
earlier political struggle.) Von Manstein, who struggled more than most with
Hitler's incompetence, thought strength of will 'the decisive factor' in
Hitler's military make-up.93 Hitler certainly thought so. 'Genius', he told a
general in December 1944, 'is a will-o'-the-wisp if it lacks a solid foundation
of perseverance and fanatical tenacity. This is the most important thing in
all human life ...' On another occasion he observed: 'My task has been
never to lose my nerve under any circumstances.' Hitler's was 'a will of
iron' 94 No doubt his fanatical self-belief, his refusal to compromise or take
advice, his blinkered obsession with conquest, the heroic stances - 'never
yield, never capitulate' - played some part in overcoming the hesitancy
of his generals and in firing the war effort. Hitler took risks the generals
would never have taken. In 1939 and 1940 the risks paid off. Against weak
or disorganised enemies the fighting skills of German forces allowed them
to prevail with relative ease. This demonstration of military competence
had little to do with Hitler, though he took the credit. He did not attri-
bute these successes to military professionalism but to his strength of will.)
Hitler's concept of willpower needs to be treated with caution.
messianic self-belief is not in doubt, but what he took for willpower might be
regarded more properly as wilfulness.(He was impervious to advice. He
listened but did not absorb the opinions of others.)If critics persisted, wrote
his operations chief after the war, 'he would break into short-tempered fits
of enraged agitation.
,95 He brushed aside uncongenial facts so habitually
that his staff began to filter out intelligence of the worst complexion.
displayed in all this not a shred of self-criticism. When things went wrong he
blamed others. Sulky, vindictive, intolerant, irascible, Hitler's 'will' was the
expression of poor powers of leadership, which he masked with a self-
constructed myth of infallibility.
The weaknesses in Hitler's military capability were magnified many times
over by the command structure he set up/ When Hitler assumed the supreme
command in 1938 he deliberately avoided the establishment of a command
staff to run military affairs. He wanted to do this himself. He appointed a
small group of officers to serve as 'administrative assistants', translating his
decisions into orders, providing him with information, but neither formulat-
ing nor recommending strategy. Hitler had scant respect for the professional
staff officer. He dominated the headquarters discussions and discouraged
independent thought. Those around him were treated, according to Field
