DEEP WAR
94
wide spearhead, held them up a dozen miles from Oboyan. The Soviet
Supreme Command ordered up the first reserves to help combat the threat,
and for two days a grim slugging match took place to deny German forces the
vital road northwards. By 9 July SS Totenkopf crossed the Psel river, south
of Oboyan, and established a small bridgehead. This was the farthest point
the attacking force reached. s
After five days of furious fighting in which little quarter was expected or
given, both sides paused to regroup. The high cost of pushing towards
Oboyan persuaded Hoth to swing his Panzer armies on to another axis,
north-east towards the small town of Prokhorovka. Hoth hoped that the
classic pincer movement would destroy and encircle the remaining Soviet
forces in front of him and open the way to Kursk once and for all. Soviet
commanders saw what was happening, and ordered in the reserves they had
created for just such an eventuality. General Nikolai Rotmistrov's 5th
Guards tank army was ordered to move rapidly from its staging areas south
of Voronezh to halt the Panzer advance. Units from the vast reserve Steppe
front were also ordered up, against the advice of its commander, Ivan
Konev, who wanted to commit the whole front later, as a single blow.
Rotmistrov's Guards faced a gruelling march. As they pressed forward on
the dry steppe they were enveloped in clouds of hot dust, which settled in a
thick layer on the tanks, lorries and soldiers. It was intolerably hot, recalled
Rotmistrov. 'Soldiers were tortured by thirst and their shirts, wet with
sweat, stuck to their bodies.. 66 In 48 hours they marched over 150 miles.
Maintenance crews rode with the tanks, keeping them on the move. Like the
proverbial cavalry, 5th Guards arrived in the nick of time.
While Soviet reserves poured in to repair the breach made by 4th Panzer
army, German forces prepared for their final push. On the morning of II
July the three SS Panzer divisions marched towards Prokhorovka. The dry
dusty heat gave way all at once to swirling winds and driving rain. German
tanks plunged forward, to the west and south-east of the town, but could go
no farther against determined anti-tank defence and in the face of heavy
losses. Zhukov and the Chief of the General Staff, Vasilevsky, assumed
control of the battle which approached its climax on the 12 July. Zhukov
organised ten regiments of artillery as tank-busting fists around the town,
while 5th Guards tank army, now supported by Zhadov's 5th Guards
infantry, prepared to counter-attack the SS forces with a mass of 850 tanks
and self-propelled guns, the largest tank force assembled for a single
engagement since the beginning of the war.
On the morning of 12 July Rotmistrov set up his headquarters on a hill
overlooking the main site of battle. 'From a solid dug-out in an apple
orchard, with trees half-burnt and half cut down', Rotmistrov viewed the
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
95
scene below on the undulating plain, broken with small groves and tree-
lined ravines, an area in peacetime of rich farmland. On the fringes of the
plain, hidden in woods and high grass, lay his tank force. At 8.30 in the
morning, as the two rival air forces battled in the cloud above, he ordered
the repeated codeword 'steel, steel' sent out to the tanks. 67 It was the signal
to move. Below him through the grass and crops he saw the T-34s race from
their hiding-places. By chance, at exactly the same time the German tanks
moved on the far side of the plain. Two vast armoured forces rushed into a
head-on collision. Nothing could be done to avoid it. It proved impossible to
control the ensuing battle. The tanks swirled around in a sea of exploding
shells, crashing
willy-nilly into their attackers. The T-34 crews took
advantage of the mêlée to attack at point-blank range, blasting the Tigers
and Panthers at the side and rear, where the ammunition was stored.
When Soviet tankmen ran out of shells they rammed German vehicles, or
attacked them on foot with grenades. From on high dive-bombers from
both sides tried to sort out friend from foe. Amidst the fury of battle
fierce thunderstorms could barely be heard. The plain was littered with
the burning hulks of tanks from both sides. The 3 square miles below
Rotmistrov turned black from green. Everything was on fire: woods, fields,
villages. Even up on the hill the air stank of soot and smoke.
While the two tank forces stayed locked in combat, barrel to barrel for
eight hours, Soviet forces south of Prokhorovka blocked an attempt by other
Panzer divisions, hastily brought up from reserve, to push through to the
east of the town. Still more Soviet divisions were sent west of the town to
prevent Ith Panzer corps from outflanking the great tank battle and
attacking 5th Guards tank army from the rear. Rapid Soviet redeployment
frustrated each German assault. Though minor gains were made against
Soviet positions here and there, Soviet tank forces began to push back the
Panzer divisions at the critical points of the battlefield. Illuminated by fire,
the battle continued on through the evening.
With the coming of deep
night the firing gradually ceased. Both sides withdrew to lick their wounds.
The following night Zhukov came to visit Rotmistrov. The two walked
out on to the plain, through the corpses and the wrecked machinery of war,
the tanks burning fitfully in the summer rain. Zhukov was visibly moved. He
removed his cap, and stood, for some moments, in thought. 68
The German failure to seize Prokhorovka marked the end of Citadel.
German forces continued to probe Soviet defences for several more days,
but they had been decimated in the gruelling armoured confrontations.
Over three hundred German tanks were destroyed on the 12th alone. The
crack divisions were exhausted. SS Totenkopf was so severely battered that
it had to be withdrawn from combat to recuperate. Over half its tanks and
