316
WHY THE ALLIES WON
The assumption that German defeat was a result of fighting a 'two-front
war' is also questionable. There is no necessary link between military defeat
and fighting a two-front war. The United States fought a war on three
fronts - five if the bombing offensive and the Battle of the Atlantic can be
defined as fronts in their own right.
All of those fronts competed with
each other for resources of manpower, shipping and weaponry, and all
bar the Atlantic were thousands of miles from the security of the home
country, situated at the end of long and vulnerable shipping lanes. The
Soviet Union was the only major combatant power to fight a one-front
war, although for much of the critical central period of the war Germany
too fought on one main front until the western Allies threw the full weight of
their forces into France in the summer of 1944. For much of the First World
War Germany survived a two-front war until the Russian war effort collap-
sed in 1917, but paradoxically she was defeated in a one-front war in 1918.
(Clearly the fact of a two-front war is not an explanation for defeat as
such. But are we on safer ground with the proposition tliat Germany was
overwhelmed by the economic size of the coalition assembled against her
from 1942? This has always been a popular view.) In 1946 the economist
Raymond Goldsmith claimed that Gross Domestic Product won the war: the
Allies simply had more of it than the Axis. Even during the war such a view
was not uncommon. When Maxim Litvinov, deputy to the Commissar of
Foreign Affairs, heard the list of American and British supplies read out at a
meeting in Moscow in September 1941, he broke all the rules of Soviet
negotiation, leapt out of his chair and shouted: "Now we shall win the war!'s
This was before American belligerency turned the United States into a
fighting power rather than just so much inviting GDP.
The drawbacks in this argument have already been laid out, but they are
worth a curtain call. Economic size as such does not explain the outcome of
wars. China had on paper a large economic product in the 193os, but it did
not help to make
China a significant warring state. If we qualify the
explanation to cover only the product of industrial
powers then there
remains the awkward evidence that Germany had greater industrial capacity
than Britain in 1940, and access by 1941 to a good deal more than Britain and
the Soviet Union together, and yet was unable to bring either power to
defeat. And had Germany prevailed in Europe before 1942, could the
United States really have used its larger GDP to reconquer the Old World?
(The balance of economic product explains everything and nothing. Political
will, technical modernity, a popular willingness to accept sacrifice, the
simple constraints of geography, these are just some of the many variables
that affect the
mobilisation of economic resources. The line between
material resources and victory on the battlefield is anything but a straight
WHY THE ALLIES WON
317
one. The history of war is littered with examples of smaller, materially
disadvantaged states defeating a larger, richer enemy.)General Eisenhower,
listening to politicians in Washington in the spring of 1942 talk glibly about
the economic defeat of the Axis, observed in his diary that 'not one man in
twenty in the government realises what a grisly, dirty, tough business we are
in. They think we can buy victory.'6
There was no other way for the Allies to dislodge the Axis states from
their conquests in 1942 than to defeat them on the battlefield. As Stalin put
it, they were not going to jump into the abyss without being pushed. Some
way might have been found of ending the war by negotiation, but this would
certainly have meant making concessions to Axis imperialism. Fighting, and
fighting better, was the only way to expel Germany and Italy from the
European New Order, or to drive Japan from her new sphere of influence in
Asia. Fighting power owed something in the long run to the large surplus of
weapons available to the Allies, though in the critical battles of 1942 and
1943 that surplus was not as large as it became in 1944 and 1945 when Axis
defeat was much more certain.)In the first years of war the chief Allied states
did not fight well, or were ill prepared for conflict. They were at a distinct
disadvantage against Germany and Japan whose fighting skills prompted
their rulers to risk war with industrially rich powers in the first place. Neither
the Japanese nor German leaders rated Allied fighting power very highly,
and they thought even less of it after their early successes. The Japanese
military in the southern zone became over-confident. Rear-Admiral Takata
remembered after the war the views he had heard: 'They said the Americans
would never come, that they would not fight in the jungle, that they were not
the kind of people who could stand warfare. " Hitler formed the same
dismissive view of the enemy. The first reports on American troops in North
Africa suggested that they were simply 'rowdies' who would 'take to their
heels very quickly'. Hitler thought America could never become 'the Rome
of the future' with such poor spiritual stock.®
To win the war the Allies had to learn to fight more effectively, just as in
the early 1800s the Coalition partners learned to tame Napoleon. They had
to be prepared to fight together, and to continue to fight until the end of the
conflict. Issues of morale and politics intimately affected the fighting power
of the Allies, as did the strictly military elements of command, training,
equipment and tactics. In Marshall's view the will to collaborate was the nub
of the matter: 'In my opinion,' he told an audience at Yale in February 1944,
'the triumph over Germany
in the coming months depends more on a
complete accord between the British and American forces than it does on
any other single factor, air power, ground power or naval power ..."
Marshall's audience, who would have known nothing of the arguments
