118
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
elements and the enemy to think of those they were bombing, we should be
reminded that each bombing mission was a military confrontation with a
statistically increased risk of death the more missions each crewman flew.
When the Combined Bombing Offensive began in 1943 the German
forces had the upper hand. They had compelled RAF Bomber Command to
fly at night; they exacted a high toll from the attacking forces; and after a few
months even the advantages of Gee were lost when German defenders took
counter-measures to jam the radio signals on which the system relied. The
heavier Allied attacks became, the greater was the concentration of fighters
on the German home front, and the more sophisticated was their equip-
ment. By the spring of 1943 70 per cent of German fighters were in the
western theatre of operation, leaving a much smaller force facing the Red
Army. Night-fighters were equipped by 1943 with airborne radar known as
'Lichtenstein', which protruded from the nose of the aircraft like stunted
television aerials. The new equipment allowed them to hunt the bomber
streams in large packs rather than in ones or twos. When British scientists
found a way of jamming this radar, a new mechanism - 'SN2' - was
introduced with even greater success. 43
Over the target area itself the
German air force employed single-engined fighters at night, using a tactic
known as 'Wilde Sau' (wild sow'). Attacking bombers were illuminated
by searchlights and flares, and in the artificial pyrotechnic glare the fighters
gunned down the silhouettes.
In practice German successes reflected the weaknesses of the attacking
force, German defences provided at best a thin and brittle shield. Hitler was
hostile as ever to the idea of defence for its own sake. He refused to release
additional aircraft for the campaign against the bombers in the summer of
1943. He urged the air force Commander-in-Chief, Hermann Göring, to
meet like with like, terror with terror. In the autumn of that year he ordered
a fresh bombing assault on Britain, Operation 'Steinbock', in the belief,
expressed to one of his generals in July 1943, that 'the English will stop only
if their cities are knocked out, and for no other reason'. 4 The growth of a
fighter defence force in the Reich, and the diversion of large quantities of
anti-aircraft artillery to protect German industry, was achieved piecemeal,
in defiance of the Führer's preferences. If the German air force had been
able to prepare the defence of Germany more thoroughly and extensively
the Combined Bomber Offensive might well have been stopped in its tracks.
As it was the resumption of mass attacks on the Ruhr by Bomber
Command in the spring of 1943 had only mixed results. The accuracy of the
RAF's attack was improved greatly by the introduction of two new
navigational aids, 'Oboe' and 'H,S', during the course of 1943. The first was
a target-finding device, with two fixed radio beams along which the special
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
II9
Pathfinder aircraft would fly to the target, where they dropped flares to
guide in the bombers. Its range was limited to the nearest German targets
because of the curvature of the earth. The second device was altogether
more sophisticated. It was an airborne radar device which freed the bomber
from reliance on ground control stations. By using radar pulses reflected
from the ground below, H,S permitted blind-flying in cloud and industrial
haze. It was fitted in a small number of Pathfinder aircraft which led the
bomber streams to the target. Both devices were employed from the
beginning of 1943, but they took time to perfect. Not until 1944 did the radio
and radar war swing firmly the Allies' way. What success Bomber Command
enjoyed in its area attacks in 1943 came from
the simplest of tactical
innovations, the introduction of a device that jammed German radar almost
completely, known by the nickname 'Window'.
Window consisted of huge quantities of small strips of aluminium foil
dropped from bomb bays to smother German radar with false information.
A few hundred strips simulated the radar image of a Lancaster bomber.
Thousands of strips rendered radar unusable. The device was first dreamt up
by a young government scientist R.V. Jones, but its employment was
bitterly resisted on the grounds that its use not only compromised the whole
radar research programme, but also would allow the Germans to retaliate in
kind. The argument was only resolved at a meeting with Churchill in June
I943, in which it was finally agreed that the saving of Bomber Command
lives outweighed the risk to British radar. A month later, Window was
employed for the first time, with devastating effect, against the North Sea
port of Hamburg. 45
The attack on Hamburg on the night of 24-5 July, with the unfortunate
codename Operation 'Gomorrah', was launched as German forces began
the slow retreat from the carnage at Kursk. In the first attack 791 bombers
were sent with instructions to jettison packets of Window at one-minute
intervals. The defences were thrown into confusion. Only twelve aircraft
were destroyed. Bomber Command returned with increasingly deadly
loads on the 27th and the 2gth, and their offensive was supported by
attacks from the 8th air force by day. The overall loss rate was reduced to
only 2-8 per cent, well below the losses sustained in other area attacks that
year. But on the ground a terrible toll was exacted.
The combination of
high-explosive bombs and large numbers of incendiaries overwhelmed the
emergency services in the city. The fires raged unchecked for two days.
Gradually they merged together, creating a heat of greater and greater
intensity. The fierce heat sucked in the surrounding air, working like giant
bellows on the cinders of the city. The fiery storm devoured everything in
its path. When the heat died away almost three-quarters of the city had
