240
A WAR OF ENGINES
from the army and given to the SS. Himmler built a production complex for
the rocket deep in the Harz mountains, and promised to fulfil Hitler's
demand for five thousand missiles a month. Thirty thousand concentration
camp labourers slaved
in the underground caverns in
unspeakable
conditions. When Speer visited the plant he was met by lines of exhausted,
grimy men with 'expressionless faces, dull eyes'. The brightly lit tunnels,
2,800 yards long, were full of stale air and the stench of excrement. Speer felt
numb and dizzy. When he returned above ground he took a stiff drink.
In the subterranean nightmare of Himmler's 'Mittlelwerk', the slaves
installed the machinery, the rail track and equipment. One-tenth or more of
their number perished every month. By January 1944 production began,
with an output of fifty rockets rather than five thousand. Constant technical
quing and cont
changes held progress up. Over the whole year only 4,120 were produced.
Despite Dornberger's warning that the rocket was still not fully developed,
Hitler and Himmler pushed on with the 'decisive weapon'. The first flying-
bombs were despatched on 22 June, but only ten could be launched, and
only five reached London. The first rocket was launched on 8 September.
Out of the six thousand produced only 1,403 were fired at Britain, and only
517 actually landed on the capital. Some 5,800 flying-bombs were eventually
launched, 2,420 of which reached the capital, out of a total production of
thirty thousand. 78 The weapons of revenge killed nine thousand Londoners,
but the total tonnage of explosives they contained - approximately 2,500
tons over nine months - represented just o•23 per cent of the tonnage
dropped on Germany by the Allied air force over the same period.?8
(Neither rockets nor flying-bombs were war winners. The technology was
immature, the warheads, even with the high velocity of the rocket impact,
which magnified the effects of a ton of high explosive, too small to achieve
any major damage, and too imprecise to target particular installations. The
weapons ignited the persistent fantasy among Nazi leaders that the fortunes
of war could be turned at the last hour by an unforeseen technological
breakthrough. The V-weapons programme cost over 5 billion marks, and
absorbed tens of thousands of workers. The resources that went to build
them could, according to the American Bombing Survey, have produced an
additional 24,000 aircraft Himmler's brutal efforts to squeeze out the
manpower and materials compromised the rest of the war economy, while
the research teams were forced to tackle the A4 and the flying-bomb instead
of concentrating on projects with greater strategic worth. One of the
programme casualties was a ground-to-air missile, 'Wasserfall, developed
at Peenemünde, which was closer to mass-production and less expensive
than the A4. Its strategic value in 1944, as a weapon capable of destroying the
heavy-bombers, greatly outweighed the A4, but there were not enough
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
241
resources to go round and the latter enjoyed Hitler's personal support. Only
a different warhead would have made the A4 worth the effort. There is
evidence to suggest that by 1944 radioactive waste from atomic experiments
was stored in Himmler's Mittelwerk tunnels, in small spherical bombs, 'the
size of a small pumpkin'. Used with conventional explosive, they could have
irradiated an area of around a square mile. But even if Hitler had ordered
their use, German researchers had failed to develop a fuse that could
detonate the material in the atmosphere. The missile programme was a lost
cause.?9
- There is a profound irony here, for it was fear of Germany's technological
prowess that prompted first the British and then the American government
to pursue their own atomic programme with their collective scientific
energy. British scientists faced the same scepticism as did their German
counterparts when the prospect of an atomic bomb was first suggested in
1940. But Britain faced a situation of desperate isolation, even defeat. In
April 1940 a committee of top British scientists was set up to evaluate and
report on the possibility of producing an atomic bomb within the likely
timescale of the war. (The 'Maud' committee,) as it was known (the word
was plucked from a cryptic telegram sent by Niels Bohr, and turned out
to be the name of his former English governess),(reported in July 1941
that it was possible to produce a bomb either from enriched uranium
or from plutonium produced in a reactor. A great deal of experimental
work supported their conclusions. They spelt out the industrial costs and
problems, even down to the price of producing one bomb per week. On 17
October the decision was taken to proceed.-That autumn two American
physicists were sent to Britain to examine the atomic programme; they
reported back to Washington that the bomb was a realistic project. The day
before Pearl Harbor the Office of Scientific Research and Development
approved the research for an atomic bomb.80)
(In June 1942 the British finally recognised that the industrial and research
effort needed to make a bomb quickly was beyond them. America took over
the whole project. British scientists were coopted to three 'secret cities', one at
Oak Ridge, Tennessee, where the uranium separation plants were built,
another at Hanford, for the production of plutonium, and the third in the New
Mexico desert, at Los Alamos, where the laboratories were sited. In August
1942 the bomb project - codenamed 'Manhattan' or 'DSM' (development of
substitute materials) - was launched. Enriched uranium was produced by
electro-magnetic process; plutonium was developed in reactors cooled by
liquid helium; graphite, the second of Heisenberg's moderators, proved the
most successful. There were still innumerable technical hurdles to surmount.
British scientists had forecast in 1941 that a bomb could be produced by the end
