194
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
the overstretched shipbuilding industry, short of skilled labour and berths.
At first sight the ships did not lend themselves easily to mass-production,
but at the west coast shipyards of Henry J. Kaiser the old principles of
shipbuilding were overturned in 1942. Kaiser was new to shipwork. He
began life running a photographer's shop in New York, moved into the
gravel business, and ended up in California running a multi-million dollar
construction company that built the Hoover Dam and the Bay Bridge. He
had a reputation for tackling the impossible. When the shipbuilding
programme started his initial involvement was the construction of four of
the new yards on the west coast, but he then began to produce the ships as
well. At his Permanente Metals Yards No. 1 and No. 2 at Richmond,
on the northern edge of San Francisco Bay, the young Kaiser manager,
Clay Bedford, set out literally to mass-produce ships.
The secret of the new method was to build much of the ship in large
prefabricated sections. Instead of setting down a keel on the slipway, and
slowly building the ship from the hull upwards, riveting one piece of steel to
the next, the Liberty Ships were built in parts, away from the slipway, and
then assembled there by modern welding methods. The shipyards were
designed like a long production line, stretching back vertically from the
coast. A mile from the shore vast assembly sheds and storehouses were built,
where the superstructure of three ships at a time was built up along a moving
line. At points along the line, components and sub-assemblies were fed in
from the storehouses by conveyors and overhead pulleys. Each job was
broken down into a series of simple tasks which could be mastered by even
the most briefly trained worker. Outside the sheds, in the open air, were 80-
foot conveyors on which the completed superstructure and bulkheads,
complete with plumbing and wiring, were moved to the berths, to be lifted
by four great cranes on to the welded hull. The whole complex of conveyors,
rail lines, cranes, the piles of preassembled, standardised parts, the army of
hurriedly-trained workers distributed by time-and-motion experts along the
line, the factory banners exhorting workers to build 'ships for victory',
became an unexpected monument to that American obsession, rational-
isation."
At the start of the programme ships took 1•4 million man-hours
and 355 days to build. By 1943 the figure was under 500,000 man-hours
and an average of 41 days. At Richmond No. 2 the Liberty Ship Robert E.
Peary was launched in just eight days. The methods gradually filtered out
to other shipyards. Over the war years productivity in the shipbuilding
industry increased by 25 per cent a year.
'We are more nearly approxi-
mating the automobile industry than anything else,' the head of the Mari-
time Commission told a Congressional hearing in 1942.38
To any American audience the motor industry was an obvious bench-
ECONOMIES AT WAR
195
mark. It had pioneered modern methods of production; its commercial
history was one of the distinctive success stories of American enterprise.
If the rationalisation of shipbuilding was a surprising bonus, the motor
industry, because of its core of mass-production giants - Ford, General
Motors, Chrysler - was expected to play a major role in the efficient
production of war equipment from the start. American vehicle manufacture
grew up in the mid-western states, on the edge of the Great Lakes. Here, in
the American equivalent of the Urals-Volga heartland, was concentrated
the largest manufacturing complex in the world. In 1941 over three and a
half million passenger cars were produced there. During the war production
dropped to the extraordinary figure of just 139 cars.39 This decline freed
enormous industrial capacity for the war effort. By 1945 the industry
supplied one-fifth of all the country's military equipment, including almost
all the vehicles and tanks, one third of the machine guns and almost two-
fifths of aviation supplies. The Ford company alone produced more army
equipment during the war than Italy. 40
The conversion of an industry of this size presented all kinds of problems.
Until the very eve of war the powerful car-makers resisted efforts to reduce
civilian output; 1941 was a record year for the motor industry. When war
came they were quite unprepared for the changeover.
The last day for
civilian output was fixed for 10 February 1942. Small ceremonies were held
in the car plants as the last chassis came down the line. Then, under the
energetic supervision of a former Ford manager, Ernest Kanzler, the
machinery was ripped out and new tools were installed to begin the mass-
production of weapons. This was a daunting task. Although the authorities
assumed that the car plants could be turned off and on again like a tap, the
manufacture of armaments on a large scale was very different from
assembling cars. Weapons exhibited a greater degree of complexity and
required higher precision; they needed periodic updating and improvement,
which made long production runs hard to sustain. That the motor industry
did adapt so successfully owed a good deal to the character of the industry.
Annual model changes accustomed managers and workers to regular large-
scale adjustments on the factory floor; the large companies were used to a
wide product range; the workforce was compelled by the nature of the
manufacturing process to be flexible and adaptive. Car manufacture was in
most cases a job of assembling parts and equipment provided by outside
firms, and the practice of employing specialist sub-contractors -
General
Motors used nineteen thousand of them during the war - was carried over to
the production of tanks, aircraft and engines.
Once the conversion was
completed the industry began to overfulfil its orders. As early as the autumn
of 1942 the motor industry could provide enough vehicles, ordnance and
