EPILOGUE
'. it is not so bad to be defeated in this war.'
Shigeru Yoshida, August 1945
i World War was quite
I dient on the fragili structure ult in 1919. Thistime the systen
was dominated by those states with the power to maintain it, the United
States and the Soviet Union. Britain and France, the key actors in I919,
found their postwar international position fatally weakened by their in-
ability to stop Germany in 1940. Without allies there would have been no
way that Britain could secure her empire, let alone defeat her enemies, once
the French army was out of the contest. After 1945 Britain and France
became powers of the second rank. Their evident weakness during the war
encouraged nationalist struggles in both the British and French empires,
and within a generation the empires were mostly gone.
Of the western
Allies, Britain lost most from the war - the old balance of power, the em-
pire and a dominant role in the world's economy.
Nevertheless, British democracy survived. In 1945 the sense that the
forces of light had triumphed against the forces of darkness was over-
whelming, even more so as the grim catalogue of German and Japanese
crimes was fully exposed for the first time to the public gaze. The end of the
war was welcomed as a break with a decadent, disordered past, as an end to
unemployment and slumps, as an end to crude geopolitics and racism. The
stale atmosphere of the pre-war age, the morbid contemplation of decline,
was blown aside by a widespread hope for a new beginning. The Axis New
Orders, and the ideological baggage they carried behind them, were
confined to history's scrap heap. In the west the ideals of democracy and
international collaboration had the field of opinion to themselves.
The hopes for a progressive post-war order in the west rested almost
entirely upon the United States.
They alone possessed the economic
strength and military power to prevent the return to economic stagnation
and international instability, however unpalatable other western govern-
ments and peoples have found this fact to be. In 1945 the willingness of
EPILOGUE
327
American statesmen to assume the responsibility for maintaining a new
international order could not be taken for granted. There were isolationists
in the United States who wanted their country to do what it did in 1919, to
withdraw from the political and military responsibility of remaking the
post-war world. Gradually it dawned on American leaders that this time the
Old World was neither able nor willing to maintain the peace, any more than
it could win the war. Shortly after taking office in 1945, President Harry
Truman recognised the transformation of America's position: 'we have
emerged from this war the most powerful nation in the world - the most
powerful nation, perhaps, in all history? A different world system, with
American power at its heart, was unavoidable. 'The whole world structure
and order that we had inherited from the nineteenth century', wrote the
American politician Dean Acheson, 'was gone."
The United States succeeded Britain as the major global power. From
being a military stripling in 1940, America by 1945 had twelve million men in
the armed forces, over seventy thousand naval vessels and almost 73,000
aircraft. America also possessed the atomic bomb, and, despite the spread
of this technology worldwide, has retained a lead in nuclear weaponry down
to the present day. Finally, the American economy emerged in 1945 streng-
thened by the war, capable of outproducing all the other great powers to-
gether. It was an economy committed to the values of liberal trade and
market competition. American politicians and businessmen were
deter-
mined that the world economy should not slip back into the bad habits of
the inter-war years, of trade-blocs and tariffs, and exerted American pol-
itical power to build a more open market. Generous funds were made
available for reconstruction in the war-torn areas of the world outside
the Soviet bloc. The siege-mentality of the pre-war era gave way to inter-
national collaboration
through the new instruments
of world-market
regulation, the IMF and GATT. America's economic priorities gave the
world economy a kick-start after 1945 which made possible the long econ-
omic boom. Prosperity dulled political antagonism and the thirst for con-
quest. Battle shifted to the boardroom, and has stayed there.
The American
succession to world leadership in 1945 was the most
significant change. The Soviet Union also emerged from the war as a major
world power, but Russia had been a leading player in the international
system for more than two centuries, and the Soviet state already possessed
the world's largest military forces before 1939. The war threw Soviet power
more clearly into focus. In the absence of any powerful neighbour, Stalin's
state became the dominant political force throughout eastern Europe and
Asia. It was a battered giant. The task of economic reconstruction and
the search for military security absorbed Soviet energies for twenty years
