126
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
attacks late in March 1945, Bomber Command was back to flying by day,
for the first time since 1940.
With so much power to inflict massive physical destruction it was difficult
to resist the temptation to turn the bombing weapon against Japan. For
long geography had been Japan's salvation. But by the spring of 1945 the
American forces in the Pacific had finally secured island bases from which
it was possible to hit Japanese cities. The air forces, now equipped with a
new heavy-bomber, the B-29 Super-Fortress, were ordered to do what they
had done in Europe, to soften up mainland Japan to ease the American
conquest of the home islands. But against a flimsy air defence quite
unprepared for the aerial onslaught the bombers were able to destroy
almost at will. In the end air power alone was able to bring Japan to the
point of surrender.
In the six months between April and August 1945 2ist Bomber Com-
mand, under the direction of General Curtis LeMay, devastated most of
Japan's major cities. One by one the urban areas were ticked off as vast
quantities of incendiary bombs were poured on to houses of wood, bamboo
and paper. So poor were the defences that the B-2gs could fly in at just 7,000
feet to release their bombs. Against the firestorms they caused there was
little the emergency services could do. Using only a fraction of the bomb
tonnage disgorged on Europe the Command destroyed 40 per cent of the
built-up area of 66 cities. In desperate efforts to halt the spread of the
confiagrations the Japanese authorities knocked down over half a million
houses to form fire breaks. The terrified populations fled into the hills and
the countryside. Over eight million refugees clogged the villages; in the
factories absenteeism rose to 50 per cent. A combination of sea blockade
and bombing reduced most Japanese industries to a mere fraction of their
wartime peak - by July aluminium production was reduced to 9 per cent, oil
refining and steel production to 15 per cent. 60
militarists could see that Japan was defeated
All except the most diehard
In Tokyo the politicians and generals squabbled over the terms of a
possible surrender while American bombers remorselessly ate away at the
very fabric of Japanese life. The equivocation cost Japan dear. At long last
the Americans had not only a 'super-bomber' but also a 'super-bomb'.
Science fiction became science fact. On 16 July in the heart of the New
Mexico desert the first atomic device was successfully exploded. A second
was shipped in a lead casket across the Pacific. Months before, LeMay had
been told to reserve some Japanese cities for special treatment, and the fire-
bombers left alone Kyoto, Hiroshima and Niigata. On 24 July the 20th air
force was ordered to prepare for atomic attacks on two Japanese cities.
Hiroshima was selected for the first, Niigata was rejected as too far north.
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
127
For the second LeMay proposed Nagasaki, farther south down the coast,
which he had not yet reached on his city hit-list. 61
America's new President,
Harry Truman, gave his approval to destroy what he insisted on calling a
'military base', when everyone knew Hiroshima was an ordinary city, like so
many of those already torched. 62
For the inhabitants of Hiroshima their neglect by LeMay's bombers was
welcome but unnerving. Superstitions quickly spread. It was widely believed
that rubbing a pickled onion over the scalp, to symbolise a bombing,
rendered immunity. The rumour spread through the city that President
Truman's mother was Japanese and lived in seclusion in Hiroshima. 63 The
reality was nightmarishly, almost absurdly different. On the morning of 6
August a single atomic bomb was loaded on to a B-29, christened the Enola
Gay a few days before. As it approached Hiroshima the air-raid alarms
began, but on the sight of only one aircraft the all-clear was sounded. A few
minutes later a single bomb destroyed in seconds 50 per cent of the city and
killed forty thousand people. Here was Super-Armageddon with a ven-
geance. Everything around the bomb was shrivelled to ash. The thick black
clay tiles which covered most Japanese roofs boiled and bubbled over a mile
from the explosion. Windows shattered 5 miles away. Demented survivors
staggered into the suburbs, ghoulish, doomed. A young student observed
them: 'Their faces were all burned and the meat on their faces was hanging
down, the lymph dripping all over their bodies.' As for Hiroshima,
'everything - as far as the eye could reach - is a waste of ashes and ruin.'64
The Japanese authorities could scarcely believe what had happened.
Frantic efforts were made to find a surrender formula, but too slowly to
avoid a second, equally devastating attack on Nagasaki on 9 August. By the
end of 1945 seventy thousand people, half the city's population, were dead.
Even Truman was horrified by the results and called a halt to atomic attacks.
Yet five days later, as the Emperor, Hirohito, prepared to broadcast the
surrender of Japan, a thousand bombers bearing incendiaries inflicted a
final, retributive, flourish. The bombers might have failed to bring Germany
to defeat unaided, but the ruthless destruction of Japanese cities from the
air made direct invasion here redundant. The war was over.
Did bombing help the Allies to win the war? The arguments began even
before the war was over, when American and British technical intelligence
teams scoured the bomb sites trying to decide what effect bombing had had
on the enemy war effort. The air force commanders wanted the civilian
investigators to confirm that if bombing had not quite won the war, it had at
least made a major contribution to victory. The civilians, drawn in the main
