EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
The belief that the European order was bankrupt, that the pursuit of
progress was a dead end, was widely held in post-1918 Europe. The
economic crisis in 1929, which was so severe that the very future of
capitalism seemed in doubt, was further proof of the fragile nature of the
existing system. The idea that some kind of violent, purifying transforma-
tion was necessary to renew European civilisation, or the white race, was not
confined just to the radical political fringe. A New Order based on harsh
authority, eschewing sentiment and compromise, was a more serious
prospect in the 1930s than the survival of traditional liberalism. Hitler
reflected, but did not cause, the profound moral crisis of the inter-war years.
He embraced the idea of a New Order; he accepted violence and struggle as
the elements of human existence; he gloried in his harsh post-Christian
morality. Hitler appeared as nothing less than the harbinger of a new Dark
Age. 'A Nazi victory', wrote the American philosopher, Melvin Rader, in
1939, would not only destroy the freedom of Europe; it would jeopardize
every noble ideal of human culture, every high concept of human morality,
every fine achievement of hard-won democracy.' Rader thought the war a
turning-point in world history, upon whose outcome depended 'the fate of
mankind'. 31 These were large claims for a conflict ostensibly over the fate of
Danzig. Hitler was taken to stand for all those forces worldwide making for
disintegration and violence. An English bishop wrote in response to the
Pope's 'Five Peace Points' in May 1940, that there was a choice 'between the
Christian religion and nihilism, the destruction of humanity that Hitlerism
brings' 32 As a focus of Allied hatred Hitler was the object not only of the
accumulation of half a century of anti-German sentiment, but also of the
deeper fear that civilisation was now confronted by barbarism, order by
chaos, good by evil.
The firm conviction that what they were fighting was a wicked thing greatly
simplified the Allied war effort. The willingness to fight the war to the end
was nourished by the image of 'just war'. Moreover the fact that the Allied
powers were all the victims of aggression also simplified the task of
constructing the wartime consensus. Where the aggressor powers had to find
ways of justifying aggression to the home populations, the Allied peoples
fought wars of self-defence, in which victory was pursued for its own sake.
Defence was less morally ambiguous than attack, Roosevelt did as much as
he could during 1941 to avoid having to declare war first because of the
strength of pacifist and isolationist opinion. The Japanese assault on Pearl
Harbor, and the German declaration of war four days later, solidified
American public opinion behind a patriotic war of defence. The Soviet war
THE MORAL CONTEST
effort was presented by Stalin not so much
sacred mission to save Mother Russia.
announced in his Order of the Day, to Sc
above all in the fact that it is not waging
lash
75.9
patriotic war, a war of liberation, a just w
(The Soviet situation differed from that
because the Soviet Union was actually invade
United States fought their wars of self-def
people fought to regain lost territory. The Gi
Soviet Union also precipitated a crisis in Sovie
the west. At times in 1941 and 1942 the sitt
disasters and economic chaos that sapped the R
World War and brought the collan
of the Tsal
morale was essential to the reviv
middle years of the war. The Sa
the Soviet people required an excep
how that resolve was summoned up
the war.
(The problem in any assessment of
genuine commitment from the fear o
Soviet head. Behind the front operate
million NKVD security troops, whose ta
hunt down saboteurs and fifth columnis
deserted or fled before the enemy. Stalin's o1
that retreat meant death, was not literally
retreated, but was certainly used on occas
others. Order 270, in which Stalin declared th
into enemy hands were. 'traitors to the Mot.
Soviet soldier with a grim choice. 34 Yet it is difficu.
a terrorised soldiery with all the evidence of sponta.
self-sacrifice.
A great many Soviet people approve
because it matched the expectations of the time.
One si
reaction to hearing the order 'Not a step back': 'Not the lette
and content of the order made possible the moral, psych
spiritual breakthrough in the hearts and minds of all to whom i.
35 A story from the wartime journals of the British war corresp
Alexander Werth reveals the inadequacy of any explanation based entir
on Stalinist terror. At a railway station in Moscow at the height of the
November fighting in Stalingrad Werth observed an elderly Siberian soldier
waiting on the platform for his train to the front.
Suddenly
over the
loudspeaker system came a low but distinct voice. The soldier gave a start
