202
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
seriously believe', complained a group of German engineers in 1944 based at
the research centre in Rechlin, 'that so much inadequacy, bungling, con-
fusion, misplaced power, failure to recognise the truth and deviation from
squary, deviation tom.
the reasonable could really exist. 54 As long as the military tail wagged the
industrial dog, German war production remained inflexible, unrational-
ised and excessively bureaucratic.
Not surprisingly the experience of mass-production in Germany was very
different from that of the Soviet Union and United States. The German
armed forces shared a widespread prejudice against 'American' production
methods. Göring's jibe that all America could produce was razor-blades
was not an isolated belief. Mass-production was associated with cheap
consumer goods and shoddy standards. The German military preferred to
establish close links with smaller firms with traditions of skilled craftsman-
ship, which would be sensitive to frequent design changes and produce a
sophisticated custom-built weapon. The great strengths of the German
industrial economy had always been high quality, skilled workmanship, the
conquest of technical complexity. German weapons were very good, but
very expensive - in skilled manpower, time and materials?
Nothing more clearly reveals these preferences than the story of the German
car industry, which during the 1930s became the largest manufacturing sector in
Germany. The major names - Adam Opel, Ford (in Cologne), Auto-Union,
Daimler-Benz - slowly adopted American production methods. Hitler was an
enthusiast for the motor-car, so much so that he dreamed of making cheap
motoring available for the masses. In 1933 Hitler met the designer Ferdinand
Porsche. He asked him to try to develop a low-priced family car 'in which one
could go for weekend trips. a car for the people'? 5S The design that Porsche
came up with was the prototype of one of the century's most famous cars, the
Volkswagen. In 1938 work was started at Fallersleben in the Brunswick
countryside, not far from the vast new iron and steel complex at Salzgitter;
around the Volkswagen plant was to be built one of the new model cities of
the Third Reich, Wolfsburg. The factories were planned on a gigantic scale,
together capable of turning out half a million cars a year, rising eventually to
one and a half million. The central workshop boasted the largest metal press in
the world, capable of punching out whole car bodies at a time. By the beginning
of the war the installation of machine tools for the production of 200,000 cars
was completed. Yet the contribution to the German war effort of the plant
designed as one of the largest and most modern mass-production factories in
the world was absurdly small. Only one-fifth of its capacity was ever utilised, for
a hotch-potch of equipment from one and a half million camp stoves to army-
issue footwarmers. Only a few thousand chassis were produced for a military
version of the Volkswagen which the army took with great reluctance. Otto
ECONOMIES AT WAR
203
Hochne, who worked at Wolfsburg during the war, later recalled that 'there
seemed to be no plans at all'. The works were used haphazardly until they were
bombed in 1943.56
The rest of the industry suffered something of the same fate. Postwar
estimates showed that barely 50 per cent of its capacity had been utilised
during the war. The largest and most modern producer, Opel, almost
disappeared entirely at the start of the war. Opel was owned by the
American car giant General Motors, which did not endear it to the German
authorities. The directors had clashed with the army in 1936 when they
closed down a small army supplier; Wilhelm Opel had earned Hitler's
displeasure when he introduced his new small car at the 1937 Berlin Motor
Show with the words 'This, Herr Hitler, is our Volkswagen'. When war
broke out in September the military authorities wanted to break the whole
complex up and parcel its tools and workforce out among other smaller
producers. There were no orders for war work and no mobilisation plan.
The company resisted dispersal, but not until 1942 did it become a major
producer after the authorities had dithered for almost three years over what
it should make. 5? During the war the productive performance of the Opel
workforce dropped by almost half. The systematic conversion of the motor-
cycle, motor-car and tractor plants only began in 1942 and 1943.
There was more, of course, to the problems of the German war economy
than the failure to mobilise the largest mass-producing
industry in the
country, but this was symptomatic of a productive system in which technical
sophistication was routinely preferred to turning out large quantities of
standard weapons. In the end it took Hitler to break the logjam. Prompted
by complaints from industrial leaders, Hitler called military and civilian
leaders together at Berchtesgaden in May 1941 and berated the soldiers for
burdening industry with unnecessary technical demands.
He demanded
'more primitive, robust construction' and the introduction of 'crude mass-
production'. The military took little notice. In December 1941 Hitler turned
his request into an order, a Führer Decree on 'Simplification and Increased
Efficiency in
Armaments Production'. Citing the success of the Soviet
factories, he ordered German industry to embark on 'mass-production on
modern principles' and insisted on putting industrialists in charge. 58
The real turning-point came a few months later when Hitler appointed as
Minister of Armaments the young architect Albert Speer, a close courtier
who indulged Hitler's fascination for monumental architecture. He was
only 36, a man with no military experience or close knowledge of industry
but a sound organiser. He quickly built up a team of young managers and
engineers, almost all of them in their thirties or early forties, most of them
co-opted from German industry. German industrial resources were at last
