1
UNPREDICTABLE VICTORY
Explaining World War II
WHY DID THE ALLIES win World War II? This is such a stra inforward
question that we assume it has an obvious answer. Indeed the
question itself is hardly ever asked. Allied victory is taken for granted. Was
their cause not manifestly just? Despite all the dangers, was the progress of
their vast forces not irresistible? Explanations of Allied success contain a
strong element of determinism. We now know the story so well that we do
not consider the uncomfortable prospect that other outcomes might have
been possible. To ask why the Allies won is to presuppose that they might
have lost or, for understandable reasons, that they would have accepted an
outcome short of total victory. These were in fact strong possibilities. There
was nothing preordained about Allied success.
This is a difficult view to accept. The long period of peace and prosperity
for the west that set in with the Allies' triumph in 1945 could be said to show
that Progress was once
again in the saddle of history from which the
momentary aberration of world war had unseated her. It has always been
tempting, psychologically comforting, to see victory in 1945 as a natural or
inevitable outcome, the assertion of right over might, of moral order over
nihilistic chaos. For western liberals victory was a necessary outcome, a very
public demonstration that in the scales of historical justice democracy
counted for more than dictatorship, liberty for more than servitude. To
hammer the point home, enemy leaders were put on trial at Nuremberg and
Tokyo for all the world to see what happened to regimes that thrived on
Of course no one pretends that the triumph of freedom over despotism is
an entirely sufficient explanation. The western powers defeated the Axis
only in alliance with the Soviet dictatorship, which before 1941 they had
shunned and vilified with only a little less vehemence than they reserved
for Nazi Germany.
The Soviet Union bore the brunt of the German
onslaught and broke the back of German power. For years the western
