7
A WAR OF ENGINES
Technology and Military Power
'... modern imperialist war
is a war of engines
- engines in the air and
engines on the land.'
N. Voznesensky, Chairman
of the Soviet State Planning Commission, 1940
NE OF THE MOST FAMOUS of the German armoured divisions, the
Panzer Lehr division commanded by General
Fritz Bayerlein,
experienced in 1944, at the height of the struggle for Nomandy, the full
weight of Allied technical might. The hapless division, reduced after 49 days
of continuous fighting to a mere 2,200 men and 45 serviceable tanks, held a
stretch of French countryside 3 miles wide south of the town of St Lô. It sat
right in the path of overwhelming American forces poised for the break-
through - Operation Cobra - which destroyed the German front in France.
On the morning of 25 July waves of American Thunderbolt fighter-
bombers swept over the division, every two minutes, fifty at a time. They
dropped high explosive bombs and napalm incendiaries. They were
followed by four hundred medium-bombers carrying 500-pound bombs.
Then from the north came the sound every German soldier dreaded, the
heavy drone of the big bombers - 1,500 Flying Fortresses and Liberators.
From their swollen bomb-bays 3,300 tons of bombs obliterated almost
everything on the ground. Finally, the German line, or what was left of it,
was pounded by three hundred Lightnings carrying fragmentation bombs
and more of the new incendiaries. It was an awesome display of power,
numbing and terrifying for the soldiers and French civilians who lay under it.
One survivor remembered that everything shook so much 'it was like being
at sea in a force 10 gale'.!
Almost half the Panzer Lehr remnant perished in the bombardment.
Hundreds more were killed or blasted by the barrels of ten thousand
American guns that opened up as the last aircraft disappeared from view.
Bayerlein later told his captors that the experience of that morning was the
worst he ever saw in battle. In front of him stretched a moon-like landscape,
so filled with dust that German artillerymen were forced to fire blind at the
oncoming enemy. All communications were destroyed. He could see no
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
209
human life left where the bombs had fallen. To the astonishment of the
Americans the bemused and wretched dregs of Panzer Lehr fought on, until
they were swept aside by American armour the following day. Bayerlein
reported that evening the utter destruction of his division.
The same night
the American General Hobbs, leading the assault, reported his success:
This thing has busted wide open.'? Panzer Lehr's few survivors joined the
general retreat across France. When they were regrouped beyond the Seine
they could find only twenty tanks and six self-propelled guns and a handful of
lorries. From then until the end of the war this elite Panzer division averaged
a strength of only 22 tanks instead of the 74 it should have had on paper.
Most of those who joined the division in 1944 soon became casualties,
victims of an exceptional disparity in firepower and mobility between
Germany and the western Allies.3
Here was a complete reversal of fortune. Four years before it was German
armour and aircraft that tore the Allied front to shreds and sped almost
unopposed across French soil; the combination of tank and aircraft proved
irresistible. German forces were regarded as the most modern in the world,
the product of years of frantic mechanisation and technical improvement)
That apparent modernity gave the German armed forces in 1941 what one
senicr staff general, Günther Blumentritt, called 'the reputation and aura of
invincibility. * Something of that same aura touched the Japanese when they
swept aside western forces in southern Asia and the Pacific. The fighting
skills of both peoples contrasted starkly with their enemies' feeble efforts to
Si struct them. (Some of that reputation,
though
not all,
was hastily
constructed myth, serving to explain Allied humiliations.
But about one
thing there was no doubt in 1940 and 1941: the German use of air power and
ground mobility set their armed forces apart from every other major state.
Why that lead was lost,
and then overturned, why Panzer Lehr was
obliterated in Normandy, is a central explanation of Allied victory
The answer lay in imitation of German practice? By the end of the war
America, Britain and the Soviet Union possessed very large and increasingly
effective mechanised forces; American and British Commonwealth armies
were fully motorised; each of the Allies developed sophisticated systems of
tactical air support, marrying together air and ground power. Given the
extraordinary success of German arms, the Allied learning curve had to be
short. In the Soviet Union, against which the bulk of German armour and air
power was concentrated in 1941 and 1942, Stalin grasped the obvious lesson.
In his speech to mark the 24th anniversary of the revolution on 6 November
1941 he pinpointed Soviet weaknesses in tanks and aircraft as the critical
difference between the two sides: 'In modern warfare it is very difficult for
the infantry to fight without tanks and without adequate protection from the
