22
UNPREDICTABLE VICTORY
inspirational grasp of strategy and operations. As the war went on he
concentrated the war effort more and more in his own hands and trusted
almost no one to give him advice. The German war became a remarkable
one-man
show in which intuition displaced rational evaluation, and
megalomaniac conviction ousted common sense. Hitler was able to achieve
much more than might have been expected given the manifest limitations of
his education and experience, but in the end he took on too much.
Not surprisingly, such wide differences in the style of leadership produced
contrasts between the warring societies as a whole. In the Allied states there
developed a powerful bond between leaders and led which helped to sustain
populations through the bad times, and brought societies closer together.
This was true even of the Soviet Union, where the home population was
regimented and oppressed to a greater degree than that of Hitler's
Germany, but nevertheless exhibited a fervent, crusading patriotism that
transcended the risks and miseries of everyday life. The response of Axis
populations was more ambiguous. Important sections of society became
disillusioned with the consequences of wayward, one-man leadership - so
much so in the German case that Hitler's senior officers tried unsuccessfully
to assassinate him in July 1944. The costs of Mussolini's overblown
ambitions became too much for the Italian King and army, who kicked him
out in July 1943 and sought a peace with the Allies three months later. In
Japan there were large numbers who thought from the start that the war was
a mistake. Though they fought with fanatical tenacity for fear of what the
vengeful Allies might do to them, there was always an ambivalence about
the Axis war effort. As the war slowly turned against the Axis states, they
were forced to rely more on naked terror and crude propaganda to keep
their populations fighting. On the eastern front the German authorities shot
the equivalent of a whole division of Germans, fifteen thousand men, for
indiscipline, defeatism or dereliction of duty." In Japan in 1945 gangs of
militarist thugs toured the home front bullying and murdering anyone who
talked of peace, while young recruits were browbeaten into adopting
suicidal tactics.
There is a striking moral contrast here. Whatever the rights or wrongs of
the case, the Allies were successful in winning the moral high ground
throughout the war. There are clear advantages in moral certainty and moral
superiority. The Allied populations fought what they saw as a just war
against aggression. They were able to appeal to neutral states to collaborate
in a good cause; enthusiasm for war was straightforward; much was justified
in the name of a higher ideal, such as the bombing, which provoked a real
heart-searching only after the conflict was over. It was impossibly difficult,
on the other hand, for the aggressor states to slough off their merited
EXPLAINING WORLD WAR II
23
reputation for oppression and violation, although Axis leaders saw their
own cause as just in their terms. In every theatre of war the language of
liberation and resistance was directed against the Axis. The Japanese were
regarded by the west as little more than barbarians. The Gestapo and the
SS, even before the lurid revelations at Nuremberg, were bywords for
inhumanity. The war was never, in reality, a simple war of good against
evil, of civilisation against Dark Age, but the Allies' ability to make it seem
so simplified their war aims and cemented a domestic and international
consensus in their favour.
At the core of this moral certitude was a shared hatred of Hitler and
Hitlerism. The Allies were never in any doubt that Japan and Italy were
the lesser threat to their way of life. They were united in a moral revulsion
at everything that the new German Reich and its leader stood for. As
a moral crusade the war aims were reduced to one single ambition, to rid
the world of Hitler. Even before the war and the Holocaust, Roose-
velt regarded Hitler as 'pure, unadulterated evil'. 22 More than any other
contemporary leader, Hitler was personified as the dark force that
threatened to take civilisation by storm and drag it into the abyss. Why he
aroused such strong passions, and still does, a half-century later, is not as
easy a question to answer as it appears. But it is worth asking because they
were passions that held together the Alliance when it threatened to
dissolve in the face of bitter military or political disputes. They were
passions that stimulated the Allies to the greatest of efforts, (including the
search
for atomic weapons), and they explain the Allies unyielding
commitment to unconditional surrender.
If we are to understand why the Allies won we must recognise that
material explanations, of resources, of technology, of fighting men, are not
enough on their own. There is a moral dimension to warfare inseparable
from any understanding of the outcome. Allied populations were sustained
by the simple morality of defending themselves against unprovoked
assault; Axis populations knew in their hearts that they had been led into
campaigns of violence which the rest of the world deplored. If the Axis
states had won, the qualms of their populations would not have mattered.
But the moral ambiguity underlying that violence surely explains some-
thing about why they did not. When Franz von Papen, one time Chancellor
of Germany before Hitler came to power, heard of the outbreak of war in
September 1939 he told his secretary: 'Mark my words; this war is the
worst crime and the greatest madness that Hitler and his clique have ever
committed. Germany can never win this war. Nothing will be left but
ruins. 23 Even Hermann Göring, Hitler's right-hand man and confidant in
1939, greeted the news of war with agitated alarm: 'then God help
