DEEP WAR
80
was in chaos. The snow-covered grassland was covered with the grotesquely
frozen corpses of more than ten thousand horses some, like statues,
hardened where they stood. Almost all the weak divisions holding the
salient were eliminated. Soviet armies fanned out east and west, creating a
heavily defended corridor over 100 miles wide, cutting off the German 6th
army and part of the 4th Panzer army, and pressing the whole southern
German front back to where it had stood in August. Paulus's immediate
reaction had been to pull German forces rapidly back, out of the trap, but
* Hitler, failing entirely to see what the Soviet operation had achieved, and
obsessed with the city, ordered him to stand fast and wait for rescue, Though
Paulus's commanders urged him to break out, he stuck by the rulebook. An
estimated 240,000 German and allied forces, with a mere hundred tanks and
1,800 guns, prepared for the desperate defence of a bleak area 35 miles long
and 20 miles wide, the Stalingrad 'cauldron'. 29
Litter again!
*
The news from the Soviet front followed hard on the Allied landings in
North Africa and the defeat of Rommel at El Alamein. Hitler, who had
retired to his Bavarian redoubt, the Berghof, hurried back to his winter
headquarters at Rastenburg in East Prussia. Here he took stock of the
situation. At first, according to one witness, he was 'completely uncertain
what to do. But he was, he told Mussolini on 20 November, 'one of those
men who in adversity simply becomes more determined' 30 His decision to
stand and defend Stalingrad was in part a statement of that determination,
in part a recognition of what retreat or surrender would mean in terms of
morale for Germany's war effort. To justify his order to Paulus he grasped at
a slender straw, offered to him by the air force chief, Hermann Göring, who
was at headquarters on 24 November to discuss the Stalingrad situation.
Though Göring's staff doubted the ability of the Luftwaffe to do anything
very much in the south after the losses sustained in the summer and autumn,
their wayward chief assured Hitler that the besieged city could be supplied
from the air, until such time as relief forces could he organised to break
through. He promised to fly in 500 tons of supplies a day. Armed with this
assurance Hitler reiterated to Paulus that day the need to stand fast. 31
The airlift operation was a disaster. Instead of the 500 tons promised, the
air force supplied less than 100 tons a day, and considerably below this by the
end of December and during January. The Luftwaffe units in the east were
down to only a quarter of their strength by the end of the year, flying in the
teeth of a Russian winter, starved of fuel and technicians. German forces
were compressed into a progressively smaller pocket of territory around the
city, so the number of airfields available fell, until by mid-January German
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
8I
aircraft dropped supplies by parachute. Slow, poorly armed transport air-
craft had to fly over 150 miles from crowded, ill-prepared airfields against
a numerous enemy. Command in the air around Stalingrad, which German
forces enjoyed until October, evaporated. By December there were fewer
than 375 German fighter aircraft for the whole Soviet front, and many of
those were unserviceable. Aircraft and crews were drafted in from train-
ing stations in Germany to augment the dwindling stock of pilots skilful
enough to navigate the dangerous winter route. Soviet air forces set up a
well-organised air blockade around the city, while ground forces fought
to capture the remaining German airfields. In less than two months the
Luftwaffe lost 488 transport aircraft and a thousand crew, while German
forces in the Cauldron ran short of food, ammunition and medical
supplies.32
While the Luftwaffe burned itself out in pursuit of a hopeless ambition,
the German army planned a dramatic overland rescue. Its inspiration was
Field Marshal Erich von Manstein, victor at Sebastopol. He was put in
charge of the hastily formed Don Army Group, made up of forces scattered
westwards by the Soviet offensive together with the remaining German
reserves. A small group of Panzer divisions gathered south of the Soviet
corridor at Kotelnikovo, under the command of General Hermann Hoth.
Manstein planned to use this group to rush through the Soviet forces, link up
with Paulus's army moving south-west and retreat back to a secure defensive
line. The attempt began in heavy rain on 12 December, and made steady
progress in difficult conditions. By 23 December Hoth's force advanced 40
miles, then ground to a halt in fierce tank fighting with Soviet reinforcements
rapidly deployed into the area.
The critical point of the whole Stalingrad
campaign had been reached. After the initial shock of the German assault,
Soviet commanders in some haste, and with poor intelligence on German
intentions, succeeded in mounting a strong counter-blow. Though Manstein
and Paulus later complained in their memoirs that a great opportunity to
fight a successful retreat from Stalingrad was lost because of Hitler's
insistence that Paulus stay put the truth is more complicated.
When Zhukov and the Soviet General Staff first planned to encircle
Paulus at Stalingrad, they realised that German forces would not stand idly
by but would try to rescue him. The Uranus plan anticipated this. The
corridor separating Paulus from the remaining German forces had to be
wide enough to make rescue difficult, and it had to have a strong outer ring
of defences and reserves to counter any German thrust. Over sixty Soviet
divisions were poured into the breach, with almost a thousand tanks.
Though Manstein's forces, with fewer tanks, made remarkable progress in
driving blizzards and over difficult, toughly defended terrain, the Soviet high
