136
ALONG A GOOD ROAD . . .
in the summer of 1942, but it was not far short. For all those critics of British
policy, then and since, the invasion of Madagascar is a salutary reminder of
just how slender were British resources in 1942, and how inexperienced
were its forces for a major amphibious assault of the kind that Stalin urged
against German-held Europe. The British Chiefs-of-Staff were even hostile
to an operation as modest as Ironclad because of the disruption to shipping.
As it was, the Royal Naval task force at Gibraltar had to be severely
depleted to support the Madagascar invasion. If the Japanese navy had
chosen to intervene, Britain could have done little to obstruct it, and the
whole operation would have produced a strategic nightmare. * How much
greater were the risks and costs of a cross-Channel assault against a strongly
defended coastline with limited resources. When later in the year a
substantial raid was mounted on Dieppe by Canadian forces stationed in
Britain the outcome was disastrous. Until the landings in North Africa later
in the year, the invasion of Madagascar remained the one solid victory for
the Allied cause, and it was fought not against hardened soldiers of the Axis
but against an assortment of French colonial troops who had started the war
as Britain's allies and had little stomach for the conflict.
The western Allies knew that at some point they would have to invade
Europe and face their most dangerous enemy. But in the summer of 1942
they were not even sure they could save themselves against the onrush of
Japan in the Pacific and Axis forces in North Africa. The choice of
Madagascar was an admission of weakness, not strength. Ironclad disrupted
the war effort elsewhere but was ultimately successful. The invasion of
France in 1942 was operationally impossible. It took another two years
before the secretive, hazardous assault on the beaches of Cap d'Ambre was
writ large in Normandy.
From the outset the outlook for frontal assault on Hitler's Europe seemed
singularly unpromising. Before Pearl Harbor the British had discounted it as
beyond their means, but even with American participation from December
1941 delays were unavoidable. The training and equipping of an Anglo-
American force large enough to be confident of remaining ashore in
northern Europe was a time-consuming process. The air and naval back-up
needed to carry the invaders to Europe and shield their lodgement there did
not yet exist in 1942, and no amount of hustling improvisation could supply
them. In 1943, with subsidiary demands in the Pacific and North Africa,
existing forces were spread dangerously thin. Even with large trained armies
invasion held all kinds of hazard. The English Channel was an unpredictable
sea. Though only 20 miles wide at its narrowest point, it had defied all
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
attempts at invasion from Europe since 1066, a fact so well known that its
significance is sometimes overlooked. Beyond the sea lay an enemy with
powerful coastal defences, good communications and a large army in
waiting, seasoned with men battle-hardened from the fearful contest in
Russia. Tactical advantage would lie with the defender, established in
prepared positions to drive back an enemy confined to narrow beach fronts
and with the sea behind him.
Worse still from the Allied point of view in 1942 were the unpredictable
elements in their strategy, each of which might well have rendered invasion
out of the question. It was essential that the front in the Soviet Union held. If
it did not Germany would be able to swing large forces from the east to the
west and make the northern French coast virtually impregnable. It was
necessary for the western Allies to defeat the submarine and recapture the
Atlantic sea-lanes for the shipping of troops and supplies from North
America. Finally it was vital to do something about the German air force
whose close support of German ground forces had been, since 1939, a
critical element in German military success. In the end the Allies were able
to turn the tide in all three of these campaigns, but such an outcome could
not have been taken for granted in 1942 or for much of 1943. Until the
picture was clearer and more favourable, preparations for invasion had
more the character of contingency plans than a firm commitment. The final
decisions for invasion rested on the achievement of victory in the Battle of
the Atlantic, in the Red Army campaigns of the summer and autumn of
I943, and on the attrition of German air forces over the Reich in the months
before June 1944. Without them invasion was a gambler's throw.
It is only in the light of these many problems that sense can be made of the
prolonged and often bitter arguments between the two western Allies about
invasion strategy. Though united in a common cause, they were anything
but united on how best to prosecute it. At times relations between the two
partners were strained almost to breaking point. Their first battles were
fought not on the beaches of Normandy but across the conference table.
There was no question but that both sides wanted to defeat Germany. The
passion with which advocates from each camp defended their strategic views
was testament to their conviction that they held the surer key to German
collapse, and that only the obduracy and amour propre of their colleagues
was preventing general approval. The differences of opinion were sharply,
but honestly, held.
From the start American military leaders and politicians were more
enthusiastic about the invasion of northern Europe than the British. The
American rearmament programme authorised by Roosevelt in June 1941,
portentously named the Victory Programme, was based on the assumption
