A WAR OF ENGINES
problems. Now the gospel was needed more than ever. The struggles of
collectivisation and industrial transformation became the struggle for
military progress. Soviet soldiers were tough, used to harsh conditions of life
and few luxuries. When that hardiness was married to modern technology
the mix proved much more effective than many in the west had thought
possible. When John Erickson, later a distinguished historian of that
modernisation, first confronted the Red Army as a young infantry sergeant
in 1945 he was struck by the curious blend he beheld: 'an army of unwashed,
uncouth, lithe Ukrainians, squat riflemen from the central Asian republics,
combat medals a-jingle, cradling superb self-loading rifles - but, above all,
the tanks in their fungicidal green colouring, the paint just slapped on over
those powerful turreted guns' 84 In the end the Soviet army proved just
modern enough; but German forces were too modern for their own good.
8
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY
Allies and Leaders in War
'Our greatest triumph lies in the
fact that we achieved the impossible,
Allied military unity of action'.
General George C. Marshall, 1945
The The ram coat the thine Alied leaders me four to tack wa sat
afternoon of the 28th, they were to assemble at a small conference room in
the Soviet Embassy. Stalin was already waiting for them. Roosevelt was
pushed in his wheelchair from
the small building in the grounds of the
Embassy where the American delegation had been persuaded to stay.
Dressed in a blue business suit, he arrived half an hour before Churchill.
Churchill had already met Stalin, but to the President the Soviet dictator was
an unknown quantity. When Roosevelt entered Stalin ambled towards him,
walking clumsily 'like a small bear'.' A little later Churchill left the British
compound with his retinue to walk the few hundred yards to the conference
hall. Soviet secret policemen peered from behind every tree. When he
arrived he greeted Stalin cordially and shook Roosevelt's hand. 'Everything
was so relaxed,' recalled the American interpreter. 'It did not seem possible
that the three most powerful men in the world were about to make decisions
involving the lives and fortunes of millions of people.'2
Teheran was not an ideal location. Roosevelt had travelled 7,000 miles to
get there, Churchill 4,000. Stalin chose it only because he wanted to stay in
close communication with the front in an area where Soviet security could
operate freely. No one ran any risks. The city was patrolled everywhere by
Soviet agents, guns bulging ostentatiously beneath their jackets; there were
2,500 American troops on hand; Churchill was protected by a whole
regiment of Indian Sikhs. The conference room was comfortably furnished,
with a large green-covered table in the centre. The leaders, with their
interpreters and chief advisers - all except General Marshall, Roosevelt's
Chief-of-Staff, who was out sightseeing because, incredibly, nobody had
told him about the meeting - sat in a circle to begin the formal proceedings.'
Their opening remarks were entirely in character. Roosevelt began
lightly: as he was the youngest of the three he welcomed his elders to the
table. Churchill was almost absurdly grandiloquent: 'In our hands we have
