188
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
longer and harder to endure. Hunger was averted only by sowing every
garden with vegetables and potatoes. By 1943 some seven million cottage
gardens kept the Soviet workforce going. For those who produced the
food on the collective farm the situation was worse. Rural labourers got only
half a pound of bread and a potato or two each day. Farm workers were
forced to work long hours. Most of the horses and a great many tractors were
taken away by the army. Women workers were trained to use
what
machinery remained, and by 1944 over 80 per cent of tractor drivers were
female. But for many farmers ploughing was done with oxen, or even, in
extremes, by teams of women
and youths who pulled the ploughs
themselves. After hours in the fields, tired and in bitter weather, they took
their turn at felling timber to feed the local factories with power. 22
How Soviet workers kept going, month after month, exhausted, hungry,
terrified that any slip or dereliction might be classified as sabotage, defies
belief. No other population was asked to make this level of sacrifice; it is
unlikely that any western workforce would have toleraied conditions so
debilitating. The story of the Soviet people is one of epic endurance, that
needs no embellishment of Soviet propaganda to make it convincing. Why
did they do it? This might have seemed a curious question to the war-
workers, not just because they were the victims of state conscription which
limited freedom of choice, but also because the expectations, outlook and
experiences of Soviet workers and farmers were entirely different from
those of their more privileged western cousins. The characteristics of the war
economy - large, crudely constructed factories, a harsh barrack room
existence, poor food and tough discipline - were the features of Russian
working life since the late nineteenth century when the Tsars began to
modernise the Imperial economy. They persisted in the four years of civil
war following the Russian Revolution in 1917; the forced industrialisation
of the Five-Year Plans was an upheaval every bit as exceptional and distort-
ing as the rush for war production in 1942. Russians of sixty or more would
have seen it all. This tough history did not make wartime conditions any
easier to bear, but it helps us to understand why they were borne.
There are other less speculative explanations. The workforce was sub-
jected to a barrage of(propaganda that generated an ethos of struggle and
commitment. In the 1930s the enemy was Soviet backwardness, socialist
progress the goal; in the war the enemy was the Fascist Beast, 'Everything
for the Front' the aim.
Every workshop was
decorated
with banners
promoting economic heroism and posters advertising the names of plant
workers who exceeded their work norms. In a society where material
incentives made little sense, since there was almost nothing to buy in the
shops, there developed a popular culture of achievement; workers vied with
ECONOMIES AT WAR
189
each other to perform extraordinary feats of labour, to be rewarded with
public praise and the occasional medal) Every factory had its small assembly
place, the wooden stage and the dais where the plant managers announced
the roll of honour for the over-achievers and castigated slackers in front of
their workmates.23 Every worker knew the name of the legendary steel-
worker Bosy who arrived in Nizhny Tagil from Leningrad in 1941 where he
proceeded to produce his five-month quota in fifteen days. Bosyi got the
State Prize. The spirit of what became known as 'socialist emulation' spread
throughout the economy, echoing the Stakhanovite movement of the 1930s
when incentives had been given to workers to exceed work norms by a wide
margin, The women tractor drivers got their own hero, driver Garmash,
whose team completed a year's ploughing by June through the simple
expedient of keeping the tractor shifts going for over twenty hours a day. 24
No doubt the competitive pride that fuelled the emulation programme
owed a good deal to official encouragement. Other
incentives
were
developed to keep the workforce going. Large factories had kindergartens
and schools, and canteens in which the workers could get three meals a day
for 5 roubles, outside the regular rationing system. Since cash had little value
even on the black market, where goods were beyond the reach of the most
prosperous worker by 1943, factories began to reward their workers in kind,
with additional food and fuel, and to punish them by withholding food. 25
Work took on a new meaning once it was linked directly to the food supply.
For a great many Soviet citizens the workplace became the literal source of
sustenance, of food, warmth and companionship. Wartime collectivism, like
wartime planning, was more than just a party slogan.)
In the end the motives that kept workers at their ploughs and lathes
through years of profound suffering and physical exhaustion can only be
guessed at. Few families were unaffected by losses on the battlefield. The
refugees had the bitterness of enforced exile and the wild stories of Ger-
man atrocity to fire their efforts.
There was no shortage of ideological
enthusiasm, however naive it now seems. Teams of energetic Young
Communists acted as economic shocktroops, shaming their elders into
greater efforts, and spreading the socialist gospel. For those resistant to such
blandishments there was Soviet patriotism, simple-minded perhaps, unduly
credulous, but real enough. To attribute the suffering and efforts of the
Soviet workforce simply to a sullen acceptance of coercion is to diminish
both. When the American visitors to Magnitogorsk were introduced to a
sour-faced young woman, an exceptional over-achiever, they asked her why
she did it. Instead of a stock Marxist-Leninist answer, she explained that she
worked from hatred, born of the death of her parents under German rule. 26
(Planning, mass production and mass mobilisation were the pillars of
