18
UNPREDICTABLE VICTORY
different kinds of historical approach, between the war as a series of decisive
military campaigns and the war as a set of distinct themes, between how the
Allies won and why the Allies won. The first half of the book examines the
four main zones of conflict in which the Allies prevailed between 1942 and
1945 - the war at sea, the land struggle on the eastern front, the offensive
from the air, and the reconquest of Europe. The second part explores the
elements that conditioned and caused those military successes: the balance
of resources, combat effectiveness, leadership and strategic judgement, the
mobilisation of the home front, and last, but not least, the moral contrasts
between the two warring camps.
The zones of conflict are self-defining, for they were the arenas in which
the Allies chose to exert their maximum effort. It may well be argued with
hindsight that they should, and could, have made other choices, but that is
hardly the issue here. To understand why the Allies prevailed in these zones
is to understand the outcome of the war. Though each zone was fought for
independently, the outcome in any one affected the outcome in others. If the
submarine menace had not been contained in 1943, the invasion of Europe
the following year would have been infinitely more hazardous; if the
bombing offensive had not diverted large quantities of men and materials
away from the eastern front, the Soviet advance might well have been slower
and less secure; and so forth. There is, in short, a strong line of connection
between each zone, which explains the Allies' determination to prevail in
them all
The war at sea was a critical one for the western Allies, for the simple
reason that all their major arteries of communication and supply were across
water. Seapower was the only means by which they could bring other kinds
of military force to bear on the enemy, and the only means by which they
could fight a genuinely global war. For most of the Second World War
Britain and the United States fought a predominantly naval conflict, and
relied more heavily on naval power than anything else, until they shipped
the armies to Europe in June 1944 to start the reconquest of the Continent.
In the Pacific the United States navy bore the brunt of the conflict with Japan
right up to the point of Japanese defeat. The naval war linked all the zones of
conflict. Supplies for the Soviet Union were dangerously convoyed to
Archangel or Vladivostock or the Persian Gulf. The vast American war
effort - men, tanks, planes and trucks - was shipped in great armadas across
the Atlantic Ocean. The British war effort was unsustainable without the
flow of materials, food and equipment from all over the world. 'It is in
shipping', Churchill wrote to Roosevelt, 'and in the power to transport
across the oceans
that the crunch of the whole war will be found. 18
The Axis states knew how much the oceans mattered, which is why they
EXPLAINING WORLD WAR II
19
made such strenuous efforts to sever the arteries one way or another. By
1942 German submarines were sinking British ships faster than they could
be replaced, while the Japanese Imperial Navy won for itself a brief period
of ascendancy in the Pacific and Indian Oceans. For the next two years the
western Allies struggled to defeat the submarine and to contain Japanese
naval power. The reasons for their eventual success in both theatres are
elaborated in what follows. Axis defeat on the high seas paved the way for
the more effective reinforcement of the Soviet Union and western Europe,
and the complete defeat of Italy and Japan.] St
While the western Allies tried to secure the seas, the Soviet Union was
locked in the world's largest land battle, stretched across the heart of
Eurasia, from the Baltic to the Black Sea.
Germany was by far the most
powerful of the three Axis states; the core of that power was her huge army,
eight million strong. The overwhelming bulk of it was directed at Soviet
Russia. In 1942 Germany deployed 178 divisions on the Soviet front; her
allies, Hungary, Italy, Romania and Bulgaria, provided another 39. In
North Africa Rommel had only four divisions. When the Soviet Union was
invaded in June 1941 Hitler expected to conquer it in four months. Few
western observers gave the Soviet Union much chance. Roosevelt's
Secretary of War, Henry Stimson, gave it even less than Hitler: 'a minimum
of one month and a possible maximum of three months'. 19 Within a matter
of weeks Soviet forces lost two million men and five thousand aircraft,
dwarfing the losses in World War I; within months German armies besieged
Leningrad and Moscow.
The key to the eventual victory of the Allied states lies here, in the
remarkable revival of Soviet military and economic power to a point where
the Red Army could first contain, then drive back the German invader:
remarkable, because it followed the loss by December 1941 of 4 million men,
8,000 aircraft and 17,000 tanks, equivalent to almost the entire strength of the
Soviet forces in June;2° remarkable, because it followed the German capture of
more than half the Soviet steel and coal output, and the entire Soviet 'bread-
basket', the fertile black earth regions of the Ukraine and the western steppe,
where the vital food surplus for the cities was produced. So severe was the
mauling, we now know from Soviet records that Stalin contemplated giving up
in October 1941. He was dissuaded not least because of the frantic patriotism
displayed by the Soviet people as they carried their threatened factories back
beyond the Ural mountains, out of the German reach, and scoured the villages
of Siberia and Mongolia to find fresh armies. In 1942 there were local successes,
but also long retreats, as the German armies pressed on the southern flank
through the Crimea and beyond. But in 1943 the Soviet forces defeated their
enemy at Stalingrad, and then at Kursk, and the long drive back into Europe
