234
A WAR OF ENGINES
There were two particular problems to be solved. The first was to find a
safe way of getting oil to the main industrial areas of the east and north-east
in the face of the German submarine threat to the oil supply routes along the
coast. At the beginning of the German-American war tanker tonnage took
heavy losses. Petrol rationing was introduced in the eastern states, and
speeds restricted to 35 miles per hour. Ickes urged the industry to build new
pipelines to deliver the oil across country. So began the construction of the
"Big Inch' pipeline, one of the largest engineering projects undertaken
anywhere during the war. The pipe was in fact 24 inches in diameter, and ran
from Longview in Texas to Phoenixville, Pennsylvania. It was designed to
carry 15 million tons of oil a year. Pumping stations were constructed every
25 miles along its 1,380-mile course. The line was completed in 1943.66
The second problem was the production of high-octane fuel for aircraft.
Hundred-octane fuel produced much better performance than the 87-octane
fuel used by the Luftwaffe. It allowed
aircraft longer range, greater
manoeuvrability, and those surges of power that gave Spitfires the edge over
the Messerschmitt-109 in 1940. In 1940 the United States produced fewer
than 40,000 barrels of it a day. Ickes pushed hard for another great
engineering effort to expand 100-octane production above all else. By 1944
the United States produced over 90 per cent of the Allies' high octane fuel,
more than half a million barrels a day." American production made it
possible to sustain a vast navy, the bomber fleets of both western Allies, and
a fully motorised army. Though the distribution of supplies never worked
perfectly - the shortage of fuel for Patton as he raced across France is the
most notorious example - the oil weapon gave the Allies the means to
exploit the modernisation of their forces to the full. At the dinner for
Churchill's birthday in the middle of the Teheran conference Stalin stood up
to propose one of many toasts: 'This is a war of engines and octanes. I drink
to the American auto industry and the American oil industry. 68
(The only way the Axis states could have reversed the technological balance
decisively was by finding entirely new weapons. In effect that meant the
atomic bomb.*A great many technical novelties were proposed on both
sides, but nothing approached the unique destructive power of atomic
energy. Every combatant knew by the war that atomic physics might have
a military application, but only the United States was able to turn this
knowledge into a usable atomic weapon by the war's end.
Japanese scientists pursued a number of secret weapons, none more
bizarre than the 'death ray'. By the end of the war they had developed an
electronic device based on a high-frequency electro-magnetic wave tube
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
235
emitting 13-foot waves that could stop a petrol engine at a short distance, or
kill a rabbit at 10 feet from haemorrhages of brain and lungs. The plan
to turn the ray on enemy bombers never materialised. 69 Atomic research
got little further. Japanese physicists were well aware that a bomb was
a possibility, and that their American enemy was working on just such a
project, but they did not believe that any power could produce one within
the likely period of conflict. The Japanese navy began exploratory experi-
ments in 1942, working with Japan's leading atomic scientist,
Yoshio
Nishina, a pupil of the Danish physicist, Niels Bohr. The navy was more
interested in the prospects for nuclear propulsion - given the shortages of oil
- but by March 1943 naval researchers could see that the likelihood was poor
and abandoned atomic research. Nishina switched loyalties to the Japanese
army, which would not collaborate with its sister service, and continued to
pursue the separation of the vital u235 isotope of uranium which held the
key to atomic fission. Neither his equipment nor method matched hi/
ambition. By 1944 the experiments faced stalemate. The money and high
quality scientific equipment Nishina wanted could not be spared from the
war effort. When he complained to his army contact that he still needed 10
kilograms of u235 to make a bomb, the general replied, 'Why not us
kilograms of a conventional explosive? 70 Four months after this int
B-29 bombers hit Nishina's laboratory. The wooden building burnt
ground; Japan's atomic weapons programme was reduced to ash.
-The prospects for producing atomic weapons were much grea
Germany. Much of the pioneering work in atomic physics was Geri
Germany was endowed with extensive scientific resources, and an
standing scientific community, even after the emigration of distinguish
scientists to the west in the 1930s, It was a German chemist, Otto Hahn, wh
published in January 1939 the first paper to demonstrate that the nuclea
fission of uranium was a possibility; this was the process at the heart of
nuclear power. The fruits of overseas research were freely availabl
scientific periodicals. In the spring of 1939 German physicists gra.
the energy released in the fission of uranium would be sufficient noi
produce a new source of fuel, but also to create an explosion that
dwarf those produced by conventional weapons.
On 24 April 1939
Hamburg chemist Paul Harteck, a Nazi Party member who had worke
the 1920s with Rutherford in Cambridge, wrote to the Army Ordna
Office with news of the potential new weapon: 'That country', he warne
'which first makes use of it has an unsurpassable advantage over the
others.''! The same month the German Education Ministry set up a high
level nuclear research team; in September many of its resources
were
absorbed by an even larger project funded by the German army. In
