148
ALONG A GOOD ROAD • • •
(The second task, limiting the German build-up after D-Day, was more
difficult. Great hope was placed upon strategic deception, which was
orchestrated in ways to keep alive Allied threats to the Balkans and Norway,
and to disguise the exact landing point in France. The success of these
efforts, as we shall see, kept German forces dispersed around Fortress
Europe well after invasion had begun. But such deceits could not stop the
immediate reinforcement of the invasion area. For this the Allies turned to
air power. Eisenhower was convinced that the only sure way to retard the
German build-up was to damage the French communications system so
severely that troop movements that should take a matter of hours would
take days instead. In January 1944 his deputy commander, the British Air
Marshal Tedder, and the British scientist Solly Zuckerman, drew up a plan
to attack the railway system in France for ninety days before invasion,
hitting over a hundred marshalling and repair yards before turning to the
coastal areas and the destruction of German air defences. Straightforward
enough on paper, the plan turned out to be anything but straightforward in
practice.30
Eisenhower had reckoned without the self-interest of all those parties
with a stake in the bombing effort! Spaatz and Harris, who commanded the
American and British heavy-bombers, were united in their hostility to the
transport plan Some of the attacks on rail targets were the responsibility of
the fighter-bombers and light-bombers of the tactical air forces assigned to
Overlord, but Eisenhower had no doubt that the heavy-bombers were
essential to the success of the operation. The problem was not one of
feasibility. Spaatz thought the Overlord attacks were 'child's play' compared
with strategic bombing; Harris had recently introduced tactical changes in
bomb attack which greatly increased the accuracy of night-time bombing of
limited targets 31 Precision was no longer an issue. The problem was one of
strategic priorities. The bomber commanders wished to continue attacks on
the German aircraft industry and oil supply in the belief that this would
weaken German resistance to invasion more surely than attacks on railway
lines. They regarded the Overlord campaign as an unnecessary diversion of
effort when bombing was on the point of achieving decisive, possibly war-
winning results, They won powerful allies, including Churchillond Brooke.
Eisenhower's calm imperturbability was, for once, thoroughly punctured.
By March he was all for resigning rather than battle any longer with the
'prima donnas': I will tell the Prime Minister to get someone else to run this
damn war. I'll quit!'32
But there was worse to come. Not only would Harris and Spaatz not
accept the strategy for Overlord, they also refused point blank to relin-
quish command of the heavy-bombers to Eisenhower's air commander,
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
149
Air Marshal Trafford Leigh-Mallory. Again they had Churchill's backing,
a spoiling action that Eisenhower deeply resented. Early in March he
squabbled so violently with the Prime Minister over command of the heavy-
gan they had Cary in the he my.
bombers that he finally threatened 'to go home' 33 The threat was enough.
On the issue of command a compromise was reached. Leigh-Mallory was
excluded, but for operations in support of Overlord Eisenhower and Tedder
had temporary command of the heavy-bombers. This still left unresolved
the more serious issue of what to bomb. Eisenhower's headquarters were
bombarded with objections to the transport plan throughout March. Spaatz
told his staff that Overlord was doomed. On 25 March Eisenhower called all
his critics together for a final decision, almost at the end of his tether. The
result was another compromise. The transportation plan was accepted,
while the bomber forces were allowed to continue attacks against oil
installations and the aircraft industry when the opportunity arose. Honour
appeared satisfied. 34
Eisenhower had reckoned without Churchill. No sooner was the strategic
issue settled than the Prime Minister refused to sanction a campaign that
might kill 100,000 Frenchmen' and 'smear the good name of the Royal Air
Force around the world'. There was deadlock. By early May, only five weeks
before invasion, no final decision had been taken; Churchill wanted attacks
restricted to targets where fewer than a hundred Frenchmen would be
killed. Only under pressure from Roosevelt did he concede on I May, with
scarcely time to implement the air plan that Eisenhower regarded as critical
to the whole success of Overlord. Fortunately the bombers had been at work
since March attacking railway targets in the Ruhr and north-eastern France,
killing Frenchmen without formal approval. When the Free French General
Koenig was asked for his view he replied laconically: 'C'est la guerre?
During May attacks were stepped up. By early June rail traffic was down to
just over one-third of the amount in January. 35 French casualties numbered
ten thousand
The results of the pre-invasion bombing campaign were mixed. Civilian
rail traffic declined sharply, but German mobile repair teams were able to
maintain the operation of rail transport for military priorities. Real success
came in the final campaign of what was called interdiction, the destruction of
bridges and tunnels connecting the invasion area with the east, There was
even argument about this until, on 7 May, eight American P-47 fighter-
bombers dropped two 1,000-pound bombs each on the railway bridge across
the Seine at Vernon, proving beyond doubt that these targets could be
destroyed with pin-point accuracy and few bombs. Over the next three weeks
74 bridges and tunnels were destroyed, effectively isolating the whole of
north-western France, and fatally curtailing the prospects of rapid German
