36
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . • •
islands dotted with tropical greenery. Along the southern coast lay the
I,500-mile Great Barrier Reef, which produced a fringe of white foam
around the azure waters. Neither side had accurate intelligence on the
whereabouts of the other, and squally, grey weather made aircraft
reconnaissance difficult. Both forces circled round, anxious to make
contact. When they finally did so there followed a catalogue of errors on
both sides. The Japanese carrier force under Admiral Takagi mistook the
American fuelling ship Neosho for the enemy task force, pounding the
unfortunate vessel with the full weight of an aerial assault. American
reconnaissance aircraft mistook the light naval force supporting the Port
Moresby invasion for the Japanese carriers. Fletcher sent off his own
aircraft, which by mere chance found the larger covering force on their
way. They attacked and sank the light carrier Shoho, the first of its kind
lost by Japan. This was enough to halt the attack on Port Moresby. The
assault force retreated north-west, its air cover lost. On 7 May the weather
was too poor for successful air attack, but Takagi sent off his aircraft
regardless. Reaching the end of their fuel supply, his fighter bombers were
continuing to hunt for the American ships when they were attacked by
enemy fighter aircraft. Nine were shot down. In gloomy weather the
remainder turned for home. Some tried to land on the Yorktown, mistaking
it for their own ship. Short of fuel the rest were forced to land in the sea.
Only one-fifth of the force returned safely.
The following day both fleets knew that they must be close enough to each
other to make contact. American aircraft found the two large Japanese
carriers in cloudy weather. They attacked in two waves, beginning at just
before 11 a.m. The result was disappointing: neither carrier was sunk. The
Zuikaku avoided any serious damage; the Shokaku was hit by just three
bombs - this was however sufficient to destroy her engine repair shops and
damage her flight deck severely enough to send her later on a long haul back
to Japan for repairs. At almost the same time Japanese airmen found
Fletcher's ships. Both American carriers sustained severe damage, but were
not sunk. Only later in the day did the Lexington, listing badly, suffer a
massive internal explosion. At eight in the evening she was put out of her
misery by an American destroyer. Her crew watched from nearby rescue
ships as she finally went down, 'crying and weeping like young girls'? 30
The Battle of the Coral Sea was the point at which Japanese expansion in
the Pacific was halted. The Allied force hardly distinguished itself, but
enough was done to turn back the invasion of Port Moresby, and to blunt the
assault on the islands. On 12 May an American submarine torpedoed the
Okinoshima, flagship of the invasion force for Naura and Ocean Island. 'A
dream of great success has been shattered, wrote Ugaki in his diary,
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
although in Japan the authorities announced yet another startling victory.31
Any attempt to renew the attack on the southern islands was shelved until
later in the year. Every effort was made to prepare for the next operation,
codenamed 'MI', the invasion of Midway. In planning it, Japanese com-
manders drew almost no lessons from the failures in the Coral Sea. Yet it
was a conflict dictated by air power, a naval battle in which no ship fired its
guns at another ship in anger, indeed no ship even sighted the enemy fleet. It
showed as clearly as the sea war in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean that
command of the sea also required command of the air.
Midway Island was an unprepossessing target. A tiny atoll no more than 6
miles across, much of it under water, it formed the farthest point of the
Hawaiian archipelago, and the most westerly point of United States
territory. Claimed for America in 1867, it was not occupied until 1903 when
the navy chased off its itinerant population of Japanese feather-hunters.
Only in 1940 was a ship channel built to allow larger vessels to enter the
harbour, and Midway became a full military base, with aircraft, flying boats
and marines. Japan wanted Midway as a gateway to the shipping lanes of the
Pacific, and as a base from which to threaten Hawaii itself. On 5 May
preparations began. The Japanese forces were once again widely dispersed
in five main groups: a carrier strike force under Admiral Nagumo consisting
of four large carriers; an occupation force for Midway itself; the main fleet of
seven battleships, including the flagship Yamato, intended as the instrument
to destroy the remains of the American Pacific Fleet; a diversionary force to
seize the two westerly islands of the Aleutians; and finally an advanced force
of submarines to scout ahead and to shield the main fleets. Yamamoto's plan
was simple. Midway would be occupied, American ships would sail from
Pearl Harbor to save the island, where they would be softened up by the
carrier force before being annihilated by the main battleship fleet following
in its wake. There was little flexibility in the plan, and Japanese commanders
could see small reason to be flexible. They had scanty intelligence on the
American position, but they
were
confident that the Lexington and
Yorktown had been sunk in the Coral Sea.
By skilful misinformation
American radio intelligence persuaded the Japanese that the remaining two
carriers of the American Pacific Fleet were in the south-west
i Pacific Fleet
Pacific
protecting Australia, too far away to interfere in time with the battle of
Midway 32 The date was fixed for 5 June, Japanese time, 4 June in the
United States.
The American position was precarious. Reinforcement was slow, and the
calls on American shipping in every marine theatre compromised efforts to
supply Hawaii. American dockyards were turning out large numbers of new
ships, but there were no new carriers or battleships to confront the current
