30
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . . •
Belgium and France in June 1940 resulted in the nightmare that had haunted
British governments since the days of Napoleon: control of the Channel
coast and ports by a hostile power. Now German surface forces and
submarines were able to operate from an Atlantic coastline against British
trade. Hitler's directive to his navy to 'deal an annihilating blow to the
English economy', which looked hollow when it was published the previous
November, began to fill up with early successes. ' The defeat of France was
a double blow for the Royal Navy, for not only did it mean the loss of the
French navy for the Allied cause, but it also invited Mussolini's Italy to join
in the war, hungry for spoils. Straddled across Britain's vital Imperial route
through the Mediterranean, from Gibraltar at the western end of the sea to
Suez in the east, was the Italian navy, half a million tons of hostile vessels,
including more than a hundred submarines. 12
There was worse to come, for the real enemy of the British fleet was not on
the sea but in the air. When war broke out navies on both sides were still
wedded to the traditional view of sea power, exercised by ships on or under
the surface of the ocean. Few people foresaw how swiftly air power would
render redundant naval strategies still rooted in the battleship age of Fisher
and Tirpitz, who led the naval race before the First World War. The very
first naval contest of the war, off the coast of Norway, was a rude shock
With secure air bases on the Channel coast by the summer of 1940, German
bombers began to take a terrible toll of British shipping. When the German
air force supplied the navy with a small group of converted long-range
passenger aircraft, the Focke-Wulf Condor, attacks on shipping
were
extended far out into the Atlantic shipping lanes. In 1940 aircraft alone sank
$80,000 tons of British shipping; the following year over a million tons, more
than British dockyards could make good. 3 In the Mediterranean, with
its narrow channels and clear skies, ships made easy targets, first for the
Italian air force, then from 1941 for the bombers and dive-bombers of
the Luftwaffe, transferred there to secure the Balkans and to help Italian
endeavours in North
Africa. The persistent illusion, shared even
Churchill, that the big battleships could defend themselves against air attack
ended with the destruction of the Italian fleet at Taranto on 11 November
1940 by a mere twenty Swordfish biplanes of the British Fleet Air Arm, the
sinking of the German battleship Bismarck in May 1941, and the devastating
destruction of the Prince of Wales and Repulse seven months later. 4 Great
ships that took years to build and commission were sent to the sea-bed in a
matter of minutes, destroyed by a handful of bombs and torpedoes. The
most remarkable mismatch of the whole war was the trial of combat between
these great dinosaurs of the sea and the tiny aircraft that circled them like
venomous insects, waiting to sting.
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
3I
The Royal Navy was soon stretched to the limit, fighting with shrinking
resources in waters from the North Sea to Egypt, from the Arctic to the far
reaches of the South Atlantic. The enemy avoided fighting face to face, for
he had no main fleet. Instead he fought a bitter war of attrition, sapping
away the lifeblood of the British merchant marine by sea and air, seizing any
opportunity to sink naval vessels that came to its defence. During the course
of 1940 the tables were turned on Britain: the blockader was blockaded.
Though Hitler lacked the naval strength to invade Britain, he was easily
persuaded by his naval chiefs that Britain's war effort could be crippled,
perhaps decisively, by cutting through the main artery of trade across the
Atlantic sea-lanes. Though the German navy was able to send no more than
ten or fifteen submarines into the area for the first eighteen months of war,
these were sufficient to create a debilitating haemorrhage.
British preparations were undone. Though the navy took over the
organisation of all British shipping in a remarkable feat of global planning,
German cryptographers succeeded in unmasking the British naval codes
that carried the directives. German submarines were able to compensate for
their small number by the foreknowledge of convoy movements.] The
convoy escorts relied on the use of ASDIC, a sound-detecting instrument first
developed in the Great War, which betrayed the presence of submerged
submarines. To counter this threat the German submarines adopted the
simplest of counter-measures: they attacked at night on the surface, where
they could neither be seen by the escort look-outs, nor detected by ASDIC.
Deprived of their eyes and ears, their position on the ocean betrayed, the
convoys were easy prey. During 1940 over a thousand ships were sunk,
totalling 4 million tons, a quarter of British merchant shipping. 'By careful
use of brief radio transmissions it proved possible for the Germans to gather
large numbers of submarines together in 'wolf-packs' to snap at the heels of
intercepted shipping. In the first four months of 1941 almost 2 million tons
of shipping were destroyed, over half in the north Atlantic. For German
submariners these were 'die glückliche Zeiten', fortunate times. 16
German forces succeeded against British sea power beyond their wildest
expectations. British trade was slowly bled white: 68 million tons were
imported in 1938, 26 million in 1941.17 When figures of sinkings for February
were released Churchill was finally moved to give anti-submarine warfare
priority over everything else. On 6 March he announced that Britain was
now fighting 'the Battle of the Atlantic' which he regarded with justice as
'the real issue of the war' for Britain. 18 The concentration of British minds
on the naval war produced some positive results. British cryptanalysts at the
code and cypher school at Bletchley Park succeeded in breaking enough of
the German naval code to be able to steer convoys away from the gathering
