198
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
This may have made it harder to exact a higher level of effort or self-
sacrifice, but it certainly fostered a productive workforce.
(Without the wartime opportunities the
American population would
presumably have done its patriotic duty with more or less enthusiasm. But
can we doubt that economic opportunism spurred on the war effort as
much as raw desperation fired the Soviet population? Over the war more
than half a million new businesses were started up in America. Like the
Soviet over-achievers, the new entrepreneurs were hailed as examples of
economic individualism at work. But in wartime American workers really
could become bosses overnight.) The son of a Syrian immigrant, Tom
Saffody, worked as a machinist at the start of the war for a Detroit company.
During the course of his work he invented a machine for metal measurement
in his home garage. He left his job, built a factory using secondhand piping
welded together, and by 1943 ran a business with an annual turnover of 4•5
million dollars. 4 The entrepreneurial ideal did not explain America's war-
time economic performance any more than socialist emulation explained
that of the Soviet Union, but it would be wrong to ignore its motivating
power entirely. Much of America's economic effort was voluntary; it was
therefore all the more important that it should be prosperous. 'If you are
going to try to go to war or prepare for war in a capitalist country,' wrote
Henry Stimson, Roosevelt's Secretary for War, with unusual frankness in
his diary, 'you have got to let business make money out of the process, or
business won't work.'47)
By 1943 there existed a decisive disparity between the quantity of weapons
and equipment available to the Allies and the output of their enemies, Italy,
Germany and Japan: more than three to one in aircraft and tanks, four to
one in heavy guns. Of the three Axis states only Germany had the economic
resources, the depth of skilled manpower and technical expertise, and the
industrial capacity to support a war effort on the scale of the Soviet Union
and the United States. The German economy was regarded in the west as a
formidable source of military power, which is why so much effort was
devoted to destroying it from the air. On the success of the German war
economy hinged the more general success of the Axis states.
There is little doubt that throughout the war the German economy
produced far fewer weapons than its raw resources of materials, manpower,
scientific skill and factory floorspace could have made
possible. The
disparity between the two warring sides was always wider than the crude
balance of resources. Indeed up to 1943 the much smaller British economy
outproduced Germany and its new European empire in almost all major
ECONOMIES AT WAR
199
classes of weapon, while the Soviet Union, in 1942 temporarily reduced to
an economy even smaller than Britain's, produced half as much again as
the German empire between 1942 and 1945. However much the statistics
may mask differences in policy and circumstances, this is still a significant
contrast. Had the situation been otherwise German fighting power might
well have avoided the remorseless attrition which set in in 1944.
The irony in all this is that no state so actively worked to prepare its
economy for war as Germany did in the I930s, nor saw so clearly the
intimate connection between industrial and military might. The lessons of
military defeat were not lost on Germany's leaders. It was branded deep in
the German public mind that blockade, hunger and material weakness
sapped the will and ability to carry on fighting in 1918. The very idea of 'total
war', a contest to the death between whole societies - armies, economies,
peoples - was a German one, originally coined by General Erich Ludendorff
to describe the bitter experiences of the Great War 48 Hitler, who had
marched next to Ludendorff in November 1923 in the failed Nazi attempt to
seize power in Munich, shared entirely the view that to win wars 'the whole
strength of the people' - material, moral, military - had to be thrown into
the scales.
During the 1930s the sinews of the militarised economy gradually took
shape. By 1939 Germany devoted almost a quarter of its national product,
and more than a quarter of its entire industrial workforce to military
production. From the mid-1930s the state sponsored a colossal programme
of capital investment - more than two-thirds of all German industrial
investment - to build a solid foundation of material resources on which to
raise the later superstructure of military output. Across Germany sprang up
the world's largest aluminium industry; a new iron and steel complex,
planned on a scale to eclipse Magnitogorsk, was built from scratch on the
large ore-fields of Brunswick in central Germany; the chemical industry
began to construct whole new plants for the synthetic production of oil and
rubber, resources vital for mechanised warfare, but controlled on world
markets in their natural form by Germany's potential adversaries. By 1939
Germany possessed the kind of military-industrial complex that would be
developed by the two super-powers after 1945. Its productive potential was
enormous, all the more so when, bit by bit, Germany assimilated the
valuable resources of central Europe - iron ore and machine-building in
Austria, brown coal (for oil production) and armaments from Czechoslo-
vakia, coal, iron and steel from the areas of conquered Poland. 49
On this foundation Hitler hoped to build a military power that could face
the prospect of war in the 1940s with every chance of success. In 1938 he
approved the weapons that would make Germany the first super-power: an
