MANEATER
176
ALONG A GOOD ROAD . . .
prospect of yet another encirclement, for General Patton had got there
before them. While 7th army was fighting its way out of the Falaise pocket,
the vanguard of Patton's forces reached the Seine at Mantes-Gassicourt,
north-west of Paris. The following day the 12th corps of Patton's 3rd army
pushed south of the city, and drove the weak German defence across the
river. By 25 August the American forces were 140 miles beyond Paris, and
only 6o miles from the German border. Model made frantic efforts to create
a stable front line, but his exhausted troops, mostly on foot or in horsecarts,
were overtaken by the Allies. They struggled to the lower reaches of the
Seine as American and British forces moved in for the kill. Some escaped in
small craft, or on cider barrels lashed together; yet others swam across. On
the far bank Model could scrape together only the equivalent of four
divisions, with 120 tanks, against an Allied force of more than forty
divisions. There was little else between them and the German border. The
retreat continued. 'We are gaining ground rapidly, wrote a German soldier
to his family in Germany, 'but in the wrong direction.'"
On 25 August Paris was liberated, after a half-hearted defence by the
German garrison was swept aside by the Americans, the Free French forces
and a popular uprising inside the city. The following day General Charles de
Gaulle, leader of the Free French forces, entered the capital in triumph. At
the Are de Triomphe he stopped to rekindle the eternal flame on the tomb of
the Unknown Soldier. At the head of his forces he walked down the Champs
Elysées to hysterical cheering. When he arrived at the square in front of
Notre Dame there was a burst of gunfire. De Gaulle ignored it and strode on
into the cathedral, but behind him in the parade the tanks of the 2nd French
armoured division opened fire on the surrounding rooftops. Inside, de
Gaulle stood quietly, until he was shot at again by an unknown gunman
within the cathedral itself. This time he was hustled away by anxious aides.
That evening as Parisians dined out on liberation, the German air force
offered one last riposte to Allied victory. At 11.15 waves of German
bombers inflicted on Paris its heaviest raid of the war. They destroyed five
hundred houses and a huge wine warehouse, the Halle aux Vins, whose
contents burnt with such a fierce glow that the whole of central Paris was
illuminated.92
It took only a week to clear German forces from the rest of France.
By 4 September British troops entered the Belgian port of Antwerp. Dur-
ing the defeat in Normandy and the long rout eastwards German forces
lost some sixty divisions; 265,000 men were killed or wounded, 350,000
taken prisoner. Almost all the equipment of Germany's western army was
abandoned or destroyed. So rapidly did Allied armies exploit their victory
that their supply lines became stretched taut and Eisenhower insisted on a
Left: Hitler as the beast from the abyss, devouring one
country after another. This 1941 cartoon formed part of a
collection presented by Stalin to Lord Beaverbrook.
Below: The end of old-fashioned sea power: a US
Dauntless dive-bomber attacks Japanese carriers during
the Battle of Midway.
Belgi
Dece
Above: American submarines strangled Japanese
commerce in the Pacific. This merchant ship was
photographed through the periscope of the submarine,
June 1945.
Left: American opinion was shocked by Japan's attack
on Pearl Harbor. The thirst for revenge is strikingly
conveyed in this poster from 1942.
