52
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . . .
end of the war. 62
Despite all these innovations the rate of sinkings hardly abated. It might
well be objected that the painstaking organisation of sound intelligence,
and the slow conquest of the scientific frontier made little difference to the
Atlantic Battle. But the statistics deceive. During the latter half of 1942
there were many more submarines available to Dönitz, but their sphere of
action was restricted more and more to the poorly defended areas in the
mid-Atlantic, or the coast of southern Africa. Each U-boat in the Atlantic
sank the equivalent of 920 tons per day in October 1940; in August 1942
the figure was only 149 tons, and in November 1942, even though the
aggregate figure for tonnage sunk was the highest of the war in the Atlantic
Gap, no more than 220 tons.63 The ratio of operational submarines to
successful sinkings declined sharply over 1942. Allied efforts did not halt
the submarine offensive, but in 1942 they prevented the carnage at sea
from being very much worse. Merchant losses were still unacceptably high
but the rate of loss was slowed down and contained, while the losses of U-
boats rose steadily. During the second half of 1942 65 were sunk, four or
five times the number lost in the first months of the year.
There were other solid achievements for Allied naval power. In the
Mediterranean, too, the careful application of air power, and the use of
radar and radio intelligence, turned the tide. The convoys began to move
through the areas of greatest danger with more success. Supplies were run
to Malta, which became a frontline base in the fight against Axis aviation
and shipping. During the course of the year the Royal Navy used the
submarine weapon against the Italian fleet, cutting vital supplies to Axis
land forces stretched out along the sandy supply lines to the Egyptian
frontier. Two-thirds of Italy's merchant marine ended un at the bottom of
the sea, a quarter sunk by Britich submarines, an per cent by Allied
aircraft. The Axis forces in North Africa were denied almost half their
supplies, and over two-thirds of their oil. « Pushed to their logistical limit
against an enemy reinforced by supplies brought via the long sea route
around the Cape, Italian armies, supported by Field Marshal Rommel's
small Afrika Korps, were finally pushed back at El Alamein in early
November. Between November and May 1943, when Axis forces finally
surrendered in Tunisia, Italian vessels plied the seas between Sicily and
Tunis through a hail of Allied bombs, torpedoes and mines. Sailors called
it the Death Route, for there was almost no chance of survival. Between
November and May, in rough winter seas, beset by squalls and fog and
pursued by the relentless drone of enemy aircraft, 243 ships were sunk and
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
53
242 damaged passing through precarious narrow channels cut across the
minefields, each one 40 miles long and at some points less than a mile
The U-boat threat was also contained sufficiently to permit the transport
of troops and equipment across the Atlantic for operation Torch. The effort
disrupted the normal flow of traffic but the naval build-up was successfully
concealed from the enemy. The passenger liners Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth scurried at high speed and in isolation across the Atlantic carrying
fifteen thousand troops apiece. In October a vast convoy of 102 ships sailed
from America bound for Casablanca, where 25,000 troops were to
disembark. From the Clyde in Scotland sailed six assault convoys and six
slower supply convoys, a total in all of 334 ships. The effectiveness of the
convoy when it had adequate air protection and the benefits of modern
technology was demonstrated beyond dispute. Only one small supply vessel
was lost out of the whole armada. On 8 November, supported by heavy fire
from the big battleships, Allied troops landed at Casablanca, Oran and
Algiers. Local French
troops soon abandoned
combined Anglo-American force joined up with British Commonwealth
armies chasing the Axis westwards from Libya. Although the final Allied
victory was much slower and more costly than expected, German and Italian
troops were bottled up by western naval and air power, fighting until there
was nothing left with which to fight.66 On 13 May 150,000 Italians and
Germans surrendered
The war in the Mediterranean did nothing to solve the U-boat war. At the
end of 1942 the Battle of the Atlantic was delicately poised. Allied shipping
was still dangerously vulnerable; the morale of the merchant mariners was
low and casualties high. But U-boat losses were rising too, and German
submariners were faced with the stark reality that they would now survive no
more than two or three sorties at most. Between January and May the Battle
of the Atlantic reached its final climax.
Nature itself supplied a backdrop to the crescendo of battle that was straight
out of Wagner. The weather in the winter was never good; over the winter
months of 1942-3 it was atrocious. Gale force winds for weeks on end drove
the sea into icy mountains and valleys that could barely be navigated by
submarine or victim. Driving blizzards made the sighting of vessels almost
impossible. On the bridge of the submarine the men on watch were strapped
down with strong security belts as the waves swept up and over the boat time
after time. It was difficult to hold the wolf-packs together in pursuit of the
convoys. In January 1943 only nine ships were sunk in the North Atlantic.
