102
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
assumption that a large-scale landing in Europe could not be contemplated
before the summer of 1943 at the earliest.3 But Churchill was bitterly
provoked by the suggestion of western cowardice. On 30 July he proposed a
face-to-face meeting with Stalin at a place of his choosing. The following day
Stalin extended a formal invitation to come to Moscow. Churchill accepted.
On 12 August he flew from the Middle East in a converted B-24 Liberator
bomber which was so noisy that the passengers could only communicate by
passing handwritten notes. The plane landed at Moscow in the early
evening, and Churchill was whisked away in a limousine with windows of 2-
inch-thick glass to State Villa No. 7 on the outskirts of the Russian capital.
Churchill found everything prepared with 'totalitarian lavishness' - caviar,
vodka, veteran servants with 'beaming smiles', and the novelty of mixer
taps, which he later installed at Chartwell. At seven o'clock he was driven to
the Kremlin to meet Stalin. 4
Churchill's task was an unhappy one. At one and the same time he was to
repudiate Stalin's accusations of bad faith and announce that there could be
no Second Front. The meeting went badly from the start. Churchill outlined
in detail the reasons for abandoning any prospect of helping Russia in 1942,
and promised an offensive at some point in 1943. Stalin argued with
everything, bluntly, 'almost to the point of insult. "You can't win wars if you
aren't willing to take risks'; "You must not be so afraid of the Germans.'
Sullen and restless, Stalin rejected all Churchill's argumenis, but accepted
that he could not actually force the west to come to combat. It was at this
point, with the discussion deadlocked, that Churchill revealed what the west
could actually offer: the heavy bombing of Germany and Operation Torch,
an Anglo-American landing in North Africa late in 1942.
The mood of the meeting lightened. Stalin liked Torch. He saw straight
away that it would secure the defeat of Rommel, and speed up the
withdrawal of Italy from the war. But what he liked most was the bombing.
The American envoy, Averell Harriman, who was present throughout the
meeting, wired Roosevelt the following day that the mention of bombing
elicited 'the first agreement between the two men'. Stalin came to life for
the first time in the conference. He told Churchill to bomb homes as well as
factories; he suggested the best urban targets. 'Between the two of them',
Harriman continued,
they soon had destroyed most of the important
industrial cities of Germany. The tension eased. Stalin accepted that the
British could, as Churchill put it, only 'pay our way by bombing Germany'
His visitor promised a 'ruthless' bombardment to shatter the morale of the
German people?
cordiality than it had started with.
After four hours the meeting broke up with
more
There were three more days of meetings. Great pressure was exerted to
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
103
get Churchill to change his mind about a Second Front. Stalin returned to
the theme of Britain's yellow streak, her manifest 'reluctance to fight on the
ground', remarks which drew from Churchill such a heated and dignified
rebuttal that Stalin was provoked to his famous response: 'Your words are of
no importance. What is important is your spirit!" But by the end of the visit
relations between the two leaders were better than Churchill could have
hoped. On the evening before Churchill's departure, 15 August, Stalin took
the unprecedented step of inviting his guest to visit his private apartment. A
long dinner, liberally accompanied by every kind of alcohol, created a more
relaxed atmosphere, though Stalin still flung taunts at British courage (*Has
the British Navy no sense of glory?'). At one o'clock in the morning Stalin
began to eat heavily from a sucking pig, at what was his usual dinner hour.
At 2.30 with a splitting headache, Churchill made his farewells, and flew off
exhausted from Moscow airport three hours later. When he arrived in Cairo
he told officers of the 8th army of his renewed commitment to bombing:
*Germany has asked for this bombing warfare... her country will be laid to
ruins.' On his return to London he ordered RAF statistics to be sent to
Stalin, and called for the large-scale reinforcement of Britain's heavy
bomber forces.' For the moment bombing constituted the Second Front.
Churchill had always been an enthusiast for bombing. In World War I, as
First Lord of the Admiralty, he authorised the early bombing attacks by
Britain's fledgling air forces against the German
Germany. As Minister for War in 1919 he defended the newly formed Royal
Air Force from the predatory claims of the army and navy, who resented the
parvenu service, and hoped to stifle its claims to independence. Iº During the
1930s it was Churchill who led the campaign to increase British air
rearmament to match German strengths.
Where Chamberlain as Prime
Minister refused to unleash the air weapon, Churchill had no such scruples.
Only five days after he became Prime Minister in 1940, on 15 May, he
ordered the restrictions on British bombing lifted, and Britain embarked
on a five-year campaign of air bombardment against Germany. It was
Churchill's view, expressed in the bleak summer of 1940, that the only thing
that would defeat Hitler was 'an absolutely devastating, exterminating
attack by very heavy bombers upon the Nazi homeland'.
For all Churchill's uncritical enthusiasm for air power, the whole strategy
of the bombing offensive was shot through with paradoxes. At the time
when Churchill promised Stalin his 'ruthless' campaign the whole issue of
bombing was in the balance. Little had been achieved by the offensive
between the summer of 1940 and the spring of 1942. Churchill told the Chief
