58
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT • • •
submerging boats by radio. The nearest support group steamed to attack
and arrived behind the hastily reorganising U-boats, who were now caught
between the two forces. A second boat was sunk. In the afternoon the relief
Liberators arrived and in close cooperation with the surface vessels sank
four more submarines. The small cargo ships, slow and old-fashioned,
watched the explosions of bombs and depth charges in a distant noisy ring
around them. But not one torpedo reached them. After two days of battle
the wolf-packs broke up to lick their wounds. For Dönitz the convoy battle
was especially poignant for on board u-954, sunk by a Liberator on 19 May,
was his son, Peter.75
Horton's offensive did all that he had hoped and more. During May
sinkings in the North Atlantic fell to 160,000 tons, the lowest figure since the
end of 1941. The new tactics and technology blunted the U-boat threat in a
matter of weeks. During May the U-boat arm lost 41 vessels.
catastrophic rate of loss. By the end of the month U-boats were being sunk
faster than cargo ships. With great reluctance Dönitz bowed to reality and
on 24 May he ordered all submarines to retreat from the Altantic until his
forces could be reformed and rearmed. On 31 May he reported to Hitler that
the Atlantic Battle was lost for the moment. His retreating forces were
harried home to their bases across the Bay of Biscay where they were forced
to fight it out with enemy aircraft armed with rockets, depth charges and
pin-point radar. In June and July his force lost 54 more boats. For submarine
crews each mission was more and more likely to be their last.
[It was some time before the British realised what had happened. After
years of painful attrition the U-boat threat was liquidated in two months.
Radio interception soon showed that the submarines had gone. A strange
silence fell across the battlefield, almost too good to be true. In June the
weather calmed. Thirty-two convoys ploughed through the ocean. Not one
ship was lost, not one attack was recorded. In July 1,367 ships crossed both
ways without incident. In the autumn Dönitz sent back a part of his force to
test the water, but losses were once again beyond endurance. Between June
and December 1943 only 57 ships were sunk in the whole Atlantic theatre,
for the loss of 141 submarines. In October Portugal allowed Allied aircraft to
operate from the Azores, and the last hole in the Atlantic where submarines
could hide was finally plugged. In the whole of 1944 Allied shipping losses
were no more than 170,000 tons, a mere 3 per cent of the losses endured in
1942. The battles of May and June 1943 represented, Horton told his staff, 'a
clear-cut victory over the U-boat'. 77
So sudden was the end of the campaign that had hung dangerously in the
balance only weeks before that it is tempting to assume that some special
factor, lately introduced into the battle, explained its abrupt conclusion. The
Shore-based air cove!
Casablanci
o • Dakar
Atlantic
Gap
12-
Cape Town
Shore-hased air cover
• Merchant ships sunk
• Dakar
GREENLAND
Atlantic
Merchant ships sunk from 1 August 1942 to 21 May 1943 (left)
Merchant ships sunk from 22 May 1943 to 31 December 1943 (right)
