108
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
Bomber Command might well have remained in limbo had it not been for
the catastrophes that overtook the British war effort in the spring of 1940.
The British defeat in Norway in April brought the fall of Chamberlain. In his
place came a man much less scrupulous about the use of force. When the
Germans broke through into northern France and threatened to inflict a
disastrous defeat on Allied armies, Churchill searched desperately for
anything that might halt the onslaught. Bomber Command, chafing at the
bit, offered the prospect of hitting the German homeland, even perhaps of
drawing the German air forces away from the land battle to defend Germany
against the bombing threat! Churchill grasped at the straw. Following a
devastating attack by the Luftwaffe on the Dutch port of Rotterdam on I5
May, Churchill ordered Bomber Command to begin a long-range offensive
against German industrial and military targets in the Ruhr. On the night of
15-16 May a force of 96 twin-engined bombers was dispatched to destroy oil
and power installations. The Ruhr was shrouded in its usual industrial haze
and was thickly defended with anti-aircraft guns. Only 24 crews later
claimed even to have found the target area, and six aircraft failed to return.
It was an inauspicious baptism of fire.
22
The early bombing of Germany demonstrated all the limitations of
Bomber Command. Daylight raids were soon abandoned once it was found
that some attacks suffered the loss of almost the entire force Rombing by
night, on the other hand, though safer for the crews, could only be
attempted when it was clear and moonlit. Without the moon it was difficult
to locate the area of the target, let alone the target itself, and without the
clear night sky navigation by the stars was impossible. There were no radio
navigation aids, no radar, not even effective bomb-sights. So inaccurate was
British bombing that German intelligence had considerable difficulty in
grasping exactly what strategy the British were pursuing. The offensive was
continued only because, following the defeat of French and British forces in
June 1940, there was no other way left for Britain to demonstrate to the
world her willingness to continue fighting: "We are hitting that man hard,
Churchill wired Roosevelt at the end of July 23
In fact Bomber Command was doing anything but. Moreover the pin-
prick attacks did exactly what Chamberlain had always feared: they
provoked fierce German retaliation. Between 25 August and 4 September
Bomber Command launched five attacks against the German capital. Hitler
was outraged. So far the German air force had been deliberately kept away
from making attacks on British urban areas. On 4 September Hitler used the
occasion of a speech in Berlin inaugurating wartime relief work to pledge
... we shall obliterate their cities! We shall put a stop to these
night pirates, so help us God. 24 Over the following six months the Luftwaffe
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
109
subjected British cities to the first real bomber offensive, killing 21,000
people and destroying wide areas of London, Bristol, Coventry, Liverpool,
Glasgow, and a dozen other urban centres. If there remained any moral
scruples or strategic second thoughts on the British side about whether they
should continue bombing, they were instantly dispelled by the Blitz. The
bombing of Germany not only promised the one slim prospect of eventual
victory in the absence of powerful allies, but it was also justified in the eyes of
the British public as retaliation for German attacks.!
With the coming of the Blitz the British got the war they had expected all
along. The German attacks were costly and terrifying, but the Blitz was not
the Super-Armageddon. When Gallup polled Londoners early in 1941
about what made them most depressed that winter, the weather came out
ahead of bombing. 25 Bombing did little to dent British production, and if
anything morale was stiffened rather than reduced. Hitler, who had started
the Blitz in a rage at British 'terrorism', soon became disillusioned with city
bombing. What the Blitz did achieve was the firm commitment of both
British and American leaders to the idea that strategic bombing as a way of
conducting war was here to stay. The bombing of London shocked world
opinion in ways that the bombing of Berlin evidently could not. In thousands
of American cinemas the newsreels showed the famous image of St Paul's
cathedral, majestically, incredibly rising above the tide of flame that licked
all round it. The American newsman Ed Murrow's poignant reports of
ordinary British courage and tenacity kept alive western optimism at a dark
moment of the war. The public perception of the Blitz in the United States
perhaps did more than anything to switch American opinion to the view that
bombing mattered, and that the United States should do it too.
During the course of 1941 Roosevelt and his military advisers began
seriously to make ready for war. Roosevelt himself was the inspiration
behind the planning of a bombing offensive as a central part of American
preparation for war. On 4 May 1941 he ordered the production of five
hundred heavy bombers a month - British production was just 498 for the
whole of 1941 - in order to achieve what he called 'command of the air by the
democracies'. Money now flowed from
the US Treasury to fund the
development and production of a vast heavy bomber force. It is still not
entirely clear why Roosevelt, a man of peace and good-neighbourliness,
who had long campaigned to get aerial bombing outlawed by international
agreement, should have become so enthusiastically committed not just to
air power but to its unlimited use against civilians. But there seems little
doubt that this is what happened. His confidant Harry Hopkins reported in
August 1941 that the President was a believer in bombing as the only
means of gaining a victory'] Roosevelt told his Treasury Secretary,
