32
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . • •
wolves for the summer months. Desperate efforts were made to provide
better air cover for convoys and escort vessels for the whole of the North
Altantic run, and a submarine Tracking Room set up in London succeeded
through a combination of secret intelligence and intelligent guesswork to
steer large numbers of convoys clear of danger altogether. 1º But losses
continued to mount elsewhere. By late 1941 the British merchant fleet began
to decline steadily, while the long hauls necessary to avoid danger-spots
wasted vital shipping capacity. Over the year I,299 ships were sunk, and
over half their crewmen were lost. 20 Still bereft of naval allies, Britain faced
the prospect of isolation from American supplies and the loss of the
Mediterranean. Already all that linked her with her Empire in the east was
the long 8,000-mile haul around the Cape of Good Hope, into seas
increasingly threatened by Japanese aggression.
It was with this gloomy outlook that Churchill sat down to supper with
Averell Harriman and the American ambassador, John Winant, on the
evening of 7 December 1941. Harriman found the Prime Minister 'tired and
depressed'. Churchill said little throughout dinner, deep in thought, with
his head in his hands'. Just before nine o'clock his butler brought in a small
radio for the evening news from the BBC. He was slow to switch it on and
missed the opening headlines. Then minutes later the news reader returned
to the opening story, which had reached him shortly before going on air:
"Japanese aircraft have raided Pearl Harbor' Churchill leapt out of his chair
and banged the radio. He telephoned at once to Roosevelt: "What's this
about Japan?' Roosevelt confirmed that Japan and America were now at
war: 'We are all in the same boat now:2' Churchill promised to declare war
on Japan the next day. The two largest navies in the world were now ranged
side by side, an alliance for which Churchill had worked hard for two years.
It was impossible for British leaders not to feel a sense of relief at the news.
General Ismay, secretary to the British Chiefs-of-Staff, told a companion
the following day that the alliance made 'ultimate victory certain'. But in the
short term Britain and the United States faced what Ismay later called a
"cataract of disaster' 22
There was no disguising what a disaster it was. Within a matter of weeks
Japan crippled the American Pacific Fleet and eliminated the British and
Dutch navies in the Far East. British, Dutch and American possessions were
seized one after the other, their fragile defences swept aside with contemp-
tuous ease. The Indian and Pacific Oceans lay wide open to Japanese sea
power. None of the world's broad seaways could be safely sailed, or easily
defended. 'If we lose the war at sea', observed Britain's naval chief Admiral
Sir Dudley Pound in March 1942, 'we lose the war. 23
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
33
No one was more surprised by the speed and completeness of Japanese
success than Japanese leaders themselves. They had expected a campaign of
six months or more, not twelve weeks; they had anticipated losing a quarter
of their fleet, but lost only three destroyers. It took only a dozen divisions to
capture the entire southern region.24 Whatever qualms existed before Pearl
"victory-drunk' as they called it. The temptation to capitalise on that success
was overwhelming. Japanese self-confidence was riding high. On New
Year's Day 1942 Admiral Matome Ugaki, Chief-of-Staff of the Japanese
Combined Fleet, saw a year ahead brimming with promise: 'The future is
filled with brightness. The course of events this year will determine the fate
of the war ... The main thing is to win, and we surely will win. 25
There were now so many options open that Japanese army and navy
leaders began to squabble about which one to take. Some wanted to drive
through to Australia to complete the conquest of the whole south-west
Pacific. There was talk of moving westwards to join up with the Germans in
the Middle East, driving the British from Asia. The army rejected them both
because it lacked the manpower for operations on such a bold scale. The
Combined Fleet led by Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto favoured a more
modest but strategically significant move: the extension of Japan's new
Pacific perimeter to embrace the western Aleutians in the north, the island
of Midway in the central Pacific, and a circle of bases north of Australia -
Port Moresby in Papua, Ocean Island and Nauru. The object of these
operations was to cut sea communications between the United States and
the western Pacific, and to tempt the crippled American Pacific Fleet to a
final showdown where it would be annihilated by the larger Japanese
force. 26 The Japanese admirals were obsessed with the traditional rules of
sea warfare, the pursuit of a great fleet engagement like the one they had
won against the Russian navy in the Straits of Tsushima 37 years before,
when Yamamoto was a young midshipman. Only the decisive defeat of the
American main fleet could make the Pacific a Japanese lake.
The plan was first to seize the south-western islands in May, while the bulk
of the fleet and its carrier forces rested, regrouped and prepared for the main
operation against Midway in June. The attack on the Aleutian islands,
seizure of which would safeguard Japan's northern flank, was scheduled for
the same time, in the hope of dividing American forces at a critical point in
the confrontation. The core of the Japanese strike force was provided once
again by the large aircraft carriers and the small force of highly trained naval
pilots which had inflicted so much damage at Pearl Harbor. Armed with the
highly effective 'Zeke' or Zero fighter, faster and more manoeuvrable than
anything yet available to the Allies, and with 'Long Lance' torpedoes,
