DEEP WAR
70
a more effective last stand. German forces reached the outskirts of the city,
and by 23 August had even breached part of the Soviet front to reach the
Volga north of the city, but their progress here slowed down in the face
of fierce defensive fighting. The struggle now reached its critical stage.
German forces, urged on by Hitler, expected to seize Stalingrad within
days. For them the town enjoyed a symbolic significance that went well
beyond its real strategic or economic importance. Stalin became day by day
more alarmed. For him, too, Stalingrad was a symbol.
Late in August, Stalin played one last card. He called to his Krem-
lin headquarters General Georgi Zhukov, the man who a year before
had organised the frantic defence of Moscow and brought the German
assault there finally to a halt in December 1941. On 27 August Zhukov,
commander of the Soviet western front, was appointed Deputy Supreme
Commander to Stalin. That evening he arrived at the Kremlin, where he
found Stalin and the State Defence Committee anxiously discussing the
problem of the south. Stalin offered him tea and sandwiches. While
Zhukov ate, Stalin outlined the situation: it was a matter of days before
German forces would capture Stalingrad unless a proper defence could be
organised. Zhukov was given the unenviable task of saving the city. The
following day he spent in Moscow studying Soviet dispositions. On 29
August he flew to the Stalingrad headquarters to see for himself what could
Georgi Konstantinovich Zhukov, son of a shoemaker from a small
village south of Moscow, had achieved a meteoric rise to become second to
Stalin in the Soviet war effort. He was only 45 in 1942. A bright schoolboy,
he was apprenticed to a Moscow furrier at the age of eleven. When he was
nineteen he was drafted into the Tsarist cavalry where he rose to become
an NCO by the time of the Revolution in 1917. During the Civil War he
joined the new Red Army. He, too, fought for the defence of Tsaritsyn,
where he was wounded by a grenade in fierce hand-to-hand combat. He
remained a Red Army professional following the Civil War, a cavalry
officer with a deep interest in military theory and the modern techniques of
war. He was an able, popular commander, decisive, well-organised, who
paid close attention to detail and expected the utmost from his men. Stalin
respected him, which perhaps explains why he survived the great purges of
army staff in the mid-193os. For Stalin, Zhukov epitomised the new young
generation of communist soldiers, dedicated to the cause, anxious to move
the army forward out of the cavalry age. He was an observer for Stalin of
the Civil War in Spain in 1937; in 1939 Stalin chose him to command Soviet
forces in a full-scale conflict with Japanese troops on the Mongolian-
Manchurian border at Khalkin-Gol. For his success in routing the Japanese
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
71
in a spectacular victory Stalin personally awarded him the title Hero of the
Soviet Union. He had become Stalin's military troubleshooter. 13
He was remembered by those who served with him as a tough-minded
commander, who sacked officers who lacked sufficient will to win, and also
as someone who had a clear grasp of operational realities and could remain
calm under the most adverse of circumstances. All these qualities were
required at Stalingrad. When Zhukov reviewed the situation it soon became
clear to him, as it was to Hitler's critics in the German army, that the
attacking force was greatly over-extended. During August it became evident
that German armies had very limited reserves in the south, though they
enjoyed local air superiority and an advantage in tanks. Moreover the long
flanks protecting the spearhead of the German attack were not composed of
German troops, but of Italians, Romanians and Hungarians, who were less
well-armed and less committed to Hitler's life-and-death struggle against
Marxism. Zhukov recognised almost immediately the opportunity to cut
through the weakly defended sides of the salient and isolate German forces
at Stalingrad in a giant pincer movement. But before that it was necessary to
hold on at Stalingrad. A limited number of Soviet reserves were moved to
the Stalingrad front early in September. They failed to break the German
encirclement but they did enough to prevent the Germans taking the city by
storm. During the early days of September Stalin anxiously prodded his
commanders to keep the enemy at bay at all costs. Though he wanted
Zhukov to think of a way of saving the city, because he himself could not, he
found it difficult to relinquish the habit of interference.
In the end Stalin allowed Zhukov to take the initiative. This was one of
the most important decisions of the Stalingrad struggle, for it allowed
the Deputy Supreme Commander to capitalise on his grasp of German
weaknesses. On 12 September Stalin summoned him to the Kremlin. While
he gloomily pored over maps of the front, Zhukov and the Chief of the
General Staff, Alexander Vasilevsky, stood to one side whispering about
the need to find another solution. Stalin's ears pricked up: 'What other way
out?' He sent the two men away to work out in a day a solution to Stalingrad.
At ten in the evening of 13 September they returned. Zhukov took the floor,
patiently explaining to Stalin that as long as an active defence could be
maintained at Stalingrad itself, large reserve forces could be assembled to
the north and south-east which could mount a counter-offensive against
the long-drawn-out flanks of the German attack, cutting the umbilical cord
of supplies and reinforcements, and encircling enemy forces. Zhukov
explained that the attack would have to be made against the weaker
Romanian divisions, and it would have to be made only when adequate
preparations were completed, at some point in mid-November. Stalin was
