UNPREDICTABLE VICTORY
10
desire to fight for the largely Slavic empire. When he was finally caught he
had moved to Munich. Early in 1914 he was examined by Austrian military
doctors and they found him, to his relief, unfit for service. He stayed on in
Munich in 1914, where on i August he stood in a large crowd on the
Odeonplatz listening to news of the outbreak of war. Now he was eager for
military service, and the German authorities were less circumspect about his
health. He joined the Bavarian Reserve Infantry and went to the front. He
was exhilarated by war. In December 1914 he wrote to his Munich landlady:
I have been risking my life every day, looking death straight in the eye?'
That same month he was awarded the Iron Cross, Second Class. 'It was', he
wrote, 'the happiest day of my life.'
Against all the odds Hitler survived the whole war. After his early
exuberance, Hitler later confessed to a growing fear. He did not like the
constant artillery barrage, the daily confrontation with death. He stopped
himself from going mad or from shirking his duties by what he described as a
long inner struggle. By 1916, he later wrote, 'my will was undisputed
master ... Now fate could bring on the ultimate tests without my nerves
shattering or my reason failing? His later determination to show his
willpower at moments of crisis, despite inner misgivings, surely has its roots
in the horrific experiences of the Western Front. When the war ended with
Hitler in hospital following a gas attack, the will temporarily snapped.
He was consumed in 1918 by a deep despair at German defeat. He found
the psychological shock almost unbearable, the humiliation personal. In his
struggle to come to terms with reality he reached two conclusions: defeat.
was the fault of Jews and Bolsheviks on whom a terrible revenge would one
day be wrought; and he, Adolf Hitler, was the chosen instrument of destiny
to lead the German people in the coming era of racial struggle and conquest.
The messianic complex married to the savage prejudices made Hitler a far
more dangerous and explosive force in world politics than Italy or Japan, or
even Stalin's Soviet Union. Hitler's appetite for vengeance, his unquench-
able hatreds, his powerful self-belief, all proved irrepressible. Once he had
his hands on the controls of the German state after 1933 there was nothing
else he wanted to do but to keep his tryst with fate, first through the
construction of a powerfully armed, racially-aware community embracing
all the German peoples, and then through the unavoidable struggle against
Bolshevism and the Jews.®
He revealed little of these fantastic ambitions to those around him.
Historians have been inclined to take them with a pinch of salt. There was no
clear plan, no detailed blueprint for German world power. But there did
exist an incontestable continuity from Hitler's first angry scribbled notes in
1919, through Mein Kampf, written in 1924, to the memoranda, speeches
EXPLAINING WORLD WAR II
II
and secret meetings of the 1930s. His warped view of the world was his
reason for living. By marrying his fortunes to German destiny he ceased to
be the humble, insecure veteran, the man who looked, according to one of
his close friends, like a waiter in a railway station restaurant', and instead
rubbed shoulders with Charlemagne, with Frederick Barbarossa, with
Bismarck, the heroes of the German pantheon. Hitler was Jekyll and Hyde;
at rest he appeared puffy, nondescript, socially inept, full of nervous small
talk; but in his stride, eyes ablaze, theatrical, unstoppably articulate,
intemperately self-absorbed, he imagined himself a modern Siegfried.'
[Hitler was astute enough politically to recognise that he could not
transform the world order overnight. Germany had to revive its shattered
economy; the Nazi Party needed to secure itself domestically; above all
Germany needed to rearm. By 1938 much of this was achieved. Hitler's
personal power was beyond challenge and he now exerted it to turn the
German state towards war. The first object was to build a united Germany.
In March 1938 Austria was fused with the German Reich. In May Hitler
ordered the armed forces to prepare an attack on Czechoslovakia to bring
the three million Germans living there back under German rule. Only the
unexpected intervention of Britain and France, unable to countenance an
entirely free hand for Hitler in eastern Europe, frustrated his desire for
violence. The German areas of Czechoslovakia were won instead by
negotiation. In March 1939 the rest of Czechoslovakia was swallowed up,
this time with no intervention from abroad. In April 1939 he ordered the
armed forces to prepare for another small war, this time against Poland, for
the reconquest of the German areas lost in 1919. By 1939 Germany was
poised, like Japan and Italy before her, to use war to tear up the existing
order.
Those states bent on preserving this order had a number of uninviting
options left by the late 1930S. They could give in and acquiesce in the
redrawing of the world in the hope that something might be salvaged; they
could side with the aggressors, as many smaller states did; or they could fight
to preserve the old system and their own way of life./There were circles in
London and Paris in support of each of these options. Most opinion outside
Britain and France assumed that the western failure to stop either Japan or
Italy was a tacit recognition that acquiescence made most political sense. In
truth, neither Japanese nor Italian expansion was perceived to be so vital to
western interests that they would risk open war. Germany was a different
matter. [The German threat was closer to home, and much larger.
Germany's economic size and military potential marked her out as the only
revisionist state that could seriously menace the national interest of the
other great powers. Though Nazism was disliked by much of British and
