66
DEEP WAR
effort would be brought to a halt, while the Third Reich would become all
but invincible. On 5 April he issued his Führer Directive for the new summer
campaign: a general blow to the south against the Crimea, the Don steppe
Soviet forces were caught off-guard, as they had been the summer before.
Stalin had anticipated the strategy proposed by Hitler's advisers that
German forces should renew their attack against Moscow and Leningrad
with the object of encircling and defeating the core of the Red Army. When
a German light aircraft crashed behind Soviet lines in June with full details of
the planned southern attack, Stalin saw it as a clumsy piece of mis-
information. When the British passed on details of German dispositions
culled from decrypted German signals, Stalin had no more faith in British
motives for doing so than he had displayed over their warnings in 1941 about
Barbarossa.* On 28 June German forces launched the southern campaign,
Operation 'Blue', against the weakest point of the whole Soviet front,
achieving complete surprise.
The result was almost a repeat of the previous summer. German forces
punched their way forward using a combination of large tank concentrations
and massed air power. In a matter of weeks the Red Army was driven out of
the whole area south of Kharkov and the Crimea was captured. Large
numbers of Soviet soldiers were taken prisoner, or fled eastwards in
disorder. The Black Sea port of Sebastopol held out against overwhelming
air and artillery attack until it fell on 4 July to General Erich von Manstein.
His reward was promotion to Field Marshal. The crumbling of Soviet
resistance threatened to turn into a rout. Rostov-on-Don, east of the
Crimea, fell with little resistance on 23 July. Hitler was now quartered in the
Ukraine, slightly north of the town of Vinnetsa. The summer base was given
the code-name 'Werwolf. It consisted of a small group of log huts concealed
in woods. It was here that Hitler, ill at ease in the intense, muggy heat, prey
to bouts of insomnia and soaring blood-pressure, first got news of the
remarkable progress of German forces. Despite the climate, his spirits were
restored. The victory that eluded him in 1941 was closer, the enemy
'considerably weaker' than a year before.'
Impatient for the final showdown Hitler decided at the end of July to
speed up the campaign on the southern front. He divided his forces into two
separate groups, Army Groups A and B. The first group was given the task
of plunging across the Don river in pursuit of the retreating Soviet forces and
capturing the whole of the Black Sea coast and the Caucasus region as far as
the oil cities of Maikop,
Baku and Grozny. This vast area was to be
conquered in a matter of weeks by the Ist Panzer army, under Field Marshal
von Kleist. The second group, the 6th army and 4th Panzer army, under the
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
67
command of General Paulus, was ordered to advance to Stalingrad, destroy
Soviet forces on the Volga, and proceed rapidly down the river to Astrakhan
cutting all communication between the north and south. Stalingrad became
for the first time a primary target. Its 'early destruction' Hitler considered
'especially important'.
In almost all postwar accounts of the German failure in the Soviet Union,
this decision to divide German forces in pursuit of distant economic targets
in the late summer of 1942 is regarded as the decisive misjudgement on
Hitler's part. It is easy to see why he was tempted to make it/ German forces
won large areas of territory very quickly in June and July. Soviet forces were
clearly in disarray: In North Africa Rommel was pursuing the British forces
back into Egypt. A swift strike through the Caucasus opened up the prospect
of German domination of the whole Middle East. A quick victory at
Stalingrad opened up the prospect of sweeping the other way, too, in a vast
outflanking movement north-eastwards behind Moscow. Hitler seems not to
have sensed that he was taking a gamble or risk in the summer of 1942, but
was once again confident that his amateur strategy would win him more than
he would get by following the stolid advice of the professionals.?
His military staff saw things in a far more sober light. They could see little
sense in simply sending forces off to occupy open steppe against an enemy
that had so far committed only a fraction of his forces to the southern con-
test. On 23 July, the day Hitler issued his directive for the new offensive,
his Chief-of-Staff, General Franz Halder, complained to his diary that
Hitler's misreading of the enemy was 'both ludicrous and dangerous' The
easy summer victories were achieved against weak forces, which eluded
defeat by pulling back across the vast spaces of central Russia. The more
German forces pushed forward
dispersed they became. A long, vulnerable flank developed along the whole
northern wing of the offensive, which was defended mainly by troops of
Germany's allies, Hungary, Romania and Italy.
The supply trains had to
follow with the fuel and ammunition over long, hot trails, with poor roads
and rail routes constantly harassed by Soviet partisans. Hitler would have
none of it. He berated his commanders for timidity,
even defeatism, and
sacked those who disagreed. Events bore out his optimism. The ist Panzer
army burst on to the northern Caucasian plain, sweeping through its rich
grainlands and abundant orchards; within twelve days it had penetrated
350 miles to the very foothills of the Caucasus mountains. Here German and
Italian Alpine forces, trained for mountain warfare, began the slow ascent to
the mountain passes. Meanwhile Paulus's armies moved steadily eastwards,
clearing Soviet troops from the Don steppe and forcing them back to
the approaches to Stalingrad. By 19 August the first assault on the city
