158
ALONG A GOOD ROAD . . •
suffused by a subdued, unbearable tension. 'I never want again to go
through a time like the present one,' Brooke confided to his diary. 'The
cross-Channel invasion is just eating into my heart. I wish to God we could
start and have done with it.' Bored in his fictitious headquarters, Patton
chafed miserably at the bit. 'This waiting is hard on the nerves,' he wrote to
his wife. 'I must go and exercise!'60 If it was hard for subordinates it was
certainly excruciating for Eisenhower, who lived out the last week in a
bored, fatalistic cloud. He played bridge and badminton; he suddenly took
up sketching and then abandoned it. He developed a ringing in one ear, and
sore eyes brought on by the strain of reading. His impatience was evident.
There was little for him to do after the months of planning, except to give the
final order to go. This was a responsibility that bore down on him more and
more as the final days approached. No one, Eisenhower wrote in his own
diary, could understand 'the intensity of the burdens' facing a supreme
commander. "1
The agony of suspense reached a cruel climax in the last few days. On I
June the French Resistance, and Sergeant Walter Reichling of the 15th
Army Communications Reconnaissance Post, heard the first stanzas of the
tell-tale poem broadcast by the BBC at 9 p.m. The 15th army went over to
the alert, but not the forces farther west. On 2 June Eisenhower prepared his
Order for the Day from his new field headquarters just outside Portsmouth.
Then, after weeks of clear, warm days, the weather sharply deteriorated on
the 3rd. Eisenhower had always known that this was a risk, but there was
nothing to be done about it. The outlook was gloomy. There were anti-
cyclones over Greenland and the Azores; across the Atlantic, an easterly
depression was already bringing rain and heavy cloud. At four o'clock in the
morning on 4 June the commanders met with the senior meteorologist, John
Stagg. He predicted low cloud cover and a force six wind. Eisenhower knew
that the whole enterprise depended on air support and steady seas. Neither
could be relied upon with this forecast. With great reluctance he postponed
D-Day from the 5th to the 6th. Ships already at sea were recalled. The crews
and soldiers on board now had to endure 24 hours sitting at anchor in high
seas, their adrenalin evaporated. 62
By the evening the winds were calmer and the cloud more broken, but
the outlook was still poor. At 9.15 Eisenhower reassembled his comman-
ders and the unfortunate weather man. Stagg spoke as wind and rain beat
at the mess room windows. He detected an improvement, broken cloud
and calmer winds for 48 hours. Eisenhower canvassed the views of his
commanders one by one. The airmen were hesitant. Montgomery was keen
to start. But Ramsay's voice was decisive. The navy had only another thirty
minutes to give the orders, or risk a postponement for 48 hours, beyond the
The actua
dack
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
159
period of favourable tide. Eisenhower told the navy to start regardless, and
asked them all to meet him again at four in the morning. He awoke at 3-30 to
gales and driving rain. The group was tired and in drooping spirits. But Stagg
had good news: the better weather was a certainty. As if by some divine
hand, the rain outside abruptly ceased. Eisenhower thought for a few
moments. The others remained silent. It was a moment of supreme drama.
All at once Eisenhower spoke quietly but distinctly: 'O.K., let's go.63 The
room cleared in seconds, leaving Eisenhower alone.
A strategy that had taken years to agree, and months to prepare, had
almost been brought to naught by the elements. There was still a great risk.
The following day the Supreme Commander sat down to pen in advance a
communiqué announcing the failure of the whole enterprise, which he
solemnly placed in his wallet. He no longer had any power to halt the task
force. From all around the coast 2,700 ships moved to pre-arranged
assembly points in the Channel, from where they were guided along five
pathways cleared through the minefields. Though it was not an order, the
men spoke in whispers. While the ships ploughed through heavy seas the
paratroop divisions prepared to fly out. For want of anything else to do,
Eisenhower rode out to visit the loist airborne division as it embarked in
the transport aircraft. He waited until the last plane took off, then returned
to bed. For the first hours of D-Day Eisenhower slept.
The gloomy weather had an unexpected silver lining. German com-
manders relaxed at the sight of heavy rain and cloud. On 4 June the naval
command in Paris reported that invasion could not be considered imminent.
The regular naval patrols that might have betrayed increased Allied activity
were cancelled on the 5th, so poor was the weather.
Rommel took the
opportunity for a short rest. On the 4th he drove back to Germany, where he
arrived in time for his wife's birthday, on the oth. The junior commanders of
the 7th army in Normandy were on their way to an exercise arranged at
Rennes on the same date. 4 Only Sergeant Reichling stood between the
Allies and complete surprise. On the evening of the 5th he duly intercepted
the final lines of Verlaine. His seniors contacted Field Marshal Rundstedt's
headquarters in Paris, only to be told that no enemy would be so foolish as to
broadcast invasion over the radio. Fifteenth army stayed on alert, but the
rest of Army Group B, including the six divisions directly in the line of Allied
fire, received no warning until paratroopers began their graceful descent on
to French soil in the early hours of the morning of 6 June.
It still took time to realise what was happening. Seventh army head-
quarters had to piece together numerous reports of airborne landings to get
any coherent picture. Among local German garrisons there was fear
bordering on panic. The fighting was confused and sporadic. At the vital
