224
A WAR OF ENGINES
armoured division was overhauled. The number of tanks was reduced to two
regiments from three, and a regiment of motorised infantry with three
battalions of self-propelled artillery was added. With the addition of
engineers and service battalions, the new division was actually much more
like its German counterpart, a self-supporting combined-arms unit with
considerable tactical flexibility. However, the American division had the
advantage that all its infantry was carried in armoured half-tracks, and all its
artillery was motorised. In addition the unit had two Combat Commands, A
and B, which allowed the division to develop smaller combined-arms
combat forces capable of fighting on their own. This gave the whole
structure even more flexibility. Each division had 375 tanks and 759 other
tracked and armoured vehicles; the first Panzer divisions had had 328 and
97.39
The initial purpose was to use the armoured divisions as the decisive shock
force, like the Panzer armies of 1940, but experience in the early fighting in
Tunisia and Italy, where the terrain was largely unsuitable for the massed
deployment of armour, brought a final reform of the way in which the US
army deployed its forces. Instead of fighting with two armies, one formed of
the heavily armoured tank divisions, one based on infantry, the two were
fused together to create, in effect, one vast Panzer army, with the resources
more evenly spread. The number of armoured divisions planned was
reduced from 61 to sixteen, and they were integrated with the general army
command structure. They had a larger complement of tanks to allow them to
be used in pursuit and exploitation,
but were otherwise indistinguishable
from the regular army divisions, all of which were allocated a battalion of
tanks and self-propelled artillery and were fully motorised. The object was
to fight in combination, tanks, artillery and infantry each supporting
the other. As with the Soviet system a large reserve of tank battalions
could be allocated to critical points in the battle. The breakout from St Lô
was a good example of the system at work - an initial thrust by heavily armed
and mobile infantry divisions to create a protected channel through which
the armoured divisions could move, to exploit the fracturing of the enemy
line.
( The
American
decision
to
produce a
completely mechanised and
motorised army, rather than a heavily armed core, was made possible by the
generous supply of vehicles from American industry and the very large pool
of drivers and mechanics available at home. America was the most heavily
motorised of the major combatants. In 1937 she produced over 4•8 million
vehicles; Germany produced 331,000, Italy 71,000, Japan 26,000. For every
thousand Americans there were well over two hundred motorcars and
trucks; for every thousand Germans only sixteen; for every thousand
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
225
Japanese there was less than one. 40 America's motor-car culture helped to
compensate for the lack of a conscript army. Both air force and tank force
enjoyed high levels of serviceability. Standardisation of design - the original
five tank engines were reduced to just one type for ease of maintenance -
allowed interchangeability of parts and rapid repair and redeployment of
damaged vehicles. American forces were backed up by a formidable supply
organisation based on sturdy purpose-built army trucks. These were
produced in such quantity that there was little need to resort to civilian
requisitioning, whereas the German army was forced to denude the home
economy of motor traffic. During 1944 America produced almost 600,000
army trucks. German industry turned out just 88,000, against losses between
January and August of well over 100,000. 41
The American army became in two years the most modern army in the
world. Its air force followed the same course. Rather than concentrate on
the single role of providing air support for the mechanised armies, the army
air corps under General Hap Arnold began to plan in 1940 a multi-role air
force, capable of strategic bombing, of large-scale air transport, of air
defence and tactical air support? Aircraft were widely understood to explain
Germany's success in Europe. 'Air power', announced Secretary for War
Stimson at the height of the Battle of Britain,
'has decided the fate of
nations; Germany with her powerful air armadas has vanquished one people
after another. '42 American air intelligence exaggerated German air strength
in 1940 by a factor of ten. Roosevelt needed little persuasion that the air
force should be given everything it wanted. A new generation of bombers,
fighters and fighter-bombers - the Flying Fortress and Liberator heavy-
bombers, the B-29 Super Fortress introduced in June 1944 in the Pacific war,
the Lockheed Lightning fighter-bomber, and the Mustang and Thunderbolt
fighters - were all at
the forefront of aviation technology, and
were
constantly refined as the war went on.
They were produced in greater
numbers than were needed, with generous spares and additional engines, to
match what it was believed Germany was producing. 43
The development of a battlefield air force, designed to win local air
superiority and to help push the ground forces forward, was a natural
adjunct to the build-up of large mechanised armies. In 1941 the American
air force began to experiment with close-support tactics. The results were
very mixed, for there was no means for local army commanders to
communicate directly with strike aircraft as there was in the German
system. As a result air units responded slowly to demands for front-line
assistance; messages had to be routed through major command posts, which
was time-consuming and tactically ineffective. It was the system used by the
RAF in France 1940 which American forces largely borrowed. When it was
