114
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
known by the codeword 'Gee', was introduced. It was one of a number of
target-finding devices hastily developed by British scientists in the early
years of war. Its range was short - barely as far as the Ruhr- and on the first
raid when it was used, against Essen on the night of 8 March, the target was
missed altogether. Gee did not improve bombing accuracy very greatly, but
it did allow Harris to concentrate his force? Bombers no longer had to run
the gauntlet of the Kammhuber Line in vulnerable isolation - with the help
of Gee they swept across the German coast in a great stream, swamping
German defences, and arriving, in most cases, all together over the target
area.
[Harris himself made a number of operational improvements He insisted
that bombers should carry a specially trained bomb-aimer to relieve the
harassed navigator of this extra burden. He began to organise a group of
elite crews - 'Pathfinders' - to lead the attacking force and to illuminate the
target for the bombers that followed. But he realised that Bomber
Command in 1942 was still in its infancy. He saw 1942 as an experimental
year, until the force could be provided with large numbers of heavy aircraft
and the more effective navigation aids which he knew were in the pipeline.
Without this equipment Bomber Command had little chance of redeeming
its tarnished reputation.
One great advantage Harris enjoyed over his predecessors was that in
1942 Bomber Command was no longer fighting alone? During the course of
that year the United States began to organise its own air forces in Britain
with the object of hitting hard at Germany as soon as the force was trained
and assembled. This was easier said than done. It took months after Pearl
Harbor to agree a strategy for Anglo-American forces. The initial aim of
setting up a huge force of heavy-bombers had to be modified on account of
the more urgent demands for equipment in the Pacific and North Africa. Not
until June did General Carl Spaatz arrive in London to set up the 8th air
force, and it was by then assumed that all the bombers would do would be to
soften up Germany before ground forces stormed across the English
Channel in the following spring. Spaatz was followed only slowly by men and
machines. For much of 1942 and 1943 the 8th air force relied on British
station equipment, radar and communications. The main bomber force had
to be flown from the United States across the inhospitable Arctic, first to
Goose Green in northern Canada, then in small groups to Greenland, then
Iceland and finally to northern Scotland. One-fifteenth of the force was lost
in the icy waters and glacial landscape before it even reached Britain. By the
end of August 1942 only 119 bombers had reached their destination.
The 8th air force, for all the painful delays in its establishment, was a
blood transfusion for the bombing campaign. It was not just that American
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
I15
airmen, brash, confident, eager for combat, brought a breath of fresh air to a
stale campaign. It was also that they brought with them the enthusiastic
conviction that bombing, whatever its limitations hitherto, was the answer
to destroying German power. Unlike the British, American airmen believed
that the destruction of Germany's vital industries, her transport system and
her fuel supply could be precisely calculated in terms of aircraft despatched
and bomb tonnages dropped. The source of that conviction was the
technology available. American bombing forces were composed largely of
the Boeing B-17 'Flying Fortress' which had been developed as early as 1935
It was robust, had a high ceiling and long range and was so heavily armed
that it was assumed that it could fly in daylight and defend itself effectively
on the wing. Flying by day meant a better view of the target; the use of the
Norden bomb-sight, which the American air force refused to pass on to the
RAF, increased accuracy even more. Bombing tests in the United States
demonstrated not quite the ability to hit a 'pickle-barrel' that some
American airmen claimed, but were more than satisfactory. 38 Armed with
equipment for
accurate,
daylight bombardment, the 8th air
force
deliberately distinguished their practice of 'precision bombing' of individual
targets from the more random efforts of the Royal Air Force. The choice of
daylight tactics would prevent the two forces from treading on each other's
toes: the RAF bombed industrial areas by night, the 8th air force would pick
off factories and railway stations and oil depots by day.]
In practice it was a long time before the American air forces could do
anything of the sort. Though their learning curve was shorter than Bomber
Command's, it had to be endured. American bombers launched their first
attack in Europe on 17 August 1942, against the giant railway marshalling
yard at Rouen, in northern France. Twelve aircraft took off, with the
commanding general of 8th Air Force Bomber Command, Ira Eaker, along
for the ride. They were heavily escorted by four squadrons of RAF Spitfire
fighters. All the bombers reached the target, and approximately half the
bombs fell within the target area. All twelve aircraft returned to base. The
only casualties were the bombardier and navigator of one aircraft who were
showered with glass when the nose of their plane was struck by a pigeon. 39
For the rest of the year the 8th air force confined itself to attacks against
French targets which were within range of American fighters. This was
however a poor preparation for more distant attacks over Germany, where
there could be no fighter cover, and where anti-aircraft artillery was much
more densely concentrated. The issue of how well the B-17 could defend
itself was hardly proven from the French attacks. On one occasion, the
attack on Lille on 9 October 1942, the B-17 crews claimed to have destroyed
up to 102 enemy fighters. Since this was 15 per cent of German air strength in
