34
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . . .
fuelled with liquid oxygen to give them a speed and range unrivalled by any
other navy, the Japanese approached the coming battles with a dangerously
arrogant sense of invulnerability.
[On the other side of the Pacific Japanese victories produced a frenzied
response, part fury, part fear. The American public, used to regarding
the Japanese as their racial and cultural inferiors, was suddenly faced with
an enemy apparently unstoppable, whose military skills bordered on the
magical. The thirst for vengeance was unquenchable. 27 This posed difficul-
ties for Roosevelt and the military chiefs. Ever since 1940 the assumption
in Washington was that Germany was the chief enemy; Roosevelt had
reiterated to Churchill at Placentia Bay the commitment to fight 'Germany
first' if America found herself at war. Japanese aggression challenged this
commitment. It was not simply a question of satisfying the bloodlust of
ordinary Americans, powerful lobby though it was. The real issue was the
imminent collapse of America's position throughout the Pacific basin. This
required an urgent response. Admiral Ernest King, appointed Commander-
in-Chief of the US navy in 1941, pleaded for the priorities to be reversed,
Japan first, then Germany In the end Roosevelt settled on a compromise:
Britain was given a guarantee that the defeat of Hitler was still the primary
ambition, but the Pacific got the lion's share of naval and army resources. By
the middle of 1942 there were almost 400,000 American soldiers in the
Pacific theatre; against Germany and Italy there were only sixty thousand 28)
King had another bee in his bonnet: he did not want to share the Pacific war
with the British, against whose naval ambitions he displayed a powerful
prejudice. There was little the Royal Navy could do in the Pacific with
unlimited commitments elsewhere, and in March Churchill agreed to divide
oceanic responsibilities, America to operate in the Pacific, Britain in the
Indian Ocean, and both states in uneasy condominium in the Atlantic.
[In the early months of 1942 American strategy crystallised into a single
objective, to keep some kind of military foothold in the southern Pacific as a
springboard for a future offensive. Australia was the obvious choice and it
was here that the American commander General Douglas Macarthur,
rudely
expelled from the Philippines, gathered together the ragged
remnants of the retreating armies for the desperate task of halting the
Japanese onslaught. On 30 March Roosevelt appointed him Supreme
Commander, South-west Pacific. At the same time King appointed Admiral
Chester Nimitz Commander-in-Chief, Pacific Ocean Area. On these two
men fell the responsibility for keeping open the lifeline from America;
Macarthur, flamboyant, ambitious, a jealous guardian of army responsi-
bilities, and Nimitz a more modest personality, a man of method and good
sense, a solid organiser.
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
35
Both men could see that Japan was unlikely to stop after the first flush of
victory. By mid-April Nimitz had reliable intelligence that enemy forces
were once again on the move south towards Australia, almost certainly
intending to seize Port Moresby on the south-east coast of New Guinea, a
short flight from Queensland, and probably to take the remaining necklace
of islands bordering the Coral Sea. On 16 April Nimitz despatched the
aircraft carriers Lexington and Yorktown from Hawaii to rendezvous with a
motley assembly of smaller warships to form a task force to oppose the
Japanese assault. The Japanese moved down in four groups, organised
according to a complex schedule of operations. There were two invasion
forces, one for Port Moresby, the other for the ring of islands, stretching
from the Solomons to Ocean Island. They were accompanied by a covering
force of larger warships. The main striking force, built around the large
aircraft carriers Shokaku and Zuikaku, steered farther to the south-east,
to try to catch American ships in a pincer movement. The whole assault
was to take four days, from 3 May to 7 May.29
Japanese soldiers had already landed on Tulagi in the Solomon Islands on
3 May when the American task force, commanded by Rear Admiral Frank
Fletcher, sailed into the Coral Sea. No stretch of water more deserved its
name. Calmer and much bluer than the ocean, the sea was ringed with coral
Bismarck
Rabaatoe
, Sea
NEW BRITAINS
covering force
Lag
solomon
invasion forc
Port Moresby
NEW
Sea
GUINEA
Tulagi occupation force
carier strike force (Takag)
Solomon Islands
Tulagi®
(3 May)
Port
Moresby
shoay)
Coral
Se a
Lexington sal
(8 May)
Chokakl
attacked
(8 May)
US carrier force (Fletcher)
Neasho
(7 May)
KEY:
Shio sunk
Battle of the Coral Sea, 5-7 May 1942
