280
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . •
concert of the Berlin Philharmonic, at which they played Wagner's Twilight
of the Gods. The piece was Speer's choice, an epitaph for the regime. When
he returned from the concert he found Hitler in a state of agitated euphoria.
'The war isn't lost,' he told Speer. 'Roosevelt is dead!'106 For weeks
beforehand Hitler had been repeating the story of Frederick the Great,
whose imminent defeat in the Seven Years' War was suddenly averted at the
last moment by the death of the Tsarina Elizabeth, and a switch in Russian
allegiance. For some months Nazi propaganda had been making much of
alleged divisions between the western Allies and the Soviet Union. Hitler
and Goebbels were gambling on persuading the west to join Germany in a
crusade against Bolshevism. Goebbels hurried back to Berlin from a visit to
the front when he heard the news from America. He was convinced that the
new President, Truman, unlike the 'Jewish' Roosevelt, feared communism
more than Nazism. Hitler and he together drafted an appeal to the soldiers
of the east to hold the approaches to Berlin at all costs. With the death of
the greatest war criminal of all times', German soldiers should expect "a
turning-point in the war'. 107 It was all delusion. A day later all German
armies in the Ruhr surrendered, and Marshal Zhukov launched the assault
on the German capital that took the Red Army to Hitler's bunker in a little
over two weeks.
Hitler was right to detect serious strains in the coalition by 1945, but he
was wrong about their nature. There was no disagreement about the defeat
of Germany, only about the consequences of that defeat. Stalin, it is true,
nursed growing suspicions about his allies as news filtered through of efforts
by German soldiers and politicians to reach a separate peace with the west.
But there was no danger here; there was nothing German leaders could offer
that was remotely attractive to Britain and America, least of all the prospect
of an anti-communist crusade Marchall's 'impossible unity' was maintained
through to unconditional surrender on 8 May. The willingness to fight in a
common coalition for so long Marshall regarded as the single greatest
achievement of the war. 108
Hitler, too, thought that Allied unity would not last. His own relations
with his closest allies were limited and secretive. He did not share his
strategy or his military thinking with anyone. Alliances were made and
unmade. When Ribbentrop was presented with a casket by his staff
containing all the alliances he had concluded as Foreign Minister, it was
found that almost every one had been broken. When Hitler heard he is
said to have laughed until the tears streamed down his face. Hitler found
it difficult to imagine what cause had been sufficiently powerful to bind
together such unlikely comrades-in-arms as capitalist west and communist
east for so long. His own collaboration with the Soviet Union between 1939
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
281
and 1941 began to turn sour after a year; in less than two years the two allies
were at war. The only explanation Hitler could find for the survival of the
coalition was a 'Jewish conspiracy' that married together the forces of
Mammon and the forces of world revolution to bring about Germany's
collapse. 109 It does not seem to have occurred to him that he himself was
‹ The different attitudes to alliance reflected the deeper contrast in the way
the two sides ran their war efforts. The Allied systems were centralised, *
unified and coordinated. They were run by a central staff with wide powers,
but they all operated with a good degree of delegated responsibility. Each
relied on leaders with solid professional and managerial skills who actually
ran the war effort from day to day. Though each national leader could bring
considerable influence to bear
on
the system, they waged what were
essentially wars by committee, with the burden of duties spread over a wide
administrative area. As the war went on military responsibilities devolved
more to the professionals. No one could pretend that the system worked
perfectly, but it was designed around checks and balances that reduced the
element of arbitrary will or personal misjudgement, even in the case of the
Soviet dictatorship./
Hitler's system was almost the exact opposite in every respect. Military
affairs were dominated by the will of one man who considered himself to be a
modern Charlemagne. There was no central staff to run the war effort.
There was no unity of command, no formal structure to oversee military
operations that united army, navy and air force around the same table. The
idea of a committee war flew in the face of everything Hitler understood by
the term leader. As the war went on Hitler delegated less rather than more.
His personal role in the war effort was enlarged rather than diminished; so
many responsibilities were
there that no one, not even a leader more
rational and more discriminating than Hitler, could have mastered them.
Hitler dragged the military system and his own people behind him by the
sheer force and momentum of his neurotic personality, and the terrible
vengeance he wrought on anyone who crossed him. If Hitler helps to explain
why Germany lost the war, he is also the reason why German forces
continued to fight long past any prospect of victory. At the end of the war the
tank general Heinz Guderian was asked by his American captors to reflect
on the lessons of command on the German side. Guderian had seen Hitler at
close quarters. He concluded, predictably enough, that the essential feature
in any war was unity of command under an agency that enjoyed complete
authority 'over the whole military establishment', but one that was run not
by the head of state but by a 'trained professional', a 'military man', 110
Dictatorship on its own was not enough.
