214
A WAR OF ENGINES
2,500-3,000 aircraft were built up. The Soviet Union ended the war with
over eleven thousand frontline aircraft.
There were a host of smaller changes which together transformed the
fighting power of Soviet airmen. A new generation of simple but technically
advanced aircraft was introduced - the Yak-9, Lagg-3 and La-s fighters, and
the formidable Sturmovik II-2 dive-bomber, with its tank-busting rockets.
They proved capable of regular upgrading, which avoided disruption to the
assembly lines, and by 1944 they could outperform the latest Me-109 and
Fw-190 fighters. The models were few in number, and relatively easy to main-
tain. Novikov overhauled the rear services for aviation, providing teams of
mobile repair units, improving the building and organisation of a host of
small, temporary airfields, and insisting on high standards of camouflage and
deception, so that Soviet aircraft would never experience again the pre-emptive
destruction of 1941. Radar was gradually introduced; dummy aerodromes
were constructed; aircraft in forward areas were hidden in woods and farm
buildings.
The Soviet air force of 1943 was an effective fighting force,
unrecognisable from the clumsy and incompetent instrument of 1941. * By the
time of the Battle of Kursk the reforms were largely completed. After a week
or so of fighting, Soviet aircraft built up a superiority of ten to one on some parts
of the battlefield. For the first time it was the turn of German soldiers to scan
the skies in desperate search of friendly craft.
The pace of modernisation never slackened thereafter. The Soviet Union
emerged in 1945 with the sinews of a military super-power in place. Some
of this was the fruit of Allied assistance. The United States motorised not
only its own army but the Red Army too. Under 'Lend-Lease' war aid agree-
ments America supplied over half a million vehicles - 77,900 jeeps, 151,000
light trucks, and over 200,000 Studebaker army trucks, the backbone of
the Soviet motorised supply system. 15
American aid also made possible
the revolution in radio communications by supplying 956,000 miles of tele-
phone cable, 35,000 radio stations and 380,000 field telephones. l During
1943 the Soviet air force concentrated on improving radio control of its
aircraft, and radio communication between ground and air forces. Radio
control centres were set up about a mile and a half behind the front, enab-
ling aircraft to be directed quickly and flexibly to help the ground forces,
or to attack enemy aircraft and air bases. In the main, modernisation and
reform were driven by the sharp spur of necessity. The Soviet solution to the
crisis of 1941 was deceptively easy: tanks and aircraft were organised into
large, flexible offensive forces, backed by huge reserves of robust and effec-
tive weapons. Mistakes were still made, and Soviet losses remained high
throughout the war, but enough was done during 1942 to erode the margin
between the two sides in military performance and military technology.
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
215
The German experience on the eastern front was almost exactly the
reverse. German forces started the war on the Soviet Union with over
3,600 tanks; by the summer of 1943 they had only two-thirds this number.
In 1941 the Luftwaffe fielded 2,500 aircraft; in the summer of 1944 there
were 1,700 aircraft along the entire eastern front, including a mere three
hundred bombers
and three hundred fighters.!' The vaunted
Panzer
divisions became primarily defensive units: the number of tanks and
vehicles in each division declined steadily over the course of the conflict,
though German production of tanks in 1944 was more than ten times
higher than in the first year of war. Panzer divisions started the war each
with an established strength of 328 tanks; at Kursk they started the battle
with an average of 73; in March 1945 their average was 54.18 Though
German forces fought with high tactical skills throughout the war, they
experienced a progressive 'demodernisation'.
There were extenuating circumstances. The slow development of mass-
production has already been observed. By 1944 German forces had to be
spread thinly over three main fronts. Bombing contributed a good deal to
the dislocation of the German military supply system. But the process of
demodernisation was already evident in 1942, when the main theatre of
operation was the eastern front, and bombing had barely begun. The
explanation for the growing technical weakness of German forces lies with
Germany rather than the Allies, and it goes back to the summer of 1941
when Panzer forces raced with apparent ease across the Soviet steppe.)
The army that Hitler assembled to crush Bolshevism was essentially two
armies, one small modernised army based on tanks and trucks, and a vast
old-fashioned army still reliant on rail and horse. The first contained an
expanded number of Panzer divisions; 21 of them had been created by
parcelling out the stock of tanks in smaller packets than before. The
second comprised 119 divisions moving at the pace of the foot-soldier and
the horse and cart. This was the result of a conscious decision taken in the
1930s to neglect the modernisation of a large part of the army in favour of
developing a hard-core of heavily-armed mobile divisions.
The split was
maintained in the Barbarossa plan. The Panzer armies were established as
entirely self-contained forces, carrying the fuel and ammunition required
to take them 400 miles into the Soviet Union. This strategy avoided trying
to supply the mobile forces through a poor road and rail system clogged with
the slow infantry army behind. It was managed only by starving the war
effort elsewhere of fuel and vehicles. Some 600,000 vehicles were mo-
bilised for the invasion, many of them in the Panzer armies; the rest of the
army made do with some 700,000 horses.l9
In reality even the modernised core of the army was weaker than it
