196
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
equipment to provision America's new armies throughout 1943, and to
do so with weapons of high quality and standard construction. 41
The ultimate challenge was to produce an aircraft by the same method
used to mass-produce a car. The consensus was that it could not be done.
This was a technical challenge too great to resist for that apostle of progress,
Henry Ford. He was the archetype of the unschooled heroic entrepreneur of
American legend, a man whose faith in the possibilities of the machine age
was boundless and uncritical. Early in 1941 the Ford company was invited to
produce parts for the
new B-24 Liberator bomber being built by the
Consolidated aircraft plant in San Diego. When Ford's general manager,
Charles Sorensen, visited Consolidated he was appalled at the modesty
of their plans and the primitive methods of construction. That evening,
8 January, Sorensen sketched out the plan of a plant to mass-produce
bombers. It was the start of one of the most famous projects of the American
war effort. The army was lukewarm about the idea when Sorensen and Ford
suggested it a few days later, but Ford persisted: he would either produce the
whole aircraft in a purpose-built plant, or nothing at all. The army
reluctantly concurred and by March 194I work began on the factory
foundations.42
The site chosen was dictated by the sheer dimensions of the plan and the
need to have an adjacent airfield for aircraft testing. In the open country
south of Detroit Ford had bought some flat, tree-covered farmland. A small
creek meandered across it till it hit the river Huron. It was known as Willow
Run. The name was adopted for the project itself. Within months the quiet
rural vista was transformed into a sprawling, noisy building site over 900
acres in extent. The centrepiece was the main assembly hall, 'the most
enormous room in the history of man', a vast L-shaped construction that
eventually housed an assembly line 5,450 feet long, and covered an area of
67 acres. Ford's aim was to break down the construction of the aircraft in
such a way that the components could be fed into a continuous moving
assembly line. With a car this could be done relatively easily, for it averaged
fifteen thousand parts; but the B-24 had thirty thousand different parts, and a
total of 1,550,000 parts in all. To mass-produce something so complex was to
push mechanised production to its very limits. 43
The project was so difficult that it almost collapsed. Constant delays in the
supply of tools and labour, pressure from the army to stick to building the
components, the erratic intervention of Ford himself who insisted on
re-siting the whole plant when he discovered that the boundary of a
Democrat county ran through the complex, all conspired to hold up the
promised supply of one bomber an hour. While Ford struggled with Willow
Run, the 'enormous room' was even eclipsed by a room yet bigger, a vast
ECONOMIES AT WAR
197
plant for Oerlikon anti-aircraft guns built by the Chrysler Corporation in
Chicago. But Ford's technical persistence paid off. By 1943
over ten
produced, reaching a rate of one bomber every 63 minutes. Willow Run, for
all its problems, came to symbolise all the self-confidence and drive of
American industry. Looking across the giant assembly hall was like gazing at
a scene from Fritz Lang's futuristic movie, Metropolis. The glare of the
machinery and polished aluminium and the clouds of dust made it
impossible to see its whole length. At one end four moving lines carried the
core of the aircraft; the four merged to two as the aircraft took shape; 1 mile
from the start there was just one line of completed bombers, fed out through
a cavernous opening on to the airfield beyond. It was, observed the aviation
hero, Charles Lindbergh, 'the Grand Canyon of the mechanised world'. 44
Long before Willow Run redeemed its author's ambitions the rest of
American industry turned to modern methods. Productivity in the aircraft
industry doubled between 1941 and 1944. By 1944 each American aircraft
worker produced more than twice his German counterpart, four times the
output of a Japanese worker. The war revived America's flagging enterprise
culture. After a decade of depression and high unemployment,
both
business and labour profited from war. The contrast not only with the Soviet
Union but with every other warring population was striking. In America
there was enough left over from the booming war effort to provide civilians
with supplies of consumer goods and food in generous quantities. Rationing
was limited and loosely applied, except for petrol. Wages boomed, with an
average increase, even allowing for price rises, of 70 per cent across the war
years. As the nine million unemployed were absorbed into the workforce,
and women - fourteen million in all - took up paid work, family earnings
rose even faster. For millions of Americans who had lived on state relief and
handouts in the 193os the wartime economy was a windfall. The lure of high
wages drew almost four million workers from the poorer south to the boom
cities of the west coast, Michigan and the north-east.
That haunting
photographic image of the 193os, the Madonna of the Depression, gave way
to the propaganda ideal of war-working womanhood, Rosie the Riveter
(though given the changes in work practices Wanda the Welder might have
been more appropriate). In reality the high demand for labour and the
unwillingness of the government to regiment the workforce led to high
labour turnover, and a strike movement that produced almost five thousand
strikes in 1944.45 The migration of labour exacerbated racial tension, and
strained the housing market. But compared with the hugely deprived Soviet
workforce and the bombed and bullied workforces in Germany and Japan,
American labour was able to work without danger, well-fed and well-shod.
