146
ALONG A GOOD ROAD • • •
strength was ashore to break out from the bridgehead and push the German
armies back across France. 25
( The decision to expand the invasion force made unavoidable a further
postponement. The extra divisions and the wider front meant more landing
craft and larger supplies. So narrow was the margin in the supply of vessels
for amphibious assault that the necessary craft could only be secured by
waiting for an extra month for the next consignment from American
dockyards, and by abandoning the idea of a subsidiary assault on southern
France which Stalin had warmly supported at Teheran. Instead of a pincer
movement, the Allies had to settle for a frontal assault. The southern attack,
codenamed 'Anvil', was put on ice, though not terminated. On 1 February
the two staffs agreed on a date of 31 May for the invasion, subject to the state
of the tides and the moon. These were small but critical considerations.
There were only a small number of days in the early summer when adequate
moonlight for the crossing coincided with low-tide at dawn to permit the
landing craft to negotiate the many obstacles thrown across the beaches by
the enemy. The ideal dates were easily calculated. The nearest to 31 May
were the 5th, oth and 7th of June, but the first of these dates provided
optimum conditions. When in May Eisenhower had to make a final decision
on the date he chose as D-Day S June, with H-Hour, the very moment of
attack, at 5.58 in the morning. 26
It was a plan of attack fraught with difficulty. An army of officials and
officers, more than 350,000 men and women, laboured behind the scenes on
routine issues of supply and recruitment. The organisation of training and
troop deployment across 3,000 miles of ocean constituted a major feat of
logistics. Dull though it seems on paper, the work of the long tail of non-
combatants behind the Allied fist was vital to the success of the operation.
Between January and June 1944 almost 9 million tons of supplies were
shipped across the Atlantic, and some 800,000 troops, while almost four and
a half million soldiers waited at bases in the United States? But the critical
issues remained those of operations rather than organisation. Allied leaders
recognised that the margin between success and failure was slim indeed, and
would rest in the end on three factors: the ability to maintain the momentum
of supply to the Allied beachhead before capture of a major port on the
French coast; the ability to restrict the build-up of German reserves for a
powerful counter-thrust; and finally the necessity, forlorn though the
prospect seemed at first, of keeping hidden from the enemy the direction
and timing of the invasion.
The first of these was essentially a naval matter. Although the primary
object of Overlord was to move a large army to fight in France, it relied for
success on the movement of a vast armada of shipping, and the regular
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
147
supply of seaborne troops and equipment for weeks after the initial landing.
Indeed the whole campaign could only be contemplated by major naval
powers. For all the attention lavished by historians on the land battle in
Normandy, Overlord was a classic example of Admiral Mahan's famous
dictum that the sea rules the land. The naval operation was given a different
code-name, 'Neptune', and was placed under the command of a British
officer, Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay. He had no illusions about what lay
ahead: it was to be 'the largest and most complicated operation ever
undertaken'. His task was to marshal and load almost seven thousand
vessels with men and supplies, move them from around the British coastline
to pre-arranged assembly points in the Channel, and then to shepherd them
through marine pathways cleared of mines towards an enemy shoreline in
unpredictable seas. 28 Thanks to the experience of four years of convoy
planning, the movement of ships could be arranged almost like clockwork.
This was a task for which British and American seamanship was well
equipped/ The difficult part of Ramsay's brief was to keep those supply lanes
open day and night with nowhere for ships to sit at anchor secure from the
elements. During the invasion itself eight convoys a day sailed for France.
Even a captured port - Cherbourg, or Le Havre - would need time to be
returned to working order following almost certain German demolition.
The solution arrived at seemed so fantastic that the German authorities
never guessed it. The Allies brought their harbours with them across the
Channel. The idea was the brainchild of a British naval officer, Commodore
Hughes-Hallett, who in 1942 began to work on plans for the construction of
artificial harbours. The scheme was not finally approved until the Quebec
conference, when Allied staffs agreed to establish two harbours,
code-
named 'Mulberries', off the French coast. Each one was constructed from
long concrete sections 200 feet in length, which had to be towed by tug across
the Channel and secured in place. These formed the harbour walls. Inside
each were large floating steel structures designed to
provide additional
shelter, from which ran long piers and roadways to the shore. It was sub-
sequently decided to set up a second breakwater to reduce the tidal strain on
the Mulberries. These were known as 'Gooseberries', and were to be made
in situ in from the hulks of old ships. The 55 merchant and naval vessels
chosen for sacrifice were gathered together in Scottish ports and sailed to
France on D-Day, where they were scuttled in five different places. In all
some four hundred separate pieces made up the artificial anchorage.
Together they weighed I•5 million tons; ten thousand men were employed
on D-Day towing them to France and building the harbours. 2 Though in the
event only one worked fully, enough supplies rolled across the 12 miles of
artificial pier to keep Allied armies provisioned in the first critical weeks.
