216
A WAR OF ENGINES
looked. To assemble the required
number of armoured divisions, the
number of tanks in each had been reduced to 150. Of these tanks half were of
poor quality - the weakly armed Panzer-II and the captured Czech TNHP-38
tank which was now becoming obsolescent. There were a thousand of the
Panzer-III, and 479 of the Panzer-IV, but neither was a match for the T-34.20
Much of the Soviet armour destroyed in the summer attack was the victim
not of German tanks but of German artillery. The incompetence of Soviet
forces in 1941 allowed the Panzer armies to penetrate far and fast, but by the
autumn the toll was very great. The losses sustained in combat and from
wear saw the modern army crumble away; when the front stabilised in late
1941 the infantry mass had caught up to support it. By August tank strength
was down to half what it had been in June 1941; by November there were
only 75,000 vehicles still working out of the half-million committed in June.
(By December the Panzer armies were using horses again. These were rates
of loss never anticipated by German leaders. Little thought or preparation
had gone into the question of what to do if the quick campaign of
annihilation failed. The German army too needed to modernise in 1942.
The collapse of the air-tank offensive in 1941 was compounded with
problems of geography and terrain. When the autumn rains came German
vehicles were brought to a standstill on roads that were little more than
sand-tracks. The supply of fuel oil and lubricants for the front broke down;
tanks that could cruise on a pint of oil for 6o miles on flat summer roads
now consumed over 4 gallons to cover the same distance, creeping for-
ward in first gear. The coming of cold winter weather gave some respite,
but with their narrow tracks German tanks were unsuited to traversing
frozen mud, and the sub-zero temperatures brought new problems. Turrets
and gun-sights froze solid. Rubber seals became brittle. Efforts to warm up
engines with small braziers produced explosions. On open grassy airstrips
mechanics literally froze to the machines they worked on. The supply
system, overstretched already by the rapid advance, threatened to snap
entirely.2' It was rescued by horses, which pulled tanks and guns when
engines failed, and dragged rows of covered wagons full of supplies and
ammunition. Even this brought difficulties, for the large European horses
suffered from frostbite and malnutrition. In the first months of the campaign
there were over a quarter of a million horse casualties. Their place was
taken by the smaller Russian panje horse and sled, which became the
primary form of transport for much of the German army. During 1942
another 400,000 horses were brought to Russia from German-dominated
Europe; the same year German industry turned out just 59,000 trucks for an
army of three million men. 22
The growing reliance on horses was not due only to climate and terrain.
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
217
Great difficulties were also experienced in servicing and repairing motor
vehicles, a problem that persisted in the German forces for the rest of the
war. The German army, unlike its Soviet enemy, had a bewildering array of
different vehicles and engines. In the effort to provide lorries and fighting
vehicles for the Panzer armies Europe had been scoured for motor vehicles
of all kinds. There were two thousand different types of vehicle in the assault
on the Soviet Union. Army Group Centre alone had to carry over a million
spare parts. One armoured division went into battle with 96 types of
personnel carrier, Ill types of truck, and 37 different motor-cycles. 23
Repair work became a nightmare, all the more so as the poor terrain and
harsh combat produced exceptionally high levels of wear and tear.
By
November 1941 the same armoured division reported only 12 per cent of its
entire stock of vehicles as roadworthy. Understandably, vehicle spares
were not top priority in the strained supply organisation. Nor were they a
production priority. In the Reich much more emphasis was placed on
producing the whole product than a satisfactory ratio
of spares and
components, particularly engines. During 1942 and 1943 efforts were made
to produce more spares, but the absence of standardisation and the poor
state of the long supply routes into Russia left a great many vehicles
immobilised for months or weeks, forcing the German armed forces to rely
increasingly on horse-drawn artillery and long marches on foot.24
During the winter of 1941-2 the German army hoped to make good the
collapse of the armoured force by/developing new tanks that could both
outgun the Soviet T-34, and remain immune to anti-tank fire with greatly
strengthened armour. Hitler took a leading role in planning them, but
instead of developing a tank that was easy to maintain and to produce in
quantity, he demanded large, technically complex tanks of very great
weight.) The result was the "Tiger' and the 'Panther'. Though they could
deliver the enhanced firepower, they were slow and unmanoeuvrable, a
liability on poor ground. When Hitler insisted on throwing the first six Tigers
into battle in the early summer of 1942 the result was a fiasco. On a road
fringed by marshland the tanks were ambushed by Soviet troops.
The first
and last tank were hit in the poorly protected side and rear, immobilising the
remaining four which were destroyed one by one.25 The Panther's baptism
of fire was no more propitious. The first batch was sent into battle before the
development work was complete. All 325 had to be returned to Berlin for
modification of the steering and control mechanism; the Maybach engine
proved inadequate and had to be improved, making an already complex
piece of engineering yet more sophisticated The level of technical quality
of the new tanks was such that they were difficult to produce and maintain.)
There were too few to turn the armoured battle in Germany's favour in
