10
WHY THE ALLIES WON
'There has been no instance yet in the history
of wars of the enemy jumping into the abyss
of himself. To win a war one must lead the
enemy to the abyss and push him in to it.'
Joseph Stalin, Order of the Day,
23 February 1944
A s ALLIED ARMIEs closed in for the kill in the spring of 1945, and
German leaders urged their battered forces to stand and die like
heroes, Hitler took time to reflect on why he had lost the war. His remarks
were faithfully recorded by his indispensable secretary, Martin Bormann,
who followed his leader with pad and pencil so that posterity would be
denied none of Hitler's prophetic wisdom. There they sat as Germany
crumbled around them, the
sounding-board for his master, and Hitler, isolated, physically broken,
consumed with hatred and self-pity, but clear-headed enough to look back
over his years as warlord to see where he went wrong.
The start of his troubles Hitler traced back to the Munich crisis of 1938.
He regretted his failure to keep his nerve and conquer Czechoslovakia in
defiance of Britain and France. He was convinced that had he done so the
west would have backed away, German domination of the Continent would
have become fact, and the great war to the east could have been postponed
until Germany was thoroughly prepared. He regretted his friendship with
Mussolini: 'anything would have been better than having [Italians] as
comrades in arms...
" Italy drew Hitler into the Mediterranean and
the Balkans, when the Soviet Union was the priority. Looking back,
Hitler realised that he should have attacked Stalin in May 1941, and won
an extra five weeks of dry weather. Better still, he should not have fought
attack the Soviet Union because Britain's 'stupid chiefs' refused to make
a sensible peace: perhaps, he reflected, he should have struck south,
seized Gibraltar and swept into the Near East to smash British resistance.
But then, standing in the wings was Stalin, just waiting for the moment to
strike.?
The remarkable thing about Hitler's reflections was how little blame
attached to him. At every move it was other people, other forces, that
WHY THE ALLIES WON
315
compelled him to act. 'I, perhaps better than anyone else, can well imagine
the torments suffered by Napoleon, Hitler told Bormann towards the end of
the dictated testament, 'longing, as he was, for the triumph of peace and yet
compelled to continue waging war, without ceasing... '3 Munich was the
fault of Neville Chamberlain who 'really intended to wage ruthless war
against us' ; Hitler was let down by Mussolini, frustrated by Stalin, served by
a German elite composed of feeble 'petty bourgeois reactionaries'. Above
all German defeat was the work of the Jews, a refrain that echoes through
Bormann's jotted notes.
The war, Hitler believed, was typically ... and
exclusively Jewish'. It was sustained by the 'most powerful bastion' of world
Jewry, the United States, whose President, 'the elect of the Jews', worked
tirelessly, in Hitler's view, to keep war against Germany going. 'If we should
lose this war' - and this in February 1945 - 'it will mean that we have been
defeated by the Jews.' Hitler was quite unable to grasp the extent of his own
responsibility. Germany was a plaything for fate, doomed by the forces of
world history to fight on 'until our last drop of blood has been shed'. Hitler
thought the suffering would be redemptive, purifying, good for Germany.
Out of the ashes of defeat, a new Reich would arise.
(No one doubts that the war was ultimately Hitler's responsibility, or that
Hitler made mistakes on a grand scale. In most postwar explanations of the
outcome Hitler's failings stand at the head of the list. The story is a familiar
one. German victories early in the war were the result of short, opportunistic
campaigns against enemies who were weaker and isolated. In 1941 Hitler
made the mistake of invading the Soviet Union in the belief that the tactics
of lightning war' would bring victory in four months. In December 1941
Germany found herself at war with a combination of the three largest
industrial economies outside Continental Europe, a war that Germany,
allied to economically weak states, could never hope to win.)Hitler's belief
that a German super-power could tear up the political structure of Europe
and western Asia and replace it with a Party-led authoritarian empire was
always irrational and deluded.
Much of this argument comes with hindsight. (The idea that the whole
imperial enterprise was flawed from the outset is a post-war rationalisation,)
Moreover, Eastern Europe was dominated for forty years after the war by an
authoritarian super-power, run by single-party dictatorships which denied civil
rights and smothered society with secret policemen and a thick blanket of
ideological conformism. The Soviet bloc lacked the wanton destructiveness
and deadly racism that a Nazi empire would have displayed, but there was
nothing deluded or irrational about the new system.
The dominance of
communism and the Red Army was achieved as a direct consequence of the
power they had built up in the military defeat of the Nazi empire.
