DEEP WAR
84
hundreds of frightened German soldiers huddled in the foetid air of
overcrowded cellars, Paulus was found by a small detachment of Soviet
troops led by Lieutenant Fyodr Yelchenko. Depressed, almost detached
from his grim surroundings, Paulus refused to meet his captors face to face.
His staff officers agreed to the surrender and asked for a car to take their
chief away in order to prevent a lynching. Paulus and 23 German generals
were taken into captivity, where Paulus publicly recanted his wicked ways.
He ended up living in Dresden, in communist East Germany, where he died
in 1957.40 Farther to the north of the city German forces refused to accept
the surrender and battled on until 2 February until they had nothing left with
which to fight. The Battle of Stalingrad was finally at an end.
There was no doubt that the Red Army had won a remarkable victory. In
Moscow the journalist Alexander Werth found a pronounced psychological
shift in the population: there was no longer grim, anxious desperation, but a
renewed self-confidence. 'No-one doubted that this was the turning-point
in World War II,' wrote Werth later. 41 The aura of German invincibi-
Tity vanished - German losses were catastrophic. In the struggle since
November, 32 divisions of German, Romanian, Hungarian and Italian
forces had been annihilated and a further sixteen all but eliminated. Twelve
thousand guns and mortars had been destroyed or had fallen into Soviet
hands; according to Soviet sources, 3,500 tanks and three thousand aircraft
had suffered a similar fate. 42 The talk in the Soviet press was all of Cannae,
the ancient battle where Hannibal's Carthaginians routed Rome. Early in
February Werth was invited with other western journalists to visit the scene
of Soviet triumph. On the approach to Stalingrad they were surrounded by a
seemingly endless stream of men, lorries, horses, even camels, moving in an
untidy mass westwards, to new battles. The temperature was - 44 degrees
centigrade. In Stalingrad itself the battleground was frozen into a gruesome
still life of the conflict - dead men and horses stiff where they had fallen,
burnt-out tanks and trucks, the litter of cruel combat. In the basement of the
Red Army House, Werth was shown two hundred emaciated,
disease-
ridden Germans, their skin parched and yellowed, gnawing the frozen bones
of one last horse while they waited in threadbare coats and rags for boots to
be taken off to prison camp. There seemed, Werth later reflected, a 'rough
but divine justice in the yard of the Red Army House at Stalingrad', 43
The fall of the city reverberated worldwide. A year earlier a batch of maps
sent from England to Moscow helpfully titled 'Follow the wAR with this map
of the WORLD on Mercator's projection' did not even include Stalingrad.
Now the name was on everyone's lips. On 20 February British cities
celebrated Stalingrad Day, the 'twenty-fifth anniversary' of the name it was
actually the seventeenth). The following day the Royal Albert Hall hosted a
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
85
glittering array of the rich and the good in a salute to the valour of the Red
Army. 4 Three weeks after the capture of Stalingrad, Stalin sent Churchill
film of the battle which Churchill, laid up with pneumonia, watched with a
private projector set up in his bedroom. 45 The effect on Hitler's allies, who
shared in the collapse, was no less marked. The suffering inflicted on
Romanian, Italian and Hungarian forces made them reluctant partners of
the Reich. 'It is now certain', the Italian Foreign Minister told Mussolini
on 8 February, 'that hard times will come.'46
a Hitler, as usual, blamed everyone but himself for the catastrophe. When
he heard the news of Paulus's surrender he could hardly contain himself with
rage. The day before he had promoted Paulus to Field Marshal. Though he
harboured to the end the illusion that oth army could be rescued in the
spring, he expected Paulus to fight to the very last if rescue proved
impossible, leaving the final bullet for himself. He became obsessed with the
view that the heroic sacrifice of so many German soldiers was besmirched by
the failings of 'one single characterless weakling' 47 For weeks he would not
allow Göring's name to be mentioned for failing to keep the airlift going. His
staff watched him age visibly over the period of crisis, crippled by gastric
disorders which gave him pronounced bad breath, ill-tempered and
depressed. His way of coping with the psychological blow was simply to
pretend that Stalingrad had never happened. He refused to mention it again
and busied himself in a flurry of insignificant staff work in preparation for
further victory plans in 1943.48 Eor the German public there was no disguise
for the disaster. Too many were killed or captured to pretend that Stalingrad
had not happened.
It has always been a temptation to signify Stalingrad as the turning-point
of the Second World War. Field Marshal Keitel, Hitler's Chief-of-Staff,
later confessed that this was the moment at which Germany 'played [her]
last trump, and lost' 49 But it was not a decisive victory on its own.
It demonstrated a remarkable improvement in the onerational skills and
battle-worthiness of Soviet soldiers and weapons. The awesome scale of the
carnage on both sides, fighting to the death for a city that no longer eixsted,
indicates the special character of the savage contest between invader and
victim. The victory had a moral and psychological impact well beyond the
significance of the strategic triumph. It laid the foundations of Soviet self
belief for battles in 1943 that were really decisive.
Stalingrad was only one part of a much more ambitious Soviet campaign.
The rapid success of Soviet armies encircling the oth army in November
encouraged the Soviet General Staff to exploit the advantages they enjoyed
