178
ALONG A GOOD ROAD . . .
When Eisenhower placed the note in his wallet announcing the failure of
Overlord he did so not from misplaced modesty, but from quite genuine
anxiety as to the outcome. He found the note again on I1 July, five weeks
after the secure establishment of the bridgehead. His naval aide asked
if he could keep it, and Eisenhower reluctantly agreed, conscious perhaps
that he might still have need
of it. He was not the only one to express
doubts. Although Moscow was reported to be 'awash in boozy good feeling'
at news of the Normandy landings, the night before D-Day Stalin was scath-
ing about his western allies: 'Until now there was always something that
interfered
Maybe they'll meet up with some Germans! What if they
meet up with some Germans! Maybe there won't be a landing then, but just
promises as usual.% Only weeks before the invasion Churchill confided
to Eisenhower his nightmare of the beaches of Normandy 'choked with the
Rower of American and British youth'. On 5 June Brooke still believed
the invasion could be 'the most ghastly disaster of the whole war'.??
(Victory in France when it came was both sudden and complete, but it was
by no means preordained The balance of technology was at best even,
though German heavy tanks, the Panthers and Tigers, outgunned those of
their opponents. Until well into June the manpower of 7th army and von
Schweppenburg's Panzer group outnumbered the invading force, and
possessed a much greater density of both manpower and firepower than
German armies in the east. Moreover the German forces had in genera!
much tougher battle experience than their enemy, and displayed a greater
willingness to fight stubbornly, hand to hand if need be, without the help of
air power or the artillery barrage. Too little allowance is made in criticisms
of Montgomery for the quality and tenacity of the German defence, and the
inexperience of his own forces. There were points in the invasion where
things could have gone badly wrong. If at any stage in the first four or five
weeks the twenty divisions
of 15th army had all been moved to the
Normandy front the balance would have been very different. The weather
was not ideal on D-Day, but if Eisenhower had decided at that critical
moment to wait for the next brief period when the moon and tides held good
the invaders would have been swallowed up by the great gale, which
coincided exactly with the next block of favourable dates, 19-21 June.
"Thank the gods of war', Eisenhower wrote on the meteorologist's report of
the storm, 'we went when we did!'98
(Victory depended on a great many things: the prodigious organisation of
supplies by sea and air, meticulous planning, the solid virtues of civilian
management. But two explanations stand out above the rest. The first is the
inestimable value of air power to the invading armies in every field of war -
supply, reconnaissance, battlefield support and the bombing of enemy
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
179
supplies and communications. The impact of Allied aircraft was magnified
many times by the successful defeat of the Luftwaffe over Germany in the
first half of 1944, and the destruction of German oil supplies. Aircraft gave
the Allies a striking power on the battlefield that artillery alone could not
supply. One German commander calculated that 50 per cent of his losses
were caused by bombing. German troops were worn down by shock and fire
and were demoralised by the overwhelming air superiority of the enemy. Air
attack prevented the German forces from ever seizing the initiative and
dictated German front-line tactics.
The second factor was deception. No doubt German forces would have
remained dispersed even if more had been known about the Normandy
plan, so certain were the senior German commanders that the northern
Channel thrust made most operational and strategic sense. But the careful
preparation of the FUSAG deception, and the exceptional good fortune over
months of anxious subterfuge that shielded the Overlord plan from German
eyes, ensured that the balance of forces, potentially so favourable to the
defender, was evened up. German commanders were compelled by their
uncertainty to do the very opposite of everything they had been trained to
do: to dilute their forces rather than concentrate them. By the time they
reverted to concentration at Mortain, the damage had been done and the
Allies enjoyed local superiority in numbers strong enough to deliver the
final, annihilating blow
¿The defeat of Hitler's entire western army between June and August 1944
certainly did not win the war on its own, but it ended once and for all any
fantasy Hitler might have harboured about stalling the western front in
order to win in the east. However short the straws at which he grasped in
1944, there remained a slender chance of revival. New technology was in the
offing - jet aircraft, ground-to-air missiles, rockets, long-range submarines
undetectable by Allied radar. Allied victory in France put paid to any
prospect that Germany could avoid defeat. 'The war was won', Eisenhower
concluded in his final report as Supreme Commander, 'before the Rhine was
crossed. 99
