i Kilometres
27 June
Cotentin
1st US
21st Army Group
(Montgomery)
Assault landings, 6 June
Allied airborne landings, 6 June
Beach heads, evening, 6 June
10 June
24 July
2nd British
army
(Dempsey)
puinte
Mulberry
German
7th army
German
15th army
10
Battle for Normandy, 6 June to 24 July 1944
Bayeux was captured and British and American forces linked up. That day
Montgomery moved his headquarters to France. Eisenhower, increasingly
heartened by the success ashore, crossed the Channel in a fast minelayer to
see for himself the progress of battle. From the deck he watched the trails of
men and lorries wending their way from the beaches through the rich
farmland to the front line. Though still well short of the initial objectives, the
lodgement was firm. After four more days of fighting a continuous front
was established from the Orne river to Montebourg, 10 miles across the
neck of the Cherbourg peninsula.
The failure of the German shore-line battle had many causes. The
German navy was swept aside by overwhelming Allied naval power.
German torpedo boats and submarines inflicted only slight damage to the
vast armada astride the Channel - three small ships in convoy, and a dozen
minor naval vessels were lost - and of the 43 submarines sent to attack the
invading naval force, twelve were forced to return to base damaged, and
eighteen were sunk.** German air power suffered the same fate. Thanks to
the critical weakening of the German air force over
Germany, the
contribution of German aircraft to the invasion battle was negligible. On 6
June, against over twelve thousand Allied aircraft, including 5,600 fighters,
the grd air fleet in northern France could muster only 170 serviceable
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
163
aircraft. Attempts to reinforce the front further weakened the defence of the
Reich, while contributing very little to the battle. Many of the aircraft sent
were destroyed in transit as Allied aircraft smashed German airfields in
France. Many German pilots were plunged into conflict before they were
fully trained; inadequately prepared for the invasion, many lost their way.
The reinforcements were shot out of the skies. This left Allied airmen with
the freedom to attack other targets. Large groups of marauding fighters and
fighter-bombers attacked anything that moved on the German side, making
the transfer of German ground reinforcements and supplies almost impos-
sible by day. The bombers were free to blast German defences, to terrifying
effect. Allied air supremacy proved to be a vital factor in securing and
holding on to the shallow lodgement. 69
(German defences did not turn out to be as formidable as had been feared.
The beach obstacles were cleared in a matter of hours thanks to careful
Allied preparation and reconnaissance. The element of surprise was
sufficient to allow Allied forces to storm ashore before adequate German
reinforcements could be rushed to the front, and the initial German
intention to build a second defensive line 3 miles inland from the shore never
materialised. The great expectations of the Atlantic Wall were never
realised.)None the less, Rommel did have 34 divisions under his command to
face the five British and American divisions in Normandy. The Allies' early
success owed a great deal to the confused and hesitant response of their
enemy as a result of the FUSAG deception, which continued to mesmerise the
German high command long after the invasion.
There were hints of imminent invasion relayed to Hitler on the evening
of 5 June. Goebbels found him 'unperturbed'. In poor health, Hitler
was resting at the Berghof, high in the Bavarian Alps. At ten on the morn-
ing of 6 June the first reports of Allied action came in. Hitler was asleep
and no one had the courage to approach him until he had breakfasted.
When he was finally told the news he was unimpressed by what he regar-
ded as a mere diversion from the main invasion across the Dover-Calais
strait. So confused were the reports coming in from the west that Goebbels
thought the invasion was taking place from Dieppe to Dunkirk, echoing
Hitler's conviction that Normandy was a 'decoy'.
70 Only late in the after-
noon of the 6th was Rommel allowed to take forces from the reserve to
oppose the landings, too late to prevent British and Canadian troops from
digging in, and now in the face of relentless air attack. But there was no
question of moving the forces of 15th army away from the Calais area to
help the beleaguered forces in Normandy. As long as the German high
command believed that FUSAG was still poised to strike it was strategic suicide
to move everything into western France and risk an annihilating pincer
