88
DEEP WAR
able accuracy how German forces would begin the attack. It was assumed
that two heavy armoured thrusts, north and south of the neck of the salient,
would converge to encircle Soviet forces in the bulge. But after that German
intentions could only be guessed at.54
The next step was to decide how to respond. Stalin instinctively sought an
offensive solution: an attack launched pre-emptively against
German
positions, followed by hot pursuit. Zhukov and the General Staff rejected
this, and it says much for Stalin's judgement that he bowed again to his
deputy. On 8 April Zhukov suggested the plan which a few weeks later was
adopted as Soviet strategy for 1943. First, Soviet forces would absorb the
German punch at Kursk on deep defensive lines, to wear down enemy tank
numbers, and then respond with a counter-punch of annihilating power that
would leave the enemy sprawled on the canvas. It was a bold plan, for the
Red Army had previously failed to defeat German forces in summer time,
when ground and climate suited the invaders more. But it was a plan based
on solid experience. The lessons learned in the long Stalingrad campaign
had been absorbed. Zhukov insisted that the Kursk battle should be placed
under the control of the Supreme Headquarters, with special attention to
the central planning and coordinating of all aspects of the campaign. There
was an operational and logistical depth to the preparations for Kursk that
previous Soviet plans had lacked. After a string of glaring intelligence errors
in the past, the Soviet High Command also insisted on the topmost priority
for intelligence-gathering of all kinds. Some was provided from Britain, but
the most detailed information was culled from the Ultra decrypts and
forwarded by the Soviet spy John Cairneross (later revealed as the 'Fifth
Man' of the Cambridge spy ring), who had found himself a job at the
Bletchley Park intelligence centre in 1942. But most of the intelligence on
German troop concentrations came as a result of great improvements in
Soviet intelligence gathering, particularly in reading low-level German
radio traffic, and in using small storm detachments to capture Germans from
the front lines for interrogationS Though Soviet commanders never
guessed the exact striking point for the German attack, they had a much
clearer idea of what they were up against than in previous campaigns.
The whole crux of the Soviet plan was the carefully prepared battlefield.
Troops began digging in even before the plan for Kursk had been finalised.
Inside the salient seven armies were concentrated on the Central and
Voronezh fronts, which defended the north and south of the salient. On
either side of the bulge additional strong forces were placed, in the Bryansk
front to the north and the South-western front to the south, ready to launch
the counter-punch. Many miles to the rear of the salient was Zhukov's trump
card, a reserve force with two infantry armies, a tank army and the 5th air
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
89
army, organised into the Steppe front. This massive reserve was to be
thrown forward once the German attacks had been blunted on the defence
lines. Inside the Kursk bulge the population stayed put, a decision taken
partly to prevent demoralisation at the sight of yet another eflux of refugees,
and partly because civilians of both sexes and all ages were needed to help
the troops prepare the defensive ramparts.
The defensive system was one of considerable tactical sophistication. No @
fewer than six defensive zones were established in the salient, up to a depth
of 50 miles, with two further defensive lines in front of the reserve Steppe
front. The first three zones were the most crucial, for it was here that the
Soviet armies' main strength was concentrated. Each zone had continuous
trenches and anti-tank obstacles, connected with a system of communica-
tion passages. On the Central front alone troops dug some 3,000 miles
of trenches, and laid 400,000 mines. Each line was protected by barbed
wire, some of it electrified. The main object was to hold up and destroy
the enemy's armour. Every kind of device was used - ditches fitted with
'dragon's teeth' (wooden stakes slotted together like a giant set of jacks),
small dams to flood the ground in front of advancing tanks, and abatises
(trees piled one upon the other with branches pointing towards the enemy)
in every wood. Great attention was paid to the field of fire for artillery and
points, from which all lines of advance could be covered, providing what one
front commander called 'an impenetrable curtain of fire' 56 And last, but not
least, an intensive programme of training was undertaken for Soviet anti-
tank and artillery forces.
Within a matter of weeks the Kursk area was turned into a vast fortress.
Inside its walls massed more than a million Soviet troops. They were better
armed than at any time since the beginning of the conflict. The infantry had
improved automatic weapons and more effective communications equip-
ment. The standard Soviet tank, the T-34, had undergone small but very
significant improvements. Despite its strong armour and high speed the T-34
performed poorly in combat up to 1942. It carried a crew of only two (three
was standard on German tanks), which meant that the tank commander also
had to fire the gun. The turret was cramped and afforded poor visibility, and
when the tank commander stuck his head out of the top hatch all he could see
forwards was the hatch cover. Very few tanks carried radios, so that they
were on their own once engaged with the enemy. During 1943 Soviet
engineers slowly rectified these blunders. To allow another crew member, a
larger turret was added, with a modified hatch allowing 360-degree visibility.
A great many more tanks carried radios, and a battlefield communications
system was set up allowing commanders to direct larger and more complex
* 1's to
mapon
Cep-
7-34 pin echalies
plannen
