252
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . . .
aid the western powers sent her would quickly fall into German hands. Even
Roosevelt and Churchill, for all their sudden enthusiasm for the Soviet
Union, recognised that their prime interest was in the damage the Red Army
could inflict on German forces, 'killing Huns' as Churchill bluntly put it.27
Economic aid, Roosevelt told Stimson in August, should only be sent as
long as the Soviet Union 'continues to fight the Axis powers effectively 28)
The commitment to supporting the Soviet Union was sustained by a small
circle of political supporters around the Prime Minister and the President.
Roosevelt's coterie included Harry Hopkins, his personal adviser, who
travelled to Moscow in July to see whether the Red Army could hold out.
After two days, in which he neither met Red Army leaders nor discussed
military affairs in detail, he reported back to Roosevelt that 'the morale of
the population is good'. Hopkins felt 'ever so confident' about the Soviet
front. The news tipped the scales in Washington.(On 2 August Roosevelt
announced publicly that although the Soviet Union would not qualify for
Lend-Lease - which was technically only for democracies fighting aggression
- she would be given 'all economic assistance practicable. Two weeks later
the Soviet Embassy provided a detailed list 29 pages long of everything they
wanted. 30 In September a schedule of deliveries was finally agreed, and the
following month Roosevelt personally pledged a billion dollars for Soviet
aid. On 7 November, as German forces were advancing on Moscow, the
American President finally persuaded Congress to grant the Soviet Union
full Lend-Lease facilities, not because of her democratic credentials, but
because Soviet survival was 'vital to the defense of the United States'.
The task of helping the Soviet Union was eased by the reaction of public
opinion in both states? In Britain the cause of the Red Army was taken up
with enthusiasm. The great battles of the east came at a time when the
British war effort was stagnating. The British labour movement now had
a fellow working-class with which to identify, but even among British
elites it became the fashion to hail the Soviet Union as a firm ally. On 1
January 1942 a New Year pageant was held in the Albert Hall in London for
'Empire and Allies'. When the Soviet ambassador, Ivan Maisky, was
introduced he received, according to The Times, a tumultuous welcome; the
entire audience greeted him with a 'V' sign." In the United States popular
opinion was more divided. Little more than half the people admitted
in opinion polls to trusting the Soviet Union, but by October 1941 73 per
cent in a Fortune poll favoured working with her, and by February 1942
the figure was 84 per cent." They could see, like their President, that
Soviet belligerency was good for American security.
To the Soviet authorities expressions of goodwill and solidarity were no
substitute for a firm commitment to help. Stalin wanted a formal alliance
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
253
between the three powers. Roosevelt would not entertain the idea. Britain
accepted a limited joint declaration, signed on 10 July 1941, that both states
would keep fighting against Hitler and would not make a separate peace.
Beyond that, assistance was conspicuous by its absence.)In September
Maisky complained to Eden that the British were more like 'spectators' than
allies. 34 The same month Stalin sent a desperate appeal for military help to
Churchill. To Maisky, who delivered it, Churchill replied: 'I do not want to
delude you; until winter we cannot give you any serious help ... All we can
give you is a drop in the ocean.' Throughout 1941 the United States sent only
20 million dollars in aid, against more than a billion for Britain. 35
(Over the next two years the Soviet Union wanted only one thing from the
west: the opening of a Second Front. The story of the western response has
already been told, but the ambiguities in the western position did nothing
but harm in Moscow. Roosevelt's promise of a Second Front when Soviet
Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov visited Washington in May 1942 was
given more to keep the Soviet Union in the war than
from genuine
commitment. Soviet suspicions that western assistance was 'prompted by
expediency rather than by friendliness' were not entirely misplaced Averell
Harriman, Roosevelt's personal representative in Moscow,
recalled long
after the war that he had been sent to the Soviet Union 'to keep Russia in the
war and save American lives'. In November 1942 Admiral King observed 'in
the last analysis' that 'Russia will do nine-tenths of the job of defeating
Hitler'. 36
The Soviet authorities did little to help their cause. They refused to supply
their co-belligerents with detailed information about military strategy or
economic planning.
They shared almost no technical or intelligence
information with the west, while expecting a great deal in return. Contact
between the Soviet people and visiting foreigners was carefully limited.
Soviet citizens could not fraternise without running serious risks. Journalists
and diplomats were confined in Moscow except for short stage-managed
visits to the front or to showpiece factories. In the capital, according to
one British correspondent, (*an invisible fence sprang up around us .../
and moved with us wherever we went' 37 Soviet officials were routinely awk-
ward and obstructive, without explanation. General Deane, head of the
American Military Mission, wrote after the war that when it was ' "kick-
Americans-in-the-pants week" even the charwoman would be sour'. 38 By
contrast a good deal of sensitive technical and military material was passed
regularly to Moscow. Fifteen thousand Soviet experts visited factories and
military installations in the United States during the war. Not until 1944,
when it became clear that Soviet economic demands were now being
tailored for the postwar economy, did the American authorities begin to
