92
DEEP WAR
and the powerful new 'Ferdinand' self-propelled guns, and backed by
smaller tanks and motorised infantry, found themselves subjected to a
fearsome wall of fire. Anti-tank gunners followed instructions by attacking
the new heavy tanks at suicidally close range. Mobile shock units, armed
with petrol bombs and
portable anti-tank obstacles hurried about the
battlefield, immobilising enemy vehicles. At the end of the first day Model's
forces had moved forward only 4 miles and were pinned down under heavy
and accurate fire. Each German thrust brought a rapid response from the
enemy, who moved whole divisions to block German progress. The next day
2nd and gth Panzer divisions mounted an attack with three thousand guns
and a thousand tanks on a 6-mile front but made slow progress against the
main defensive zone. The following day Model brought the full weight of his
armies to bear on two small towns, Ponyri and Olkhovatka. Four Panzer
divisions ground slowly forward against stiffening resistance, the area
behind them littered with burning tanks and guns. Caught in the chief zone
of defence, the tanks were bombarded by Soviet fighter-bomber aircraft,
and picked off by carefully camouflaged anti-tank nests. After five days of
bitter fighting the German drive into the north of the salient petered out. By
12 July the roles were reversed. Rokossovsky still had forces in reserve and
now Soviet armies slowly prised open the tenuous grip of the depleted
Panzer divisions, forcing them back across the grisly field of war. o4
In the south, where more German armour was concentrated, the attack
made greater headway. The defences on Vatutin's Voronezh front were
more thinly spread, for it had been difficult to guess exactly where the
German blow would fall. At five o'clock in the morning, 4th Panzer army,
led by the same General Hoth who had failed to rescue Paulus in December,
pushed forward on a narrow front with a spearhead of seven hundred tanks.
His force consisted of nine Panzer divisions, the cream of the German army.
In the van were three of the toughest divisions, SS Panzer
divisions
'Totenkopf', 'Das Reich' and 'Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler'. Like the forces
in the north they faced a curtain of fire as they stormed the Soviet defensive
lines, but such was the size and ferocity of the attacking force that it was able
to make deep holes in the Soviet front. By 7 July SS Totenkopf division won
a foothold on the road to Oboyan, a small town 20 miles inside the Soviet
front, whose conquest would open the way to Kursk and the vulnerable rear
of the salient. Confidence mounted among the SS soldiers. The possibility
that they could repeat the great successes of 1941 and 1942 loomed nearer.
But the following day the leading German divisions began to meet stiffer
opposition as they entered the main army defence field and progress
suddenly slowed. The Soviet ist tank army and 6th Guards army, pitched
against the terrifying Panzer force of five hundred tanks massed on a 4-mile-
Soviet
offensive
12 July
Bryansk front
(Popov)
Soviet
offensive
12 July,
• Bryansk
oth panzer
Torel
army (Model)
German
army group
centre
(Kluge)
Soviet counter-
offensive August 1943
Ponyri
• Olkhovarka
Central
front
(Rokossovsky)
• Kursk
• Oboyan
Voronezh front
(Vatutin)
• Prokhorovka
German
army group
south
(Manstein)
4th Panzer
army (Hoth)
Kharkov •
Soviet
offensive
August
1043
KEY:
- Front line 3 July 1943
_ _ Main Soviet zones of defence
XXXXX Limit of German
advance 12 July 1943
Battle of Kursk, July-August 1943
Steppe front
(Koniev)
5th
Guards
tank
South-west front
(Malinowski)
