262
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . ..
dominated by the army chief, George Marshall, but chaired by the
President's personal representative, Admiral William Leahy. The Admiral
reported directly back to Roosevelt, and conveyed the President's views of
the committee. In practice the President played a smaller part in their
deliberations than he perhaps intended. He preferred the informal
atmosphere of one-to-one interviews. Even here he gave surprisingly few
clear directives. He relied on his chief appointments to act on their own
responsibility. 58
The flaws in Roosevelt's leadership came with him into war. His informal
administrative habits - suggestions which should have been orders, spoken
directives instead of a written brief - made it infuriatingly difficult, from all
accounts, to know exactly what policy was. Roosevelt himself seems to have
viewed this as a strength as much as a weakness. I am a juggler, he told a
group of businessmen in 194I, 'and I never let my right hand know what my
left hand does. I am quite happy to mislead and to tell untruths if it will
help to win the war. '59 Stimson found this 'topsy-turvy, upside-down sytem'
appalling for the conduct of government business, though on balance it does
not appear to have inhibited the American war effort any more than
excessive centralisation might have done, if anything rather less. Roosevelt
cheerfully appointed plenipotentiaries who trampled roughshod over the
established departments of state. The inner circle of unofficial advisers -
Hopkins, Harriman, Leahy - allowed the President to bypass the normal
channels, and excited jealousies among the permanent officials. Above all
Roosevelt remained a trimmer, an arbiter, aware that the diffuse character
both of American society and of its wide political class required a great deal
of politicking to hold a wartime consensus together. Roosevelt with his
bruising experience of the New Deal was better placed than most American
politicians to keep Americans fighting in a common cause.
For all his inclination to compromise, on the big issues Roosevelt took a
clear stand, backed by his closest advisers. He sustained aid for Britain
against a good deal of popular criticism; he did the same for the Soviet
Union. In 1942 he stuck to the strategy agreed with the British of defeating
Hitler first. This was a choice vital to the outcome of the war, and it flew in
the face not only of much popular opinion (isolationists were happy to fight
Japan, but much less certain about fighting in Europe) but also of the
Pacific-minded navy. All the while he stoked up popular enthusiasm inside
and outside America with his idealistic vision of a new world order after the
war based upon the principles of freedom and good-neighbourliness. These
were ambitions honestly held - and they had the added bonus of sustaining
popular commitment to war after the initial thirst for revenge had been
slaked.
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
263
The net effect of Roosevelt's leadership is difficult to judge. Like Stalin, as
the war went on Roosevelt was able to leave much of the routine of war to
the American and inter-Allied apparatus set up in 1942. He was a good
judge of men, and appointed people who could do the job. Exuding
confidence and optimism himself, he responded to these traits in others.)
When he made Marshall chief of the army in 1939 there were 33 generals
more senior who might have hoped for the job. He liked Marshall because
he told him the truth. What Roosevelt supplied was inspiration; he remained
steadfast, unruffled even by defeats, supportive to all around him. He kept
his anxieties to himself, just as he kept his disability from the public gaze. He
had the strength to recognise his limitations, in itself a hallmark of intelligent
leadership.) At Teheran the critical Brooke observed that the President
'never made any great pretence at being a strategist'. But he impressed all
who met him at the conference. Churchill's military aide, General Ismay,
found him to be the perfect coalition chairman,
wise,
conciliatory,
paternal'. 60 During 1944 his health deteriorated rapidly, worn down by a
dozen years in office. He struggled on with his work,
borne up by his
confidence in victory, but on 12 April 1945, just weeks away from that
outcome, he died. The country was stunned at the loss. In Moscow Molotov
hurried to the American Embassy in the middle of the night, where,
evidently deeply distressed, he spoke of Soviet respect for Roosevelt. Lord
Halifax observed the effect in Washington: 'Such a gap did the withdrawal of
Roosevelt's personality seem to leave that it was hard to imagine anybody
filling it. '61
Much the same might have been said of Churchill had he not survived
a heart attack and serious bouts of pneumonia during the war. But survive
them he did. Though Churchill was eight years older than Roosevelt, five
years older than Stalin, he outlived them both by a good margin - and this
despite a regime of indulgence and little exercise for most of his later life.
Churchill differed from Stalin and Roosevelt not only in temperament and
background but also in the circumstances of his wartime leadership. (He was
the only one of all the major wartime leaders, on either side, who was
appointed during the conflict as a war leader. In the second place he was a
leader by the grace of Parliament, which put him there in May 1940 and had
the right at any time to remove him. Roosevelt was President for four years;
Stalin was a dictator; Churchill was a chief minister, responsible to the
Commons. The constitutional position of such an appointment remained
ambiguous; the limits of authority depended on how much could be
achieved through sheer force of personality.)
In Churchill's case personality carried him a long way. He was so much
larger than life, it is difficult for the historian to judge the true dimensions
