28
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . . .
The sea mattered to Churchill and Roosevelt because the states they led
were, first and foremost, naval powers. The United States possessed the
largest navy in the world in 1941, but her army was ranked eighteenth, a
tiny skeleton force. The British had a navy in 1939 second to none among
the powers then at war, but could muster no more than two fully equipped
divisions to send to France when war came. Though both states built up
large well-equipped armies by the war's end, they fought the large part of
the conflict as a naval war - blockading their enemies, securing foreign
supplies, and fighting small local engagements, supplied and protected
from the sea. Axis victories ensured that Britain and America could bring
their enemy to battle in only one way, by securing the sea-lanes for
amphibious assault.
For both Britain and the United States naval power was a geographical
necessity, though for different reasons. British naval strategy was chiefly
concerned with protecting overseas trade and safeguarding a far-flung
colonial empire. Britain purchased half her food and two-thirds of her raw
materials from abroad. Without this flow of supplies homewards, and the
flood of manufactured exports sent in return, Britain might have remained
what she was until the eighteenth century, an impoverished, under-
developed island off the European mainland. Without a powerful navy
Britain would not have been able to protect her trade, or build the network
of imperial possessions that nourished and guarded it. Without the navy
Britain would not for centuries have been blessed with the means to defend
the home islands from assault and the luxury of being able to fight on other
people's soil at times and
places of her own choosing. There were
drawbacks. British strategy was global rather than local. The seamless cloth
of ocean made for a vast, unmasterable field of conflict. Britain was
manifestly vulnerable to the interruption of her sea traffic by states with
pretensions to regional maritime power, and even, in the worst case, to the
blockade of the home islands. In the fifty years before the Second World
War these dangers had become first apparent, then real. The
rise
American sea power challenged British maritime primacy, though not
dangerously so. The growth of German naval power, though blunted by
defeat in the Great War, was regarded as much more dangerous, particu-
larly when it revived again in the 1930s, and even more so when Germany
began to drift closer to Italy and Japan, both of whom had large modern
navies in menacing proximity to Britain's chief imperial interests. By 1939
Britain simply could not afford a navy of a size sufficient to ensure global
security. Yet she entered the war in September 1939 reliant for her very
survival on the ability of her navy to defend the arteries of trade and to
shepherd troops and supplies worldwide.®
29
America was much less vulnerable than Britain. Geographically remote
from potential enemies, the United States possessed abundant food supplies
and extravagant natural resources. Foreign trade made her richer, but it was
not a lifeline. Neither did America have a far-flung empire on which she
relied for men and supplies. Her few overseas possessions, in the Pacific and
the Caribbean, were sentry posts to the
western hemisphere and not
stepping stones to world empire. The American navy was not a means to
other ends but was mustered purely for the armed defence of the New
World. Ever since 1822, when President James Monroe announced his
famous Doctrine for the Americas, the United States assumed unsolicited
responsibility for the defence of the New World against outside military
interference. Its vital strategic function brought it the lion's share of
Congressional appropriations for defence. In the crisis-ridden international
order of the I93os it was the navy's task to insulate America from the
dangers of war,
east and west. If it ever became necessary to commit
American forces to battle, as Roosevelt realised might be the case sooner
than most, the existence of a powerful navy ensured that the fighting would
be overseas in distant theatres, provisioned
and protected by American
ships. Without naval power American intervention in World War II could
not have been contemplated, even less attempted.
When war broke out in Europe in September 1939 America was still more
than two years away from belligerency. For most of that period the British
Royal Navy confronted the European Axis states across the global
battlefield with its own limited resources. The outlook at first was set fair.
Britain had French naval power to call upon in the Mediterranean, the
critical supply line to the imperial east. The German navy was tiny. Britain
and France between them had 22 battleships and 83 cruisers; Germany
possessed 3 small 'pocket' battleships and 8 cruisers.' The German navy
knew that there was no prospect of fighting any kind of face-to-face battle
with the enemy fleet. Neither were prospects for submarine warfare against
British trade much better. The German submarine arm had only eighteen
operational boats in the Atlantic, against an enemy who began at once to
convoy all shipping and to provide escort vessels equipped and trained for
anti-submarine warfare. The German navy's Commander-in-Chief, Gross-
admiral Erich Raeder, regarded the outcome as a foregone conclusion,
hoping only that his forces would know 'how to die gallantly' when the time
came. 10
Yet within a few months the balance in the sea war began to move away
from the Royal Navy. The German conquest of Denmark and Norway
transformed the geography of the conflict by securing a long coastal flank for
the movement of German vessels into the Atlantic. The German defeat of
