UNPREDICTABLE VICTORY
version of the war played down this uncomfortable fact, while exaggerating
the successes of democratic war-making. Yet if the moral image of the war
is muddied, the material explanation for victory seems unambiguous.
Alliance between the British Empire, the Soviet Union and the United
States created overwhelming superiority in manpower and resources. If
there is any consensus about why the Allies won, it rests on the unassail-
able evidence that one side vastly outnumbered and outproduced the
other.
There is danger here of determinism of a different sort. As one historian
of the conflict recently put it, the Allies 'were certain to defeat Germany'
once German and Japanese aggression brought them together in December
1941.' By 1943 the material gulf was huge. That year the Axis produced
43,000 aircraft; the Allies produced 151,000. The temptation has always
been to assume that the figures speak for themselves. The balance of
populations and raw materials greatly favoured the Allies: hence whatever
the Axis powers did they would always come up against the strategic dead
end of material inferiority. This is at best an unsophisticated argument. It
begs endless questions about the comparative quality of weapons, or the gap
between potential and real resources, or about how well weapons were used
once the forces actually got them. It also ignores the very considerable
efforts made by both sides to deny resources to the other, for example the
submarine offensive against British trade, or the Anglo-American bombing
of German industry. There was a wide gap between potential and actual
output on both sides. The statistics do not simply speak for themselves; they
require interpreters.
We can see at once that there are no simple answers to the question we
started with. Much of what we believe about the war is illusion. Take, for
example, the view that the war represented the triumph of democracy over
tyranny. In reality democracy was narrowly confined in 1939 - to Britain,
France, the United States and a handful of smaller European and British
Commonwealth states - and was even more restricted once the conflict got
under way. Far from being a war fought by a democratic world to bring
errant dictators to heel, the war was about the very survival of democracy in
its besieged heartlands. Victory in 1945 made democracy more secure in
western Europe, America and the British Dominions, but outside these
regions this form of government has had at best a chequered career in the
half-century since the defeat of the Axis.
If anything the war made the world safe for communism, which was as
embattled as democracy in the 1930s and close to eclipse by 1942. One of the
most significant consequences of the war was the spread of communism in
Europe and Asia and its consolidation in the Soviet Union. This outcome
EXPLAINING WORLD WAR II
3
reflected the significant role played by Soviet forces in defeating Germany.
There is now widespread recognition that the decisive theatre of operations
lay on the eastern-front. Without Soviet resistance it is difficult to see how
the democratic world would have defeated the new German empire, except (
by sitting tight and waiting until atomic weapons had been developed. The
great paradox of the Second World War is that democracy was saved by the
exertions of communism.
This unpalatable fact is usually explained in terms of the common cause
against Hitlerism, which helped to bridge the ideological gulf between
capitalist democracy and communist authoritarianism. The pooling of
resources and military effort was clearly a better way to secure survival than
going it alone. But here, too, a word of caution is needed. Collaboration
between the three Allied states could not be taken for granted. Until 1941
the Soviet Union was regarded by the west as a virtual ally of Nazi Germany
following the signature of the German-Soviet Pact in August 1939, which
ensured the steady supply of resources and food for Germany from Soviet
production. When the Soviet Union was attacked by Germany in June 1941,
there was a residue of profound distrust between the Soviet leadership and
the west which had to be dispelled before any alliance could be built. There
was still powerful anti-communist sentiment in Britain and the United
States. 'How can anyone swallow the idea that Russia is battling for
democratic principles?' asked Senator Taft in Congress. 'In the name of
Democracy are we to make an alliance with the most ruthless dictator in the
world? '2
The alliance was forged in the end from the bare metal of national self-
interest. It survived as long as each side needed the other to help achieve
victory, and no longer.
'We are much better off', wrote Roosevelt's
Assistant Secretary of State, Adolph Berle, in his diary, 'if we treat the
Russian situation for what it is, namely, a temporary confluence of
interest.3 Throughout the war each side worried that the other might reach
a separate agreement with the common enemy, and the naked pursuit of
national interest led to endless squabbles between the three partners. In the
end they fought separate wars, the Soviet Union on the eastern front, the
United States in the Pacific, Britain and America in the Mediterranean and
western Europe.
The coalition certainly did produce a great weight of resources in the
Allies' favour as long as they fought together. But there are illusions to
dispel again. God does not always march with the big battalions. In World
War I Britain, France and Russia mustered 520 divisions in the middle of
1917, but could not prevail over 230 German divisions and 80 Austrian. But
in March 1918, with Russia out of the war, 365 German and Austrian
