152
ALONG A GOOD ROAD . . .
inflate their estimates of Allied forces in order to include the false divisions.
In the United States the FBI rounded up an elderly Dutch spy recruited
by the German secret service, who obligingly handed over the German
codes and instructions, and was operated as a double agent. Under the
codename 'Albert van Loop' he relayed regular information about units
sailing for England, including those contributing to FUSAG. Such a ploy
was made possible by the American system of numbering army divisions.
The regular army was listed from 1 to 25; National Guard units absorbed
into the army from 26 to 75; reserve units from 76 upwards. By 1943 only
numbers i to 45 and 76 to 106 had been used, leaving ample room to
feed false division numbers into the Allied order of battle without
arousing suspicion. 42 By January 1944 German military intelligence in the
west believed there to be sS divisions in Britain, when there were still
only 37; by May 1944 they had identified 79, when in fact there were only
47.43 The German iSth army, facing the Calais coast, stayed put to fight
thirty invisible divisions.
The success of the FUSAG deception, as its perpetrators always realised,
relied on the extent to which it reinforced preconceptions in the mind of the
enemy. Hitler was convinced that the Allies would land somewhere on the
northern French coast; he was at one with his generals in assuming that the
Allies would come by the shortest route, to provide better air cover, to make
early detection of the invasion fleet more difficult, and to bring Allied forces
quickly within striking
distance of the Ruhr and the heart of German
resistance. Hitler thought like an army commander; the possibilities open
to a naval power were foreign to his outlook. The FUSAG deception fed a
conviction already forming that the Allied plan was to invade the Pas de
Calais. Nevertheless by the spring of 1944 there was unmistakable evidence
of large troop concentrations and exercises in south-west England. Hitler
came round to the view
that a subsidiary or diversionary landing was
planned for Normandy, and he instigated moves to strengthen the coastal
defences there. The idea of Normandy as a secondary target actually
strengthened the deception, by fixing German eyes on the Pas de Calais as
the main invasion site long after the Normandy beaches had been stormed.
The campaign of misinformation did just enough to prevent German sources
ever discovering the focal point of invasion or the precise timing. Had they
been able to do so the concentration of forces to oppose Allied landings
would have made Overlord too dangerous to attempt.
By May of 1944 most of Eisenhower's conditions had been met: German
forces were dispersed along the whole northern and north-western coast-
line; reinforcement of Normandy by German armies was likely to be a
lengthy and cumbersome process; behind the Mulberries and Gooseberries,
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
153
the Allied rate of supply could more than match that of the enemy. He still
regarded Overlord as hazardous, but now possible. 44
Hitler had no illusions about what was at stake in 1944. Defeat of the Allied
invasion would amount to 'a turning-point of the war', a psychological shock
from which British and American opinion would not recover. Victory would
free German forces for a renewed offensive on the eastern front. 45 By the
end of 1943 he was sure 'the attack will come' and that it would 'decide
the war'. On 3 November he published the last of his numbered war direc-
tives, No. 51, on the war in the west. His strategic solution was simple:
once invasion started all German forces were to concentrate in one major
counter-blow to throw the enemy 'back into the sea'. 46
This was a campaign long awaited. Work had begun in 1942 on
strengthening the coastal defences of northern France, the so-called
Atlantic Wall. Hitler himself designed the pill-boxes and concrete case-
ments, which were faithfully reproduced by the Corps of Engineers. An
army of conscript labour used up 17 million cubic yards of concrete and I•5
million tons of iron building it. Along the coast Hitler planned fifteen
thousand strongpoints, bristling with machine guns and flamethrowers;
every port was to be defended by huge naval guns. But the project was too
large for German resources. Most of the defensive wall was concentrated
between the river Seine and the river Schelde, where the invasion was
generally expected. The rest of the coastline took what was left over. The
same went for the men defending it. In late 1943 the Commander-in-Chief
West, Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt, had in all some 46 divisions under
his command. They were spread thinly along the French coast: the area of
north-eastern France had one division for each 50 miles, but the Normandy
front had one for every 120 miles, and the rest of the coast one for every 217
miles. Many of these divisions were largely made up of older soldiers - a
quarter of the German army was over 34 by 1944 - and some of the units
manning the defences, composed of wounded from the eastern front and
men of poorer physical condition, had low combat effectiveness. One whole
division on the Normandy sector was made up of men with stomach
complaints; other units were methodically constructed from men with lung
or ear conditions. Most of the combat divisions had been reduced to eleven
thousand men from the conventional 17,200 of the early campaigns.
Once it was clear that invasion could be expected at some time in the
spring or summer of 1944, great efforts were made to make good these
deficiencies. To keep up numbers large contingents of volunteer battalions
from the occupied part of the Soviet Union - Tatars, Turcomen, Cossacks,
