XiV
PREFACE
into the narrative. All of this has been done in order to answer very directly
the question 'why the Allies won'.
There are conventional answers to this question. There is a commonly:
held assumption that the Axis states were beaten by sheer weight of material
strength, which ought inevitably to prevail in an age of industrialised
warfare. To this might be added a related assumption, that Germany, Japan
and Italy made fundamental mistakes in the war, not the least of which was
biting off more than they could chew in fighting Britain, the United States
and the Soviet Union together. Neither of these assumptions is very
satisfactory, and it would be wrong to pretend that what follows is not in
some sense a response to them. The more I have worked on the history of the
Second World War, the more I have become convinced that the outcome
had not just a material explanation but also important moral and political
causes. I am also sceptical of the view that the Axis powers lost the war
through their own efforts rather than those of the Allies. Mistakes were
obviously made on both sides, but the outcome on the battlefield ultimately
depended on a very great improvement in the military effectiveness of
Allied forces. The Allies did not have victory handed to them on a plate;
they had to fight for it.
This might seem an obvious point to those who lived through the war, but
it is one that is seldom made with much force. I owe a debt to all those
veterans of the conflict I have talked with and listened to over the years.
Their testimony has prompted me to think more critically about Allied
success. I have accumulated many other debts along the way too numerous
to mention. I would like to give particular thanks to Ken Follett who has
read more of the manuscript than anyone else; also to Andrew Heritage for
help with the maps; and to Geoffrey Roberts, Peter Gatrell and Mark
Harrison for help on aspects of the Soviet war effort. I also owe a great deal
to my publisher, Neil Belton, and to my editor Liz Smith, both of whom have
helped enormously to make this a much better product than I could have
made it. My agent, Gill Coleridge, has been more patient than I deserve.
Finally a word of thanks to my family who have been a great support
throughout. My wife Kim, our daughter Alexandra, my children Emma,
Becky and Jonathan, have had to endure months of painful writing, and
my irritatingly preoccupied air. I hope they feel that the end-product has
justified their endurance and my distraction.
Richard Overy
March 1995
Author's Note
THese to The to the ered he A is cove hase born used.
coalitions: Britain, France and Poland from 1939 to 1940, Britain and the
Soviet Union in 1941, and Britain, the Soviet Union, the United States and a
host of other smaller states from 1942; from 1944, with the fall of the French
Vichy regime, France again became one of the major allied powers. Both
the terms 'Britain' and 'France' have to be understood also to cover their
respective empires. In the British case this included the Dominion states
Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, all of which made very
substantial contributions to the Allied war effort. Neither the Allied nor
Axis powers were united as a whole in a formal military or political alliance.
Only Britain and the Soviet Union had a firm alliance, sealed in 1942. The
Axis states were united only by informal agreements. Italy broke with the
Axis in 1943, though Italians continued to fight for both sides. I have
persisted in using the conventional shorthand fully aware of its lack of
historical precision. The alternatives are simply too cumbersome to sustain
readability, but the defects of the existing terms must be borne in mind.
Measurements provide difficulties too. I have in general kept to imperial
weights and distances, i.e. pounds, tons and miles. But in cases where the
metric system is commonly used (for example in expressing certain gun
calibres and wavelengths) I have kept the metric measurement. The use of
tons needs to be clarified. I have used the word interchangeably for imperial,
American and metric tons. In generaf tons applied to Soviet or German
production are metric tonnes, 2,204 pounds instead of the imperial 2,240
pounds. In America the ton is generally 2,000 pounds. Measures of Japanese
and American oil production have generally been quoted in barrels:
approximately 7•5 barrels
equal 1 ton of oil. Again, it proved too
cumbersome to make all these differences explicit throughout the text.
