DEEP WAR
82
command was able to redeploy its reserves on the right flank and in front of
the attacking force. By 24 December there was a very great danger that the
whole of the force striking towards Stalingrad might itself be encircled.
Manstein was forced to order withdrawal, the last gamble in ruins. All along
the German southern front Soviet forces went over to the offensive,
destroying Italian and Hungarian armies and weakened German divisions,
driving towards Rostov-on-Don. The result was an operational triumph for
Soviet commanders. Throughout 1941 and 1942 the German army had
profited from the Soviet inability to coordinate their forces, to react to
circumstances, to think through a plan and to execute it consistently. It was
not just German mistakes that cost Hitler victory at Stalingrad. In the bitter
attritional warfare of 1942 the Red Army was coming of age. 33] *
[For Paulus the end was only a matter of time. By late December his
soldiers were beyond rescue. The German force, almost a quarter of a
million men, was still an obstacle of sorts, but the conditions they
experienced were destructive of strength and will. There were desperate
shortages of food, the endless bombardments, the collapse of medical
services for the wounded and sick, and the grim, unbearable realisation that
there was no way out? Wilhelm Hoffmann, a German infantryman who
arrived with his unit in Stalingrad in early September, wrote his last diary
entry on 26 December: 'The horses have already been eaten. I would eat a
cat, they say its meat is also tasty. The soldiers look like corpses or lunatics,
looking for something to put in their mouths. They no longer take cover
from Russian shells; they haven't the strength to walk, run away and
hide ...
By January the temperatures were down to -30 degrees
centigrade, and food supplies were reduced to 2 ounces of bread a day, half
an ounce of sugar, and a little horsemeat. Each soldier was allowed one
cigarette.35 There was little fuel and ammunition. The German guns that
had blasted the city flat fired only sporadically. The troops dug in to
underground shelters and trenches and awaited the worst.
Stalin and Zhukov gave little thought to finishing off the Cauldron while
the battles raged to seize back the Don steppe. Soviet intelligence informed
the Supreme Command that only eighty thousand men were in the net, not
all of whom were military combatants. It was assumed that oth army would
either surrender or be eliminated rapidly, at Soviet leisure. So the plan to
destroy the German pocket, codenamed Operation 'Koltso', was not drawn
up until 27 December. It was proposed that the armies of the Don front, to
the north of Stalingrad, would attack from west to east, driving German
forces back into the city, splitting them into smaller groups which would then
be reduced by air and artillery bombardment, stage by stage. Difficulties in
moving supplies and men into position postponed the opening of the
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
83
offensive until 10 January, to Stalin's intense irritation. The force that
gathered around the perimeter of the Cauldron was a hammer expected to
crack a nut: 47 Soviet divisions, 5,600 heavy guns and mortars, 169 tanks and
300 aircraft. 36 Two days before the attack was unleashed Paulus was given
an opportunity to surrender. A small delegation of soldiers approached
German lines and was promptly fired upon. The following day, armed with a
bugler and a red flag, they tried again. This time they were taken blindfold to
German lines. Paulus would not meet them; the surrender terms were
dismissed out of hand. The following day, 10 January, at eight o'clock in the
morning, Soviet artillery began the heaviest barrage since the war began. 37
When Soviet armies rolled forward they made slow progress against
determined German resistance. Fierce fighting brought surprisingly heavy
casualties from an enemy thought to be on his last legs. In terror at what
would happen to them if they were caught, German troops fought with
whatever desperate energy they could muster. It was now their turn to fight
to the last man and the last bullet. After a few days Soviet commanders
discovered why progress was so costly. From captured orders and the
interrogation of prisoners it was discovered that 250,000 men had been
encircled in November, not eighty thousand. This number exceeded the
number of Soviet troops attacking the city. They were under orders not to
surrender but to die as heroes. Most did die, from wounds, from frostbite,
from starvation, hundreds of miles from Hitler's headquarters, where the
Army Chief-of-Staff ostentatiously ordered his entourage to eat 'Stalingrad
rations' while the battle raged. 38 Soviet forces pressed forward through the
outer defence lines, until, under the weight of shelling and bombing, short
of ammunition and heavy weapons, the German front collapsed. By 17
January the occupied pocket was less than half the size it had been at the
start of Koltso. On 22 January the last push began into the city itself, where
one-third of the original German force dug in. More and more German
soldiers began to surrender in circumstances of utter hopelessness and
panic. Those that stayed in their bunkers were incarcerated by the heavy
tanks that passed overhead, or flushed out by flamethrowers and grenades.
On 26 January the forward units of the attacking force finally met up with
the 62nd army, which had continued to hold the west bank of the Volga, an
anvil to the Soviet hammer. At 9.20 in the morning men of Rodimtsev's
13th Guards attacking the Red October Factory watched as panic broke
out among the German units in front of them. Down the hill to the west
of the factory settlement came a heavy tank column of the Soviet relief
force. Soldiers from the two armies embraced in tears. 39
Five days later the bulk of the remaining German forces surrendered.
In his headquarters in the Univermag department store basement, with
