50
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . . .
cargo vessels, a smaller group hunting the convoy perimeter for submarines.
Direct attack on the submarines required information of a different kind.
There was little chance of a kill without some way of locating to within feet
the position of the enemy JAt night-time, against submarines operating on
the surface, this knowledge could not be acquired with conventional
technology and naval tactics, and chance played a part in any densely packed
convoy battle. During 1941 and for much of 1942 the number of submarines
destroyed in all theatres remained small, only 35 in 194l, and only 21 in the
first six months of the following year. This was a rate of attrition that could
comfortably be supported by the U-boat arm. The only way to increase that
rate was to apply to the naval conflict the new weapons of war - long-range
aircraft, radio and radar.
The importance of aircraft was plain to see. Wherever air patrols were in
operation submarine activity was much reduced. Aircraft were 'the great
menace for the submarines' Dönitz told Hitler in September 1942. But until
well into 1942 the aircraft was a limited weapon in the actual destruction of
U-boats. The number of aircraft allocated to over-sea duty was small in
relation to the task, and it proved difficult to persuade the RAF to divert
larger bombing aircraft from the attack on Europe to the war at sea. The
original anti-submarine bomb proved to have almost no destructive power,
and was replaced by an aerial depth-charge, though only in the course of
1942 were weapons of enhanced destructive power, charged with a new
explosive (Torpex), finally introduced S° The central problem for the anti-
submarine aircraft was to find the submarine and, having found it, to sustain
an attack before it submerged to the safety of waters beyond the range of
depth-charges. The answer lay with Radio-Direction Finding, later known
by its familiar name of radar.
The development of effective Air to Surface Vessel (ASV) radar played a
key part in the Battle of the Atlantic. A radar using wavelengths of 1'7
metres was developed, capable of detecting a surfaced submarine at 5 miles.
The radar allowed aireraft to find submarines by day or night, but about a
mile from the target their exact location disappeared on the screen because
of distortion from the sea. By day visual contact could be maintained, but at
night, when submarines cruised on the surface confident of invisibility, they
were almost impossible to find. The solution emerged almost by accident. A
junior RAF officer, Sir Humphrey de Vere Leigh, privately developed the
idea of a powerful marine searchlight, located in the nose or under the wing
of anti-submarine aircraft, which could be switched on at the point where the
radar picture faded. The device was developed in defiance of orders from
above, but its advantages shone through. During 1942 the Leigh Light was
turned rapidly into an operational instrument. Flying dangerously close to
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
51
the surface of the sea the attacking aircraft tracked the target with ASV
radar, until approximately 1 mile away from it an operator floodlit the area
ahead. The aircraft then dived to 50 feet to deliver a pattern of depth-
charges. The first successful attack was carried out on the startled crew of u-
502 cruising in the Bay of Biscay on 5 July 1942. U-boat sinkings in July were
four times as many as those in June. By August U-boats were forced to travel
submerged and at night when they crossed the Bay to and from their bases;
or they would move during daylight hours, with anxious look-outs scanning
the skies for RAF patrols. But two months later the pendulum swung back
the other way. German scientists rapidly developed a receiver set, 'Metox',
which gave warning of aircraft approaching using the 1•7-metre frequency.
The ball was back in the Allies' court, to find a radar with greater accuracy
and beyond submarine detection. 60
Ships suffered from the same deficiency as aircraft in the accurate location
of submarines. Here too radar was the only answer. The standard long-wave
I 7-metre radar was of little use for tracking surface vessels, for there was
too much activity from the sea itself, even in relatively calm weather. In 194I
the British navy sponsored the search for much narrower wavelengths. At
Birmingham University the breakthrough was made. The invention of the
cavity magnetron permitted the development of radio valves that could
operate on much shorter frequencies, of 10 centimetres. When a radar set
was built around the new valve it proved able to detect even a submarine
periscope. The new Type 271 sets were installed on escort vessels from the
middle of 1941. They did not yet work perfectly. The valves had a small
power output until the development later in the war of the 'strapped'
magnetron, the cv56 valve, which powered the radar sets of all naval vessels
by 1943.61 In rough seas even this more sensitive radar was deceived by the
waves. But centimetric radar gave a solid scientific foundation to the war at
sea. Its constant refinement enabled more and more escort vessels to see in
the dark around their threatened convoys.
By 1943 all British and American vessels were fitted with some basic form
of centimetric radar. Once the target was in range it could be destroyed
either with gunfire or depth charges. During 1942 this technology was
also improved. Instead of depth charges being dropped from the back of
the vessel at the point where contact with the submarine through radar on
ASDIC was lost, a new method was devised by the British Department
of Miscellaneous Weapons Development. A multiple mortar, nicknamed
'Hedgehog', was installed at the front of the ship. It fired 24 small bombs
which fanned out in front of the ship and dived swiftly into the sea 200 yards
ahead. The bombs were fitted with contact fuses, so that only a submarine
hit would produce an explosion. The remaining bombs sank to the bottom of
