EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
his guilt and that of all those beguiled by the system, a confession that
probably saved his life. In fact most of them, when brought unavoidably face
to face with what they or their companions had done, were shocked or
stunned by the realisation.
Early on in the trial, on 29 November, the defendants were shown a
film taken by American forces of the liberated
concentration camps.
A psychologist was posted at either end of the dock to note the reaction of
the prisoners. Even allowing for calculated expressions of remorse, the
reactions are worth recalling: 'looks pale and sits aghast ... has head
bowed, doesn't look. covers his eyes, looks as if he is in agony. blinks
eyes, trying to stifle tears... Goering looks sad ... Doenitz has head
buried in his hands... Keitel now hanging head . . .
The film pricked all
but the coldest conscience. When the psychologists visited the cells that
same evening, many of the prisoners were still in shock, most were horrified
and shamed by what they had witnessed. Hans Frank, the Nazi ruler of
wartime Poland, burst into a sobbing rage when asked about the film: 'Don't
let anybody tell you that they had no idea! Everybody sensed that there was
something horribly wrong with this system. To think that we lived like kings
and believed in that beast...
,99 From within the wretched remnants of
Hitler's elite there surfaced, in varying degrees, a recognition of the immoral
character of the regime they had served.
The history of the Nuremberg Tribunal exemplifies the moral contrast
between the
two sides (and the awkward morality behind a victorious
coalition of democratic and communist powers). The indictments were an
extension of the Allied conviction that they had fought a just war against
aggression and barbarism. The justness was demonstrated by the fact that
the victors had not, as Justice Jackson put it, exacted immediate vengeance
while 'flushed with victory and stung with injury', but had submitted their
case to the due process of law. The same procedure was adopted when
Japan's leaders were brought before a second International Tribunal, at
which a catalogue of appalling atrocities against civilians and soldiers was
paraded in horrifying detail. The revelations in both trials confirmed the
picture created during the war to sustain the Allied war effort, of primitive
savages in the east, and devious barbarians in Europe. This image had both
simplified and strengthened the Allied cause. During the war, hatred of
Hitlerism papered over the deep cracks in the Allies' own coalition of
interests and ideologies, and it continued to do so, if falteringly, during the
trials. It was a hatred that had sustained the most significant moral effort of
the war, the mobilisation of the Soviet will to win. Whatever the rights and
wrongs of the Allied cause, the belief that they fought on the side of
righteousness equipped them with powerful moral armament.
THE MORAL CONTEST
313
There were many on the Axis side who would have agreed. War was not
widely welcomed, nor were its purposes understood. Popular propaganda
was distrusted. A hard core of enthusiasts saw the war as a way to impose a
brazen 'new morality', rooted in racism, violence and enslavement. But
many more continued to fight only through fear, or struggled, like the Ger-
man resistance, to reassert a conventional morality. As the war deterior-
ated for the Axis states, the instruments of terror were turned on their
own people and soldiers.
They fought from sheer survival instinct, but the
underlying moral dilemma of fighting an aggressive war in which brutal-
isation and atrocity had become routine was inescapable. The repeated
efforts to murder Hitler revealed a system divided against itself, just as
the wave of suicides at the war's end surely revealed uncomfortable con-
sciences. Historians are loth to pronounce on moral issues, even where
the balance of right and wrong seems clear-cut. But can there be any doubt
that populations will fight with less effect in the service of an evil cause?
