ALONG A GOOD ROAD . . .
174
ing 7th army and 5th Panzer army to launch a concentrated armoured
offensive towards Avranches with all the Panzer divisions he could spare.
Disobedience was hardly an option. Only two weeks before, on 20 July, a
group of high-ranking army conspirators had failed to assassinate Hitler
at his headquarters. Many of von Kluge's comrades were now in prison
awaiting trial, and Hitler had sent a personal emissary to von Kluge's head-
quarters on 2 August to keep close watch on what the Commander-in-
Chief West was doing. Von Kluge knew that to fulfil Hitler's order to
counter-attack was military suicide; but to order retreat would mean a
career brought to an abrupt and dishonourable conclusion. On 3 August
von Kluge, against the strident protests of his tank commanders, began to
arrange what Hitler wanted. By the oth he had gathered five weakened
divisions in an area 30 miles from the sea around the town of Mortain, in a
position to sever the thin neck of land connecting Patton's forces with the
rest of the American front. Between them they could muster no more than
four hundred tanks. There were no reserves.88
Intelligence on the counter-attack at Mortain was plentiful on the Allied
side. The time when it would be launched was revealed through Ultra
decrypts. Bradley was able to place forces in strongly fortified areas in front
of the German threat. A little after midnight on 7 August the Panzer forces
began their attack. One division under cover of darkness and early morning
mist covered 10 miles. But when the mist finally cleared at midday, the
German armour was subjected to an air attack of exceptional intensity. The
German forces made no progress and suffered heavy losses. On that
afternoon Bradley began to counter-attack. By the end of the following day,
the German Panzer divisions were back where they had started, and faced
irresistible pressure on either flank. That same day the rest of the front
began to cave in. Around Caen, the Canadian and British forces pinned
down in the German defensive field took advantage of the withdrawal of the
armoured divisions westwards. Under cover of darkness and an annihilating
bombardment that disorganised the attackers almost, but not quite, as much
as the defenders, Allied forces drove to within 7 miles of Falaise, far behind
the rear of the German armies trying to sustain Hitler's counter-offensive.
That day Eisenhower, who had moved his headquarters to France for the
first time, met with Montgomery and Bradley to discuss how to take
advantage of the long weak salient now occupied by the remnants of three
German armies. It was agreed that Patton should swing north to form the
southern jaw of a giant pincer to cut off German forces before they could
retreat. Patton obliged with a march of 35 miles in two days that brought him
by 11 August to the town of Argentan, just 20 miles from the ist Canadian
army closing on Falaise from the north.
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
175
It was now only a matter of time before the jaws closed tight. All along the
shrunken German line von Kluge's forces fought with desperate tenacity to
keep the narrow escape route open. Von Kluge, fearful that he would take
the blame for the collapse, became 'more and more gloomy'. Without
permission from Hitler he ordered 2nd Panzer division to withdraw. But
It was nov only a mat von Kluge's . Von Klugand more glo mith
frantic and insulting messages from Hitler's headquarters forced him to keep
the rest of his forces where they were, pressed back on all sides. There was
no hope of relief. The Allies revived the Anvil attack on southern France
(now codenamed 'Dragoon' as their grip in the north tightened. On 15
August Allied troops landed in southern France and against the lightest
resistance, and with much willing French participation, pushed up to meet
American armies driving towards Paris. Behind the trapped German armies
there were only the remnants of isth army and little else between them and
the Reich. By now Hitler suspected that von Kluge was on the point of
surrender. Rather than face another Stalingrad he ordered Field Marshal
Walter Model, a hero of the long fighting retreat on the eastern front, to
fly at once to the western pocket and perform miracles.ºº
It took Model only a few hours to see that no miracle could save the
western front. He gave the German commanders permission to withdraw
through the jaws, now only 5 or 6 miles wide, and closing hourly. The costs
were far greater than a surrender. The exhausted Germans who ran the
gauntlet through the gap were subjected to a barrage from air and artillery.
Much of the equipment was abandoned. All along the roads, made
impassable by bomb craters, and blocked by wagons and lorries burnt out
and blown apart, trudged small groups of soldiers, who sought any avenue
out of the carnage. The withdrawal had some semblance of order on 18
August, as the last German tanks held off the furious attacks of Allied
forces, but when the jaws closed the retreat became a rout. A cloud of dense
smoke hung over the battered mouth of the salient. Without food or
munitions, German stragglers tried to fight their way through. They were
raked with fire and bombed incessantly. A great part of the army escaped,
but it was no longer a fighting force. Of those who did not, 45,000 were taken
prisoner, and ten thousand lay in tangled heaps, among the bloated horses
and crumpled tanks, victims of a slaughter for which Hitler alone bore the
For the first time German forces fled before the enemy. Because Hitler
had insisted on fighting the decisive battle far forward in Normandy, there
was almost nothing left of German forces in France once that battle was lost.
The flight that followed little resembled the fighting withdrawal in the east,
or the slow, hard-fought retreat across France in 1918. The remnants of the
defeated army rushed for the Seine and beyond. Here they faced the
