ALONG A GOOD ROAD • • •
150
reinforcement. 36 There was in this a profound irony, for the most successful
part of the whole transport plan was executed not by the heavy-bombers,
which had plastered 72,000 tons of bombs on the hapless French railways,
but by the small battlefield bombers under Leigh-Mallory's command,
whose 4,400 tons of bombs achieved all of what Eisenhower wanted, in a
matter of days. The most important contribution of the heavy-bombers, as
Spaatz maintained all along, was the progressive destruction of the German
air force over the Reich, which gave the Allies overwhelming air supremacy
throughout the invasion. 37
(None of these efforts would have availed a great deal if the German
Supreme Command had known well in advance where and when the Allies
would strike, and disposed their forces accordingly. The element of surprise
was critical. And yet an operation designed to move 4,000 ships, 2 million
men and 12,000 aircraft to France, from a base only a few minutes flying time
from German airfields, appeared an impossible secret to keep for six long
months) The fact that German leaders failed to guess the main invasion
target and the date of invasion owed something to good fortune; but it also
owed a good deal to an elaborate web of misinformation and deceit spun by
Allied intelligence.
Deception was the instrument of surprise.The British had begun to use it
extensively in the Middle East, with mounting success, and it was their
growing experience in the techniques and tactics of deception that per-
suaded them, and eventually their sceptical American allies, that it could be
used on a grand scale for Overlord. There was no question that preparations
for invasion could be disguised. Even the most casual intelligence would
indicate a massive build-up of men and material in southern England
during the first half of 1944. The intelligence staffs instead chose to mis-
lead the Germans about the destination of the invasion forces, and to
conceal the date of attack. By this stage of the war the initiative lay very
much with the Allies. All German spies in Britain had been rounded up,
and many of them acted as double agents, purveying to their credulous
German controllers a diet of innocuous, but true, information, spiced with
plausible falsehoods, all of it supplied by the British secret service. The
effectiveness of the Double-Cross System, as it became known, relied
on British access to the German Enigma cryptographic communications
(Ultra), which confirmed the success or failure of the campaign of misinfor-
mation. By 1944 German secret service codes were routinely broken. By
contrast, German intelligence on Britain was poor. The high level codes
for Allied communication proved impenetrable; and air reconnaissance
remained scrappy and unsystematic, thanks to a wall of radar and fighter
defence."
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
151
(The deception plan, code-named 'Bodyguard', was drawn up in Decem-
ber 1943 and finally approved by the Allied staffs late in January 1944.
The core of the plot was to persuade the German leadership that the
Allies intended to attack across the narrow neck of the English Channel,
between Dover and Calais (codenamed 'Fortitude South'), with a diversion-
ary attack against Scandinavia ('Fortitude North'). The object was to tie
down German forces in northern Europe, and to keep the bulk of German
troops in France and Belgium guarding the Pas de Calais and the Belgian
and Dutch coastline. The Scandinavian deception had limited success.
Hitler had been obsessed for years with the idea of an Allied landing in
Norway. The mass of false information about a British 'Fourth Army' in
Scotland played on this fear but did not succeed in enlarging it. Twelve
divisions remained in Norway, but they were not supplemented by
reinforcements taken from France. German radio operators were tuned in radio
to the Soviet front, so that they missed the phantom radio traffic beamed
from Scotland to sustain the illusion of a northern invasion.
39 The Channel
deception was far more successful. It hinged on persuading German
intelligence that large Allied formations existed in south-east England for an
invasion towards Calais, while concealing the size of the forces and shipping
concentrated in the south-west. Credentials for an entire force, one million
strong, christened First US Army Group (FUSAG) were fed, piece by piece,
into the German intelligence system, where they lodged, until well past the
real invasion, as actual fact. Notionally stationed across south-east England
and East Anglia, FUSAG was from first to last a figment of the deceivers'
imagination. 40
The creation of FUSAG was a work of artistic mendacity. Across the whole Camps
of south-eastern England sprang up dummy camps and supply depots, false
headquarters, tanks made of rubber (fashioned by set designers from the
Shepperton film studios), landing-craft of wood and fabric, and airfields
complete with concealed lighting to give an air of authenticity to the ruse.
Lights blazed and camp stoves smoked, visible to any intruding enemy
aircraft. But west of a line drawn from the south-coast city of Portsmouth
every effort was made at concealment: tents were darkened, food was
dispensed from smokeless stoves, army issue white towels were replaced
with khaki. 4' To confirm the visible falsehoods, the double agents radioed
details of unit insignia and FUSAG organisation to their German contacts.
Eisenhower chose one of his most successful commanders, the profanely
outspoken General George S. Patton, to command FUSAG. Patton fumed
at the inactivity this imposed upon him, but the appointment of a com-
mander of this quality added inestimable weight to the whole FUSAG
deception. Finally, every effort was made to get German intelligence to
