190
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
Soviet survival and subsequent revival. The Soviet Union was turned into
Stalin's 'single war camp'. The costs were high for the Soviet people as they
struggled to come to terms with life in an economy where there was little left
over for civilians once the forces were equipped and fed. Theirs was an
exceptional, brutal form of total war. The resilience of the Soviet people in
the face of the German assault and the remorseless demands of their own
regime needs a Tolstoy or a Dostoevsky to do it justice. Here was Ilya
Ehrenburg's 'deep war', sustained, he later recalled, by an 'unobtrusive
day-to-day heroism'.27
The situation facing the United States economy could hardly have been
more different. There was no doubt that America had the resources for a
prodigious war effort. British leaders had longed before Pearl Harbor to
have that abundance at their disposal. 'There is one way, and one way only',
the British economist Sir William Layton told an audience of American
industrialists in October 1940, 'in which the three to one ratio of Germany's
steel output can be overwhelmed and that is by the 50 to 60 million ingot tons
of the United States 28 In 1941 America produced more steel, aluminium,
oil and motor vehicles than all the other major states together.
The problem was how to turn this abundance from the purposes of peace
to those of war. The United States had no tradition of military industry.
Intervention in the First World War came too late to build up war prod-
uction of any real size. The 'military-industrial' complex was the product
of a later age. By the 1930s twenty years of disarmament and detach-
ment left the world's richest economy with an army ranked eighteenth
in size in the world, and an air force of 1,700 largely obsolescent aircraft
and a mere twenty thousand men.2) In 1940 military expenditure made
up just 2 per cent of America's national product. Military weakness was
a consequence of an isolation
both
geographical and
political. The
American public displayed a deep-felt hostility to war and militarism. In
1937 comprehensive neutrality legislation passed through Congress, inten-
ded to keep the United States out of other people's wars, and to limit the
trade and production of armaments. Many Americans regretted the inter-
vention of 1917 and were determined not to make the same mistake twice.
This was not the only political issue. America's was a free market
economy, emerging in the late 1930s from a decade of economic hardship
into the full glare of a consumer boom. The American government could not
simply suppress its people's expectations and turn butter into guns. Both
business and labour distrusted state power, no more so than when the state
was planning to spend their money on arms. The effort to increase federal
ECONOMIES AT WAR
191
responsibilities under Roosevelt's 'New Deal' for economic recovery in the
1930s brought bitter disputes. Unlike Germany or the Soviet Union, the
growth of the military economy depended on reaching a broad consensus
across the whole political spectrum, from hard-nosed Republican bosses to
tough-minded Democrat unions. This remained the case even after Pearl
Harbor gave Roosevelt the
perfect opportunity to cut across
all the
objections to economic mobilisation at a stroke? The American people
reacted with a fiery indignation to the Japanese attack in the early months of
1942, but the United States itself was not threatened with invasion; no
bombs fell on American cities. The conflicts were an ocean away, and
sustaining a popular commitment to production and economic sacrifice was
an altogether different issue than it appeared in Britain or the Soviet Union.
For all these reasons American rearmament was slow to materialise
before 1942. Roosevelt was able to win additional budget funds for the navy
only on the grounds that the navy was a genuine instrument of defence
rather than offence. The tiny American military aircraft industry was
stimulated from 1939 onwards by the demand for aviation equipment from
Britain and France. Only in 1941, with a third Presidential election
successfully behind him, did Roosevelt feel confident enough of popular
support to begin to rearm more earnestly! On 9 July 1941 he asked the army
and navy to draw up a comprehensive plan of all the resources they would
need to defeat America's potential enemies. The programme became
known informally as the 'Victory Programme?) The results were presented
to the President in September, but a final estimate could not be prepared
until British and Soviet requests for military aid were drawn up and
approved.
As a result a final programme for war production
was barely
ready before the United States found themselves at war with Japan and
Germany in December. Until a clear general picture
of the scale of
America's planned rearmament was available, the President could do little
more than authorise temporary and uncoordinated contracts, many of them
to feed the needs of the other warring states for whom he had promised in
December 1940 to make the United States the 'arsenal of democracy'. In the
whole of 1941 military expenditure was just 4 per cent of the amount
America spent between 1941 and 1945•
30
When war broke out the United States was still a predominantly civilian
economy, with a small apparatus of state, low taxes, and a military estab-
lishment that had only reached the foothills of re-equipment. America
faced states which had been arming heavily for eight or nine years and now
had more than half their national product devoted to the waging of war.
American leaders were conscious of how much there was to catch up ¿The
giant plans approved by Roosevelt and Congress in the first weeks of war did
