48
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . . •
bombers and flying-boats, armed for anti-submarine warfare. During 1942
the radius of air action was
extended, with great arcs of the Atlantic
becoming accessible from Ireland, Iceland and Newfoundland. What was
left was an area 600 miles wide in the mid-Atlantic, the so-called Atlantic
Gap' or 'Black Pit'. The gap stretched from Greenland in the north through
to the area around the Azores, and it was here that Dönitz concentrated his
submarines from the middle of the year. The wolf-packs lived in the gap,
attacking convoys as they left air cover and breaking off the attack when they
regained it. The packs would then refuel from the milch-cows and await the
next convoy. The attacks carried great risks, but the rewards were
substantial. In 1942 sinkings in the Atlantic reached 5•4 million tons; total
Allied losses reached 7-8 million tons, 1,662 ships in all. This was a rate of
loss difficult to sustain. British imports sank to one-third of their peacetime
level; by January 1943 the British navy had only two months' supply of oil
left. "The only thing that ever really frightened me during the war', Churchill
later wrote, 'was the U-boat peril. 56
In an area as vast as the Atlantic the submarine was an inherently difficult
enemy to defeat.
Cruising on the surface it could outrun most ships;
submerged it was invisible without the right scientific equipment. The
initiative lay with the submarines who could choose where and when to
engage enemy traffic. The Allies by 1942 were faced with a daunting but not
insoluble mission. They adopted two very distinct approaches. The first was
to find ways of avoiding the submarine altogether. Indeed the chief priority
was not to sail pell-mell into a submarine trap in the hope that a handful of
small escort vessels could sink the attacker in time, but to get across the
Atlantic entirely unmolested. If this was galling to naval commanders who
relished combat, it was none the less the best way of getting supplies (and
relieved sailors!) across the ocean. The second was to find a way of
accurately locating submarines so that effective anti-submarine forces, naval
and air, could be brought to bear without wasting endless time on long
sweeping searches. It was never enough simply to avoid the submarines: at
some point they had to be fought.
The common denominator required for both strategies was precise
knowledge of the movement of submarines. Convoys could then take
evasive action; aircraft and combat vessels could close in on the betrayed
location. Accurate intelligence about the whereabouts of U-boats was the
first building block in the Atlantic Battle, but it was frustratingly difficult to
secure. For much of 1942, with Allied cryptanalysis blinded by Triton, the
navy relied on the Submarine Tracking Room set up in the Admiralty at the
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
49
outbreak of war. The Tracking Room used a wide variety of intelligence
sources, from agents' reports in the submarine bases on the French coast, to
bearings reported by the units for radio interception scattered around the
Atlantic rim. It was deliberately housed next to the Trade Plot Room, from
which the global movement of merchant vessels was controlled. Intelligence
from the Tracking Room was immediately available to alter the movements
of merchant shipping. The room was run not by desk-bound sailors but by
civilians - academics, economists, lawyers - drafted in to bring intelligence,
in its conventional sense, to bear on the sea war. In charge was Rodger
Winn, a barrister of exceptional talent, who devoted himself, to the point of
physical collapse, to providing the best estimate day by day of the number
and position of submarines in the Atlantic. Even without cryptographic
intelligence the Tracking Room was able to warn the American navy of the
impending assault on east coast shipping lanes in January. It did not take
Admiral King long to realise the value of accurate plotting, and a similar
room was set up in Washington, which cooperated closely with its British
counterpart for the rest of the war. 57 The intelligence effort paid rich
dividends. Between May 1942 and May 1943 105 out of 174 convoys sailed
across the Atlantic without interference from submarines; out of the 69
sighted by the wolf-packs 23 escaped without attack and 30 suffered only
minor losses. Only the remaining 10 per cent were severely depleted. 58
Good intelligence was the first step. It was up to the convoy commander
and his naval escort to do the rest. However, there were obvious weaknesses
in the escort system. Escort vessels were in short supply, even more so when
the crisis in the Pacific drew American vessels away from the Atlantic. Many of
the escorts were obsolescent boats, converted to a role for which they were
inadequately prepared and armed. The task of the escort commander was
hazardous and demanding. In all weathers, with only imprecise knowledge of
the exact whereabouts of the submarine packs, he had to remain constantly
vigilant, shepherding his loosely-formed flock of merchantmen scattered over
miles of ocean, and rescuing stragglers. Air cover was almost non-existent. The
large aircraft carriers were needed elsewhere, and the conversion of tankers
and cargo vessels to a carrier role was a slow process, their potential realised
only late in the day. Until 1942 the training for escort duty was rudimentary.
Commanders were expected to devise their tactics on the ocean.
When
confronted with a U-boat some commanders ordered the escorts to give
chase, leaving the merchantmen weakly defended. Others concentrated on
herding their vessels out of danger, using the escorts like so many sheepdogs,
snapping at the heels of slower transports to save them from the wolves. But
gradually a common set of tactics emerged: when numbers permitted, the
escorting ships would divide into two groups, the larger part protecting the
