ALONG A GOOD ROAD • • •
144
leaders left Teheran they did so with a common strategy for the first time in
the whole course of the conflict. Overlord was approved not on its strategic
merits alone, but also to seal the alliance.
After two years of messy argument and uncertainty the final six months
before invasion brimmed over with a bustling sense of purpose. The first
step was to appoint commanders. The British had agreed at Quebec that
when the time came the Supreme Commander should be an American. It
was expected that Roosevelt would recommend the army Chief-of-Staff,
General Marshall, who was anxious to prove that he was more than a desk-
top soldier. But the President realised at the last moment how much he
relied on his military manager, and chose instead the man who had assumed
the overall command of Allied efforts in the Mediterranean, General
Eisenhower. He was a natural choice as the senior American general in
Europe. After a year in the field he had much more experience
than
Marshall. He had a reputation as a good manager of men, a good chair for a
committee. A tall, balding figure, Eisenhower ('Ike' to almost everyone)
looked at 53 like a school headmaster in uniform - even more so when he
donned his round-rimmed spectacles to read. Born in Abiline, Kansas, in
1890, the son of a failed storekeeper, his rise to supreme commander had
much of the American Dream about it. With no money and a modest mid-
West education behind him, he stumbled into an army career in which he
quickly showed himself to be an energetic organiser. The First World War
ended before he got to Europe. He swore to himself that he would 'make up
for this', but he spent a fruitless twenty years stuck at the rank of major.
There was nowhere to fight and little to fight with.?' On the outbreak of war
he was posted to the War Department to take over as Deputy for War Plans,
but not until August 1942 did he get a field command, Supreme Commander
for the Torch landings in North Africa.
When he arrived in Africa in
November to take up his command he had never seen armed combat. His
talents were managerial. His inexperience was self-evident; Brooke com-
plained that he had 'absolutely no strategical outlook'. His strength was his
ability to achieve 'good cooperation' from subordinates and allies alike.
Such a talent was at a premium in preparing Overlord.22
It was a talent that was stretched to the limit in Eisenhower's relationship
with the commander chosen by the British to storm Fortress Europe,
General Bernard Montgomery. He was once again a natural choice. 'Monty'
was the victor of the Alamein campaign which turned the tide in North
Africa; he was enormously popular with the troops under his command and
with the British public. Three years older than Eisenhower, his military
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
145
career was fuller. The son of a clergyman, he followed a conventional path
from public school to the British army academy at Sandhurst. In 1914 he was
a lieutenant in the Royal Warwickshire Regiment. He saw fierce fighting on
the Western Front, was severely wounded, returned to the front and ended
the war as a divisional chief-of-staff with the rank of major; two years
later he saw combat again,
against Sinn Fein in the struggle for Irish
independence. Between the wars he was a successful staff officer; when
war broke out again he was a major-general. As with Eisenhower, real
responsibility came only in 1942 when Churchill chose him to take over
the 8th army in Egypt and turn back the Axis armies advancing on Suez. 23
He was a good organiser and a careful strategist. His bloody baptism of
fire in 1914 taught him not to gamble with the lives of his men. He suffered
fools not at all, and had little respect for rank and distinction. He believed
that officers should get close to their men, but with fellow commanders he
could be prickly and arrogant. He possessed a strong self-belief which he
communicated to those below him, but it was a quality that made him
intolerant of allies and colleagues where Eisenhower was a
model of
appeasement. The eventual success of their awkward partnership owed
more to Eisenhower's self-restraint than it did to any diffidence on the
part of Montgomery.
On one thing both men were agreed: the invasion plan drawn up in the
summer of 1943 was not adequate for the task Montgomery first saw the
plan on New Year's Eve in Marrakesh where Churchill, whose cold had
deteriorated into pneumonia, was convalescing. He spent the night reading
it through and reported to the Prime Minister the following morning that the
plan as it stood was impracticable. Instead of a narrow beachhead and three
assault divisions Montgomery recommended a much broader front with a
larger attacking force of five divisions, and a concentration of air power
sufficient to win air supremacy over the lodgement area.24 Eisenhower
arrived at the same conclusion when he had leisure to study the plan in
January. While the two men settled into new London headquarters -
Montgomery at his old public school, St Paul's in
West Kensington,
Eisenhower at the Supreme Headquarters (SHAEF) on the outskirts of
London at Bushy Park - they got down to the task of drawing up a firm plan.
On 21 January the command team met and agreed to widen the front of
attack from the mouth of the Seine to the east coast of the Cotentin
peninsula, and to put ashore five divisions in the first assault phase instead of
three. The aim was to capture the port of Cherbourg as soon as possible, and
to seize the town of Caen in order to provide suitable bases from which to
build up Allied air power. Once ashore it was planned to build up a secure
lodgement using 37 divisions already stationed in Britain, until sufficient
