130
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
America's industrial cornucopia, German air power could be blunted once
and for all The result was not a single, spectacular victory, but a slow and
lethal erosion of fighting capability. For the Allies this was an essential
outcome, if their re-entry to the Continent was not to face hazardous risk.
For all Stalin's impatience, the western Allies knew the stunning effect on
their war effort that a German victory on the invasion beaches would
generate. Without the defeat or neutralisation of the German air force the
Allies might well have hesitated to take the risk. Without the successful
diversion of the heavy-bomber force to the job of pulverising roads, railways
and bridges, in order to stifle German efforts to reinforce the anti-invasion
front, D-Day might have failed at the first attempt. That story remains to be
told below, but it weighs heavily in the scales of any judgement on bombing.
All of these factors, the defeat of the German air force, the diversion of
effort from the eastern front at a critical point in that struggle, the successful
preliminaries to D-Day, belie the view that bombing was a strategy of
squandered effort. It is difficult to think of anything else the Allies might
have done with their manpower and resources that could have achieved this
much at such comparatively low cost.)
Beyond these military gains lay the German economy and German
morale. No one would argue with the view that for much of the war the
bombing forces exaggerated the degree of direct physical destruction they
were inflicting on German industry. Neither can it be denied that between
1941 and 1944, in step with the escalating bombardment, German military
output trebled. The effect of bombing on the German economy was not to
prevent a sustained increase in output, but to place a strict ceiling on that
expansion. By the middle of the war, with the whole of continental Europe
at her disposal, Germany was fast becoming an economic super-power. The
harvest of destruction and disruption reaped by bomb attack, random and
poorly planned as it often was, was sufficient to blunt German economic
ambitions.
The effects of bombing on the economy were both direct and indirect. The
direct physically reduced the quantity of weapons and equipment flowing
from German factories; the indirect forced the diversion of resources to
cope with bombing, resources which German industry could have turned
into tanks, planes and guns. Direct effects were felt from both area bombing
and precision bombing, as the city attacks hit water, gas and electricity
supplies, cut railway lines, blocked roads, or destroyed smaller factories
producing components. Much of this, it is true, could be made good within
weeks, sometimes within days. But for the German manager in the last two
years of war there were two battles to fight: a battle to increase production,
and a battle against the endless inconveniences produced by bombing, the
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
I31
interruptions to work, the loss of supplies and raw materials, the fears of the
workforce. Where the businessman in America or Britain could work away
at the task of maximising output, German managers were forced to enter an
uncomfortable battlefield in which they and their workers were unwitting
targets. The stifling of industrial potential caused by bombing is inherently
difficult to quantify, but it was well beyond the 1o per cent suggested by the
post-war bombing survey, particularly in the cluster of war industries
specifically under attack. At the end of January 1945 Albert Speer and his
ministerial colleagues met in Berlin to sum up what bombing had done to
production schedules for 1944. They found that Germany had produced 35
per cent fewer tanks than planned, 31 per cent fewer aircraft and 42 per cent
fewer lorries as a result of bombing. The denial of these huge resources to
German forces in 1944 fatally weakened their response to bombing and
invasion, and eased the path of Allied armies. 69
The indirect effects were more important still, for the bombing offensive
forced the German economy to switch very large resources away from
equipment for the fighting fronts, using them instead to combat the bombing
threat. By 1944 one-third of all German artillery production consisted of
anti-aircraft guns; the anti-aircraft effort absorbed 20 per cent of all
ammunition produced, one-third of the output of the optical industry, and
between half and two-thirds of the production of radar and signals
equipment. As a result of this diversion, the German army and navy were
desperately short of essential radar and communications equipment for
other tasks. The bombing also ate into Germany's scarce manpower: by
1944 an estimated two million Germans were
engaged in anti-aircraft
defence, in repairing shattered factories and in generally cleaning up the
destruction." From the spring of that year frantic efforts were made to
burrow underground, away from the bombing. Fantastic schemes were
promoted which absorbed almost half of all industrial construction and close
to half a million workers." Of course, if German efforts to combat the
bombing had succeeded the effort would not have been wasted. As it was the
defences and repair teams did enough to keep production going until the
autumn of 1944, but not enough to prevent the rapid erosion of German
economic power thereafter, and not enough to prevent the massive
redirection of economic effort from 1943. Bombing forced Germany to
divide the economy between too many competing claims, none of which
could, in the end, be satisfied. In the air over Germany, or on the fronts in
Russia and France, German forces lacked the weapons to finish the job. The
combined effects of direct destruction and the diversion of resources denied
German forces approximately half their battle-front weapons and equip-
ment in 1944. It is difficult not to regard this margin as decisive.
