228
since 1939.
A WAR OF ENGINES
32,000 aircraft overseas.4 For Germany modern war had come full circle
The war of engines, of aircraft, tanks and trucks, was a war run on oil.)
'Petroleum products', wrote the American geographer C.F. Jones, in 1943,
'are the blood of battles that bring victory. 5ยบ The Axis states were at a
profound disadvantage in fighting modern war because they largely lacked
this critical resource. Over 90 per cent of the world's natural oil output was
controlled by the Allies. The Axis states controlled just 3 per cent of the
output and 4 per cent of the oil-refining capacity.
( So vital was oil for modern industry and modern war that the Axis states
were willing to fight to gain control of it.The Japanese decision to attack the
United States and Britain in 1941 was forced by an oil embargo that cut off
from Japan go per cent of her supply. The prime target of Japanese soldiers
and sailors in the drive southwards was the valuable oilfields of Borneo,
Java, Sumatra and Burma, which produced more than enough oil to cover
all Japan's military needs. In 1942 Hitler's drive into southern Russia,
against the generals' advice, was aimed at the even richer oilfields of the
Caucasus which could provide four times the quantity of oil Germany had
in 1941. When German soldiers reached the oil centre of Maikop, and
threatened to cross the Caucasus mountains to Baku, German and Italian
forces in north Africa were battling towards the Suez Canal and the oil
resources of the Middle East beyond. Axis armies came close to achieving
the geopolitical dream, the conquest of the oil-rich crescent from Trans-
Caucasia to the Persian Gulf.
Japan conquered her oil supplies; Germany and Italy did not. Without the
oil of south-east Asia the Japanese war effort would have petered out.
Though retreating oilworkers blew up or ignited what they could before the
Japanese arrived, the damage was not irreparable. The Japanese expected
to take two years to get oil production going again, but some of the fields
were working within days. During 1942 the southern region supplied almost
as much oil as Japan had imported from the United States before the
embargo. Most of the oil was refined on the spot and absorbed into the
battles in the south Pacific. This left the rest of Japan's forces and the home
economy short of oil throughout the war. The large home fishing fleet was
ordered to convert to sail and abandon oil. Even naval ships were converted
back to coal, though it reduced their performance. Every effort was made on
the home front to cut back on civilian oil consumption, which by 1944 was a
mere 4 per cent of the amount used in 1941. From 1938 Japan had pursued a
programme to produce synthetic fuel from coal, a process already pioneered
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
229
in Germany. Although production went ahead, precise details of how the
processes worked were withheld by the Germans until January 1945. In the
interim the grandiose pre-war plans to produce 14 million barrels of oil a
year fizzled out in the general climate of shortages; the peak of synthetic
production was reached in 1942, a mere 1.5 million barrels of poor quality
fuel. 51
The one problem to which little thought had been given
was how to
transport oil safely around the new imperial seaways.
There was a large
tanker fleet, to which i million tons of new tankers were added during the
war. By the end of the war most of them were on the ocean bed. Knowing
how much Japan depended on oil, American submarines and dive-bombers
sought out the vulnerable tankers, which had virtually no protection, sailing
in ones or twos. If they radioed for air protection they were more likely to be
visited by American aircraft than Japanese, directed to the target by the
regular interception and decoding of Japanese messages. The flow of oil to
Japan's empire began to slow down early in 1943; it was no more than a dark
trickle by 1945.52 Too late, efforts were made to sail in large convoys, but
even these were given little air or naval protection. On 9 January 1945
Commander Kuwahara led a slow convoy of tankers and merchantmen out
of Saigon harbour, with six armed escorts. The following day it was spotted
by a B-24 bomber. On the 12th it was ambushed by 16 fighter-bombers in
mid-morning; one freighter was destroyed and the convoy was scattered. As
it began to regroup seventy dive-bombers appeared, circling round the ships
like hungry birds of prey. They bombed and torpedoed the convoy until
dusk. All the oil tankers were sunk, all the merchant ships destroyed, and
three escorts lost. The remaining escorts, heavily damaged, limped into
harbour, where they were attacked and damaged three more times by
carrier aircraft. Kuwahara survived, but of the convoy that followed from
Saigon on the 10 January not one ship got through. 53
Japan's oil situation was critical in 1944. Imports dropped to less than
one-seventh of the pre-war volume. Though enough oil had been stock-
piled to provide an estimated eighteen months' supply, it was eaten away in
the months of fierce fighting in the southern islands. By 1945 imports were
almost zero, and stocks fell to a level so low that the fleet could no longer
operate. During 1944 Japanese warships had been hampered by fuel
shortages from fighting effectively. They were forced to sail slowly to
conserve oil, or to sail by direct routes when good sense called for evasion.
Pilots could not be fully trained for want of scarce high-octane fuel, and
pilot losses reached levels so high in 1945 that there was little to distinguish
the regular flyers from the suicide squads. During 1945 thousands of
aircraft and small suicide boats or shinyo - wooden vessels of 2 tons, driven
