284
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
connection with the Soviet Union. Among the strongest opponents were
American Catholics, many of them of Polish or Italian extraction. In 1937
Pope Pius XI issued an encyclical on 'Atheistic Communism', forbidding
Catholics from collaborating with communism in any undertaking.
The
Catholic community was divided on the issue only because some saw Hitler
as the more immediate evil and were prepared to fight Hitlerism first. When
on 29 June 1941 the Pope broadcast to the faithful, some expected an
endorsement of the German anti-communist crusade. The Pope instead
abstained, calling on the faithful everywhere to place themselves in the
hands of Providence.
The paradox for Christians siding with communism was clear. At least two
of the three enemy states were nominally Christian. Italy was the home of
Roman Catholicism; Germany's population
was one-third Catholic.
Religion in both states lived in uneasy proximity with regimes that were
strongly anti-clerical in outlook peddling new secular religions of their own.
The same month that the Papacy condemned communism, a second
encyclical was published, 'Mit Brennender Sorge' (With Burning Anxiety'),
which condemned the Nazi persecution of the churches, Nazi racism and
Mussolini's deification of the state. Though Hitler often invoked God or
Providence when he spoke, he was a thoroughly lapsed Catholic. Hitler
considered Christianity incompatible with the new National-Socialist age - it
was 'merely whole-hearted Bolshevism, under a tinsel of metaphysics'. He
deplored the survival of religious observance among German ministers and
generals, 'little children
who have learnt nothing else'. He
regarded
Christianity and communism as two sides of the same coin, sharing in St Paul
a common Jewish ancestor.® Hitler took the German nation as his religion.
This did not make him a pagan as was widely believed, although paganism
was practised
under the Third Reich. The German Faith Movement,
under the banner of the golden sun-wheel, with the 'Song of the Goths'
as their anthem, indulged in pagan festivals and invoked the gods of pre-
Christian Germany. Heinrich Himmler's SS generated a pagan theology,
a pagan liturgy, even a pagan credo?
Many German Christians were alienated by Nazism. The German oppos-
ition counted thousands of priests of every denomination in its ranks; six
thousand of them died in the concentration camps or in prison. However,
most German Christians saw the defence of the nation as a Christian duty,
and the Church authorities reached compromises with the regime rather
than risk a more violent anti-clericalism. But Nazism and Christianity were
fundamentally at odds, and the Party made little effort to disguise it.
Roosevelt could quiet his religious critics by showing a German state even
more hostile to the Christian message than Stalin's Russia. A few weeks
THE MORAL CONTEST
285
before Congress finally approved Lend-Lease aid for the Soviet Union in
November 1941, Roosevelt obtained a copy of a thirty-point programme for
a German National Church drawn up by Hitler's chief of ideology, Alfred
Rosenberg. In his Navy Day Address on 27 October Roosevelt told his
audience that he had in his possession a secret document which showed a
Nazi plan to 'abolish all existing religions', to supplant the Bible with Mein
Kampf, and to replace the Cross with a sword and swastika. 1º Roosevelt was
also armed with a personal assurance from the new Pope, Pius XII, that the
encyclical condemning communism could be bent sufficiently to allow
Catholics to support aid for the
suffering Russian people. American
Christians of all denominations could now rally to the cause with a clear
conscience.
Religion was mobilised in every state to support the national war effort,
though it was by no means the only, or even the prime, source of moral
validation. The conscription of moral energies, like the mobilisation of
technical and economic resources, was a necessary element in the war effort
on both sides, particularly in this war when societies were fighting for their
very existence, or thought they were. Like the religious wars of the sixteenth
century, the Second World War was fought with a ferocity and desperation
born of real fears and deep hatreds. It was not a war simply for balance-of-
power politics, but also for ideals deeply held. Moral commitment to the
cause was forged from a heady mix of outrage, vengeance, loathing and
contempt, an intensity of feeling and a depth of anxiety not experienced
since the days of French Revolutionary Europe or the Thirty Years' War.
Populations on both sides sustained the struggle with some sense of the
justness of their cause, with that 'sacred hatred'.
/ No account of Allied victory can afford to ignore the moral dimension in
war. The conflict was never a simple one of right against wrong, as the
confused battle-lines of Christianity demonstrate. Roosevelt was clear in
his own mind that on the basic moral issues Stalin's dictatorship was of a
piece with Hitler's. The first line of Churchill's declaration of support for
the Russian people broadcast on the night of 22 June 1941 began with the
words: 'The Nazi regime is indistinguishable from the worst features of
communism.'l1 None of the Allies, the democracies included, fought an
unblemished war by any standard. The real success of the Allies lay in their
ability to win the moral high ground throughout the conflict by identifying
their cause with progressive, post-Enlightenment values.
Their enemies
they tarred with the brush of reactionary, even barbarous, vices. The
western democracies were self-righteous about their liberal virtues; but even
the Soviet Union was regarded then as a system striving for social progress, a
'new civilisation' as the British socialist Sidney Webb called it. The Allied
