54
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . ..
The respite was only temporary. Hitler, determined to press home the
submarine campaign at all costs, sacked Raeder and appointed Dönitz
Commander-in-Chief of the navy. All resources for the naval war were
concentrated on the production of submarines and the training of their
more each day.
On the Allied side there was the same sense of imminent climax. Meeting
in January the Combined Chiefs-of-Staff agreed that the defeat of the U-
boat was still their strategic priority, 'a first charge on the resources of the
United Nations'. More escorts and aircraft were sent to shelter the convoys.
In London the U-boat war was placed under the direction of a remarkable
British submariner, Admiral Sir Max Horton. In November 1942 he was
appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Western Approaches. His brief was
to find some way to reverse the downward slide in the anti-submarine war.
He was a pugnacious, hard-working commander, chosen deliberately as a
breath of fresh air in the anti-submarine campaign. He was respected rather
than liked, 'quite ruthless and quite selfish' according to one of his staff. He
kept unusual hours and expected his colleagues to do likewise. He worked in
the morning, then played a leisurely round of golf every day between two
and six, finally returning to the submarine plot room where he worked until
well past midnight every night, gulping pints of barley water, barking at his
subordinates and displaying what one witness described as an 'uncanny
prevision of what the enemy would do next'67 As a former submarine
commander he understood more clearly than his predecessors how Dönitz
might react. He could also see clearly the weaknesses still evident in the
Allied anti-submarine campaign.
With the arrival of Horton to duel with Dönitz came the changes that
would eventually tilt the Battle of the Atlantic the Allies' way. He
campaigned immediately for more aircraft, particularly long-range aircraft
to fill the Altantic Gap. He insisted that all aircraft hunting submarines at
night should be fitted with Leigh Lights and centimetric radar. He set about
reorganising the whole escort system, insisting on employing more up-to-
date ships and escort carriers, and on the establishment of 'support groups'
of submarine hunter-killers which could be moved quickly about the
Atlantic battlefield to the point of greatest danger. He insisted on higher
standards of training and preparation. During 1942 escort commanders and
crews received only two weeks' training for convoy work, and often entered
the fray quite unequal to the task assigned to them. Horton appointed an
officer to the task of training escort crews at greater length in the skills they
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
55
needed, emphasising above all the ability to cooperate as a naval team,
coordinating both attacks on submarines and the sheltering of their
vulnerable charges. All of this took time; the initiatives of late 1942
flowered only with the passing months. Until they bore fruit Horton fought
Dönitz with the weapons he had to hand.
From the end of January, when the worst of the weather was past, were
fought the fiercest battles of the Atlantic campaign. The first blows were
struck against convoys Hx224 and SCI 18 on route from America laden with
goods for the Soviet Union. Contact was made by u-456, whose captain
called up other U-boats and then moved in and sank three ships in strong
gale-force winds. Dönitz stationed a wolf-pack codenamed 'Pfeil' in the
Gap. Hx224 was hounded, although for little additional loss, but sci18,
following two days behind, ran full tilt into the waiting submarine trap.
Though the convoy had an unusually heavy air and sea escort, the
submarines, pressing home their torpedo attacks at night against fierce
counter-attacks, succeeded in sinking thirteen ships for the loss of three U-
boats and severe damage to four more. At the end of February the
submarines mauled three convoys going the other way. One of them, convoy
ONI66, was betrayed by radio intelligence and ran into a waiting wolf-pack.
The ensuing battle stretched out over 1,000 miles of ocean and lasted four
days. Ultimately two U-boats were lost but fourteen merchantmen were
sunk. In London and Washington there was consternation.
Even with
improved escorts and air cover the convoys were still vulnerable. More
worrying still, not even the fact that the British cypher school had succeeded
at last in breaking into the Triton cipher prevented convoys from running
into disaster. Messages could not always be decoded either fully or quickly
though sufficient could be gleaned to permit the convoys to be re-routed.
But the new routes could be detected by German intelligence, and so
numerous were the submarines hidden in the Atlantic Gap that even the
best-informed of convoys ran the risk of making accidental contact. 70
In March the worst fears were realised. The slow convoy SCI21 crossing
from west to east lost thirteen ships, with no loss to the submarine pack.
Then on 5 March a large slow convoy of fifty vessels, SC122, escorted by
three Canadian corvettes and a minesweeper, set off from New York. Three
days later a faster convoy, нx229, left from the same port with 41 ships and
an escort of two destroyers and two corvettes, following almost the same
route as the convoy in front of it. In the mid-Atlantic the two convoys piled
up one behind the other, presenting a large and tempting target. Fore-
warned of the convoy routes by German intercepts, Dönitz stationed three
large wolf-packs,
'Raubgraf, 'Stürmer' and 'Dränger', across their path.
Once more the weather deteriorated, with heavy seas, fog, and intermittent
