246
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY .
the future of mankind.' Stalin, speaking softly, almost indistinctly, as he
did for much of the conference, said simply: 'Now let us get down to
business . . ' There were other contrasts. Stalin's habit was to sit very still,
to make few gestures, and to speak only when necessary. He occupied
himself by doodling with a thick red pencil, which he carried around with
him all the time. Roosevelt was affable and talkative. He acted as an
informal chairman, removing his pince-nez and waving them in the air to
underline his remarks. Churchill was ill for much of the conference, and
obviously ill-at-ease. He fidgeted at the table, scribbled notes and passed
them to his colleagues, and talked at such length without pausing that his
interpreter was hard pressed to reproduce what he had said. The one habit
they had in common was smoking, Stalin a pipe, Roosevelt cigarettes, and
Churchill a recalcitrant cigar which he lit and re-lit throughout the
discussion.
Beneath the outward show of bonhomie there were strong currents of
distrust and uncertainty. The three leaders were united in
what
was
popularly called the 'Grand Alliance', but their three states were not even
allies in any formal sense. Britain and the Soviet Union had signed an
alliance of cooperation in May 1942, against Churchill's better instincts, but
the United States refused to enter into fixed agreements with either of their
fellow combatants. The coalition survived through a common interest in the
defeat of Germany, and little else. There were differences between them
even on this central ambition. The Soviet delegation arrived at Teheran
determined to force the west to enter into an unambiguous commitment to
open a Second Front in France, after almost two years of delays. Churchill
and his staff were just as determined to assert the British preferences for
further action in the Mediterranean theatre. Stalin would have preferred to
meet Roosevelt on his own. He let the President know before the meeting
that he and Churchill 'got into each other's hair'. Only Roosevelt, who had
long hoped to meet Stalin face to face, travelled to Teheran with the
expectation of smoothing the rough edges of collaboration.
For all the President's notorious charm, the first contacts were awkward.
He wrote to his wife of the atmosphere of 'great distrust' emanating from
Stalin when they first met. Arnold, Roosevelt's air force Chief-of-Staff, was
struck by Stalin's patronising treatment of the British, 'half-humorous,
half-scathing'. Roosevelt decided to side with Stalin in these exchanges in
order to break the ice. At the plenary meeting on the second day of the
conference the President began by ignoring Churchill and chatting to the
Soviet delegates; he began to poke fun at the British, and the more Churchill
scowled the more Stalin smiled. When Stalin finally burst out laughing at
Churchill's discomfiture, the tension between the two leaders was broken.
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
247
Though Roosevelt later recalled that they now talked like men
and
brothers', he strained the relationship with Churchill, who had to accept not
only the jibes of his partners but their strategy as well. For at the second
session Stalin at last got his commitment to the Second Front, even from
Churchill.?
By the evening of the second day there was a more affable mood. Dinner
was held at the Soviet Embassy, and was by the traditions of Soviet
hospitality both lavish and long. But Stalin could not leave Churchill alone.
Throughout the evening he returned to the theme that the Prime Minister
wanted to treat the defeated Germans too kindly. When Stalin suggested
shooting fifty thousand German officers as an example Churchill, red in the
face, rose indignantly from the table and denounced his host with a
passionate ill humour; Roosevelt smilingly agreed to 49,000 and with that
Churchill swept out of the room. Stalin hurried after him and persuaded him
to return and the baiting ended.?
The following day the seal was put on the coalition's strategy for the defeat
of Germany. In the evening the British Legation hosted a birthday dinner
for Churchill. With the Second Front secure, the Soviet delegates shed their
inhibitions. Stalin refused the offer of cocktails, for which he had an
unexplained distrust, but attacked the whisky, and then a great deal of
champagne, which he was less used to drinking. Churchill decreed that the
party would adopt the Russian habit of endless toasts and speeches. He
toasted 'Stalin the Great' with more than a touch of irony, and 'Roosevelt
the Man'. Stalin hailed 'my fighting friends', but added the sting: 'if it is
possible for me to consider Mr Churchill my friend'. Later Stalin accused
Churchill's Chief-of-Staff, General Brooke, in front of the whole dinner
party of being 'unfriendly' towards the Soviet Union. Both Churchill and
Brooke gave as good as they got in reply, but the aspersions gave an
unfortunate edge to an occasion generally remembered by all present to
have been an optimistic expression of real partnership?
By the end of the evening the sour note was drowned out. Stalin was
unusually intoxicated, moving from one guest to another and clinking
glasses, and then forcing the disconcerted waiters to drink with him too.
Roosevelt ended the proceedings by calling on the three coalition partners
to work as 'a harmonious whole', with 'the traditional symbol of hope, the
rainbow' before them in the skies of war. Churchill - who of all of them had
the most to regret from the conference - went to bed that night satisfied
that 'nothing but good had been done' 1º The following day, 1 Decem-
ber, the spirit of the birthday party was embodied in a public communiqué
signed by all three leaders. They announced a 'common policy' directed at
'the destruction of German forces'. The final Tine betrayed its American
