140
ALONG A GOOD ROAD • • •
invasion in mind. Morgan was now given something to do with his planning
staff in London.
Over the summer months they laboured away, exploring the operational
options. This generated heat as well as light. The two invasion sites chosen as
the most likely to yield solid results were the Pas de Calais, the closest area to
England, with the wide flat plain behind it pointed toward Germany's
heartland, and the area from the mouth of the Seine to the Cotentin
peninsula in Normandy. The second of these had a number of advantages: it
provided some natural shelter from the Channel weather and tides; it was
less well defended than the Calais region; and it contained the valuable port
of Cherbourg, which was larger than the northern Channel ports.
To
Morgan's surprise his staff divided in fierce defence of the two options. He
himself was not sure that the operation was feasible at all, whichever option
was chosen. The argument broke down along national lines again. American
planners favoured Normandy; British planners favoured Calais. The
threatened stalemate was broken only by the intervention of Lord Louis
Mountbatten, Chief of British Combined Operations. He invited Morgan's
staff to his headquarters at Largs in Scotland. There, in two days of bitter
wrangling, the invasion strategy took shape. The outcome was victory for
the American view. When Morgan prepared the final version of the invasion
plan to present to the next Anglo-American summit in Quebec in August it
was based on a narrow assault on Normandy with three divisions in May of
1944.' Beyond this nothing was yet decided. America might have won a
battle with its ally, but it had not yet won the war.
It had taken more than a year for invasion even to reach the planning
stage. To Soviet leaders western hesitancy was viewed with deep suspicion.›
When Stalin was told in June 1943 that no invasion was possible that year he
warned Roosevelt of the 'negative impression' the statement would make on
Soviet opinion and he refused to entertain excuses. 12 What Stalin could not
see was that the failure to invade came not from cowardice or bad faith, as he
believed, but was the offspring of a sharp difference in strategic outlook
between his two Allies. The contrast was in part a product of differing
experience. For two years British forces in Europe had faced one defeat
after another. They had been forcibly expelled from Norway, from France
and then from Greece. These experiences bred an understandable caution.
British leaders wanted to run no risks of further defeat. If an invasion were
bloodily repulsed the effect on opinion at home and abroad might be
disastrous; defeat would certainly jeopardise prospects for any second
attempt. The circumstance of America's entry into the war raised quite
different expectations.
There was no humiliating retreat to redeem.
American opinion stood six-guns blazing, eager for combat. American
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
141
military leaders reacted with an instinctive belligerency. The contrast,
according to Roosevelt's Secretary for War, Henry Stimson, was between a
'fatigued and defeatist government' on the one hand and 'a young and
vigorous nation' on the other. 13
The differences ran deeper than this. At stake were two ways of warfare
that were difficult to reconcile. British preference was for war on the
periphery, using naval power to develop a flexible and opportunistic
strategy, as they had done in the wars against Napoleon. With a relatively
weak army and limited economic resources, short winnable campaigns
against light enemy forces made greater strategic sense. Britain hoped that
Germany would be worn down by losses sustained elsewhere, so that British
forces would never have to face the full weight of the German army on land.
The watchwords
were attrition and dispersion, 'scatterization'. 14 The
American traditions were those of the Civil War, of Ulysses Grant and the
massive rolling front. American soldiers looked for the main enemy force in
order to concentrate all efforts upon its comprehensive destruction. This
could be achieved, they believed, only by ceaseless and vigorous action by
powerfully armed formations driving the enemy to a standstill: the bludgeon
rather than the rapier. They found little merit in dividing forces un-
necessarily. Where the British saw calculated attrition, American soldiers
saw action
that was piecemeal and indecisive. British arguments for a
Mediterranean strategy reflected British priorities; cross-Channel invasion
was the American way, and America had the resources to invade not once
but, if necessary, twice. 15
By the autumn of 1943 the whole issue of invasion still hung uncertainly in
the air. The two allies had agreed to meet at Quebec in the middle of August
to thrash out once again the direction of Allied strategy. The American
delegation travelled to Canada determined to force a showdown. A few days
before, Henry Stimson called on Roosevelt to present a letter in which he
laid out the issue. The British could not be trusted to direct the invasion, he
argued, for 'their hearts are not in it'. Instead America should assume
strategic leadership; the Supreme Commander should be an American; and
the British should be told that 'pinprick warfare did not work and be made
to accept the big battle. 16 Roosevelt agreed with it all. At Quebec the British
delegates found their opponent more determined and better informed. The
two sides sat down for their discussion almost literally face to face across an
unusually narrow table. As the Americans expected, their ally tried to water
down commitments to invasion. After three days of argument the British
accepted the principle of a cross-Channel invasion, operation Overlord,
based on Morgan's final plan.
But they refused to allow the words
'overriding priority' to be applied to the allocation of men and material to
