322
WHY THE ALLIES WON
dive-bombers in the German air force as a whole fell to less than a quarter
from well over a half. In the summer of 1944 there were four times as many
serviceable fighters as bombers. l The advent of the long-range fighter in the
spring of that year was fatal for the Germans. The Allies were able to bring
the fight all the way to the defensive fighters, which were neither able to
attack the bombers - their stated mission - nor to fight off enemy escorts
effectively. The German air force was drained of planes and pilots; Allied
bombers hemmed in aircraft production and heavily damaged the plants:
producing aviation fuel. The switch to an anti-bombing strategy, and the
destruction wreaked in the battles over the Reich, fatally weakened German
air power at the front-line, which had relied on large numbers of medium-
bombers. Allied air forces enjoyed a superiority of seventy to one in the
invasion of France. German ground forces were compelled to fight the last
two years of war with limited or non-existent air support. When the last
Luftwaffe chief-of-staff, General Karl Koller, sat down at the end of the
conflict to address the question 'Why We Lost the War', he reduced it to a
single formula: 'What was decisive in itself was the loss of air supremacy: 20
In Koller's view, partisan though it no doubt was, 'Everything depends on
air supremacy, everything else must take second place.' There is certainly a
strong connecting thread of air power trailing through all the major zones of
combat. In the war at sea naval power was not entirely superseded by
aircraft, but the major naval engagements of the Pacific War were all
determined by aircraft firing bombs or torpedoes. In the Atlantic, escort
carriers and long-range anti-submarine aircraft brought the U-boat threat
to a halt. In 1943 aircraft claimed 149 out of the total of 237 German
submarines sunk?' Patrolling aircraft kept German naval forces at bay
throughout the invasion of France. Allied aircraft took a heavy toll of the
merchant shipping in the Mediterranean and in the Pacific. In the invasion
battles in 1944 air power was regarded by both sides as the critical factor.
'There is no way by which, in the face of the enemy air force's complete
command, we can find a strategy which will counterbalance its positively
annihilating effect without giving up the field of battle
': so wrote Field
Marshal Kluge to Hitler on 21 July, a few days before the Cobra operation
broke open the German front. On the eastern front Soviet air power from
the summer of 1943 was able to do what German aircraft had done in
Poland, France, Yugoslavia, Greece and Ukraine. Underlying everything
was the bombing offensive, whose far-reaching effects on German economic
potential and on the German home front was sufficient to limit the
expansion of German military might to a point where the Allied ground
forces could fight on more than equal terms.
Air power did not win the war on its own, but it proved to be the critical
WHY THE ALLIES WON
323
weakness on the Axis side and the greatest single advantage enjoyed by the
Allies. Koller, in his reflections on defeat, did not simply attribute the failure
in the air to German ineptitude, but recognised also that Germany's enemies
drew the right conclusions from the early years of war 'and with an iron
tenacity built up a superior air force which alone could lead to victory'.
Koller was right that the strategy was a self-conscious one. Perhaps the most
important decision was taken in the summer of 1941 in Washington, when
General Marshall instructed the air force to draft its contribution to the
Victory Programme - in effect to plan America's air war. A small group of
airmen led by Colonel Hal George was given the almost impossible task of
drafting the plan in nine days at the height of a sticky Washington summer.
They sat up until past midnight each night, and twice the team worked all
through the night. They knew that Roosevelt had given the green light to
produce as much as possible. Each of them worked out the figures for a
particular element of air power - heavy-bombing, very-long-range bomb-
ing, tactical air support, training, and so on. When they came together at the
Washington Munitions Building on a Sunday lunchtime to add all the figures
up, they were astonished at the quantities needed to defeat the Axis. The
plan was collated and approved, and the work was begun on establishing
massive American air power even before America entered the war. The plan
was leaked to the press some days before Pearl Harbor. In its essentials it
was sent to Hitler by German agents in America. His staff drew up a draft
directive - No. 39 - to hold the line in Russia, while they planned a course of
action to keep American aircraft and men away from Europe. Hitler refused
to accept the recommendation, and stuck to the contest with the Red
Army. 23
That decision locked Germany into a strategy in which the defeat of Soviet
ground forces was the principal mission. The failure to achieve this ambition
exposed German forces not only to a revamped and angry Red Army, but
also to the eventual realisation of that massive western air power anticipated
in the Victory Programme. Both together defeated German forces, leaving
Germany's weaker allies to be destroyed in turn.) When the Allies devoted
their full attention to Japan in the summer of 1945, the Red Army swept
Japanese forces in China aside in a matter of days, while American air forces
transformed Japanese cities into open crematoria. The Red Army went on
to become the backbone of the Soviet super-power, while American air
power became the central pillar of the new military giant in the west. Both
developments were the fruit of German aggression. To deny Germany's bid
for world power, the Soviet Union and the United States had to become
world powers themselves. The war was won in 1945 not from German
weaknesses but from Allied strengths.
