40
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT •
by flag or morse code. The weather was foul, with high winds and heavy seas.
North of the island of Iwo Jima the force split up, the covering fleet for the
Midway invasion steering due east towards the island, the carrier task force
and the main body of the fleet going north-east, with the carriers in front,
waiting to pounce on any American forces sent out from Pearl Harbor.
Japanese commanders could hear a heavy increase in American radio traffic
but, believing their codes to be secure, assumed that this indicated routine
precautionary measures in Hawaii. Throughout the seven-day voyage every
effort was made to find out if the enemy had detected Japanese intentions.
So poor was the weather that sighting from the air was unlikely. Heavy mist
on 1 June and thick fog the next day shielded the force from detection by
enemy submarines. But Japanese reconnaissance was equally hampered.
Seaplanes sent to French Frigate Shoals, a small group of coral islands west
of Hawaii which it was hoped would provide a base for air reconnaissance,
found them already occupied by American forces. The submarine screen
was late in arriving at its destination, and by the time it was in place Nimitz's
forces had long left Pearl Harbor and were well to the west. On 3 June the
commander of the carrier force, Admiral Nagumo, recorded in his log that
the enemy did not know of the Japanese plan, and that there was no
evidence of an enemy task force anywhere in the vicinity. Confident of
success, the carriers now veered south-east on a course for Midway, entirely
ignorant of an American force 200 miles away, forewarned days before of
their arrival, 37
The first sighting by either side came on 3 June when a Catalina flying boat
from Midway spotted the small island invasion force approaching from the
west. The pilot reported that he had seen the main body of the Japanese
feet, but the American carrier force knew from intelligence that the main
Japanese fleet was farther north. Bombers were despatched to attack the
invasion force, while Fletcher and Spruance moved their carriers to a point
where they would lie exactly on Nagumo's north flank, within easy striking
distance of his carriers. The sun rose the following morning at four o'clock.
Visibility was excellent, a mixed blessing for a force in hiding. The Japanese
ships launched a limited reconnaissance. One aircraft even flew over the
American task force but its negligent observer failed entirely to see it. A
second was held up on deck with a faulty catapult. A third plane turned back
with engine trouble. Confident that there was no enemy force to be found,
Nagumo ordered his carrier aircraft to strike the island of Midway. Over a
hundred aircraft were launched from the decks of Akagi, Kaga, Hiryu and
Soryu and at 4.45 a.m. they flew off south-eastwards.
Half an hour later the first American aircraft sighted the carrier force and
relayed its approximate position. By seven o'clock the first attack was made
Attu
CHINA
Dutch Harbore
Aleutian Islands
occupation
TOTCCH
Aleutian attacking force
Hiryu
(5 June)
carrier force (Nagumo)
main body (Yamamoto) Soryu (4 June)
Akagi (5 June)
Midway support force
Midway occupation force
Wake I.
kada
(4 June)
•Saipan
Pacific Ocean
Yorktowr
(7 June)
Midway I
US carrier force
French
Frigate Sh. • o
Oahu
Pearl Harbor 3B
Hawalian
KEY:
Axis
movement
→ Ship sunk
screen
Battle of Midway, 4-5 June 1942
from aircraft based on Midway. For over an hour the carriers swerved and
slewed about to avoid bombs and torpedoes; American aircraft scored not a
single hit. But that hour was a decisive one. At 7.28 the one remaining
Japanese reconnaissance aircraft at last sighted the American carrier force,
though it reported only cruisers and destroyers. Nagumo dithered. He had
ordered his remaining torpedo bombers to be converted to carrying land
bombs for a second attack on Midway; most were below decks in the process
of rearming. In an hour he would need to land the first wave of aircraft
returning from Midway. He asked the reconnaissance aircraft to be more
precise, while he ordered the bombs to be replaced by torpedoes again. At
8.20 he learned that there might be one carrier with the enemy force. He
became uncharacteristically hesitant. Rather than attack the enemy at once
he decided to land and rearm his aircraft now arriving back from Midway
and then reorganise his forces for an attack later in the morning. For the next
hour his carriers were at their most vulnerable, full of refuelling and
rearming aircraft, with only light fighter cover, their position known to the
Fletcher and Spruance could not have planned things better. They held
back their carrier attack aircraft so that they would hit the Japanese ships
during the crucial changeover. The first wave of torpedo bombers attacked
