62
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . • •
1939 and 1942; and only 36 destroyers against I12.83 In the Atlantic the
Allied merchant marine lost only 31 ships in 1944 against a figure of 1,006 in
1942, despite the fact that the U-boat arm actually had almost four hundred
submarines in 1944, bottled up in their home ports or kept at arm's length by
an almost impenetrable curtain of anti-submarine defences.
The source of this enhanced naval presence was the vast production of
American shipyards. The United States navy ended the war with 1,672
major naval vessels, the Royal Navy with 1,065 major warships, and 2,907
minor ones. The American merchant shipbuilding programme was a
production miracle: 794,000 tons of shipping were built in 1941, 21 million
tons in the next three years.®S It is tempting to argue that sheer material
strength won the sea war. Yet this is to ignore the question of timing.
Midway was won against overwhelming Japanese superiority in warships.
The convoy battles were won by a tiny number of maritime aircraft and
limited numbers of escort vessels. The great imbalance in resources only
began to tell later in the war, when it helped to prevent any re-entry by the
Japanese navy or the U-boats as a serious peril in the sea war. In the critical
year between Midway and the defeat of the submarine Allied resources were
stretched to the limit. Tactical and technical innovation won the war at sea
before sheer numbers came to matter.
The war at sea ended as untidily as it had been fought. When Germany
finally accepted defeat on 8 May 1945, Grossadmiral Dönitz had become the
most unlikely head of state - Hitler had designated him his successor shortly
before committing suicide in the Führer-bunker in Berlin. Dönitz ordered
the remaining U-boats to surrender. Forty-nine of them were at sea and
most complied with the order over the next two weeks. But two boats, U-530
and U-977, refused to do so. The first arrived off Long Island and attempted
to torpedo shipping moving in and out of New York. Out of ammunition, the
submarine made its way to Argentina where it arrived on g July, hoping for
an enthusiastic welcome from Argentinian fascists. The crew was instead
interned and their boat turned over to the American authorities. The second
boat, u-977 made a slow, submerged crossing of the Atlantic and arrived in
August on the Argentine coast. This was the submarine that was later
alleged to have carried Hitler, his new wife Eva Braun, and his secretary
Martin Bormann to safety in Latin America or Antarctica. The reality was
internment for its fiercely pro-Hitler crew three months after the formal end
of hostilities in Europe, and a matter of days before Japan's surrender.8 But
by the end of May Allied ships were reasonably clear of danger. On 28 May
the United States navy and the British Admiralty issued a joint statement:
'No further trade convoys will be sailed. Merchant ships by night will burn
navigation lights at full brilliancy and need not darken ships. 87
3
DEEP WAR
Stalingrad and Kursk
'We speak of deep night, deep autumn;
when I think back to the year 1943
I feel like saying: "deep war"?
Ilya Ehrenburg, The War 1941-1945
OUR CENTURIES AGO on the broad river Volga, at the sharp elbow where
it turns south-east to flow the last 300 marsh-fringed miles to Astrakhan
on the Caspian Sea, the Cossacks built a small trading town, Tsaritsyn.
Through this typically provincial 'three hotel town', dotted with wooden
houses and jetties, flowed the rich produce of the Caspian and the Caucasus.
It might have languished in this state but for the Russian Revolution in 1917,
when Tsaritsyn found itself in the midst of a fierce civil war between the
new Bolshevik forces and the 'White armies', a motley array of counter-
revolutionaries and independent-minded Cossacks. The Whites laid siege to
Tsaritsyn in the autumn of 1918, pushing back the Red Army until it held
just a small horseshoe of territory on the west bank of the Volga,
surrounding the town. The population began to evacuate. Local Bolshevik
leaders cabled desperately to Moscow for reinforcements and arms of any
kind. Nothing was forthcoming save a telegram urging the revolutionary
forces to stand firm: 'Under no circumstances is Tsaritsyn to be given up.'
The town was saved, according to Soviet legend, by the initiative of one
man, the local chairman of the military committee, Josef Djugashvili, who in
1913 had adopted the name Stalin or 'steel'. Urging his comrades to fight to
the death rather than abandon the town, he disobeyed orders from Moscow
by recalling a Red Army division from the Caucasus; Zhloba's 'Steel
Division', after a forced march of 300 miles, crashed into the rear of the
Cossack host and saved the day. A month later Stalin was promoted to the
national Council of Defence in Moscow. A year later he was back on the
southern front in charge of a campaign that stretched from the steppe city of
Kursk, through Tsaritsyn down to the Caucasus.
Once more Stalin was
instrumental in saving the region for the revolution. For his success on the
Volga, Tsaritsyn became his city, Stalingrad.
Twenty-four years later, by a strange quirk of history, Stalin found himself
defending the city once again, in circumstances far grimmer. In the autumn
of 1942 German forces reached to their farthest extent, to the snow-covered
