168
ALONG A GOOD ROAD • • •
battle were thrown straight into the breach before they had had time to
assemble or to collect their equipment. On 17 June Rommel and von
Rundstedt met Hitler at his forward headquarters,
"Wolf's Lair II', at
Margival near Scissons, whither he had flown at their request to discuss
German strategy in the west. Von Rundstedt wanted a fighting withdrawal
to hold a front along the Loire and Orne rivers, where a mobile reserve could
be built up strong enough to resume the counter-offensive. Hitler was
quite unmoved. He ordered the line to stand fast at all costs and flew back to
Germany. But twelve days later the two generals were back in front of
Hitler at Berchtesgaden, pleading for a fighting retreat across France in the
hope that Germany could reach a political settlement with the west, or
achieve an armistice like 1918. Again, Hitler was unmoved. He insisted once
more on holding the line, where the enemy would be worn down by the
struggle, and forced back into the sea 'using every method of guerrilla
warfare.?" Yet the twenty divisions that might have turned the tide in such
a battle were kept back to check the second strike expected at any moment
on the Channel coast to the north.
German commanders in France knew that Hitler was quite out of touch
with reality. Hitler, for his part, saw
an insidious defeatism in the
suggestions of withdrawal. He sacked von Rundstedt and appointed Field
Marshal von Kluge in his place. The new commander arrived confident of
stabilising the situation; but in a matter of days he realised that the reports
from the front had spoken the truth. Within days of his arrival Montgomery
launched the first of a number of major operations on the eastern wing of
the lodgement which aimed at destroying what remained of German offen-
sive power, and creating the conditions for an American breakout farther
to the west. On 7 July began the battle for Caen. The assault started with
an attack by 467 heavy-bombers which carpet-bombed the unfortunate
town. When British troops reached the outskirts the following morning the
streets were impassable, pitted with giant craters and blocked with piles of
heavy stones from the shattered buildings. The German forces abandoned
the main part of the city, but destroyed all the bridges across the river,
making it impossible for Allied forces to pursue the enemy farther. South of
Caen the German forces dug in. Rommel organised a defensive zone 10
miles deep to prevent an Allied breakthrough. There were five lines of
defence: a light infantry cover to absorb the bombing and artillery barrage; a
line of tanks positioned a short distance behind; a third area of small villages
occupied by infantry dug in with anti-tank guns; a powerful gun line along
the crest of the Bourguebus Ridge some 4 miles south of Caen, with 78 of the
formidable 88-millimetre anti-aircraft guns that doubled as tank-busting
artillery; and finally a defensive zone behind the ridge itself manned by
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
169
infantry and backed by a tank reserve 5 miles to the rear. Rommel waited for
what threatened to be the climax of the gruelling six weeks of attritional
Urged on by the tetchy Eisenhower, and anxious about the slow pace of
American preparation for the breakout, Montgomery rose to Rommel's
bait. On 13 July he planned a fresh operation, 'Goodwood', to drive east of
Caen and seize the defended areas to the south. His instructions issued to
commanders two days later made it clear that rather than attempting a
breakout himself his objectives were limited to tying down and destroying
the bulk of German armour, and creating a firm hinge on which Bradley
could swing when he pushed open the door in Brittany: 'all the activities on
the eastern flank are designed to help the forces in the west while ensuring a
firm bastion is kept in the east ?81 Ultra intelligence showed the weak state of
the German divisions, and the problems of reinforcement, but did not make
clear the extent of Rommel's defensive field. Goodwood was scheduled
for 18 July. The day before, Rommel made a final tour of his defensive
preparations. On his way back from the headquarters of Panzer Group West
his car was machine-gunned on the road by two British aircraft. There was
no cover. His driver was killed outright and Rommel was hurled on to the
carriageway. Severely injured, he took no further part in the struggle for
Normandy. His duties were assumed by von Kluge.
On 18 July Allied bombers prefaced Montgomery's attack with the
heaviest bombardment of the campaign. For three hours the German
defences were pounded so thoroughly that when the British armour and
infantry followed the bombers' wake they encountered almost no opposition
from the first line of dazed defenders. But the line of tanks and the
anti-tank gun-nests behind held fast. Montgomery's troops became locked
in a fierce and prolonged struggle for the villages all along the slopes of
Bourguebus Ridge. Heavy losses were sustained on both sides. For two days
of bitter fighting Canadian and British forces blasted German defenders
from all but one of the villages in the third line of defence, but above them on
the crest of the Ridge the German gun line remained intact. Then, on the
afternoon of 20 July, just as Montgomery's forces were preparing to assault
the Ridge, a prolonged downpour turned the battlefield into a sea of mud.
Tanks could no longer be deployed and Montgomery brought Goodwood to
an end. Though the Ridge eluded him, his other aims were largely met. The
battle exhausted the German armoured divisions and prevented the transfer
of armour to the west. To meet the Allied assault at Caen two Panzer
divisions earlier moved to the American sector were recalled. The vital
task of pinning German armour to the eastern end of the lodgement was
achieved. Though Rommel's defensive zone held fast, the hail of 12,000 tons
