272
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . ..
and became from 1955 until his death in 1962 Chief-of-Staff of the Warsaw
Pact.85
There has been little controversy about the merit of the last example of
professional leadership, Roosevelt's army Chief-of-Staff, (General George
Marshall, He was the epitome of the modern military manager. Though he
ran an army of more than eight million people, he himself had never
tea, he himset,
experienced combat. He ran the American war effort from a desk in the
Pentagon. Born in 1880, the son of a failed hotelier, Marshall never wanted
to be anything other than a soldier. His reputation as a serious, excessively
industrious, and ascetic personality was formed at cadet school in Virginia.
He saw himself as a man of action, but was always fated to miss it. He arrived
in the Philippines in 1902 a week after the armed insurrection there was
over; he was sent to France in the vanguard of United States forces in 1917,
but ended up on staff and training assignments. When he was finally offered
command of the invasion of France in 1944, Roosevelt rescinded the com-
mission.
Marshall's real virtues were evident from the first. He was an outstanding
organiser and manager, avid for responsibility. Before the Great War he
collapsed twice from overwork. In an army light on managerial skills
Marshall was indispensable. He organised much of the training programme
for the American army raised from scratch in 1917-18, but like so many
middle-aged American servicemen between the wars he remained stuck
at a relatively junior rank with limited staff duties. He was rescued from
obscurity by Roosevelt in 1939, who wanted a Chief-of-Staff with experience
of building up an army quickly. Marshall was the obvious man for the job. 86
The new Chief was very different from Roosevelt, and although they
came to respect each other deeply they never became close friends: in six
years Marshall never once visited the President's estate, 'Hyde Park'. His
personality was outwardly calm and unassuming. He had a natural air of
authority. He was reserved where his President was extrovert, sparse with
words where his leader was garrulous, mechanically competent rather than
informal and disorganised.
Beneath the modest exterior, Marshall was
known to be firm; he had a fierce temper which he tried to keep under
control. He eschewed both sentiment and anger, once telling his wife: "My
brain must be kept clear.'87 Colleagues found him aloof and unsociable, a
strict taskmaster, a perfectionist who had not a great deal of tolerance for
imperfections in others - in fact remarkably akin to Brooke and Antonov.
His whole being was subsumed by work. He was famous for the disciplined
regularity of his own life. He rose at 6.30 every day, rode half a dozen miles,
arrived for work at 7.45, took lunch alone with his wife at home, and worked
until five. No one, Marshall believed, had an original idea after five o'clock
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
273
in the afternoon, and when he left the office, even during the war years, he
cut himself off from the outside world until the following morning. After an
evening ride, or canoeing on the Potomac river for an hour or so, he retired
at nine. This routine was disturbed during the war only by the introduction
of a general briefing meeting
each morning. Outside office hours he
answered the telephone only to the President or the Secretary for War, and
invited no one to his home for fear that they would talk shop.88
His attitude to war reflected his personality. He described it as a managing
director might define the operation of a giant company. In a speech to
veterans in June 1940 Marshall reminded them that the old 'flag-waving
days of warfare are gone'. The modern army, he continued, 'is composed
of specialists, thoroughly trained in every aspect of military science, and,
above all, organised into a perfect team'. In war, he believed, cold factual
analysis was preferable to enthusiasm, common sense to sentiment. 8ยบ He
applied these technocratic views to the job of constructing America's new
army and choosing its strategy. His experience of World War I convinced
him that unity of command was essential. The development of an American
equivalent to the British Chiefs-of-Staff was his inspiration. He dominated
the proceedings
of this new Joint Chiefs-of-Staff Committee, which
reported directly to the President. During the war he assumed the role of
senior adviser to Roosevelt. Unity between Allies he regarded as of
paramount importance and he was a driving force in fusing together the
British and American war efforts. He streamlined the top of the army,
reducing from 61 to six the number of officials with direct access to his office,
and he divided the organisation into three major elements, army, air forces
and supply. A great deal of his energy was devoted to training and logistics.
These were not just the preferences of a desk general. War for Marshall was
a unity, from recruitment through to combat. He did not want to repeat his
experience in France in 1917 when the United States ist division arrived
short of weapons and uniforms, with men who had not yet fired a gun.
On the major issues it was Marshall rather than Roosevelt who perceived
the necessity for a 'Europe first' priority, and battled with King and the navy
to sustain it. It was Marshall who without reservation backed the cross-
Channel attack when his President wavered. His approach was rooted in
strategic rationality and good sense. He did not decide things lightly, but
once plans were formulated he stuck to them. The decisions to fight in
Europe and to attack the German main force in the west can both be
regarded as central to Allied success. Marshall displayed great force of
character in carrying the plans through to fulfilment in
the face
of
considerable opposition. For Roosevelt he became 'the indispensable man'.
By 1944 he drafted many of the President's military papers, even replies to
