42
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . . .
at about 9.30, a second shortly after. Short of effective fighter cover, the
slow planes were shot to pieces by the defending Zero fighters. Out of 41
torpedo bombers, only six returned; not a single torpedo reached its target.
But circling above the doomed torpedo-bombers were 54 Dauntless dive-
bombers. Undetected by the Japanese fighters they dived out of the sun like
a beautiful silver waterfall' 3ยบ Nagumo's flagship Akagi, with forty refuelling
aircraft on deck, was hit by three bombs and in minutes became a floating
inferno, wracked by one devastating explosion after another. Nagumo stood
disbelieving on the bridge amidst a sea of flames. His staff pleaded with him
to abandon ship; finally he was physically dragged from the bridge, leaving
by the only remaining exit, a rope over the side. All around him unmanned
guns were firing as the flames licked at their ammunition. As Nagumo made
his way to a waiting destroyer he could see the carriers Kaga and Soryu
burning furiously. Kaga was hit by four bombs out of nine aimed at it, Soryu
by three. On decks crowded with fuelled or refuelling aircraft, petrol tankers
and bombs, the explosive effects were magnified. Kasa sank at 7.35 that
evening, Soryu a few minutes earlier, after blazing fiercely all day. Akagi
stayed afloat but was scuttled as beyond repair the following morning.
Within ten minutes the heart of the Japanese navy's strike force was
destroyed by a mere ten bombs on target. Aboard the Yamato far to the rear
of the carrier force, the mood of jubilation which had greeted news that an
American fleet was near enough to engage, turned to utter dismay. When
Yamamoto was handed the message that three carriers were lost with all
their aircraft, he stood groaning, too stunned to speak. His first reaction was
to order all available
warships to make full speed ahead towards the
American force for a pitched battle. They sailed on through fog so thick it
was impossible to see the next ship. Encouraging news reached Yamamoto
during the course of the day. Aircraft from the remaining carrier, the Hiryu,
had succeeded in damaging the recently repaired Yorktown (which was to
be torpedoed by a Japanese submarine three days later). But then at 5.30 in
the afternoon came news that American aircraft had destroyed the Hiryu
too. Half an hour earlier, 24 dive-bombers from the Enterprise had dropped
four bombs on to the carrier, causing such damage that she was to sink
the following morning, with Admiral Yamaguchi, widely tipped to be
Yamamoto's successor, standing forlorn, sword in hand, on the bridge. That
evening Japanese warships circled round preparing to search out the
American force for a night engagement, but with the loss of all air cover
Yamamoto bowed to reality and cancelled the entire operation at two
o'clock in the morning. 'How can we apologise to His Majesty for this
defeat?' asked one of his staff. 'I am the only one who must apologise,' was
the reply.40
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
43
The Battle of Midway was the closest the war at sea came to a Trafalgar. It
was the most significant fleet engagement of the war. 'After Midway',
recalled Navy Minister Mitsumasa Yonai, 'I was certain there was no chance
of success.' All the Japanese naval officers interrogated by the United States
navy at the end of the war picked Midway as the decisive turning point, 'the
beginning of total failure' 41 It achieved the American objective of keeping
failurer picked Mitiva,
the Pacific open to sea traffic, but more than that Midway saw the
destruction of the outstanding instrument of Japanese success since Pearl
Harbor. Nagumo's force was the navy's elite. The losses of ships and aircraft
at Midway were hard enough to sustain, but the pilots were almost
irreplaceable. The six hundred carrier officers were outstanding aviators,
flying samurai, trained to the highest standard for arduous flight over water
and pinpoint attacks on enemy ships. At Midway one-third lost their lives
and 40 per cent sustained injury. 42 Many of the rest were swallowed up in the
wars of attrition fought in the autumn in the Solomons, where American air
forces won local superiority. Little thought had been given by the Japanese
commanders about what to do if the carriers and pilots were ever lost.
During 1942 losses of Japanese carrier aircraft were almost double the
numbers produced to replace them. 43 In 1943 Japanese shipyards supplied
only three more aircraft carriers, and four in 1944; the United States navy in
these two years procured another ninety. Yamamoto's ambition to destroy
American power at one blow was frustrated once and for all at Midway. A
few months later he was killed when his plane was shot down by American
fighters, his flight details decoded by American cryptanalysts. In 1945 his
flagship, Yamato, condemned to see out the war without a single naval
engagement, made one desperate
suicide run to relieve the Japanese
garrison holed up on Okinawa and was battered into the sea by a swarm of
American aircraft. 44
Midway did not end the war in the Pacific, but it threw Japan on to the
defensive, and allowed the United States to divert men and materials to the
German war. Over the next three years Nimitz and Macarthur wore down
Japanese resistance island by island, from Guadalcanal to Okinawa, against
fierce, suicidal defence. Japan's fleet was decimated, her merchant shipping
obliterated. When bases near enough to Japan's home islands could be
secured, a relentless aerial bombardment of her cities eroded what
economic strength remained. Without the Coral Sea and Midway this bitter
erosion of Japanese fighting power would have been both longer and more
costly. The United States might well have had to fall back on California as its
front line in the Pacific. Midway was won by the narrowest of margins - ten
bombs in ten minutes - but it was not an accidental victory. It was rooted in
sound intelligence and the effective deployment of air power at sea for which
