306
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
the autumn deep pessimism needed little fabrication. Through the winter of
1942, during the long slugging match at Stalingrad, the residual confidence
of the German people in the prospect of victory slowly evaporated. News of
the Soviet counter-attack seeped out in Berlin through the official wall of
silence. The heavy lossess could not be disguised. An air of deep gloom
descended on the German population. Off the record Goebbels told a group
of foreign correspondents in December that 'only a hair's breadth separates
us from the abyss'. 84
The defeat at Stalingrad brought about a real moral crisis in the German
war effort. The mood in the capital was one of sorrow and exasperation.
Rumours abounded that Germany might sue for an armistice. One neutral
observer noticed in the mood of 'desperation' and 'anxiety' an open
willingness to blame Hitler for what had gone wrong. & The regime made a
virtue of necessity and used the crisis as an opportunity to shift the moral
ground of the conflict from uncritical confidence in victory to a sombre
defence of the homeland against the barbaric Bolshevik threat. Goebbels
was the inspiration behind the change. Hitler disliked the idea of a war of
defence, since it smacked of weakness, but he accepted Goebbels's
suggestion that moral justification should now be based on the idea of a life
or death struggle between European civilisation, shielded by Germany, and
A siatic barbarism. Goebbels thought the message should be uncompromis-
ing so that even non-Nazis could see that 'everybody will have his throat cut
if we are defeated'. The propaganda was never quite so blunt, but Goebbels
relayed to the nation on 30 January 1943, in a speech in the Berlin
Sportpalast, the crux of Hitler's new realism: 'In this war there will be
neither victors nor vanquished, but only survivors and annihilated. 86 The
issue was no longer a triumphant war of imperial conquest, but the survival
of the German people. No one could fail to see that the new language
suggested a nation under siege. The Party took up the theme of Europe's
final defence against the east, inverting the reality of the war entirely, but in
the process succeeding to some extent in rallying forces more willing to
defend the fatherland than to conquer living-space. Confidence in eventual
victory, on the other hand, continued to decline.
The postwar survey of
morale found that by January 1944 77 per cent of the sample regarded the
war as lost. By early 1944, the diplomat Ulrich von Hassell wrote in his diary
that 'anxiety and horror hold sway'. Hitler, he thought, had caused nothing
but 'spiritual confusion and moral deterioration'. A secret police report
from March 1944 observed that morale had reached the lowest point since
the war began."7
It
was against this background of moral decline that the German
resistance took the decision that the only way to end the war was to kill
Hitler. This was not a simple choice. For the soldiers of the opposition it
meant a betrayal of their oath of loyalty, and mutiny against their Supreme
Commander. For all the assassins plotting Hitler's death was high treason.
During the autumn of 1942 the resisters considered carefully the justification
for so radical a step. They appealed to a higher morality. They searched for
historical precedents. They yielded to the argument that their duty to the
fatherland was greater than their duty to any one individual, especially one
whose orders were manifestly criminal. 'If ever in history an assassination
was justifiable', wrote one of the few survivors of the plot, 'this was one.'
The soldiers who were willing to break their oath of allegiance did so in the
belief that they acted in accord with 'the highest standards of ethics, moral-
ity and patriotism' 88
The real problem was not squaring their consciences but doing the deed.
Men who moved whole armies around on a battlefield found the job of
murdering one man almost impossibly complex. They discussed shooting
him at the daily conference, but thought the risk of failure too high. Baron
Georg von Boeselager offered to storm Hitler's headquarters with his whole
regiment but was never posted near enough to carry out the threat. Finally it
was decided that a time bomb was the answer. This brought new difficulties.
German explosives were not well suited to assassination. The fuses available
made a hissing noise. The plotters found that the best material was British
plastic explosive, triggered by British-made timing devices. The army had a
quantity of both, picked up from supplies parachuted by British planes to
agents in Europe. The bomb was disguised as two bottles of Cointreau, a
present for someone at Hitler's headquarters. On 13 March 1943 General
Henning von Treschkow and Fabian von Schlabrendorff arrived at von
Kluge's headquarters in Smolensk for a meeting with Hitler. The Führer
arrived surrounded by bodyguards. At lunch, prepared by his personal
cook, Hitler's physician tasted every course first. At the airport, following
the conference, the parcel of liqueur was handed to one of Hitler's staff, the
fuse primed. Hitler's aircraft, with his armour-plated cabin and seat fitted
with a parachute, had been divided into compartments to reduce the effects
of bomb blast; it flew off to East Prussia surrounded by a shield of fighter
planes. The bomb failed to detonate. Before it had even been discovered,
the conspirators recovered the package the following day on the pretext that
the wrong gift had been sent. 89
Another fifteen months passed before a second serious attempt. This time
the plotters enjoyed an even wider circle of sympathisers among senior
military officers; the assassination was planned as part of a general coup
d'etat which would, it was hoped, precipitate an end to the war. The
assassination was to be masterminded by an outstanding young staff officer,
