260
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . . .
setback. He campaigned on support for the League of Nations, which
America had not yet joined, but found the tide of opinion isolationist. In the
Republican landslide he failed to win even his home state of New York. The
following year, at the age of 39, he was struck by polio and paralysed from
the waist down. He withdrew from politics to fight his affliction. Those who
knew him well found him transformed by the struggle. The young politician
had an arrogance, an intolerance of weakness, a hint of superficiality, that
marred his energy and charm. During the seven years it took him to recover
he became a more humble and more sympathetic personality.
'He was
serious,' Roosevelt's Secretary for Labour Frances Perkins later wrote, 'not
playing now. 52
In 1928 he returned to politics, winning a narrow victory as Governor of
New York State. Four years later he was returned as the first Democrat
President since Wilson, with overwhelming support. During the 1930s
suppon.
Roosevelt struggled to repair the damage inflicted on the American
economy by the Great Slump, and to heal the social wounds of unemploy-
ment and poverty. He promised Americans a 'New Deal' on jobs and
welfare, and used the powers of the state, underdeveloped by European
standards, to secure it. The results were mixed. There were still nine million
unemployed by 1940, when Roosevelt ran for an unprecedented third term.
The New Deal legislation was dragged over the coals by the Supreme Court
for the unconstitutional powers it gave to the President and the new state
agencies he set up. He made a great many bitter political enemies in his
attempt to strengthen Presidential rule. When the British ambassador Lord
Halifax, recently arrived in Washington in 1940, met a group of Republican
Congressmen he was astonished to be told that all
present thought
Roosevelt 'as dangerous a dictator as Hitler or Mussolini' 53 When the
Lend-Lease bill went through Congress, the isolationist Republican senator
Arthur Vandenburg dubbed Roosevelt 'Ace Power Politician of the
World' 54
Roosevelt was certainly an ambitious President, who disliked the
obstruction of his policies. He devoted most of his energy to short-term
political tactics, and was never choosy about the allies he found. He was
obsessed with public opinion and his own popularity. He was an unsophisti-
cated idealist, who once confessed that his political outlook could be
summed up in two words: democrat and Christian. Though the idealism was
genuine enough, friends and colleagues found his views on most issues ill-
defined and pragmatic. Roosevelt's instinct for political survival created in
him a distrust of ideological conviction. Charles Bohlen, who interpreted for
him at Teheran, thought the President 'preferred to work by improvisation
than by plan'. He disliked putting anything down on paper, and instead did
261
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
supportive, but was, by the general agreement of those around him, difficult
to pin down.) 'Not a tidy mind,' wrote an otherwise sympathetic British
observer. 55
Roosevelt the shrewd tactician and Roosevelt the idealist were difficult to
reconcile. This was particularly so in time of war. Though his public stance in
the 1930s against violence - I hate war' - helped to maintain domestic
political support among a largely isolationist population, it was difficult for
him to hide his hatred of fascism and his expectation that America at some
point would
become involved
with keeping the peace abroad. The
ambiguities in this position were sufficiently pronounced to make it almost
impossible for the American public to decide just where their President
stood on the issue of war, yet to make it just as difficult for Roosevelt to
seize the initiative and side openly with the democracies in 1940 and 1941.
When Japan attacked in December 1941 everything was simplified for
people and President alike: isolationism was dead as a political force and
Roosevelt could lead his people in war unfettered by hostile opinion. He
brought to the role of war leader some admirably suitable qualities. His was
a big personality, made larger by years of publicity and the calculated
wooing of popular approval. He had unrivalled experience in politics,
having spent eight years in the highest office in the land. When it came to
a job of work he was not hostage to party prejudice but hired Republican
and Democrat alike. He was adept at managing Congress, and at build-
ing bridges between the many constituencies - ethnic, political, religious -
that made up American society.
The coming of war injected a lease of life into the Roosevelt administra-
tion. The President announced that 'Dr New Deal' was handing his practice
over to 'Dr Win-the-War'. He insisted on calling himself Commander-in-
Chief, and made it clear that he was not going to stand back, as Woodrow
Wilson had done, from the day-to-day business of fighting the war. He saw
himself as the ringmaster of the coalition: 'I am responsible for keeping the
grand alliance together,' he told Marshall. 56 There was almost no estab-
lished structure in American government for Roosevelt to play the role of
military supremo, and the first frantic months of conflict were spent trying to
devise one.
The result was a chaos of appointments and committees.
Eisenhower, recently promoted to the Pentagon, recorded his impression of
life in the capital three weeks after Pearl Harbor: 'Tempers are short. There
are a lot of amateur strategists on the job; and prima donnas every-
where ..•
*57 Gradually a central machinery was established around the
military chiefs. A new Joint Chiefs-of-Staff Committee was established,
