60
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT .
explanation is more routine than this: victory was the product of all those
elements of organisation and invention mobilised in months of patient,
painstaking labour. Under Horton's inspirational command these elements
reached a critical mass by the late spring of 1943. German directives could
again be read by British cryptanalysts at almost exactly the time that new
Allied codes blinded their opposite number for the rest of the war? Radar
and anti-submarine weaponry had evolved at last the necessary level of
reliability and sophistication. Better training and tactics turned the escort
vessel into a genuine help-mate for the convoys and a true deterrent to its
hunters. Finally, air power worked its transforming art in the Atlantic as it
had done in the Pacific and the Mediterranean. This was the most important
change of all. Not until April did Horton get the escort carriers long
promised, but from then on the number of carriers increased more rapidly,
and air cover could be provided throughout the seaborne theatres. The
number and quality of aircraft plying backwards and forwards over the Bay
of Biscay or far out into the Atlantic, in lengthy, often unrewarding, cold
reconnaissance, increased sharply by the spring of 1943. In January 1942
there had been only 127 of which just ten were converted long-range
bombers; a year later there were 371 aircraft, including almost one hundred
long-range aircraft. But the VLR aircraft, the Liberators with their extra
fuel tanks, which could fly for eighteen hours or more, came in numbers only
in April and May 1943, although only a fraction of what had been requested
was supplied. Why the RAF remained resistant for so long to the idea
of releasing bombers for work over the ocean defies explanation. A mere
37 aircraft succeeded in closing the Atlantic Gap, whose existence had
almost brought the Allies' war plans to stalemate. 78
The Battle of the Atlantic was not won like other naval conflicts, fleet face
to face with fleet in decisive engagement. Its start and its finale were ragged
and ill-defined, though real enough. The outcome of the struggle owed a
great deal to organisations and staff far distant from the seamen and ships
whose job it was to fight for the convoys' passage: the submarine Tracking
Rooms in London and Washington, the Trade Plot Room that master-
minded the global movement of merchant shipping, and the offices for radio
interception and decipherment. It was a victory neither easy nor inevitable.
Allied navies were stretched to the limit to achieve it. But victory in the
Atlantic sea-lanes, like the victory at Midway, represented a decisive shift in
the fortunes of war
The war at sea was won not by the traditional instruments of maritime
strategy, but by modern weapons - aircraft, radar and radio intelligence.
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
бІ
Where ships sailed unprotected by aircraft, without benefit of modern
means to detect other vessels and blind to the intentions of the enemy, they
were all but defenceless. If either the British or American navies had been
unwilling to recognise that maritime strategy had to undergo a fundamental
revolution in the early years of the war, the sea-lanes might well have
remained blocked. The Japanese navy was compromised for too long by the
search for the big battleship confrontation, while the German navy was
handicapped throughout the war by the reluctance of the German air force
to develop a serious maritime strategy.
[Under the impact of modern weaponry and tactics the sea war became a
war of costly attrition conducted in the main by aircraft, submarines and
small escort vessels. These spent the bulk of their time in monotonous
routine, sweeping the skies and oceans for sight of the enemy, adding a tiny
piece to the intelligence puzzle or supplying another statistic in the trade
war. This kind of sea war, Churchill later observed, had none of the flavour
of the past, no 'flaming battles and glittering achievements'. Instead its
end product was statistics, diagrams, and curves unknown to the nation,
incomprehensible to the public'.?) Attrition warfare had none of the
spectacular bloodletting of great land battles; there was no Somme, no
Stalingrad. Yet the war at sea was exceptionally costly in men, who had to
fight one small engagement after another, with all the skills of old-fashioned
seamanship, against both the enemy and the harsh marine environment.
Out of 39,000 German submariners, 28,000 were killed, or almost three-
quarters of the force. From the 55,800 crewmen who went down with
Britain's merchant ships, over 25,000 were drowned. 8º Chances of rescue on
the high sea were slight. Life and death at sea were peculiarly harsh. 'There
is no margin for mistakes in submarines,' Horton
once
told British
submariners stationed at Malta, 'You are either alive or dead. '81
The victory of the Allied navies was the foundation for final victory in the
west and in the Pacific. It permitted Britain and the United States to prepare
seriously for the largest amphibious assault yet attempted, the re-entry to
Hitler's Europe. It allowed the Allies to impose crippling sea blockades on
Italy and Japan that destroyed 64 per cent of all Italy's shipping tonnage, and
reduced the Japanese merchant fleet from over 5 million tons in 1942 to
670,000 tons in 1945•
82 The stranglehold on Italian and Japanese supply lines
sapped fatally the industrial strength of these nations and
made their
reinforcement of distant fronts sporadic and costly. Finally, victory gave a
growing immunity to Allied shipping so that the disparity in naval strengths
and merchant tonnage between the two sides became unbridgeable. From
the beginning of 1943 onwards the Royal Navy lost no more battleships or
aircraft carriers; only six more cruisers were lost compared with 26 between
