12
UNPREDICTABLE VICTORY
French opinion, it was not the nature of Hitler's system that worried western
leaders as much as the degree of power it could exert abroad, and the warlike
aspect of its unpredictable leader. By the late 1930s both the British and
French governments opted for the most difficult course, containing German
ambition by the threat of military force.
The threat was real enough. Both states began to arm heavily from the
mid-1930s and by 1939 outproduced Germany in tanks and aircraft. In 1938
the threat was just sufficient to force Hitler to abandon his war on the Czechs
and at the Munich Conference to submit to the compromise insisted on by
Britain and France. But it was difficult to persuade Hitler longterm that the
military threat was convincing, and that the western states, after a decade in
which they had failed to obstruct any major act of aggression, had the will to
fight for the old political order. In 1939 Hitler gambled that they would not
fight; to ensure this he pulled off what he regarded as a spectacular
diplomatic coup in August 1939 by reaching agreement with Stalin on Soviet
non-aggression and the division of Poland between the two states. In his
view the old balance of power was in ruins by the autumn of 1939. He ruled
out the possibility of intervention and attacked Poland on 1 September.
Neither Britain nor France actively wanted war in 1939, but neither could
face the consequences of accepting international humiliation and German
domination of Europe. At home a broad patriotic consensus emerged in
1939 in favour of confronting Hitler. The British and French armed forces
agreed in March on a common war plan to wear Germany down in a long
campaign of blockade and attrition as they had done in the Great War. The
two states allied with each other and with Poland in the spring of 1939, a
commitment from which none of them could easily escape when Hitler
launched his war on the Poles. On 3 September Germany, Britain, France
and Poland were at war. It was not the war Hitler had expected,
but he
fought it willingly enough. It was the war the western allies expected, but
they fought it with great reluctance.
When the crumbling world order plunged into violence in September
1939, the eclipse of democracy and international stability threatened to
become total. On news of the war, Harold Ickes, Roosevelt's Secretary for
the Interior, confided in his diary the gloomy view that civilisation was now
doomed, 'headed for a decline of fifty or one hundred years, or even longer,
during which our descendants will lose many of the gains we have made? 10
There was grim evidence in the eighteen months that followed to support the
bleakest prognostications. The New Order triumphed everywhere. German
forces swept aside all resistance in democratic Europe. In the spring of 1940
Denmark and Norway were overrun. In May and June Belgium, the
Netherlands, Luxembourg and France were defeated and a German army of
EXPLAINING WORLD WAR II
13
occupation installed. The French army was the only major centre of military
power on the Continent outside Germany. Its defeat in six weeks - a product
not of numerical inferiority, but of poor organisation and fighting skills -
effectively destroyed the order established after the Great War. Britain
escaped the same fate by the narrowest of margins. Her army defeated in
France, her air force worn down in the weeks of intervention in the
European struggle, her navy at risk from German air power, Britain was
saved by the poor level of German preparation for a cross-Channel assault,
and the failure of German air forces to wrest control of the skies of southern
England from the RAF. The Battle of Britain saved the island from
invasion, but it did not do more than that. By the summer of 1940 Britain was
isolated in Europe, with no means to re-enter the European mainland, and
little prospect of alliance.
The situation in the east was more delicate for Germany. Poland was
easily defeated in the autumn of 1939; the remaining states in eastern
Europe and the Balkans began to align themselves with Germany, centre of
the New Order. The Soviet Union, which Britain regarded as virtually an
enemy state, supplied Germany with food, oil and raw materials. For Hitler
the opportunity now opened up invitingly to complete the programme of
empire-building by seizing the coveted living-space of Eurasia, the rich
steppe areas of the Ukraine, the oil of the Caucasus, the sprawling iron and
steel basin of southern Russia. Only the Red Army now stood between him
and the dream of world power, and there was every indication that it was
poorly armed and led. In the summer of 1940 he turned his back on Britain,
who could, he argued, be finished off by the Luftwaffe in good time, and
looked eastward. By December he had drawn up a plan, 'Barbarossa', for an
assault along the whole length of the Soviet frontier, deep into Soviet
territory, to seize Moscow, Leningrad and the industrial south. It was a plan
of exceptional scope and risk, for Hitler believed nothing less than that the
Soviet Union could be defeated in four months.
From Britain's point of view the German threat was only one worry
among many. On the back of German victory over France and Britain in the
Battle of France the other revisionist states, Italy and Japan, began to flex
their own muscles. Italy declared war on 10 June and confronted Britain
with a sizeable army and navy astride her imperial sea route to Suez and
India. During 1941 Italy, with German assistance, pushed back British
Commonwealth forces towards Suez and threatened the whole Middle East.
Italy attacked Greece too, and in the process provoked a German-Yugoslav
conflict, which led German forces to occupy much of the Balkan peninsula.
Britain was faced with the very real threat that the Axis states would seize
Gibraltar and Suez and shatter what remained of Britain's strategic position
