UNPREDICTABLE VICTORY
The material balance also tells us little about how the weapons were used
once the forces got them. This was not a question of economic power or
technical ingenuity, but of fighting skills. During the war there were plenty
of instances of poorly-armed troops fighting superbly; a super-abundance of
weapons and equipment was no guarantee that forces could use them
effectively. Fighting power was determined not just by weapons, but by
organisation, morale and
military elan. Both German and
Japanese forces showed this as they were pushed back in 1944 and 1945:
fighting against very large odds, with a deteriorating supply of weapons, they
maintained their combat skills and a resolute willingness to fight almost to
the end. Hitler was convinced throughout the war that the German soldier
was a superior fighter, both more competent and more spiritually fortified
than his opponent, and that this could in some sense compensate decisively
for the greater numbers of the enemy. In Japanese society the military were
supposed to be imbued with bushido, a spiritual shield that gave each soldier
the strength to fight to the limits of endurance and self-sacrifice, even against
overwhelming material odds. The emphasis placed on sheer fighting skills in
Germany and Japan brought them remarkable victories between 1939 and
1942; it also forced their enemies to think more about the quality of their
own forces, rather than their evident quantity.
The balance of fighting power, like that of resources, did not remain
constant during the war. As might be expected, after the initial shock of
defeat the Allies looked hard at the way their forces were trained, deployed
and led. Lessons were quickly learned from Axis successes. The Allies were
forced by the nature of their enemy to stretch their strategic imaginations to
embrace ways of warfare that were more ingenious and effective. By
contrast the early victories lent a certain complacency to Axis strategy and
operations; there were few fundamental changes made to the military recipe
that had worked so well the first time around. The gap in fighting power
between the two sides narrowed remarkably quickly. There are echoes here
of the Napoleonic wars. In both cases the aggressor initially demonstrated
superior fighting skills and leadership, against forces that were divided and
operationally ineffectual. In both cases the gulf between the two sides
narrowed over time as the lessons of early defeats were evaluated and the
weaker forces were expanded and reformed. By the end of the war Allied
forces performed much more effectively than they had done at first. Axis
forces, on the other hand, like the armies of Napoleon, stagnated - both
were remarkably skilled in retreat, but it was retreat none the less.
Clearly, then, the possession of bigger battalions fighting in a just cause is
not a sufficient explanation of victory. We need to be much more precise
about the reasons for Allied victory to find an explanation that is historically
EXPLAINING WORLD WAR II
7
convincing, all the more so given the nature of the crisis that generated the
war in the first place. In the i93os the world order had been subjected to
seismic shifts, rocked by forces which western liberal statesmen could
scarcely understand. Democracy was in retreat everywhere, feebly keeping
at bay the tide of violent imperialism, racial conflict and popular dictator-led
nationalism. When war broke out there were widespread fears in the west
that the march of Hitler's brutal armies signalled the end of liberal
civilisation. Well into the war the outcome hung in the balance, even after
America joined the fray. The war was not some deviation from the natural
development of the world towards a democratic utopia, but was a hard-
fought and unpredictable conflict about which of a number of very different
directions the world was going to take.
Viewed from this perspective, Allied victory represented a remarkable
reversal of fortunes. In the 1930s the western liberal world seemed at the
point of eclipse. The Great War of 1914-18 had called into question the
values of the self-confident and wealthy states that fought it. It plunged the
world from civilisation into a new barbarism, giving lie to the Europeans'
claim to be the bearers of peace and plenty. By the time it was over Europe
was impoverished, a whole generation of young Europeans brutalised and
embittered. In Russia the war provoked social revolution as the Tsarist
empire collapsed under the strain.
The triumph of Lenin's Bolsheviks in
1917 gave birth to an age of bitter social and ideological conflict.
Communism threatened to undermine the very foundations of capitalist
society, and was loathed by anyone with an interest in the status quo. Yet in
1929 capitalism almost destroyed itself. The Great Crash brought the worst
recession of the modern age. Millions were thrown out of work, and millions
more plunged into poverty. The old political system could not cope.
Communism was one alternative. In the 1930s men and women from all
walks of society were drawn to the communist claim that socialist order must
be preferable to capitalist chaos. Terrified at such a prospect, the anti-
communist right swung towards militarism and fascism and the promise of
social harmony and a strong nation.
The rise of extremist mass movements in the 1930s offered a profound and
dangerous challenge to liberal democracy and conventional capitalism. On
all sides could be heard a chorus of voices calling for a 'New Order' of
planned economies and totalitarian societies.
Communism and fascism
offered a way out of what a great many had come to regard as a ban
political and economic system whose days were numbered. The
the existing order was in terminal decline produced a deep sense o
anxiety among those who sought to defend it. The violent conflicts bi
liberalism, fascism and socialism in the 1930s were expressed b
