106
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
easily resolved: aircraft attacked enemy aircraft, and when they had finished
doing that they bombed enemy armies. This met the Clausiwitzian test of
war, the concentration of effort against the military forces of the enemy. But
@British and American airmen, much freer from the smothering constraints
of old-established armies, wanted a strategy that gave them real inde-
pendence, one that complemented the novelty and modernity of the weapon
itself. They chose what became known as 'strategic' bombing, to distinguish
it from mere 'tactical' bombing in support of armies and navies. The target of
the strategic bomber was the very heart of the enemy state, its home
population and economy. The Great War had opened the way to a new kind
of conflict, total war, in which the distinction between civilian and soldier
was eliminated. The bomber was the instrument of total war par excellence,
capable of pulverising the industries of the enemy and terrorising the enemy
population into surrender. Air strategists were fond of using the analogy of
the human body. Bombing did not just weaken the military limbs of the
victim, but destroyed the nerve centres, the heart, the brain, the arteries
(lungs remained a curiously neglected metaphor) - the very ability of a
nation to make war at all 19
[Much of this was fantasy. In the 1920s the RAF, and in particular its
overbearing, truculent commander, Sir Hugh Trenchard, clung to the quite
unproven assertion that the moral effect of bombing was twenty times
greater than the effect of material damage. It was an assumption that
lingered on past Trenchard's retirement in 1930. Though air leaders in
Britain, and later in the United States, hesitated to urge attacks on civilian
populations for the sake of terror, the whole logic of independent, strategic
bombing was to crush popular willingness and capacity to wage war. If there
was not quite a straight line between Trenchard's dogmatic views on morale
and the ghastly apotheosis of bombing at Hiroshima, the curve was barely
noticeable. For those airmen with qualms about attacking civilians, there
developed in the 1930s a second assumption, that bombers could precisely
attack selected economic targets, whose destruction would dry up the supply
of arms and drain away the material life-blood of the enemy's armed forces.
Whatever the justification, the object of attack was the home front and not
the military shield in front of it. For all of the 1930s, and even in the early
years of war, this strategy was technically unfeasible and operationally
amateur. Nevertheless in December 1937 British Bomber Command was
ordered to plan for the destruction of the German economy through
bombing, and from that date the groundwork was laid for what became the
Combined Bomber Offensive launched in 1943.
When British airmen came to think seriously about targets in Germany,
they were faced with a bewildering choice. The Air Ministry drew up a broad
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
107
list of objectives, the so-called Western Air Plans, which included in Plan w5
instructions for 'Attacking Enemy's Manufacturing Resources in the Ruhr,
Rhineland and Saar'. The question still had to be resolved about which of
these resources might prove the most strategically profitable. At first
Bomber Command favoured the German electric power system; then
during 1938 oil, chemicals, the metals industry, the engineering and
armaments industry and transport were added to the list. Priority was given
to electricity supply and oil in the area of the Ruhr, which was home to the
greatest concentration of German heavy industry, and was the easiest to
reach from air bases in southern England or France. 20
This was whistling in the wind, and Bomber Command knew it. For all the
exaggerated claims attached to bombing strategy, woefully little was done in
the 1930s to prepare the bombing campaign. When war broke out in
September 1939 Bomber Command had a mere 488 light-bombers, whose
range was generally too poor to reach even the Ruhr from British bases, and
whose bomb-loads were too small to do more than insignificant damage.
There were no effective bomb-sights; there were few bombs bigger than 250
pounds; only a handful of bases in Britain could handle the larger aircraft;
and there was even a severe shortage of maps for navigating in north-west
Europe. Bombing trials betrayed a wide margin of inaccuracy even when
bombing in bright sunlight from a few thousand feet with no enemy
interference. Though there was better equipment in the pipeline, it was still
years away. At the onset of war Bomber Command recognised that bombing
attacks over Germany would be virtually suicidal, and reluctantly accepted
the order to use bombers as the French and Germans did, in support of the
battle on land. 21
Even had Bomber Command been more prepared to attack Germany's
industrial heartland, the government would have prevented it. In London,
and in Paris, the politicians were terrified lest war should unleash Germany's
"knock-out blow'. It was what they had expected throughout the last years of
peace, that Germany would launch a merciless assault with gas, germ bombs
and explosives to paralyse western capitals and bring the war to a hasty,
despairing conclusion. At the very moment that Chamberlain publicly
declared war on the morning of 3 September, the air raid sirens sounded in
London. People dived into ditches and trenches, scrambled to put on their
gas masks, cowered in underground sanctuaries. It was a false alarm,
triggered by the approach of two friendly aircraft (there were similar panics
in Berlin and Paris), but it was symptomatic of the deeper fear that a foe as
apparently ruthless and evil as Hitler would not hesitate to bomb civilians
into surrender when it suited him. Chamberlain insisted that Bomber
Command do nothing against Germany that might provoke retaliation.
