304
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
'We shall not place too much emphasis on fighting "for Christianity", Goeb-
bels wrote in his diary on the second day of the campaign. 'That would,
after all, be just too hypocritical. 78 Instead, might was right.
The law of the jungle might have assisted German fighting spirit in the
Soviet campaign, but its moral effects were otherwise entirely negative. The
criminalisation of warfare produced a growing indiscipline and demoral-
isation among German forces themselves. The German army shot fifteen
thousand of their own number, the equivalence of a whole division. A
further 23,000 were sentenced to long prison terms, and another 404,000
to shorter periods in prison or penal battalions. As a proportion of total
mobilised manpower, these figures were higher than they were for the Red
Army, 3•3 per cent against an estimated I•25 per cent. Desertion or refusal
to obey orders increased as the war went on, and the law of the jungle
seeped into the military structure itself. The struggle for survival had a
remorseless logic. The regime imposed ever more draconian terror on its
own forces to keep them fighting until the very end of the war when
Hitler, amidst the dying embers of his Reich, ordered any saboteur or
deserter shot on the spot.?
The effect of Germany's conduct of war in the east on the rest of world
opinion was bleak. The Allies were able to stoke up the fires of moral
indignation almost effortlessly with the string of well-attested atrocities laid
at Germany's door. Though German allies and sympathisers - Italy, Spain,
Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria - sent troops to help fight the Bolshevik
threat, their treatment at German hands was arrogant and discriminatory.
Germany was feared and hated by most of Europe, and everything it did in
the Soviet Union reinforced this image, even among those non-Russian
nationalities who had at first welcomed the German armies as liberators
from Russian-dominated communism. In the occupied territories German
apparatchiks became a byword for criminality and violence - their rule was
harsh in the extreme, their economic policies a mixture of looting and
exploitation. This was not true of all German officials, and neither was
barbarism practised by every German soldier, but the dominant image
abroad was dictated by those who did thrive on crime and vice. The Spanish
ambassador to London told the Japanese ambassador in Madrid in
December 1942 that the United Nations were 'utterly certain of whipping
the Axis'. The Germans, he thought, ran their war effort mechanically,
inflexibly and 'when it comes to diplomacy' he considered 'their heads are as
hard as lead'. 'There is not a single country', he continued, 'which in its heart
is following the Germans.
France, Belgium, Holland, all hate the
Germans. ' Neither Hitler not his entourage were worried by the state of
world opinion in 1942, but their outlook unquestionably gave the moral field
THE MORAL CONTEST
305
to the Allies. 'If we win,' Goebbels remarked in his diary, 'we shall have
right on our side. '80
At home the moral bankruptcy of the eastern campaign stimulated the
conscientious rejection of the regime by sections of German society, and
brought more officers, horrified by what they had experienced in the east,
into the German opposition. Many were drawn from the upper reaches of
German society, recruited from field-marshals and generals, diplomats and
senior officials. They were united by their detestation of Hitler. Twice, in
they regarded as a disaster: 'a frightful, senseless and unfathomable war',
wrote one of their number in a diary. 81 The resistance worked at the very
heart of the German war effort. It included the head of German counter-
intelligence, Admiral Wilhelm Canaris; there were a circle of opponents in
the Foreign Ministry; in the Air Ministry there operated until 1942 the
largest communist spy-ring in Germany, the Red Orchestra; even General
Halder, the first army Chief-of-Staff under Hitler's Supreme Command, was
counted among the military opponents of the regime. The roll-call of
prominent Germans from all walks of life who opposed Hitler's war and the
immorality of the regime revealed the extent to which the war effort lacked
any broad base of public support. From resistance circles came a long run of
peace feelers to the west, searching for some way of both ending the war and
destroying Hitler with Allied cooperation. Neither proved possible. The
west distrusted the motives of many of the conserative Germans who
approached them; by 1943 the three Allies were committed to unconditional
surrender, which the resistance could not deliver. The destruction of Hitler
was frustrated time and again by the qualms of conscience or political
caution of his domestic enemies, and also by exceptional bad luck. There
were no fewer than 42 failed attempts on Hitler's life. 82
Support for the war effort among the German population as a whole
began to decline steadily from 1941. The failure to clinch defeat of the Soviet
Union in 1941, when Hitler had confidently claimed victory in October,
reflected poorly on the credibility of Hitler's promises. In a postwar survey
of German wartime morale it was found that 38 per cent of the respondents
thought the war was already lost by January 1942. In April 1942 Hitler gave
one of his last major speeches. It was not a good performance. His demands
for greater sacrifice from a home front already short of food and fuel, his
hints of another winter campaign in the Soviet Union, struck the wrong
note. Goebbels thought it sounded like the 'cry of a drowning man', and
insisted that German propaganda at home should be couched in more
realistic, even pessimistic, tones to prepare people for a harsh struggle. ®* By
