298
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
people fighting and labouring with the promise of better to come. This helps
to explain why from early on in the conflict, well before victory was even a
remote prospect, the certainty of a just cause promoted confidence in Allied
victory. 'I am absolutely convinced', wrote the German novelist Thomas
Mann, from his exile in the United States in October 1941, 'that Hitler's
game is up and that he will be destroyed - no matter how many detours and
how much unnecessary effort is required to complete the work
Churchill's private secretary wrote as early as February 1941: I am confident
that we have won. We shall see much serious damage and undergo many
trials and dangers ... the ultimate issue cannot be in doubt. 56 Stalin in
November that year argued that the 'moral degradation' of the German
invader made their final rout 'inevitable'. When a few weeks later Genera!
Wedemeyer observed the British Chiefs-of-Staff in Washington discussing
future strategy with their opposite numbers he was struck by how little
affected they seemed by the desperate situation facing the Allies: There was
nothing in their demeanour to reveal concern or doubt about final victory.""'
On the Axis side the war was fought with much less moral certainty of
popular commitment. At the outset of the conflict there was no clear
consensus in favour of war, and a great deal of evident misgiving. When the
American journalist William Shirer heard the news of the British declara-
tion of war on Germany on 3 September 1939, he was standing among a
crowd of 250 Berliners. He watched them listen carefully to the announce-
ment from the street loudspeakers. 'When it was finished', he wrote in his
diary, there was not a murmur. They just stood there .. Stunned. All that
day he observed only 'astonishment and depression' on the faces all around
him.& On the day that Italy entered the war, 10 June 1940, Mussolini
addressed a dispirited crowd in front of the Palazzo Venezia. The news
aroused little enthusiasm. In his diary for that day the Italian Foreign
Minister, Count Ciano, who had opposed running the risk of war with the
west, expressed nothing but profound regret at the decision to fight: 'I am
sad, very sad. May God help Italy!'5º In Japan, which had been at war with
China for ten years, the news of war with the US was greeted, according
to one witness, the journalist Kazuo Kawai, with indifference and shock' 60
Aggressive war was not a popular choice in any of the three Axis
populations. It was the aim of narrow sectional interests. In Germany and
Italy war was declared because of the ambitions of two dictators, who
carried their country into conflict against the strong advice of political
colleagues and military leaders. In Japan war was promoted by the military
elites, who persuaded the Emperor, against a chorus of civilian protest, that
THE MORAL CONTEST
299
war was an unavoidable necessity. All bar two of the elder statesmen, or
jushin, summoned to meet the Emperor late in November 1941, counselled
peace and negotiation. Not even the military were confident that they could
win outright a war against the United States; the risk of war was taken in
the hope that Japanese forces could make the cost of reconquering lost
territories too high for America, and as a result arrive at a negotiated
settlement favourable to Japan. Once war broke out there was a patriotic
response in all three states, though nothing quite like the drive for retri-
bution and justice, the unity of purpose, that animated the populations
of their enemy. Enthusiasm for war was least evident in Italy; in July 1943
Mussolini was overthrown by the army, and peace was agreed with the Allies
before the final defeat of Italian forces. In Germany and Japan morale never
collapsed completely, but the willingness to fight over the last two years of
war was only maintained with large doses of propaganda and terror.
Popular morale in Japan was already subdued when war broke out after
the draining years of warfare in China. The early victories brought about a
sudden revival of enthusiasm, but it was short-lived, as conditions on the
home front rapidly deteriorated. The defeat at Midway, though represented
at home as a great victory, brought home to a great many officers that
the war could not be won.o' The ordinary soldier and civilian knew little
in general about the true course of the war. Censorship stifled all forms
of communication and was enforced with a brutal thoroughness. Official
propaganda turned every defeat into victory. In 1943 the army invented a
new
verb, tenshin, to march elsewhere, in order to avoid having to say
retreat. 2 Little effort was made to tell people what the war was actually for.
Instead it became an opportunity to rally round the Emperor. Loyalty to the
sacred ruler and to 'yamato damashiï - Japan's divine racial spirit - was
summoned up to encourage a spirit of sacrifice and endeavour. When
American pollsters explored Japanese morale after the war they found that
almost half those asked believed that Japan's spiritual values represented
the country's greatest source of strength. 3 On the eve of war Admiral
Ugaki, who became Commander-in-Chief of the 5th air fleet by 1945,
wrote in his diary that the coming conflict was 'sacred', a war in which
the highest honour was 'to die as martyrs for our empire' and whose simple
purpose was to display 'single minded loyalty to His Majesty', 64
Religion mattered a good deal more in the Japanese war effort than in that
of any other combatant power. The Emperor had a divine status in the eyes
of the population. To die in battle for the Emperor was to die a holy death.
The ashes of each dead soldier were solemnly returned to his family in a brief
religious ritual. Even in educated Japanese society the motto 'We are
guarded by the gods above' was taken with great seriousness. Propaganda
