128
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
from academic or business backgrounds, were at best sceptical of air power
claims, at worst hostile to bombing. Their concluding reports damned with
faint praise: bombing had certainly contributed to undermining resistance in
Germany in the last months of war, but until then it had done nothing to
reverse the sharp upward trajectory of German production, and it had
clearly not dented morale sufficiently to reduce production or produce
revolution. 6s
It was estimated that Germany lost only 10 per cent of its
production in 1944, which could hardly be regarded as critical. The view has
persisted ever since that bombing was a strategic liability, a wasteful
diversion of resources that might more fruitfully have been used building
tanks or laying down ships.
‹ Bombing has also occasioned a chorus of moral disapproval. Yet to
understand what bombing achieved it is necessary, though agonisingly
difficult, to lay aside the moral issue Its strategic merits or limitations are
distinct from its ethical implications, however closely entwined they have
become in the contemporary debate. Even on the strategic questions there
is a great deal of confusion. There persists the myth that bombing was
supposed to win the war on its own, and was thus a failure in its own terms.
This was never the expectation of Allied leaders. Bombers were asked to
contribute in a great many ways to what was always a combined endeavour
of aircraft, ships and armies,The popular view of bombing has concentrated
far too much on the narrow question of how much German production was
affected by bomb destruction, at the expense of looking at bombing's other
functions, and the other theatres of combat in which it was used. To give a
more balanced answer to the question of how much bombing contributed to
victory we must be clear about the nature of its achievement.
Let us examine Allied strategy first.
Bombing met some significant
objectives of western engagement in war. Though the costs were far from
negligible - over six years the death of 140,000 American and British
airmen, and the loss of 21,000 bombers - bombing did reduce the overall
level of western casualties in Europe and in the Far East, by weakening
German resistance and by knocking Japan out of the war before invasion.
Western losses were far lower than those of the other fighting powers.
Bombing also permitted Britain and the United States to bring their
considerable economic and scientific power to bear on the contest. The
campaign was capital intensive, where the great struggle on the eastern front
was based on military labour. This suited the preferences of the west, which
did not want to place a much higher physical strain on their populations.
For all the criticism directed at the waste of resources on bombing, the
whole campaign absorbed, according to a post-war British survey, only 7
per cent of Britain's war effort. 66
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
129
The effect of bombing on the Axis states was uniformly negative. About
Japan there is little argument. Bombing of Japanese cities clinched victory
and almost certainly shortened the war in the Far East. Of course the early
naval victories were essential to turn the tide on Japan's embattled
perimeter. But as the island-hopping became costlier for the American
forces and Chinese resistance in Asia weakened in 1944, bombing recovered
the initiative for the Allies and struck the awesome coup de grâce. In Italy,
where heavy bombing began in the summer of 1943, there was almost no
effective resistance, or adequate civil defence. Production in the northern
industrial regions was cut by an estimated 6o per cent, largely due to the
urban workforce sensibly decamping to the countryside. There is little
dispute that Mussolini's fall from grace in July 1943, and the eventual
surrender of Italy in October that year, owed a good deal to the effects of
bomb attack.67 Neither of Germany's junior partners had the means to
obstruct bombing, and both paid the price. With Germany the case was
different, and it was here that bombing mattered most.
The bombing offensive was for most of its course a fighting
contest
between the two western bomber forces and the German defences. From the
middle of 1943 the defeat of the German air force became a central
objective. Until that date German air power, deployed in the main as a
tactical offensive arm, was a critical factor in German success on land and
sea. The bombing offensive caused German military leaders to drain much
needed air strength away from the main fighting fronts to protect the Reich,
weakening German resistance in the Soviet Union and the Mediterranean.
Though Stalin remained sceptical
of
Churchill's claim that bombing
somehow constituted a Second Front, the facts show that German air power
declined steadily on the eastern front during 1943 and 1944, when over two-
thirds of German fighters were sucked into the contest with the bombers. By
the end of 1943 there were 55,000 anti-aircraft guns to combat the air
offensive - including 75 per cent of the famous 88-millimetre gun, which had
doubled with such success as an anti-tank weapon on the eastern front. As
the bombing war developed, the whole structure of the Luftwaffe was
distorted. On the eastern front it was the bombers that had caused the
damage to Soviet forces in 1941 and 1942. The shift to producing fighters
reduced the German bombing threat over the battlefield. In 1942 over half
the German combat aircraft produced were bombers; in 1944 the proportion
was only 18 per cent. The German air threat at the battle of Kursk and in the
long retreat that followed visibly melted. By compelling Germany to divide
its air forces there were reductions in effectiveness on all fronts, which could
not be reversed even by the most strenuous production effort. 68
Once the Allies had the long-range fighter pouring out in numbers from
