132
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
®The impact of bombing on morale is a different question altogether. The
naive expectation that bombing would somehow produce a tidal wave of
panic and disillusionment which would wash away popular support for war,
and topple governments built on sand, was exposed as wishful thinking.
Neither in Germany nor Japan did bombing provoke any serious backlash
against the regime from those who suffered. But there can surely be little
doubt that bombing was a uniquely demoralising experience. No one
enjoyed being bombed. The recollections of its victims are unanimous in
expressing feelings of panic, of fear, of dumb resignation. The chief
ambition of ordinary Germans in the last years of war was survival, das
Überleben, the desperate struggle to secure food and shelter, to cope with
regular and prolonged cuts in gas and light, to keep awake by day after nights
of huddling in cramped shelters.?? The last thing on the minds of those living
under the hail of bombs was political resistance. Not even the prospect of
vengeance against the bombers could sustain morale.73 Bombed popula-
tions developed an outlook both apathetic and self-centred; each night they
hoped that if there had to be bombing, it would be on someone else.
If the real thing was not bad enough, the survivors were subjected to a
second bombardment when the war was over, this time of surveys and
questionnaires. Ordinary Germans and Japanese were selected for close
interrogation by an army of American officials, anxious to learn at first hand
what being bombed felt like. The Irish-American writer James Stern was
among their number. He found the fatuous questions and the endless stream
of tired, unhappy, defeated Germans almost more than he could bear.
*What do you do and say with all that Galluping nonsense on the table to be
answered?' he wrote two years after the war, 'and across the table the
forlorn life with nothing to live for ... ' Nevertheless Stern, and a host of
others, went on to extract the answers. * They were in the main predictable.
Many Japanese respondents placed bombing at the top of the list of factors
that had made them doubt the possibility of victory (34 per cent of those
polled). In a second poll on Reasons for Certainty that Japan Could Not
Win' 47 per cent put bombing. In Germany, 36 per cent of interviewees
explained the decline of morale by the impact of bombing, and one out of
three claimed that their personal morale was affected by bombing more than
by any other single factor. When they were asked the more specific question
"What was the hardest thing for civilians during the war?', 91 per cent said
bombing.?6
The impact of bombing was profound. People became tired, highly strung
and disinclined to take risks. Industrial efficiency was undermined by
bombing workers and their housing. In Japan absenteeism from work rose
to 50 per cent in the summer of 1945; in the Ford plant in Cologne, in the
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
133
Ruhr, absenteeism rose to 25 per cent of the workforce for the whole of
1944. At the more distant BMW works in Munich the rate rose to one-fifth of
the workforce by the summer of 1944. A loss of work-hours on this scale
played havoc with production schedules. Even those who turned up for work
were listless and anxious. 'One can't get used to the raids, complained one
respondent. 'I wished for an end. We all got nerves. We did not get enough
sleep and were very tense. People fainted when they heard the first bomb
drop." For the bombed cities the end of the war spelt relief from a routine
of debilitating terror and arbitrary loss. No one could doubt who walked
through the ghost towns of Germany and Japan, past the piles of rubble and
twisted concrete, the rusting machines and torn up rails, miles and miles of
burned-out houses, their few frightened inhabitants eking out a half-life in
the cellars and ruined corners, no one could doubt but that bombing
shattered civilian lives.
There has always seemed something fundamentally implausible about the
contention of bombing's critics that dropping almost 2•5 million tons of
bombs on tautly-stretched industrial systems and war-weary urban popula-
tions would not seriously weaken them. Germany and Japan had no special
immunity. Japan's military economy was devoured in the flames; her
population desperately longed for escape from bombing. German forces
lost half of the weapons needed at the front, millions of workers absented
themselves from work, and the economy gradually creaked almost to a halt.
Bombing turned the whole of Germany, in Speer's words, into a gigantic
front'. It was a front the Allies were determined to win; it absorbed huge
resources on both sides. It was a battlefield in which only the infantry were
missing. The final victory of the bombers in 1944 was, Speer concluded, 'the
greatest lost battle on the German side ...
the morality or operational effectiveness of the bombing campaigns, the air
offensive was one of the decisive elements in Allied victory.
