278
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . . •
war, according to an admirer, General von Manteuffel, he developed 'a
good grasp of how a single division moved and fought' but never understood
the operation of an army. 102 As the army leaders struggled to ameliorate the
misjudgements of their commander, conflicts became more common; Hitler
sacked those who crossed him, or who refused to fight for every inch of
ground. He trusted no one to take decisions for him. His concern with details
was Napoleonic. He was a victim not just of his own military incompetence,
but also of the overwhelming nature of his responsibilities. No one on the
Allied side attempted to undertake a fraction of what Hitler took upon
himself. The remarkable thing is that German forces continued to fight with
so much determination that the war hung more in the balance than Hitler's
flawed command merited.
Few leaders can have needed a military manager more than Hitler. Yet
the nature of Hitler's personal command ruled out the emergence of any
figure to compare with Marshall or Brooke. The chief of the Supreme
Headquarters staff, Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel, was appointed in 1938
for his weaknesses rather than his strengths. He was at best an office
manager, channelling information to his chief, disseminating his orders.
Keitel did not see it as his responsibility to recommend strategy, or to
contradict his commander. He was
known, without affection, by his
nickname 'Lakeitel', a pun on the German word for lackey. The Operations
Chief at Hitler's Supreme Headquarters, Colonel Alfred Jodl, was generally
judged to have had the aptitude to guide Hitler's operational choices, but he
grasped early on that Hitler was not open to advice. and he gave it. when he
did, without conviction. Everything Jodl said to Hitler, observed one
General Staff officer, 'simply bounced off him with no visible effect.
Though Jodl understood Hitler's military deficiencies, he was loyal to Hitler
the statesman. In his cell at Nuremberg after the war, awaiting execution as a
war criminal, Jodl described Hitler as a true German hero, who bravely
chose death and destruction rather than face humiliating surrender. 103
There was no shortage of other candidates of high quality on the German
side. Hitler could have made an effective deputy out of von Manstein oF
Guderian or von Rundstedt or Milch or many others; the list is a long one. It
was simply not in Hitler's nature to share the responsibilities of 'leader'. For
the Allies the war was a proving ground, a struggle for survival which by its
very nature threw up commanders and organisers of high quality. Despite
Hitler's Darwinian view of life, the opposite was generally true in Germany
where the story of the war is littered with wasted expertise, men at the
peak of their profession sacked, demoted, imprisoned, humbled. Not even
Stalin, who could be as capricious as Hitler, dispensed with Soviet talent so
freely, at least until the war was over. The men Hitler preferred to employ
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
279
were recruited for their loyalty to him and the Nazi movement. The most
notorious, and almost certainly the most damaging, was Hermann Göring,
who survived as Commander-in-Chief of the German air force throughout
the war. A veteran of the Great War and of the early Party struggles, Göring
rose to become one of the most powerful figures in the movement. An astute
and ambitious politician, his credentials for high military command were
if anything more feeble than Hitler's, and only rather better than the
unfortunate Udet's. He bears a large part of the responsibility for the
failures of German air power, but he was too important a political figure to
be replaced. In 1940 Hitler gave him the new title of Reichsmarschall,
making him the highest ranking officer throughout the armed forces. He was
the only other man allowed to sit at the daily briefings with Hitler, when he
was around, which was seldom. The air force functioned as well as it did only
because its commander, unlike Hitler, neglected the routine of command
more as the war went on. In the last year of war senior air force officers
risked a great deal by petitioning Hitler to sack Göring, but to no avail.
Hitler placed great store on personal loyalties. 104
Hitler chose to remain a lone commander. His isolation
was more
pronounced as the war went on. He seldom left the seclusion of his
headquarters, or his retreat at the Berghof. He made almost no public
appearances. He paid his own allies scant attention.
Yet he retained a
surprising degree of loyalty from his forces and from the wider German
public. To those who saw him discussing the military crises, dominating
the situation conferences, he exuded a powerful sense of optimism about the
final outcome of the conflict. His personality continued to exert its compul-
sive, almost hypnotic effect on those around him. To those outside the Füh-
rer's orbit, the myth of the lone German saviour battling to stem defeat
and rescue the nation, though seriously diminished by the accumulating
evidence of catastrophe, was still able to mobilise fading energies in the
German public. Only in the last weeks of the war did Hitler's will, and
wilfulness, fade. Speer found a man who 'had let go of the controls'. He was
a physical wreck; his limbs trembled, he shuffled rather than walked, his face
was yellow and swollen.
He moved between bouts of petulant, shrieking
anger and listless disillusionment. His staff no longer rose when he came into
the room. He played out a charade of command, ordering non-existent air-
craft and troops to imaginary battles. His last order was to appoint Admiral
Dönitz his successor in place of Göring, whose loyalty he finally doubted. 105
When Hitler read the news of Roosevelt's death on 12 April 1945 he was
overwhelmed with joy. That afternoon Speer was attending the farewell
