Bay of the Seine
Remnants sul ranize
KEY:
dato indiestod
attack, I Augus
Sartne
11 Breakout and pursuit in France, July-August 1944
which would be marked by smoke-shells fired by the tanks. So close to the
front line did Allied aircraft operate that deaths from 'friendly fire' could
not be avoided. But the effects of bombing on the enemy were severe.
Against heavy bombing, the trenches, the foxholes, and even the deeper
bunkers were little defence. After 45 days of severe fighting the German
soldiers in front of the
American attack were already weakened and
demoralised. Bombing was more than many of them could stand: some
went crazy, others surrendered or deserted, or drifted to the rear. Under
the American onslaught the last reserves of German fighting power slowly
dissolved.
In two days American forces drove 15 miles south all along the line. The
armoured divisions of 8th corps reached the town of Coutances, close to the
Atlantic coast, sweeping aside the shattered remnants of half a dozen
German infantry divisions. While the remaining German armoured forma-
tions fought a vigorous rearguard, the rest of the line began a disorderly
retreat southwards. The American progress was relentless. The 4th
Armored division raced down the coast to seize Avranches and the gateway
to Brittany, driving 25 miles in 36 hours. Bradley was astonished at their
progress. He had expected the usual steady steamroller, but now he had a
racing-car. Aware of Montgomery's directive that 'there must be no pause',
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
173
he instructed his forces to keep going. On I August the 3rd army was
activated and General Patton was unleashed. Patton's reputation preceded
him. Fiery, intemperate, vulgar, he had many vices; but he loved war. 'Made
a talk,' he wrote in his diary in May, at FUSAG headquarters. 'As in all my
talks I stressed fighting and killing. 86 There was no better general on the
American side to send in hot pursuit of the collapsing German armies. He
took to the task with a remorseless zeal. Ignoring Bradley's precise
instructions he moved seven divisions in 72 hours down the narrow coastal
road and seized the whole of Brittany, save Brest and Lorient; he then
wheeled his armies eastwards and began to drive towards Paris with almost
no German forces in his way.
The German command was faced with a strategic nightmare. The day
after the fall of Avranches von Kluge warned Hitler's headquarters that the
German left flank had collapsed, the front 'ripped open' by American
armour. The choice was between holding at Caen and abandoning western
France, or dividing German forces between two battles, and risking collapse
in both. He was unable to retreat, at Hitler's express instruction. He decided
on a compromise. He sent armoured reinforcements to the west and counted
on Rommel's defensive field to hold fast. The result was predictable. Strong
British and Canadian thrusts both sides of Caen immobilised the German
forces and intercepted those driving
towards the American front. The
German effort was futile. Two months of attrition made it next to impossible
to conduct the kind of mobile warfare that had taken German forces across
all Europe in 1940 and 1941. There was no air support. German units fought
with the frantic energy of a cornered animal, as they began to sense their
imminent defeat. At last Hitler allowed forces to be released from the 15th
army, but they arrived in small groups like the earlier reinforcements,
unable to turn the tide of battle, and grimly aware of how hopeless the
situation had become. 87
As the German 7th army struggled to keep the rising tide of Allied forces
at bay along its entire northern flank, Patton's divisions raced out of Brit-
tany towards Le Mans and Chartres. Much of the area was already falling
into the hands of armed Frenchmen. So fast was American movement that
it took some time before von Kluge realised that his armies now faced the
threat of complete encirclement. The natural thing to do was to withdraw
quickly and in reasonably good order beyond the Seine. Though Hitler too
late began to plan a new defensive line in eastern France, he was deter-
mined that von Kluge should stay where he had been ordered to stay. On
2 August he issued him with instructions to retake the western coast at
Avranches and cut off Patton's forces. After von Kluge's protest that this
was quite beyond his forces, Hitler sent a detailed plan on 4 August order-
