UNPREDICTABLE VICTORY
Germany!' Confidence in victory, misplaced though it proved in the
short-term, was much in evidence on the other side. As the conflict loomed
late in August, General Pownall, head of British Army Intelligence,
scribbled exultantly in his diary: ' ... we must have a war. We can't lose
*
In the end both views were borne out, though not before the world dissolved
in flames; 55 million people lost their lives, and destruction was wrought on a
scale almost unimaginable fifty years later. Out of the ruins of war a new
political and economic order was forged which is now, in its turn, in the
throes of a less painful transformation. The threats to peace are far less than
they were in the 1940s, when Hitler was poised with his allies on the very
brink of world conquest, but none the less there are dangers to confront in a
nuclear world. Asking 'why the Allies won' is done not in some spirit of
modern triumphalism - though the explanation is a tale of triumph over
adversity - but in a spirit of genuine inquiry, in order to be precise about the
explanations that matter, and may matter once again in the century to come.
2
LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY
AIRCRAFT ...
The Battle for the Seas
It was the job of the little ships and
lonely aircraft, a hard, long and patient job,
dreary and unpublicised, against two cunning
enemies - the U-boat and the cruel sea?'
Captain G. H. Roberts, Cambridge, 1950
Osa DuLL, misty August morning in 194l the British destroyer Oribi
steamed into the great naval base at Scapa Flow in the Orkney Islands,
at the northern extreme of the British Isles. Her unusual cargo, disgorged
into ferry boats, was transferred to the very latest British battleship, the
Prince of Wales, a mountain of a ship by comparison, sporting ten 14-inch
guns. The consignment began with the British Prime Minister, Winston
Churchill, who had left London in great secrecy the day before on board a
sealed train. Behind him came a cavalcade of senior officers and officials,
followed by a box of grouse, a world globe, and enviably unrationed
quantities of sugar, beef and butter. The battleship moved slowly out of the
harbour, shepherded by three escort destroyers. In faltering sunlight the
ships set off north-west, taking Churchill to the first Anglo-American
summit talks on the far side of the Atlantic.'
The invitation to meet had been Roosevelt's, but Churchill jumped at the
opportunity. The two men had never met face to face, and Churchill was
uncharacteristically nervous about the encounter. 'I wonder if he will like
me,' Churchill asked the American envoy Averell Harriman before the first
session.? There were solid grounds for anxiety. Churchill desperately
needed American help for Britain's war effort; a close personal relationship
would do a great deal to cement an unspoken alliance between the two
states. All Churchill could do was wait in excited anticipation during the
five-day passage. For security reasons there could be no contact with the
outside world. The battleship dipped and zig-zagged through unseasonally
heavy
weather, ever-conscious of the threat of German submarines.
Churchill behaved 'like a boy let out of school', temporarily absolved of the
heavy burdens of office. He struck
a nautical note. Abandoning the
luxurious but noisy admiral's cabin prepared for him, he spent the whole
voyage up on the bridge, sleeping in the admiral's sea-cabin, close to the
