96
DEEP WAR
vehicles lay lifeless on the steppe. Other divisions suffered even more. The
3rd Panzer division had thirty tanks left out of three hundred; I9th Panzer
was left after the battle with just seventeen. The struggle for Kursk tore the
heart out of the German army. Heinz Guderian, Inspector of Armoured
Forces in 1943, described the failure of Citadel as a 'decisive defeat'. The
losses at Kursk could not quickly be restored, and the balance of armoured
vehicles had tipped decisively to the Soviet side. On the whole of the eastern
front in August the German army could muster only 2,500 tanks and self-
propelled guns against 8,200 on the Soviet side.7°
(Soviet success at Kursk, with so much at stake, was the most important
*
single victory of the war. It ranks with the great set-piece battles of the past -
Sedan in 1870, and Borodino, Leipzig and Waterloo from the age of
Napoleon. It was the point at which the initiative passed to the Soviet side.
German forces were certainly capable of a sustained and effective defence
as they retreated westward; but they were now too weakened and over-
stretched to inflict a decisive defeat on their enemy. The Red Army at Kursk
demonstrated that it was a formidable modern fighting force.
The day after Prokhorovka Hitler cancelled Citadel. Three days before,
an Anglo-American force landed in Italy. A real threat now existed of, a
frontal assault on German-held Europe across the English Channel. Faced
with dangers in east and west, even Hitler could see that timely retreat in the
face of defeat at Kursk was a necessary course. But no one on the German
side could have predicted what followed. In the months before the Kursk
battle the Soviet Supreme Command carefully planned a massive counter-
offensive to be launched once the defensive stage of the campaign was over.
The scale and geographical extent of the plan was concealed from German
intelligence by careful use of camouflage and misinformation, at which
Soviet forces had become much more adept? Even before the battle for the
south of the Kursk salient was over, the neighbouring Soviet fronts in the
north, the Western and Bryansk fronts, tore into the rear of the German
forces grouped around Orel. German defensive lines, constructed in depth
like those in the Kursk bulge, gave way before the onslaught, overwhelmed
by numbers. German Panzer reserves were thrown in to stem the tide, but by
5 August Orel was again in Soviet hands and the whole German force was in
retreat.
On the south of the salient von Manstein began to pull back German
forces as more intelligence reached him about huge Soviet reserves moving
westward. Stalin, anxious to speed up the timetable again, was all for
pursuing the beaten enemy at once. 'With the greatest reluctance', Zhukov
recalled, Stalin had to accept the need for careful preparation. Reserves,
fuel, ammunition and the whole array of rear services were brought up
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
97
behind the armies. The knock-out punch that was held back throughout the
bitter Kursk battles was to be released only when Zhukov was ready. As
German forces tried to recuperate and dig in around Belgorod and Kharkov,
the Soviet steamroller was fired up. On 3 August the southern offensive,
Operation 'Rumyantsev', was ready. The Voronezh front constituted the
Soviet battering ram, mirroring the combined tank and air offensive
employed by their enemy. Within hours a hole 30 miles deep was gouged out
of German lines. By 5 August Belgorod was captured. A little over two
weeks later Konev's Steppe front pushed through to Kharkov, where under
cover of darkness Soviet soldiers rushed in to liberate the city. In recogni-
tion of the liberation of Orel and Belgorod, Stalin ordered military salutes
to be fired in Moscow as each city was freed, the first of many. It was these
battles, fought against the Panzer armies still smarting from the combat at
Kursk, that completed the operations Zhukov had first suggested in April.
The next stage was to capitalise on the destruction of German forces by
driving westward into the Ukraine and towards Byelorussia. 72
The German front in the east was forced, after Kursk and the seizure of
Kharkov, to fall back along its entire length. Between August and
December the Red Army gave the retreating enemy no rest. Stalin urged the
Soviet armies forward across the vast battlefield stretching from the Baltic to
the Black Sea. German forces simply lacked the manpower and equipment
to hold fast against an enemy with larger resources and an increasingly
confident grasp of large-scale mobile operations. By October they were
pressed back to the Depr river. Stalin promised to award the coveted title
Hero of the Soviet Union to the first soldiers to cross it. In September the
broad river barrier, which Hitler had insisted would be the final rampart
against Bolshevism, was breached in several places. Early in November an
attack in strength was made across the river which routed the German force
concentrated around the Ukrainian capital of Kiev and the city was seized on
the 6th. Though Red Army commanders still made mistakes, and Stalin
drove his armies on to the point of exhaustion, the traffic was almost all one
way, against a demoralised and under-armed enemy. There was a long way
to go to take the fight into Europe and to reach Berlin, but Kursk had &
unhinged the German front irreversibly. Von Manstein ordered the best
that could be hoped for: an active defence to wear down the Soviet
attackers, a strategy that was maintained through the long, wounding trek
back to the Reich.
At the height of this pursuit Stalin agreed for the first time to meet both his
Alliance partners, Churchill and Roosevelt, at Teheran to discuss face to
face the course of the war and Allied strategy. On 24 November his train left
Moscow for the south. The following day it rolled into Stalingrad, a city of
