120
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
been destroyed and forty thousand of its inhabitants consumed in the
inferno. One million were rendered homeless. The glow from the fires could
be seen 120 miles away.
As the stream of wretched, incredulous refugees spread out into the
neighbouring provinces, a widespread panic gripped the German public.
[Though the destruction of Hamburg was not the turning-point of the air
war, not decisive in any general sense, it shocked the German leadership FIt
put the fear of God in me, Albert Speer, Hitler's Armaments Minister,
confessed in his memoirs. Three days after the attack he told Hitler that the
destruction of another six cities on the same scale would bring arma-
ments production 'to a total halt' 46 The Luftwaffe Chief-of-Staff, Hans
Jeschonnek, was deeply affected by a tragedy beside which 'Stalingrad was
trifling'. Two weeks later, following a destructive attack by Bomber
\Command on the German rocket research station at Peenemünde,
/Jeschonnek shot himself.47
Speer's fears proved to be unfounded. There were few other major cities
within range of the Oboe apparatus that had not already been attacked
heavily that year. Moreover despite the temporary shock produced by
Window, which took the German night-fighters back to where they had been
before radar, German forces quickly adapted to the new situation and once
again began to inflict higher and higher losses on Allied bombers both by day
and by night. When Bomber Command turned its attentions to the German
capital from September onwards, its loss rates began to reach unacceptably
high levels. In the raids in the early autumn, 14 per cent of the attacking
force were destroyed or damaged. The slow attrition of Bomber Command
strength was an expensive drain on production and trained crews. It took its
toll on the morale of the Command. The long and dangerous circuit to Berlin
and back gave the defending forces a much greater opportunity to find and
intercept the bombers. The new HaS navigation aid proved much less
effective as a means to accurate bombing than had been expected, because
the radar gave only a very general picture of the ground below. Out of 1,719
bombers sent to Berlin in the first wave of attacks only 27 dropped their
bombs within 3 miles of the target centre. 48
The fortunes of Bomber Command reached their lowest point in March of
1944. The last attack on Berlin on the night of 24 March cost the bomber
force a loss of almost 10 per cent, and extensive anti-aircraft gun damage to
the returning planes. The German defenders had adopted a new and lethal
tactic. One or two controllers kept in contact with the entire night-fighter
force which could then be directed as a whole towards the bombers once
their route and target were visually confirmed. On some nights British radio
jammers succeeded in talking over the German controllers and directing the
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
I2I
fighters to the wrong town; on some occasions they played recordings of the
Führer's speeches to apoplectic pilots, who were forced to circle round in an
aerial no-man's-land. But such a ruse was very hit-and-miss. On the night of
30 March it failed entirely. Some 795 bombers were sent on an unusually
direct route to bomb Nuremberg. Instead of the expected haze there was a
clear moonlit night; the bombers left a conspicuous condensation trail. The
German controller was able to call in night-fighters before the bomber
stream had even reached the German frontier. On the long run towards
Fulda, north-east of Frankfurt, the night-fighters fought a spectacular
running battle with the bombers. In all 95 bombers, i1 per cent of the force,
failed to return. The German authorities claimed their 'greatest success'.
Harris gloomily contemplated what amounted
to the
defeat of his
Command. In April he warned the Air Ministry that such casualty rates
could not be sustained for long. He urged 'remedial action'. 49
The fortunes of 8th air force in 1943 were no less chequered. For much of
the year the force was still in the process of building up its organisation,
manpower and bomber strength. Where Bomber Command could routinely
organise attacks with five or six hundred aircraft, most American attacks
involved fewer than half this number. From June some of these attacks were
at last directed against targets in Germany. The 8th air force stuck to its
guns over bombing precision targets by day. It was planned to give priority
to German air force industries and their chief suppliers, but in practice most
attacks were directed at a wider range of targets in northern Europe where
the force could enjoy fighter cover. When American bombers began to
penetrate deep into German air-space they came up against the same
problems afflicting their night-bombing partners. ©
The first such attack, against the Focke-Wulf aircraft plant at
Oschersleben, south of Berlin, saw the loss of fifteen out of 39 bombers. On
17 August American bombers made the trip right across Germany to attack
the Messerschmitt aircraft works at Regensburg and the ball-bearing plants
at Schweinfurt, which produced half Germany's requirements of bearings, a
component vital in aircraft manufacture. The force of 376 B-17s set off from
England with a heavy escort of fighters which took them as far as the
German border. The German fighter defences were alerted. A swarm of
three hundred hovered over Frankfurt along the path of the bombers. There
followed a ferocious air battle, the greatest yet seen over German soil, which
left sixty B-17s destroyed (19 per cent of the attacking force) and over a
hundred damaged, for the loss of 25 German fighters.
50 For the first time
bombers were brought down by German air-to-air rocket fire.
Loss rates on such a scale were insupportable. Yet two months later, in
the hope that repeated attacks would render the revival of ball-bearing
