218
A WAR OF ENGINES
1943; they were too heavy and cumbersome to be used on anything but flat
summer ground; and like other German vehicles they were difficult to
repair. The Tiger tank required a small army of mechanics to keep it in the
field, while the ratio of spares produced was derisory. For every ten Tiger
tanks only one spare engine and one transmission were produced. The new
heavy tanks were supposed to be repaired at the front line, but the absence
of heavy repair equipment or adequate stocks of spare parts meant a long
trail of tank transporters carrying damaged vehicles back to repair depots in
Germany, 2,000 miles away.27
(Even with the introduction of higher quality tanks, the slow attrition of
German technical resources in the east could not be reversed Both the Red
Army and the German army relied largely on horses, but the Soviet stock of
motor-vehicles steadily expanded while the German stock declined by
almost 50 per cent from a peak reached in January 1943. The number of
half-track transporters fell from 28,000 in 1943 to eleven thousand at the
end of 1944. As German forces fell back the effort to maintain mobility
and levels of mechanisation was abandoned. By 1944 still only one-tenth
of the German army was mechanised. Instead the production effort was
diverted to heavy infantry weapons necessary to fight the long retreat. Even
the Tiger and Panther, and the lumbering 'King Tiger' and 'Mouse' that
followed, became tools of defence, mobile anti-tank platforms to blunt
enemy armoured attacks. Their gradual switch from offensive to defen-
sive firepower helps to explain why German troops remained an effective
fighting force, even when vastly outnumbered in tanks and aircraft. But for
the bulk of the German army during 1943 and 1044 there was a progressive
decline in the number of tanks and supporting aircraft, of lorries and half-
tracks to move the infantry and supplies, and even of artillery pieces 28 The
German soldier got used to fighting without a German aircraft in sight, with
dwindling supplies of fuel and ammunition, and trucks and tanks short of
tyres, spares and lubricants, and long marches on foot or by sled. The small
core of high quality weaponry sustained pockets of a modernised army; the
rest of the army fought a refined version of the infantry and artillery battles
of 19182
The German air force in the east suffered the same fate, though for rather
different reasons. There were the same problems of supply and maintenance
over long distances, the severe shortages of spares and replacement engines,
the problems of flying in cold weather for which German aircraft had not
been properly equipped. The use of rough grass airfields in forward areas
increased the losses of aircraft and crew through accidents! But the real
failure in 1942 and 1943 was in not matching either the quantity or the quality
of Soviet aviation. Luftwaffe leaders, no less than the army, failed to
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
219
anticipate the high levels of attrition that would be experienced even against
a much weaker enemy. Before losses could be made good that enemy began
to fight with large numbers of aircraft of much higher quality, making it
difficult for German air units to avoid the attrition cycle. The German effort
to introduce a new generation of advanced aircraft in 1942 to restore the
technical lead enjoyed at the start of the war failed disastrously.
In 1941 responsibility both for the production and development of aircraft
in Germany lay with Colonel-General Ernst Udet. It was a post for which he
was utterly unsuited. He was appointed in 1935 at Hitler's suggestion. A
veteran fighter-pilot, Udet made his reputation in the 1920s as a stunt-man
of the silent screen. He was a notorious bon viveur and womaniser, who
narrowly survived a knife attack by one of his mistresses. He was a talented
cartoonist; he ate only meat, a habit that left him in chronic ill health when
he held office; he loved hunting. For the job of chief technical director of the
German air force he had almost no credentials whatsoever. 29 All he had
wanted to be was a test-pilot, and even in his new office he still flew
dangerously to get the feel of new aircraft. He was fully aware of his wide
limitations. His only contribution to air force development was to insist that
all bomber aircraft, even large four-engined craft, should have a dive-
bombing capability, a requirement that set German bomber development
years behind that of the Allies.
Under his wayward stewardship the Luftwaffe lost its direction. The real
architect of German air power in the 1930s was Erhard Milch, an ex-director
of Lufthansa, and Göring's deputy, but in 1939, jealous of his successful
subordinate, Göring excluded Milch from the realm of technical develop-
ment and production altogether, and left the work to Udet. Between 1939
and 1942 aircraft production stagnated. Udet lacked the organisational skills
and strength of character to impose what views he might have had on the
scientists and entrepreneurs under his control. Unable to reach clear
decisions about the development of new aircraft models he became the
victim of rivalry between aircraft designers and the butt of every complaint
from bureaucrats and airmen. Except for the Focke-Wulf 190, which proved
to be a fighter aircraft of high quality when it was introduced in the autumn
of 1941, every one of the new aircraft Udet selected was a failure. The He-
177 long-range bomber, which Göring and Hitler wanted for attacks on
Soviet industry and the Atlantic trade routes, was plagued with technical
problems that stemmed from Udet's dive-bombing order, and was never
produced in any quantity. 30 The new generation of medium-bombers and
heavy fighters, the Junkers Ju-288 and the Me-210, were technical flops and
were scrapped, but only after a heavy investment of money and production
effort. The replacement for the ageing Stuka dive-bomber, the Hs-129,
