90
DEEP WAR
tank operations, and to call up aircraft assistance against stubborn pockets
of resistance. "' Soviet tank forces knew that they faced a new enemy in 1943,
the next generation of German heavy tanks, the 56-ton 'Tiger' and the
smaller, 45-ton 'Panther'. Both had large calibre guns and good armour,
more than a match for the T-34. To cope with the threat a new tactic was
devised. At close-range the large German guns could not be deployed so
easily. Soviet tankmen were trained to drive in close and to fire point-blank
at the vulnerable parts of the enemy tank, in the sides and rear. The anti-
tank artillery were taught the same. In a head-on attack the Soviet 45-
millimetre anti-tank gun was ineffective; but ambushing the Tigers or
Panthers from the side, as they rolled past, would destroy or disable them.
If mines, guns and ditches failed to stop enemy tanks, the Soviet high
command added the famous Ilyushin II-2 Sturmovik dive-bomber. The 1943
version was faster and better armed, with a 37-millimetre tank-busting
cannon and the new 'PTAB' anti-tank bomb. There were almost a thousand of
them assembled for the Battle of Kursk, along with over a thousand fighters
and almost a thousand bombers. To support this array of largely modern
equipment stood a huge reserve air force of another 2,750 aircraft, waiting,
like the Steppe front, to deliver the knock-out blow. The number of radio
communications stations, a facility which at last permitted air commanders
to coordinate attacks, rose from 180 to 420. and were equipped with
effective radar for the first time. Over 150 airfields were built for Kursk, and
fifty dummy fields to mask Soviet strengths and intentions.ยบ In the air and
on the ground Soviet forces were both tactically and technically a more
formidable barrier than German commanders realised.
The small details mattered a great deal in the final outcome of the
confrontation, for there was not much to choose in size between the two
opposing forces. Each had watched what the other was doing over the late
spring. More and more soldiers and equipment were drafted in, until what
Manstein had thought of as a local counter-offensive assumed anything but
local proportions. Kursk became, almost by default, the largest pitched
battle of the war. On the German side were massed fifty divisions of 900,000
men, 2,700 tanks and 10,000 guns, and 2,000 aircraft. On the two main
defensive fronts, Central and Voronezh, there were 1,336,000 men, 3,444
tanks, 2,900 aircraft and 19,000 guns. 6ยบ The Soviet commanders allocated
40 per cent of Red Army manpower, and three-quarters of its armoured
force, to the contest. Victory or defeat for either side became critical.
One piece of intelligence the Soviet high command was desperate to
learn: when would German armies attack? This question was impossible to
answer firmly, since Hitler, prey to anxieties of his
own about the
unpreparedness of German forces, kept postponing the date, first 3 May,
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
91
then 12 June, finally early July. Soviet forces were kept in a state of semi-
alertness for much of this period; regular intelligence scares brought them
up to full alert more than once. The longer Stalin waited, the more impatient
he became for action. But Zhukov knew that Soviet forces must be kept on a
leash, or the whole carefully orchestrated operation would be spoiled. He
hammered the point home again and again until Stalin treated the plan as his
own. During June all Soviet intelligence sources confirmed that German
forces were in place and ready to attack, but the waiting game went on. The
Soviet side became restless, suspecting some unanticipated ruse.
The
mystery deepened when, on 23 June, a Soviet spy ring in Switzerland
reported, through agent 'Lucy', that Hitler had changed his mind, and the
attack was off. In a week of high tension Zhukov kept calm. All the
indicators from the front line showed that German forces were moving to
battle stations and that an attack could be expected at any time between 3
July and 6 July. Troops were on full alert for every day from 2 July. Then,
abruptly, on 4 July all activity on the German side ceased. A strange silence
descended on the frontline, disconcerting, menacing. 61
Soviet leaders knew it could only mean one thing. A prisoner seized on the
Voronezh front told his captors that the German soldiers had all been issued
with battle rations and a portion of schnapps. At ten o'clock in the evening
another infantryman was seized by a Soviet scouting party. His interrogation
revealed that the German assault would start with an artillery barrage in four
hours' time. 62 Stalin and Zhukov waited anxiously at headquarters, unable
to sleep. At 2 a.m. the order went out for Soviet guns to open fire with a
spoiling barrage against German positions. The thud of bombs and shells,
the whoosh of rocket salvos, the rumbling of aircraft engines, all merged into
one, 'like the strains', Zhukov later recalled, 'of a symphony from hell. 63
The waiting Germans were taken completely by surprise. For some time
German commanders thought that by the wildest of coincidences the Red
Army had begun an offensive at exactly the same time as them. Order was
slowly restored, and the German offensive began at 4.30 on the morning of 5
July to the sound of ten thousand guns and the roar of two thousand aircraft.
The German assault was an awesome demonstration of modern military
power. From the assembly points around Belgorod in the south and Orel in
the north a heavily armed Panzer fist, strongly supported by aircraft, was
hurled against the Soviet rampart. To the north Field Marshal Model's gth
Panzer army led the charge. In his way stood the 13th army of General
Rokossovsky's Central front. Zhukov's patient preparations paid off almost
at once. The German forces, spearheaded by battle groups of Tiger tanks
