276
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . . .
Marshal von Richthofen, like 'highly-paid non-commissioned officers' -
sweet revenge for the ex-corporal. Strategic issues were discussed, if at all,
with a close circle of party cronies. The military were left in ignorance of
what to expect from their commander. As a consequence any kind of overall
or long-term planning was out of the question. Hitler deliberately kept his
plans to himself, as he felt befitted the guardian of the nation's destiny:
My true intentions you will never know,' he told the army Chief-of-Staff,
Franz Halder. 'Even those in my closest circle who feel quite sure they
know my intentions will not know about them.'96
(By avoiding any body equivalent to the British Chiefs-of-Staff, to
ensure that he alone would determine strategy, Hitler also avoided establish-
ing any unity of command for the three services. None of the other major
areas of the war effort - production, logistics, manpower, intelligence - was
coordinated by a single committee, or discussed by any kind of war cabinet.
There was simply no forum in which the war effort could be viewed as a
whole. Instead the three services and the civilian ministries competed with
each other for Hitler's attention. The rivalry between them was never
controlled. They cooperated loosely or not at all, a situation that helps to
explain the poor economic effort and the failure to decide on priorities in the
technological war.)Hitler was, as he intended, the sole common denomi-
nator, the spider at the centre of the web. This suited his secretive nature, his
intense dislike of committee work - the civilian cabinet ceased meeting in
1937 - and his distrust of military expertise. He was the first man 'since
Charlemagne' to hold 'unlimited power', he told his commanders, and he
would know how to use it in a struggle for Germany'. 97
The Polish invasion was the only campaign in which the armed forces had
any degree of independence in planning operations, though they had no
influence whatsoever on the broader strategic issues as they did in 1914.
After that Hitler dominated operational preparations as well. No one dared
directly to challenge or circumvent the Commander-in-Chief, for the
armed forces were very conscious of their personal oath of loyalty, and
so the whole military machine had to adopt the routine of its leader. This
was ill adapted to the rigours of supreme command. Hitler habitually slept
until late in the morning.
The major activity of the day was the situation
conference held at noon. Hitler alone sat at the map table, on a plain
armchair. The rest of the conferees stood throughout the two- or three-hour
session. The army leaders were usually in attendance, but, remarkably, the
navy and air force were often represented by junior liaison officers. Hitler's
primary interest throughout remained the field army. Neither the navy nor
the air force was fully integrated with the higher direction of the war. Much
of the discussion turned on small technical or operational details, seldom on
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
277
overall strategy. Senior officers found themselves forced to discuss matters
of trivial significance, far beyond the necessary purview of a supreme
command. When the conference broke up Hitler gave his orders. He then
filled up the rest of his day with meetings and receptions, and abandoned the
role of commander. The evenings were given over to long monologues with
party cronies in which the issues of war featured surprisingly little. He read,
or watched films, until two or three in the morning. So rigid was this routine
that his staff did not rouse him even on the morning of D-Day.?8
(At the end of 1941 Hitler added to his responsibilities direct command of
the field army. Until then the army leaders had been able to use their own
initiative within the broad operational guidelines laid down by the Supreme
Command. With Hitler's assumption of control over the army, all surviving
freedom of action was lost.) From that moment Hitler neglected the wider
issues of supreme command in order to concentrate on the front-line duel
with Stalin, while the Supreme Headquarters staff were left to run the other
theatres of war. Any pretence at central direction of the war disappeared.
Hitler took his new duties as seriously as his old; deeply distrustful of the
army leadership, and confident that he had mastered the military art, he
rode roughshod over the army General Staff. Relations between the army
leaders and Hitler, strained already in 1941, reached a new low. He regarded
them as conservative, cautious and obstructive. General Franz Halder, the
army Chief-of-Staff, despised his new commander: 'this so called "leader-
ship" is nothing but a pathological reaction to the impressions of the
moment . . •
›99 When Halder suggested in July 1942 that the German line
withdraw at a point in the north to create a sounder defensive position,
Hitler angrily denounced him as a coward. The tension between the two men
poisoned effective staff work during the summer campaign in 1942. In
September Halder was sacked. His replacement, Colonel Kurt Zeitzler, was
chosen because he was sufficiently junior, and sufficiently pliant, to do what
Hitler told him. In a speech to army staff Zeitzler said he expected one thing
from them: absolute belief in the Führer and in his method of command. 100
(From that point onward Hitler denied his forces any initiative. It is no
accident that German forces now experienced the long series of disasters
that turned the tide of war.
Hitler interfered with the smallest details of
battle; regiments and air squadrons were moved on the instructions of the
Supreme Commander. The consequences were predictable. Instead of an
overall strategy Hitler substituted a jumble of 'individual decisions and
orders' .There was, Zeitzler later complained, 'no delegation of powers or
coordinated action', no 'decisions on policy'. 101 Even allowing for profes-
sional jealousy, the generals' recollections of Hitler's leadership paint a
uniform picture of a man quite out of his depth. During the course of the
