64
DEEP WAR
passes of the Caucasus mountains and the banks of the Volga on either side
of Stalingrad. In the decades between these two assaults, the city had
changed beyond recognition. It had become a major industrial centre,
sprawling untidily along the river for a length of 40 miles. Its half a million
inhabitants worked mainly in the new factories, turning out vast numbers
of tractors to fuel the regime's agricultural revolution, and latterly large
numbers of tanks. The city was a vital junction in Soviet trade. Industrial
goods and machinery came down from the north; a steady flow of grain and
oil was headed up the other way. Stalin had changed also. He was now the
chief source of authority in the Soviet state, and the Supreme Commander
of the armed forces. He wielded far more power than he had enjoyed
in 1918, and vastly greater armies. On him alone rested responsibility
once again for saving the city and the embattled Soviet system. On 28 July
1942 he issued a demanding order to the troops desperately trying to
halt the German drive: 'Not a step back!' For four months they clung
to the same horseshoe of land, while Stalin relived the nightmares of the
civil war.
Then, slowly, the tide turned. Once again, Soviet armies crashed into the
rear of the enemy host. The first major defeat of the war was inflicted. Over
the next twelve months the Red Army drove German forces from much of
western Russia, on a broad are from Kursk to the Caucasus. These Soviet
victories marked the turning-point of the whole war, as victory in 1919 had
turned the tide of the civil war. In December 1942 Stalin promoted 360
officers to the rank of General for saving the city that bore his name. In
March 1943 he awarded himself his first formal military title, Marshal of the
Soviet Union.?
When German forces had renewed their onslaught in the early summer of
1942, Stalingrad had not been high on Hitler's list of priorities. His one
thought had been to secure a decisive, annihilating victory over the Red
Army and crush his Bolshevik enemy once and for all. With the east
eliminated, German resources could then be turned to defeat the western
Allies. The issue was where the blow should fall. German army leaders
favoured an attack at the centre of the front, to seize the Soviet capital,
Moscow. This was where the bulk of Soviet forces was concentrated; the loss
of the city would be devastating for Soviet morale Hitler thought otherwise.
The conquest of the Soviet Union was ideologically inspired, but motivated
by material greed. Hitler wanted the industries, the oil and the grain of
southern Russia; here was real Lebensraum, or living-space. He reasoned
that if Germany captured these resources from the enemy the Soviet war
FINLAND T
Helsinki
Lake
Ladoga
Leningra
ESTONIA
Army
grou.
north
Novgorad
Lake Ilmen
Staraya Russa•
LATVIA
-ITH,
Smolensk&
Minsk •
Army
centre
PripetR.
• Gomel
Zhitomir
Lake
Leningrad front
Volkhov front
Tikhvin
KEY:
Reoccupied by Russian forces
Front line (30 April 1942)
Front line (18 November 1942)
Limit of Axis advance 1941
Towns/cities
German offensives
Volga R.
West front
South-
west
front
Voronezh
Kursk • W
Voronezh
front
Stalingrad
Dnepropetrovsk*
Sebastopo
1 a
C
Zaporozhye
Sea
of Azov
Kerch
Caucasus
Se a
The Eastern Front 1941-1942
Caspian
Sea
Grozny
