288
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
primitive, ape-like creature; his followers became vermin, 'foul hounds'. 21
Soviet journals preached a single-minded detestation of the enemy. 'May
holy hatred', ran the Pravda editorial on I July, 'become our chief, our
only feeling.' The Soviet poet, Konstantin Simonov, called on his readers
to 'kill a German, kill a German, every time you see one!' Here are echoes
of Churchill's casual slogan 'kill the Hun!'22
Britain did not officially
instigate a progamme of hatred,
but one was widely evident. Lord
Vansittart, Permanent Secretary of the Foreign Office in the 1930s, sold
over half a million copies of Black Record, a diatribe against the German
race, 'a breed which from the dawn of history has been predatory and
bellicose', led by a fanatical anti-Christ.23 In a series of lectures given at
Oxford shortly after the outbreak of war, the historian R.C.K. Ensor told
his audience that the Germans were not like other civilised peoples: they
were aggressive, militaristic, prone to cruelty. 'Ask yourself whether a
Dachau or a Buchenwald would be conceivable on English or French soil;
he continued. 'I do not think it would 24 Anti-German sentiment, rooted
in hatred of Hitler and a crude racial stereotyping, was widespread well
before the course of the war lent such views an evident validity. The war
exacerbated them. 'Whether you like it or not,' ran an editorial in the
Daily Express, shortly before Pearl Harbor, 'vengeance on Germany is
becoming the prime war aim of all Europe.' NoT ENOUGH HATE was the
headline above another editorial: "You can't win a war like this without
hating your enemy: 25)
Hitler aroused emotions strong enough to hold together an unholy
alliance for the whole course
of the conflict,
strong enough to fire
exceptional levels of popular hatred, strong enough to incite the peaceable
Chamberlain to declare war in 1939 against all his instincts, and to rouse
Roosevelt from neutrality to intervention. The strength of feeling owed
something to the nature of the man himself. Hitler's populist roots, the
demagoguery, the crude messianism singled him out from the generation
of orthodox statesmen in the
I93OS.
His dishonesty in international
dealings was regarded as quite distinct from the usual pursuit of flexible
self-interest. Roosevelt considered Hitler's word worth no more than 'the
bond of gangsters and outlaws' 26 In the 1930s Hitler's world view was
characterised outside the Reich as nihilistic, amoral, destructive. 'Hitler is
the arch-destroyer,' ran a sermon preached at Canterbury Cathedral;
wherever he goes he
brings death.' The style of Hitler's leadership
provoked abroad an apocalyptic language that curiously mirrored Hitler's
own expectation of a final struggle, a reckoning of accounts, the new order
versus the old. An English guest at a Nazi Party rally in Berlin recalled in
his memoirs that he had observed what appeared to be flashes of blue
THE MORAL CONTEST
289
lightning
escaping from Hitler's body, and concluded that at certain
moments Hitler was actually possessed of the devil. 27
More significant for understanding the reaction to Hitler than the man
himself is what he was taken to represent. Hitler was the personification of a
German threat abroad that could be traced back to at least the 1890s.
Popular anti-German feeling was composed of a number of strands. Fear of
Prussian militarism and bellicosity was a well-established feature of it well
before 1914; H. G. Wells's The War in the Air, published in 1908, when no
bombers yet existed, painted a frightening picture of devastating attacks by
'German bomber fleets', which heralded 'the beginning of the end' of
civilisation. 28 Blame for the Great War was laid at the door of German
ambition by the victor powers in 1919. The continuities in German power-
seeking were regarded as self-evident by much foreign opinion.
"The
Germany of the Kaiser', wrote the American journalist Walter Lippmann,
in 1944, 'was not nearly so evil a thing as Hitler's Germany. But it had the
same fundamental design of conquest. 29 In the 1920s, side by side with
liberal sympathies for German mistreatment at Versailles lay the constant
fear of German revival and rearmament. In the 1930s it was commonly
assumed that Germany would violate Versailles and rearm in the air, posing
the sort of annihilating threat first painted by Wells. The British Air Ministry
expected the Germans to use bombing in a 'ruthless and indiscriminate'
fashion because that was the German way. 30 Even before the Nazi revolu-
tion, Germany was regarded as the disruptive force in world affairs. Hitler
played a part already written for him.
The representation of Hitler as anti-Christ, as a symptom of a more
profound malaise in European life, exaggerated the German threat. Before
1914 a whole
generation of European thinkers turned their back on
simplistic notions of liberal progress.
There emerged a prominent cultural
pessimism, fears of decline and decay for western civilisation, premonitions
of war and social chaos, a yearning for spiritual renewal. Both extreme right
and extreme left rejected the solid virtues of bourgeois Europe - scientific
rationalism, the pursuit of peace and prosperity, the values of Christian
respectability. They turned instead to the cult of violence and overthrow,
exalting the strong at the expense of the weak; life was seen as Darwin saw it,
a struggle for existence, the survival of the fittest. The sense of impending
doom, of the end of an age, was fuelled by the horrors of the Great War and
the revolutionary upheavals at its end.
Violence and social chaos were
established facts. The liberal order was visibly in decay. The moral certainty
of the pre-war age was destroyed.
*What are the roots that clutch, what
branches grow/Out of this stony rubbish' asked the poet T. S. Eliot in The
Waste Land, written in 1922.
