184
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
planning was introduced in the 1920s to replace the irrational pressures of
the market-place with socialist certainty; planning was perceived to be the
only way in which the economic and social backwardness of the Soviet
Union could be overcome quickly. The pre-war Five-Year Plans, begun in
1928, transformed the Soviet Union in ten years. On paper it was the
world's largest military power, and the second largest economy. Centrally
planned industrial development, on greenfield sites, was nothing new to
Soviet officials when the war came. The large-scale movement of popula-
tions, from village to city, from rural south to more industrial north, was
a familiar experience. The planning process itself, of matching means and
ends, inputs and outputs, though it seldom worked perfectly, familiarised
economists and officials with just those skills most in demand in organis-
ing a war economy.
There was a solid base from which to work in 1941, though/nothing could
have prepared Soviet planners for the nightmare they faced as one after the
other key elements of the planned economy fell under enemy control.
Central planning became impossible and the government was forced to
introduce what they called the 'regime of emergency measures).!ยบ In July
1941 the head of the Soviet economic planning agency Gosplan, Nikolai
Voznesensky, was instructed to draw up a regional plan for a war economy
based on the Urals-Volga-Siberia heartland. He moved from Moscow to the
provincial capital at Kuibyshev, on the Volga river north of Stalingrad, with
the Ural mountains visible to the east. Here he drew together the Soviet
commissariats responsible for military production - Aviaprom for aircraft,
Tankprom for tanks - to form an industrial cabinet away from the front line.
(For a year they struggled from one emergency to another, improvising,
hustling, bullying. Where there was no coal they ordered factories to burn
wood or peat. Shortages of rail transport compelled firms to become self-
sufficient, supplying all their own parts and services, and making do without
the usual ring of small contractors surrounding every armaments complex.
Geologists scoured the Siberian countryside for new supplies of vital
minerals. At Sverdlovsk hundreds of scientists and technologists were sent
from the Moscow Academies to spend all their time working out solutions to
the thousands of technical problems thrown up by improvised, poorly-
resourced production."
(The emergency programmes were bound together by a single, common
theme: the necessity of using anything and
anyone to promote war
production at the expense of everything else. This was a great simplifier, but
it brought its own problems. Voznesensky had to fight off military demands
for valuable manpower. Gradually a set of priorities was worked out which
exempted skilled men from the call-up. In the wave of fear and panic that
ECONOMIES AT WAR
185
gripped the Soviet Union in 1942, the NKVD stepped up its search for
scapegoats - workers guilty of 'economic misconduct', saboteurs, spies. As
German armies neared the Volga in the late summer of 1942 a second wave
of evacuation began; in some instances factories were moved a second time.
Improvisation yielded enough dividends for the Red Army to survive, but by
the autumn of 1942 widespread confusion and inefficiency accentuated the
need to return to greater central planning) In November a centralised
Manpower Committee took over the allocation of labour supplies; on 8
December Voznesensky was appointed head of national planning once
again, and in addition the planners were given real teeth for forcing the plans
through. In 1943 a single national plan could once again be drawn up. 12
The great strength of Soviet planning lay in the scale and simplicity of the
goals set. There was nothing sophisticated about Soviet ambitions. The war
production of 22,000 aircraft and 22,000 tanks for 1942.
in sur die amy and quiet ho
These were the
benchmarks. It was up to the engineers, managers and workers to fulfil the
requirements as best they might. The Soviet Union could not afford the
luxury of employing a wide range of different types of weapon; there were
two main tank types, the t-34 and the KV, and five main aircraft types, three
fighters, one bomber, one fighter-bomber. 13 Technical development was
confined to improving chosen models, which enabled Soviet engineers to
catch up with German standards very quickly. Modifications were kept to
the most essential; crude mass-production ensured large numbers and
robust construction. During 1942 Soviet industry in the Urals-Volga-Siberia
region supplied not 22,000 tanks and 22,000 aircraft, but 25,000 of each.
Soviet factories displayed the same priorities of scale and simplicity.
When the industry of the Urals region was first developed in the 1920s,
Soviet planners, uninhibited by the usual pressures of the free market, were
able to build giant factories and furnaces, huge complexes producing
everything from the molten metal to the finished machines and tools. The
model for Stalinist industrialisation, and the later heart of the eastern war
economy, was the new industrial city of Magnitogorsk, on the eastern slopes
of the Ural mountains, 300 miles east of Kuibyshev. The project begun there
in 1928 was to build a single steel works capable of producing more than the
whole pre-1917 Tsarist empire: 5 million tons of steel, 4'5 million tons of
iron. The city took its name from the high-grade magnetic iron ores on the
surrounding ironfield. It was built with the help of American engineers, and
was equipped with American and German machinery. ' By the time the war
started the steel works had six blast furnaces and twenty open-hearth
furnaces, and it was expanded with the addition of evacuated equipment
