124
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
that the new threat was real enough. In November the Luftwaffe lost 21 per
cent of the fighter force, in December 23 per cent. Production of fighters
declined too, from a peak of 873 in July to 663 in December. German forces
were faced with a vicious cycle of attrition from which there was no escape.
(American production escalated beyond anything the Germans had ex-
pected. Eighth air force fighter strength quadrupled in eight months. The
Lightnings, Mustangs and Thunderbolts roamed at will over northern and
central Germany, forcing the German fighters to unequal combat. By the
spring the German fighter force was decimated. Half the fighters and a
quarter of the pilots were lost each month. 54 Despite frantic efforts to
reorganise fighter production the initiative lay firmly with the Allies. With a
heavy heart the General of Fighters, Adolf Galland, reported to his
superiors the irreversible crisis of German air power:) The ratio in which we
fight today is about i to 7. The standard of the Americans is extraordinarily
high. The day fighters have lost more than 1000 aircraft during the last four
months, among them our best officers. These gaps cannoi be filled. Things
have gone so far that the danger of a collapse of our arm exists. 55
The German air force never regained the initiative. The defeat of German
air power in the skies over the Reich starved other theatres of desperately
needed aircraft. The invasion in the west could be met with only three
hundred aircraft against over twelve thousand Allied planes.56 By April
there were only five hundred single engine fighters left on the eastern front
facing over thirteen thousand Soviet aircraft. If this were not enough, the
bombing offensive was now renewed with fresh vigour. The target for the
daylight bombers was the German aircraft industry. In a concentrated
attack, later nicknamed 'Big Week', escorted bombers launched a devastat-
ing attack on the leading aircraft and aero-engine plants. The attacks did not
halt aircraft production altogether, but they forced a desperate and
improvised dispersal of the plants which put to an end any thought of
producing five thousand fighters a month, as the German Air Ministry
wanted. Most new aircraft were shot out of the skies in a matter of days, and
nine thousand were destroyed on the ground by marauding US fighters. A
temporary respite, while the bombers were withdrawn for the destruction of
transport targets to support the invasion of Europe, ended when the
bombers returned in May to hammer the German oil industry. In June the
production of aviation fuel was reduced to a trickle, and the Luftwaffe from
then on relied on accumulated stocks. The defeat of the German air force
was now an accomplished fact.
During the last year of the war the bombing campaign came of age. With
the thin veil of German air defence in tatters, the economy was at last
exposed to the full fury of the bombers. Most of the bomb tonnage dropped
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
125
by the two bomber forces was disbursed in the last year of the war - 1•18
million tons out of a total for the whole war of I•42 million. These attacks did
not go entirely unresisted. There were over fifty thousand heavy and light
anti-aircraft guns at the peak, organised into heavy batteries, concentrated
around the most important industrial targets. There remained an exiguous
fighter force by day and night (including a few of the new jet fighters), whose
pilots continued with almost reckless bravery to pit their tiny strength
against the air armadas. The force now available to the Allies was one of
overwhelming power. 'It is a truly awe-inspiring spectacle which confronts
us, wrote one German fighter pilot in his diary early in 1944.
"There are
approximately 1,000 of the heavy bombers flying eastwards along a wide
frontage
aircraft. 57
with a strong fighter escort . . •
Against them we are forty
A few months later he led his depleted squadron of five aircraft in
a final do-or-die battle with sixty Mustangs and Thunderbolts and was shot
down in minutes.
Over the last year of war the bombing of Germany was relentless. Both
Bomber Command and the American air force finally had the aircraft they
needed. Eighth air force was supplemented by 15th air force from the Med-
iterranean theatre, which could attack over the Reich at long range. At
the end of the war, in March 1945, the Americans had over seven thousand
fighters and bombers on hand for the offensive. The RAF had over 1,500
heavy-bombers, which could carry bombs of up to 20,000 pounds in weight.
This massive firepower was thrown against the industrial fabric of Germany.
Oil supplies for Germany's war effort were critically reduced. Chemical
production was emasculated, reducing the output of explosives by half by
the end of the year. From the autumn, attacks were concentrated against
transport targets, which could now be hit accurately by fighters and fighter-
bombers flying unmolested in German air space. The railway system was
fatally debilitated. By December 1944 the number of freight-car journeys
was half those of the previous year, and only half the quantity of coal needed
by German industry could be moved by rail. 58 Bombing gradually dismem-
bered the economic body. By the winter of 1944-5 Germany was carved up
into isolated economic regions, living off accumulated stocks, while frantic
efforts were made to divert essential military production into caves and salt-
mines and vast, artificial, concrete caverns built, like the pyramids, by an
army of wretched slaves. But by January 1945 the end was near.
Albert
Speer sent Hitler a memorandum on 30 January, the twelfth anniversary of
the Nazi seizure of power, in which he declared that 'The war is over in the
area of heavy industry and armaments ...
from now on the material
preponderance of the enemy can no longer be compensated for by the
bravery of our soldiers. 'S By the time the Allies mounted their last bombing
