300
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
made a great deal of Japan's 2,600 years without a defeat. Divine providence
was assumed to be the reason. The Japanese population expected the gods
to intervene quite literally in the course of the war. A doctor from Hiroshima
explained to American interrogators after the war what this meant in
practice: 'There is a big difference between the way they think about Christ
in Europe and America, and the way the Japanese think about kamisama
[gods] ... This is one big place where Japan falls below America. It is all
right to believe in the gods, but it is pure foolishness to think that the gods
will help you out of holes like this.'65 The high levels of sacrifice displayed by
Japanese troops were sustained by religious belief. Each officer cadet had to
learn by heart in the first three days of training the 27,000 sacred words of the
Emperor on the duties of a soldier. The suicide charge on the battlefield, the
refusal to surrender, the stark fear of dishonour were instilled in all
Japanese. In the Pacific war almost half of all the soldiers committed by
Japan to the island battles were killed, a proportion of loss that eclipsed even
the Soviet figures. 66
The popular emphasis on spiritual armament was supplemented by a good
deal of coercion. The civilian workers were allowed no independent organ-
isation but all belonged to the single Industry Patriotic Society.
Factory
police (kempei) were posted in every war plant, listening out for dissent of
complaint, punishing offences on the spot in front of the workforce, or
removing offenders into a gruelling police custody. Everywhere police agents
provocateurs worked to eradicate defeatism by deliberately
prompting
comments on the futility of war, or the brutality or misgovernment on the home
front, and punishing those foolish enough to loosen their tongues. Military
police attacked and on occasion killed those suspected of pacifist sentiment.
The military tapped the telephones of their civilian colleagues, and harassed
and threatened ministers and officials who were less than wholeheartedly
committed to the war. By 1943 a negative outlook was more and more
common. The civilian population, restricted to slim food rations, poorly
informed about the state of the war, brow-beaten by police and military both
in the workplace and through the thousands of 'neighbourhood associations'
established throughout Japanese society to keep it patriotic, became progres-
sively disillusioned with the war effort, and with the military leadership. After
Midway it was widely recognised by Japan's rulers that Japanese victory could
come only in the wake of German success. In February 1943 the officials of the
Japanese Foreign Office met to discuss Japanese options after Stalingrad. They
guessed, rightly, that Germany's new offensive in 1943 would fail; seeing little
chance of a German victory, they proposed that Japan should 'reorient her
policy towards a peace settlement with America. At the end of March 1943
Emperor Hirohito himself expressed the wish that the war be ended without
THE MORAL CONTEST
301
delay. The military leadership was unmoved. But by the spring of 1944 even
they could see the writing on the wall. A commission set up under Rear-
Admiral Takagi reported in February 1944 that Japan could not possibly win
the war and should seek a compromise peace. 68
From 1943 onwards Japan's war effort kept going at the insistence of the
military hardliners for whom surrender, even a negotiated surrender, was an
anathema. Ordinary Japanese citizens were aware of the wide gulf that had
opened between the crude propaganda of victory and the reality of the war,
particularly after the onset of bombing. "The government kept telling us that
we would defeat the United States,' complained one Japanese after the war,
'but as my house was burned down and I had no food, clothing or shelter, I
didn't know how I could go on. 9 In 1944 it was impossible to disguise the
reality of the war. The Japanese loss of Saipan, where only a thousand
Japanese survived out of the 32,000 on the island, was reported by the
General Staff nine days later. 'We were staggered at this dreadful news,'
wrote a trainee pilot. 'It was obvious that Japan had no hope at all of
regaining supremacy on the sea or in the air.' Bombing brought the reality
home. One-third of the urban population lost their homes and possessions;
over eight million were evacuated; two-fifths of the industrial workforce
was absent from work for more than two weeks during 1945. 7º Little attempt
was made to persuade the population that there was a moral purpose
in continued belligerency beyond the fear of dishonour. Waverers were
victimised and terrorised, but behind the scenes Japanese politicians tried to
find a way of ending the war that would satisfy the Allies and the die-hard
militarists at the same time. The Japanese war effort was riddled with moral
ambiguity. Behind a façade of national unity and confidence in victory, both
leaders and led understood that the war was effectively lost. The American
postwar study of Japanese morale found that by 1945 68 per cent were
convinced the war was lost. Only 28 per cent were willing to continue
fighting and embrace death rather than dishonour."
• The German case was every bit as ambiguous. The German population
was little prepared for the conflict when it came. The early victories provided
a moral boost, as they did for the Japanese. But in Germany, too, all
information was carefully controlled and information distorted to mask the
reality of war. Again there was no clear indication from the authorities about
the nature of war aims, or the moral purpose behind the conflict? The war
against France and Britain was presented as a revival of the 1914 war against
Germany's restrictive 'encirclement' by other European powers. Victory in
1940 was hailed as an end to the hated Versailles system, and revenge for the
humiliation of 1918. To justify the war against the Soviet Union, the regime
returned to the 1930s propaganda of Bolshevik menace. The population
