68
DEEP WAR
began; by the 23rd German soldiers had reached the suburbs. There was,
recalled one witness, an 'exultant mood' at the Werwolf headquarters.?
In the first flush of German victories a mood of panic began to grip Soviet
society. Populations in the south moved eastwards in a headlong flight from
an enemy they had come to regard as unstoppable. At Rostov-on-Don even
the troops were infected by fear of what would happen to them if they were
caught by the Germans. At the height of this crisis of morale came the
historic order 'No. 227' from Stalin himself: the Red Army was to stand firm
against the invader or be treated as criminals and deserters. The notorious
Soviet NKVD security forces rounded up alleged defeatists and saboteurs,
while national propaganda roused the Soviet people to a final do-or-die
effort on behalf of Mother Russia. The panic subsided, to be replaced by a
mood of sombre determination. Audiences in Moscow flocked to patriotic
Tchaikovsky concerts. Great heroes from the Russian past, whose socialist
credentials were nil, were invoked to inspire heroic resistance and hatred
of the enemy. The journalist Alexander Werth, who lived in Moscow
throughout the darkest davs of the war. recalled that hate reached "
paroxysm of frenzy' during the difficult weeks in July and August. Alexei
Surkov's poem 'I Hate' was published in the army journal Red Star on 12
August:
My heart is as hard as stone.
I hate them deeply.
My house has been defiled by Prussians,
Their drunken laughter dims my reason.
And with these hands of mine,
I want to strangle every one of them!
A few weeks earlier Pravda published an editorial on 'Hatred of the
Enemy: 'May holy hatred become our chief, our only feeling'?
It was not mere fear of the NKVD that kept the Soviet people fighting in
1942. There was a widespread and spontaneous patriotic revival, and a wave
of revulsion against German brutality. The revival was deliberately stoked
by the regime. Churches were reopened, and religious
attendance
encouraged after years of persecution. Pravda began to capitalise the word
God for the first time. 1º Stalin looked to build bridges between the Red
Army and the traditions of the Imperial past. New medals were struck for
heroism in July 1942 named after the great Tsarist generals, Kutuzov,
Suvorov, Nakhimov. More heterodox still, a medal was introduced only for
officers, the Alexander Nevsky Order from Tsarist times; and at the height
of the Stalingrad battle it was announced that officers would once again wear
Inspire hereism, patrotom
ла.
vin propagand = posie tove to
STALINGRAD AND KURSK COWbIA Naris 69
distinctive insignia and gold braid to instil a sense of pride and discipline into
a hitherto classless army.
bas would not defeat the etor nomie. The he so the
Supreme Command (Stavka) to restore to the Red Army a sense of self-
confidence and the means for effective resistance. Despite the rapid success
of German forces in the south, the overall balance between the two sides was
more even than the contest in the south would suggest. At the start of the
summer campaign the Soviet forces numbered five and a half million men,
against six million Germans and their allies. Both sides had roughly the same
number of aircraft, a little over 3,000; the Soviet armies had 4,000 tanks,
German forces 3,200. Across the whole area of northern and central Russia
the two sides built a vast defensive barricade, and it was here that Soviet
forces were concentrated, protecting Moscow and the heartland of Russia
itself. Only in the south were Soviet forces much weaker. By July the
187,000 Soviet soldiers here, with 360 tanks and 330 aircraft, faced an enemy
force of 250,000 men, 740 tanks and I,200 aircraft." It was this temporary
disparity that allowed German forces to move so rapidly across the Don
basin and the northern Caucasus. Stalin was reluctant to send reinforce-
ments from farther north until he could be certain that the southern front
was the main area of campaign. Until July Soviet military leaders counted on
a renewed assault on Moscow. As a result they were forced to respond in a
hasty and improvised way once it became clear that the German goal was oil.
_ Stavka's first priority was to re-establish a clear Soviet frontline in the
south. In the Caucasus a strong defensive line was set up under the veteran
cavalryman Marshal Budenny, who had fought with Stalin in the civil war,
defending Tsaritsyn. Once von Kleist's forces reached this enemy defence
line on the Black Sea coast, in the foothills of the Caucasus mountains and
on the approaches to the Caspian oilfields, their progress slowed down, and
then halted. On 12 July a new Stalingrad front was formed on the outskirts of
the city under General Gordov. Its aim was to try to slow down the German
advance and to build a clear defensive line along the river Don, using the
retreating armies in its construction. This proved a difficult task. Some of
the soldiers in small groups, cut off from their units and their officers, never
reached the front but were lost on the vast stretches of grassland, easy prey
to roaming German aircraft. The army field headquarters had little idea how
many troops they commanded, or, in many cases, even where the troops
were.
Stalin tried to salvage the situation by sacking commanders and
bringing in men who had proved themselves in combat. Although this was
unable to stem the tide of retreat, Soviet forces were at least falling back in
better order on to the defensive line around the city, where they could make
