LITTLE SHIPS AND LONELY AIRCRAFT . . .
furries of fierce snow and hail. Through these miserable elements the two
convoys plunged until sighted by the 38 U-boats waiting for them. With no
air cover in the heart of the gap, but with increased naval escort, the battle
commenced. The first victim was HX229, which was sighted by U-653 on her
way to refuel. The submarine dived as the whole convoy passed slowly above
it. When it resurfaced the message went out to 21 of the waiting submarines
to close and engage the convoy. During the night of 16-17 March, in high
seas that hampered the use of shipborne radar, the attack was pressed home.
Seven merchantmen were sunk or immobilised. During the course of the
night the two convoys began to merge together, and in bright moonlight
the U-boats now turned on scI22. Over the course of the day five more
ships were sunk, but that morning for the first time very-long-range
(VLR) aircraft arrived over the convoys. Only three aircraft were sent,
all converted B-24 Liberator bombers, and only two managed to find the
convoys. These two could only stay with the ships for short periods before
their fuel ran dangerously low. But the submarines were exceptionally
cautious in their presence. The two ships sunk that day from convoy HX229
were lost in the interval between the departure of the first Liberator and the
arrival of the next. Over the next two days isolated kills were made, but by
the 19 March the convoys were out of the gap and under air cover. It was
only then that the single submarine kill of the whole battle was made, U-384,
sunk by a B-17 Flying Fortress from Benbecula Island in the Outer
Hebrides.71
For the Allies the battle was a disaster: 21 ships totalling 141,000 tons were
lost for the cost of just one U-boat. Even worse might have followed but for
the renewed intervention of the elements. In late March a fierce hurricane
blew across the mid-Atlantic, so severe that the U-boats could not
manoeuvre or attack. Most were withdrawn back to base to refit and refuel
after a month in which they had sunk in all waters 82 ships of almost 700,000
tons. Two more convoys were sighted and attacked in March, but the
submarine commanders noted for the first time strong air cover provided by
escort carriers. They could not prevent sinkings, but they kept most of the
U-boats at arm's length. This was small consolation in the Admiralty after a
disastrous month. The naval staff recorded later that the U-boats came'very
near to disrupting communications between the New World and the Old'. 72
In the prevailing gloom there was speculation that the convoy system itself
might no longer be effective. If such were the case the prospects for
mounting any kind of Allied assault on Europe were poor.
Admiral Horton was undaunted by the crisis. A considerable number of
convoys had sailed in March and been steered clear of U-boats altogether.
Moreover the kill rate was rising: nineteen U-boats were sunk in February,
THE BATTLE FOR THE SEAS
57
the highest figure for any month of the war so far, and fifteen in March.
Radio intercepts indicated a distinct lowering of morale
submarine crews. Attrition worked both ways. Rather than halt the con-
voys Horton planned in April to lure the U-boats into battle in the hope
of inflicting insupportable rates of loss. He insisted, and insistence was
Horton's hallmark, that the Royal Navy release naval vessels to form the
nucleus of his new anti-submarine hit squads, the 'support groups'. By the
end of March he had his way. Five support groups made up of destroyers and
including existing escort carriers were readied for action. The support groups
were to keep in close contact with the convoys, to be called at a moment's
notice. Overhead Horton now had the air support he had asked for in
December, including the VLR aircraft fitted with centimetric radar and
Leigh Lights which could plug the Atlantic Gap. He ordered all anti-
submarine aircraft to concentrate on destroying submarines either around
the convoys or in the approaches to the U-boat bases in the Bay of Biscay. 73
Rather than avoid the submarines, Horton drove his convoys into their
midst. There was no repeat in April of the fate of HX229 and SC122. Each
convoy was now surrounded by a carefully trained escort, able to cooperate
with aircraft and with the lurking support groups. The ships had the
latest centimetric radar, and, more significantly, so did the supporting long-
range aircraft. The submarine's Metox receiver was now useless against air
attack. New radio equipment was installed in ships for the purpose of
High Frequency Direction Finding (HF/DF), which provided an accurate
bearing on any submarine that used its radio. 4 Convoy Hx231 from New-
foundland fought its way through four days of gale-force winds against a
pack of seventeen submarines. Four U-boats were sunk for almost no loss.
At the end of April convoy ONS5, outward bound from Britain, was sent
into the gap with a powerful escort. Some 39 submarines attacked and
sunk twelve ships in all. But with the aid of two support groups and the
Liberators seven submarines were sunk, and five severely damaged. By the
end of the month only half the merchant losses of March were recorded,
for the loss of nineteen more U-boats.
Offensive tactics were resumed in May. On the lith Horton sent 37
merchantmen, formed in ten columns and escorted by eight naval vessels
under Commander Peter Gretton, from Halifax, Nova Scotia, to England.
Convoy scI30 had continuous air cover. For the first six days nothing
happened. By the seventh submarine contact was made in what was left
of the gap. Gretton marshalled his merchantmen like well drilled guards-
men, turning in formation first this way, then that, to avoid the waiting
submarines. Overhead, Liberators prowled the skies. The first to appear
sank a U-boat in its initial attack. The others drew the escorts to the
