UNPREDICTABLE VICTORY
14
overseas. Only Hitler's obsession with the assault on the Soviet Union
prevented Britain's almost certain defeat. In the Far East Japan moved
forces down to the French colony of Indo-China (Vietnam) and threatened
British and Dutch possessions in the East Indies, with their rich supplies of
oil. [In September 1940, in recognition of their successes, the three
aggressors met at Berlin to sign a Tri-partite Pact to divide the world
between them, 'to establish and maintain a new order of things'."
| The ultimate confrontation for Hitler was the contest with Bolshevism,
which he had longed for ever since the agonising days of defeat in 1918. On
22 June 1941 three million soldiers poured across the Soviet frontier,
including contingents from Germany's allies. Despite numerous warnings
from sources even the Soviet intelligence authorities could have regarded as
unimpeachable, Stalin insisted to the very last moment that Hitler would not
attack. He thought he had the measure of his fellow dictator. The shock was
complete. Soviet forces were quite unprepared for the scale of attack.
Thrown into complete confusion the Soviet front broke open, and German
armies streamed towards their targets. On 3 October Hitler broke a three-
month silence by returning from his headquarters to Berlin to announce final
victory to the German public. His excitement was evident to all who saw
him. To his carefully selected audience at the Sportpalast he announced that
he had returned from 'the greatest battle in the history of the world', which
Germany had won. The Bolshevik dragon was slain 'and would never rise
again' 2 There was a tumult of applause. A few days later the news was
formally released to the German public: there were two large Soviet army
groups encircled by German forces and on the point of surrender, but after
that the war in the east was over. Hitler planned, like some mediaeval
Mongol khan, to destroy Stalin's capital. Moscow was not to be occupied but
completely wiped from the earth'. Neutral journalists were invited to the
Propaganda Ministry where, in front of a colossal map of the Soviet Union,
German spokesmen outlined to the anxious newsmen the dimensions of the
German victory and the shape of the New Order. 13
Everyone who visited Hitler's headquarters that autumn could sense the
euphoria. In just two years the political map of the world was torn up. In July
Hitler had already authorised new armament programmes to build up a
large battlefleet and overwhelming air power to destroy British resistance
and to keep America at arm's length. When the Soviet government sent out
peace feelers in October to see what could be salvaged by negotiation, Hitler
swept them aside, convinced that German forces were on the point of
destroying Soviet resistance once and for all. A few weeks later, prompted in
part by the scale of German success in blunting any Soviet threat, Japan
turned south to attack America and Britain in the Pacific and carve out a new
EXPLAINING WORLD WAR II
15
empire in south-east Asia. On 7 December Japanese aircraft attacked the
American naval base at Pearl Harbor. Four days later Hitler declared war on
the United States as well. German leaders did not consider America a
serious military threat. Two months before, Hitler's Foreign Minister,
Joachim von Ribbentrop, had told the Japanese ambassador that 'American
policy represented one great bluff'. Germany planned to complete the
establishment of the New Order before America could intervene. 14 Over
the weeks following Pearl Harbor Japan's forces took the south by storm; by
February they had captured Malaya, Singapore, most of the Philippines, the
Dutch East Indies and much of Burma, and had threatened Australia and
India. On all fronts desperate defensive efforts kept alive both Soviet and
western hopes, in the outskirts of Moscow, which German forces failed to
take over the winter of 1941, in the approaches to the Suez Canal, on the
borders of northern India, and in the northernmost territories of Australia.
These battlefields proved to be the limits of Axis advance, but who in those
catastrophic months would have believed it?
On the face of things, no rational man in early 1942 would have guessed at
the eventual outcome of the war. In the jargon of modern strategy, the
Allies faced the worst-case scenario. The United States was not yet armed,
and would have large trained forces only by 1943 at the earliest; the Soviet
Union had lost the heart of its industrial structure and German forces were
poised to seize the oil of the Caucasus and the Middle East. The situation for
the Allies - and the coalition only emerged in December 1941, not sooner -
was desperate, demoralising. In January 1941 Harry Hopkins, Roosevelt's
personal emissary to Churchill, conveyed the President's conviction 'that if
England lost, America too would be encircled and beaten. 15 Even the
belligerent Churchill had moments of bleak despair when he sketched to his
staff his picture of 'a world in which Hitler dominated all Europe, Asia and
Africa' and left to Britain and America 'no option but an unwilling peace', 16
It was from this sorry foundation that the Allied powers first halted, then
reversed, the apparently inexorable drive to conquest of their enemies,
Germany, Italy and Japan. Between 1942 and 1944 the initiative passed to
the Allies, and Axis forces experienced their first serious reverses - at
Stalingrad and Kursk on the eastern front, Midway and the Coral Sea in the
Far East, and El Alamein in the Middle East. By 1944 the demoralisation of
the Allies was dispelled; contemporaries could see that the odds were now
overwhelmingly on Allied victory. The neutral states that hedged their bets
earlier in the war - Turkey, Spain, Sweden - now looked for association with
the winning side. The countries of Latin America came, one by one, to
declare war on Germany. Argentina was the last, on 27 March 1945, six
weeks before German defeat.
Persia declared
war on Germany in
