98
DEEP WAR
ghosts, draped in snow. No attempt was made to survey the ruins; Stalin ate
dinner in his carriage and thirty minutes later the train pulled on. From Baku
the party flew to the Persian capital, where on 28 November the conference
assembled in the Soviet Embassy. At each sentry post stood a Soviet, an
American and a British soldier, side by side. 73 The Soviet delegates came in
a mood of evident self-assurance. They were the victors of Stalingrad and
Kursk, and had defeated the overwhelming bulk of German armed power.
Stalin was in a position to give advice, and to make demands. Roosevelt and
Churchill agreed to launch a western attack on Europe in May of the
following year. Among the formalities of the conference was the presenta-
tion to Stalin of a gift from the British King, George VI, of a gleaming Sword
of Honour for the victory at Stalingrad. In front of a room full of officials and
soldiers, and in the presence of the American President, Churchill handed
the sword to Stalin, who raised it to his lips and kissed it. Roosevelt was
visibly moved as the sword was solemnly escorted from the room by a Soviet
guard of honour.?4 A few days later Stalin returned to Moscow. He told
Zhukov that Roosevelt had given his word that the Allies would attack
German-held France in the spring. 'I believe he will keep his word,' Stalin
continued, but even if he does not, our own forces are sufficient to complete
the rout of Nazi Germany 7S
Soviet victory in the campaigns at Stalingrad and Kursk effectively
determined the outcome of the war. There is little dispute on either the
German or Soviet side that this was the major turning-point. But there is a
great deal of argument about the reasons for it. The conventional view has
been to blame Hitler for gross strategic mismanagement, or to ascribe Soviet
success to crude weight of numbers. Manstein in his memoirs blamed defeat
in 1943 on 'the extraordinary numerical superiority of the enemy'. General
von Mellinthin, veteran of the tank battles he later described, wrote that
defeats 'were not due to superior Russian tactical leadership', but to 'grave
strategic errors' and 'the gigantic Russian superiority in men and material'. 76
[The underlying assumption is not that Soviet forces won the contest in 1943,
but simply that the German side lost it.
From everything now known about the eastern front from the Soviet side
such an explanation is no longer tenable. Hitler may well have appeared
a liability to German commanders, but until the failure at Stalingrad, as
he told his staff the day that Paulus surrendered, We were always
superior ...
77 Moreover for the Citadel operation he left the planning and
execution largely to the professionals, Manstein and Zeitzler. The crude
weight of Soviet numbers cannot be the answer either. Soviet forces on
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
99
paper greatly outnumbered the German attackers in 1941, but were cut to
pieces; at Stalingrad and Kursk, though the margin in equipment slightly
favoured the Soviet side, the gap was too small to blame German defeat on
Soviet 'masses'. It is true that German forces found themselves taking loss
rates that would have seemed inconceivable in 1941. The rest of Europe was
conquered for less than the losses they suffered in December 1942 and
January 1943. German armies faced a determined, furious enemy grimly
willing to die rather than let German soldiers pass. But losses on this scale
were caused not just by Soviet 'masses', but by the attitude of Soviet forces
to death, and their almost fanatical hatred of the enemy.
§The reasons for Soviet victory on such a scale in 1943 are active Soviet
reasons, the result of a remarkable resurgence in Soviet fighting power and
organisation after a year and a half of shattering defeats. When Marshal
Zhukov wrote his reminiscences of the campaign he could point to solid
achievements: better central planning of operations, and their careful
supervision by the General Staff; very great improvements in Soviet
technology and the tactics for using them, exemplified nowhere more fully
than on the prepared defensive ground around Kursk; and the ability at last
to deploy millions of men and thousands of tanks and aircraft, with all their
supplies and rearward services, in lengthy and complex operations, without
losing control of them. 78 To this Zhukov might have added the argument
that Soviet planning and central direction, generally viewed unfavourably
today, were the final factors that turned a demoralised population and its 4
shattered economy into a great armed camp, providing the weapons and
food and labour to sustain 'deep war'. No other society in the Second World
War was mobilised so extensively, or shared such sacrifices. The success in
1943 was earned not just by the tankmen and gunners at the front, but also
by the engineers and transport workers in the rear, the old men and the
women who kept farms going without tractors or horses, and the Siberian
workforce struggling in bitter conditions to turn out a swelling stream of
simply constructed guns, tanks and aircraft.
Doubtless some of this energy was conscripted at the point of a gun and
through fear of the Gulag, but this cannot explain on its own the remarkable
effort of will expressed by ordinary Soviet citizens and soldiers in the face of
the German threat. That effort was fuelled by the very visible consequences
of invasion. When Ilya Ehrenburg, the Soviet writer, visited the Kursk
salient after the battle he was horrified by what he saw: 'Villages destroyed
by fire, shattered towns, stumps of trees, cars bogged down in green slime,
field hospitals, hastily dug graves - it all merges into one, into deep war.'79
The sight of so much wanton destruction in the areas once occupied by the
invader provoked Ehrenburg to write in Red Star: 'Now the word "German"
