200
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
air force
of twelve thousand modern front-line aircraft; a huge new
battlefleet to replace the one unceremoniously scuttled in Scapa Flow in
1919; a quantity of explosives almost three times that produced at the height
of Germany's war effort in 1918. The development of rockets, jets and new
forms of nerve gas was well advanced. The army in 1939 evaluated the
possibility of developing atomic weapons. The war that broke out in 1939
cut across all these preparations. Neither foundation nor superstructure was
complete; despite the growth of state planning and control, the transforma-
tion of the German economy into the instrument of super-power status was
slower than expected. If war had not started until the mid-1940s Germany
might well have proved unstoppable. In 1939 the whole military-industrial
complex was still in the throes of expensive and lengthy construction.
(When war broke out the economy was conscripted at once.
Strict
rationing was imposed on the population. Inessential businesses were closed
down; those that could be converted to war purposes were ordered to do so.
A world of shortages, queuing, ration coupons and a dreary, monotonous
diet was imposed overnight.) Life in Berlin, recalled an American cor-
respondent in 1939, was 'Spartan throughout'. so
An army of bureaucrats,
military and civilian, descended on the German people, requisitioning cars
and lorries, horses and tractors, issuing permits for travel, directing workers
to the arms factories. Already by the summer of 1941 well over half the
industrial workforce laboured on military orders. (Even at the height of the
German war effort in 1944 the proportion was not much greater.) It was a
level of commitment to war production higher than the British in 1941, and
higher than the United States throughout the war. 51
On any reasonable expectation Germany should have won substantial
dividends from a mobilisation on this scale. By 1941 the economy was
supplemented by the rich resources conquered in Belgium, France and
Luxembourg, which gave Germany access to almost the whole European
coal and steel industry, a large additional labour force and trainloads of
looted machines and metals. Instead Germany's industrial effort stagnated;
8,000 aircraft in 1939, 10,000 in 1940, only 11,000 in 1941. The output of
weapons and equipment was not much greater after two years of war than it
had been after one. A great chasm opened up between Hitler's plans and the
material reality There were not many more tanks and aircraft available to
attack the Soviet Union than Germany had used to defeat Britain and
France, a factor that played an important part in Soviet survival in the first
critical six months of the Barbarossa campaign.)
There is no easy explanation. Hitler's Germany was an authoritarian
single-party state, dominated by the personal dictatorship of a man who was
not only head of state but also the Supreme Commander of the Armed
ECONOMIES AT WAR
20I
Forces. By the start of the war Hitler had gathered into his own hands the
authority necessary to order the weapons he wanted. But Germany was not
the Soviet Union, centrally planned and centrally commanded. Hitler's
orders, though they shaped national policy, were refracted and distorted by
a system that was poorly coordinated, factious and obstructive. There was
no straight line of command between Führer and factory. In between lay a
web of ministries, plenipotentiaries and Party commissars, each with their
own apparatus, interests and rubber stamps, producing more than the usual
weight of bureaucratic inertia, At the end of the line was a business
community most of whom remained wedded to entrepreneurial indepen-
dence, and resented the jumbled administration, the corrupt Nazi Party
hacks, the endless form-filling, which stifled what voluntary efforts they
might have made to transform the war economy.
' No organisation was more guilty of limiting Germany's war potential than
the military. Answerable only to Hitler, the armed forces treated the
German industrial economy as an annexe to the front line. Military priorities
dominated arms production, from the design and development of a weapon
through to the final factory inspection? Military officials were posted to
factories to monitor production. Changes to design and specification were
made endlessly in response to every cry for improvement from the
battlefield. Production schedules were set by military agencies; consultation
with the industrialists and engineers who had to produce the goods was rare
and one-sided.
(The military domination of production had mixed effects) There is no
dispute that Germany developed weapons of very high quality, with a level
of finish and attention to detail that astonished the Allies when they
inspected crashed aircraft or captured guns. By the end of the war German
designers had developed many of the weapons that armed NATO a decade
later. But the pursuit of advanced weaponry came at a price. Instead of a
core of proven designs produced on standard lines, the German forces
developed a bewildering array of projects. At one point in the war there
were no fewer than 425 different aircraft models and variants in produc-
tion. 52) By the middle of the war the German army was equipped with 151
different makes of lorry, and 150 different motor-cycles.
(With such a variety it was difficult to produce in mass. In 1942 Hitler
remarked how industrialists 'were always complaining about this niggardly
procedure - today an order for ten howitzers, tomorrow for two mortars and
so on' 53 But this was the nub of a system in which the military dictated the
selection and development of anything that promised battlefield dividends.
(It produced a situation where a proper sense of priority and evaluation was
replaced with a chaos of demands and programmes.) 'Nobody would
