20
UNPREDICTABLE VICTORY
began. How and why this happened, against every reasonable expectation,
remains the central question of the war.
Stalin, quite naturally, hoped that in the critical years the western Allies
would find some way of relieving the pressure on the Soviet war effort. They
did so in two ways, neither of which entirely satisfied the Russians. First,
they launched a bombing offensive against the Axis on a scale without
precedent. Second, and after much inter-Allied argument and hesitation,
they launched two vast amphibious operations, one against Italy in July
1943, the other a year later, in June 1944, against German forces in northern
France. Bombing has always been a contentious issue. Aside from the strong
moral objections which it raised, and continues to raise, there have always
been serious doubts about its strategic worth. The bombing offensives
absorbed very large resources and their results were regarded as ambiguous
at best, even by the politicians who ordered them in the first place.
Nevertheless bombing was the first choice of Anglo-American planners in
their efforts to get directly at Germany in 1942, and it remained a central
element in western war-making until the defeat of Germany and Japan in
1945. For this reason, if for no other, its contribution to Allied victory
deserves serious assessment.
There exists a great deal of confusion about what bombing was supposed
to achieve in the war. The popular expectation that bombing alone would
cripple the German economy, destroy the morale of its people and bring
about German surrender was never seriously entertained by British and
American leaders. The achievements of bombing were more modest, but
were nevertheless substantial. Bombing speeded up the re-entry to Europe
of western forces; it helped to open up a 'Second Front' in 1942 and 1943 by
diverting large quantities of manpower and equipment away from the
Russo-German conflict to the defence of the Reich. Finally, the choice to
confront Germany through an air campaign created the conditions for
the defeat of the German air force. In Italy and Japan bombing undermined
the home economy and home morale critically; in Germany bombing
prevented the effective development of an economic super-power. In any
argument about why the Allies won, this is an impressive catalogue of
reasons.
Bombing, like the war at sea, created circumstances that made possible
the main thrust of Allied armies in 1944 to defeat Germany on three
European fronts, east, west and south. This was rightly seen as the only way
to secure victory, but for the western states it involved an operation of very
considerable risk. The assault on the Normandy coast on the morning of 6
June 1944 was the largest amphibious attack ever launched. History was
replete with examples of failure: Gallipoli (which almost finished Churchill
EXPLAINING WORLD WAR II
2I
as a serious politician in the First World War); the Spanish Armada;
Napoleon in 1805 (when his strength on land was overwhelming); and more
recently Hitler's own failure to invade Britain in the autumn of 1940, when
the opposition on the beaches of Kent and Sussex was nothing to the
network of defences facing the Allies four years later. So difficult was the
enterprise that the Germans thought the Allies might try a more indirect
route through the Balkans, or Portugal, or Scandinavia rather than risk the
frontal assault on Fortress Europe. The success of the D-Day landings
sealed Hitler's fate, as the landings in Italy a year before sealed Mussolini's.
Like the bombing, this was an enterprise whose outcome deserves careful
explanation.
The history of each of these four zones of conflict is central to the overall
explanation of Allied military triumph. They are linked together by the
wider themes which follow. The success in combat was determined in great
measure by issues of production, scientific discovery, military reform and
social enthusiasm. In all these spheres there are marked contrasts between
the Allied and Axis sides which require elaboration. We have already seen
how the balance of human and material resources between the two sides can
be reduced to three critical questions: how did the Soviet Union recover its
industrial resilience? how did the United States turn itself in a year into a
military super-power, when every other state had taken years to rearm? why
did Germany, with so rich and industrially developed a continent at her
disposal, produce so much less than the Allies? On the theme of fighting
power it is tempting to reduce the issue to the simple question of why the
Red Army managed to transform its effectiveness in a matter of months,
when it looked a clumsy, spent force in 1941. This is almost certainly the
most important question; but should we not also ask why the two military
superstars, Germany and Japan, failed to sustain their momentum in the
second half of the war? If the graph of Allied combat effectiveness rose
steeply upwards, that of the Axis levelled off, and finally declined.
Some of these contrasts in fighting power can be explained by better use of
intelligence or by superior technology, but it is impossible to ignore the
human factor? Leadership counted for a great deal. So, too, did popular
enthusiasm for war. The leading personalities contributed in all kinds of
ways to the final outcome. Churchill, with his dogged hatred of Hitlerism,
Roosevelt, with his defence of embattled democratic values, and Stalin, who
roused a furious people to the defence of Mother Russia, all emerged under
the stress of war as leaders of quality; but they tempered their own
contribution by listening to advice and leaving much of the day-to-day task
of running the war to others with more time and competence. In Germany
the opposite happened. The easy victories persuaded Hitler that he had an
