318
WHY THE ALLIES WON
between the Allies, must have puzzled at his cryptic remarks on the harmful
effects of past 'discord', but unity of purpose and plan was not something to
be taken for granted. It was always under strain: in the bombing offensive
(where British and American air forces fought different campaigns, by day
and by night); in the arguments about the route of re-entry to Continental
Europe; in the tension between Soviet demands for a Second Front and
western hesitation. It is no coincidence that Germany was defeated during
the nine-month period when all three Allies, assisted by the exiled forces of
the conquered European lands, put the main weight of their military effort
together for the first time.
The Allies would have been the first to admit that fighting power was their
real weakness. After the terrible defeats of the summer and autumn of 1941
the Soviet General Staff began a comprehensive review of what had gone
wrong and right in Soviet practice. By March 1943 five volumes of critical
analysis were published, covering everything from the use of tanks and
aircraft to the laying of smoke-screens and the use of gunboats on Russia's
rivers. The fruits of Allied reflection have already been discussed, and
need only a brief summary here. The reforms covered both the organisation
of forces and their equipment and operational skills. The purpose was to
achieve improvement in the qualitative performances of all Allied forces
and technology, without which quantitative supremacy would have availed
little! With better training
and improved weapons the morale of Allied
troops was also raised appreciably. Mistakes were still made, but the gap
between the two sides narrowed in every sphere of combat
The Allies did not depend on simple numbers for victory but on the
quality of their technology and the fighting effectiveness of their forces. Axis
forces did little to alter the basic pattern of their military organisation and
operational practice, or to reform and modernise the way they made war)
They were not under the same urgent pressure as their enemies and they
responded more slowly to the sudden swing in the balance of fighting power
evident in 1943. There is a deeper contrast here. (In Germany and Japan
much greater value was placed on operations and on combat than on
organisation and supply. Here were societies where military endeavour
ranked as the highest social duty, where military elites dominated the
waging of war. The best military brains were at the battlefront, not in the
rear. It is inconceivable that a Marshall or an Eisenhower, with no combat
experience between them, could have won supreme command in either the
German or Japanese war effort. The German army was notorious for its
stubborn inability to release from conscription men whose scientific or to
managerial skills were in desperate need on the civilian front. Staff officers
were obliged to spend time fighting at the front, which explains why even the
WHY THE ALLIES WON
319
at the front."
watered of are me bers of er perienced parnap al
In both Germany and Japan less emphasis was placed upon the non-
combat areas of war: procurement, logistics, military services. In the Pacific
War there were eighteen American personnel for every one serviceman at
the front. The ratio in the Japanese forces was one to one. The post-war
bombing survey of Japan observed the marked failure of Japanese air forces
to provide adequate maintenance, logistic support, communications and
control, or airfields and bases ' Young Japanese men did not want to be
maintenance engineers - they wanted to fly. 2 In the German army in
Europe there were roughly two combatants for every non-combatant; but
the American army had a ratio almost exactly the reverse, one fighter for
every two service personnel. Some measure of the emphasis Marshall placed
upon military services can be seen in his decision to divide the army into
three separate components, ground forces, air forces and services, each with
supply system:
I cannot understand these Americans. Each night we know that we have
cut them to pieces,
inflicted heavy casualties, mowed down their
transport. But - in the morning, we are suddenly faced with fresh
battalions, with complete replacements of men, machines, food, tools
and weapons. This happens day after day...14
Stalin paid the same close attention to servicing Red forces. The Red Army,
like the American, had a large and influential service sector under the Main
Directorate of the Red Army Rear, whose chief sat on the Defence
Committee on equal terms with the combat commanders. Its director,
General Khrulev, remembered after the war that his job was regarded by
Stalin as 'operational work, organically linked to the combat operations of
the troops. • •
In the 1940s both Germany and Japan were highly militarised societies.
The forces controlled the selection and development of weapons; they
bullied and harassed manufacturers to produce what they wanted; they
jealously guarded military prerogatives, even to the extent of long and
damaging feuds between the separate services. They resented and rejected
from mere civilians. Allied forces were by
contrast supported by a large civilian apparatus; many of the senior
