164
ALONG A GOOD ROAD . ..
attack. Evidence from radio intercepts and from double-agents regarded
as particularly reliable all indicated an Allied strategy of double-barrelled
invasion. Everything pointed to 15 June as the critical day for the
new assault, and Dieppe as its nodal point. At Supreme Headquarters it was
decided to hold on at all costs in Normandy, while every effort would be
strained to throw FUSAG back into the sea when it came. Against even the
wildest expectations the deception lived on; late in June the BBC relayed
bogus messages alerting the Resistance movements of Belgium and north-
eastern France. The fifteenth of July was now regarded as invasion day. So
convinced was Hitler that his enemy would do what he would have done
that not until ? August, on the very eve of German defeat, did he finally
accept that FUSAG was not coming, and order I5th army westward."
¡The failure to commit more forces early on was Rommel's undoing. Even
then the margin on D-Day was slimmer than Montgomery would have liked?
A week later he told Field Marshal Brooke with unusual candour that his
forces could well have been defeated, for all the Allies' advantages,
Rommel had been able to mount strong assaults from midday against forces
still in a confused state on the beaches. 2 Fortunately for the Allies,
Rommel's reinforcements came piece-meal, tanks without their fuel, men
without their lorries or horses. In the first four days German forces did all
they could to establish a firm line &-10 miles from the coast. From then on
the battle entered a new phase. Montgomery had two immediate objectives:
the capture of the port of Cherbourg at the end of the Cotentin peninsula,
and the capture of Caen at the eastern end of the lodgement area. He knew
that German forces wouid concentrate against the threat to Caen, because it
was perceived to be the gateway to the Seine and Paris, and beyond. This
would free American forces to exploit German weakness in western France
and begin the long encirclement eastwards. But progress towards this stage
was slow, well behind the schedule drawn up in the Overlord plan. In the
western sector Allied forces could not bring their greater mobility and
firepower to bear because of the nature of the terrain. They were fighting in
the bocage, a farming country of narrow roads and high banks topped with
thick hedgerows. This was ideal for defensive warfare. Though weakly held,
the German line was difficult to penetrate. Progress was measured in yards.
Morale was dented by fear of snipers, who were armed with everything from
rifles to anti-tank guns. Tanks were ambushed and disabled before they
could even find a target at which to aim. The German forces facing the Allies
now were drawn mainly from the regular field army, and they fought with a
greater determination and skill than the defenders of the Atlantic Wall.
Around Caen, Rommel succeeded in concentrating four Panzer divisions by
13 June; though they were short of equipment, and constantly harassed from
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
165
the air, they prevented a quick capture of the city. The front settled down to
a slow battle of attrition.
As the front solidified, Allied forces became hostage to the rate at which
they could be supplied with fresh troops and equipment. Within days the two
Mulberries were complete enough to be operational. By mid-June the Allies
had moved nineteen divisions into the bridgehead - more than half a million
men, and 77,000 vehicles. Then once again the weather let the Allies down.
On 18 June the day was fine and warm. The following day the Channel was
suddenly and unexpectedly hit by the worst gales of the century. A force
eight wind and driving rain whipped the waters into waves 6 feet high; by the
20th nothing could sail across. The shrieking wind and fierce seas played
havoc with the small craft sheltering like so many sheep inside the pens
provided by the almost-completed Mulberries. Small boats were tossed up
and smashed against the shore and the walls of the harbour. After eighty
hours of battering, the Mulberry off the American beaches at St Laurent
began to disintegrate beyond repair. Only the 55 old merchantmen, sunk
farther out to sea, afforded enough flimsy protection to prevent a complete
disaster. When the storm abated on the 22nd, eight hundred small craft,
including many of the essential tank transporters, lay smashed and stranded
on the beaches. For the German defenders the gale was like that Divine
Wind, kamikaze, that broke up the invading Mongol fleet in the Sea of Japan
seven centuries before. The supplies to the lodgement area dried up at a
critical juncture of the battle. Up to the I9th June an average of 22,000 tons
of supplies had been brought in every day; over the next three days the total
collapsed to a little more than 1,000 tons a day. The loss of ammunition was
particularly acute. Without it neither the British nor American forces could
launch the attacks they had planned. For four days the German defenders
were free of air attack, and could move forward men and tanks unmolested.
Not until the end of July were the Allies able to make good all the losses
inflicted by the capricious elements.73
The storm made slow progress sluggish. The only relief for the Allies came
in the Cotentin peninsula, where weak German defences were swept aside
isolating the whole peninsula from the German defensive line in the south.
The American commander, General Bradley, had just enough ammunition
left for his forces to attack the four retreating German divisions cut off
around Cherbourg. The German defences crumbled. Within a week the
American 7th corps reached the outskirts of the port; by the 22nd, as the
storm subsided, the attack on Cherbourg began with a thunderous
bombardment from sea and land. By the 25th American troops entered the
outskirts. A day later the German commander surrendered. A few German
soldiers who took to heart Hitler's order to stand and die to the last man and
