258
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . . .
Klement Voroshilov out of the key post of commander of the northern front.
A veteran of the Tsaritsyn battles of the civil war, Voroshilov was utterly
unqualified for the military offices he held. Khrushchev regarded him
bluntly as the 'biggest bag of shit' in the army. Following the older Russian
tradition of promotion on merit, Stalin selected Georgi Zhukov as his
deputy, an appointment that proved to be of critical importance for the
eventual revival of Red Army fortunes. 47 Under Zhukov's lead the role of
the notorious 'commissars' in the armed forces - political officers who
enjoyed equal rank with the military commanders - was emasculated and
the armed forces were restored to military control.
From then on Stalin exercised very close supervision over the conduct of
the war. He worked long hours, rising late but working until two or three
o'clock the following morning. He took hardly a break over the next four
years. At Teheran western officials noticed how much he had aged, his dark
grey hair almost white, his swarthy complexion sallow. He imposed this
arduous regime on his General Staff, who literally operated round the clock
throughout the war, sometimes working an eighteen-hour day. Stalin
expected reports three times a day from the General Staff, the last, in the
evening, a personal briefing in the Kremlin. At this session Stalin would go
over the maps of the front in detail, and look through the operational orders
for the following day prepared by the staff. He seldom travelled far from
Moscow, but he insisted that his Chief-of-Staff and his deputy, Zhukov,
should make regular trips to the front line to oversee major operations. He
was methodical and rigorous,
but he made no pretence that he had great
operational imagination. The one thing he insisted on, that Hitler would not
strike on the southern front in 1942, though not a foolish calculation, almost
brought another summer of disaster. The victories at Stalingrad and Kursk
were designed by the military leaders,
not by Stalin, who played a smaller
role as the war went on and the General Staff matured into an effective
command and planning unit. Stalin's role was to act as a spur, driving the
whole war effort along. He harried and bullied his subordinates where he
sensed failure or timidity. The threat of imprisonment or death hung over
every mistake. Stalin placed particular worth on the willingness of his staff
to present the true state of affairs, 'straightforward and unembellished'.
Once it was realised that Stalin could actually be told the truth without
risking life and limb, the prospect of operational miscalculation was much
reduced. By 1944 Marshal Voronov, Chief of Artillery, recalled that the
atmosphere at Supreme Headquarters had eased: 'Stalin was more balan-
ced, far more even-tempered than before.
The man western leaders met at Teheran was very different from the rude
and irritable despot, under 'intense strain', who had greeted the first western
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
259
mission to Moscow in September 194I. He made a remarkable impression
on General Brooke, the British Chief-of-Staff, whose splenetic views on
American strategy were well known. During the course of the conference, at
which Stalin did much of the talking for the Soviet military, Brooke formed
the view that he had 'a military brain of the highest calibre'. He could not
recall Stalin making a single strategic error. This was high praise indeed. 49
Commander of the American air forces General Arnold echoed Brooke's
testimonial: 'brilliant of mind, quick of thought and repartee, ruthless, a
great leader ... 50 The quality of any leader remains, of course, a matter of
judgement. Stalin carried with him the disadvantages of dictatorship - the
excessive centralisation, the pall of fear enveloping subordinates - but he
brought a powerful will to bear on the Soviet war effort that motivated those
around him and directed their energies. In the process he expected, and got,
exceptional sacrifices from his besieged people. The 'personality cult'
developed around him in the 1930s made this appeal possible in wartime. It
is difficult to imagine that any other Soviet leader at the time could have
wrung such efforts from the population. There is a sense in which the Stalin
cult was necessary to the Soviet war effort. It provided a common focus of
loyalty, and promoted a growing conviction about ultimate victory. That
people suspended their disbelief, that they colluded with a myth later
tarnished by revelations of the brutal nature of the wartime regime, should
not blind us to the fact that Stalin's grip on the Soviet Union may have
helped more than it hindered the pursuit of victory.)
Franklin Delano Roosevelt was everything Stalin was not. He was born in
1882 into a wealthy New York family, on a 100-acre estate beside the
Hudson river. He had every social advantage. Excessively pampered by his
mother,
Roosevelt was sent first to the
exclusive school at
Groton,
Massachusetts, modelled on the English public school, then on to Harvard,
and to law school. He was not outstanding academically, but the tall,
distinguished, sociable patrician, a member of America's untitled aristo-
cracy, needed little
more than
his
name and
background
when he
launched himself into politics in 1910. He had no particular scruples about
which party to join; his cousin, Theodore, was the Republican President,
but he adopted the Democrat ticket because they asked him to stand first.
He soon became a political high-flyer. In 1913 he was appointed Assistant
Secretary for the Navy. He was a solid administrator, and also an arch
politician,
utterly absorbed by
the art of politics.
A college friend
remembered a man 'extremely ambitious to be popular and powerful'. " He
had many Republican friends, whose social world he shared, but made his
name fighting on issues for the common man. In 1920 he was chosen by
James Cox, the Democrat candidate, to run as Vice-President. It was his first
