296
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
German people an equal measure of terror. Public concern did little in the
end, however, to inhibit the use of the bomber in inflicting almost a million
civilian deaths in the name of democracy.
• | The most striking moral paradox of the war years was the willingness of
ostensibly liberal states to engage in the deliberate killing of hundreds of
thousands of enemy civilians from the air. Serious consideration was at times
even given to the use of chemical and biological weapons. There was little
evidence of moral scruple in discussions about the use of atomic weapons.
This paradox can be explained partly by the deliberate choice made by the
western democracies to save the lives of their own populations by resorting
to technological solutions rather than strategies with high manpower losses. &
The atomic bomb was the supreme expression of the reliance on technology
to inflict insupportable damage, while reducing the democracies' losses to
virtually nil. The use of technology produced a distance between those who
planned and executed attacks and the victims themselves. A western ground
army would never have run amok in Hamburg, murdering forty thousand
people. Bombing permitted a kind of moral detachment, evident in the
language surrounding it. The attack on city suburbs was called 'de-housing,
as if the buildings could in some way be separated from the families inside.
The fire-bombing in Japan was justified on the grounds that the residential
districts were scattered with small-scale industry, which had to be burnt out,
along with indistinguishable but innocent households. A second, and less
charitable, explanation is simply that the western states did react with a
crude vengeance. They adopted a strategy of lynch-law against those states
that violated the world order, and did not accept that there was a moral case
to answer when dealing
with outlaws. The sense of outraged decency
provoked by bombing has grown with the passage of time. During the war
the awkward moral position was side-stepped or ignored. 50
Few even moderately informed Britons or Americans could have been
unaware of the political complexion of their Soviet ally, although it was true
that information from the Soviet Union was difficult to obtain. During the
period when Hitler and Stalin were in temporary alliance the Soviet and
Nazi systems were treated by much western opinion as varieties of the same
warped totalitarianism. When German aggression brought the Soviet Union
into the anti-Hitler camp it was impossible to sustain the image of a decent
war' in combination with a regime run by a one-man, one-party dictatorship,
full of concentration camps and secret policemen. The moral coalition
worked only to the extent that the west was able to suppress or at least
lighten their ally's dark image. This was done deliberately. Capra found that
the first seven authors assigned to write the scripts for Why We Fight
contributed what he regarded as 'Communist Propaganda'.
Roosevelt
THE MORAL CONTEST
297
promoted Soviet sympathisers and played down public criticism. Soviet
missions in Washington and London were permitted to circulate newsletters
and books presenting the Soviet view. In Britain Soviet War News sold over
fifty thousand of each edition.51 The British Ministry of Information
published during the war a special manual providing journalists
with
'Arguments to Counter the Ideological Fear of Bolshevism'. The first
suggestion was that the 'Red Terror' should be portrayed as a figment of the
Nazi imagination, a mirror-image of German behaviour; the publication
went on to recommend that British propaganda should then construct 'a
positive picture of Russia' - the patriotism, the contributions of Soviet
scientists and artists to knowledge and culture, the increased encourage-
ment of savings and possession of personal property, and the improved
Soviet attitude to religion. This last point was to be used 'only in addressing
people already sympathetic to the USSR on other grounds'. 52 These
guidelines proved too much for George Orwell, who gave up his weekly war
commentaries for the BBC in 1943 to write his powerful satire on Soviet life,
Animal Farm. The Ministry of Information banned its publication until after
the war. Then Orwell began work on Nineteen Eighty-four, depicting a
world in which history is falsified, truth becomes untruth. 33
To strengthen their positive stance both western Allies played on the
promise of a new world after the war in which all states, including the Soviet
Union, would play a part in securing international peace and cooperation.
The war was presented as a crusade for the defeat of tyranny and aggression,
and not a new wave of conquest and empire-building.
The declaration of
the so-called United Nations in January 1942, to which 49 countries had
subscribed by 1945, was a public expression of world opinion against the
Axis New Orders, a reassertion of public morality in dealings at home and
abroad. The Soviet Union found itself pledging to preserve life, liberty,
independence and religious freedom' and to
observe
human rights and
justice'. Since the document was also signed by Poland, Yugoslavia, Haiti,
Bolivia, Abyssinia, China, Cuba and Persia, the concept of human rights
and justice was interpreted loosely at best. What mattered at the time was
not so much the moral credentials of the signatories, but the sense conveyed
in the document that those who signed it walked on the side of the angels
against 'savage and brutal forces seeking to subjugate the world ...
The moral ambiguities in the Allied coalition were never strong enough to
undermine the image of a righteous cause. The wartime consensus was built
around simple shared aims. There were no deep conflicts about the main war
aims, or about the necessity of fighting the war to a victorious conclusion.
With language of liberation, freedom and reconstruction, the Allies devel-
oped a positive moral outlook which worked in countless ways to keep
