210
A WAR OF ENGINES
air.'S Priority in 1942 went to the production of tanks and planes, with
revolutionary changes in the way the Red Army deployed them. Britain and
America were forced to build up large modernised forces almost from
scratch in the early 1940s to counter the substantial operational skills
displayed by the enemy, and both adapted German practice to their
particular circumstances?
By contrast the military effectiveness of both German and Japanese forces
first stagnated, then went into decline.
Both had been flattered at the
beginning of the war by the weaknesses of Allied forces, which served to
exaggerate their military prowess) American servicemen were issued with
pamphlets 'Exploding the Japanese "Superman" Myth' to counter the
image of Japanese superiority. In reality Japanese forces were poorly
armed, a situation masked by high levels of training and endurance. The
technological balance between Japan and her enemies was greatly in the
latter's favour, and the underdeveloped state of the Japanese economy
made extensive modernisation of the armed forces difficult to achieve. For
every American soldier in the Pacific war there were 4 tons of supplies; for
every Japanese a mere 2 pounds.' German forces were also underarmed for
much of the war. Modernisation was concentrated on a small portion of the
army; German air power, for all its successes, remained limited in role and in
size and was all but eliminated by 1944 from the skies of battle. By 1944 a
great portion of the German ground forces relied on horse-transport.
Neither the quality nor quantity
of German technical resources
was
sufficient to prevent the dissipation of the myth of German invincibility.
The core armoury of offensive warfare in the Second World War consisted
of aircraft, tanks and trucks. The effectiveness of these weapons in German
hands depended on their use in combination, concentrated in great number
at the decisive point of battle. Operational success also relied on communi-
cation./Radio played a vital role in linking tank to tank, and tank to aircraft.
Good communications enhanced the flexibility of armoured forces and
helped to concentrate its firepower. They were essential for units that were
effectively self-contained divisions, operating with their own motorised
infantry - some in trucks, some in armoured carriers - engineers, artillery
and anti-aircraft batteries. The German Panzer forces did not have to wait
for the mass of ordinary infantry divisions to catch up by rail and by foot but
could fight at the pace of the tank, punching holes in the enemy front to
outflank and envelop his forces. Panzer divisions were organised by the
German army as battle winners, designed to 'strike decisively'?
They
worked at their best on flat open plain, less well in built-up areas, and with
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
2II
least effect in mountainous terrain. The wide even grasslands of the Soviet
Union showed German armoured forces at their most deadly in the summer
of 1941. Against overwhelming odds - some 3,648 tanks against
an
estimated fifteen thousand Soviet tanks - the Panzer armies cut swathe after
swathe through the Soviet defences, virtually destroyed the Soviet tank and
air arm, and brought the Soviet Union almost to the point of collapse.®
Though the Soviet tank and air forces were numerically large, the Ger-
man attack exposed fundamental weaknesses in the way they were used.
The key to Soviet revival in 1942 and 1943 lay in improving the quality of
both forces and in the transformation of the way in which they were used
tactically on the battlefield. The eastern front was vital to Allied survival) It
was here that German armour and air power were blunted. More than two-
thirds of German tank casualties were suffered in the east. Later on at Kursk
Soviet armies won the largest tank battle of the war.
The almost complete destruction of the Soviet mechanised corps in 1941
allowed the Red Army to start from scratch in the spring of 1942. The basic
organisational unit became the tank corps, equipped with 168 tanks,
supported by anti-tank guns, a battalion of Katyusha rockets and anti-
aircraft artillery. Two tank corps and a rifle division were put together to
form tank armies, combining tanks, infantry and supporting arms and
services, like the German Panzer armies. The shortage of purpose-built
armoured carriers for the infantry, which helped German soldiers to keep up
with the tanks, was solved by the simple but dangerous expedient of welding
hand rails on to Soviet tanks, which each then advanced into battle with a
dozen riflemen clinging precariously to its hull. In September 1942 the Red
Army began to organise mechanised corps, with a higher proportion of
infantry and fewer tanks. The infantry were heavily armed and more mobile
than the bulk of Soviet forces, particularly when, from December 1942, they
began to receive the first self-propelled artillery units. During 1943 both
tank and mechanised corps were strengthened and the modernisation of
their equipment was accelerated. By the autumn of 1943 each tank corps
boasted 195 of the most modern tanks, each tank army about four hundred.
Between 1942 and 1945 43 tank corps were activated, and 22 mechanised
corps. Overall Soviet tank strength climbed steadily from the low point of
November 1941; by the end of 1942 it was more than double German
strength, and by the autumn of 1943 more than three times greater.'
(The new tank and mechanised forces were designed to do what German
armour did, to punch hard at the weak points of the enemy line, to pierce it
and to exploit that penetration in sweeping pincer movements. It was first
used with real success at Stalingrad, and repeated devastatingly at Kursk,)
when other improvements in equipment and training began to bear fruit.
