206
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
clearly foreseen how rapidly and on what a scale America and the Soviet
Union would arm themselves? Two years of production turned both states
into the super-powers Hitler's Germany hankered to become.
What Hitler failed to see was how central industry was to the Allied view
of warfare. 'Modern war is waged with steel,' Churchill told Hopkins when
he weighed up the imbalance between American and Japanese economic
strength. Stalin's view of the war was entirely conditioned by economics, as
befitted any disciple of Marx: 'The war will be won by industrial production,'
he told an American delegation in October 1941. Roosevelt's opinion
of American power was every bit as determinist. In planning the Vic-
tory Programme in 1941 he told War Secretary Stimson to work on the
assumption 'that the reservoir of munitions power available to the United
States and her friends is sufficiently superior to that available to the Axis
powers to insure defeat of the latter. '64 Though Hitler was the inspiration
behind the German adoption of mass-production in 1941, he did not
consider economics as central to the war effort. Rather, he stuck to the view
that racial character - willpower, resolve, endurance - was the prime mover;
weapons mattered only to the extent that they could be married to the moral
qualities of the fighting man.
There was much in common between
the Soviet and American ex-
perience. One of the correspondents that made the trip to Magnitogorsk
observed that the Russian people were 'in many ways like Americans..•
they have a fresh and unspoiled outlook which is close to our own. 65 These
were sentiments that pre-dated the Cold War, but they contained a grain of
truth. In both countries mobilisation was a hustling, improvised affair;
technical tasks were tackled head-on and quickly; production was big in
scale and easily standardised; engineers and managers were given wide
scope to solve problems themselves. Both economies had a good deal of
central planning,
but here the similarity ends, for the one enjoyed a
supervised abundance, the other a regimented scarcity. Both countries
shared the sudden shock of unprovoked aggression, which gave a genuine
urgency to economic planning, and forced their economies to give priority to
finding a cluster of advanced weapons on which to concentrate production
energies.
The situation facing Germany was very different. There was no direct
threat to the homeland until the onset of serious bombing. German planners
and designers had almost two years at war before conflict with the Soviet
Union and America. During that time there was little pressure to mass-
produce, even if the military had approved it, or to concentrate on a narrow
band of designs. The military slowly built up their version of a heavily
bureaucratic command economy, which displayed a ponderous inflexibility
ECONOMIES AT WAR
207
beside the enemy. A few hours before the attempt to assassinate Hitler on 20
July 1944, Speer wrote to him that the great strength of the American and
Soviet systems was their ability to use 'organisationally simple methods'. He
drew a contrast between Germany's 'overbred organisation' and the 'art of
improvisation' on the other side. Speer was a man constantly banging his
head against officialdom. Posterity, he warned Hitler,
would judge that
Germany lost the struggle by clinging on to an 'arthritic organisational
system'. Posterity might find this view a little harsh, for Speer himself had
given the system a good shaking. But the contrast between American and
Soviet productionism and Germany's bureaucratised economy was more
than superficial. No war was more industrialised than the Second World
War. Factory for factory, the Allies made better use of their industry than
their enemy.
