166
ALONG A GOOD ROAD . . .
the last bullet held out for another five days against overwhelming odds.4
But everywhere else along the line the
Allies met stiffer resistance.
Protected by cloud cover during the storm Rommel moved up four more
armoured divisions. By 1 July, he was prepared to launch a strong counter-
attack, with five Panzer divisions, against the British position north of Caen.
The attack was repulsed by concentrated artillery fire in what proved to be
the heaviest fighting since D-Day. Two days later the American 8th corps
began to drive south to prepare for the breakout planned by Bradley and
Montgomery which would take American troops across the German line,
towards the Seine, but fierce fighting, poor weather, and the combination of
swampy inlets and bocage bogged down the assault. Rommel now moved
two Panzer divisions, 2nd SS and Panzer Lehr, to obstruct the American
threat to his western flank. It took American forces six days to move 5 miles.
The launch of the breakout - Operation 'Cobra' - had to be postponed in the
face of German resistance. By mid-July there was every appearance of
stalemate.
Eisenhower, who seemed 'buoyant and inspired' when he visited France
on I2 June, returned at the beginning of July "smouldering' at what he
regarded as Montgomery's excessive timidity. The mood of optimism at
Supreme Headquarters engendered by the success of the initial lodgement
was dissipated by the dispiriting slogging match played out in the orchards
and marshes of Normandy. When Stalin began the great Soviet offensive on
20 June, timed deliberately to coincide with the Allied pressure in the west,
the contrast between the early successes of the Red Army and the slow
progress of the forces under Montgomery's command was plain. 5 It is not
difficult to find the source of Eisenhower's frustration. With the advantage
of surprise, with overwhelming air supremacy, with the success of the
deception plan, with regular and ready access to German signals, it was
difficult to grasp why the limited German forces could not be pushed back
swiftly and decisively. The fear at Supreme Headquarters was of a return to
the trench stalemate of the First World War. Relations between Eisenhower
and Montgomery deteriorated. At Eisenhower's headquarters there was
talk of sackings; his deputies urged him to confront Montgomery and
demand action.
The conflict between the two men has often been presented as a
fundamental contrast in strategy, Eisenhower's haie to Montgomery's
tortoise. There is certainly something in the contrast, revealed long before
D-Day, between the American doctrine of the general offensive and the
British emphasis on economy of effort, with the careful husbanding and
deployment of limited resources. This was a difference made explicit on the
ground in Normandy. Eisenhower wanted to see vigorous action all along
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
167
the front, and would have been happy with a breakout anywhere, as long as
the Germans were chased out of France. Montgomery feared that such a
strategy would produce diluted effort and high attrition. He was conscious of
how shallow was the pool of manpower that sustained British and Canadian
forces. With only 37 divisions assigned to the Overlord campaign, against a
potential of over fifty German, it was essential to conserve manpower by
getting the enemy to concentrate his efforts against one strongly defended
sector, in order to reduce pressure along the whole front. This is what
happened in the area around Caen. The failure to capture the city in the first
few days was in a sense immaterial, though to Montgomery's critics, then
and now, it came to symbolise the apparent collapse of the Overlord plan.
The enemy regarded the front at Caen as the most important Allied
objective, from where they would attempt a breakout towards the Seine,
and they concentrated the bulk of German forces in that sector. By the end
of June there were only half a Panzer division and 140 tanks opposing the
American sector; around Caen were seven and a half armoured divisions,
and over seven hundred tanks. Even when Rommel switched two divisions
in early July the balance of armoured vehicles remained the same. By 25 July
there were two Panzer divisions and 190 tanks in front of the American
forces preparing Cobra; but at Caen there were still six armoured divisions
and 645 tanks.** What held up the Allied advance was not a failure of Allied
strategy, but the failure to predict how difficult the topography of the area
would be for mobile warfare, or to anticipate Hitler's order that all forces
should fight for every inch of ground rather than execute the strategic
withdrawals dictated by military good sense. The battle of attrition was
dictated not by Montgomery but by the desperate German defenders.
Eisenhower had little appreciation of quite how brittle the German
position was. Had he realised, he might well have viewed Montgomery's
efforts more kindly. The failure to throw the invader back into the sea
compelled Rommel to fight the kind of contest least congenial to German
forces. Unable to build up a significant strategic reserve, he was forced to
plug every gap that appeared in the line, using even the valuable armoured
divisions, whose tactical advantages were squandered in actions more suited
to infantry. Naval gunfire and remorseless aerial bombardment inflicted
further heavy losses. The movement of reinforcements and supplies across
France was rendered increasingly difficult by Allied air power and French
Resistance. It took longer for the gth and roth SS Panzer divisions
transferred
from the eastern front to travel from eastern France to
Normandy than it did for them to move from the Soviet front to France. The
chaotic transport conditions made it difficult to keep front line troops
supplied with fuel and ammunition. Divisions that arrived at the Normandy
