232
A WAR OF ENGINES
miles west of it. The annual production here exceeded all German sup-
plies. Beyond, on the Apsheron peninsula by the Caspian Sea, lay Baku,
a city literally floating on oil. From a forest of derricks and chimneys
came annually over 20 million tons of oil, three times Germany's yearly
consumption.60
At Maikop the revival of oil output was beset with dif-
ficulties. Almost nothing had been done, for all Hitler's insistence on the
economic objectives, to prepare for the revival and exploitation of the
Caucasus oil. Germany was short of drills and oil-producing equipment.
What drills she had were already in use in Germany and Austria, in the
search for new sources of natural oil. There were few oil technicians to
spare. A group of forty experts sent to Maikop were housed in a large
barrack block with German guards at the door, but during the night Soviet
partisans broke in and slit their throats. There were severe food shortages
for the oil workers. When the drilling equipment was finally prepared for
transit it was held up in the overtaxed rail network and had not reached
Maikop by the time Soviet armies recaptured the town. All Germany
acquired was 70 barrels of oil a day while they were there. 61
(The defeat at Stalingrad completed the rout of the oil offensive. Germany
was forced to rely on synthetic production and Romania for the rest of the
war. Oil supply from these sources reached a peak in 1943 and then declined
sharply. In 1944 Germany received less than half the oil from Romania
supplied in previous years. The Allies had long regarded oil as the German
Achilles heel. The British and French had planned to attack oil from the air
in 1939 and 1940 but lacked the technical means to do so.62 During 1944 the
bombing offensive was used to impose an aerial oil blockade on Germany.
The Romanian fields at Ploesti, one of the most heavily defended targets in
Europe, were attacked first on 5 April, and were then bombed heavily until
19 August, the day before the Soviet invasion of Romania forced her to
change sides and cut off all supplies of oil to Germany. The Danube had
been mined by British bombers, reducing traffic along the river from
Romania by two-thirds.63 Germany was compelled to rely more and more
on home production, but in May 1944 the Allied bomber forces began a
systematic assault on synthetic oil production. The impact was immediate.
In June synthetic output fell by 60 per cent; by September it had been
reduced to a mere 10 per cent of the output before bombing began. The
American air force mounted 127 oil attacks, the RAF some 53. From the
summer of 1944 the German forces lived off reserved stocks. At the
beginning of the year these had been kept at roughly a month's consump-
tion. By September 1944 they were down to a mere 150,000 tons, less than
half the monthly total needed to keep the German forces in the field. 64
During the course of 1944 the life-blood of German armoured and air
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
233
forces drained away. It was impossible to fight modern war without fuel.
German air training, like Japanese, was reduced to simulation. ]New pilots
got their first taste of real flying when they reached the squadrons, and the
German front line
rationed to only the most essential operations. The shortage of aviation fuel
in particular - down by September to 5 per cent of its peak production level
that year - gave the Allied air forces virtual command of the skies, allowing
them to attack Germany's meagre oil supply lines at will. Even had the
modern weapons been available in sufficient quantity, the problem of
driving and flying them was insuperable. Both Germany and Japan gambled
that they could win with careful use of their existing oil supplies and the
seizure of oil-producing regions,
but in reality oil remained a vulnerable
aspect of their war efforts, and one that limited the extent to which their
forces could be armed and supplied with modern petrol-driven equipment.
The oil shortage was exacerbated by enemy action. The seaborne blockade
of Japan and the aerial blockade of Germany were deliberately designed to
exploit this Axis vulnerability.
It would be wrong to argue that oil determined the outcome of the war on
its own, though there could scarcely have been a resource more vital to
waging modern combat. Because they had sufficient supplies, the Allies
enjoyed a much greater flexibility both in choosing the structure of their
forces and deciding how to use them. But even the Allies, for all their
preponderant supply of oil resources, were not free of oil problems. Soviet
production fell by almost half thanks to the disruption of the industrial
economy, and the supply of high-grade aviation fuel was made possible only
by importing chemicals from America to upgrade Soviet fuels. Britain
fought for much of 1942 and 1943 to keep open the oil supply lines from the
Americas across the Atlantic, and to guard the gateway to Middle Eastern
oil in Egypt. Even the United States, endowed with more oil than the rest of
the world together, could not simply turn on the tap.
California
alone
produced more than the Soviet Union, but there were no pipelines running
eastwards, and west coast oil went largely to fuel the Pacific war. After a
decade of low output and prices the oil industry suddenly found itself faced
with demands from the armed forces and America's allies that it could barely
meet. A state oil commissioner was appointed to plan the expansion of
output. The choice fell on Roosevelt's Secretary of the Interior, Harold C
Ickes. He was a politician of the New Deal, far too liberal for the oilmen.
Ickes swallowed his scruples and built bridges to the industry. Government
investment and subsidies poured into some of America's largest and richest
corporations. 65
