248
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY
authorship: 'We leave here, friends in fact, in spirit and in
purpose'."
Roosevelt returned to Washington confident that the foundation for a firm
personal relationship with Stalin had been secured, and that this was
essential for the defeat of Germany and the rebuilding of the postwar world.
Neither Stalin nor Churchill saw the meeting in such rosy terms. In Moscow
the commitment to a Second Front was treated sceptically right up to its final
launch, on 6 June 1944. Churchill, aware of how his influence in the coalition
had been diminished, drew away from the close relationship with Roosevelt
established earlier in the war, and continued to distrust Stalin. None the less,
the one solid achievement of the conference, a mutual commitment to the
final defeat of Germany, was forcefully and publicly stated.
This final
coalition, which had been fragile and embryonic since 1941, was an essential
condition for the eventual victory of the Allies.
*
(The coalition was from the first a product of necessity rather than deliberate
intention. The relationship between Britain and the United States was far
closer throughout the war than the relationship of either with the Soviet
Union. Yet even Anglo-American collaboration was difficult to secure
before Pearl Harbor, and was marred by friction thereafter) The roots of
western collaboration went back to the early summer of 1940 when Britain
faced certain defeat in Europe, and Churchill, recently appointed Prime
Minister, appealed to Roosevelt to throw American assistance into the
Allied scales. American opinion was divided on the issue. The President was
forced to take account of strong anti-war sentiment, and a powerful resid-
ual distrust of British imperialism.
Nineteen-forty was
also
election
year. Roosevelt was ambitious for a third term in office, and would not
run risks with public opinion. He was sympathetic to the British cause, but
he was by nature, he told Averell Harriman, 'a compromiser'. He prom-
ised the American people that he would keep their country out of war,
while agreeing to provide some of the material assistance Churchill wanted.
In November 1940 Roosevelt was re-elected. A few weeks later, following
an impassioned plea from Churchill for real aid, Roosevelt took the risky
step of proffering more American goods and weapons. The scheme of provi-
sion was named Lend-Lease, to preserve some spurious notion that goods
were on extended loan and might one day be returned. The British saw it as a
lifeline. 'This is tantamount to a declaration of war by the United States,
Churchill declared to his private secretary. He regarded the economic
alliance as 'the most important thing' next to winning the war. '2
( Lend-Lease provoked
a political
storm in the United States, but
Roosevelt stuck steadfastly to the commitment. In March 1941 the proposal
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
249
passed through Congress. Churchill now worked to turn economic aid into
active belligerency. The US navy gradually extended its activities out
into the Atlantic to protect the sea lanes from submarine attack; Am-
erican servicemen were stationed in Greenland and Iceland. Beyond
that Roosevelt would not go. He was, remarked the journalist Dorothy
Thompson,
"attempting to win a war without fighting it'. 13) Whether
Roosevelt would ever have declared war on the Axis states if American
non-belligerency had
not been swept aside by Pearl Harbor remains
unanswerable. Churchill regarded the Japanese attack as Britain's salva-
tion. He recalled in his memoirs the emotion he felt at hearing the news: 'We
had won the war ... Once again in our long Island history we should
emerge, however mauled or mutilated, safe and victorious.'14 Though
Churchill had failed to secure America's active participation sooner, he did
succeed in securing the moral support of both the President and a good
fraction of American opinion! When the United States entered the war there
already existed a framework for close cooperation between the two states.
Unlike in the First World War, when the United States refused to integrate
its war effort closely with Britain and France, the two western powers swiftly
established an exceptional degree of collaboration.)
It has become fashionable to see this as the time when Churchill, half-
American himself, sold out to his richer cousins, leaving the future of the
British Empire hostage to American wishes (Churchill recognised, however,
sooner than many of his countrymen, that without American help Britain
was not going to win the war. The alternative was a negotiated peace with
Hitler, with the odds stacked heavily in Germany's favour. Churchill, of all
people, would never have countenanced agreement with Hitler,) hence his
single-minded pursuit of a 'special relationship' with Roosevelt, something,
he told the Commons in February 1942, 'I have dreamed of, aimed at and
worked for...
›15 Churchill was without doubt right. The Soviet Union was
an unknown quantity, and its survival in 1941 very much in doubt. For all the
rhetoric of English-speaking brotherhood, there did exist more in common
between the two democracies than between Britain and
authoritarian
Europe. Roosevelt was not taken in by Churchill's sentimentality, but he
understood the real danger to American interests if Britain were isolated
and defeated, leaving the United States 'an island of peace in a world of
brute force facing the 'contemptuous, unpitying masters of other conti-
nents'. 16 The decision of both men to build a common cause between their
two states ranks as perhaps the most important political explanation of
ultimate Allied success.)
The association was intimate from the start, and took its lead from the
personal contacts between Churchill and Roosevelt. At regular summit
