270
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY ...
and unruffled administrator. He cultivated a mask of compiete imperturb-
ability. 'I considered it essential', he wrote after the war, 'never to disclose
outwardly what one felt inwardly
.. It was of primary importance to
maintain an outward appearance that radiated confidence.'79 When in June
1942 he became Chairman
of the Chiefs-of-Staff Committee, and the
leading British representative among the inter-allied Combined Chiefs, he
was able to influence the whole Allied military effort.
His brusque manner and arid persona grated on his American opposite
numbers, but his exceptional grasp of the complexities of global strategy,
meticulous preparation and analytical power dominated the early Allied
meetings as well. Churchill found him an uncongenial foil: 'When I thump
the table and push my face towards him, what does he do? Thumps the table
harder and glares back at me ...
,80 But he recognised the virtues of the
military manager and Brooke kept his place for the entire period of the war,
running every aspect of the conflict from the Cabinet War Room in Great
George Street, a little way from St James's Park in central London. For the
man regarded by the Secretary for War, James Grigg, as second only to
Churchill in his contribution to victory,
he features remarkably little in
Churchill's history of the
war, beyond the bland assertion that Brooke
rendered 'services of the highest order'. But other colleagues with less to
conceal testified to Brooke's exceptional qualities. Ismay, Churchill's go-
between, observed the work of eight Chiefs of the Imperial General Staff at
close quarters and considered Brooke 'the best of them all'. Though
Eisenhower did not like Brooke's strange mannerisms when they first met,
and thought him shrewd rather than wise, he ended by regarding him 'as a
brilliant soldier'.8' Brooke rather than Churchill was the architect of
Britain's military revival from 1942. His one weakness, a product of his
gruelling experiences in the retreat from France in 1940, was his excessive
caution over direct cross-Channel assault, even though he knew it made
strategic sense. He preferred the peripheral to the direct strategy in 1942
and 1943 on grounds of military realism, but he accepted the joint decis-
ion of the coalition to launch an invasion in 1944, and hoped to command
it. Instead he remained at his existing post until February 1946 when he
was succeeded by Montgomery.
The second example is less well known. During the course of 1942 in the
Soviet Union the crises of retreat brought a rapid turnover of key military
personnel. Zhukov and Novikov continued to enjoy Stalin's confidence, but
it proved impossible to find a satisfactory Chief-of-Staff or Chief-of-
Operations, positions of critical importance in the Soviet military structure.
Between June and December there were no fewer than seven Operations
Chiefs. *2 A settled Chief-of-Staff, Vasilevsky, was appointed in July, but he
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
271
was compelled by common practice to spend long periods at the front
directly coordinating operations. In December 1942 the remaining gap
was filled by the appointment of General Alexei Antonoy as Chief-of-
Operations,
and simultaneously deputy Chief-of-Staff,
to act when the
Chief was at the front. Antonov, 46 years of age and a distinguished staff
officer, was Chief-of-Staff to the Trans-Caucasian front when the summons
came from Moscow. He was an inspired choice. He made it clear that he was
not going to follow his unfortunate predecessors by jumping to Stalin's tune.
He spent a week in Moscow familiarising himself with the military situation
before he visited Stalin. Instead of the brief sojourn everyone expected,
Antonov stayed at this post until February 1945, when he was made full
Chief-of-Staff. His deputy, General Shtemenko, regarded him as an officer
of exceptional qualities, firm,
even-tempered, clear-minded.
Shtemenko
never saw him lose his self-control in six years.
Like Brooke he was
impatient with less able men, intolerant of 'superficiality, haste, imperfec-
tions and formalism' 83 He praised people seldom, planned his work with a
meticulous care, spoke 'with brevity and clarity'. His calmness and breadth
of vision restored morale at the army's head.
Stalin developed a great respect for Antonov, not least because he gave
him straightforward accounts of the state of affairs at the front, however
unpalatable. In addition, Antonov was not afraid to argue with Stalin, which
was even more unusual. He quickly acquired a reputation for the skill with
which he presented the General Staff case. Even Marshal Zhukov, never
happy at sharing the limelight, allowed Antonov, 'a master at presenting
material', to draw up the operational maps and schedules and to go over
them with Stalin at the evening briefings. 84 Gradually the pattern of General
Staff work altered. More and more of Stalin's directives were prepared by
Antonov, and Stalin would sometimes sign them without even reading
them. The balance between the generals and Stalin perceptibly changed. In
the months leading up to the Battle of Kursk Antonov played a key part in
the planning and preparation, and in allaying Stalin's fears that the 1943
campaign would be a repeat of 1941 and 1942. Antonov and Zhukov
between them argued against Stalin's desire for a quick pre-emptive strike at
the gathering German forces. Over the shape of Soviet strategy in the
summer of 1943 the General Staff view prevailed. Antonov took a leading
role in the planning of the drive into Poland, and the final assault on Berlin,
but he was able to conduct much of his work from Moscow, by telephone,
rather than suffer the time-wasting visits to the front forced on other senior
commanders. After the war he retained Stalin's affections longer than
Zhukov, but in 1948 he was suddenly demoted from the General Staff to
command the Trans-Caucasian Military District. In 1954 he was reinstated
