328
EPILOGUE
or more. But the war did secure the survival of communism. Victory in
1945 gave the Party a new lease of life. The political veterans of the war
dominated Soviet life through to the 198os. More than that, the war was
used to present the Soviet Union as a force for world progress. School-
children chanted: 'By defeating Hitler's Germany, the Soviet Nation saved
mankind from annihilation
and preserved world civilisation.' The
triumph of the Red Army was used to underpin the illusion that com-
munism was Khrushchev's 'wave of the future', the system to which all
societies were historically moving.?
Victory in the Great Patriotic War helped to establish the core myths of
the post-war Soviet state. When memories were fading in the 196os, the
Soviet leader, Leonid Brezhnev, resurrected the war experience in order to
bolster Party power. In 1965 Victory Day was made an official public
holiday, and a medal was struck for all participants of the war. Associated
state propaganda played up themes from the history of the war acceptable to
Party leaders. Any discussion of the early defeats, or suggestions of Stalinist
incompetence, were stamped on by the censors. The publication of wartime
memoirs was halted for fear that the true dimensions of Stalin's leadership,
or of the cost of the war, would escape into the open.? It is no coincidence
that the torrent of uncensored publications on the war in the 198os con-
tributed to the unravelling of the myths of communism, and ultimately of
the whole Soviet system.
The confident belief in a communist future engendered by victory found
expression in the political success of communism throughout much of the
defunct Japanese New Order, in China, North Korea and Vietnam. Com-
munism filled a power vacuum left by the collapse of the old colonial em-
pires, Japan included, and by the weakness and corruption of the Chinese
regime under Chiang Kai-Shek. Most of the area fought over during the war
was run by communist regimes by the mid-195os, bent on modernising their
states along Soviet lines. In all these countries high levels of state-directed
economic growth transformed backward rural societies. No communist
people became prosperous in the western sense, and neither did the war
bring democracy any nearer for them. But communism presented itself as
an ideological counterpart to fascism and militarism which had been laid
low by Soviet arms in 1945.
The consolidation of communist regimes in most of Asia and eastern
Europe did not fit with the American ideal of the free world and open
economy proclaimed in 1945. One of the first casualties of the peace was the
moral consensus that bound the Allies together in the common defeat of
Hitlerism. Once that enemy was removed, both western Allies were able to
return to a relationship with their totalitarian companion with which they
EPILOGUE
329
were more morally at ease. The Cold War began where it had been left off in
1941, with their profound distrust of Soviet motives for anything, and an
ideological divide every bit as deep as that between liberalism and Nazism.
Only two years after the end
of the war the American Air Policy
Commission reported to Truman that the essential 'incompatibility of East
and West' called for the build-up of a 'devastating' force of bombers and
missiles equipped with nuclear weapons capable of operating at a range
of 5,000 miles.* American strategists moved effortlessly from one Mani-
chaean world to the next.
The transition from World War II to Cold War made possible the most
remarkable consequence of all: the integration of the three Axis states with
the western, anti-communist world. This did not happen immediately, and it
was not simply imposed on the vanquished willy-nilly. For the three or four
years following the war, conditions for the defeated populations remained
bleak; food was scarce, industrial production a fraction of what it was pre-
war, much of the urban area was flattened by bombing, and it was far from
clear what the intentions of the occupying armies were. Although there was
a sizeable fraction of the population prepared to embrace communism, even
in the Soviet-occupied eastern zone of Germany, where communism had
been experienced in the raw, in all three defeated powers there had always
existed a significant majority attracted to western values and western
economics. What disappeared in 1945 was any belief that the path to
recovery lay in a revival of the violent imperialism and economic dirigisme of
the 1930s. America in 1945 was self-confident and rich. The window to the
west, closed in the depression years of the 1930s by American isolationism
and economic crisis, was now invitingly open. A future Japanese Foreign
Minister, Saburo Okita, recalled how in the depths of a wretched defeat
people thought, * "It's miserable now, but in time Japan will get back on its
feet again, not through military power, but by new technology and economic
power." »S The new Japanese constitution included Article 9, renouncing
war 'forever' as a means of settling disputes. When a western German state
was set up in 1949, its constitution prevented German soldiers from ever
serving outside the frontiers; the German forces permitted by the Allies by
the mid-1950s were for defence only.
The Cold War hastened the realignment of the Axis states with their
former enemy. There was more than a touch of irony in German and Italian
populations once again finding themselves confronting the Soviet colossus
they had fought in the war, but this time at the side of Britain and the United
States.
But by the early 1950s, during the Korean War, the first serious
fighting between 'east' and 'west' since the war, America needed to establish
a firm military alliance in Europe to contain the Soviet Union, for which
