IIO
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
Henry Morgenthau, that 'the only way to break the German morale' was
to bomb every small town, to bring war home to the ordinary German.26
Closer examination shows that Roosevelt had been influenced for some
time by the scaremonger's view of bombing. At the time of Munich, and to
the horror of his Cabinet colleagues, he cursed Chamberlain for not circling
Germany with bombers and threatening to smash her cities if Hitler did not
see sense. Roosevelt had a strong personal dislike of Germans, whom he
regarded as arrogant bullies. And he deeply feared their scientific genius and
lack of scruple. At another cabinet meeting, in October 1939, he scared his
colleagues again with rumours that the Germans had invented a strato-
spheric bomber that could stay aloft for three days, strewing bombs over
American cities, and a concussion bomb that could kill every living thing in
Manhattan?* During 1940 and 1941 American army intelligence fed the
President with greatly inflated figures of German aircraft output, which
might well explain his enthusiasm for massive American striking power.
Germany was believed to be producing 42,500 aircraft in 1941, including a
force of twelve thousand long-range bombers, (the true figure was a mere
11,776 aircraft in total, and no truly long-range
bomber). 28 With a
frightening scenario before him of massed air attacks against America's
eastern seaboard, and with a ready willingness to believe that Hitler would
not hesitate to bomb America if he could, Roosevelt opted for massive
[Without the support of Roosevelt and other senior American politicians
for a policy of bombing it is unlikely that it would ever have materialised as
one of the key elements in the western war effort Without Churchill's
championship of 'a ceaseless and ever growing air bombardment', whose
strategic necessity he regularly endorsed in his correspondence with the
American President, Bomber Command would almost certainly have
remained auxiliary to the activities of the army and navy 29 Even with such
powerful allies, the bombing offensive found the senior services snapping at
its heels throughout the period of trial and error. Admirals and generals
pleaded with Roosevelt and Churchill to release the bombers to help
them overcome the armed power of the Axis at the battlefront. Without
the urgent pressure of Soviet demands for a Second Front in 1942, which
bombing was used to placate, even Churchill and Roosevelt might have
given way. Strategic bombing emerged as a major commitment not from
proven operational success but from political necessity." It was chosen by
civilians to be used against civilians, in the teeth of strong military
opposition. Now bombing had to prove that the politicians' confidence was
not misplaced. s
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
In its early stages the bombing offensive faced a daunting learning curve.
Poor technical resources, the long periods of training, the diversion of
bomber crews to other pressing objectives, forced a slow build-up of the
force. Though Bomber Command was anxious to paint its operations every
shade of rose, it proved impossible to disguise the disquieting reality. In the
summer of 1941 a British civil servant, D.M. Butt, produced a report for
Churchill's scientific adviser, Lord Cherwell, on the accuracy of Bomber
Command attacks on Germany. The resulting report was a devastating
indictment of the Command. By examining photographs taken in night
attacks over Germany, and
extrapolating
from the statistics of each
operation, Butt concluded that only one aircraft in three got within 5 miles
of its target, and in the Ruhr, whose smog-bound industries formed the
Command's main target, the figure was a mere one in ten. On hazy nights, or
when the moon was waning, the proportion fell to one in fifteen. Taking
conditions as a whole the average proportion of aircraft that managed to
make an attack within the 75 square miles surrounding a target was a mere 20
per cent. 3° The figures spoke for themselves. Even Churchill was deeply
affected. Early in October 1941 he told the Chief of the Air Staff that he
deprecated 'placing unbounded confidence in this means of attack', though
he would stick by the strategy regardless.31 Six months later the Singleton
report confirmed these critical conclusions.
If Bomber Command was handled roughly at home, it met yet stiffer
resistance over the skies of Germany. When the first night attacks were
made against the Ruhr in May 1940 the German authorities were caught by
surprise. Very little specific preparation had been made to meet such
attacks, though Germany bristled with anti-aircraft guns. In June 1940 air
force General Josef Kammhuber was given the job of constructing a system
of air defences against British attacks which became popularly known as the
Kammhuber Line.]He began modestly enough with a squadron of heavy
Messerschmitt fighters, Me-rIos, converted to a night-fighter role. They
were dependent on whatever the searchlights could pick up in clear weather.
German defences were transformed by the addition of radar in the autumn
of that year? The large Würzburg radar units were set up, one in each of a
series of grid 'boxes' drawn on a map, roughly 20 miles across. Within each
box a night-fighter could be directed to intercept any bomber picked up on
the screen. A central control room kept each fighter within its sector, circling
round, waiting for its prey.
The system worked so well that Kammhuber extended it to cover the
whole area from Paris to the Danish coast. It was ideally suited to exploit the
tactics of Bomber Command attacks. British aircraft approached the target
singly, at intervals, giving the night fighters plenty of time to track and attack
