292
EVIL THINGS, EXCELLENT THINGS
and listened with deep attention. Then he whispered to himself the name
'Stalin' and solemnly performed the sign of the cross. 36
The Soviet leadership was well aware that a whole population cannot be
made to fight and work at the point of a gun. The war was presented in Soviet
propaganda not as a war for communism but as a war for the Russian
motherland. The very name chosen for the conflict, the Great Patriotic War,
emphasised the continuities between the war with Hitler and the earlier wars
against Napoleon, or the Teutonic knights. The rediscovery of Russia's past
history allowed the current Soviet conflict to be identified with an almost
mythic contest between German and Slav that stretched back seven
centuries. The term Soviet was used less and less frequently, to be replaced
by a new vocabulary of nationalist endeavour. The communist hymn,
the 'Internationale', was suppressed, to be replaced with a new Russian
national anthem.3? The regime presented the war as a people's war, sus-
tained by the daily heroism of ordinary Russians. Above their struggles
stood the Russian Father, Stalin. The symbol of the great leader, whose
wisdom and resolution would hold the war effort together, was a necessary
symbol, widely accepted by the Soviet public. The young Petro Grigor-
enko, a later Soviet dissident, remembered after the war that everyone
he mixed with agreed that Stalin had produced the turnabout in the for-
tunes of war. He ended the war still believing that 'without Stalin's genius'
victory might not have come at all. 38 Soviet soldiers were said to charge
into battle shouting 'For Motherland and Stalin!', in that order.
The entire Soviet war effort was suffused with a grim atmosphere of
sacrifice and death. The people were immersed in a popular culture that
exalted death in battle and preached violence towards any enemy of the war
effort. Soviet newspapers were full of stories of extraordinary heroism for
others to emulate. 'Every soldier must be ready to die the death of a hero,'
ran a Pravda editorial in July 1942, and there is enough evidence from the
German side to corroborate the tales of suicide attacks on tanks and Soviet
soldiers refusing to surrender until cut down to the last man. 39 The Russian
attitude to death in battle was not a casual one, as is sometimes supposed,
but was rooted in a social psychology that had long endorsed self-sacrifice
and leadership by example.
There was little formal code of honour like the
rules governing Japanese military behaviour, but there was a strong sense of
a deeper social and ethical commitment beyond loyalty to Stalin or the
Party. Some of that commitment can be explained by the image in the mind
of the Soviet people of the
enemy they faced. German forces were
presented, with good reason, as utterly amoral and bestial. Atrocity stories
crowded every news page. Soviet propaganda created a dehumanised image
of the enemy, not unlike the American image of the Japanese as apes
THE MORAL CONTEST
293
or sub-humans, or German depiction of the Jews as vermin. The public
language used against the German enemy was violent in the extreme: the
conflict was described as 'a war of extermination', aimed at 'annihilating to
the last man all Germans'. Soviet soldiers told to expect mutilation and
death if they were caught routinely meted out harsh treatment to German
soldiers. Russians were in a very real sense absorbed by the immanence of
death. They sought death in battle, they inflicted death, they confronted
death. Which other people could have suffered the loss of more than twenty
million of their number and continue to fight?40
For Britain and the United States death was the exception rather than the
rule. American civilians were not subject to mainland attack at all, while
British civilian casualties ran to sixty thousand, a small fraction of civilian
losses in the other warring powers. It was a priority in both states to keep
casualties to a minimum. About 3 per cent of those mobilised for military
service lost their lives. The American censors deliberately played down the
theme of death in the first two years of conflict. Life magazine did not show a
dead American until September 1943. The Information Manual produced
for Hollywood by the newly created Office of War Information instructed
film directors to limit scenes of death or injury: 'In crowds unostentatiously
show a few wounded men.' Between May and November 1942 only five out
of sixty-one war films showed deaths in combat. 41 American authorities
remained anxious that the reality of war might dent morale.
Pictures
showing weeping were banned. Only in 1944, and partly in response to
popular demand, did the American media show the war in its truer colours.
American society was less prepared for the traumas of battlefield violence
than the people of Europe and Japan. The first American forces to fight in
North Africa
suffered a 25 per cent casualty rate from psychological
disorders. A report by army psychologists on one American division found
that during heavy combat a quarter of the soldiers soiled themselves, and
another quarter vomited. 42
Unlike the Soviet Union, the two western Allies were democracies, whose
populations were used to a high standard of living and amenity. They could
not be regimented to the extent of Soviet citizens, or their armies terrorised
to fight.
Throughout the whole war only forty
British
soldiers
were
executed. 43 Those who suffered what was euphemistically called 'lack of
moral fibre' were demoted or redeployed, but not thrown into Gulags or
shot. In the American forces a good deal of emphasis was placed on mental
health. One million conscripts were rejected on neuropsychiatric grounds.
Almost one million soldiers were admitted for treatment of
psychiatric
disorder during the war, and almost half a million of these were subse-
quently released permanently from fighting. Combat zones with a high
