104
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
of Air Staff in March that bombing was probably 'better than doing nothing,
but after all the extravagant expectations, which he had done much to fuel, it
would clearly not be 'decisive'. 12 There was strong pressure from the other
services in Britain and the United States to disperse the bombing forces to
support the land and naval campaigns in the Pacific and the Mediterranean.
In May 1942 a committee of inquiry into bombing accuracy headed by Judge
John Singleton revealed that fewer than a quarter of the bombs dropped fell
within 5 miles of the designated target, and only 30 per cent hit built-up
areas. 13™
Powerful voices began to urge a diversion of manpower and
industrial capacity away from the unproductive bombing effort and towards
building a large army which could provide, in the end, an effective Second
Front. When Churchill made his promise to Stalin, as a means to sweeten the
bitter pills he had prescribed, the effect was to lend bombing political
support at a critical moment in its evolution.
The paradox of British bombing ran deeper than this. With the important
exception of the United States, none of the other warring states saw much
merit in long-range 'strategic' bombing. On Stalin's own initiative the
heavy-bomber development programme in the Soviet Union was wound up
in 1937, and the hapless designers, headed by Alexander Tupolev, shunted
into a labour camp, where they continued their work from behind barbed
wire. Experience in the Spanish Civil War, where Soviet pilots fought for the
Republican side against Franco in 1936, had convinced Stalin that aircraft
were best employed at the front line, helping the army. German and French
observers arrived at more or less the same conclusions. During the Spanish
Civil War the German air force tried out in combat their new dive-bomber,
the Junkers Ju-87, with its fearful siren that heralded the coming bomb. The
aircraft was the brainchild of Colonel Ernst Udet, a larger-than-life aviator
who thrilled cinema audiences in the 1920s with his flying stunts, and was a
noted cartoonist. His support for Hitler's cause brought him the job of
directing production for the German air force. His infatuation with aerial
acrobatics led to the neglect of long-range bombardment in favour of smaller
bombers that could dive down and destroy even small targets on the
battlefield. 4 When the head of the German air force, Hermann Göring,
insisted that Germany develop a long-range four-engined bomber as well,
Udet told the German designers that it, too, had to be able to dive, an
instruction that held up its development for three years. I5 When war broke
out Germany gave priority to air force cooperation with the army, a strategy
that persisted there and in the Soviet Union right to the war's end.
Why, then, did Britain and the United States fly in the face of
conventional military wisdom and persist with bombing? At best the answer
is a patchwork. Public opinion in both states was unusually susceptible to the
BOMBERS AND BOMBING
science-fiction view of air power, first popularised by writers such as H.G.
Wells, whose War in the Air, published in London as long ago as 1908,
painted a lurid picture of 'German air fleets' destroying 'the whole fabric
of civilisation' 16 Wells was father to a whole generation of scaremongers,
who traded on popular anxiety that bombing was somehow a uniquely
unendurable experience. Writing in the American journal Liberty in
December 1931, the retired head of the Irish Free State air corps, Colonel
James Fitzmaurice, offered 'An Expert's Prophetic Vision of the Super-
Armageddon That May Destroy Civilization':
A Hideous shower of death and destruction falls screeching and
screaming
through space and atmosphere to the helpless, thickly
populated earth below.
The shock of the hit is appalling. Great buildings totter and tumble in
the dust like a mean and frail set of ninepins ... The survivors, now
merely demoralized masses of demented humanity, scatter caution to the
winds. They are seized by a demoniacal frenzy of terror. They tear off
their gas masks, soon absorb the poisonous fumes, and expire in horrible
agony, cursing the fate that did not destroy them hurriedly and without
warning in the first awful explosions.!7
This was hardly a basis for military strategy. Yet British airmen and
politicians stuck by the view in the inter-war years that indiscriminate
bombing, to achieve a rapid 'knock-out blow', was likely to be the central
feature of the next war. To counter the threat of bombing you needed
bombers of your own. The roots of post-war deterrence reach back to the
British decision in the 1930s to build a powerful striking force of bombers to
frighten potential enemies into restraint. 18
There were, to be sure, more solid reasons for pursuing bombing than fear
of being its victim. No one wanted to repeat the awful bloodletting of the
Great War. A bombing war, for all its manifold horrors, promised a quicker,
cleaner conflict. Colonel Fitzmaurice comforted his readers with the
reassurance that his 'Super-Armageddon' would end wars of attrition once
and for all, ensuring they were 'buried securely in the mud, slush, and war
cemeteries of Flanders'. In comparison with the wastage of young lives in the
trench stalemate, bombing might bring a week of horror followed by
surrender. Here was war on the cheap, saving not only lives, but money:
an economical strategy to appeal to the democratic taxpayer and the
parsimonious treasury alike.
All of this begged a very large question. what should the bombers bomb?
In Germany and France, with politically powerful armies, the issue was
