264
IMPOSSIBLE UNITY . . .
of his leadership. Canonised as the saviour of western civilisation, vilified
as the flawed commander who diminished the empire he led, Churchill
defies neutrality. Throughout his long and chequered career he provoked
bitter resentments and deep affections. He was born in 1874, the eldest son
of a Tory peer, Lord Randolph Churchill, and his American wife, Jenny.
Disliked and ignored by his irresponsible, spendthrift, philandering parents,
Churchill grew up
at the
time of Europe's aristocratic fin de siècle,
surrounded by a wayward family that staggered between debauchery and
bankruptcy. He took the conventional upper-class trail, first public school
at Harrow, then Sandhurst and a commission in the Hussars. He rode in one
of the last British cavalry charges, at Omdurman in the Sudan in 1898.
He found action irresistible. A year later he was a war correspondent in
the Boer War, where he was captured. His dramatic escape made him
into a popular hero. In 1900 he entered Parliament as a Conservative; four
years later he changed sides in time to profit from the Liberal landslide of
1905. Twenty years later he switched back to his old party. In the interim
he was in and out of high office. In 1910, at the age of only 36, he became
Home Secretary; a year later he was moved to the Admiralty, where he
masterminded the Dardanelles campaign in 1915. The calamitous failure of
the enterprise cost Churchill his job, and almost ended his political career.
After two years in the political wilderness, serving on the Western Front,
Churchill was recalled to serve as Minister of Munitions in Lloyd George's
Cabinet, against strong Conservative resistance. Except for a brief spell
between 1922 and 1924, he was in high office throughout the 1920s. He was
never widely popular, either in the country at large or in Parliament. He was
regarded as unprincipled and dangerous by the right; progressive opinion
found him deeply reactionary. In 1929 he once again disappeared into the
wilderness, and it was widely thought that this time it was for good. In
the 1930s Conservative politics was dominated by Chamberlain,
whose
austerity, thoroughness and self-righteousness represented everything that
Churchill was not. The two men despised each other. While Chamberlain
wrestled with the crises of empire and of Europe, Churchill sat in virtual
isolation on the back benches, berating the government ceaselessly for
failing to hold the empire more firmly, and for rearming too slowly. Many
found him to be a man out of touch with the modern age, a Victorian
grandee whose values and habits were locked in the world before the war.
If his career had ended in the 1930s he would be remembered largely as
a political maverick, which was the reputation of his father. 2
Churchill was saved by the war. In 1939 a reluctant Chamberlain brought
him back to the Admiralty. His thirst for action was undiminished. His shrill
bellicosity set him apart from the rest of the Cabinet. In April 1940 he
ALLIES AND LEADERS IN WAR
265
pushed for invasion of Norway, for which British forces were manifestly
unprepared. The failure of the campaign carried strong echoes of Gallipoli,
but its chief victim was not Churchill but Chamberlain. Widespread popular
disillusionment with the war effort inside and outside Parliament made
Chamberlain's position untenable. Churchill was not the obvious successor.
Anthony Eden, the Dominions Secretary, was more popular with the
public; Lord Halifax, Foreign Secretary, was preferred by Chamberlain's
party. But Churchill was impossible to ignore. He was a man, Lloyd George
once remarked, who likes war', 63 On 8 May, two days before Hitler attacked
in the west, Chamberlain called Halifax and Churchill to Downing Street to
discuss the succession. Churchill's version of events is melodramatic - the
long pregnant pauses in this, 'the most important' interview of his life, the
silence finally broken by Halifax who ruled himself out of the running, the
profound sense of responsibilities settling on his shoulders.
In reality,
Halifax had already decided that he did not have the stomach for war, and
had told Chamberlain so. Churchill's appointment depended only partly
on Halifax, and more crucially on the willingness of the Labour opposition
to work with a new Conservative leader. On 10 May Chamberlain was told
that Labour would work with Churchill, and he reluctantly informed the
King, who preferred Halifax. Churchill's appointment as war leader was
achieved against a great many odds, and at the behest of a Labour Party he
disliked deeply. When Churchill entered the Commons the following day
there was no more than a ripple of applause to greet him; the news was met
in the Lords by complete silence. 64
Some measure of the man who took office in 1940 can be found in his
recollection of the triumph: 'At last I had the authority to give directions
over the whole scene. I felt as if I were walking with destiny, and that all my
past life had been but a preparation for this hour and for this trial ...
(Churchill's outlook was incurably romantic and overblown. He treated life,
the philosopher Isaiah Berlin once commented, 'as a great Renaissance
pageant', 66 His was not a subtle or devious personality. He saw things in
black and white, right or wrong. He had a great respect for liberty and an
intense dislike of tyranny, though he never defined either very deeply. He
was steeped in history at the expense of the present, from which he seemed
oddly alienated. He might have flourished in any age - a knight at arms, an
Elizabethan captain, a cavalier, an old-regime general like the ancestor he
so admired, John, First Duke of Marlborough.
His great love was war.
He was not personally bloodthirsty, but took a boyish delight in military
action.)He told French leaders on the eve of their capitulation that Britain
would 'fight on for ever and ever and ever'. That same summer, when Hali-
fax asked if he would consider transferring the government to Canada,
