72
DEEP WAR
sceptical at first. He objected that the counter-offensive was too far away
from Stalingrad to relieve the city itself. Zhukov explained that the attack
had to be carried out at some distance to prevent Germany's mobile Panzer
forces from simply turning round and repelling the attack. Stalin said he
would think about it, but by the end of September he was persuaded. Amidst
the utmost secrecy a detailed plan was drawn up, officially approved by
Stalin. Zhukov and the General Staff worked furiously for five weeks to get
the counter-offensive organised. On 13 November Zhukov presented the
completed version of Operation 'Uranus' to a cheerful Stalin. 'By the way he
unhurriedly puffed his pipe, smoothed his moustache, and never interrupted
once', Zhukov later recalled, 'we could see that he was pleased."4
The whole success of a Soviet counter-blow rested on being able to
hold Stalingrad at all costs, with very limited reinforcement. This called for
the utmost sacrifice from the Soviet forces, who were to know nothing of
the counter-offensive plan while they were bled white in the street-fighting.
The defence of the city fell to two Soviet armies, the 62nd and the 64th.
Determined German thrusts in late August pushed both armies back
towards the centre of the city. By late August the front was split in two, the
62nd army besieged in the heart of Stalingrad, the 64th pushed to a small
bridgehead on the Volga, south-east of the main battle. Most of the civilian
population was now evacuated to the east bank of the river by a fleet of
ferry boats that plied back and forth, carrying troops, guns and ammunition
one way, the wounded and refugees the other. The 62nd army could
continue only because of the frantic efforts of the military supply organisa-
tion and engineers in keeping open the Volga crossings in the face of heavy
and repeated air and artillery attack. The long tail of the army - its artillery,
air support and its rear services - was all on the far side of the Volga. From
this less exposed position Soviet gunners and pilots kept up a ceaseless
barrage against the approaching German forces. I5
The fighting in Stalingrad was very different from the mobile cut and
thrust that German armies had practised across the steppe. Because the city
had been all but obliterated by the Luftwaffe during August, it was difficult
terrain in which to manoeuvre. Tanks were vulnerable to ambushes, or were
simply stuck in the rubble. Progress was no longer measured in miles but in
' yards each day. In addition, the geography of Stalingrad did not render it
susceptible to a sudden swift seizure. The city sprawled for 40 miles along
the river bank, from the large factories - the Red October Factory, the
Barricades Factory, the Tractor Factory - in the north, backed by extensive
workers' settlements, through the central residential and commercial area,
dominated by the low hill Mamayev Kurgan, down to the houses and railway
terminals of the south. Each area of the city became a battlefield, each
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
73
building a fortress to be stormed. Slowly, German troops edged forward
from the north and the west, using the surrounding hills as vantage ground
from which to pour artillery fire into the city. By 3 September some of the
units were only 2 miles from the river, pressing the 62nd army into a cluster
of narrow footholds among the factories, around the central station and
main jetties, and on to the remaining high ground in the city centre. The
commander of the 62nd, General Alexander Lopatin, doubted that his
army, which was suffering an appalling casualty rate, could hold the city. He
began to move units across the Volga. For this he was promptly sacked. The
commander of the Stalingrad front, General Andrei Yeremenko, a tough,
thick-set Ukrainian, whose wife and four-year-old child had been killed in
the German attack the year before, was forced to find a replacement at the
very height of the battle.
The choice fell on Vasili Ivanovich Chuikov, the son of a peasant, and a
veteran of the Civil War, who until a few weeks before had been in China as
a military adviser to Chiang Kai-Shek. Joining the retreating Soviet army in
July, he distinguished himself by launching limited attacks against the
oncoming enemy to slow up his advance. He was lucky not to have died
even before he reached Stalingrad. On the way to the front his drunken
driver crashed the car at high speed, leaving him in hospital for a week with
an injured back. A few weeks later, in late July, he had another fortunate
escape when a reconnaissance flight over the Don steppe ended in disaster
with his plane forced to crash by enemy aircraft. On hitting the ground it split
in two, throwing Chuikov out. He survived with nothing worse than a bump
on the head. By his own admission he was 'healthy and hardy by nature', a
handsome, sturdy man, with a loud laugh that exposed rows of front teeth all
crowned with gold. He learned lessons quickly in combat, and was a master
at improvisation and surprise. He never questioned that his task was to stay
in Stalingrad, and to die there if he had to. By all accounts he was an
inspirational leader, and certainly one with nine lives. 16
Over the next two months Chuikov fought a terrible duel with his opposite
number, General Friedrich Paulus. The two opponents could not have been
more different. At the time of Stalingrad Paulus was 52, a successful career
officer, born in a modest middle-class home in Hesse, the son of a minor
official. Though he is persistently described as 'von Paulus', he was in fact
just Paulus, that rarity in the German military leadership: a successful
bourgeois officer. An enthusiast for the new style of tank warfare, he earned
his place on the army General Staff by virtue of his considerable bureau-
cratic skills. In 1940 he became Deputy Chief-of-Staff, but was returned to
the field in January 1942 to command the crack oth army following von
Reichenau's sudden death from a heart attack. He was an unlikely candidate
