320
WHY THE ALLIES WON
commanders were civilians in uniform, and very conscious of it. The United
States was so unprepared for war in 1941 that there was no alternative but to
bring in men with virtually no military experience at all. Industry was freer to
concentrate on large-scale production; scientists were freer to develop and
experiment; managerial skills were rewarded as well as combat skills. No
doubt Axis militarism brought its own rewards, but it made it harder to build
a strong coalition of civilian and military expertise, or to capitalise on the
early victories once the Allies were able to mobilise their economic,
intellectual and organisational strengths for the purpose of waging war. The
Allies, both dictatorship and democracies were committed to the rational
exploitation of modernity. The Axis states sought to press modernity into
the service of irrational or reactionary causes. 16,
For all this, the margin of victory or defeat was often so slender that
general theories look out of place. Battles are not pre-ordained. If they
were, no one would bother to fight them. The decisive engagement at
Midway Island was won because ten American bombs out of the hundreds
dropped fell on the right target. The victory in the Atlantic came with the
introduction of a small number of long-range aircraft to cover the notorious
Atlantic Gap. The bombing offensive, almost brought to a halt in the winter
of 1943-4, was saved by the addition of long-range fuel tanks to escort-
fighters, a tiny expense in the overall cost of the bombing campaign. The
Battle of Stalingrad depended on the desperate, almost incomprehensible
courage of a few thousand men who held up the German 6th army long
enough to spring a decisive trap. The invasion of France hung on the ability
to keep the enemy guessing, against every conceivable odds, the centre of
operational gravity, and then on the weather. It is hardly surprising that
Churchill thought at the end of the war that Providence had brought the
Allies through. 17)
(The Second World War was not of course won in a day, or in a month of
good luck. But the narrowness of the margins returns us to the question of
winning battles. For all the solid achievements of military reform and of
military production, of science and intelligence, which made the Allied
forces so much more effective by 1943-4 than they had been only two years
before, the military contest still had to be won. Eisenhower's 'grisly, dirty,
tough business' had to be endured to the bitter end. Of all the conflicts that
made up the war, the one that mattered most to the Allies was the struggle
with Germany. On their own Italy and Japan might have made regional
gains. The most likely scenario is that without the success of German arms to
shield them neither state would have risked war at all. Germany's success in
overturning the old European balance of power in less than twelve months
opened up possibilities that neither of her allies could have created alone,
WHY THE ALLIES WON
321
and even then they hesitated to follow in the German wake. But the German
situation was different. The quantity and quality of its armed forces were in
another league altogether. The chief instrument of the whole Axis war effort
was the German army, more than two hundred divisions strong by 1941,
supported by the most modern and effective tactical air force. It was this
military strength that had to be defeated to secure Allied victory. The
United States devoted only 15 per cent of its war effort to the war with
Japan. The other 85 per cent was expended in the defeat of Germany. 18
(If the defeat of the German army was the central strategic task, the main
theatre for it was the conflict on the eastern front.The German army was
first weakened there, and then driven back, before the main weight of Allied
ground and air forces was brought to bear in 1944. Over four hundred
German and Soviet divisions fought along a front of more than 1,000 miles.
Soviet forces destroyed or disabled an estimated 607 Axis divisions between
1941 and 1945. The scale and geographical extent of the
eastern front
dwarfed all earlier warfare. Losses on
both sides far exceeded losses
anywhere else in the military contest. The war in the east was fought with a
ferocity almost unknown on the western fronts. The battles at Stalingrad and
Kursk, which broke the back of the German army, drew from the soldiers of
both sides the last ounces of physical and moral energy. Both sides knew the
costs of losing - neither victors nor vanquished, Hitler announced in January
1943, only 'survivors and annihilated'. The other main fronts involved for
most of the war much smaller forces. The German army fielded only 20-30
. The oiner
divisions at most
in the Italian theatre,
but succeeded in preventing
Allied victory there for two years. The war in France in 1944, where Ger-
many could have employed over fifty divisions, mostly understrength and
some indifferently armed,
was fought in its decisive phase between fif-
teen Allied divisions and fifteen German.
Throughout the war German
forces kept more tanks, guns and tactical aircraft in the east than on the other
fronts.
The German air force, unlike the army, owed its defeat to the western war
effort. The revival of Soviet air power in 1942 did a good deal to blunt
German tactical air forces, but the main axis of defeat lay across the Reich
itself, and was the product of the bombing offensive. The German air force
was compelled to adjust to a strategy it had not anticipated, as the bulk of
German fighter aircraft had to be moved back to the Reich, behind a
rampart of radar,
anti-aircraft guns and searchlights, to fulfil the un-
accustomed role of defending German industry. By September 1944 80 per
cent of the fighter force was based in Germany on anti-bombing missions.
The whole air effort was thrown off-balance as priority was given to the
production and maintenance of fighters and the proportion of bombers and
