100
DEEP WAR
has become the most terrible swearword. Let us not speak. Let us not be
indignant. Let us kill ... if you have killed one German, kill another!*80
When General Chuikov crossed the Volga in September 1942 to join the
62nd army he had been moved to tears by the sight of Soviet refugees
huddled on the jetties waiting to escape the bombing, small children without
parents, their eyes filled with a blank despair. 81 For Soviet soldiers war was
not something happening in another country; it was happening in front of
them, to their villages and cities, and to their families.
The drive to succeed in the battles in 1943 stemmed from violent
emotions, directed hatred. The stubbornness of Soviet resistance astonished
German commanders; the ferocity of the confrontation led to barbarisms on
both sides. The contest came to assume the character of that very struggle of
nature which Hitler believed lay at the root of all human life, the survival of
the fittest. The Soviet will to win, which emerged
painfully from
the
wreckage of Soviet fortunes before Stalingrad, was not a mere abstraction
but a spur to efforts that both sides, Soviet and German, would have thought
impossible a year before. The Soviet people were the instrument of their
own redemption from the depths of war.
4
THE MEANS TO VICTORY
Bombers and Bombing
'.. our supreme effort must be to gain
overwhelming mastery in the air. The Fighters
are our salvation, but the Bombers alone
provide the means to victory?'
Winston Churchill, 3 September 1940
ON 6 oCTOBER 1942, at the height of the dangerous struggle on the Don
steppe in front of Stalingrad, Pravda published a cartoon by Yefimov
ridiculing the failure of Russia's British ally to help the desperate Soviet
forces by attacking the German rear. The picture showed three Blimp-
ish British officers, General What-if-they-lick-us, General What's-the-
hurry and General Why-take-risks, confronted by two go-getting young
Americans, General Guts and General Decision. The Soviet public needed
no caption. They understood that Britain, perhaps from timidity, certainly
in bad faith, had failed to help her ally at her hour of greatest need.'
It is easy to understand the disappointment felt by Soviet leaders and the
Soviet people. Germany had almost won the contest in 194I; she was poised
for what might be the decisive victory in 1942. The feeling in Moscow was
that anything the British or Americans could do to tie down or divert
German forces away from the Russian front should at least be attempted.
Ever since the initial German assault in June 1941, Stalin had pleaded with
the western powers to do something. In June 1942 a half-hearted hint was
given from London and Washington that a 'Second Front' might be started
in Europe in the course of that year. But actions spoke louder than words
and only a month earlier Britain had suspended supplies to the Soviet Union
on the difficult Arctic route to Archangel because of German submarine and
air attack from Norway. And on 21 June, the anniversary of the German
invasion, Rommel succeeded in capturing
Tobruk
with only limited
resistance. In Moscow the 'gutless' surrender of Tobruk was contrasted with
the heroic defence of Sebastopol. Stalin, not one to mince words, accused
the British of cowardice.?
In truth Britain and America lacked the trained manpower and shipping,
particularly landing-craft, to do anything very effective in Europe; British
forces in North Africa were stretched to the limit containing a mere four
German divisions. British and American military planning was based on the
