86
DEEP WAR
in winter fighting, and the obvious exhaustion of the enemy, by pushing the
German front back along its whole length, from the Baltic to the Black Sea.
With the enemy on the run in the south, Stalin seized the reins back from
Zhukov and bullied and urged commanders to rush in hot pursuit before the
enemy could regroup. In the north the siege of Leningrad was broken
though not lifted; on the central front the German line was pushed farther
away from Moscow. In the south the aptly named Operation 'Gallop' was
launched at the end of January with the object of driving German forces
from the industrial Donetz basin farther back into the Ukraine, and trapping
and destroying the whole of the German southern front. The retreating
German armies in the Caucasus region narrowly escaped the fate of Paulus,
but so swift was Soviet pursuit that by the beginning of February large
pockets of German forces were holed up on the wide peninsulas that form
the gateway to the Sea of Azov.
There were fears among the German commanders that the whole of the
southern front would collapse. One city after another was liberated. At the
farthest point Soviet advance forces pushed the enemy almost to the river
Dnepr. But Stalin had overplayed his hand. Soviet forces were in turn
exhausted from the long gruelling battles in appalling winter conditions,
against an enemy adept at rapid withdrawal and tough rearguard defence. It
proved difficult to move supplies and reserves, many of which were stranded
far in the rear of Stalingrad, so rapid had been the progress of Soviet armies.
Stalin was furious at the delays, and ordered the NKVD to take over the
running of the railways in the south, but their intervention, brutal but
inexperienced, played havoc with already inadequate schedules.
50 The large
advantage in number of tanks enjoyed by Soviet armoured divisions at the
start of the offensive petered out on account of poor maintenance and heavy
losses. Sensing growing Soviet weakness, von Manstein gathered together
another strike force for a defensive counter-stroke. Soviet intelligence
failed to detect the concentration of German forces south of Kharkov,
preferring to believe that the armoured columns they had identified were
part of a general retreat. Poor planning and constant pressure from Supreme
Headquarters blinded local Soviet commanders to the danger. German
armies, pushed back like a coiled spring towards the river Dnepr, were
released on 20 February with devastating effect against an enfeebled enemy.
By mid-March Kharkov was recaptured and the German line stabilised, not
along the Dnepr as Stalin had hoped, but on the Donetz, 150 miles farther
east. 51
The German counter-attack was a timely reminder that the Red Army still
faced a powerful and well-armed enemy. The spring thaw at the beginning of
April brought both sides to a standstill after nine months of continuous
STALINGRAD AND KURSK
87
warfare and enormous losses. The final German counter-attack had left an
untidy front line. In the central area opposite the city of Voronezh there
existed a large Soviet bulge far into the German lines, around the city of
Kursk. This salient was 120 miles wide from Belgorod in the south to within a
few miles of Orel in the north, and posed a threat to the German forces on
either side. It was here that the conflict was renewed again in the summer.
After the large-scale offensives launched in 1941 and 1942, German
ambitions for 1943 were much more modest./ The losses suffered in the
struggle for Stalingrad and the long retreat afterwards had been debilitating.
In January 1943 only 495 of the tanks along the whole length of the eastern
front were serviceable. Even with extensive repairs and reinforcements, by
May the German army could raise a force of only 2,500 tanks, the lowest
figure for two years.52 Manpower was also hit. By the summer of 1943 the
field army totalled only 4•4 million men, against the 6•2 million available for
the campaign in 1942. German army leaders were almost all agreed that the
best that could be hoped for was to hold the line in the east, and to frustrate
the Soviet offensive by undertaking limited but powerful counter-blows. For
once Hitler accepted advice. After Stalingrad his interest in the eastern front
perceptibly declined. The initiative was left to von Manstein, who proposed
pinching out the Kursk salient before moving further south to regain some of
the lost territory. Hitler accepted the plan, which was given the codename
'Citadel'; but he insisted that there should be no more defeats after the
humiliation at Stalingrad. Although Manstein wanted to attack in April or
early May, before the enemy had time to regroup and dig in around Kursk,
Hitler postponed the offensive until mid-June, and then again until July, in
order to build up German tank forces to a level that he felt would reduce risk
of failure. 53
During March and April Stalin and the Soviet General Staff tried to assess
what their enemy would do next. After two years of disastrous miscalcula-
tion, Stalin was more receptive to advice. He recognised that he had been
the main barrier to interpreting German intentions correctly. This time
opinion was sought from staff officers and front commanders as well as his
immediate circle. There emerged a consensus among them all that the Kursk
salient was the only place on the front where German forces were in a
position to launch an attack with any prospect of success. This view was
based for the first time on solid intelligence. From aerial reconnaissance,
partisan activity and radio interception Soviet commanders pieced together
a much clearer picture of German dispositions. From the concentrations of
Panzer forces and infantry divisions around Orel and Kharkov it was clear
from where the main thrust would come. From two years' experience of
German operational planning, Soviet commanders predicted with remark-
