160
ALONG A GOOD ROAD . . .
Pegasus bridge straddling the Caen canal British forces achieved complete
surprise; the sentry stood still, struck literally dumb with terror. 65 Not until
three o'clock in the morning was 7th army put on alert, and not until 3.09 did
German radar begin to pick up the sea and air activity in the Channel. At five
o'clock the first shore batteries opened fire on the approaching fleet. At
dawn the invaders began a fearsome fusillade. The first assault came with
1,056 British and 1,630 American heavy-bombers which blanketed the
coastal defences with high explosive, except for the Omaha beach, where
cloud cover led the bombers to drop their loads 3 miles inland. There then
followed a ferocious naval bombardment directed at the big coastal guns and
the concrete emplacements too thick for aerial bombing. The shells roared
over the heads of the soldiers slowly wending their way through the
minefields, packed into landing craft. The naval gunfire was devastating. It
did not destroy many of the fortified bunkers and gun casements, but it left
their defenders stunned and deafened. As the naval bombardment eased up,
swarms of fighter-bombers and medium-bombers flew in low to attack
German defensive positions, while from the sea came yet another barrage,
this time from thousands of rockets launched from batteries in converted
landing craft which floated in on the flanks of the troop carriers. The pall of
acrid smoke hanging over the beaches was so thick that the coastline at Utah
beach was obscured entirely, and as a result American troops landed over a
mile south of the beach they were supposed to storm.66
Behind the bombs and guns came a swarm of smaller craft, carrying men,
supplies and tanks specially converted to an amphibious role to provide
firepower in the first stages of assault. Some of the landing craft had to travel
up to i1 miles from the mother vessel to the shore in rough seas. Seasick and
cold, packed shoulder by shoulder, the soldiers gradually drew level with the
beach defences, now lapped by the incoming tide. As the leading boats
reached shallow water the loading ramps were dropped and the first troops
slid and jumped down them.
Some had 100 feet of water to stumble
through; some just a few yards. Many radio operators, weighed down with
additional equipment, sank beneath the water. Raked by small arms fire, a
bewildering mêlée of floating tanks, landing craft and soldiers struggled
shoreward. Unable to see the Allied wounded, tanks rolled on to the
beaches over the bodies of soldiers too injured to move. From the mixture of
noise, smoke and death it was impossible for each successive wave of troops
to make out what progress had been made by the men in front. The beaches
were consumed in the most literal sense by the fog of war.
As the morning wore on it proved possible to form a clearer picture. At all
except Omaha beach the Allies had achieved the initial foothold. The
airborne troops on both flanks had secured the most vital roads and bridges.
161
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
On the British sector German resistance was light after the shuddering
bombardment from the sea. The static divisions put up little opposition.
Sword beach was cleared by mid-morning; the Canadian 3rd division on
Juno captured the beach by 10 a.m. and began to move inland towards Caen.
On Gold beach there were more defences to neutralise, but by midday the
British soth division was on the move, and by the end of the day it had
established a bridgehead 3 miles wide and 2½ miles deep. By the evening all
three divisions were well inland, but failed to capture either Caen or Bayeux
as Montgomery had hoped. Not until the late afternoon did they meet
serious opposition, when Rommel was finally able to order 2ist Panzer
division to attack west of Caen to prevent British forces from capturing the
city. The effort to move some of von Schweppenburg's reserve Panzer forces
towards Caen broke down, as Rommel had argued it would all along, when
cloud lifted and Allied fighter-bombers attacked anything that moved on
the roads.
Farther to the west American forces had more mixed fortunes. At Utah
beach the failure to land at the right area was a blessing in disguise.
American forces streamed ashore against the lightest beach obstacles and
negligible enemy fire. By the evening they had established a beachhead 6
miles wide and 6 miles deep; total casualties were 197 from all causes. At
Omaha an unpredictable set of circumstances almost produced failure. The
bombers missed the shore defences entirely; the naval bombardment was
short and, against high bluffs, was difficult to direct with accuracy; the sea
was rougher than expected, and losses of tanks and landing craft were
correspondingly higher. German defences were stronger in this sector than
in any other, and troops had recently been reinforced, unknown to Allied
intelligence, by a fresh German division. The troops were pinned down on
the beaches by a withering fire; ahead of them were cliffs broken by narrow
defiles, easy to defend. American officers persuaded the men sheltering
among the wreckage on the beach that there was little choice but to fight
their way up the cliffs or be slaughtered where they lay. Yard by yard they
battled forward until they reached higher ground, supported by accurate fire
from destroyers lying close to shore. By the end of the day the American 5th
corps had secured a narrow bridgehead but had been unable to clear all
German resistance from the coast, or to make contact with the forces from
Utah farther to the west.
The successful landings confounded Rommel's shoreline strategy. Over
the next four days Allied troops and supplies poured in to stiffen the
bridgeheads) By 11 June 326,000 men, 54,000 vehicles and 104,000 tons of
supplies had been landed across the beaches."' British and Canadian forces
pushed towards Caen to reach within a mile or two of the city. On 7 June
