220
A WAR OF ENGINES
which was expected to match the Soviet Sturmovik, had to be withdrawn
because its engines caught fire too easily, and were so susceptible to the
dust of the southern Russian steppe that serviceability could not be main-
tained. 31
(The failure of almost the whole range of new air designs forced the
Luftwaffe to stick with older, proven models. But the damage was done.
Production of older models was run down to make room for the new; a great
deal of modern factory space and skilled labour was allocated to production
that never materialised. The prospect of developing German air strategy
with long-range bombing and enhanced battlefield firepower evaporated. It
proved impossible to expand numbers to meet all German's many air fronts;
air reserves, which for the Soviet Union comprised almost half of all combat
aircraft, could not be built up. Udet did not survive long enough to see the
chickens home to roost. On 17 November 1941, unable to stand the strain of
office any longer, he drank two bottles of brandy and shot himself through
the mouth. Milch was his successor. The unravelling of Udet's legacy took
almost two years, by which time German aircraft production was dwarfed by
that of the Allies. Priority switched to defending the Reich during 1943,
while air power on the eastern front declined. The last attempt to mass
German aircraft offensively in the east came at the Battle of Kursk, when
over a thousand planes supported the armoured thrusts. By this time the gap
between the two air forces had all but disappeared; German losses at Kursk
amounted to 1,030 aircraft. Air superiority passed to the Red air force. As
more and more aircraft were sucked into the defence of the Reich, numbers
in the east collapsed. German air forces mustered little more than three
hundred fighters and three hundred bombers along the whole front during
1944, manned by crews whose levels of training and tactical skill were often
a fraction of what had been the norm in 1941.32
It was Germany's misfortune to be allied in the Second World War with two
states whose ability to produce and deploy the new technologies of war was
limited in the extreme Neither Italy nor Japan developed large armoured
forces; neither was effectively motorised; Japanese aircraft production, like
Italian, was restricted by shortages of raw materials and industrial capacity.
Though both states could produce designs of high quality, they lacked the
technical means to turn them into large numbers of battlefront weapons that
could compete on equal terms with the enemy?
The mechanisation of ground forces made scant progress by Allied
standards/ Italian military leaders well understood the principles behind
modern armoured warfare. The Italian army actually organised the first
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
221
armoured corps in 1938, and used an armoured division for the invasion of
Albania in 1939. And there it stopped. Italy fought the war with the three
mechanised divisions she possessed in 1939.They were equipped with tanks
that were between ten and twenty years old, with small-calibre armament. A
new tank, the MI3, was introduced into battle in the invasion of Greece in
1941, but proved easy prey for Greek artillerymen. The MIl tank used in the
north African desert was under-armed and poorly maintained. Two of the
three armoured divisions were destroyed at the Battle of Alamein. None
of them had adequate numbers of supporting vehicles. Most of Italy's
75 divisions were horse-drawn; in August 1942 two Italian cavalry squad-
rons made their country's last cavalry charge with sabres drawn against a
Soviet infantry division. The divisions nominally designated as 'motorised'
divisions had only 350 vehicles each. Tank production was too small to
supply more - only 667 tanks were manufactured in the whole of 1942 and
350 in 1943. Even for these small numbers the supply of fuel and ancillary
services proved difficult. 33
(Japan made no attempt to embrace the new developments.
The army
remained an infantry army, reliant largely on horses. Army divisions had on
average three thousand mounts, but fewer than three hundred vehicles.
Tanks were produced in small quantities to serve as infantry support. They
were poor by wartime standards.) Armour was so thin it could be penetrated
by small-arms fire, while the standard heavy tank boasted only a 37-
millimetre
gun.
Production
of tanks, most of them
light vehicles,
declined during the war from 1, 100 in 1942 to 400 in 1944, and a mere 142
in 1945. For all its postwar success, the Japanese car industry was tiny in the
I930s. In 1938 Toyota produced 458 cars, Honda 1,242 and Datsun 2,908.34
Most of the army's stock of trucks in 1941 were imported American models,
for which the supply of spare parts dried up. The entire Japanese army had
approximately seventy thousand trucks and cars, and limited numbers of
personnel carriers and half-tracks. This represented one truck for every 49
soldiers overseas against an American figure
of one for every thirteen.
During 1942 the Japanese army explored the prospect of building up self-
contained armoured forces but rejected the
idea as beyond Japan's
capability. Tanks played only the smallest part in the conquest and defence
of the southern empire. 35
Possessing few tank forces of their own, the Japanese army failed to
develop anti-tank weapons. Southern Asia and the Pacific were not ideal
terrain for tanks, but both American and British forces deployed them in
ever-increasing numbers. The Japanese army responded with primitive
solutions. Coconuts were hollowed out and primed with explosives; soldiers
stacked with explosives threw themselves under the tracks of oncoming
