238
A WAR OF ENGINES
denied the uranium to verify his findings. Another researcher, Baron
Manfred von Ardenne, who worked, improbably, for the German Post
Office, successfully developed the method of electro-magnetic isotope
separation. * Neither idea was taken up by the elite of theorists who
dominated the field. Was this a form of resistance, or sabotage? or was it
simply that they failed to grasp their significance? Did it reflect professional
self-interest? or a genuine belief that a workable bomb was many years off?
No doubt moral scruple played a part with some of Germany's science
community, but there were enough scientists who supported the war effort
and understood the nature of the atomic bomb to have produced a nuclear
capability if the regime had been enthusiastic enough. As it was the sceptics
were borne out by events; even the Americans, with vast resources, 150,000
workers, and top priority for the project, failed to produce a bomb until the
war in Europe was over.
Just what a difference Hitler made in the field of research and develop-
ment was evident from the fate of the German rocket programme. Rocket
research dated back to the 1920s, fired by the seminal work of a German-
speaking Transylvanian, Hermann Oberth. His book The Rocket into
Interplanetary Space,
first published in 1923, provided the theoretical
frame; but when Oberth tried to build a liquid-fuelled rocket in 1929 as pub-
licity for the Fritz Lang film The Woman in the Moon the project was a
technical disaster. The furore over Oberth's rocket attracted the attention
of the German army, which began a programme of rocket development
initially with Oberth's assistance. In 1932 the army decided the project
was so important that it set up its own top-secret laboratory. The first em-
ployee was a twenty-year-old student at the Berlin Technical High School,
Wernher Freiherr von Braun. Despite his youth, von Braun had grasped
the principles of rocket propulsion, and led the way in developing the first
generation of army rockets. By 1935 enough was achieved to secure
generous funding and the cooperation of the fledgling Luftwaffe. The two
services combined their research on a remote and barren stretch of the Baltic
coast, at Peenemünde. Here laboratories, production facilities and giant
rocket launchpads were built under the leadership of an ex-captain of
artillery, Walther Dornberger.75
The army leadership wanted to be sure that a viable weapon would result
from their investment. In 1936 Dornberger promised them a missile that
could deliver a I-ton warhead twice as far as the famous Paris Gun - the
Krupp
cannon used in the Great War. For the next six years von Braun's
team of engineers wrestled with the technical difficulty of turning their early
experiments into a real weapon. The Dornberger rocket, the A4, suffered
from the immature state of research into engines fuelled with liquid oxygen,
TECHNOLOGY AND MILITARY POWER
239
and persistent problems in the guidance and control systems. Hitler, though
aware of the research, did not give it a particular priority, until Dornberger
and von Braun visited him in August 1941 to discuss their work. Rocket
technology did not alienate Hitler like nuclear fission did. He hailed the new
missile as 'revolutionary for the conduct of warfare' and promised more
money. By June of 1942 the first rocket was ready for launching. Hermann
Göring was the guest of honour. Among the sober team of engineers and
soldiers, Göring arrived dressed in bright red riding boots with silver spurs,
and a vast opossum-skin coat, his hands covered in ruby-encrusted rings. In
front of the baroque visitor the research team watched as the i3-ton rocket
blasted from its pad and roared into the clouds. A minute and a half later the
roar began to get louder again. To the horror of the onlookers the missile
plunged into the ground only 800 yards away. The guidance system was still
insufficiently developed
On 14 October 1942 the first successful launch was carried out. The rocket
travelled 120 miles and landed within 2½ miles of the target. This was hardly
long-range precision, but Hitler was impressed enough to call for production
of five thousand. Technical problems continued to plague the rocket,
however, and by the summer of 1943 there were still no finished weapons.
By that time the Luftwaffe had developed its own pilotless missile, the
Fieseler-103 'flying bomb'. Both projects emerged as technical possibilities
at just the time that Hitler began to search for some means of retaliation
against Allied bombing, or some wonder-weapon that might turn the tide of
war. On 7 July 1943 Dornberger and von Braun visited Hitler again to press
their case for developing the rocket. After a brief discussion, Hitler was
invited to the cinema at his headquarters, where von Braun showed a colour
film of the successful launch of a rocket. It was an ideal tactic. Hitler was
overcome with excitement. He told Speer that the A4 was the decisive
weapon of the war'; he agreed to appoint von Braun a professor on the spot,
and ordered immediate mass production. 76 )
The new weapons, the air force pilotless bomb and the rocket, were
nicknamed 'Vergeltungswaffen', 'weapons of revenge', which gave rise to
the popular abbreviations vi and v2 respectively. Hitler wanted thousands
of them there and then to shower down on England and the preparations
for invasion. In reality things moved slowly; neither weapon was yet at the
stage of development suitable for mass production. The A4 became bogged
down in a further round of design changes to cope with the unexpected
distortions created by the addition of a warhead. In August 1943 the RAF
destroyed the Peenemünde rocket-research base, as news of the secret
weapons leaked to the west. Despite this setback Hitler determinedly
persisted with the wonder-weapon' strategy. The whole project was taken
