6
A GENIUS FOR MASS-PRODUCTION
Economies at War
'With our national resources, our productive
capacity, and the genius of our people for
mass-production we will. outstrip the
Axis powers in munitions of war.'
F.D. Roosevelt, Message to Congress, 10 June 1941
*
'HE SOVIET AIRCRAFT DESIGNER, Alexander Yakovlev, set down in his
T memoirs one of the few first-hand accounts of that most remarkable of
Soviet wartime achievements, the evacuation of hundreds of factories and
thousands of workers from under the very noses of the approaching German
armies. In September 1941, with the enemy only 150 miles from the Soviet
capital, the Moscow factories producing the Yak-I fighter were ordered to
the east. Under heavy air attack, the plant was dismantled piece by piece.
The machines were run until they had completed every part for the aircraft
on the assembly line. Outside the factory Soviet pilots waited to fly the
planes straight into combat.
Yakovlev's design bureau was scheduled to follow the machines. He
drove to the station at Khimki to watch the equipment leave. He found a
scene of complete confusion. Hundreds of people were milling about on the
wooden platforms. A continuous line of battered trucks brought machinery
of all kinds to be loaded on to flat railway cars. Trains with forty cars stood
on the track. One left every eight hours for Siberia. Yakovlev found his own
workers in the mêlée. Men, women and children were loaded into box cars
hastily converted for the long journey. Each one had a number of double
bunks, an iron stove in the middle and a paraffin lamp. Each train was placed
under the command of one of the workshop superintendents, whose job it
was to supervise the loading and unloading of their invaluable cargo.
The Yak plant was destined for western Siberia. Crude wooden barracks
were set up to welcome the industrial refugees, while local workers prepared
the supplies of electricity, water and fuel. But as with so many of the
factories shifted eastwards, there were long delays through Russia's over-
strained rail system. The trains did not arrive until after the frosts had taken
grip. In sub-zero temperatures the workers struggled to reassemble the
workshops. Within six days of arrival production was restarted. After three
months, more fighters were turned out each week than the plant had
ECONOMIES AT WAR
181
produced in Moscow. The figures may owe a good deal to the distorting
effects of Stalinist economic heroism, but even after such allowance is made
there is little dispute that the evacuation saved the Soviet war effort in 1942
& from certain disaster.
What Yakovlev witnessed was a small part of a vast exodus. Between July
and December 1941 1,523 enterprises, the great bulk of them iron, steel
and engineering plants, were moved to the Urals, to the Volga region, to
Kazakhstan in central Asia, and to eastern Siberia. One and a half million
wagon-loads were carried eastwards on the Soviet rail network. An esti-
mated 16 million Soviet citizens escaped the German net, many of them
factory workers, engineers, plant managers, all needed to keep the uprooted
industries going.? The whole process was a messy, improvised affair.
Workers arrived without their machines; equipment without its workforce.
So short of rolling-stock was the rail system that car-loads of machinery were
dumped beside the track in the Russian interior so that trains could return to
the battlefront in the west to pick up further cargoes. The transplanted
enterprises were destined for the most inhospitable regions of the vast Soviet
Union. Workers struggled to assemble their new premises in temperatures
forty below, while the machines, thick with hoar frost, had to be revived with
braziers. There are too many accounts of work restarting on frozen earth
foors in buildings with no roofs for this to be mere legend.3
What the Soviet people could not evacuate they destroyed. Thousands of
mines, steelworks and engineering plants were abandoned. Food that could
not be transported was torched. Yet for all the exceptional and desperate
measures adopted, by the end of 1941 Soviet production sank to a mere
fraction of the level before the German invasion. The overall levels of
output were never restored throughout the conflict, but the war effort was
sustained on the remarkable expansion of armaments and heavy-industrial
output in the Urals and beyond. By 1942 the eastern zones supplied three-
quarters of all Soviet weapons and almost all the iron and steel.
The
restoration of economic order out of the chaos and confusion caused by the
German assault was as remarkable as the revival of Red Army fortunes after
Stalingrad, and just as essential to the Allied cause. 4
'It is often forgotten that in the critical middle years of the war the balance
of economic resources was not yet weighted heavily in the Allies' favour.)
Until the German invasion of the Soviet Union Britain and her Empire were
overshadowed by the economic potential of the European Axis states and
their conquered territories. Alone, it is unlikely that Britain would have
survived. After the invasion of the Soviet Union the balance improved until
German armies swept through the rich iron, coal and steel regions of
western Russia and the Ukraine, depriving Soviet industry of two-thirds of
