ALONG A GOOD ROAD . . .
the campaign, preferring to use the more modest term 'main object'. They
also insisted that invasion should only go ahead under certain important
conditions: the German fighter force should be much reduced in strength
first, and there should be no more than twelve German divisions in reserve
to oppose the attacking force. Since they had won the main commitment, the
American negotiators gave way on the rest. The British accepted Overlord
with deep reservations, but they saw the conditions they had imposed as a
final defensive line against excessive risk. 17
No sooner had the ink dried on the Quebec agreements than the British
negotiators began to chip away at the idea of Overlord. In private the
British deplored the enterprise. Churchill cursed 'this bloody second front!';
*all this "Overlord" folly must be thrown "Overboard", wrote Alexander
Cadogan, head of the British Foreign Ministry, in his diary when bad news
came from Italy in October. Field Marshal Sir Alan Brooke, Chief of the
Imperial General Staff, told the British Chiefs-of-Staff in November that
they should not regard Overlord as 'the pivot of our whole strategy'. Not for
nothing did Stimson suspect that the British even after Quebec wanted
nothing more than 'to stick a knife into the back of Overlord', 18 Though
British leaders could not openly flout publicly agreed strategy, they did
everything they could to suggest other courses of action that could only have
the effect of inhibiting plans for invasion. By October Churchill was once
more all for planning adventures elsewhere, in the Balkans, in Yugoslavia,
in Italy. By November, with the Allies bogged down on the Italian front, and
little sign of German weakening elsewhere, the British began to argue that
the putative conditions laid down at Quebec in August might not be met
after all.
Whether or not the British would in the end have baulked at Overlord
remains an open question. By late 1943 a great deal of planning and force
preparation had already been carried out, and they risked a serious breach
with a watchful ally, growing more confident of its power month by month.
But in the end the decision was taken out of their hands. At the end
of November the three Allied leaders agreed to meet at Teheran. Rather
than argue any more with the British, American leaders planned to out-
manoeuvre them. The two western Allies met first at Cairo to discuss issues
from the Far East and, so the British expected, the Mediterranean.
Relations between the two military staffs were poorer than ever. Brooke
became uncharacteristically intemperate; Admiral King, commander of the
American navy, came close on one occasion to striking him. But on issues to
do with Overlord and the Mediterranean the Americans remained silent,
leaving the floor to their ally. When pressed they replied that the issues
would be discussed when they met with Stalin.
THE INVASION OF FRANCE
On 26 November the Presidential party flew to Teheran, followed a day
later by Churchill's. Teheran was occupied by Soviet troops. On every
corner stood NKVD men in plain clothes, or in their distinctive dark blue
and khaki uniforms. Security was tight. In the ride from the airport
Roosevelt's place in the limousine was taken by an American security agent
wearing the President's familiar hat and cape. So anxious were American
agents for Roosevelt's safety that when the Soviet authorities announced the
discovery of an assassination plot the President's party agreed to move to the
Soviet Embassy compound. The British were housed next door in their
Legation buildings. The close proximity of Soviet and American staffs gave
some cause for concern for Roosevelt's room was almost certainly bugged;
more worrying for Brooke and Churchill was the failure to
advance with the Americans any of the issues that were to be laid before
Stalin. For once, a heavy cold had rendered Churchill almost speechless. In
bad health and worse temper he attended the opening session of the three
leaders on 28 November with foreboding. The three sat at a baize-covered
table. There was no agenda, at Roosevelt's insistence,
could say anything Roosevelt outlined Overlord. Stalin's reply was every-
thing the Americans could have hoped for. He said that Overlord was
essential to bring the German army to defeat: 'Make Overlord the basic
operation for 1944.' When Churchill finally growled out
alternative it was too late. Stalin dismissed the whole idea as a wasteful
diversion. The following day the Soviet-American alliance held the field.
When Churchill tried to raise the Mediterranean again, Stalin stared directly
across the table at him: 'Do the British really believe in Overlord?' Churchill
was undone. He 'glowered, chomped on his cigar' and finally spat out that it
was indeed 'the stern duty' of his country to invade. 19
(In a few hours of negotiation Stalin achieved what the Americans had
get in eighteen months of frustrating argument. Stalin liked
Overlord; so too did Roosevelt. There was little Churchill could now do to
keep other strategic options open. The following day a magnificent dinner
was put on at the British Embassy for Churchill's 6oth birthday. This time it
was Stalin's turn to feel discomfited. He was so ill-at-ease with the array of
cutlery on the table before him that he asked the British interpreter to
instruct him when each item should be used. Churchill was good-humoured
at last, briefly the centre of attention. 20 Exaggerated toasts were drunk to
the good health of each party. But for Churchill respite was short-lived. The
following day Stalin insisted on a firm date for Overlord.
The first of May
was agreed. Then he demanded the immediate appointment of a com-
mander for the operation as an indication of western good faith. In return he
promised a Soviet offensive to coincide with the invasion. When the three
