pg_0064.pdf:
- 12 -
VA8. Consolidation
(a) General
(1)
(i1)
(b)
(iii)
i can i to not a th boundertos of respond lay
185 Inf Bde will be responsible for dofonce of chunter ind
for establishing patrols to harassand doly enany evanes on
the line river crossing 0157 - high ground 0756 - MONTEr.
9 Br Int Ble will be in Div reserve. end will maintain
outposts
on the general line of the rood CAMBERTEY - YULDHAM from inter
Bde boundary with 185 Inf Bae to co tav boundary with 3 Daa
and on THORNTON from ONEncils to junction with
Inf In? Bde, in ordor to cover thn flonks of 185 Inf bde.
9 Br Inf Bde will be responsible for counter attacking ar;-
attempts by the
enemy
to infiltrate within the Bde bounäaries
either FAST or WEST of CAMBERLEY.
(iv)
8 Br Inf Bde will hold the ridge HICKLING - WALGRAVE as
base and will be responsible for the defence of the bridges at
COAT,VILLE and STAINLAND.
8 Br Inf Bde will olso maintair
patrols on THORNTON up to the boundary with 9 Br Inf Ide and
prevent eneny crossings in this area,
(v)
27 Arma Bde will concentrate about DE/NDFORD ready to counter
attack any eneny attacks from the WEST of CAMBERLEY or through
the 3 Can Inf Div aren.
27 imma Be will be prepared to send a force of tanks across
THORNTON on D + 1 day to support 185 Dr Inf Bde patrols and to
dominate the high ground SE Of CAMBERLEY about C756 (IC of AYESHAM).
Anti Tank Defence
(1)
Inf Bdes are responsible for siting infantry and Ri anti tank
guns and minefields within their locclities,
co-ordination being
undertaken by the respective anti tank battery commenders with
each bde.
(11)
27 Arnd ide and 101 Beach Sub /re are responsible for the enti
tank defence of their own areas.
101 Beach Sub Area will be
responsible as far SOUTH as inclusive the road running EAST and
WEST through BRIGHOUSE.
(iii)
OC 20 1. Tk Rogt will:
coordinate the divisional anti-tank layout including
minefields (in conjunction with CRE) and give recommendations
any additional minfields
co-ordinate anti-tank defence of the BMA as between heach
group anti-tank guns and army Al guns.
allot reserve anti-tank guns landing on later tides in
accordance with the situation at the time.
(c)
Minefields
Bdes will be prepared to lay minefields as slova on trace at lpps_?.
9 Br Inf Bde
Western ap reaches to CAMBERTHY
8 Br Inf Bde
Bridgehead ai, STAINLAND.
Balance of mines will be available for protection of 185 and 9 Be Inf
Bde localities.
8 Br Inf Bde will not lay local minefields unless the advance of 1,85
Inf Bde has been held up NORTH of CAMBERLEY.

