pg_0098.pdf:
Wan Drawy
NEPTUNE
BICOT
MOST SECRET
S/2081/G/211
74. Mar 44
Army and. Navy Alternative
Copy No _ 12
--- Elon _ __
The following are deauctions made at a conference on 13 Mar to discuss Army
and Navy alternative plans.
Effect of Underwater Obstacles
Obstacles as at present disrosed (i.e. 15 to 25 fi
gaps between obstacles)
on Canadian beaches would not present a serious obstacle to DDa or tO:, vile
AVRE LOTs mighi fores
Arrangements can be made for their removal prior
to the arrival ci the next flotilla of LoTs.
Deduction
The placing of a similar obstacl ca IED ard WITE beaches woula rot iherefors
necessitate any alternative plar.
Arrangementa anst of course le mid, to deal.
with these obstacles in the plan whether or not they exist priür te time
of sailing.
and connecte?
The operation for gapping
obstacles will hae"
be covered by fire and smoke and a delay imposed on further Mights so tha
will not be confusion at the obstacle.
Deduction
the best expert advice, both Army and Navy, must be obtained at onc
regarding methods of removing
these obstacles and on this advise a
combined plan agreed to by Cond Force S and 3 Br Inf Div.
If the obstacles are confined to RED and WHITE beaches then, fram an
examination of the approaches to beaches and exits, it would seem
advisable to put into force an alternative plan to land on GREEN.
(c)
3г
(г)
(b)
further examination is required by Naval, Beach Group,
and RE te ensure
there is no major snag regarding rocks,
peaches or exits.
Otherwise it
does not materially affect the army plan.
If the obstacles cover RED WHITE and GREEN the only alternatives are to
carry out the original plan and clear the obstacles or to land at a state
of tide when the obstacles will be ineffective.
The latter is a desision
to be made by higher authority and must be represented to them now.
To sun up the effect of beach costacles:
If the obstacle is thin enough to be overcono no alternative piu ca
landfall is necessary:
If the obstacle is thick on RED and WHITE an aiterative plan in lini -
GREEN is suggested,
(o)
If the obstacle is thick on RED, WHIlE, and GIE Shen we muss:
(1)
Force it and risk delay and cunfusio..
1100%
(L1)
Land if possible at e stero of taño inton corders the cigienle
ineffeotine.

