pg_0031.pdf:
14,
15.
Distinguishing Signs for Beach Exit Teams
(a) Each Iraffto Commander will wear a yellow band on his right arm and
a white traffic sleeve on both arms.
(b) Each Exit Comnander will use a red flag and a grenn flag for
controlling traffic.
(c) One man with a red flag and a grenn flag will be posted by each
Exit Comander in a prominent position at the exit and will signal
to the Exit; Commander whether or not the end of the exit is clear.
Provision of detachments for exits
Detachments (size to be determined by Cannander 101 Beach Sub Area)
from the Beach Coys landing at H + 60 will be detailed to ench exit, and
equippe
with shovels,
to carry out maintenance work under the direction
of the Beach Field Company.
TRATFIC CONTROL INLAND FROM AND EXCE, SECOND LATER L
The Divisional Traffic Plan (See Appendix A) will be enforced on
orders from Div HQ as soon as the tactical
situation allows,
such time traffic control inlana will be a Bde to responsibility
co-ordinated by Div HQ when necessary.
(b)
Until H + 4 -11 traffic will be UP. Essential down traffic will
cleor roads for up traffic.
(c)
Appendix A shows the order of priority for the development of roads.
Formations and units
will be responsible for the development of any
roads they wish to use other than those shown in the trace.
Road Incomation
Div HQ requires infomation as to suitability of roads for single
or to way traffic,
and in particular the location of any demolitions
or mined stretches, so that action can be taken to clear them.
an P
1.
2.
LEGEND
Routes waich it is ained to dovelop as a first
priority.
Routes which will be develeped later.
Routes which will be used,
if possible, by 9
Br Inf Bde but for which there will be no
RE resources available other than those in the
Bde Gp.
Tie trace shows:
traffic responsibilities on the beaches.
Div Traffic Plan - the routes being those which
it ia hoped to develop if possible.
Section A
It is the Beach Coy Cond's responsibility
to get vehicles fron the craft to the exits,
maintain recovery on the beaches, and to allot recovery
vehicles to each of the four exita.
Section B.
It is the responsibility of the Traffio
Coma (with his subordimate officers) on each beach
to keep the entire length of the exits cleared up to
the first lateral, There will be later four exits
on each beach.
Section C .
It is the responsibility of leach Pro to
control the traffic from incl the first lateral up
and through the second lateral.
Sectiona A, B and C will be under commend of the
Beach Gp Cond, while the Div Traffic Office,
which will be
located at the Beach Gp HQ, will be responsible for
coordinating the traffic arrangements.

