pg_0030.pdf:
3.
Third Fhase
The gaps node by AVRE and flails up to the second lateral will be
oxtended inland to open country by 8 Br Inf Bde.
EXIT MARKTIGS
4 (a) Whilo the AVRE aro attornting to nake an exit a parti-coloured
windsock will be erected at the exit.
The colours will be,
the right,
each of the
four exits on ench beach, green and white,
yellow and white, blue and white, red and white,
(b)
When on exit is free for traffic a plain coloured windsock will be
erected at each exit in place of
the parti coloured one and smoke
signals will be burned on the beach.
The colour of the windsock will
the see as that of the beach, e g. red for RED beach and white
for WHITE beach.
If for any reason an exit is not free for traffic the plain coloured
sock will be taken down and replaced by a parti-coloured one.
When large explosive charges are being blown at any exit an additional
large red flag will be flown under the parti-coloured sock.
taken down after the charge is blown.
In addition a bugle
will be blown by AVRE immediately before the charge goes up.
all unprotected men will be warned to keep a minimum of 200 yards clear
5.
ENGINEER COMMAND
OC 5 Assault Rogt RE will land in the AVRE flight of LOTs and will
assume engineer control of all exit work and gapping.
ARITITURY ON THE BEACHES
6. First Phase
Dontaurs
Two troops of Contaurs will ld fron four ICT(A) IN on each beach and
into action on the flanks of the beach.
They will remain on the
flanks until the Fd Arty have left the beaches.
7. Second Phase
One regt of Fa Arty SP will land on each beach at H + 75.
The leading
troops will stop just short of high water mark.
They will be responsible for
their own mine clearonce up to the back of the beach,
It may be necessary
for then to renain in action on the beach up to H + 2, but they will be cied
of the beach as soon as circunstances allow.
They must on no account blook
exits on the beach lateral.
8e Ihira Phase
One regt of Fd Arty SP will land on each Beach at # + 105, but will
only come into action on the beach if circumstances dictate, otherwise they will
9.
Fourth Phase
As Ips will take up firing positions along the beach lateral.
They will
be responsible for the necessary mine clearance for gun sites and will move
through the exits when these are clear.
- 3 .
10.
TRATIC CONTROI, I0 AND INCI, SECOND LATERAL
Organisation of Traffic Control
The Beach Gp Comd will be responsible for supervising traffic control
within the area from the waters edge up to and including
An officer will be
appointed by Div HQ to assist Beach Gp
Comd to supervisethis are and to co-ordinate traffic control between
the Beach Go and the Assoult Bde Gp until such time as Div HQ lands ito
tak control. He will establish himself at Beach Gp HQ and will infor
Div Cond of any injor diversion
if possiblo before the
decicion is tolon.
will deal direct with Beach Gp Comd and
Ho will work in close co-operation withia Naval
Officon appointod for a similar purpose in connection with the noveronts
of lending craft to beaches.
Within the area of the Beach Cp Cond's responsibility, subdivision of
responsibility will be as under :-
(i) The area from the water's edge up to the seaward end of the
exits will be controlled by the respective Beach Company
Commanders.
The area from the seawnrd end of each exit up to and
excluding the second Interal will be controlled by
specially provided exit teams under a Traffic Commander
(corposition below).
(iii)
The area along the first and second laterals will be
controlled™
on the whole front by the beach Provost under the Beach Group
Carmander,
11.
Orgonisation of Beach Exit Teams
The composition and control of Beach Exit Teams on each beach will
be as shown below ;-
Traffic Carmander (Major - Regtl)
No 46 set.
Borch Exit Tean Bench Exit Jeem Beach Exit Toem Beach Exit Team
No 46 Set
Exit Cond (Regtl
offr)
Cp1 (Regt])
Two CMPs
(Beach
Pro)
Duration of operation of Beach Exit Iooms
The Beach Exit Teams will operate throughout D day,
After D day
Beach Group organisation will take over and exit teans will await disposni
orders fran Div HQ.
13.
Time of londing of Exit Teams
Exit teams will lond with the flight of first priority vehicles.

