pg_0065.pdf:
- 15 -
(Pages 13 - I reserved for paras 19 - 21)
MINIS TRATTVE
22. (a)
Outline Maintenance Policy
The syston of maintenance is divided into trec soparate bit related
periods:
(1) Assault Maintenance (D to D + 7).
3 Br Inf Div will control maintenance or ait formations und mits
in its area using the resources of 101. Beach Sub Area.
(1i)
Beach Maintenance (D + 1 to P + 4).
1 Corps control maintenance utilising Beach Maintenance Arcas
formed by Beach Sub Areas.
(111) Lines of Cormunication terminal maintenance (D + 5 onwards).
HQ Second Army Troops controls Beach Maintenance Areas which
are merged to form No.l Line of Comunication Terinal,
(b)
6 Airborne Div and SS Bde
3 Br Inf Div is responsible for establishing and maintaining a refilling
area and Casualty Collecting Post immediately EAST of THORNTON adjacent
to the bridge at COALVILLE for the purpose of maintaining and evacuating
casualties from 6 Airborne Div (less one Bde) and SS Troops EAST of
THORN TON.
I Corps are to assume this responsibility as opportunity offers.
(c)
RN and RAF personnel
During the period of assault and beach maintenance 3 Br Inf Div is
responsible for the provision of supplies and POL for personnel
certain craft.
(a)
101 Beach Sub Area will establish a Beach Maintenance Area ready to
accept stores by 1800 hours on D Day and to issue not later than first
licht D + 1.
In order to provide essential stores before Beach Maintenance Area is
open 101 Beach Sub Area will establish Sector Stores Dumps near
beach to take
loads of four ICTs to be beached.
Dumps will be ready to
issue by I + 4 - H + 5 hours.
23.
Stores Policy
(a)
General
All Commanders will emphasise to all ranks under their conmand the
necessity for
strict administrative discipline.
Hoarding or
carelessness in administrative matters can jeopardise the operation.
(b)
Holdings on Landing
With the exception of armunition and petrol for tanks and DUKWS for
which special arrangements will be made sufficient stocks will be
landed with all troops
and vehicles to maintain them for at least two
days.

