L.S.H. (H.M.S. Bulolo).
OBSTACLES
SCOURED
Ships (and Attached Craft)
landing and raiding craft may be organised into one or more gin the
Ships allocated for combined operational purposes, in the British Isles, and their associated
sual manner by the Admiralty.
home-based ships and their
The allocation will be made in the
attached craft
Operations Co under in command of Classes T and I, whether H.M. ships, R. FAt in Mere Cant aed
ships,
will be under the command of the Senior Officer, Assault Ships and Craft (S.O.A.S.C.), who
receive his orders from the C.C.O.
laced under the orders ut the Force Commander concerned.
When any ships or craft are required for an operation they will be
It the force is a big one a. Senior Nava
placet, Landing (S.N.O.[.), may be specially appointed on the Staff of the Force Commander to taki
charge of such ships.
1.Gu
g.M. ships and all naval craft and personnel within any
The administration of these ships will be carried out through the normal channels
through S.O.A.S.C.,
R.F.A.s by
Admiralty
D, of S.T., through P.S.T.O. and D.S.T.O. appointed to the staff of S.Ö.A.S.C.
and Merchant Navy ships by
22. S.O.A.S.C. is authorised to communicate direct with the Admiralty on matters of routine
administration and with local naval authorities on matters controlled by them, but matter so routine
and matters directly affecting the Combined Operations Organisation are to be submitted by hion to
C.C.O. (and will be dealt with by R.A.L.B.).
3. Any ships which are specifically allocated for training purposes will come automatically under
he direct command of V.A.C.I
, who will receive his orders from the C.C.O.
will be made on representation of the C.C.O. through the Admiralty and D. of S.T.
Allocation of such ships
T.L.C. and B.P.C.
24. Captain T.L.C. is the administrative authority for all T.L.C. and B.P.C. in Home Waters and is
in command of H.M.S. Dinosaur (parent ship of I.L.C. and B.P.C. personnel).
25. He is authorised to communicate direct with the Admiralty on matters of routine administration
and with local naval authorities on matters controlled by them but matters of policy and matters directly
affecting the Combined Operations Organisation are to be submitted by him to R.A.L.B.
Discipline, Drafting, Accountant Branch Organisation
26. Details regarding discipline, drafting and advancement of Combined Operations personnel, and
the Accountant Branch Organisation, are issued in Confidential Admiralty Fleet Orders only.
MILITARY ADVINISTRATION
27. The Commandos are formed into the Special Service Brigade commanded by the Commander,
S.S. Brigade, under the C.C.O.
Their administration is the responsibility of the War Office.
Commandos
are specially trained for landings on a hostile shore.
Beyond such tasks as the C.C.O. may allot to them,
they will be available for specific combined operations when they will be placed temporarily under the
Force Commander appointed for that operation.
The Royal Marine Commando is also under the C.C.O.
R.A.F. ADMINISTRATION
28. All R.A.F. personnel on the staff of Combined Operations Headquarters will be borne on Air
Ministry C.A.S.
establishment and will be administered by Air Ministry.
The administrative link
between C.O.H.Q. and Air Ministry is Director,
Training and Organisation, to whom all administrative
and training questions are referred for action within the Ministry.
29. Headquarters Combined Training
(Air Section) under V.A.C.T. are borne on a
special
establishment WAR/MISC/178, and are administered directly by Air Ministry, D.T.O. Air Ministry
forming the administrative link.
30. No. 1441 (Combined Operations) Flight is at present operating from Abbotsinch and is maintained
and administered by No. 17
Group,
Royal Air Force and is under operational command of the Air
Commodore, Combined Training.
This unit will move to Dundonald aerodrome as soon as it is prepared.
31. R.A.F. squadrons and special formations such as the R.A.F. servicing Commandos,
attached to Combined Training Headquarters on courses will come under Combined Training Head.
quarters (Air Section) for operations and local administration while so attached, but will continue to
be administered by their parent R.A.F. command.
TRAINING
Monck),
32. The Headquarters, Combined Training (H.Q.C.T.) are established at Largs, Ayrshire (H.N.S.
, under Vice-Admiral Combined Training (V.A.C.T.).
The Major-General,
Combined Training
the Air Commodore,
Combined Training (A.C.C.T.), and the Captain,
Naval Combined
training of their own Service
Establishment is administered by S.O.A.S.C.)
* V.A.C.T.
Hallet;
was later
correctly renamed Director of Combined Training,
Captain Robson.
M.G.C.T. was Major-General Drew, A.C.C.I. was Air Commodore Walker and C.N.C.T.,
217
(C52794)
FI t
WO 277/21
27
3
Reach obstacles
