equipment, spares and stores was accomplished in the short time available because they were issued
from the S.O.A.S.C. store on the pier at Greenock and the Landing Maintenance Base at Glasgow,
both of which were easily accessible by sea and rail.
Force "V", which was also mounted by Combined Operations Command on the Clyde, was
sailed on 28th June, 1943, via the Straits of Gibraltar.
This Force, which contained the lst Canadian
Division, took part in the assault on Sicily from the West.
the Admiralty in
Admit in With one the with a GS Bath a ship es, alad, was ta con mete.
The Hilary was fitted out with the necessary communications equipment under the supervision of
the C.O.H.Q. Signal Section; and S.O.A.S.C. ensured that the ship was fitted for her duties in
time for her to sail with the convoy.
In addition to Force "W" and Force " V", there was a third force which was mounted in
the Mediterranean on a hastily extemporised basis and was to carry out a shore-to-shore assault
on Sicily from Tunisia.
An Admiralty report on the mounting of " Husky" remarks :—
in this report; accordingly we will only say here that the job was done and achieved success.
A division of labour between C.O.H.Q. and the Combined Operations Section of the
Naval Staff was drawn, and the former must take full credit for the assembly and launching
The Combined Operations Section concentrated entirely during this period
on the build-up of the logistics to support these forces.
In the meanwhile the build-up of close support craft as a result of experience at Dieppe
was being pushed forward by
C.O.H.Q., Beach Group
Organisations were coming into
existence as the result of experience from ' Torch.'
D.U.K.W.sl were
beginning to make
their appearance and the problem of bridging the water-gap between L.S.T. and the shore
was solved by the introduction of N.L. pontoons.
In all these matters C.O.H.Q. played a
leading part.'
Manning the Assault Fleet for Operation " Husky"
The problem of finding the manpower for the assault fleet, including the craft and the various
special parties required, came under very close study during the first quarter of 1943. At this time,
the manpower situation was critical.
The difficulties in the provision of personnel are well describec
n a report written by the Combined Operations Section of the Naval Staff at the end of the war
target required by
although it is not quoted in full, it clearly shows the steps that had to be taken to achieve the
" PERSONNEL
(1) As a result of the personnel computations contained in J.P. (42) 983 and the serious
manning problem thereby
presented, the First Sea Lord held a series of meetings on this
subject,
the first being held on Sunday, 3rd January, 1943.
These meetings resulted in the
presentation of his note of 5th January, 1943, to the Chiefs of Staff. Some interesting points
concerning the personnel difficulties at that time are brought out by the first draft of this
note which was prepared in the form of minutes of the meeting held on 3rd January, 1943.
(2) Broadly speaking, this investigation set a limit to our abilities to man landing craft,
and stated that if, operations were required against the Continent above a certain scale,
it would be essential that America should provide the balance.
Furthermore, the suggestion
was first mooted that personnel should be transferred from other Services to the Navy to
assist in this manning problem, thus producing an optimum effective offensive effort by a
redistribution of Service manpower.
(3) The First Sea Lord's note was written prior to the Casablanca Conference (January,
1943), and it should be borne in mind, at this juncture, that this programme of personnel intake
to Combined Operations, which was then proceeding at a rate approaching 3,000 per month,
was due to cease on 31st May, 1943.
Then followed a period when, perhaps
due to the
essential concentration of all the Staff on the acute problem of mounting®
' Husky,' no
decision was made with regard to continuing this manpower intake.
1 A wheeled amphibian vehicle.
105
