(i) Issue of instructions to S.R.D. regarding reserve supplies to be
forwarded to ports of embarkation; cold storage; food for ad.
vance parties; and information about contractors.
(iv) Issue of instructions to commands regarding the completion of
purchases for the first contingent; quantities to be loaded in
Ships; number of days' supply to be maintained in supply depots
at home; and the method of maintaining stocks in supply depots.
(v) Completion, in conjunction with the D.A.C., of the arrangements
made in peace with Food (Defence Plans) Department, Board of
Trade, regarding the institution of food control.
(vi) Arrangements with the Ministry of Health for the appointment of
special inspectors for food supplies.
(vii) Arrangements with the Government Chemist for the provision
of more W.D. analysts.
(viti) Provision for any special inspection of catering arrangements.
(ix) Initiation of daily progress reports and supply states by Com-
mands and S.R.D.
Plans for Feeding Troops
The plan for feeding the troops in the United Kingdom on mobilization
was that the peace-time method of accounting for messing would continue,
but that units should demand the N.A.A.F.I. items of the ration from that
corporation in terms of so many standard rations, instead of indenting for
commodities.
This was an attempt to simplify procedure without departing
from the peace-time system of provisioning by reference to the cash value
of the ration.
Issues in kind were to begin as soon as the R.A.S.C. and N.AA.F.I. organi-
zations had expanded sufficiently to take the load.
In the meantime, troops
who could not draw rations in the normal way were to be fed by means of
subsistence allowance, i.e., a per capita cash allowance by means of which the
unit made its own arrangements for feeding by local purchase.
Situation of S.T. Services on Outbreak of War
On the supply side, on the outbreak of war, the position was that Com-
mands held a three-day reserve of preserved meat, biscuit, tea, sugar, and sal,
for a total of one million men; and they were prepared to accept automatic
deliveries of seven days' supplies from S.R.Ds. and pre-arranged contractors.
A complete ration was available for certain coast defence units.
diet sheet had been issued.
A standard
There were two S.R.Ds, 50 R.A.S.C. supply depots
28 N.A.A.F.I. depots, and 270 N.A.A.F.I messing stores in existence
five W.D. static bakeries could produce about 160,000 lb. of bread daily.
As far as petrol was concerned, the original bulk storage planned in th.
west was completed and filled, and in factories were completed, but were not
fully run in, or provided with a staff of fully-trained operatives.
mobilization deficiency of 12,000 men, and 19 peace R.A.S.C. cadres for the
On the transport side. while the vehicles were provided for there wass
of 12 additional peace-held officers and 60 emergency officers to the staff oi
Field Force and six Station Transport Companies were deficient.
An increase
42
the C.I.S.T. had been agreed as essential, to speed up initial impressment
arrangements; and plans had been made for their provision.
Contracts for
the supply of technical R.A.S.C. vehicle requirements for the T.A. Divisions,
forming the increment to the first contingent of the B.E.F., had been arranged
in July, but delivery was not expected till March, 1940.
Provision of non-
technical vehicles for the second T.A. contingent had not even been considered.
It was expected that the commitment would have to be met by post-mobiliza-
tion production, although even so deficiencies would occur.
Implementation-Supplies
The planning for mobilization in regard to supplies was implemented
without serious difficulties as far as the organization in the United Kingdom
was concerned.
The necessary stocks of food for despatch to the B.E.F. were
forthcoming, the machinery for their despatch to the ports was put into gear,
and the flow began.
Difficulties, however, then arose which were beyond the control of Q.M.G.6.
Owing to an over-emphasis on security, ships were not loaded with one type
of stores, i.e., supplies or ordnance, as had been expected, but with a propor-
tion of all kinds, so that, if a ship were sunk en route, the effect on stocks
would be minimized.
This led to delays in clearing at the discharging end.
Action might have been taken by Q.M.G.6, had this been known there; but,
again for security reasons, the Staff imposed a complete ban on all informa-
tion as to what was taking place, even to War Office branches.
Q.M.G.6
could, therefore, only presume that the arrangements were proceeding accord-
ing to plan.
The effects of this method of shipment on the supply system
in the B.E.F. are described in Chapter IV.
The expansion of the R.A.S.C. supply organization in the United Kingdom
was comparatively effective, but that of the N.A.A.F.I., on which so much
of the messing of the troops depended, was less so.
It was consequently
necessary to extend the subsistence allowance period for 15 days.
The supply
arrangements in the United Kingdom at this time, and subsequently, are
described in Chapter XII.
Pending the introduction of food control, commands continued to draw
on the War Office contractors who had provided the automatic seven days'
supply.
P.O.L.
As for the supply of petrol, the orders went out, as soon as mobilization
was ordered, for the can factories to go on to full production; but it immediately
became obvious that even the reduced figures of output planned, barely half
maximum capacity, on which the shipping programme to the B.E.F. was
based, would not be attained. This failure was the result of three main factors;
the lack of operation in peace-time to ensure that the plant was thoroughly
run in and tuned up to efficiency; the lack of training of operatives; and minor
mechanical breakdowns, due to the first factor.
It was also caused indirectly
to some extent by the lack of financial support from which the scheme had
suffered.
As a result of the failure, many P.O.L. ships in the planned sailings had to
be withdrawn, though men and vehicles were moving to France according to
44
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
