tankers would enable full use to be made of the sheltered discharge facilities
at Port-en-Bessin,
could therefore be
considered an operational
necessity.
Eventually, an initial allocation of all available tanker vessels.
including small tankers, was made to the Army and Air Force.
All reserves
were pooled, and allocated according to the need of the moment by a work.
ing group formed for the
purpose.
The Military Oil Barge Companies
carried out the water duties for the Admiralty (see under " Water Transport "),
A complex problem was the provision of equipment for bulk installations
on the far shore.
The responsibility for the provision, storage, and custody,
of bulk petroleum distribution equipment had been assumed unofficially from
R.E. by S.T. 2.
In August, 1942, Q.M.G. ruled that this should revert to the
Royal Engineers, S.T. 2 continuing to plan, specify, and list all the materials
required for the main distribution scheme.
" Pluto"
The alternative method of delivering bulk P.O.L. to the Continent was by
means of the submarine pipeline, known by the code name of "Pluto", or
"Pipe Line Under The Ocean"
The idea of a cross-channel pipeline had
been already suggested by Q.M.G. 17, War Office, the fore-runner of S.T. 2,
in November, 1939. But it only began to take practical shape in 1942, when
the Chief of Combined Operations discussed the possibility with the Petroleum
Warfare Department. The latter was then given the responsibility for co-
ordinating the planning, construction, and operation, of the scheme.
It consisted of two series of high-pressure pipelines of revolutionary
design, laid by novel methods under the channel.
They were served by
batteries of high pressure pumps.
The two routes were: -
From Sandown, Isle of Wight, to a terminal near Cherbourg, a dis-
tance of 65 sea miles.
le of wight, to terminal was known as "Bambi",
and that on the Continent as " Bambi-far"
From Dungeness to a terminal near Boulougne, a distance of 23 sea
These terminals were known as " Dumbo" and " Dumbo-far".
The successful operation of the scheme accomplished the feat of bringing
an uninterrupted flow of bulk P.O.L. from reserve tankage in Britain to the
i upted no for ball pe protestinent, via bulk installations
and land-line systems erected on that side.
Definition of Responsibility for " Pluto"
All executive work in connection with operation " Pluto" was carried out
through the Petroleum Warfare Department.
The services of branches of the
War Office were co-ordinated by 5.T. 2, as being principally concerned in the
military aspect of the undertaking.
The responsibilities of the Service and other Departmente were eractly
defined in a directive issued in Tune 1944 which ic renroduced in full a
Appendix XE.
the responsibilities nies. is re prede provision of
personnel to operate the terminals; provision of, and accounting for, the
petroleum products required, anting as liaison with the Petroleum Board and
Petroleum Warfare Department regarding pumping operations and quantitie
and grades required to be delivered through Pluto.
308
R.A.S.C. Units Employed with " Pluto"
To provide the personnel for operating the terminals, Nos. 7 and 8 Bulk
Petroleum Storage Companies, R.A.S.C., were earmarked.
of these units were Sinially solected, placed under a pledge of se personne!
The personnel
posed at the Primes initin corters), and specially trained in the operation
of bulk installatice to been control of high-pressure pumps and pipelines.
This work had hitherto been the responsibility of the R.E., and, in conse.
quence, in order to give the R.A.S.C. personnel practical experience, they took
over a submarine pipeline which ran from Swansea to a point near lifracombe,
and operated it for a year.
No. 7 B.P.S.C. was reorganized on a special War Establishment in
December, 1943; this
was modified and the unit redesignated " R.A.S.C.
Petroleum Installation " in June, 1945 (see Appendix IIL). No. 8 B.P.S.C.
operated the continental terminals under 21 Army Group.
Other P.O.L. Units and Personnel
The organization of the units which were to form the P.O.L. distribution
system for 21 Army Group was evolved from the experience gained in
previous operations in other theatres.
consideration, and adjustments were made to remedy weaknesses, both in
the composition of individual War Establishments, and in the organization of
the system as a whole from front line units back to the base.
nection, see Chapter III, Section 1, and also Appendix III.
The Order of Battle of P.O.L. Units is shown in Appendix VN.
manpower cover allowed for the formation of new units where necessary, but
in addition certain units were withdrawn from the Mediterranean theatre and
set against deficiencies in 21 Army Group requirements.
Petrol Depots, Type "B", five Petrol Depots, Type "C,", and six M.P.F.Cs
They were remobilized where necessary to bring them into line with " Over-
It had not been possible prior. to 1939 to build up a strong section of
officers to operate the many P.O.L. units.
inevitable difficulties in finding the full number required to man the units
of 21 Army Group at their full strength with officers with P.O.L. experience.
This difficulty was accentuated by
the limitations of age and medical
category imposed for all ranks in 21 Army Group.
There was no dou all rankshe work of all ranks in any type of petroleim
unit, whether a M.P.F.C. operating well forward, or a storage installation
receiving bulk at a newly opened port, would be of an arduous and exacting
The success of the campaign depended largely on an efficient and
reliable system of P.O.L. supply.
courting disaster to risk the emploument in this service of personnel who
It would therefore have been foolish, and
might not be fit or active enouch to stand un to the conditions in the early
This assumption proved to be correct.
The hit ta side of the training of pOT units was
Training—P.O.L. Units
to give them as much practice as possible in the use of their own equipmen
and in performing as a team the role which they would be required to carr
309
wester
WO 277р
7
27
W0277726
