The actual mounting of the operation is best described by quoting from the report of the
Military Commander :—
" On 12th March, I received orders from H.Q. Expeditionary Force to report to the War
Office on the morning of 14th March.
When I arrived at the War Office, I was informed that
the Chiefs of Staff had decided at 11 o'clock the previous night that the operation subsequently
known as " Ironclad," was to be prepared to capture Diego
Suarez during the favourable
May moon and tide periods, that was between 3rd-8th May.
The expedition was to sail with
Convoy WS 17 which was to be delayed until 23rd March.
Embarkation of vehicles and stores in the four assault ships (Karanja, Keren, Winchester
Castle and Sobieski) was to commence on 18th March and all planning had to be completed to
this schedule.
After the examination
which did not
of the new intelligence available, Bonus") were
as yet include air photographs, we decided that our previous plans (for
sound and could be carried out with the reduced forces available. •
The reduced forces referred to by Major-General Sturges are accounted for in the minutes of a
Chiefs of Staff meeting which reads as follows :—
" The Chiefs of Staff have re-examined the various methods by which the operation
might be carried out and they hit upon a workable solution which obviates any delay.
They propose that the assault should be carried out by the small force which the Chief
of Combined Operations suggested, i.e. four Battalions and one Commando, and that one
Brigade Group of the 5th Division should be in reserve to support the landing.
By the directive issued to the C.C.O. on 9th December, 1941, the preparation of the ships and
craft and naval personnel was the responsibility of his Administrative Staff.
To assist them was
the staff of the Senior Officer, Assault Ships and Craft (Commodore G. L. Warren) who had his
headquarters in the same building as the headquarters Expeditionary Force.
There was a very close link between R.A.L.B. and S.O.A.S.C. and the preparations for the
sailing of the expedition were completed satisfactorily by the date required.
On this subject the remarks of the Military Commander are of interest :—
" From 15th March to 19th March my staff was engaged in preparing the necessary
plans for loading the ships and completing the necessary preparations for the force to leave
A difficult combined problem was to decide in detail the composition of the naval and
military forces to be embarked in the four assault ships.
To these were to be added
H.M.S. Royal Ulsterman (L.S.I.) (from the Mediterranean) and H.M.S. Bachequero (L.S.T.)
(from Sierra Leone).
These two ships could not meet the convoy until arrival at Durban,
and any troops and vehicles required to make the assault from them had either to be
embarked in the four assault ships or to be taken from those units already embarked with
17th Infantry Brigade Group.'
Note.—The latter were in Convoy WS 17 which was not loaded tactically.
operation and on 19th March I met the Prime Minister.
ation and on it Mart was enterviewed the chiefs of Set in my plassmer the
I left for my Headquarters at Melrose and on 21st March embarked in M.V. Winchester
Castle. . . .
On 23rd March the Winchester Castle sailed."
General Conclusion from Operations " Chariot " and " Ironclad"
expeditions is well illustrated.
In both Operations " Chariot" and " Ironclad" the power given to the attackers by amphibious
produced successful results.
The principles of mobility and surprise were used to the full and
Re-entry into the Continent, Operations " Sesame," " Round-up " and " Sledgehammer"
After Dunkirk it was obvious that a return to the Continent by sea was an inevitable operation.
For some time, every one was preoccupied with other problems and it was not until November,
a directive to "
1941, that much attention was given to the matter ; it was then that C.-in-C. Home Forces received
prepare a plan in consultation with C.C.O. and in conjunction with the appropriate
was named Operation " Sesame."
Naval and Air Commanders-in-Chief"' for " a large scale raid of some duration," which eventually
1 Annex II to C.O.S. (42) 83 Meeting (O).
WO 277/21
27
30
The Invasion Fleet sails for Normandy.
L.C.A. leaving L.S.I.(S).
C52794)
