travelling instructors, with the necessary subordinate personnel.
as established, was the basis for the provision of officers and supervising
Its strength
depended on the number of formations of all types, and of large static instal.
Lapons, principally General Hospitals, Convalescent Depots, and Reinforce-
ment Holding Units.
There was, however, a deadlock over the manpower cover in relation to
the Field Force conspectus, and eventually the necessary cover had to be trans.
ferred from Home ceilings.
until April, 1944, and thus important headquarters, such as those of Corps,
had no catering representatives until six weeks before D-day, a serious position.
In view of the importance of this service, it is considered from the technical
point of view that the manpower cover might well have been provided when
the construction of the force was being examined originally.
The catering services for the Canadian Army came under the supervision
of the Chief Catering Adviser, 21 Army Group, and policy was applicable to
British and Canadians alike.
Control of A.C.C. Personnel
The best way of controlling the postings and promotions of Army Catering
Corps personnel in 21 Army Group formed the subject of considerable dis.
cussion with staff branches of 21 Army Group, and G.H.Q., 2 Echelon.
quick and equal distribution of the available resources was to be achieved, it
would not be practicable for 2 Echelon to have to deal with postings and
promotions, especially as that body would not enter the theatre for a consider-
able time.
It was therefore agreed that the most satisfactory method of deal-
ing with these A.C.C. personnel matters would be to decentralize their control
to formation catering advisers, giving restricted powers at the various levels.
Steps were taken to train A.C.C. officers, designated for duty in 21 Army
Group, in field force work and conditions, as the majority had only experience
with static units in the United Kingdom.
Hospital Catering
Experience in other theatres showed that the full-time services of an
A.C.C. officer were essential to good catering in General Hospitals.
Provision
was made in War Establishments for the appointment of a Specialist Messing
Officer to each General Hospital.
This appon new departure, in the nature
of an experiment, and proved eminently satisfactory in practice.
Diets for
military hospitals were discussed in detail between the Medical and Catering
Services, and resulted in a revised series of diet sheets being issued.
event, the standard of feeding in hospitals was high, and the employnen the
technical exerts largelv overcame the vital problem of getting really hot
food to the patients.
A.C.C. Reinforcements
It was realized at an early stage that A.C.C. reinforcements from th
United Kingdom would never be adequate to cover casualties and normal
trained cooks.
A scheme had therefore to be devised to provide a regular flow of
Training facilities in the theatre in or early days of the cam:
paign were obviously out of the question; and it was consequently arranged
for Cookery Training Centres in the United
Kingdom to
be available for
students returned from 21 Army Group for training.
316
In practice, the greatest problem proved to be that of persuading com-
manding officers to send men home for training when mannower shortage
was acute, and when the potential student was a trained fighting soldier.
This was overcome by fist, whi personnel returned to the United Kingdom in.
and demand replacements.
this way on the X (IV) list, which enabled units to strike them off the strengt
Catering Demonstration Teams
In the campaign in N. W. Europe, many troops would be living for the
fist time on ration packs, particularly the 24-hour landing pack.
This con-
tained items, such as dehydrated porridge and meat, which were new develop-
ments and unknown to the average soldier.
These packs were in short
supply, and could not be issued to units in any quantity for demonstration
purposes.
Three mobile
demonstration teams therefore
went on
tour,
equipped with a complete selection of all ration packs, and of new items such
as self-heating soup and cocoa which were to be used in the operation.
They
demonstrated to thousands of men the way to deal with the 24-hour pack,
and how to make the best of it.
The results were undoubtedly satisfactory.
The teams also advised on methods of improvisation in cooking in the field.
The War Office, through its appropriate branch, S.T. 7, was responsible
from D-day to May, 1945, for the supply of all solid fuel to both the British
and American Forces taking part in " Overlord". It had been decided that
this should be a S.T. responsibility on the principle that the largest user
should assume responsibility for coal overseas. In Middle East and North
Africa, this had been Transportation.
Planning took place in collaboration with 21 Army Group, First U.S. Army
Group, and the small Solid Fuel Section in S.H.A.E.F. This section was set
up in March, 1944, as part of the Petrol and Fuel Branch of G. 4 Division of
Until late August, 1944, its personnel, consisting of one
British officer, two American officers, and two clerks, could only plan and
Requirements were planned up to D +270, that is, about the end of
February, 1945.
It was clear that the Normandy landings would take place
fat from any coali was clear chording to the general plan then prepared it
looked as though it ends, a no ace possible to draw from the Northern French
coalields for about six months.
Because it was feix mohat, as in the war of 1914.1918, the retreating
Germans would destrov the coal mine shafts. arrangements were made before
the landings to earmark sufficient colliery equipment to produce three million
tons of coal.
engines, wire ropes, pit props, electric pumps, etc.; and the list was produced
" first-aid" equipment consisted of portable
in conjunction with a mining engineer who had great experience of the Nord
and Pas de Calais coalfields.
were also provided, by means of which supply could be maintained by man-
A quarter of a million rot-proofed 80-1b. sacks
handling the coal over the beaches in the early stages.
This pack
laid down at Swansea.
(37452)
317.
NO 2717
117
WO 277/21
27
WO27 7/26
