The Base and L. of C. organizations, devel Russia", perational purposes.
were similar to those required for "Aid to Russia", and were expanded.
and adapted.
The removal of threat of invasion
therefore brought no.
relaxation on the administrative side.
The topography of the command requires some comment.
The com-
munication system was V-shaped, with the group of base ports,
usually
referred to as Basra, at the point, one arm running up through Persia, and
the other through Iraq.
There was no lateral communication between the
two except through Khanaqin, north-east of Baghdad.
Transfer of stores.
between the two involved either carrying them by road for 400 miles from
Sultanabad to Khanaqin, or vice versa, or else down to the base and up the
other line.
When Tenth Army was in control in P.A.I.C., the S.T. organization was
under a Brigadier, R.I.A.S.C., but when the command passed to Middle
East, the S.T. Directorate was organized under a D.S.T. (Brigadier), R.A.S.C.
One of his A.Ds.S.T. was for local resource duties; these local supplies
represented a very considerable part of the supply commitment and an
expenditure of £6 million a year.
War Office
nevertheless downgraded
the appointment to that of a D.A.D.S. for a time, but it was later reinstated.
There was no special representation for P.O.L. duties until November, 1942,
when a D.A.D.S. (Oil) was appointed.
This proved insufficient, as might be
expected in a command where oil was so predominant a question, and an
A.D.S.T. was appointed in April, 1943, with D.A.Ds.S. for provision, oil
planning, and technical duties, respectively.
A petrol inspectorate and petrol control staffs were formed on the
Middle East model (q.v.).
One of the petrol control staffs was later re-
placed by a C.R.A.S.C., Petroleum Installations, due to the expansion of
Army interests at Abadan, and the need for a senior officer to conduct
affairs with the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company.
Relations with the
civilian oil companies are discussed later.
S. and T. Units
Almost all Base and L. of C. supply and petrol units in the command,
and the majority of the transport units, were R.I.A.S.C. Particulars of the
supply and transport units are given in Appendix VG.
The Indian organization of supply units, as described in the chapter
on India, was unsuitable for static duties on a long L. of C.
There was
no trained Indian P.O.L. unit, except a Petrol Depot, the Indian theory
being that Supply Personnel Sections could operate either supply or petrol
depots, or both at once.
This did not achieve the best results in practice,
as, with big stocks and off-takes, units did not get the chance to specialize.
The general policy of the dires units dias not gefore, to reorganize Indian
units on R.A.S.C. lines.
Five BaDes asd 23 DoL.Ds. were formed from
Indian units, while the indian PeBSiD, ant a a2d six Indian Supply Personnel
Sections operating patrol dam Petrol Depot and six Is Petrol Depots on the
R.A.S.C. basis.
The results were satisfactory.
In view of the large intux of triaointo the command in the summet
of 1942, a number of British and dia into the cond transport units wete
transferred from Middle East, and Polish units also came in or
formed in the command.
376
Polish forces arrived in the command in the autumn of 1942, with one
wich D.I.D., composed of untrained personnel.
maintained almost
entirely by
R.A.S.C./R.I.A.S.C.
Consequently, the Poles
in were at once raised to make the Polish forces self-supporting.
Polish supply
DIDs, were formed comparatively easily, and were operating in six months.
a training of butchery and bakery personnel was more difficult; but a
Red Bakery and one type
ra Butchery was operating in the late spring of 1943. and a Mobile
"A", were established with mobile machinery
con afterwards.
A proposal to form a Polish B.S.D. did not mature, as
te Polish troops would always operate near a British base from which
Aty could be maintained.
Latr, as the operational situation in the command improved and com-
rites in Middle East increased, formations were withdrawn, and supply
a transport units were transferred to balance the load, while Indian units
irmed to India, where trained units were badly needed.
" Aid to Russia"
"Aid to Russia" then became the principal pre-occupation of the com-
mand. The story of this,
from
the
War Office point of view, began in
Spember, 1941, when the question was considered of establishing a semi-
military line of communication to Russia through
Persia,
from
Bandar
Shapur, via Dizful, to Kermanshah.
A project had already been started by
te Ministy of Supply, without being properly thought out, and it appeared
kat the Army would be required to take over this responsibility and run
trailand road service, with from 2,000 to 4,000 lorries organized into convoys
it aport companies, with complete maintenance installations.
The necessity was stressed by S.T.3 for the appointment of a senior
11S.C officer on the force headquarters, of colonel's rank, as a complete
SH R.A.S.C., M.T. base installations would be required to maintain the
hey ubt of vehicles to be operated on the line, and there would also
later sponsibility for R. A.S.C spevices in the formation and on the L. of C.
This necessity was met by the allotment of 4 Corps Headquarters to take
an of the operation; the Headquarters included a D.D.S.T.
The R.A.S.C. transport organization for the L. of C. was to consist
« a Headquarters, C.R.A.S.C.,
basides a complete set of Corps Troops second line R.A.S.C. units, and
and four General Transport Companies,
Ge second line transport of the two divisions forming the Corps.
The Corps Headquarters and a number of the transport units left the
Vited Kingdom early in December, 1941, but the entry of Japan into the
it completely altered the plan.
dewhere: the Force Headauarters after a brief visit to Iraq, went to India:
The two divisions,
18 and 50,
and the R.A.S.C. transport companies went to Middle East,
India, and
i he Base M.T. Installations, including Headquarters and one part of a
Vehicle Reception Depot, an Advanced Sub-depot of a M.T. Stores Depot,
and a Heavy Repair Shop, reached Base in January,
1942, at a moment
den they could not have been more needed.
tion of the TA OC was practically non-existent, and formed part of the
The Base M.T. Depot organi-
Ordnance Depot.
were scattered in
i ups over a vast area of desert,
For security reasons, vehicles
cases were lying about in heans and becoming covered with sand
and M.T. stores still
377
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
