To the third chase after a vear or more. all supply from overseas could be
in bulk. for there would then he adequate bulk storage in the theatre, and the
requisite tin manufacturing and filling plants.
In the circumstances, however, it was decided to modify the original policy,
and to expedite the beginning of the second phase, by developing bulk suppl
to existing tankage at French ports.
This involved a great deal of planning
and experiment at home, to evolve the necessary administrative and technical
organization decide on the composition of and equipment of the completely
organization for handling bulk supply, and for distributing
bulk imports,
new, specialized units required to receive, store,
and distribute the bulk
supply.
These unis included a Bulk Petroleum Storage Company, a Bulk
Petrol Transport Company,
and a Base Petrol Filling Centre, to
which
reference has been made in Chapter III.
Petrol, Oil and Lubricant Distribution
Distribution of P.O.L. in the forward area during the winter was carried
out in accordance with the recognized system; i..., it was delivered by rail
to two corps petrol railheads, and one G.H.O, railhead, from which it was
taken forward by corps petrol parks, divisional petrol companies, and P.O.L.
sections of G.H.Q. companies, and issued by them to units.
As the result of practical experience, the system was supplemented by the
establishment of reserve dumps in advance of railhead.
Before the war, the doctrine was that reserves of P.O.L. should not be held
"on the ground" at or in advance of railhead, but that the only reserve in
that area should be what was held "on wheels" in 3rd line transport.
that pra thou as house, in line with the current opinion ron the st hi
3rd line transport, later discredited and abandoned.
This is considered else-
where, as a transport question.
However, as a matter of practical politics in France in the winter of 1939.
1940, reserves " on the ground" in advance of railhead came into existence.
It is of interest to note that they had been suggested as far back as 1936 by
the Standing Committee on the method of delivery and distribution of petrol
to units in advance of railhead; but this advice had not been accepted, though
that for separate petrol railheads was.
The reserves were built up in two ways. First, it was found impossible to
gauge accurately the daily requirement of petrol to reach railhead, and thus
a surplus accumulated there, amounting to hundreds of tons.
Secondly, Corps
H.Q. authorized the holding "on the ground" by divisional petrol companies
and consumer units of a week's supply at current rates.
Without these
stocks, Corps would have been immobilized for want of petrol in the sever
weather of February, 1940, when the railways broke down.
A trouble was that no adequate provision of personnel had been made,
either to man petrol railheads, or to take over and control railhead depols.
The consequence was that corps petrol parks, and the P.O.L. elements of
G.H.Q. companies, were obliged to undertake these duties.
They were trans.
port units, without personnel earmarked for such work, and the result was
hat they were denuded of personnel, particularly spare drivers, to supplement
the detachments from supplv nersonnel comnanies and pioneer companies
114
officially provided, but inadequate for the purpose.
The transport companies
might thus have been faced with a shortage of drivers in an emergency, and
consequent possible failure.
The need for small self-contained units to operate railheads and railhead
depots was thus amply demonstrated.
In addition, the lack of sufficient
specialist personnel in forward depots led to bad accounting and the rapid
deterioration of stocks through improper storage.
Bulk Supply in the Forward Area
Further interesting developments were the establishment of one section
of a base petrol filling centre at Lille, to supply forward units, and the institu-
tion of bulk supply to corps and G.H.Q. troops.
Both of these were regarded
as purely administrative conveniences, to be used while " peace" conditions
prevailed.
The returnable container system proved itself during the active
operations in
1940, when the output of the Lille filling centre maintained
supply to the B.E.F. until practically the last stages of evacuation.
Nevertheless it was apparent that base petrol filling centres,
with their
heavy extensive equipment, requiring careful selection of sites, and consider-
able engineering work for the installation, were out of place in a mechanized
war.
A mobile type of unit was indicated.
Maintenance of R.A.F.
The air component of the R.A.F. for co-operation with the B.E.F. con-
sisted at first of two Army Co-operation Wings, one Fighter Wing, and one
Bomber Reconnaissance Wing, and was later increased by the addition of
eight Fighter Wings, and a Communication Squadron.
The Advanced Air Striking Force consisted of light bombers, later supple-
mented by several squadrons of fighters, and its role was to bomb Germany
more easily than this could be done from the United Kingdom.
The B.E.F. was responsible for the maintenance of these R.A.F. forces.
The initial commitments were the provision of petroleum products for
two days at airfields, for five days in air stores parks, and for seven days in
reserve dumps 30 miles behind railhead; and the provision and delivery
of all general supply commodities to airfields.
Demands for rations were at least calculable, but those for petroleum
responsibility for the R.A.F's. liquid fuels
ended at railheads.
R.A.F. reserves were based on estimates of eleven weeks' consumption at
"sustained effort", but these estimates were misleading.
The highest weekly
rate of consumption before the period of active ground operations began was
189,000 gallons.
At that rate, the stocks then held would have lasted from
six months to a year; but the effective life of a tin was less than six months.
In March,
the
petrol depots held nearly three million gallons of aviation
unirit in containels.
besides two million gallons in bulk, for the R.A.F. units
allotted to the B.E.F.
could start on the bulk supply.
These units had to use up the canned fuel before they
If the static phase of the war had continued, the R.A.F. would not have
needed to draw upon its bulk reserves until September or October, 1940, and
115
WO 277/21
27
1027775,
