Plans for expansion of the barrack services in the event of mobilization
included expansion of military hospitals, preparation of the Families' Evacua-
tion Centre, and the building up of reserves of fuel and light to a minimum
of six months for 6,000 men.
The additional quantities
were held by con-
tractors, available for immediate issue to the War Office department when
required.
Situation, 1939-1940
Peace-time procedure for rationing and accounting continued on mobiliza-
tion but on the basis of the field service ration laid down in Allowance
The increased reserves of supplies and fuel were duly laid
in, but the actual increase in feeding strength was not great.
Although the W.D. underground cold store had been approved in May,
1939, nothing had yet been done, owing to failure to reach agreement with
the naval authorities as to the site.
The new store huts were built.
As the island was not directly threatened in the early stages of the war,
it was possible at first to continue to operate the local transport contracts,
and the impressment scheme was only implemented to a limited extent.
Drivers for the impressed vehicles
were provided by
enrolment into the
Malta Auxiliary Corps, their status being that of semi-civilian employees,
subject to military law.
Pending the arrival of the promised storage tanks,
a number of 500-
gallon tanks were made in the R.N. Dockyard and placed in quarries.
regular use would have been difficult and laborious, as all pumps were manual,
and they were only once actually employed.
S. and T. Staff-Organization-Relation to O.C. R.A.S.C.
In November, 1939, the increased duties consequent on mobilization led
to the addition of a D.A.D.S.T., to the staff of the A.D.S.T.
importance of Malta in relation to the campaigns on the shores of the
Mediterranean, and the consequently enhanced responsibilities of the S.
and T. staff, were recognized by the upgrading of the appointment of
A.D.S.T. to D.D.S.T. in August, 1942, and by the addition to his staff of
two more second-grade staff officers in January, 1943.
a D.A.D.S., a D.A.D.S. (petrol), and a D.A.D.T.
It is of interest to notice here the division of responsibility for R.A.S.C.
services between the D.D.S.T. and the O.C.,
It might be asked
how the two appointments can be justified for a limited area, with a com-
paratively small ration strength, only a few R.A.S.C. units, and not more than
one C.R.A.S.C./O.C., R.A.S.C., to be co-ordinated.
The position is that,
in a more or less independent command such as Malta, or any other isolated
overseas station, a number of matters arise which require to be dealt with on
command level, and not as it were on district level.
The greater experience
and weight of a more senior S. and T. officer are therefore desirable if the
policy of the D.S.T., War Office, is to be given effect.
Moreover, in such
stations there is the question of liaison with the civil government depart-
ments; and in Malta, in particular, there were extensive dealings with the
Royal Navy and the R.A.F.
410
The Middle East system of control, in cases where an S.
and an O.C., R.A.S.C. were both present, was in operation in Malta.
of responsibility was, broadly speaking, as follows:
Under control of D.D.S.T.
Supplies.—General control of policy.
Technical control of supply units.
Control of stocks; stock returns, stocktaking, and warranties.
tracts and arrangements for local purchase.
Bulk issues. Accounting, except
The whole of the work of forecasting, demanding, and reporting stocks,
was carried out by the S.T. staff from 1942 onwards.
The only information
which the supply depot was required to furnish in regard to these matters
was a monthly stock state, and an out-turn of convoy receipts.
the S.T. staff prepared all the necessary stock states, etc., required to be
rendered to D.S.T., Middle East, and to War Office.
Liaison on supply
matters within the island was effected between the S.T. staff and the com-
mittee for the co-ordination of supplies.
Transport.-General policy regarding transport duties and the allocation
units to particular services and tasks.
General policy regarding issue,
maintenance, modification, repairs, and condemnation, of M.T. vehicles and
of W.D. vessels.
Executive action in respect of the issue of new vehicles,
and their allocation to units, and of provision of spares and assemblies.
Supervision of accounting for technical stores and equipment.
Affiliation of vehicles for workshop repair and inspection.
-Similar to that for supplies, i.e., S.T. made provision and
responsible for, technical questions of storage and handling, and carried out
forecasting, demanding, reporting, and control of stocks.
Malta Government through the Controller of Mineral Oils, with whom the
provision of the Army's requirements were arranged.
Under control of O.C., R.A.S.C.
Command of all R.A.S.C. units, and supervision of their
interior economy, and regimental accounts.
Questions regarding accommo-
dation of R.A.S.C. personnel.
Custody of supply and P.O.L. stocks.
precautions in Supply Depot, D.I.Ds. and stores.
Courts of enquiry
writes-off. Administration and operation of W.D. Bakery and Cold Store.
Issues of supplies and P.O.L. to troops.
Clearance of supplies from ships.
Operation and control of the Land and Water Transport Office.
inspection, and maintenance of transport units and W.D. Fleet.
of records and non-technical documentation.
It is of interest to compare the above arrangements with the question of
the relations of the D.D.S.T.,
British Army Staff, Washington, with the
Os.C., R.A.S.C., Bermuda, and the Caribbean Areas.
The Siege
As the military situation in Europe got worse in the early part of 1940,
Malta began to be placed on a war footing.
In April, 120 vehicles were
impressed to supplement the R.A.S.C. establishment, and the transport com-
pany was reorganized into four sections, of which one was military and
411
