The new establishment was designed to include:•
(a) Company headquarters and domestic transport;
(b) three self-contained parachute platoons, each capable of:-
i) Landing with a brigade group,
and marking out and holding a
supply dropping point or points;
(ii) clearing,
stacking, and guarding panniers and supplies dropped
on the S.D.P., and effecting subsequent distribution;
(c) three transport platoons, each capable of: -
(i) unloading supplies from aircraft or gliders, and delivering them
speedily over difficult country, whilst affording their own protec.
tion within the platoon;
(i) acting alternatively as air crews, if not employed in transport
rôles;
(d) one R.D.I., providing relief drivers;
(e) workshop platoon, capable of maintaining its own company vehicles,
and jeep transport of all units affiliated for maintenance, and of
modifying and constructing equipment, as used by the light company
for supply by air.
Each parachute platoon consisted of two officers and 34 other ranks, the
latter including a proportion of supply storemen and artificers, the balance
Each transport platoon was organized in seven sections, each of five jeeps
and five 10-cwt, airborne trailers, a reduction in the scale of transport being
The transport platoons included a total of 40 operational para-
chutists, as a pool for keeping the parachute platoons up to strength, the
remaining personnel of the transport platoons being trained in aircrew duties.
The defence element was eliminated.
This organization was sponsored by 21 Army Group, and was that which
operated in connection with the landing of 6 Airborne Division in Normandy
on D-Day, 6th June, 1944.
Provision of Air Despatching Crews
In connection with the Arnhem operations in September, 1944, to which
reference is made in Chapter VIII, the organization for the provision of air
despatching
crews from the heavy composite companies completely broke
down, and additional air despatchers had to be provided from other sources.
This was only possible because the main base was in the United Kingdom.
It was therefore approved in principle that the necessary quota of air despatch
companies should be included as base troops in any force in which airborne
or airportable divisions were included.
The number of despatchers required
would depend on the composition of the formation to be served by re-supply,
and the distances between despatching airfields and the dropping zone, which
governed the payload for each aircraft, and therefore the number of aircrat
and despatching crews required to deliver a daily fixed tonnage.
Developments in 1945
The establishment of the light composite company was reduced from
three to two transport platoons in April, 1945, as it was not thought that more
than two transport platoons would ever be ais true in any one operation
The airborne division could be maintained by two platoons during the
airborne phase of an operation.
This amendment had not however taken
effect in 21 Army Group before the end of the war in Europe, and the three
platoons of the light company in 6 Airborne Division were fully employed
during the closing weeks of the campaign, as described in Chapter VIII,
although not in an orthodox fashion.
A further amendment, of which notice may be taken here, was the sub-
stitution, as an alternative to jeeps and trailers, of eight 15-cwt. half-tracked
cargo carriers (M.S) in each of the two transport platoons of the light com-
These were for use in the initial phase of an airborne
operation, and were considered an operational necessity for the clearing of
supply dropping points and dropping zones when under enemy fire.
The Lethbridge Report (see Chapter XI) considered that the organization
of airborne troops adopted for the European theatre would be generally suitable
for the Far Eastern theatre.
The establishment of the airborne light company,
R.A.S.C., intended for service in the Far Eastern theatre, was therefore based
on the standard British airborne organization, modified only where necessary
to suit local conditions.
SECTION 5.-WATER TRANSPORT
Introductory
Waterborne transport units and vessels in the Army were operated during
the war of 1939-1945 by two separate services, namely, the Transportation
Branch (Inland Water Transport), R.E., and the Water Transport branch
of the R.A.S.C.
This state of affairs led to a certain amount of uncertainty, with the
possibility of confusion, as to the respective rôles and responsibilities of the
two services; and the question became ultimately a major problem, requiring
to be resolved by a decision of the Army Council as to the policy to be
pursued.
The circumstances in which this situation arose, and the definition
of responsibility enunciated, are set out below.
It will be seen, from the account given of them below, that the R.A.S.C.
water transport services developed during the war from the performance of
routine duties by vessels manned by civilian crews to that of a variety
operational functions in active theatres of war, carried out by craft with
military crews.
For the latter purposes, the craft were organized in various
descriptions of unit, according to their type and rôle.
Some account of the
organization of these units is given below; and further details of the craft
operated, and of their military crew complements, are contained in Appendices
VIID and VIIE respectively.
For non-operational duties, both at home and overseas, vessels were
organized, wherever numbers permitted, in Water Transport
Companies.
Those formed in the United Kingdom are dealt with in Chapter XII, Section
3, and further details of the operation and administration of all types of water-
borne companies,
R.A.S.C., will be found in the chapters dealing with the
various theatres of war.
99
WO 277/21.
27
W027 7/26
