Provision of R.A.S.C. Transport Units
A very large number of R.A.S.C. transport units had to be provided for
21 Army Group, totalling nearly 100.000 men and some 25,000 vehicle
Provision was a matter
of some difficulty, mainly owing to shortage of
personnel, but also to some extent to the non-availability of vehicles.
In December, 1943, 37 companies were still unformed or were in cadre
form only, and their formation or mobilization depended on the availability
of personnel, and, in the case of 12 G-ton, three 10-ton, and five Tank
Transporter companies, of vehicles.
There was a general shortage of manpower, but transport units were
particularly affected, as there was a serious deficiency of drivers.
a matter of some concern.
This was
It had been recognized for some time, and made
good in part.
Thus, in June, 1943, S.T.3 had agreed to accept surplus per-
sonnel of the Royal Armoured Corps for transfer to the R.A.S.C. transport
branch, as they could be readily absorbed.
These were followed by transfers
from other arms, and it became necessary to use several G.T. companies as
Driver Training Units.
In spite of these accretions, it was impossible to forecast a date for com-
pletion of nearly half the R.A.S.C. transport units in the Order of Battle, and
it was estimated that the deficiency in April, 1944, would be thirty-seven
companies.
This deficiency would have serious consequences, even to the
extent of involving a modification of the operational plans, unless drastic
action was taken to make good at least a large part of it. It was the policy of
the D.S.T., War Office, to go on forming most units at fifty per cent. of their
establishments and to expand them progressively, as agreed between War
Office and 21 Army Group, as the most flexible means of absorbing the
irregular flow of both vehicles and personnel.
The deficiency in personnel was estimated at about 15,000. To meet this,
9,000 men were withdrawn from A.A. Command, and 1,000 from Home
Forces and Northern Ireland, while 1.000 were found from surplus companies
in Middle East.
Apart from these, the attenuated resources remaining in
the United Kingdom i moon themit of ate other measures to reduce the
deficiency much further.
The limite shortage of about 4,000 at the ch ci
May, representing about five per cent. of the total establishments of all trans-
port units of the force, had therefore to be accepted.
There were
The vehicle position was, on the whole, more satisfactory.
sufficient vehicle assets to complete all transport units of 21 Army Group
with some form of G.S. load-carrier, and, with the exception of tank trans.
porters, the total * lift " required could be met by adjustments between 3-ton
6-ton,
and 10-ton, companies.
The deficiencies in January amounted to
The latter
1,400 6-ton lorries,
644 40-ton tank transporters, and 237 tippers.
Four
were amply covered by consignments awaiting shipment from Canada.
6-ton companies were to be
equipped with 10-tonners from reserves, and
five 6-ton companies with 3-tonners from reserves, until the proper siz
became available from U.S.A.
role, and were to be equinned with DIIK We in the early stages of " Overlord"
of the G.T. companies had a dual
and then to revert to normal transport duties.
DUKWs. however. and Terranins were consequently held against this com
There was a shortage of
amphibian units were fully equipped with their DUKWs by 22nd May, 1944.
mitment until expected shipments matured.
In the event,
all operational
302
Only five companies of heavy tank transporters would be available for
D Day, and two of these might be required for use of movement of tanks in
the United Kingdom; but a proportion of 20-ton transporters would be
wanted for the movement of gun-towing and other tracked " A" vehicles,
with these vehicles.
and it was therefore proposed to equip some of the remaining compiles
Amphibious Training Centre
In November, 1943, the R.A.S.C. Amphibious Training Centre was
established at Towyn in North Wales to train R.A.S.C. personnel in the
operation and maintenance of DUKWs and other amphibians, in preparation
for " Overlord".
The commitment was that of training the 4,000 personnel
of the eleven Amphibious G.T. Companies forming part of the Beach Groups
Continuation training took the form of beach group
exercises in off-loading various types of shipping.
After the 21 Army Group commitment had been completed, the centre was
employed partly in developing methods of training and maintenance of new
types of amphibians such as were likely to be used in the war in the Far East.
These included Terrapins, L.V.T. 2's, and M. 29's.
The Centre also took part in the mounting of " Overlord" by manning
DUKWs which operated in the South Coast ports, loading landing craft,
transporting personnel to craft, etc.
A cadre of trained officers and other ranks from the centre was sent out
to India, where it formed the Amphibious Training Centre at Cocanada.
Phasing in of Transport Units
The plans for phasing in the transport units in the early stages of the
landing were based on the known factors of minimum tonnage and mileage
required to support the assault, and the maximum planned capacity of the
beaches.
Other factors were forecasts and not certain, e.8.,
the rate of
build-up of the reserves, and the progress of operations.
These forecasts
were treated as firm facts for planning purposes, and from them the amount
of transport required acts the datesion which it should land were calculated.
Only estimates could be made of such requirements as the
bridging to be undertaken, on the requirements for troop-carrying at different
stages.
In Mav. 1943 a co-ordinating agencv was set un at War Office to deal with
Petrol, Oil and Lubricants-Planning
the provision, supply and distribution of P.O.L. for the contemplated opera
This was a C.O.S.S.A.C. Committee, and it confined itself to matters
of general policy, chiefly in regard to the relations between the British and
U.S. elements of the Committee.
petroleum products to an expeditionary force in N.W. Europe.
designed to give planners an outline of the task involved in the mounting of
"Overlord,
• the requirements for provision of PO.L, and details of the
(37452)
303
7
WO 277/21
27
WO27 7/26
