out in the field.
To this end, as many units as possible were given practical
instruction by attaching them to P.O.L. units operating in the United King-
Various methods of collective training were employed, of which the
following are examples.
A H.Q.,
C.R.A.S.C., Petrol Units, was established
by the Mobilization Centre where all P.O.L, units were prepared for handing
over to 21 Army Group; under the direction of that Headquarters units which
had been trained at the Petroleum Technical Training Centre received realistic
practical training in their actual role under active service conditions.
The
P.T.S.Ds. intended for 21 Army Group received practical training in the
custody, receipt and issue of Petroleum Technical Stores at 9 Petrol Depot.
They assisted in the packing,
marking,
and consignment of the technical
stores which in due course they were to receive and issue in B.L.A.
Technical personnel of the Petrol Tin Factory Operating Companies were
present during the dismantling and packing of the tin-making plants at two
satellite factories, which it was then intended to ship to the continent.
Supply and Maintenance by Air
Provision was made for supply by air of 21 Army Group, under four
main heads, viz.: —
(a) Emergency supply by air.
(b) Schedule supply by air.
(c) Maintenance by air-ground forces.
(d) Maintenance by air-airborne forces.
(a) Emergency Supply by air was designed to furnish a supply by air fo
21 Army Group of all types of stores and supplies in an emergency,
e.g., in the event of the interruption of normal sea communications.
The lift would be landed on airfields in France.
(b) Schedule Supply by air was a daily air service, catering for a fore.
cast requirement of 26 tons a day; but no supplies were to be in-
(c) Maintenance by air ground forces provided for the temporary
maintenance of a fighting formation in the event of its land com-
munications being cut.
Stores despatched for this purpose were pre-
packed and dropped by parachute in panniers.
(d) Maintenance by air-airborne forces-
-provided supplies, etc., held in
readiness for airborne troops to draw at very short notice.
21 Army Group Requirement
and maintenance by air, which formed an appreciable proportion of the
In March, 1944, 21 Army Group stated their firm requirement for supply
total maintenance tonnage.
It was as follows:-
(a) Emergency Supply by Air, to the extent of: —
1,000 tons a day from D+ 14,
2,000
» »
D + 21,
3,000
D + 30.
all upon 24 hours' notice.
310
(b) Schedule Supply by Air, to the extent of 26 tons a day.
(0) Maintenance by Air.- Three days maintenance for a Brigade Group
at 100 tonSiv say, at 3 five days maintenance for an inta Group
Armoured Division at 350 tons a day. Maintenance of the Brigade
Group and the Division might be concurrent.
Group
That of the Brigade
might be required from D+1, and of the Division from
D+ 10, and both were all to be free or parachute dropped.
Schedule Supply and Emergency Supply might be concurrent. Emergency
Supply might be required for British and/or U.S. Forces, and might take
place from British and/or U.S. airfields.
a requirement was stated for four Bailey Bridges from D+ I.
In addition to these commitments,
Preliminary Action
Until these requirements had been formulated, and the locations of the
transport aircraft assigned to the commitment were known, detailed planning
could not begin.
A start had already been made, however, in preparation
for the task by training General Transport Companies in packing, loading, and
despatching.
This went on from October, 1943, to March, 1944, at the Air-
borne Supplies Training Wing, Amesbury, which was formed for the purpose,
and provided in addition the nucleus of an air despatch organization for
21 Army Group.
At the same time, the foundations of a properly-organized air despatch
system had been laid in the light of experience gained in the various theatres
of war.
The basic organization, and the allocation of responsibility,
described in Chapter III, Section 1. It is proposed here to deal with the
particular aspects of the service as it applied to 21 Army Group.
The first steps were to set up an experimental Air Supply and Mainten-
ance Organization, and to prepare provisional War Establishments for
C.R.A.S.C. Air Despatch, and an Air Despatch Company, the latter to include
an air loading platoon, and two air dropping platoons.
Limitations of man-
povet made the imp, mentation of the proposals difficult, but a L. of C.
Transport Column H.Q., lent by 21 Army
Group, and a Troop-carrying
Company, R.A.S.C., were temporarily converted to fill the roles.
"twas
evident that these . were impulicient for the task, and a Driver Trainis
Battalion was disbanded, and the manpower used to cover two or more Air
Despatch Companies, and seven Air Dropping Platoons.
organization
now comprised 12 Air Dropping Platoons, each providing 15 Air Despatch-
of 360 tons a day.
in crews of four men, Ora potal of 180 crews, with an approximate capacity,
If two sorties were flown, 540 tons a day might be reached,
or three days.
but this would he a great strain. and could not be kept up for more than two
In May, 1944, the entire Air Despatch organization was moved to the
area of the airfields near SD Swindon on which it was to be based. and
intensive training was continued in coniunction with the R.A.F
Detailed Arrangements
The first task of the Air Despatch organization, in preparation for the
maintenance by air commitment, was to pre-pack the requirements, plus two
days reserve and hold them in Air Meaneit dumns
One days' requirement
311
17
WO 277/21
27
WO277726
