CHAPTER V
SCANDINAVIA AND THE NORTH
SECTION 1.—THE SCANDINAVIAN OPERATIONS, 1940
Introductory
It was decided early in 1940 to send Allied Forces to Scandinavia, in order
to assist Finland, then struggling with Russia, to deny the iron ore fields in
invaded Sweden or Norway.
Northern Sweden to the enemy, and to be already on the ground if Germany
for these operations, but,
Originally, three British divisions were allotted
when Finland concluded an armistice with Russia,
two of them were withdrawn and sent to France, only the 49 Division
remaining.
It was then planned that, in the event or threat of German invasion of
Norway, we would send one force to Narvik, in Northern Norway, and another
to Trondheim,
These two areas are 350 miles apart.
Bergen, and Stavanger, in Central and Southern Norway.
communications are poor.
The country is mountainous, and land
Communication is largely by
steamers travelling coast-wise.
means of smal
The Narvik Force was known as "Avonmouth", (later as " Avonforce",
and then as " Rupertforce"), and consisted of the 24 Guards Brigade, some
divisional troops of 49 Division, a French contingent, and the headquarters
of a Base Sub-area, with some Base and L. of C. troops.
The Trondheim Force was known as " Stratford" at first, and was split
into two, Force
" Maurice", which landed at Namsos, and Force "Sickie"
which landed at Andalsnes.
Each consisted originally of one Infantry Brigade.
Together, the two forces were known as the North Western Expeditionary
Force (N.W.E.F.).
They embarked in Scotland during the first week of April, and awaited
orders; but, before they could sail, the Germans forestalled us by landing in
Norway, and occupying Oslo,
Stavanger, Trondheim and Narvik.
It was at
once decided to support the Norwegians, but there were various delays in
implementation, such as the troops having to be disembarked from the war
ships in which they were to have proceeded, owing to the vessels being re-
quired for operational duties.
There was also great uncertainty about the
situation in Norway, which made the formulation of new plans very dific.
and there were numerous alterations, even after the ships had sailed, of which
even the commanders concerned were not always informed.
The general intention was for "Avonmouth" to enter Narvik, and for
"Stratford" to capture Trondheim by a pincer movement from landing ti
Namsos and Andalsnes, about 100 miles to the north and south of Trondhen
respectively.
This movement was initially intended to support a frontalatis
on Trondheim,
but this plan was cancelled after the convoys siled.
various landings were duly effected, but both expeditions complete tin.
and were evacuated, the first after eight weeks, and the second after fortity
" They lacked aircraft, anti-aircratt guns, anti-tank suns, tanks, transpon, go
campaig"".
to quote Mr.
Churchill, on what he called
"this ramshackle
130
The difficulties of terrain and climate were aggravated by bad planning,
lack of proper preparation, and failure to observe elementary principles.
lafort seems to have been made to ensure that either force was supported by
a balanced administrative element.
and was continually overstrained.
The machine provided was never adequate,
There were many errors and deficiencies
in the administrative arrangements, as will be seen in the following account
of the adventures of the two forces from the S.T. point of view.
The original intention was that headquarters, 49 Division, should be the
headquarters of N.W.E.F., that the normal H.O., divisional R.A.S.C., would
not accompany it, but a special S.T. staff.
This was to consist of a lieutenant-
colonel, R.A.S.C., a senior transport officer, a senior supply officer, a local
purchase officer, and an adjutant.
Before the force sailed, however, the S.T.
staff was reconstituted on a more normal establishment.
S.T., 4 Corps,
assumed control eventually, and each part of the force had an A.D.S.T., with
the usual staff.
The base sub-areas also each had an A.D.S.T.
Planning
The scale of reserves originally laid down was 30 days, plus 30 days'
working margin.
It was the intention to build these up to 60 days' reserve
in the theatre, with a working margin of between 15 and 30 days.
All units embarked with 14 days' supplies, including three days' composite
rations for the initial maintenance of the force, and il days' bulk supplies;
while an additional 19 days' bulk supplies, and five days' special mountain
haversack rations for a proportion of the force were also shipped.
All M.T. and aviation spirit was to be supplied in 4-gallon non-returnable
containers packed in cartons, and lubricants in 5-gallon drums. No provision
was made for supply in bulk, as the estimated requirements were small and
did not warrant it, nor was it thought that there was sufficient tankage for
the purpose in the parts of Norway concerned.
Practically all tankage in
Northern Norway was for gas-oil, for use in the fishing boats, which were
the primary means of communication coast-wise, motor road transport being
very small in numbers in comparison.
The basis of calculation for pro-
vision of M.T. spirit was five gallons a vehicle for a day.
The maintenance
of the French contingents in P.O.L. was a British responsibility.
Transport to accompany the Force was kept to a minimum, reliance being
placed on hiring transport locally on arrival to supplement it.
This seems
to have been due to lack of information and of appreciation of local condi-
The force commander subsequently commented that, although a
study of the map would have shown that inland water transport would
necessarily have to be used to a great extent, no provision was made to send
with the force the necessary personnel to organize and operate it.
was considering in April the question of including a motor boat company
in the force, bu this never materialied, as not enough vessels could be made
available in time.
A catering adviser was appointed to Force Headquarters, but both he
and the 49 Division ad was appelett behind in the United Kingdom.
light of the experion advis later ca mpaigen as to the value of catering advisers
in the earliest starience in later atre, this was perhaps unfortunate.
131
117
we
WO 277/21
27
W027//26
