Rifles, the Northern and the Southern.
A small number of R.A.S.C. officers
and other ranks were attached for duty with the K.A.R.., but there was no
actual R.A.S.C. organization for the performance of supply, transport and
From this small beginning grew a command which was to mount and
support the invasion and capture of Italian Somaliland and Ethiopia, and
whose feeding strength reached a peak of nearly a quarter of a million.
In addition, the 11 East African
reoccupation of Burma.
Division was set to take part in the
From the outbreak of war until the summer of 1941, East Africa came
Commander-in-Chief, Middle
became an independent command, under the direct control of War Office.
At its largest, it included, besides the original territories, Northern Rhodesia.
Somalia, the former Italian Somaliland.
Seychelles, Mauritius, Ethiopia, British Somaliland, and
There were five phases in the story of the war in this theatre.
from September, 1939, to June, 1940, mobilization and adjustment to war
conditions; second, from June, 1940, to February,
1941, preparation for
offensive operations; third, from February, 1941, to December, 1941, active
operations in Somalia and Ethiopia; fourth, occupation of those territories,
and the mounting of the invasion of Madagascar, during the period to the
middle of 1943; and,
thereafter, the production of reinforcements for 11
East African Division, which went to South East Asia Command in June,
Supplies and Transport Pre-war
Until 1938, the administration of supplies and transport services in
British East Africa was the responsibility of the S. and T. Corps of the
King's African Rifles. Supplies were then divorced from transport on the
grounds of economy, and became, with P.O.L., the responsibility of the
brigade staff quarter-master.
This meant the end of the organized supply
service, which had been in operation since 1919, as supplies were now
delivered to railhead under contract.
transport part of the
corps continued as the Transport Corps,
comprising in peacetime four officers, four British warrant and non-commis-
sioned officers, nine Asians, and one hundred and five Africans, with 58
besides a reserve of 21 officers and 200 African drivers.
strength must be compared with a mobilization requirement of nearly 3,000
all ranks, and 1,900 vehicles.
Frequent requests were made for a reserve of
2,000 drivers to be approved, but this was not allowed until 11 days before
The general East African mobilization scheme drawn up in May, 1939,
provided for the formation of an
East African Army Service Corps, which
would assume responsibility for
both supply and transport services; this
took effect on the outbreak of war.
Organization of E.A.A.S.C.
The general organization
of the E.A.A.S.C. was based on the pre-war
system designed to meet the operational needs of the K.A.R., the foundation
of which was the " Group"
, intended to serve one battalion, and maintain
it at a distance of 80 to 100 miles from railhead.
The new Corps therefore
comprised a Headquarters, three operating Groups, and Base units.
Group consisted of a Headquarters and Repair Shop Wing, a Field Supply
Each
Depot, a Bus Company, two Supply Companies, two Ammunition Companies,
and a Motor Ambulance Convoy.
The Bus Companies were designed to
carry one battalion, and were later re-designated Reserve M.T. Companies.
The existence of the Transport Corps naturally facilitated the introduc-
tion of the new system, but the fallacy of the policy of severing supplies from
transport in 1938 was realized, when the re-creation of a supply branch was
initiated, as there was literally nothing on which to build.
for a Main Supply Depot was obtained, and, although not a single member
of the personnel of that installation had any
previous experience of supply
work, it was in a position to function by 4th September, 1939, when the
Staff Quartermaster ceased to control the rationing of the forces.
The transport base installations included a Vehicle Reserve Depot, to
deal with the receipt, inspection, registration, and allotment, of the vehicles
brought in from civilian sources; the Heavy Repair Shop was formed by
taking over civilian workshops complete, until workshop machinery arrived;
the formation of the Main M.T. Technical Stores (later M.T. Stores Depot)
was only made possible by a firm placing its entire accommodation and staff
at the disposal of the Army.
The number of supply and transport units required by the battalion
group system was found to be uneconomical when the force was concen-
trated, and battalions were brigaded.
A new S.T. organization for a Brigade
Group was therefore designed, consisting of Headquarters with workshop
wing, two supply companies (purely transport), two ammunition companies,
two field supply depots, and one reserve M.T. company.
viously been no provision for divisional troops' second line,
now organized as a Divisional Troops Group, consisting of a supply com-
pany, an ammunition company, and a F.S.D.
The theory of operation of transport was the " endless chain" system
between rail and roadhead and delivery point.
The Brigade Group had a
range of about 80 miles, but the Divisional Troops Group a good deal less,
while that of the two Battery Ammunition Columns was
shortage was made up by reserve M.T. companies, acting as third line trans-
The function of the two F.S.Ds. in each group was that one should be
at railhead as a railhead supply detachment, and one at roadhead, or inter-
mediately, to break bulk, and/or hold a reserve stock in front of a possible
break in the L. of C.
This organization was inflexible and wasteful. The number of small
units tended to an extravagant use of officers and British N.C.Os., while
the small size of the units themselves led to an uneconomical allotment of
workshop sections, which aggravated the already serious shortage of main-
tenance facilities.
petrol were both carried in
Supplies were carried in detail over excessive distances.
the existing organization of the divisonal troops made it dificult to.
he appropriate second line vehicles for units of divisional troops.
dad to operate over long distances in support of one or other brigade.
389
we
WO 277/21
27
W0277726
