reduced to 150 days, and, in March, 1944, to 60 days, with 60 days' working
margin in each case.
In January, 1945, the scale was again reduced to 45
days' G.S. reserve, plus 45 days' maintenance stocks, both being based on
the actual ration strength.
The ration strength of Malta, from October, 1939, to May, 1945, is shown
in Appendix VIIIA.
M.S.D. Formed
At the beginning of 1945, the Supply Depot, Malta, was once again re-
organized, this time as the Main Supply Depot, Malta.
The establishment
was on the lines of the well-tried M.S.D. organization as used in the United
Kingdom, with the necessary adjustments and additions to suit local condi-
Its composition was as follows: —
(a) H.Q., wing.
(b) Provision wing.
(c) Stores and transport wing.
(d) Two supply sections.
(e) One bakery section.
(f) One cold storage section.
(g) One P.O.L. section.
(h) One port detachment.
(i) One forage section.
The strength was seven officers and 137 other ranks.
Detailed issue was still carried out by the D.I.Ds., at this time, but later
these were disbanded, a detail issue section being added to the M.S.D., which
was then redesignated " Malta Supply Depot".
SECTION 4.- GIBRALTAR
The strategic situation of Gibraltar, commanding the western entrance
to the Mediterranean, made it, in this war, as in former wars, a most valuable
It was therefore strongly garrisoned, the peak figure reaching over
Although its vulnerability to modern weapons was not put to the
test, there was the real danger of the fortress having to undergo a protracted
This implied the holding of large reserves of supplies; and this, taken
in conjunction with the special difficulties caused by the nature of the
fortress, with its vast galleries in the rock, and by the damp atmosphere,
made the task of the supply and transport services a bigger one than might
perhaps have been expected, considering the size of the place.
Before the war, the strength was about 3,000; after Italy entered the war,
this rose to 10,000, and thereafter grew steadily until 1943, after which it
Figures of the ration strength from September, 1940, to May,
1945, are given in Appendix VIIIA.
S. and T. Organization
Before the war, the R.A.S.C. services at Gibraltar were under an O.C.,
R.A.S.C., with officers in charge of supplies, transport, and barracks, and
a local M.T. company.
a cold store, and a four-oven bakery.
The supply detachment operated a supply depot,
the outbreak of war of eight officers and 32 other ranks.
There was a total establishment at
418
By the end of 1940, this was found to be inadequate, and a new com-
posite War Establishment was approved, for nine
An A.D.S.T. was later appointed, and, in March, 1942,
officers and 113 other
this appoint-
ment was upgraded to D.D.S.T. (colonel). In October, 1944, it was agreed
that the existing D.D.S.T. and O.C., R.A.S.C., and their staffs, should
tinue as they were until the reserve stock of rations was actually
to the authorized holdings; when the reductions had been made, the D.D.S.T.
and his staff were to be abolished, and the O.C., R.A.S.C., retained with
strengthened staff, in
preference to the
recommendation of the fortress
commander for an A.D.S.T. and staff. The revised organization eventually
took effect in January, 1945.
Supply Organization
The supply establishment was found by the end of 1941 to be totally
inadequate for dealing with the feeding strength of
over 14,000 and the
special supply arrangements necessary for the storage and
effective turn-
over of supplies. A new organization was therefore set up, comprising a
Base Supply Depot, Type "B", two D.I.Ds., and detachments of a field
bakery and a field butchery.
Early in 1944, a M.S.D.
and Command Supply Depot were created to
take the place of the B.S.D. and D.I.Ds.
The establishment of the M.S.D.
included a bakery section and a butchery section.
reorganization
enabled personnel to be withdrawn to the United Kingdom
for inclusion
in Field Force units. The M.S.D. and C.S.D. were unified
in February,
1945, as the " Supply Depot, Gibraltar"
Ration Scales
Before the outbreak of war, the ration scales to be used in Gibraltar
in time of war had been considered. The plan was that the R.A.S.C. should
issue a full ration as soon as the situation made this necessary.
the peace-time scale would continue on the same lines as in the United
There was, therefore, a war ration scale, based on Allowance Regulations,
and also a siege-ration scale for use in prolonged investment.
reviewed by the War Office, and it was found that all the items in these
scales, in the necessary quantities, were not held by the Fortress in peace,
and also that some items included in the siege scale would probably not be
obtainable in siege conditions.
As a result, Gibraltar agreed to
single ration scale for issue on active service if N.A.A.F.I. could not function.
If a state of siege existed, the full service ration scale would be
as circumstances permitted.
In June, 1940, an emergency scale of rations was introduced for use
if the peace-time system of rationing became impracticable.
remained in force until April, 1942, when slight modifications became
necessary to enable Gibraltar to turn-over its stocks during the warranty
period, while altering the normal ration scale as little as possible.
The emergency scale satisfied the medical authorities,
they considered it would be desirable to increase the calorific value of
the rations issued in siege conditions to personnel engaged in tunnelling
or other heavy tasks. In fact, it had been originally proposed to have three
scales, for those engaged in heavy work, ordinary infantry duties,
sedentary work, respectively; but planning had to be on an average scale.
The final form of the scale is shown at Appendix IX.
