On the personnel side, good service conditions, incentive, careful training, experience,
leadershi a parslevels are absolute prerequisites for success in any assault on German-held territory
and active
15. Again, only certain types of craft are designed as assait carty all the est are primarily built
as ferries.
Military necessity may demand even the latter, particularly the craft for landing tank bu
guns, acting as assault craft.
They will suffer heavily, and need powerful and close fire support.
latter calls for special shallow draught bombarding and support vessels.
These we have not got.
Even manning of the defensive A.4. armament clashes, in craft like I.C.T., with the call for
economising crews and living space.
16. I do not wish to over-stress dificulties, but to make dear that the min qua the material cannot
be regarded in planning a combined operation as a matter of numbers.
Their quality is all important,
The same applies to the Staffs who plan.
in the coming year in the development of assault and defence respectively.
I foresee a battle of wits between ourselves and Germany
The defence has a long start.
int experience and the devising of new ways by special study and trial will enable us to catch up.
or cut the corner.
The alternative, which is
recourse to blunderbuss
methods on traditional lines
without special knowledge, can only lead to slaughter on a scale which we are in no position to sustain
this year or next.
17. To sum up—
(a) "Torch" has taken more landing craft than I can produce crews for, and numbers have had
to be made up from other R.N. sources.
(b) The standard of training of a large part of the craft crews and assault forces is not high enough
for a tough or protracted assault.
(a) So large a part of the Naval C.O. Command has been given up to " Torch" that it will not be
possible to train an adequate new force before the summer of 1943.
(d) The early formation of a Naval Raiding Force is an essential prerequisite for any re-entry into
the Continent, and it must be given regular fighting experience.
(e) A forecast of the expected expansion of the Naval C.O. Command is given in the Appendices.*
* Omitted.
APPENDIX 12
COMBINED CHIEFS OF STAFF
"SYMBOL "
REPORT BY THE COMBINED CHIEFS OF STAFF AS APPROVED BY THE
PRESIDENT AND PRIME MINISTER
In a previous memorandum (C.C.S. 155/1) the Combined Chiefs of Staff presented their proposals
for the Conduct of the War in 1943.
These proposals were in broad outline, and we have subsequently
examined them and reached certain conclusions on points of detail.
We have also studied a number of
matters closely related to these proposals.
The present memorandum contains a summary of what has
been accomplished.
2. OPERATIONS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN
(a) Operations for the Capture of Sicily
We have carefully examined possible operations in the Mediterranean theatre, and we have recorded
the following conclusions (C.C.S. 66th Meeting, Item 2, and C.C.S. 161/1) :—
(i) To attack Sicily in 1943 with the favourable July moon as the target date.
(i) To instruct General Eisenhower to report not later than the ist March, firstly, whether any
insurmountable dificulty as to resources and training will cause the date of the assault to be
delayed beyond the favourable July moon, and, secondly, in that event to confirm that the
date will not be later than the favourable August moon.
(iji) That the following should be the Command set up for the operation :—
A. General Eisenhower to be in Supreme Command with General Alexander as Deputy
Commander-in-Chief, charged with the detailed pith is and preparation and with
the execution of the actual operation when launched
B. Admiral Cunningham to be Naval Commandet, and Air Chief Marshal Tedder the
Air Commander.
C. Recommendations for the officers to be appointed Western and Eastern Task Force
Commanders to be submitted in due course by General Eisenhower.
iv That Ceneral Eisenhower should ho instrunted to set un forthwith. after concuttation wit
Staff, for planning and preparing the operation.
General Alexander. a sperial onerational and administrative staff. with its own Chiet
The necessary directive to General Eisenhower conveying the above decisions has been drafted.
222
(b) Cover Plans
We intend to instruct the appropriate agencies in Washington and London and the Commander-
in-Chief,
Alled
Expeditionary
Force in North
Africa,
Mediterranean.
to araw up a comprehensive
olat
for the
will be examined.
The possibility of carrying out feints or minor operations in the Eastern Mediterranean
(c) Command in the Mediterranean Theatre
We have agreed the following Command arrangements in the Mediterranean (C.C.S. 63rd Meeting,
Item 4, and C.C.S. 163) :-
(i) Sea.—For Operation "Husky" the Naval Commander Force X will assume the title of
Commander-in-Chief,
Mediterranean.
The
present Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean,
will be designated Commander-in-Chief, Levant. The boundary between the two Commands
will be determined later.
he ommander-in-thiet.
Mediterranean, will, however. be
responsible for naval matters which affect the Mediterranean as a whole.
(ii) Land.—At a moment to be determined after the British 8th Army has crossed the Tunisian
border, General Alexander will become Deputy Commander-in-Chief to General Eisenhower,
the 8th Army at the same time being transferred to General Eisenhower's command.
to the concurrence of General Eisenhower, General Alexander's primary
task will be
to
command the Allied forces on the Tunisian front with a small Headquarters of his own
rovided from the Middle East and after the conclusion of these operations, he will tak
charge of Operation
" Husky."
he boundary between the North African and Middle Eas
Commands will be the Tunisia-Tripolitania frontier.
ill) Air.—We have agreed that Air Chief Marshal Sir
Arthur Tedder shall be appointed Air
Commander-in-Chief of the whole Mediterranean theatre with his Headquarters at Algiers
Under
him will be
the Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief,
North-West
Africa
-enerall
Spaatz),
and the Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief,
Middle East
(Air
Chief Marshal
Sir Sholto Douglas).
We have defined the relationship and mutual responsibilities of the
Air Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean, and the Commander-in-Chief, Allied Expeditionary
Forces in North-West Africa, and we have laid down certain principles for the organisation
of the Mediterranean Air
Command subject
to anv
minor
changes
which the Air
Commander-in-Chief may find necessary after his appointment.
(d) The Bomber Offensive from North Africa
We have laid down the following as the objects of the bomber offensive from North Africa in order
of time (C.C.S. 159/1) :—
(i) The furtherance of operations for the eviction of all Axis Forces from Africa.
(ii) When (i) has been achieved, infliction of the heaviest possible losses on the Axis Air and Naval
forces in preparation for " Husky," including bombing required by cover plans.
(iii) The direct furtherance of Operation " Husky."
(iv) The destruction of the oil refineries at Ploesti.
So far as is possible without prejudice to the achievement of objects (i), (il) and (iii) above, bombing
objectives will be chosen with a view to weakening the Italian will to continue the war.
4. " BOLERO " (C.C.S. 172 AND C.C.S. 68th MEETING, ITEM 1)
(a) A study has been made of the shipping capabilities for "Bolero" build-up in 1943
With the data available at the conference and making a number of assumptions which are set out in
full in C.C.S. 172, Appendix III, we calculate that the United States Forces,
as shown in the followins
table, will be available for continental operations in the United Kingdom on
the dates
figures given in the last column include the build-up of the air contingent to 172,000
hey may
regarded as the minimum, and every effort will be made to increase the number of trained and equipped
divisions in the United Kingdom by the 15th August.
Total
Division.
Numbers
Equipped.
384,000
509,000
By 15th August
634,000
15th September
759,000
15th October
938,000
15th November
31st December
This is based on (1) the figures of 50,000 troops per division with supporting troops; (2) 45 days
allowance between sailing date and availability date.
As the movement proceeds the overall number of men per division will decrease and by
the end of
the year it may be
may be 19 instead of 15.
down to 40,000, in which case the number of divisions available on the 31st December
The number of divisions earlier in the year is unlikely to be increased.
223
(C52794)
WO 277/21
27
3ф
