and from D + 22 bulk rations were in general use.
The last general issue of Compo rations was made by B.S.Ds. on D+18.
The first supplies of fresh
bread came from Malta at the rate of 18,000 lb. a day from D + 13 onwards.
until baking got into full production in
Sicily.
To supplement the army
bakeries, contracts were made for the production of bread in civilian bakeries
with British ingredients, and the total produced was about 75,000 lb. a day.
Fresh meat was obtained locally for hospitals, but the first supplies of frozen
meat did not arrive until after the campaign was over.
There was a great deal of pilfering of Compo rations en route from the
Middle East to the Beach Groups, and the absence of balancing items created
an embarrassing situation for the supply depots.
The items stolen were
cigarettes, chocolate, tea-milk-and-sugar powder, and tinned fruit.
Hospital
supplies were also mercilessly stolen.
P.O.L. Situation
There was always adequate petrol, in spite of the ferrying of reserves from
North Africa being delayed in the same way as supplies, the loss of a loaded
ship in Algiers, and a fire in a petrol depot in Sicily.
The responsibility for checking the amount of
petrol discharged from
ships was vested in the Petrol Control Staff, a small Middle East unit, not big
enough for its task. It was intended to record tonnages by ships, grades and
types of container, of P.O.L. off-loaded from ships, and the quantities remain-
ing afloat.
Exact returns were impossible in the rush of discharging the first
convoy, but a reasonably accurate figure was eventually presented by insis-
tence on all P.O.L. being sorted before it was loaded into lorries, and by
keeping in close touch with the ships.
The unit also supervised the handing
of P.O.L. by the stevedores, who did much damage to containers in the carly
days, partly through ignorance, and partly because speed of unloading was
given priority over all other considerations in order to turn ships round as
quickly as possible.
The bulk storage at Syracuse was captured intact, and was alloted for
M.T. 80 spirit, after a quantity
M.T. spirit had been mixed and used for our M.T.
of captured German aviation and Italian
It was not until early
September, two of the ee and aited for cam it was over, that tankers
discharged bulk petrol at Syracuse and Catamia, the latter port being used
for aviation spirit, as i at Syracuse amt Catania, the airfields to which pipe-
lines could be run.
The actual consumption of the combined air forces was
only two-thirds of the quantity estimated and duly made available.
Maintenance Forward
Throudhout the campaion railhends were pushed so far forward that
F.M.Cs. were always established in their vicinity:
An attempt
to take advantage of thie circumatance hu arranging for second line trans
port to draw direct from Supply Railhead, but the arrival of the pack train
was so irregular, due to railway operating difficulties, that the ip i MC
had to be abandoned.
Thenceforth, trains were cleared into
as and when they
directly from the F.M.C. without wasting time.
arrived and second line companies were able to dran
260
The target figure to be held in F.M.Cs. was three days' supplies, and
no dificulty was experienced in maintaining this level.
In both Corps
F.M.Cs., supplies were handled by D.I.Ds.,
with the assistance in one
Corps of a Composite Platoon of a Corps
Troops Composite Company
when new F.M.Cs. were opened in support of the advance.
The movement of stores forward to the fighting troops developed on
different lines in the two British Corps.
To begin with, 13 Corps used
Army, Corps, and Divisional transport to draw from Army roadhead, or
from docks and beaches, and to deliver to the Field Maintenance Centre.
Later, it was also supplied by a roadhead at Augusta, stocked with the
stores brought from the reserves built up in Malta.
Finally, a railhead was
opened, with the F.M.C. close by.
30 Corps was able to open a railhead as early as D+2, and went forward
based on the railway throughout the campaign, with F.M.Cs. adjacent.
78 Division, while in the lava belt, was maintained from a Divisional
Maintenance Area, established as far forward as conditions permitted.
One
Brigade Company operated the area, while the others concentrated on
keeping it full and bringing gun ammunition forward.
The companies later
leap-frogged to establish D.M.As. further forward.
The transport of the
company farthest forward, and operating the D.M.A., was available for
troop-lifts.
Elsewhere, the maintenance of divisions varied according to the circum-
stances. One Divisional R.A.S.C.
began the operation with composite
companies, but, at a later stage, when the advance slowed down, and the
division was fighting on a narrow front with few roads available, the com-
panies changed to a commodity basis, replenishing single supply and petrol
points for the whole division.
Later still, they reverted to the previous
arrangement.
More often than not, divisional R.A.S.C. transport was regarded as a
pool operated by C.R.A.S.C. in accordance with the needs and circumstances
of the moment.
Factors affecting Transport
The movement of stares forward by second line transnort was affected
by certain abnormal factore og a much reduced scale of M.T., com
paratively short distances hetween railhead and FMC and forward points
Mount Etna.
and the volcanic terrain through which ran the line of advance west of
The first of these was due mainly to factors which also affected the
movement of reserves of stores from North Africa, namely, the shipping
tonnage allotted to the operation, the convoy
duration of the campaign.
cycle, and the estimated
D+3. D+ 14, and thereafter fortnightly.
Convoys were scheduled to arrive on D Day,
L.S.T. ferry services from Malta and North Africa.
In addition, there were to be
The duration of the
campaign had been estimated correctly, to within four days, by the C.I.G.S
in January. 1943. The available tonnage capacity was also of course known
accumulated in the
Yet a large proportion of the R.A.S.C. units and stores, the latter painfully
on of the R.A S.Ca, never reached Sisly.
one-third of the P.O.L. for 51 Division, and none of the reserve of supplies,
261
Mars micro 0.5 mm
17
WO 217/21
27
W0277/26
