Water Transport Office
S.T., A.F.H.Q., then regularized the position by forming a Water Trans-
port Office at that headquarters.
Part of the work of this office was to
receive tonnage details from
Movements Staff, and to allocate them to
the appropriate R.A.S.C.
Water Transport Companies and Motor Boat
Company; but its chief function was to allocate schooner tonnages to specific
routes, e.g, so many tons for the forward movement of stores from Bari
and Barletta in support of the Eighth Army, so many
for civil relief in
etc.
The procedure remained in
force
until the total tonnage
demands began to slacken, and the office, as such,
was disbanded in the
early part of 1945, the work being carried on by
the D.A.D.S.T., Water
Transport, at A.F.H.Q.
Besides these duties,
the Water Transport Office was also responsible
for maintaining an up-to-date availability state of all vessels on the strength
of companies; scrutinizing reports of voyages; affecting liaison with companies
and with the principal sea transport officer; and bringing to the notice of
D.S.T. any difficulties liable to lead to unsatisfactory operation of the R.A.S.C.
fleet.
The office had no responsibility for amphibians.
A Master Superintendent was appointed as marine adviser to the D.S.T.
in connection with water transport.
General R.A.S.C. Organization
The organization of the R.A.S.C., and of its Allied and sister corps,
in the Central. Mediterranean Force, was built up of units which came in
from North Africa, Middle East, India, P.A.I.C.,
the United Kingdom, and
other theatres. In addition to the A.S.C. of Dominion and Polish formations,
a large number of units were composed of British
cadres and diverse
nationalities, including Palestinians, Arabs, Mauritians,
Basutos, Ceylonese,
and Cypriots.
In many cases, organizations and
establishments differed
considerably, but throughout there was complete unity of effort and opera-
" Royal
tion.
A Dominion Army Service Corps officer described it as the
British Army Service Corps ".
The building up of this organization was a continuous process, which
never ceased, owing to the continued necessity for expansion and for meting
organizational
problems
unexpected
situations.
probably never enough S. and T. units in the theatre.
To make the position
other theatres
mhe complex, there were also continued cals at units to be transferred 10
Thus, 53 units had to be provided initially
for 21 Army
Group; and, at a later date when every lorry was required to
cope with
the ever-lengthening L. of C. 4 tehey lity, masty transport, were pro
vided for operation " Goldflake", the transfer of formations to
21 Army
Group early in 1945.
When the time came for the return
of the supply
Order of
units which had been lent to A.F.H.O. from the 21 Army Group
Battle. it was agreed that similar units which had carved for a long time over
seas and had field experience should be sent back in their place.
ment for C.M.F.
The allotment of supply units againat a total Pritich mannower entitie
B.P.Os., 18 B.S.Ds., 35 D.I.Ds.,
and British North Africa Force of 466,000, was then
Field Bakeries,
Mobile, 11 Field Butcheries, and 15 Port Detachments.
This number was
290
Bonifa
Bonifacio
& Solenzar.
Livitavecchie
wengett
10277/27
27
WO 277/26
