worked to the limit and urgently in need of workshop attention.
severely, were allotted to the Beauman Division and the armoured divisi
a supply column or a petrol company.
echelons were found for 52 Division, which arrived in France without i l
Reserve companies, which sufe
while various mobile columns, often on very dubious authority, appropriatet
nearly 200 R.A.S.C. lorries.
June, the reserve was less than 100 vehicles.
The V.R.D. was almost depleted, and by is
On the eve of the German offensive on 8th June, the D.D.S.T. had m
reserve M.T. company in hand at Le Mans, two were dispersed in sectio
hatween various ports. and three. including those with General Beauman m
There were four L. of C. M.T. companies in all.
in the Rouen Area.
The H.R.S. was still working, with an output of 30 reconditioned vehic
a week but, owing to the absence of a ship,
it could not get is valuab!
machinery away.
The M.T.S.D. was maintaining issues on a reduced so.
but the Advanced M.T.S.D. packed everything up, and got it away to te
United Kingdom.
S.T.3. had been called on to organize additional transport to send i
Western France. In the middle of May, the completion of the R. A.S.C. us
and vehicles of the Armoured Division was expedited, and these unit crost
between 16th and 22nd May.
A Troop-carrying Company
organized as a Composite Company of 102 lorries, to provide transport fr
the Canadian Division, but it did not proceed.
About 50 cars and drivers wre
sent over, but demands for further reinforcement vehicles were not met, oving
to the imminent evacuation.
Neither supplies nor P.O.L. gave serious cause for anxiety.
Pack trains
though irregular, still ran to railhead at Lisieux, and formations had sub
stantial reserves on wheels.
D.I.Ds. were well stocked.
They played a
much more important part than had been designed for them,
and did
excellent work, but the need for subsequent increases in their War Establish.
ments was plainly foreshadowed.
That at Le Havre was kept open to fed
the garrison there, and that at Dieppe to feed General Beauman's Division.
Final Evacuation
On 14th June, the Cabinet decided to withdraw all British troops to
France. The War Office issued orders for the formation of supply, petrol, and
ammunition dumps in France, orders for in mediate withdrawal of allise
L. of C., and labour personnel, not required for this work.
But the R.A.S.C. continued to function. On 15th June, the last pac
train left the B.S.D. with 90,000 modified rations for Cherbourg.
20 lorries left Rennes loaded with supplies, ammunition and petrol, for 151
Infantry Brioade. That dav orders were piven to disable all mahicles that
was impossible to save. Nos. 1 and 2 B.S.Ds. held between them 4,000,0
rations; the petrol depot held 8.000 tons of P.O.L. Aviation spirit was bein
returned to the United Kingdom as fast as possible.
The H.R.S. emharked in tha "Tancactria" an wn invaluer in her lo
Of all its tools and machinery. etc., only a few cases reached England.
great part of the stores of the M.T.S.D. was got away.
128
Koesfeld
MAP No I
bochoit
Roulers o
Siegen
Wit.t.lnd
Bitburg P
St. Quentin Bernkastel
Kreuznach!
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
