Naval C.-in-C., Expeditionary Force, and the U.S. Navy, Army and Service of Supply.
Their
task was defined as follows :—
"To co-ordinate the detailed administrative arrangements which must be made by the
Service Departments and staffs of the Combined Commanders and the C.C.O. in order
enable the plans of the Combined Commanders for offensive operations on the continent of
Europe to be carried out."
The detailed work was done by Sections, of which at one time there were over forty, and C.O.H.Q.
was represented on twenty-nine of them.
As time went on, it became increasingly evident that " Sledgehammer" was unlikely to take
Place and, on 10th July, 1942, C.C.O. was invited by the Chiefs of Staff to assume responsibility for
alternative operations to take the place of " Sledgehammer.
General Eisenhower was
to be
associated as necessary with the planning.
The Controlling Officer, in consultation with C.O.H.Q.,
was required to put into effect the best possible deception plan.
On 17th July, in order to clear up any doubts about " Sledgehammer," the Chiefs of Staff decided
that the outline plan as it stood should be submitted for approval and then kept in such a state
that it could be implemented if the opportunity offered.
It was referred to frequently afterwards
until it was absorbed into Plan " Rankin," an operation for use in the event of a crack in German
morale.
As a diversionary operation it was finally abandoned at the meeting between the Prime
Minister and General Marshall on 22nd July.
As interest in " Sledgehammer" waned, so " Round-up" received more attention and the
machinery for tackling this enormous problem gradually took shape.
Raids in 1942
From the outset, one of the primary responsibilities of C.O.H.Q. was raiding the coastline of
Europe but, on account of the shortage of men and material, and the claims of major operations.
no great progress had been made.
The staff was not adequate for the amount of work involved,
but, when Commodore Mountbatten was appointed and had succeeded in building up the head-
quarters to a size which was better able to cope, much more attention was given to raiding problems
In fact, no less than twenty-five raids of various sizes were studied in the first three months of 1942
and during the first six months eight were carried out, namely : —
"Curlew" at St. Laurent,
" Biting" at Bruneval®
" Huckaback" at Herm,
" Backchat" at Anse de St. Marten,
" Abercrombie" at Hardelot,
J.V." at Boulogne,
" Lighter
" at Kupho Nisi,
" Bristle " at Boulogne.
These were in addition to the bigger operations of St. Nazaire, Bayonne and Diego Suarez. Five more
were mounted including "Rutter" for Dieppe. With the background of " Sledgehammer" and a
diversion in the West, large raids were considered on the Channel Islands and Cherbourg peninsula.
The former was turned down in May, 1942, mainly on account of the difficulties of air support.
The general policy for 1942 was to produce a raid once a month, but in the latter part of the
year the demands of "Torch" (North Africa) took precedence.
Nevertheless, raiding problems
alone put a tremendous amount of work on C.O.H.Q. and there is no doubt that, as the war and
combined operations developed, much of the effort bore fruit in some form.
STAEDTLER
CHAPTER 5
THE RAID ON DIEPPE, AUGUST, 1942
Section (i).
Preparation and Planning.
Section (ii).
The Lessons Learnt from the Operation.
Section iii).
The Strategic Value of the Operation.
SECTION (i)
PREPARATION AND PLANNING
Inception
During the studies on various raids and " Round-up," there were discussions on the tactics to
be employed in the major operation, the invasion of Europe.
At this stage, it was considered that
attacks, each of about divisional strength, should be made on various ports with two brigade groups
in the assault and one in reserve.
of the technique required that the Dieppe raid was conceived.
It was in order to test these tactical conceptions and to learn more
Against this background, it was a
success and provided the key to many problems which had to be solved before the invasion of the
Continent could be launched.
Operation " Rutter "
When the requirement was clear, a plan was evolved in C.O.H.Q. for a large scale raid to
correspond in some measure to these tactical ideas.
The troops for the assault were to be provided
by the C.-in-C.,
Home Forces and the operation was to be known as " Rutter."
It was decided
that the most favourable target for this raid was the port of Dieppe.
Early in April, 1942, the
Target Committee at C.O.H.Q. first examined the project and a week or so later the Planning Staff
at C.O.H.Q. began work on an outline plan under the general direction of the Naval Adviser to
C.C.O. (Captain J. Hughes Hallet, R.N.), who was subsequently made the Naval Force Commander
for the operation that eventually took place (" Jubilee ").
It was realised at the outset that, although intelligence reports showed that Dieppe was not
very heavily defended, a town of its size could only be successfully raided if the number of troops
used was considerable.
It was estimated that as many as six battalions would be necessary and
this was the size of the force required for a trial on a reasonable scale.
The question of adequate support at once arose and the use of tanks was considered very early
in the planning.
Outline Plan for " Rutter "
A frontal assault was not contemplated by the C.O.H.Q. Planning Staff. They thought that
the best
places for landing would be on
each flank: at Quiberville, some six miles to the
West of Dieppe, and at Criel-sur-Mer, about twice that distance to the East.
At Quiberville,
the beach was deemed suitable for tanks; once ashore they would have only a short distance to go
towards the aerodrome of St. Aubin and to the high ground to the South-West of the town, both
of them suitable objectives, the capture of which would secure Dieppe from the West.
The main
obstacles, which the tanks would encounter, would be the Rivers Saane and Scie. The bridges across
them would therefore have to be seized and held to enable the tanks to cross.
These rivers are
sluggish and may be compared with the Sussex rivers, Adur and Cuckmere.
On 14th April, representatives of the General Staff, Home Forces, joined the Planning Syndicate
in accordance with the procedure agreed by the Chiefs of Staff on 30th March, 1942, whereby,
any raid involving forces within the Home Forces Command, a small number of selected staff
officers from within the Home Forces Command were to be associated with the preparation of the
plans.
The C.-in-C.
Home Forces, shortly afterwards delegated his authority in this matter to
Lieutenant-General B. L. Montgomery, then G.O.C.-in-C., South-Eastern Command.
From that
2770717
WO 277/21
27
3Ф
