Raids on the French Coast
Admiral Keyes was very anxious to carry out small raids on the French coast, which were in
accordance with his directive.
Craft and personnel for these small operations were always hard to
obtain because of the claims made by the Force Commanders of the Overseas Assault
every available trained officer and rating; the completion of the assault force ships with landing
craft and crews had to be met first.
However, towards the end of June, 1941, one L.C.A. with a trained crew became available at
Northney and one of the Commando units provided a raiding party.
It was a beginning.
It was decided that when wind, tide and moon served, a raid was to be carried out on the
enemy shore at Ambleteuse, near Cape Gris Nez.
The mounting of this operation was quite a problem in itself. The crew and raiding party had
to carry out their training and rehearsals at Northney.
The craft was then sailed under her own
power from Portsmouth to Dover, where she came under the orders of the Flag Officer-in-Charge.
He, in his turn, provided the escort and towing craft and decided in consultation with D.C.O. on
the best date for the raid.
Meanwhile the Commando troops were sent by road to Dover where
they were accommodated in the Barracks.
This raid was carried out on 27th July, 1941, the object being the capture of prisoners and the
reconnaissance of beaches.
The assault landing craft was observed when some 250 yards from the
beach but the party made a successful landing.
Three men scaled the cliff but firing broke out
before they could be joined by the remainder.
The three men returned to the beach where the
remainder of the party had been under fire and the whole force then re-embarked. The raid did
not succeed owing to the alertness of the defenders.
Small Operations
Between July and November, five small raids had been planned and carried out by the Special
Service Troops under the D.C.O.
They had, however, never exceeded the lift available in four
L.C.A., and then were carried out under the same general conditions as that employed in the
Ambleteuse raid. The object of the raids, with one exception, was the reconnaissance of enemy
beaches and defences and the capture of prisoners, the exception being a raid against a four-gun
battery position,
East of Houlgate.
Three of the raids resulted in information being obtained,
some Germans being killed and the body of one brought back.
On the other two occasions landings
were made but, owing to the alertness of the enemy, the objective was not achieved.
Occupation of Canary Islands, Operation " Pilgrim"
During May and June, 1941, the question of whether Operation " Pilgrim" should be carried
out or not was constantly under review by the War Cabinet.
As planned, it required a dark night
and so, if postponed for one month, the force could be brought to longer notice.
This enabled the
personnel embarked to be granted leave by watches.
It also enabled certain alterations, which were found necessary as the result of experience in
exercises, to be made to the transport.
ments for assault ships and craft were embodied in the specifications which were used later in the
trial and error was a hard school.
Gradually the standard of training improved until it was considered that a full scale exercise
employing the whole force could be carried out.
for
In consequence the Force Commanders designate
Operation
The exercise was given the
name " Leapfrog."
Exercise " Leapirog"
The plan for this exercise was that the whole force should sail from the Clyde area and cary
out a full dress rehearsal at Scapa Flow.
an L.S.I. (L), developed defects which prevented her sailing.
After the orders had been prepared and the force was on the phie was departure y as get
casualty and the force sailed without her.
of 10th August, the convoy anchored in their assigned berths in Scapa Flow.
The passage from the Clyde to Scapa Flow was made without incident and, early on the morning
16
The weather conditions for the exercise were by no means ideal but were not sufficiently bad
to necessitate postponement.
In spite of careful training, the mistakes of the past were again
apparent.
Movement across the beaches was slow, success was not exploited and there were delays
in landing the vehicles.
This exercise confirmed a recommendation made after the Dakar operation, the need for a
properly equipped Headquarters Ship.
This, together
with the necessity for better internal
communications in the assault ships, were matters that were at once taken up by the staffs of the
Services.
It was not, however, until March, 1942, that the first ship, H.M.S. Bulolo, was put in
hand for conversion into a Headquarters Ship.
Another important lesson learned was the requirement for a Combined Headquarters where
the Force Commanders and their staffs could work together.
Action as the result of " Leapfrog"
On completion of Exercise " Leapfrog," the whole force returned to the Clyde and the ships
were taken in hand for such alterations as could be effected within the notice at which the force
was kept.
The D.C.O. was critical of the conduct of " Leapfrog" and found himself in disagreement with
the Chiefs of Staff, who, largely as a result of their investigations into the shortcomings of the
exercise, had recommended to the Prime Minister that the D.C.O. should be issued with a new
directive.
The Prime Minister endeavoured to persuade Admiral Keyes to accept this proposal, but
the latter, finding the terms contrary to his own beliefs, was unable to do so.
In consequence Admiral Keyes was succeeded by Captain Lord Louis Mountbatten, who was
assigned the title of Adviser on Combined Operations and given the rank of Commodore Ist Class.
The latter's appointment was dated 14th October but, as he was then in command of H.M.S.
Illustrious refitting in U.S.A. he did not take up his appointment until 27th October, 1941.
WO 277/21
27
30
17
