Intelligence
Lise A spotlight of our Intelligence system should from noW onwars here issed on the Continent.
The Joint Intelligence Sub-Committee, in consultation with
noW H.Q. Home Forces and the Chief of
Com inet peltens staft, should put forward proposals to the Chief of Staff and report any speciat
steps for which approval is required.
(Signed) A. F. BROOKE,
C. PORTAL.
H. R. MOORE.
For First Sea Lord.
Great George Street, S.W.1
18th April, 1942.
APPENDIX 11
Note by the Chief of Combined Operations
THE STATE OF THE COMBINED OPERATIONS NAVAL ORGANISATION,
WITH PARTICULAR RELATION TO POSSIBILITIES OF OPERATIONS IN 1943
The primary calls on Combined Operations ships and craft are :—
(a) Operations.
(b) Exercises and rehearsals for operations.
(.) Basic training of craft crews (generally termed "naval training "). In point of time, of course,
this must come before (a) and (b).
(d) Basic combined training of military forces at C.T.C.s.
(e) " Refresher" or " advanced" basic training for already trained forces, not specifically for a
pending operation.
2. An approximately 500 per cent expansion of the Combined Operations Naval Command was
commenced during the winter of 1941-42, for completion within one year.
Some 3,300 British-manned
landing ships and craft were called for with fully trained crews by ist April, 1943, besides nearly 2,000
American-manned ships and craft.
3. Any such expansion programme requires a great part of new resources to be devoted to the
training organisation, as they become available, and the division of the operational quota left over into
first line and reserves in a proportion depending on maintenance facilities and the rate of attrition.
In the case of combined operations expansion, a further division must be made between the naval
and combined basic training within the quota of craft allotted to training ;
and unless the naval training
can be given a certain precedence, output of crews is held back and in due course retards expansion of the
whole organisation and of combined training.
4. The expansion programme has been vigorously pushed forward. But it has not been possible to
observe the above conditions as much as I should have liked.
of some types of craft have cut down the quota for training.
Disappointments in the expected deliveries
I have kept the raids quota up, in order to gain essential operational experience and provide vita
incentive; but only at a cost.
" Ironclad" took away resources in ships
time restricting intake of naval C.O. personnel.
Shoe test if ang intace at on aentuated by the departures the in nips ahis, ne kes, pted tore,
Maintenance facilities and spares have been a struggle
To ensure the Expeditionary Force being trained in time for " Sledgehammer," naval training
has had largely to take second place to combined training in the share-out of craft; and the preparatory
measures and decision to mount " Imperator" this summer, though subsequently rescinded, interruptec
basic training for some time.
and everything has been " in the shop window."
As events have turned out, it has not been possible to hold reserves of cratt
These factors have acted early in the programme, when their consequences upon the expansion
rate have been more severe than they would have been later on.
,The cent unexpected loss of the Roseneath base (with its up-to-date dockyard and accommodation
for 5, a), at which our whole means of expanding the naval traini a hed cy been concentrated, has
been a severe blow.
On the other hand, the accelerated importation into ins take of certain types of
landing craft from America, for " Bolero," has helped to tide over some difficulties.
5. The maximum force which, after these events, it would be possible to provide operationally
cotton of A penchanel operate to ber, 1942, was a laped in to july tat co rading
The figures required for Torch' and for a reduced raiding
force to provide diversionary raids in the Channel, are shown in the same Appendix.
* Omitted.
220
As can be seen, to meet the increased demands of " Torch," we are now providing more than we
considered prudent possible even for an operation near at home, in which we rovidi manore thas ve
the British assault tops al seady trained, and continue naval training of Combined Operations personnel
right up to the last minute so as to provide the maximum trained force.
6. This is being done :-
(a) At the expense of all British C.O. training, which stopped altogether on the 15th August,
and temporary cessation of new entries
Since that date all our training resources have been
devoted to the U.S. combat teams and the R.N. active personnel for the assaults in " Torch,
who have also occupied all the training accommodation left over after the loss of Roseneath.
(b) By taking on the operation numbers of craft which are not operationally fit, and of crews who
are not fully trained.
(c) By various emergency shifts in respect of repair, provision of spares, etc., which are extravagant
and cannot be repeated.
(d) By taking all the British naval combined operations personnel there are in the U.K., including
all the naval beach parties and beach signal parties (transferring L.C.I. crews to sma
craft as necessary; except some crews and care and maintenance parties for L.C.T.
behind, the reduced
raiding force,
left
arrive from U.S.A.
and
the crews receiving
and delivering craft as they
active service R.N. personnel.
The balance of naval requirements for
" Torch" has been made up by
7. The
been devoted to preparations for " Torch
whole resources for Corch and the son, y rabie
and the C.O. Establishments have for the last month
As an instance, almost my entire
navigational staff has been lent to go out in advance, and this will delay for three months or more the
urgent improvements in the navigational capabilities of C.O. craft and crews which experience has shown
to be so necessary.
8. These measures, as I pointed out verbally at the time, would be quite impossible if "Torch"
were to be against serious opposition, or if we expected to have to mount another large operation at an
early date in 1943.
The standard of training of a large part of the craft crews and assault forces is not high enough
for a tough or protracted assault.
The stopping of British training and intake of new entries,
devotion of all resources to "Torch,"
and the sweeping into that operation of so many craft for an indefinite absence, has most severely disrupted
the Combined Operations Organisation and its expansion programme.
9. The time already lost cannot be made up unless I have a higher priority call than hitherto, on
the facilities I shall require,
especially in suitable R.N.
personnel, and even then not for some months.
There have been six priorities in manning, and combined operations have had fifth priority.
At the
moment I have only one active service officer left on my operational planning staff.
Including C.O.H.Q.,
the Raiding Force (" Force J"), and Instructors, but excluding the Expeditionary Force, there are now
only 168 active service Executive and Engineer Officers (of whom 67 are retired officers), 83 active service
Petty Officers, and 80 Engine Room and Maintenance ratings of P.O. or C.P.O. rate, on whom to build
up a naval assault force of some 3,000 officers and 25,000 men.
10. The position in respect of craft left in the U.K. when " Torch" has been mounted (taken as
Ist October,
1942) is shown in Appendix " B.'*
This also shows the estimated receipts from new British
production up to the end of the year, a guess
is to what we may get from America if the points in C.O.S. (W) 277 are acted upon, the quota which must
o lo fu to tie tor trainin the an on is to be in proved the Rote
the quota I propose to offer to the
craft are received as
shown, and the craft operationally available as on Ist January, 1943, on the basis of the foregoing.
11. It will be seen that the operational craft will amount only to a limited raiding force.
Appendix
"C"* is an outline of my intentions regarding the organisation of this force, to which the
Admiralty has now given approval in principle.
this will meet disaster.
13. It is not possible at this juncture to see clearly beyond the end of the present yor,
Until it is
known what, if any, ships, craft and personnel will be returned to my Command fron
" and the
operations in the spring of 1943.
available for further
contion in the material 4, Apple to a howeve, are d be rade a alable for further
alculations of increases in resources can be made from any given arbitrary starting point.
production of new craft.
it want a recame aces can dat the maximum possiblay te to keep pace with the
14. On the material side it must be realised that none of the British designs of craft is either
" tropicalised."
Ii the
fail to work.
• crews are pressed
or prepared for the Arctic.
In the tropics this merely leads to strain and inefficiency,
In prolonged low temperatures craft and equipment would often altogether
The American craft are virtually unprotected open boats.
* Omitted.
221
(C52794)
-7
WO 277/21
27
