command. Although no directive was issued to D.C.O., in a memorandum, dated 6th September
1940, entitled " Director of Combined Operations-Organisation of Departments and Bases," it
" D.C.O. will be responsible to the Chiefs of Staff for the following :—
(a) Assistance in the tactical planning of landing operations a of the assistance to Com-
smates appointed for such operations in the preparation of their plans and orders.
(b) The planning and necessary co-ordination of raiding attacks on coasts occupied by the
(c) The training of naval, military and air forces for landing operations.
(a) The development of material that may be needed for all kinds of landing operations'"
In the same memorandum the functions of I.S.T.D.C. were given as follows :—
"Development of material and training is undertaken by the Commandant, I.S.T.D.C.,
at Fort Cumberland (Portsmouth) with his staff of a Commander, an Adjutant R.M., and the
help of the Wing Commander on the staff of D.C.O. When the base has been established at
heveratay, development in training will become the responsibility of the Admiral Commanding
Two points are apparent from this memorandum :—
(1) I.S.T.D.C. has become concerned with amphibious operations; the study of all
Inter-Services operations has been dropped.
(2) On the opening of the Combined Training Centre (C.T.C.) at Inveraray problems of
the iS d the there Tery largely problems of tactics, would be transferred from
C.T.C., Inveraray, opened in August, 1940, but it was some months before it was fully organised.
A close link between the I.S.T.D.C. and Inveraray was established and officers of the two centres
visited each other regularly.
At the same time there still appeared to be a lack of definite directions
for the work at the I.S.T.D.C. The D.C.O. was far more concerned with planning, organising and
training the Special Service Troops, leaving the I.S.T.D.C. to fend for itself.
For some time the work at the I.S.T.D.C. continued under its old terms of reference, although
their studies were now amphibious; training and tactical responsibility was moving to C.T.C.,
Inveraray. On the development side, the officers were particularly concerned with new landing ships
and craft necessary for large-scale combined operations.
The officers of a centre, whose terms of
reference had included the study of technique, tactics and training, were in a very favourable position
Shis an the type of stilly put raft bent Co by the iS s, the the an ideas i theon con-
cerned, and not because of a requirement expressed by the planners in London.
the requirement to the Admiralty who was responsible for design.
Among the ships and craft thus
originated were the Landing Craft Assault; Landing Craft Tank, L.C.T. (1), (2) and (3) ; Landing
Ships Tank, L.S.T. (1) and (2) and later the L.S.D.; also the Glen Ships and the Maracaibos (oilers
converted for carrying landing craft as well as oil) ; and the conversion of train ferries into L.C.M.
carriers.
I.S.T.D.C. :-
In February, 1941, the following were some of the problems under consideration at the
(1) The fitting of directional control equipment for the control of landing craft into Glen
class merchant ships.
(2) The first designs of L.S.T.s (Winettes) and Maracaibos (shallow draft oil tankers).
(3) The design for a more heavily armed and armoured Landing Craft Support (L.C.S.).
(4) Illumination for landing tanks at night. Under consideration were :—
(a) Star Shell fired from Mortars mounted in L.C.S.
(6) 1lb. rocket releasing magnesium stars.
(5) The landing of vehicles from L.C.T.s. The following were under consideration :-
(a) Waterprofing of vehicles by covering certain parts in bags and towing ashore
by winch, lorry or tractor.
3) A cateraman floated into position ahead of an L.C.T. and which would sink
c) Bridging the water gap by means of a form of gangway lifted by a crane fitted
when the weight of a vehicle came on it.
with a grab.
(d) A specially desioned ramp to be built at the side of a pier so that an L.C.I.
could go aloneside the pier and then be warped up to the ramp to discharge
The I.S.T.D.C. was therefore keeping abreast of Combined Operations needs; and the problems
with which the centre was already concerned were those which were to arise again and again in
In March, 1941, a directive' was issued to the D.C.O., the following extracts from which are
relevant:
" 2. The Director of Combined Operations is
the Minister of Defence and the Chiets of tspotsie, under the general direction of
(b) The development, including experiment, research and trial, of all forms of special
equipment and craft required for opposed landings.
(e) The provision of advice to the Chiefs of Staff on technical aspect of opposed landing
operations.
4. The Director of Combined Operations will have under his command and direction the
Inter-Services Training and Development Centre."
These points do not differ very much from the instructions given to his Command by D.C.O.
in his memorandum of September, 1940, nor from the more general directive issued to Lt.-Gen.
Bourne in June, 1940. It did, however, clearly make him responsible for the development, including
experiments, research and trial of craft and material required in combined operations.
last part of the directive quoted, it is seen that the I.S.T.D.C. remained under the command of the
D.C.O. Thus, with the opening and growth of the C.T.C., Inveraray, and other training bases from
August, 1940, onwards, the centre became more concerned with development and experiment and
At the same time it would be wrong to pretend that the issuing of the
directive immediately solved all the problems of guidance for the I.S.T.D.C.
There was still a lack of
co-operation between planners and experimenters; the former did not know exactly what the
latter had to offer, nor were the experimenters given an intimation of the ideas and requirements in
Nevertheless an Inter-Services Organisation, independent of the three Service
Ministries, had come into being and, even if the authorities at the London Headquarters were more
concerned with training and planning, the I.S.T.D.C. could at least function, unfettered by the
troubles of dealing with three separate ministries.
In spite of the fact that this Inter-Services Organisation had been specially set up to deal with
the problems of assault operations in which all three Services were involved, it met with a certain
amount of opposition, particularly in the Admiralty. In the autumn of 1940, a paper had been
circulated recommending the abolition of the Directorate of Combined Operations and suggesting
that training should be the concern of the Admiralty and War Office, and that all development of
ships and craft should come under the control of the Admiralty, with the Commandant IS. T.D.C.
acting as the link between the Admiralty and development.
This proposal came to nothing but
it shows some of the difficulties under which the new Directorate was working.
the i5hrDe co the su with de lop end until ths a Portment of Commodore Mountbatten,
The Chieis of Staff Directive to Commodore Mountbatten, December, 1941
In October, 1941, Commodore Mountbatten was appointed in place of Admiral Keyes and
took the title of Adviser on Combined Operations (A.C.O.) ; and Commodore Combined Operations
(C.C.O.), when acting in an executive capacity for units under his command.
a new directive,? was issued from which the following extracts are taken :—
" 2. Under the general direction of the Chiefs of Staff you will :-
(a) Act as technical adviser on aspects of, and at all stages in, the planning and training
for combined operations.
(b) Be responsible for co-ordinating the general training policy for combined operations
for the three Services.
(c) Study, in conjunction with the Chiefs of Staff Organisation, tactical and technical
developments in all forms of combined operations varying from small raids to a
full scale invasion of the Continent.
(d) Direct and press forward research and development in all forms of technical equipment
and special craft peculiar to Combined Operations."
From the above extracts it will be seen that the A.C.O. had more limited powers than the
late D.C.O., although these were later increased so that he took on, in effect,
all the functions
previously exercised by the D.C.O.
Nevertheless, his primary role, besides the active prosecution of
1 Appendix 4.
≥ Appendix 6.
(C52794)
WO 277/21.
27
3ф
