Bulk Petrol Transport Companies were il famized from six 4-platoon
companies to eight 3-platoon companies.
21 Army Group recommended
that such companies should have a mixed constituent of vehicles, some being
800-gallon, and some larger.
The smaller tankers were useful for distribution
in towns,
and where the vehicles had to leave the roads to reach Mobile
Petrol Filling Centres.
The 1,750-gallon tankers could only operate on good
roads.
Further details of the composition of transport units in 21 Army Group
as a result of the reorganization are given in Appendix IIE.
Vehicle Maintenance
The 16-task system was in operation in this theatre, but it was varied in
certain instances according to local conditions or in connection with certain
types of transport.
Thus,
one G.T. company
found it impracticable to
operate the normal system, and evolved a "Grouped Maintenance System"
by which the tasks were consolidated in three blocks, a maintenance squad
carrying out one block of tasks on 11 vehicles daily, the whole platoon
thus being thoroughly maintained every nine days.
The C.I.T.S. inspections
of this unit were most satisfactory, and its transport availability was consis-
tently higher over six months than any other company in the rear maintenance
area where it was operating.
It should be noted that the unit was working
in static conditions; such a system would not have been practicable in mobile
operational conditions.
Some units tried to arrange one rest day in every seven to allow the driver
to get rest, and for extra maintenance to be carried out on his vehicle.
The
rest day was not used for the completion of all tasks.
Second Army introduced a system by which it was possible to estimate
and appreciate the state of maintenance prevailing in R.A.S.C. M.T. com-
panies.
It was based on the result of C.I.T.S. reports. A description is given
in Appendix VID.
The normal system of company vehicle inspections was rigidly kept up
except during the period of the pursuit from Bayeux to Brussels, when it was
essential that every possible vehicle should turn round as quickly as possible.
Inspections consequently fell behind, but this had been rectified by November.
An Inspectorate of Transport Services for 21 Army Group was formed in
January, 1944, from the resource of the Inspectorate in the United Kingdom,
and operated throughout the campaign in the usual manner.
Station Maintenance Companies
There was a large number of vehicles of various units employed in road.
head areas. which were not covered by the normal Field Force workshop
21 Armu Groun asled Wor Office to seavide cir Station Maintenance
Companies to carry out the maintenance of these vehicles, on the scale of
one company for a roadhead. Owing to manpower limitations, this demand
was scaled down to three companies, but the personnel in any case had to be
found within the 21 Army Group manpower ceiling.
of three extra sections.
Later, these three companies were reorganized, and doubled by the addition
surolus due to the reorganization of army transport companies and these were
Two other companies were formed using personnel
allotted to the Armies.
Group, could maintain an average of 750 lorry units. The necessity for the
The company of six sections, as organized in 21 Army
provision of these borne in muggests that, in planning for a forcer the
probability must behout the impa that the transport on the order of bathe
will increase throughout the campaign.
It was considered that mobile independent workshop platoons were
required for employment in the Army areas.
Operation of " Pluto"
Pumping started from the Bambi station on 18th September, 1944, and
continued until 4th
October,
1944.
During this period, nearly a million
gallons were delivered to Cherbourg.
The Dumbo installation began pumping on 27th October, 1944. There-
after, pumping never ceased on one or other of the lines laid from it, and a
total of 111,000,000 gallons were received in France through them up to 22nd
May, 1945. At no time did the flow fail, and " throughput" was only reduced
at 21 Army Group request, owing to limited off-take facilities at Dumbo-far.
The installation closed on 31st July, 1945.
The system eventually comprised a total of 16 lines and was designed to
deliver an average of 3,500 tons a day, allowing for faults and leaks on some
lines. In fact, during the period, October, 1944, to May, 1945, this was the
average throughput.
At the time of the surrender of Germany, the Dumbo
pumps were delivering about 5} million gallons (18,300 tons) a week.
While it was originally intended to deliver aviation spirit by means of
"Pluto", this was never put into effect.
Control of " Pluto"
The " throughput" was governed by demands from 21 Army Group
induded in the 10-day import programmes.
Alterations were telephoned to
ST. 2, War Office, Who notified them to Petroleum Board and Petroleum.
Warfare Departments.
normally advised the shift officer at the installation of any impending charge
The flow was adjusted accordingly.
The P.W.D.
in "throughput"; but, in addition,
close local liaison between Petroleum
Board and
R.A.S.C.
(dephone between the assures.
assured compliance.
There
was a cross-channel
Dumbo was supplied by
Thames, a branch from the
Petroleum Board pipeline from Walton-on-
To guard against
Isle of Grain storage.
reakdown, reserve tankage of over a million gallons was built into th
installation, and facilities were also provided for bulk supply by rail
hey Pumping Operaties woould
breakdown of the Petroleum
organized to provide for three 8-hour shifts so that the pumps were manned
continue uninterrupted in the event of a
The operating unit
and the line custem was natalled for a hours a day without a break
There were five grouns of pumphouses, each controlled by a group control
room which was in lose come with mein control. an office linke
by direct telephone line to ST 2 War Offce the P. W.D., and the far shore
137452)
365
WS1787/17
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
