In October, 1940, it was agreed at a conference of all cony aned that the flotation device should
consist of buoyancy floats fitted to normal tanks.
These floats were to be of a suitable size to limit
tank were carried out successfully giving a speed in smooth water of 4 knots.
he draft of the whole apparatus to 3 ft. and the beam to 21 ft. In the meantime, trials with a light
series of trials and discussions was pursued by I.S. Ins 247 fOreafter C.O.X.E.) and the Combined
After this, a long
durine the summer of 1941, that the buoyancy float method was unsatistactory, principally becaus
Operations Experimental Wing of the Directorate of Tank Design.
As a result, it was decided
the tank became too bulky to operate with any existing or projected landing ships and crat.
In alternt are method was suggested by Mr. Nicholas Straussler and was initially tried out on
a Tetrarck tank. Although only partially successful, a meeting on
representatives from C.O.H.Q. decided to nominate a firm to develop the system for a Valentine
tank, with Mr. Straussler as adviser.
The apparatus consisted of a canvas screen round the sides of the tank, which could be raised
The advantages of this scheme were as follows :—
(2) It could be used any number of times, being therefore usable for river crossings as well
as the initial assault;
(2) It did not materially increase the deck space occupied by the tank and allowed launching
through the bow door of the landing ships and craft.
(3) It occupied no additional space on passage over normal tanks.
This method was adopted by both the U.K. and the U.S.A., and Sherman tanks so equipped
were operationally employed.
The Supply of Petrol in Containers
The question of the supply of petrol to the Army engaged on amphibious operations was a
source of very careful study at C.O.H.Q. commencing early in 1942.
The normal method of packing
for the Army was in four-gallon containers.
These were of flimsy construction and, if subjected to
rough handling, were inclined to leak.
Thus the petrol was not only wasted, but, from the point
of view of the ships in which it was transported, it was a grave menace.
Experience in the Western Desert had also shown that the vibration of the trucks in which these
cans were loaded caused leakage which amounted to some 40 per cent. over rough country. The
C.C.O. took the matter up and through the C.M.S.F. suggested that Jerricans, which were strongly
made and returnable, should be adopted as the standard container. Considerable opposition to this
change was encountered at first, but eventually the Fifth Sea Lord took the matter up with the
Principal Administrative Officers' Committee.
At a meeting of the latter, the Deputy Director of
Sea Transport exhibited photographs of the holds of ships, which clearly showed the wastage and
damage which resulted in the use of the standard flimsy tin. The immediate result of this meeting
was the formation of a Committee to consider the production of Jerricans.
In this way certain factories were taken over and twenty million Jerricans were produced,
half in America and half in Great Britain; and these became the standard method of distributing
cased petrol.
It should be noted that the Jerrican was an American invention and had been adopted by
the Germans with satisfactory results.
The Supply of Petrol in Bulk
Early in 1942, as part of the study of the problem of the re-entry into Europe, the question
of the supply of petrol in bulk was raised. As a first solution, it was proposed that small tankers
should be used to carry the petrol across the Channel and that, on arrival at the other side, they
there distributed as required.
should be moored close off-shore and the petrol pumped from them into storage tanks and from.
As far as it went, this trial was
large project and necessitated both research and experiment.
Out of this. the ider arose of numping the netrol in bulk across the Channel. This was a very
meeting of the Q.M.G. Petroleum Committee on 13th May, 1942..
Mr. Geoffrey Llovd, the Secretary for Petroleum, and the matter was subsequently discussed at a
The idea was put up by C.C.O. to
which it was proposed to pump petrol at a pressure of 750 lb, per square inch.
reported that experiments were being conducted with a cable laid across the Medway, through
At this meeting, Mr. Lloyd
As the idea had originated from C.O.H.Q., the D.X.S.R. stated, on behalf of C.C.O., that
further experiments should be continued at high priority.
The story of the trials of the H.A.I.S. cable, as it was called makes very interesting reading.
First there were small scale trials carried out in the Thames Estuary to test the cable.
some time but, in the end, showed that the cable would take the required pressure but impressed
nature one concene that it me he at to martha he stil London, with travat crave
and commission the ship as H.M.S. Holdfast.
Towards the end of December everything was ready for the full scale trial across the Bristol
Channel, advocated by C.O.H.Q.
necessary length of cable embarked.
Accordingly, H.M.S. Holdfast proceeded to Swansea with the
The first stage of the trials consisted of laying the inshore ends of the cable from the pumping
station and to the receiving tanks. This was done by two specially fitted L.C.T.s.
On 27th December, 2,000 yards of cable were laid from No. 5 jetty, Queens Dock, Swansea and
it up to the main cable.
Two days later H.M.S. Holdfast recovered the buoyed seaward end and connected
She then proceeded to lay the cable from Swansea to
(near Appledore) which was accomplished without incident at a speed of approximately 4 to
Having arrived off Watermouth, the end was dropped and buoyed about 1} miles from
the terminal in Watermouth Bay.
Difficulties then arose. The operation of connecting the main cable to the shore end delayed
proceedings but in the end was successfully completed.
Then damage was discovered to the main
cable which had been caused by the efforts to make the joint. To add to the difficulties a tanker
dragged her anchor across the cable at the Swansea end which caused further damage.
to both ends was eventually repaired but it was not until 31st March, 1943, some three months later,
that the cable was considered satisfactory for testing.
On 4th April, pumping commenced from the British Tanker Company's pumps at Swansea
and petrol was then delivered through the cable at the rate of 37,200 gallons every 24 hours.
This was satisfactory as far as it went, but the estimated requirements of the Army for
" Overlord" were very much greater than this amount. Therefore other methods were investigated
by the Petroleum Warfare Department.
The first one of these to be developed by C.O.X.E. at Appledore was the floating pipeline
which was connected to the tanks at the shore end and then floated out to the petrol or oil carrying
vessel moored off shore. This proved satisfactory and was employed at Port en Bessin in France.
In addition to the above two methods, the Petroleum Warfare Department proceeded with a
it prope Patie else te CO. nas are idents super man art Roating drum.
referred to above and eventually used with success in the " Overlord'
The pipeline methods of supply were eventually confirmed as a requirement by C.O.S.S.A.C.
and instructions were issued by the Chiefs of Staff for the provision of all necessary requirements
for operating oil supply pipelines to the continent. With all methods working well, the supply of
fuel reached the total of 1,000,000 gallons per day.
The Provision of Artifcial Harbour Facilities for the Invasion of France, " Mulberry."
The supply over open beaches would be entirely dependent on the weather and, from statistics
which had been collected over a number of years, it was found that the weather in the English
Channel was very much in favour of the Germans.
As the planners at C.O.H.Q. examined this problem, it soon became abundantly clear that, to
ensure any
form of build-up after the initial assault, some form of artificial harbour would be
required.
It was apparent that any port which could be seized would be so demolished and blocked by
the Germans that it would require prolonged restoration work before it could be of use to the Allies.
1 Meeting on Bulk Petrol Supply at C.O.H.Q., dated 20th April, 1942.
wO 277/21
27
30
