(4) Liaison with the other Services.
Naval and Air Force elements would be attached to the
Army Beach Organisation.
These were normally :-
(a) One R.N. Beach Commando.
(b) One R.A.F. Beach Unit consisting of :-
(i) Beach Unit Headquarters which will be attached to the Headquarters Sub-
(i) Two Beach Flights which will be attached to the two Beach Groups normally
operating under each Headquarters Sub-Area (Beach).
The Position in India
In order to establish the background against which development in India was to take place,
it is necessary briefly to summarise the progress which had been made at Home and in the Middle
East at that time.
In the U.K., the training of Headquarters Sub-Area (Beach) and Beach Groups, started in
1942, was continuing at the Technical Training Wing, Dundonald, with a view to preparing for a
In the Middle East, Beach Bricks Nos. 31 to 35 had been formed and trained
at C.T.C.s controlled by the Directorate of Combined Operations at G.H.Q.
The general principles
and technique taught in Middle East was similar to that taught by C.T.C.s in the U.K.
interchange of information between the U.K. and the Middle East had much improved.
The development of beach organisation in India had started at the beginning of 1943 when
the C.-in-C., India, sanctioned the formation of five Indian Beach Groups. Prior to this, between
January and October, 1942, an Inter-Services Committee known as Advisers on Combined Operations
(India) had been set up at G.H.Q. (India).
This Committee was responsible for keeping in touch
with combined operations policy emanating from C.O.H.Q., London, and assisting planners and
formation Commanders in difficulties arising from an inter-Services operation.
later re-designated the Directorate of Combined Operations (India), new directives being issued
from time to time, as war strategy changed.
This has been fully dealt with elsewhere in this History,
but it can truly be said, as far as the development of beach organisation is concerned, that develop-
ment in India was invariably based upon doctrine and techniques disseminated by C.O.H.Q. in
London or the Directorate of Combined Operations, Middle East. In all, five Indian Beach Groups
were formed and trained in India, numbered 1 to 5 and later re-numbered 41 to 45.
The organisation of the Indian Beach Groups followed closely on the lines of the U.K.
pattern, such differences as existed being due to differences in war establishments and Equipment
Tables of the Indian Army organisation.
They were designed to support the landing of an assault
Brigade Group and to handle 600 tons of stores and 300 vehicles a day.
The War Office Committee on Beach Organisation, 1943
On 9th October, 1943, the Quartermaster-General appointed a Committee on which the C.C.O.
was represented, to make recommendations on the establishment, organisation and working of
Beach Groups and Headquarters Beach Sub-Areas :-
(1) in view of early use in a continental operation; and
(2) to consider what changes in respect of existing beach organisation were desirable for more
distant tasks, especially for operations in South-East Asia.
At the same time, a C.O.H.Q. Committee on Beach Organisation was formed to enable the
C.C.O's representative on the War Office Committee to put forward the agreed policy of C.O.H.g.
on matters under discussion.
The report of the War Office Committee was circulated by the C.C.O., at the request of the
War Office, on a world-wide distribution.
It took the form of a Memorandum on Beach Organisation
and established a basis for training, it being made clear that its contents were not to be regarded
adoption at home.
as a directive by the C.C.O., but as a firm policy agreed and endorsed by all three Services for
The following is a summary of the more important items on which agreement
was reached from the point of view of a re-entry into the Continent :—
(1) The importance of deciding, by the end of November, 1943, at the latest, the beach
organisation to be used.
(2) The adequate provision of D.U.K.W.s and other equipment for training.
(3) That no part of a Beach Group should be set aside permanently for defence.
(4) That the Royal Navy should be responsible for the control of a ferry service between
ship and shore in accordance with the wishes of the Army (except in respect of purely
naval considerations such as weather, etc.).
(5) That the Infantry Battalion should be retained as the " hard core " of a Beach Group.
(6) That the Infantry Battalion Commander should command the Beach Group, retaining
the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel.
(7) That the existing organisation of Royal Air Force Beach Units was satisfactory.
(8) Certain additional staff officers were recommended for
(Beach) consistent with keeping it as small as possible.
Headquarters
(9) The responsibilities of the Principal Military Landing Officer to the Beach Sub-Area
Commander were re-defined.
The Training of Beach Formations for " Overlord"
of 103 Beach Sub-Area with its associated Beach Groups, Naval Beach
Commandos and R.A.F. Beach Flights had been completed in 1942, the Technical Training Wing
of the C.T.C., Dundonald, continued with the training of Beach Units.
a further three Beach Sub-Areas
By the end of 1943,
and five Beach Groups, together with their associated Royal
Naval Beach Commandos and R.A.F. Beach Units, had completed training at Combined Training
Operation " Overlord," 6th June, 1944, Beach Order of Battle
To deal in detail with Operation " Overlord" is beyond the scope of this chapter, nor is it
necessary in view of the many and comprehensive reports which have already been written.
The lessons learned on the operation were studied in great detail by a C.O.H.Q. Committee set up
Shorty tiber to erations in the far papon the whole, it came saia that the shit ban brich
stood the test of Operation " Overlord" very well.
The Beach Groups proved efficient machines
The beach order of battle for the operation was as follows :-
(a) Navy
Force "S"
N.O.I.C. Sword
N.O.I.C. Juno
R.N. Beach Commandos,
R.N. Beach Commandos,
R.N. Beach Commandos,
3rd (Brit.) Inf. Div.
3rd (Cdn.) Inf. Div.
50th (Northumbrian) Inf.
102nd Beach Sub-Area
104th Beach Sub-Area
5th and 6th Beach Groups 4th, 7th and 8th Beach 9th and
Groups and 36th Beach
(c) R.A.F. Ist R.A.F. Beach Unit
2nd R.A.F. Beach Unit
4th R.A.F. Beach Unit
101st and 102nd R.A.F. 103rd and 104th R.A.F.
107th and 108th R.A.F.
Beach Sections
The Combined Operations Headquarters Committee on Beach Organisation for the War against Japan
In July, 1944, the Directors of Administrative Plans instructed the Administrative Planning
Section to review the " Overlord" system of beach organisation with special reference to the war
against Japan; and to prepare, in conjunction with C.O.H.Q., a short report containing a concise
series of principles for the guidance of Commanders and Staffs.
Accordingly, the C.C.O. set up a Committee whose terms of reference were to recommend
changes in the system of beach organisation and maintenance for the war against Japan, in the light
A report was subsequently forwarded to the Joint Administrative
Planning Staff by the C.C.O. This report took into account the main tasks that the beach organisa-
tion would have to carry out, the main defects in the existing organisation, factors peculiar to the
Far East likely to affect the organisation and made the following recommendations:-
(1) Four Beach Brigades would be required, each capable of landing with an assault division
to develop the beaches and to carry out long term beach maintenance.
(2) Each brigade should consist of Beach Brigade Headquarters, two Beach Groups and
Beach Brigade Troops.
(3) A Beach Organisation Holding and Reinforcement Unit on the normal Army reinforcement
scale would also be required.
WO 277/215
27
30
