When Tobruk was lost it gave the emen tuch transport, and petit
three million rations,
4.000 tons of ammunition, and l& million gallo
of petrol.
At Belhamed, 8,000 tons were lost.
The stocks at Capuzo
were partly backloaded, partly destroyed, and partly consumed by is
and formations passing through.
supplies were despatched to the Western Desert.
From June 20th to 30th practically oo
Eighth Army fed on is
reserves, and those which could not be eaten down were destroyed. The
losses of supplies did not adversely affect the Middle East reserve situation
and stocks were ample to meet all commitments, as Eighth Army stocks
were excluded from Middle East reserves when demands were calculated.
As a precaution, reserve holdings in Egypt were redistributed.
stocks were cleared to Alexandria, then all surplus stocks in Alexandria
were cleared, and finally reserves were concentrated, with 50 per cem.
east of the Nile, 40 per cent. in Palestine, and 10 per cent. in the Sudan.
At last Eighth Army was back on the Alamein line, and the plan was to
establish there a 30 days' reserve of supplies, petrol, and ammunition. All
second line transport, excluding the barest minimum for daily maintenance,
operated under Corps control to get this reserve in place.
It was to be
built up by seven days at a time.
There was a shortage of transport, one
formation arriving on the line to man the defences having only eight lorries.
From Ist July, trains forward were stopped, and Corps drew dirt
from base depots, these being only about 60 miles distant.
Trains which
had taken forward supplies, ammunition, and P.O.L. were not off-loaded,
but
retained en cas mobile,
providing a readily mobile reserve.
stocks were sufficient to provide one
day's maintenance, and one day's
reserve stock for opening a new railhead; but, in the event, they were not
needed, and were cleared by the end of July.
The policy was to hold the barest minimum forward. In particular, it
was vital to deny to the enemy every drop of petrol, as his greatest hand-
cap to further progress was his own greatly extended line of communication.
The mack-train evstem wae re-introduced: in this connection. see Chapter
III, Section 1.
Tank Transporters
nower became
The necessity for transporting tanks by some means other than their on
in 1940-41, and
War Office was accordinely asked in April. 1941, to pro
apparent during the campaign in the Western Dest
vide 100 vehicles capable of performing this task.
This demand was met
from stocks available in the United Kingdom, with modified Mack 10-10
Unfortunately.
lorries, and the first company was formed in June, 1941.
was not soon enough
month to which reference
action in the offensive in
November, 1941, as far as is known the first of
to minimize the losses in the tank battle that
has already been made; but the unit went ting
its Kind.
employment of tank transporters was naturally a matter of trial
of tanks by road, but tactical considerations made it necessary for them to
and error at this stage.
be employed cross-country, and more as first line suriliaries to the armoured
They were intended to nauseally ly for the caring
formations than as transport units.
194
In the early stages of the second battle of Libya, there were only the
original company and one other available.
under the General Staff, and not under
were employed directly
"Q" or S.T., and were attached
to Ordnance Recovery Sections and Tank Reinforcement Regiments.
They
were in demand for the transport of tanks during tactical moves, for the con-
veyance of disabled tanks back to railhead, and for the transport from rail-
head forward of reinforcement tanks.
In order to meet all these calls
they were scattered over a vast expanse of country.
The nearest higher
authority was apt to seize the nearest transporters, and put them on the
first job to hand, without being in the position to see the picture as a whole.
At that time,
Ordnance recovery resources were practically non-existent,
and were not designed to meet the operations that took place.
The result
was that one transporter had to do the work of three, and, with resources
dispersed as they were in the circumstances, no control could be exercised
by S.T.
D.D.S.T. Eighth Army declined to be held responsible for their
operation or maintenance unless tank transporter units were placed under
command of S.T., Army, and S.T., Corps.
This was made effective in
February, 1942.
The S.T. view was that the primary rôle of these units was to carry
out tactical moves of armour, and that when not so employed they could
assist Ordnance in recovery work.
The alternative view
was nowever
expressed (in " Notes from the Theatres of War, No. 1, 1942, Cyrenaica")
that, when transporter companies were released by the General Staff for
administrative purposes, the Ordnance Services had difficulty in getting
hold of them for evacuation of vehicle casualties, as they were R.A.S.C.
vehicles. It was, therefore, argued that they ought to be R.A.C. vehicles,
in which case it was considered that there should be no difficulty in their
carrying out the three main rôles.
As the number of tank transporter
companies increased (by January,
1942, there were four operating in Middle East, and three more awaiting
despatch from the United Kingdom) the position improved, but Ordnance
resources continued inadequate.
The conflicting demands for the services
of transporters were almost impossible to reconcile, and in the latter part
of 1942,
Ordnance Services, Middle East, asked for 120 transporters
be transferred arce R.A.SSC. companies to Recovery Sections.
This led
to the policy being enunciated in Middle East that,
as three corps were
concerned with the operation of transporters (R.A.S.C.,
for tactical and
strategical moves, R.A.O.C. for delivery, and R.E.M.E.
for recovery and
evacuation) the minimum number of these vehicles should be on the War
Establishment of R.E.M.E. units, in order to deal with recovery under
average conditions,
and all others should be operated in R.A.S.C. com-
panies, and allotted to whatever task was most necessary at any given time.
During the retreat of June, 1942, from Gazala to El Alamein, the Tank
Transporter Companies brought back some
200 repairable tanks, tem-
porarily out of action, which would otherwise have been captured.
The final methods of control, as developed in Eighth Army during the
advance in 1942-1945, f control as in the relevant part of this chapter.
195
Mars micro 0.5 mr
7
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
