In August, 1942, the Branch was reorganized, the D.D.S.T. becoming a
brigadier, and a new section S.T.2 (d) being added to deal with staff duties
and planning, the overseas and home sections thus being able to concentrate
on provision.
The opportunity was taken to bring in an expert petroleum
technician to deal with the increasing number of specification and quality
control matters.
This officer filled a D.A.D.S.T. appointment, until, in 1945.
a further section S.T.2 (e), was formed, under an A.D.S.T., to deal solely with
quality control. For further particulars of the latter, see Chapter XII, Section S.
Responsibility for Barrack Services
The D.S.T., before the war, and until May, 1943, was responsible, through
Q.M.G.6, only for certain aspects of the barrack services of the Army, i.e.,
fuel, light, water, and connected allowances.
Through Q.M.G.5, he was also
responsible for the civilian establishments and personnel employed in barrack
service duties.
Other War Office branches, however, were responsible for the administra-
tion of other subjects included under this head.
The Director of Quartering (D.Q.), in Q.M.G.1, dealt with accommodation
and connected allowances (e.g., lodging allowance), and with barrack con-
servancy services.
through Q.M.G.6.
The Director of Ordnance Services (D.O.S.) dealt with clothing and textiles
in M.G.O.7, and with furniture, utensils, and scales of accommodation stores
The need for some sort of effective co-ordination, as between all these
different branches, had become apparent before the war, and in 1939 a War
Office Committee examined the question.
Its recommendations included one for the appointment of a barrack
officer, R.A.S.C., to the staff of Q.M.G.1 for this purpose.
He was not to
interfere with the normal functions of the other branches enumerated above,
but was to consult, and be consulted by, them on all questions affecting the
barrack department.
The appointment was eventually made in April, 1940.
The duties relating to fuel and light, and water, were carried out as part
of the general supply services, in Q.M.G.6, no officer being allotted solely for
these duties.
On the reorganization of Q.M.G.6 as S.T.6, in March, 1940, 2
staff captain was appointed to deal with fuel and light.
In December that
year, this section was increased to include a D.A.D.S.T., a quarter-master, and
the W.D. Coal Inspector (a retired Engineer Captain, R.N.).
In August, 1942, a Fuel Technologist (staff captain) replaced the coal
inspector; and in April, 1943, the fuel and light section consisted of an
A.D.S.T., a staff captain, the Fuel Technologist, and three clerks.
Inspector of Barrack Services
In 1941 some readiustment of the existing arrangements at the War Office.
for the control of barrack services appeared to a necessary, as there was s
lack of co-ordination and direction at the head of affairs.
22
Barrack services were then primarily the affair of the Quartering Directorate.
Yet there were so many domestic considerations involved,
such as repairs,
maintenance, inside fittings, upkeep,
Turnishing,
fuel and light,
water, gas,
electricity,
conservancy,
etc.,
combined
with
problems
of finance and
accountancy connected therewith, that it was inevitable that other directorates
should have a close and constant interest.
Since the outbreak of war, barrack activities had increased far beyond
what the peace-time organization was designed to cope with.
The number of
barrack officers had grown from 40 to over 100; buildings had been requisi-
tioned all over the country; and the feeding strength indicated also the extent
to which the work of the barrack services had expanded.
Yet there had been
little or no increase of staff, either at the War Office or in the offices of
Os.C., R.A.S.C., to deal with the extra work.
It was therefore recommended that the staff of the Quartering Directorate
should be strengthened by a more senior officer, with the rank of not less
than full colonel, to act as head of the branch at the War Office which co-
ordinated barrack services, and also to perform the duties of inspector of
barrack services.
This recommendation was considered by a War Office Committee on
Barrack Services, which concluded that it was impracticable for the I.R.A.S.C.
to give the barrack services the full and detailed attention they required, and
that it was essential to appoint an inspecting officer, able to devote his whole
time to the inspection of these services, to ensure that they were carried
out efficiently and economically, and also to secure uniformity in their admini-
It would be inappropriate for the Inspector of Barrack Services to
work under the D.Q., since this would involve the latter in responsibility for
certain R.A.S.C. services, e.g., fuel and light, for which D.S.T. was responsible,
and for personnel for whom D.S.T. and D. of O.
were responsible.
Committee recommended therefore the appointment of a first-grade staff officer
on the staff of the I.R.A.S.C., to act as Inspector of Barrack Services, and
this was duly given effect in January, 1942.
Formation of S.T. 7
During 1942, it became increasingly clear that the existing arrangement,
whereby a large part of the barrack services was the responsibility of the
Director of Quartering,
was unsatisfactory.
The nature of the difficulties
which led to this conclusion was summed up in the words of the Q.M.G., that
the trouble was fundamental, in that it was a case of a service being controlled
by a staff branch, though the latter was neither adapted nor suitable for
exercising such control.
The staff should control the co-ordination of the
work of the troops in a service, but not the actual service.
He had no doubt
but that barrack services should be controlled by the D.S.T.
A new branch, S.T.7, was accordingly added to the Directorate of Supplies
and Transport, with effect from Ist May, 1943.
It was organized in three
sections, absorbed from other branches, e.g.:
S.T.7 (a). Comprising that part of Q.1. (c) which had dealt with barrack
services; and covering accommodation stores, conservancy
and other barrack services, allotment of married quarters,
advice on allowances. etc.
23
WO 217/21
27
WO277/26
