satisfactorily as an individual unit.
It Was
adequate for holding small
reserves where there was little movement of stocks, but it was quite unable to
cope with a daily in and out tonnage of 1,000 tons a day.
second battle of Libya,
Eighth Army had only
At the start of the
Type "B" at Mersa Matruh, and one Type "C
two Petrol Depots, one
" at railhead.
Up to 12th
December, half the tonnage for the whole Army handled into railhead and
issued to corps was P.O.L., and this was handled by the "C" Type Depot.
The idea that a composite,
self-contained unit was needed, which could be
employed on any of the various duties whether alone or in conjunction with
others, began to emerge.
By this time, it had become apparent that it was necessary to provide
enlisted personnel for the operation of some, at least, of the Middle East tin
factories, in order to safeguard production.
Comparatively small air raids
had resulted in an exodus of labour which seriously affected both the quality
and quantity of the tins produced.
A proposed establishment for a Petrol Tin
Factory Operating Company was therefore submitted to War Office, and duly
given effect.
Short Shipment of Vehicles
As in other theatres,
Middle East depended to a very great extent on
the U.S.A.
for its requirements of vehicles.
Thus,
in July, 1940, S.T3
arranged for 4,000 Chevrolet vehicles to be shipped direct from U.S.A. to
Middle East, to be assembled in that theatre.
These covered the vehicles
for
equipping R.A.S.C. and Dominion A.S.C. transport units.
The vehicles
of transport
units proceeding to Middle East from the United Kingdom
were withdrawn before embarkation, in view of these bulk shipments.
The
estimated requirement
of R.A.S.C.
vehicles for the force in Middle East
in 1941, i.e., 14,000, was allocated for despatch direct from U.S.A.
ment was planned at 3,000 a month, to include both "B" (i.e., Ordnance
Supply) and R.A.S.C. vehicles.
In order to economize in shipping it was decided in September, 1940,
that vehicles shipped from the U.S.A. and Canada to the Middle East should
be packed in pairs, an arrangement known as the " twin unit" pack.
involved the provision of four assembly plants, to enable the vehicles so
shipped to be put together; two of these were in Egypt (one R.A.S.C, one
R.A.O.C.), one in Mombasa, and one was held in reserve.
The maximum
weight of a pack was fixed at five tons, as Middle East had stipulated that
ships' derricks should be able to deal with any lift.
Middle East plans, on the basis of the receipt of 3,000 vehicles a monit
of the year
from January, 1941, were not made good, deliveries in the first four moris.
totalling less than 6,000.
The resultant shortage
of vehicles
affected operations throughout the Middle East, sula he force sent to Grey.
was only equipped with difficulty, and at the expense of other theatres.
make matters worse,
campaign.
all its transport, about 8,000 vehicles, was is i that
and South Africa,
In order to hala to mant the defeiency. calls were made on Mact Afri
were diverted to Middle East;
and all cased M.T. vehicles, Is en en roule to East Atri,
all future consignments due to East Africa
This policy
were directed to be sent to Middle East until further notice.
172
resulted in
considerable embarassment to the transport situation in East
Africa, as will be seen in Chapter IX.
Ways and means
of increasing the shipments of vehicles direct from
Middle
East
were also examined.
America
vehicles should be shipped " completely knocked down
One proposal was that
(C.K.D.), as this
would enable space to be filled up which the existing method of packing left
vacant; but complete sets of vehicles might not be included in the same ship.
vacreased shipments to Middle East would result if this
proposal were
adopted; if it were not, then 3,000 vehicles a month could be shipped to
Middle East, but at the expense of shipments to the United Kingdom.
Middle
Fast. however,
considered an assembly plant on the requisite scale im-
practicable, and it was decided to ship cased M.T. in the twin-unit pack,
with bodies and cabs knocked down and nested, for welding to be completed
in Egypt.
Vehicle Assembly Arrangements
The R.A.S.C. vehicle assembly
unit was opened at Ataka, near Suez,
in February, 1941, by detachments of a H.R.S. and a V.R.D.
As the initial
output was small, there was time to lay out the workshops so as to allow
for expansion, and this policy was justified later.
Three months later, the
arrival of convoys considerably increased the output, and it became necessary
to reinforce the unit, which was effected by using 13th Corps Troops Supply
Column, which had recently arrived in the theatre.
Towards the end of 1941, difficulty was experienced in keeping pace with
the increased arrival of cased M.T., and a South African Base M.T. work-
shops took over, the O.C. Supply Column remaining responsible for the
workshops and inspection sections, and for vehicle despatch and ferrying.
Fly, in September, 1942, the work of assembly was taken over by
The total output of vehicles from Ataka during the period of R.A.S.C.
control was over 44,000, including every type from jeeps to tank trans-
DOtterg
An attempt was made to develop Basrah, in Iraq, as a vehicle
port, but there were no proper facilities, such as cranes in the assembly
sheds, and climatic conditions caused much sickness.
Vehicles had to be
tailed, and dimatic conditions iusn across the desert to Haifa. In view of.
all these dificulties, and of political considerations, the scheme was abandoned.
Vehicle Situation, 1941
As a result of the measures described above, and of increased shipments
from Noresult of the measures descriation improved, and by August,
Middle East had received its full complement up to date.
When the orders
for 1941 had had received its shi ments trom the United Kingdom,
Middle
East was able to completus he War Establishment of all units, build up,
a 25 per cent. reservemplete the South African divisions up to 75 per cont
use 1500 for locall in unite and meet a wastage estimated at 1,650
vehicles a month.
The S.T: requirements of vehicles to be ordered for del very
early in
1942 included such snecial commitments as replacements of the R.A.S.C
173
(37452)
We2947/17
WO 277/21
27
W0277/26
