circumstances, as field supply depots.
In the main, they were not used for the
purpose for which they were established, and had to be eaten down; bur the
lished.
name of F.S.D. was useful and it stuck when similar organizations were estab.
At this time, all British troops were put on the Middle East Field Service
Ration Scale, which provided an exceptional number of equivalents, thus
ensuring varied diet.
The cash element was withdrawn.
P.O.L. Situation, 1940
The position of the P.O.L. services in Middle East at this time was most
unsatisfactory.
The Army had no P.O.L. organization, supplies of petroleum
products being called forward from contractors as required in the same way
as other commodities.
It had not apparently been appreciated that the sources
of supply of P.O.L. and containers could not be multiplied or stepped up al
short notice, nor that the Army required an extensive organization of its own
for the storage, transportation, and distribution of petroleum products on a
large scale, and for the planning, designing, and erection, of petroleum installa.
tions and ancillary equipment.
The only planning carried out had been the
Gebel Dave scheme.
No provision had been made for container plants of
container-making material to meet the needs of military operations, not for
the transportation and distribution of petrol in bulk.
The Army had therefore to turn to the Oil Companies to see them through
the crisis, until it could plan and build up its own organization.
Those who
carried this work out were largely drawn from the staffs of the Oil Companies,
which were greatly depleted by the release of men to the forces. The Com:
panies placed their services, their technical skill and advice, and their material
resources at the disposal of the forces.
If they had not done so, the supply
and distribution of P.O.L. to the Army in 1940-1941, on the scale required,
would not have been possible.
By June, 1940, provision had been made for packed M.T. petrol reseria,
with lubricants in proportion, to the extent of if million gallons in gry.
4 million in Palestine, and 1,400,000 in the Sudan.
The latter came from a
quantity laid down by the Sudan Government early in 1939, and was allocto
to the Army on the outbreak of war.
The policy of building up packed reserves in Middle East in the early day
of the war was influenced largely by the shortase of tankage in which to hit
a proportion of our reserves in bulk.
Only one of the M.T. spirit tanks in t
Gebel Dave Scheme was complete in June, and the other three were comple
and filled by September, 1940.
were not in fact ready until the middle of 1941.
The aviation spirit tanks and the new bod
tanks were merely covered with the soil from the excavations, while those fo
This was because the MT.
aviation spirit were embedded in concrete.
by two factors: —
The actual building un of the racked reserves required was severely init
(a) The shortage of container plants.
(h) The lack of accommodation in which to hold such reserve stocks s
it might be
possible to accumulate from aroduction ne the eit!
plants, after day-to-day requirements of tins had been met.
152
There was also delay in decisions as to the size of the force for which pro-
vision was to be made, the number of days' reserves, the scale, and the provi-
sion of accommodation.
The vehicle strength of a Division was at this time calculated at 3,000,
but by October, 1940, the figure had been increased to 4,000, including corps
The personnel strength on the same basis was taken as 35,000.
Daily
consumption was calculated, for M.T. spirit, at three gallons a vehicle for a
day for two-thirds of the force, as being in base areas, and six gallons a day for
one-third, as being in operational areas; i.e., an average of four gallons a
vehicle for a day, or a total of 16,000 gallons for each division a day. Lubri-
cants were taken at 6 per cent. of fuel requirements.
The packed reserves had necessarily to be in non-returnable tins, as,
although the Suez plant could make 4-gallon drums, there was
no suitable
material available in Middle East.
These tins had the sole merit, that they
could be produced in the required quantities.
This alone made possible the
maintenance of the Middle East forces throughout their campaigns.
The
paramount necessity was for vast numbers of containers in the shortest possible
time.
The fact that the tins were regarded as non-returnable resulted in great
wastage, as the majority were roughly opened and thrown away when empty,
or alternatively used for various other purposes (e.g., for water, latrines, etc.).
Orders were therefore soon issued to provide for tins being properly opened
so that they could be used a second time, and propaganda was distributed to
the same end.
This action probably saved a breakdown of petrol supplies
during the first battle of Libya, as 3,000 tons of petrol were distributed in the
base areas in tins filled a second time, during December, 1940, though only at
the cost of very heavy leakage.
The weaknesses of the 4-gallon tin were not fully appreciated at the War
Office, as witness the difference of opinion over the question of the necessity
for covered storage for the packed P.O.L. reserves.
War Office pointed out
that packed P.O.L. was stored in the open in the United Kingdom; Middle
East replied that, as the reserve was being built up for forces much greater
than the actual strength at the time, and to enable them to operate in a highly
mobile rôle, it was impossible to turn over the accumulating reserves within the
normal life of the 4-gallon tin when exposed to the climatic rigours of the
Middle East.
The thin containers were subject to rapid corrosion, and, unless
they were covered, they tended to leak at the seams, and to burst under the
direct rays of the sun.
In order to economize in containers, so saving shipping for material, tin-
plate, and leakage, the bulk distribution of petrol began to be developed in
Middle East from the time of Italy's entry into the war.
Until then, there had
only been 38 W.D. kerbside pumps in the whole Command.
There had been
no new provision of pumps or of bulk refuelling outfits.
About 100 pumps
Were obprovision of pumps or of bull of immense value at a critical time,
It was estimated that the cost of a bulk outfit (pump and 1,500-gallon tank),
€200, was saved thos the coss afae, when 12,000 gallons had passed througn:
and that every million gallons so distributed saved €20,000 in cost of tins and
leakage. and 280 tone of chinning space as compared with distribution in
4-gallon tins.
153
7717
WO 277/21
27
WO277/26
