the War Office.
But at the instance of the War College, much interest had been arou
in the study and practice of combined naval and military operations, and during my term
of office I found myself the Chairman of two joint Admiralty and War Office Committees
to which was given the work of preparing, respectively, the first handbooks of ' Combined
Operations,' and of ' Regulations Governing the Entry of Defended Ports in the Time of
War.' The War Office, which had anticipated the Admiralty by many years in the establish-
ment of a General Staff, had given much more attention to these subjects than we had,
and they sent very fully qualified representatives to the Committee.
importance, and indeed the urgent necessity of the work before us, and
We all appreciated the
realised our
responsibility in the breaking
of new ground, so there were no inter-Service jealousies
(which in my experience are of the rarest occurrence in spite of the imaginative references to
them in the Press and by lay writers), and the work proceeded apace.
The Handbook of Combined Operations dealt,
according
to our instructions,
with
tactical subjects only, and resolved itself therefore into a full detail of the arrangements
for the disembarkation of troops on a hostile coast, opposed or otherwise.
We discussed the
historical examples of such disembarkation, some successful and some unsuccessful and I
hink those to which we paid the most attention were those at Louisburg, Aboukir, and of
Lord Raglan's army in the Crimea.
Our book was published in due course, was tried out
in an exercise on a fairly large scale at Clacton, and with some few alterations subsequent
on that experience formed the tactical basis on which our landing at Cape Helles was effected
by 1915."
Historically a unique situation had thus arisen in 1914 as regards amphibious landings.
The
remainder of this Chapter will now briefly trace the history of the Dardanelles campaign in its
amphibious aspects and the period between the two world wars.
The Gallipoli Campaign
The outstanding amphibious landing of the 1914-18 War was at the Gallipoli peninsula in 1915.
It involved an opposed landing on beaches which were heavily defended and, although it did not
attain its aim of enabling the Allied Fleets to enter the Sea of Marmora, it provides us with important
lessons worth careful study.
Prior to the entry of Turkey into the War on the side of Germany on 1st November, 1914, the
problem of forcing a passage for the Fleet into the Marmora had always been considered to be
a full scale amphibious operation.
Plans had been prepared for this but no other preparation or
provision of material had been attempted.
Two days after Turkey declared war, a force of Allied warships bombarded the outer forts for a
short period.
This force was covering the possibility of a break-out by the German battle-cruiser
Goeben and the light cruiser Breslau, which had taken refuge from our warships in Turkish waters
just prior to the Turkish declaration of war.
Inception
At the end of December,
1914, the Russians appealed to the British Government for help.
They were being hard pressed by the Germans and were afraid that the Turks would move against
them.
Lord Kitchener, the Secretary of State for War, replied regretting that no troops were available
but promised a demonstration against the Turks.
Accordingly on 2nd January, 1915, he asked
the First Lord of the Admiralty (Mr. Winston Churchill) if the Navy could carry out this
demonstration.
Lord Fisher, the First Sea Lord, strongly urged an attack on the Dardanelles if it could be
carried out at once. Thus, on 3rd January 1915, the First Lord signalled the Admiral Commanding
the Squadron (Vice-Admiral S. H. Carden) at the entrance to the Dardanelles :-
-" Do you consider
the forcing of the Straits by ships alone a practicable operation ? It is assumed older battleships
fitted with mine-bumpers would be used, preceded by colliers as mine-bumpers and sweepers.
Importance of result justifies severe loss. Let me know your views."
To this, Admiral Carden replied that he did not consider the Dardanelles could be rushed
but that they might be forced by extended operations with a large number of ships.
In reply to a
further signal from the Admiralty, the Admiral proposed that the operation should be undertaken
in four phases :—
(1)
Total reduction of the forts at the entrance.
(2)
Clear the defences inside the Straits up to the Narrows.
(3)
Reduce the defences at the Narrows.
(4)
Clear the minefields, then advance into the Marmora.
War Cabinet Decision
On 13th January, the First Lord explained this plan to the War Cabinet. The latter decided
that :—
"The Admiralty should prepare for a naval expedition in February, to bombard and
take the Gallipoli Peninsula with Constantinople as its objective.'
Reading this, it would appear that the War Cabinet had in mind some form of combined operation
if the words " take the Gallipoli peninsula
meant anything at all.
However, on 23rd January,
the War Council decided that it was to be a purely naval operation and orders were sent out
accordingly.
In " Military Operations Gallipoli," Vol. I, we find :-
" The decision thus arrived at marks the first great landmark in the Dardanelles
campaign. In an effort to satisfy the urgent need of diplomacy, Britain's fleet was to attempt,
without the aid of a single soldier, an enterprise which in the earlier days of the war both
the Admiralty and the War Office had regarded as a military task. The operation would
moreover be many times more difficult than in the early days of the war.
The Germans
had already had six months in which to improve the defences of the Straits, and the mine-
fields were continually growing. The enterprise was perhaps still capable of accomplishment,
if the Government were ready to face the inevitable loss of ships.
This was the opinion
of the German Admiral von Usedom who knew better than anyone the strength and the
weakness of the fortress and the capacity of its defenders. But there must be no indecision,
no faltering and no delay.
Nothing but iron will and grim determination, both at home
and on the spot, could snatch the hazardous victory."
Bombardment
On 20th February, 1915, a bombardment of the outer forts was carried out by battleships of
the Allied Fleets.
The Turks held their fire until the ships engaged the forts at close range, and were
then only silenced after further heavy shelling.
Provision of Troops
The first indication to the Admiral that a combined operation was under consideration in
England was information that the General in Egypt had been ordered to hold 10,000 troops in
readiness for service at the Dardenelles.
Even at this stage no attempt to organise a combined
operation was made.
The bombardment was repeated on 25th February, with excellent results.
By the late after-
noon it appeared that the outer forts were incapable of further resistance and the minesweepers
proceeded to sweep the minefields.
At the same time demolition parties landed from the inshore
squadron to blow up any undestroyed guns.
Military Opinion
On 1st March, General Birdwood arrived at the entrance of the Dardanelles and conferred with
the Admiral.
His opinion was that " he did not believe that the Fleet alone could force the
Dardanelles" and he reported this home.
Lord Kitchener at this time had no intention of undertaking a serious landing and on
4th March, we find him telegraphing to General Birdwood :-
"From the Admiral's estimate he expected the Fleet to reach the Marmora by the
20th.
The Anzac Corps, the French Division and the Royal Naval Division would be
assembled at Mudros by the 18th, but there was no intention of using these troops to take
the Gallipoli peninsula unless the Admiral subsequently found it impossible to get through
without them.
Extensive operations on the peninsula were
not to be undertaken
without further orders from home and in this case more troops would probably be sent out
from England."
Sweeping Operations
During the first week in March, the Fleet continued the bombardment and the sweeping opera-
tions.
The latter were not successful owing to the inexperience of the personnel, the strong current
through the Straits and the enemy fire which was mostly from concealed mobile batteries that
could not be silenced.
+17
WO 277/21
18
27
