extended.
First line transport collected from the F.M.Cs., second line trans.
port from the Army roadheads, and third line transport and G.H.O. transport
brought supplies from the R.M.A. to the roadhead.
The R.A.S.C. columns
concerned sometimes
200 miles a day during this period.
maintenance of vehicles
was inevitably reduced, but,
majority of vehicles were new, no serious ill effects ensued.
In view of the satisfactory state of stocks in the R.M.A., it was decided
front line becoming available in time for the reception of stores.
to cut down imports by more than half, and to truson of store nearer to the
The prime necessity during the advance was petrol.
Three armoured
divisions were engaged in the pursuit, and petrol was being consumed in
enormous quantities. Its transportation was a matter of the utmost urgency
and the great majority of the available transport was used for this purpose.
The axiom that the expenditure of ammunition is in inverse ratio to that of
petrol held good, and the demands for the former did not often conflict with
those for the latter.
As far as supplies were concerned, when the advance
began all drawings of fresh rations practically ceased, the major issues being
The arrangements for emergency supply by air were first required to be
put into operation at the end of August, 1944, and then continued on an
After the fall of Paris, 500 tons of food a day for a fortnight
were supplied by air to feed the civilian population. Between 5th and 12th
September, 432 tons of Compo pack rations were lifted by air to Douai under
The first maintenance operation undertaken by Air Despatch Group was
in connection with the battle for the Falaise Gap, on the night of 20th/21st
August, when 60 tons of ammunition were dropped to a Polish Armoured
Later, many despatch crews were provided for special air service
missions, with food and stores for resistance movements.
transport commitments in the United Kingdom, amounting to 300
vehicles at one time.
Considerable help was also given in moving P.O.L.
from U.S. depots to airfields, for despatch to General Patton's forces.
cried that his men could eat their belts, but he must have " gas".
The position at the beginning of the last stage of this phase was that the
British L. of C. was now 400 miles long, or almost double the distance
on which the allotment of transport to 21 Army Group had been calculated.
Antwerp was in our hands, but it could not be developed until the approaches
were clear; and in fact it was not until the end of November that the port
was taken into use
Against this, there was the set-off of Dieppe,
was opened as a port of entry on Sth September, and was used for bringing
First Canadian Army.
in essential stores for either Army, but mainly for the maintenance of the
Le Havre had been allotted to the Americans.
The canidity with which the advance progressed towards the end of
August upset the loading programme and some vessels had to be discharged
loaded.
partial loading, while others returned from France still fully or partly
348
Captured enemy supplies were now sufficiently large to have a materia
elect on requirements Bruss Outside the theatre.
found in Antwerp and Brussels to permit of issue to full scale
complete rations captured at Le Havre were used to feed prisoners of war.
Captured wines and spirits were disposed of under the direction of a com-
nite appointed by 21 Army Group, hospital needs being meton of
Plans were being laid for further advances, and this would obviously
place an even greate strast one the already greatly extended L. of Cously
The closest supervision and control were therefore necessary
to ensure that the best use was made of every means of transport.
qustion of balancing the quantities that could be brought up by train trom
R.M.A. against lifting by road the rest of the 6,000 tons a day required by
Second Army for maintenance and stocks.
21 Army Group assumed responsibility for the control of all transport
engaged, and set up an organization called "Tranco" to carry this out.
This consisted of an integrated "Q" and "Q" (Movements) staff with S.T.
The road L. of C. was organized in two areas, north and south of the
Seine. In each area, there were two Cs.R.A.S.C., each commanding a group
One was responsible for road patrol and the organization of
staging camps, and the other for reporting availability of transport in the area,
and the movement of maintenance convoys through the report centre estab-
lished on the main "up"
and " down" routes.
Control Cs.R.A.S.C. also
operated at R.M.A., roadhead, and Dieppe. Co-ordination of transport alloca-
"Tranco", on "Q"
It was considered that the exercise of control by means of "Tranco" was
method in the circumstances.
"Administrative History of 21 Army Group", it is described as the only
known example of such control; it may be compared with the L. of C. Road
Transport Column organization set up on the Manipur Road in Assam, as
described in Chapter XI.
Operation of L. of C. Road Transport
The total distance from Raveux in the R.M.A. to the roadhead at
Enchien was 200 mileg and the transport Operated this run on a six-day turn
Convoys operated on a platoon basis, and were completely self-
contained at funt for the whole turnround. A numher of staging areas wer
R.A.S.C. employed on the maintenance lifts.
The feeding of these convoys was one of the special problems dealt with
by the Catering Branch in 21 Army Group
five days' tinned rations, and sending the cooks on ahead each day to try
At first, the convoys were loading
and prepare meals for the drivers at the end of the day's run
Unsatisfactory. because the cooks sometimes got in after the main convoy,
and long periods of livine on tinned rations were detrimental to health and
Permanent A.C.C. staff were therefore provided at the staging camps
and hot meals and haversack rations were thus provided.
(37452)
349
WS1787/17
WO 277/21
27
N0277/26
