(b) Increment for each Division in the Corps.
One armoured division transport company,
one mixed division
transport company, or one infantry division transport com-
pany, according to the number and types of the divisions in
the corps.
These transport companies were the former G.T. companies re-
designated, to
distinguish them from such companies without a
specific rôle.
In October, 1943, the formation which had been called the "New Model"
division, and later simply the division (as distinct from the infantry division),
and later still the mixed division, was abolished as unsuitable for warfare in
Europe, and the relevant divisional R.A.S.C. organization consequently lapsed.
The scale of allotment of corps transport units was brought into line, and
their organization was once again altered.
The corps troops R.A.S.C. now
consisted of the two corps troops composite companies, the M.A.C., and the
two artillery regiment platoons, while the corps transport column comprised
the corps transport company, with increments as before for armoured or
infantry divisions.
Bridge companies became G.H.Q. troops.
Proposed System of Maintenance, 1944
As the result of the lessons learnt in the campaigns in the Western Desert
and North Africa, a maintenance system was laid down by the War Office in
February, 1944, which it was intended should be the normal method of main-
tenance to be followed in Europe by 21 Army Group.
This is set out below,
as it gives a picture of the stage which opinion had reached in regard to main-
tenance in the Field, although, in the event, much of the system enunciated
was not adhered to in North West Europe, where that used actually followed
very closely the lines of the system developed in the Middle East.
In either case, the basic principles differed very considerably from those
which had governed the maintenance organization at the beginning of this
war.
Field-Marshal Montgomery, in his book "El Alamein to the River
Sangro", put it thus: " All textbooks written before the war had assumed
that requirements of a force would be met by the despatch of daily pack
It was considered neither necessary nor desirable to hold any reserves
at a railhead, of forward of it, except in very small amounts necessary to
balance deliveries.
The campaigns of 1940 and 1941 had shown that this
system was not workable in modern conditions of warfare.
inflexible.
It was too
levels.
During a rapid advance, the demand for petrol rose to staggering
By the time that the necessary adjustments had been made in pack
train loadings, the need for the petrol had given way to a demand for
ammunition because the advance had been stopped and battle was imminent.
It is of course true that the holding of large supplies well forward had dis
advantages.
In spite of every effort made for their destruction, considerable
supplies fell into the enemy's hands during the retreat from Gazala to Alamein.
As a result of this misfortune, an attempt was made to adopt once again
the pack train system during the period of static warfare on the Alamein
position.
The attempt had to be ahandoned immediately the advance began".
68
The proposed system therefore was based on the principle of holding
considerable stocks at the forward end of the L.
of C., instead of, as before,
the reserves being held at the base or advanced base.
The system was a process of build-up, which began on the beach with the
initial landing.
As soon as there
was
enough room on the beach, a beach
maintenance area would be established in which a D.I.D. and a petrol depot,
Type "C", would operate, as far as the R.A.S.C. was concerned.
When the situation was sufficiently
stabilized, a rear maintenance area
would be formed, the beach maintenance area then becoming a beach transit
area, to which the amphibians brought their loads ashore from the ships.
They were not intended to go further inland than this, thus ensuring their
economical use and a regular supply of transport on the beach, and enabling
mixed loads to be sorted before despatch to the R.M.A.
As the operations developed, it would become necessary to form forward
dumps in the roadhead area, which might, as a rail L. of C. developed,
become the nucleus of a forward base.
The point at which maintenance requirements,
arrangements made by Army Group, would be handed over to the control
of Army, was called the L. of C. terminal.
and was described as the railhead,
Near it would be established forward depots for
the different commodities, to hold Army reserves necessary to provide for
future operations, and to cover possible interruptions of the L. of C., and also
to hold supplies in excess of the requirements for the replenishment of second
The size of the stocks would be laid down by Army group, and they
would be maintained by daily pack trains or by bulk delivery.
requirements of formations were to be drawn from depots or direct from
pack trains, if distance permitted.
When the distance became too great for second line transport to operate
in this way, field maintenance areas were to be established as a normal practice.
A F.M.A. comprised service installations into which General Transport would
empty, and from which second line would draw, and where small stocks
The use of divisional administrative areas (as opposed to divisional main-
tenance areas and divisional administrative groups was also visualized.
these all the administrative elements of the division would be concentrated
under the control of an area commander, in a single circumscribed area, and
would move only as a compact group.
Organization for " Overlord"
The organization of formation R.A.S.C. eventually crystallized, in readi-
ness for the invasion of Europe in Operation "Overlord", in the following
form: -
(a) Divisional R.A.S.C.
Three infantry brigade companies, each of two transport platoons;
one composite platoon; and two R.D.Is
One divisional troops company,
of two transport platoons; "A"
and "B" sections of a composite platoon; and two R.D.Is.
WO277/21
27
1027 7721
