so that forward echelons of bridge carrying lorries could replenish within
24 hours.
A great deal of discussion went on as to what equipment should
be carried by Divisional Engineers and by Bridge Companies respectively, and
finality was also delayed by the introduction of new types of equipment, e.g.,
the Bailey Bridge.
In May, 1941, a new establishment was produced, the unit being re
designated a corps bridge company.
It was organized in two portions: a
fixed portion, including the R.E. section and the workshop section, and a
variable portion.
The latter always included one section for the carriage
of folding boat equipment (F.B.E.), two sets, and one section for miscellaneous
bridging equipment including reconnaissance boats,
motor boats,
equipment, army track propulsion units, and fire fighting units.
kopak
In addition
the variable portion included one section for each division in the corps,
ot each of three types, viz, a pontoon equipment section; a F.B.E. section;
and an Inglis bridge section.
This made a total, for a corps of three
divisions, of 11 transport sections, numbering about 300 task vehicles, a very
unwieldy unit. The chain of supply of bridging material was that divisional
field park companies, or squadrons, drew from the corps bridge company, and
the latter refilled at the railhead dump.
There were continued changes of policy throughout 1941, and, in view
of the constant changes of equipment anticipated, the possibility was examined
of employing 10-ton lorries, without special superstructures, for this service;
but, although large numbers of this type were taken into
use, it did not
become the standard vehicle, and the British bridge companies in 21 Army
Group were to suffer from the difficulties attendant on their being composed
of as many as 19 different types of task vehicle.
The Canadian bridge com-
panies, on the other hand, were equipped throughout with Diamond T trans.
porters.
In May,
1942, the new R.A.S.C. organization
was applied as far as
possible to corps bridge companies; that is to say, the company H.Q., the
R.E. platoon, and the workshop platoon, were of the standard type, and
transport platoons were standardized in four types, for miscellaneous bridging
equipment, folding boat and small box girder equipment, pontoon equipment,
and Inglis or Bailey bridge equipment, respectively; but these platoons were
not standard in respect of the number of task vehicles in each, and averaged
about 25 lorries, 3-ton, six or four-wheeled, with two-wheeled drive.
The
pontoon and Inglis/Bailey bridge sections were allotted on the basis of one
for each division in the corps, which might be two or three.
The total number
of transport platoons in the company varied therefore between six and eight.
In September, 1943, bridge companies were taken out of the list of basic
corps troops, but no definite direction was given as to whether they should be
G.H.O. or Army troops, as it was considered that their position was bound
to vary between one and the other, according to the particular circumstances.
Generally speaking, they were to be held as Army troops, normally on the
basis of one for each corps.
This ruling was soon revised and these units
were made G.H.O. troops, their sub-allotment to Armies being a matter for
the Force commander to decide. It was considered that only by exercising
limited bridging resources available.
control as far back as possible in this way considered that use be made of the
82
It was laid down that the composition of each bridge company should be
dependent on the operational requirements in the theatres of war concerned.
The bridge companies in 21 Army Group each consisted of ten transport
platoons, comprising three Bailey platoons, two pontoon platoons, two F.B.E.
platoons, one assault equipment platoon, one raft platoon, and one heavy
platoon; and a C.R.A.S.C. Bridging controlled the group of companies.
The
administration of ten transport platoons by one company headquarters was
very difficult, and was complicated by the fact that, in the course of bridge-
building operations, the vehicles of different platoons became inextricably
mixed.
At the end of the war, it was a question whether the larger company
should not be split up into two of five platoons each, or alternatively each
platoon be made an independent unit.
An interesting development was that the R.A.S.C. became responsible for
the maintenance of the R.E. equipment which was carried on wheels, and was
assisted in this task by the R.E. platoon.
Notes on the employment of bridge companies in 21 Army Group are
contained in Chapter VIII.
Amphibians become R.A.S.C. Responsibility
The first amphibian vehicles in the British service were Landing Vehicles,
Tracked (L.V.Ts.), otherwise known as " Alligators".
The original intention
was that they should be manned by the Royal Marines.
In July, 1942, how-
ever, it was proposed by the Chief of Combined Operations that, as these
vehicles were to be used for the clearance of stores from inland waterways,
and similar duties, they should be operated and maintained by the R.A.S.C.
As the waterproofing of ordinary vehicles for beach operations would be a
major problem, and amphibians would therefore be of value, the commitment
was accepted.
Initial Organization
Three hundred " Alligators" were on order from U.S.A., and it was pro-
posed that they should be operated by three motor boat companies, the
personnel being both drivers and watermen, and the vehicles designated
At that time, only one such company was available, and this could
deal with the few " Alligators" already in the United Kingdom; but the
immediate formation of at least one more company
was urged, on
grounds that any available amphibians would probably be required for
operations in 1943, and if companies were only then hurriedly formed to
operate them, they would be immature and unequal to their tasks.
DUKWs
The DUKW, or amphibian wheeled 27-ton lorry, was first used opera-
tionally by the
Americans in the North Africa campaign, and the British
Army was not slow to recognize its merits. A cadre of officers and N.C.Os.
accordingly underwent a course of instruction in the management of DUKWs,
under American instructors, and then at once proceeded to train two hundred
R.A.S.C. drivers.
83
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
