it was not until September,
1944, that the size of the subject compelled
S. HA. B.F. to organize coal production and distribution in N.W. Europe on
a sufficient scale to make
intelligent military control possible.
become apparent by then that the problem was a big one, and required tech-
nical knowledge to deal with it.
the G.4 and G.5 (Civil Affairs) coal sections were amal-
gamated, with a U.S. full Colonel as Chief, and a British Lieutenant-Colonel,
later Colonel, of the R.A.S.C., as deputy.
The most immediate benefit gained
lay in the provision of qualified mining engineers.
The Section grew during the next six months until there were over 400
British, American,
French,
Belgian, and Dutch, officers and men on its
strength.
It was organized as a headquarters (part of Current Operations
Branch), with sub-sections eventually for each liberated country, and for
Germany.
The sub-sections co-operated with working parties in the countries
with which they dealt, and arranged local allocations.
The headquarters of
the Section was itself divided into sub-sections to deal with production (in-
cluding the supply of mining equipment, a most urgent and important matter);
requirements; shipping; internal transport; distribution; and statistics.
Priority of Allocation of Coal
Coal was allocated on a definite priority basis, in which locomotive coal
came first, then other military and quasi-military fuel users; civilian purposes,
such as power, gas, and industry, received any supplies left over. During the
such as p e4-1955, there was never any fuel available for civilian domestic
heating.
It was extremely difficult at times to decide priorities between the various
claimants for a strictly limited supply of fuel.
Apart from the railways, there
were a number of other military users; steam dredgers, tugs, and cranes, power
stations, workshops, hospitals, and some bakeries, needed coal at all times of
the yaar. on the old er meather, a day often had to be eked out with wood;
In the colder weather, all units required coal for heating, although
in headquarters compelled to use big heating and cooking installations, the
daily allowance had to be supplemented.
Over and above these direct military
requirements, coal had also to be provided for industries (such as steel works,
boot and clothing factories,
work for the armies.
laundries, and other agencies), doing essential
had to he allowed some modicum of transport. power. light. and heat, to
Finally, the people of liberated or conquered regions
prevent disease and unrest.
It was therefore impossible in practice entirely to separate military, quasi-
military, and essential civilian requirements from one another.
They had to
out to the most urgent tunes of consumers hy one central agenev which could
be correlated to such supplies as were available, and coal had to be doled
envisage and control the whole problem.
implications, were not fully appreciated at the War Office, in the higher levels
These considerations, and their
of S.H.A.E.F. at 21 Army Group, or in the U.S. Forces, during the initial
Use of Alternatives for Coal
It was fortunate in the circumstances that both the British and America
armies used oil for cooking, since coal was in extremely short supply.
other hand, even when locomotive coal was in desperately short supply in
358
N.W. Europe in the autumn and winter of 1944-1945, the Director of Military
wave at S.H.A.E.F. turned down the proposal to convert locomotives t
oil burning, because the existing engines were unsuited to burn fuels other
than coal. and because the use of liquid fuel meant installing tanks. Dumps.
pipes, etc., at refuelling points, and this work could not be done quickly.
In the first four months of 1945, 140,000 tons of pitch were shipped to
NW. Europe for the manufacture of briquettes for use on the railvaye.
Exploitation of Indigenous Supplies of Coal
In the event, none of the " first aid" mining equipment (except the pit-
props, prepared for use in the northern French coalfields, was required, as
the Germans retreated with such speed from France, Belgium, and Holland,
that they left the mines in our possession fortunately intact.
As each coal.
feld, such as the Moselle, Saar, and Ruhr, was uncovered, mining engineers
vent forward to take possession, prevent flooding, conserve coal stocks, and
try to get the pits working again as soon as possible.
In every coalfield there was a shortage of pitwood, labour, mine supplies,
transport, and food.
All these, and other things besides, had to be provided
by the staff section concerned.
Pitwood was at first supplied from local
resources to enable coal to be got from the Belgian mines; but when the
German offensive started in the Ardennes, the wood had to be imported from
the United Kingdom.
Although large quantities of coal were shipped from the United Kingdom,
the bulk of 21 Army Group's requirements in France were supplied from
indigenous sources; and, in Belgium and Holland, it had to rely on locally
produced coal.
Conclusions-Coal Supply
The task of supplying coal wherever it was needed, from Norway to the
South of France, would have been no small problem in peace-time with full
peace-time facilities of communications available, and with adequate experi-
enced staff at all points.
In war, with most imperfect communications, and
with a staff hurriedly got together, the task was difficult and unremiting,
vis not easy at that stage of the war to obtain British oficers with suitable
technical experience of coal production, distribution, and utilization, while
the American officers were often civilian experts with no military experience.
In the pritich Army cool had alivace creviously heen regarded as a small
maintenance.
Burope in 1944-1945 evidently showed that this view was very much too
The experience of coal supply to the Allied Forces in N.W.
The Deputy Chief of the Solid Fuel Section indicated the following steps
which he considered necessary to avoid a recurrence of the same difficulties
in any future war as long as cont remains an important primary source of
(a) Experts in coal production, distribution, and utilization, should be
earmarked and made to train together in peace, so as to prepare for
the coal problems of another war.
WAsTe 17
WO 277/21
27
W027//26
