BRIGADE BRICK- STANDARD BEACH PARTY FOR ONE BDE. (ASSAULT SCALES) — conta.
Personnel
Two
Vehicles
Remarks
7110-08
TAI?M
SIes
Serial
Pro. :-
One additional Sec
for each additional
beach.
Att. Beach Sig. Sec.
els 21, 22 unit. to
jeeps
Two Secs. Pro. Coy.
R.E.M.E. :—
Beach Det.
R.N. Beach Party
R.N. Maint. Party
19(a)
R.N. :-
244
R.N. Sigs.
21
Total ..
91
2,126
Notes.—1. Disposal of Units after Base Sub-Area established :—
The fol, in serials come under command Commander Base Sub-Area:- 1, 6, 9 (through C.R.E. Works), 12 and 13 (through L. of C,
The following serials come under command G.H.Q. Increment staff responsible for the development of Base Sub-Areas: —2, 3, 10, 11, 15,
17, 18, 20, 21, 22.
Serials 4 and 5 come under A.A. Bde. responsible for Base Defence.
Serials 7, 8, 16 go forward as soon as relieved by similar Base units.
Docks Operating Coy. personnel will be embarked (25 on each small coaster).
They will not be maintained on shore.
Serials 11, 12, 19, 20, 21, 22—Additional personnel will be required if more than two beaches are developed.
The above table represents the minimum troops required for the operation.
be landed or reserves for each unit must be available for immediate despatch in replacement.
casualties are anticipated, either extra personnel must
APPENDIX 24
ANNEXURE
Under Secretary of State for War,
The War Office,
Whitehall, S.W.1
SECRET
3926/BRV/16
20th November, 1942
COMBINED OPERATIONS BEACH ORGANISATION
General
1. Experience gained in exercises and whilst preparing for operations has shown that there is a
paramount need for a properly constituted unit to undertake the various duties included under the
heading of " Beach Organisation."
Existing System
The existing system whereby an ad hoc " Beach Brick" composed of a number of independent
units, detachments and individuals is assembled for a particular exercise or operation has proved itself
to be quite inadequate for this
organisation
hoth
as
regards
work and almost impossible to administer.
planning,
control and execution
The importance of beach
Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, report on Exercise " Dryshod."
has been fully brought out in the
Proposed New Method
3. This matter has been the subject of discussion between representatives of Home Forces, the War
Office and both Naval and Army Staffs of Combined Operations Headquarters.
" Reach
Organisation Group,"
As a result,
proposals
Appendix 23.
suitable for each assault Brigade landing are attached at
An established unit such as that now proposed should be able to reach the high standard of training
and esprit de corps which is so essential if it is to work and fight as a team under the difficult conditions
which can be expected on the beaches.
Function of the Beach Group
4. Briefly, the function of the Beach Group is, in conjunction with the Royal Navy, to :—
(a) Arrange and control the movement of all personnel and vehicles from ships and landing craft
to assembly areas inland.
(b) Move stores from ships' holds and craft to dumps in the Beach Maintenance Area.
(c) Develop and organise the beaches and Beach Maintenance Area both as regards defence,
movement and administration, including evacuation of casualties and recovery of vehicles.
(d) Provide a Beach Signal Organisation.
Beach Groups will be G.H.Q. troops allotted to lower formations as required for a particular operation.
The Beach Group Commander will be responsible to the senior formation commander ashore until a
Base Sub-Area is established.
Manpower Commitment
5. Attention is drawn to the fact that the size of this Group is no larger than the Beach Bricks which
have been developed by First Army in conjunction with C.C.O.'s Training Staff during the past twelve
months
Responsibility for " Fathering " Beach Groups
6. As a result of recent experience, it appears essential that one arm of the service must " father"
Beach Groups and be responsible for their mobilisation, both of personnel and equipment, development
of the technique of beach work and training.
As a result of the foregoing, it is considered that the ideal would be met if the personnel of the whole
of the Beach Groups belonged to one Corps, preferably that of the Royal Engineers; officers would be
seconded to this as necessary.
Should this,
owing to administrative and other difficulties, not be
practicable, then it is suggested that certain companies should belong to other Corps.
In either case, officers of the headquarters would be drawn from all arms.
Subsequent Employment of Beach Groups
7. Consideration has been given to the best method of employment of the Beach Groups when
beach maintenance ceases.
It is felt that the value of the special training and experience should not be
Lost by allowing them to se dispersed or retained for routine duties in the Base Sub-ana :
they should
for another operation.
be withdrawings compto be dis reset or it necessary as a result of heavy casualties, and held available
245
WO
2:
7
3
