(2) At a very early stage in planning, you, in conjunction with the Admiralty and Air
Ministry, are to make recommendations to the Chiefs of Staff regarding the system
of command, so that the Commanders for the operation may be appointed as soon as
possible and detailed planning begun.
(3) All the military resources under your command will be available for the operation.
(4) You are to assume that all the assault and special shipping in this country will be
available for
the training of your forces, subject to the continuance of a vigorous
policy of small raids.
(5) You should continue your study of a major raiding operation against one of the main
French Atlantic ports in case it becomes desirable to carry one out, but no preparations
for such an operation are to be allowed to delay your preparations for your primary task.
(6) The Adviser on Combined Operations to be consulted at all stages of the planning."
It was not until the end of 1941, when C.O.H.Q. was reconstituted, that the magnitude of the
problem became really apparent, nowhere more quickly than in C.O.H.Q. itself.
C.C.O.'s task
magnitude to the Americans.
as 20th February,
Staff Mission in Washington suggesting that the construction of additional landing craft was essential
and asking them to do everything possible to accelerate the programme put forward by the Admiralty
representatives when they visited the U.S.A. in November-December, 1941.
This was the time
that the new Admiralty design of Landing Ship Tank (L.S.T.), later known as the L.S.T. (2), was
put forward and also that of the Landing Ship Dock (L.S.D.) which was something quite novel in
ship construction.
Two hundred of the former and seven of the latter had been considered at the
time to be the maximum that American shipyards were capable of undertaking and this order was
placed only after some difficulty in persuading the American Naval Authorities of its vital necessity.
Operation " Sledgehammer"
About this time, the position in Russia gave rise to considerable concern and the question of
giving some assistance by action in the West arose.
The Joint Planners in a paper' of 7th March
suggested "a major diversion in the West designed to upset German plans and divert German
forces from the East."
This was discussed at a meeting? of the Chiefs of Staff on 10th March, at
which C.C.O. was present.
The operation was called " Sledgehammer.'
As a result of this meeting
the Joint Planners in conjunction with A.C.O. produced a more detailed paper examining the
various areas for attack which rejected the Pas de Calais and Le Havre in favour of the Channel
Islands and Cherbourg peninsula.
It is clear from the Chiefs of Staff meeting on 17th March, 1942,
that no one liked the look of the operation, nevertheless a further paper and directives for planning
were ordered.
The Admiralty and Ministry of War Transport were invited to examine and report
on the implications of speeding up the production of landing craft and of giving a higher priority
to the allocation of shipping space for landing craft from America.
Also, the Admiralty was invited,
in consultation with other Departments concerned, to begin the construction of suitable hards for
the embarkation of armoured vehicles and motor transport into landing craft.
Meeting at C.O.H.Q., 26th February,
1942
Apart from
contribution
made to these first rapid studies
connection with
The object of this was to find out
what work and organisation was required to make the south coast of England capable of acting as
a springboard from which to launch the forces necessary to invade the Continent.
The main fact that emerged was that a very large amount of work in the nature of preparation
would have to be undertaken before anything could be attempted.
What this work involved can
best be judged from the fact that, prior to January, 1942, many parts of the coasts of the U.K. had
been put in a state of defence against invasion.
were extensively
mined.
Beaches had strongly constructed defences and
might be of assistance to the enemy removed or made unusable.
Beach exits were blocked, piers dismantled and anything
that
given to the south coast of England from the Wash to the Bristol Channel.
Particular attention had been
Further, owing to the
activitine nt the Carman Air Finree the large norts like Tondon and Southamnton had heen very
activities of the terman it Force, the large posts like To that sed She thnglish Channel and the
1 J.P. (42), 243 dated 7th March, 1942.
3 J.P. (42), 274 dated 17th March, 1942.
2 C.O.S. (78th) Meeting on 10th March, 1942.
• C.O.S. (90th) Meeting on 17th March, 1942.
26
BEDTLE:
enable the west coast ports to compete with the ocean trafic diverted to them, they were equipped
Straits of Dover was restricted to small coastal ships, sailing in convoys, with local escorts.
with cranes, lighters, and tugs, which were transferred from the south and east co wis as quipped
Therefore, before any re-entry into the Continent became a possibility, not only would the
facilities on the south coast have to be restored but they would also have to be greatly augmen the.
To speed the build-up of any operations, the beaches and beach exits would not only have to he
cleared but transit areas and assembly and embarkation points would have to be made in their
As a result of the meeting a paper was prepared for the Chiefs of Staff. As this is of considerable
interest it is quoted in full in Appendix 8.
On 21st March, the Chiefs of Staff again discussed " Sledgehammer." They concluded that the
main limiting factors were going to be landing craft and the dificulty of air support other than
in the Pas de Calais.
procedure for planning Cross-Channel Operations.
They went on to discuss C.C.O.'s paper quoted in the appendix and the
Procedure for Planning Cross-Channel Operations
It was agreed at this meeting of the Chiefs of Staff on 21st March, 1942, that the planning of
Cross-Channel Operations, including the larger scale raids in Home Waters, should be undertaken
by the staffs of C.-in-C. Home Forces, C.-in-C. Fighter Command (and where applicable Bomber
Command) and the staff of C.O.H.Q., in close consultation.
Once an operation or directive for planning had been approved in outline by the Chiefs
of Staff Committee, it was agreed that the Joint Planning Procedure outlined in Appendix 8 should
be adopted.
At the same time the Chiefs of Staff Committee :—
(1) Invited the Chief 1 of Combined Operations, the Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces and
the Commander-in-Chief, Fighter Command to
prepare a brief appreciation,
accordance with the terms of the directive, with the object of diverting German Air
Forces from the Russian front.
(2) Approved the proposal for the development of the facilities and defences of the south
coast ports, and instructed the Secretary to submit a Minute to the Prime Minister
accordingly.
3) Agreed that arrangements should be made for the accommodation of the Assault
Commanders in the Headquarters of the Naval C.-in-C., Portsmouth, and at Dover
Castle.
(4) Instructed the C.O.S. (A.A.) Sub-Committee to prepare in due course, detailed proposals
for augmenting the air defences of the south coast area.
The directive, which indicates the trend of thought, was as follows :—
DIRECTIVE
" To :—
C.-in-C., Home Forces.
A.O.C.-in-C., Fighter Command.
Chief of Combined Operations.
(1) You have been appointed to plan operations with the following object :—
" To make Germany continuously employ her air forces in active operations and to
cause protracted air fighting in the West in an area advantageous to ourselves,
in order to reduce German air support available for the Eastern Front as early
as possible.
(2) It is intended that these operations should include a major deception plan designed
to threaten the Germans with a permanent return to the Continent.
(3) Planning is to commence forthwith.
You should report to the Chiefs of Staff at the
earliest possible date the forces which it will be practicable and desirable to employ
and your views on the probability of success.
1 Previously Commodore, Combined Operations. See Chapter 4.
27
0294г
+17
WO 277/21
2
7
3
(C52794)
