The first of these is that the four Colonies, Gambia, Sierra Leone, Gold
Coast and Nigeria, which together make up what is known as British West
Africa, are very widely separated geographically, and each is a separate entity
with its own problems. There was no rail communication between them and
practically no road connection (and this only through French territory) so
that the only means by which personnel and stores can be conveyed from
one to the other are sea and air.
The distances by either are great.
ordination and control are thereby rendered the more difficult.
The climate is also a factor which has to be taken into consideration
from more than one point of view.
There is the effect on the health of
European personnel, who cannot, even now on improved conditions, stand
long periods of service without at least adequate leave home.
the effect of heat and damp on supplies and material, and pests of all kinds
This complicated the work of all branches of the R.A.S.C.,
and in some respects militated against the maintenance of high standards
There were two phases in the history of the war as it concerned West
The first, from the outbreak of war until 1943, was one of rapid
expansion and mobilization.
When it first appeared that there was a threat
from the French territories, no effective opposition could have been offered.
A rough and ready force was then hastily produced, and British West Africa
could then have defended itself.
When the threat receded, it was decided
Fat at Wo West African divisions to take part in the campaign in the
This meant further recruitment and training.
The second phase was after the departure of the divisions.
stabilized, and more attention could be paid to the finer points of admini-
The establishments were organized on a static basis, and there
were reductions in the forces.
War Office assumes Responsibility
Control in West Africa was entirely in the hands of the Colonial Office
until September, 1940, when the administration and financial control of all
ground forces in those Colonies passed to the War Office. In anticipation of
this, arrangements had already been made for indents for military stores,
placed by Colonial Governments through the Colonial Office, to be met by
S. and T. Organization
There had been a very small R.A.S.C. detachment in Sierra Leone before
otherwise no supply and transport organization in any
Colonies, the Royal West African Frontier Force managing its own affairs
in these respects.
The introduction of R.A.S.C. system and control led
at first to a good deal of friction, partly because the
European personnel of the R.W.A.F.F. represented a lower standard of living
as compared with that which had been previously enjoyed on ration allowance.
The first appointment in the S. and T. organization in West Africa was
of an A.D.S.T. at command headquarters.
In each colony, there was at
first a D.A.D.S.T., but in September, 1941, the appointments of commanders,
West African Army Service Corps (C.W.A.A.S.C.) were substituted.
A.D.S.T. later became a D.D.S.T., and this appointment was up-graded to
Brigadier in May, 1942, until in September, 1944, it reverted to Colonel,
on reduction of establishments.
The S. and T. staff at command head-
quarters included two D.A.Ds.S.T., for supplies and transport respectively.
In this command the co-ordinating and
controlling influence
D.D.S.T. was particularly important.
Each Colony had its own difficulties,
which it solved in its own way, more or less successfully, and in the early
days, one decision had as much to be said for it as another.
Once experience
had been gained, however, it was important to make the fullest use of it,
and it was only through G.H.Q. that vital information could be collected,
The centralization achieved through the D.D.S.T's.
office in West Africa entirely justified itself, in bringing about the necessary
W.A.A.S.C. Personnel
It is necessary to refer to the
difficulties encountered in training the
African in Army Service Corps duties, in order to explain apparently low
standards, such as bad maintenance of vehicles.
From November, 1940, until June, 1941, very little training of W.A.A.S.C.
In the case of supplies, this
was because all
supply units had a job of work to do, and had very little time to train
Most of the Europeans had only a scanty knowledge of supply
duties, and supply personnel were so short that quite often driver serjeants,
and even fitters, had to be used for supply work.
The Africans had to learn
from practical experience.
In the earlier days, it was a matter of getting
men for the supply depots, and later weeding out.
Even civilian labourers
had to become accustomed to handling supplies and stacking correctly.
was only achieved by constant repetition of the same type of work.
The transport units were handicapped in their training in a different way.
They had the men ready to be trained as drivers and for workshop duties,
but the necessary vehicles and tools were not there.
Each company had a
few impressed vehicles but not all of these could be used for training, as
there were routine transport duties to be carried out. The raw African
had no idea of the necessity for lubricating a machine, inflating tyres, and
so on, which are a commonplace to the European. The intricacies of driving,
changing gear, and so on, had to be explained to him in
ways which he
could understand. He had no fear, which resulted in an alarming accident
rate until the general standard of driving improved.
W.A.A.S.C. were handicapped by being given routine duties to do, which
interfered with training, and they were also often called on to assist other
arms, especially in driver training.
The opinion was expressed that, if the R.A.S.C. had operated with West
African troops in peace-time, even on a limited
scale, the
training to enable units to assume an operational rôle could
have been reached at a very much earlier stage.
undoubtedly
Supply Units
Before the war, there was no R.A.S.C. supply organization in any of the
Colonies, the garrisons feeding themselves out of ration allowance.
continued until September, 1940, when European personnel
This
to provide cadres for units of the West African Army Service Corps.
were sent out
These
included a B.S.D. for each of the three larger Colonies; D.I.Ds., and field
bakery and field butchery detachments.
