bars for ice-running.
Powerful snow-ploughs
going both in depots and on main routes.
were needed to keep trafic
P.O.L.
A Special Petrol Depot, capable of handling 4,000 tons of packed petrol.
had been hastily organized on a new War
Establishment,
successful that it formed the model for the new type
" B"
and proved so
developed later, as described in Chapter III.
Petrol Depor
It was established in the Oil
Company's depot, which was served by both road and water transport, and
had covered storage for 350 tons of packed P.O.L.
All needs of P.O.L. were met by local purchase until 26th April, when
the first consignment of 14,000 gallons arrived.
Thereafter, shipments were
made according to schedule.
The plan to supply the force with packed petrol
was sound, at any rate, as the containers could easily be handled in and out
of small craft and vehicles, especially in deep
snow
conditions, and with
primitive shore facilities.
The light tins travelled well on
the whole, and
leakage was not unduly high; but the climatic conditions tended to induce
rust, and the life of the tins was estimated at only three months.
The enlirite
cartons deteriorated rapidly when stacked in the snow, and soon became
useless.
The plan did fail in the supply of derv, which was no fault of Q.M.G.17.
It had been agreed within the War Office by the planning staff that no Cl.
engined vehicles or equipment should be despatched with the force.
was in order to cut down the number of products to be supplied, and to obviate
the necessity for providing a low-power point fuel to ensure reasonable starting
in the
climatic conditions which might be encountered.
One artillery regi-
ment, however, arrived with all C.I.-engined tractors, although I.C.-engined
tractors of the same make
existed in England.
The difficulty was in fact
overcome, as the grade of light diesel oil used in fishing vessels was found
suitable; but the desirability is indicated of including a minimum quantity of
all grades of P.O.L. in the initial stocks of a force, in case of some such un-
foreseen eventuality.
For convenience
in this theatre, P.O.L. matters were handled by the
D.A.D.T.
This arrangement worked well, as this officer was in close tout
with the types of vehicles in use, and was consequently in a good position
to make special arrangements, if necessary with the local Oil Companies, a
well as facilitating exact demands on War Office.
The basis of calculation of consumption proved adequate, although roct
were few, running conditions extremely poor, and consumption correspond
ingly heavy.
On 20th May, the whole stock of packed and bulk perd li
Harstad was destroyed by enemy bombing.
As only a small quantity was held
forward, this was a calamitous loss.
As an emergency measure M.T. spiri
was sent in barrels from Svolragn,
about 6-7 hours' steaming away; and lie
local emergency supply of about 25 tons was reserved for military use.
A German 3,500 litre road-tank lorry, captured in the "Aster o
taken over from the Norwegians at Tromso, and was of great use for intern
distribution,
especially when supply was in barrels.
It incorporated me
novel features, and was got away to the United Kingdom.
134
The evacuation was carried out in an orderly fashion, and about half the
vehicles, almost all the supplies, and a great part of the P.O.L. were got away,
the remaining stocks of the latter being destroyed.
The operations in Central Norway
NAMSOS
Force "Maurice" had been originally intended for Narvik, and was
carried in large ships, and not tactically loaded in anticipation of an opposed
landing.
It landed at Namsos on 16th and 17th April, with no administrative
echelon.
It was, however, self-contained to cover the initial operations.
Lack of anti-aircraft protection made it impracticable to off-load stores,
except during the brief night of about four hours.
There were very limited
facilities for handling stores, and conditions soon became chaotic, especially
as there were no administrative staffs or
units.
To make matters
worse,
heavy bombing began on 19th April, and continued almost without inter-
ference, as there was very little air activity on our side, and the A.A. battery
which eventually arrived had guns but no predictors.
In the absence of air
support, the position was quite untenable, and
the decision was taken to
evacuate.
The force was lacking in artillery, and was unable to move in the
mud resulting from a thaw.
The object of the operation could not be carried
OUL.
The force was evacuated on 2nd May, leaving all its stores and vehicles
hehind.
The R.A.S.C. were not actually employed in these operations.
ANDALSNES
The leading elements of Force
" Sickle", consisting of 148 Infantry
Brigade of two battalions, and a light A.A. battery, of a total strength of about
1,000 all ranks, landed in the Andalsnes area on 18th April, without an
administrative personnel or base organization, and moved by train and M.T.
to Lillehammer, about 150 miles inland.
Severe fighting began, and the
brigade began to withdraw slowly. It was living on such supplies as it had
taken with it. Its first line vehicles had been sunk en route, together with the
artillery and mortars, and there was only a little civilian transport available.
In order to make the best use of this during the withdrawal, supplies and
equipment had been jettisoned, and the force was consequently short of food.
On 25th April, 15 Infantry Brigade arrived and relieved 148 Infantry
Brigade, which had lost heavily.
The headquarters and base sub-area staffs
also arrived, including the S.T. elements of both, and the personnel of a L.
of C. Infantry Brigade Company also landed.
Apart from the latter, the
R.A.S.C. contingent consisted of a supply personnel detachment, sufficient
to set up small base supply and petrol depots, and one or two forward depots.
There was no labour force, and the depot personnel had to work at night to
clear the supplies from the docks, to save them from the heavy daily bombing.
Even so, a great deal was lost.
It was the policy to get as much forward as
possible to provide against the tenuous L. of C. being cut, both road and rail
running through a narrow valley.
traffic.
The road was quite inadequate for the
Supplies were got up both by road and rail, though there were only
about 20 Norwegian logoes available, and a few of the M.T. company's 3-ton
vehicles, which were unsuitable for the local roads.
Had the campaign gone
on, it was the intention to ask for l-ton lorries to be sent out.
There were
no workshop lorries, and no local shops.
135
WO 277/21
27
WO 277/26
