training for combined operations,
was largely advisory.
His responsibility for experimental
work was covered by the words " Direct and press forward research and development
with the responsibility for the " development including experiment, research
and trial, and of
all forms of special equipment and craft required for opposed landings
" which was laid down in
Admiral Keyes' directive of March, 1941.
Development of Ships and Craft : Mission to the U.S.A. (December, 1941)
Following Commodore Mountbatten's appointment, the I.S.T.D.C. remained at Portsmouth.
representatives of D.N.C. and D.N.E. Admiralty,
visited the U.S.A. to see what asistance could be gained from American production of landing
The designs and specifications of the L.S.D., L.S.T. (2), L.C.T. (5) were taken
to the U.S.A. to be produced in their shipyards;
during the war these were produced as U.S.
Ships and craft, but the fact that they were British in conception and design must not be overlooked,
which reflects great credit on the close co-operation between the I.S.T.D.C. and D.N.C.
U.S. L.C.M. (3) was also inspected and certain modifications suggested and accepted; and the
craft was put into production soon afterwards.
SECTION ii)
THE EXPERIMENTAL SECTION OF C.O.H.Q. AND THE COMBINED OPERATIONS
DEVELOPMENT CENTRE, APRIL, 1942-AUGUST, 1942.
Formation of the Combined Operations Development Centre and an Experimental Section within
In April, 1942, a reorganisation to co-ordinate
and control experiments and developments in
combined operations took place. The Chief of Combined Operations (as Admiral Mountbatten had
become) divided the I.S.T.D.C. into two parts: one part moved to London and joined the staff of
C.O.H.Q.; the other section remained at Portsmouth now known as the Combined Operations
Development Centre (C.O.D.C.).1
This division was of considerable importance as, to all intents and purposes, it marked the
beginning of the slowly strengthening link between the planners and the experimenters.
and was known as " Có-
ordinator on op tien and Clevel here in he section ration a was him a * Can
the following officers :—
Army G.S.O. 2
Naval Staff Officer
Army G.S.O. 3
Experiments and Development.
Naval Assistant Staff Officer
In addition C.X.D. had the help of the following :—
Naval Camouflage Officer.
Senior Engineer Officer and Senior Constructor Officer of the Staff of Rear-Admiral
Landing Barges.
An officer belonging to the Air Staff.
The Signals Section were also available to give advice to C.X.D. In this connection it
should be noted that the Signals Section always worked independently of the main experimental
section throughout the war, but close liaison was constantly maintained.
The directive to C.X.D. was as follows :—
"C.X.D. is directly responsible to C.C.O. for the following duties:
(1) He will co-ordinate all experiments carried out by formations, ships and establishments
under the command of C.C.O.
for use in combined operations.
(3) He will ensure that development is kept in step with staff requirements.
(4) He will maintain close
naval, army and air force experimental
establishments and will be responsible for presenting to them the
operations aspect of developments which they are carrying out.
(5) He will be responsible for advising all combined operations Force Commanders and
planning staffs on the following subjects :—
(a) Capabilities of existing combined operations equipment.
(b) The probable capabilities of equipment under development.
(c) The possibilities of improving or developing equipment to deal with special
problems which may arise in the course of a particular operation.'
Procedure for Furthering Projects
The C.C.O. laid down the procedure for experimental and development work.
Decisions on staff requirements regarding quantity, nature and function of combined operations
material, and for research and development were made, after due consideration, by the appropriate
Member or Members of the Council. That is to say that for a purely naval requirement the decision
(for C.C.O.) was given by the Assistant Chief of Combined Operations, or if it was a combined
military and air requirement, the decision would be given by the Vice-Chief of Combined Operations
and the Deputy Chief of Combined Operations in consultation.
For developments there was C.X.D. on the staff of C.C.O. in C.O.H.Q. Under him worked the
staff officers of the three Services engaged in development.
The C.X.D. was empowered to decide
for C.C.O. all questions of development for all three Services, in respect of their technical aspects.
The normal cases to be considered fell into one of three categories, as follows :—
Case 1-Requirement originating with the Operational Staff
If a requirement originated with the operational staff as a result of experience in a
raid or at one of the training establishments, it was to be put up by the staff concerned
through V.C.C.O., D.C.C.O., or A.C.C.O., as the case may be, who, after deciding that it
was a genuine requirement, would refer it to C.X.D. for development action. C.X.D. would
then decide whether it was, on the face of it, practicable, and if it was, would set the necessary
If it was not practicable, he would refer the question back to the
Member of the Council concerned for further discussion or cancellation of the requirement.
Case 2—Proposal for requirement arising out of an actual development
This was the most common case.
If, in the course of development, it was seen that a
promising line had been opened up for a particular piece of material, the question of what
use should be made of it and the reactions of this upon the further stages of development
would be referred by the originator to C.X.D. The latter would decide whether it was worth
putting to the Council and, if it was, would do so with the object of getting the Member
or Members of the Council concerned to state whether an operational use of this material
already existed or could be foreseen and, if so, exactly what.
If possible, the Council would
then draw up an outline staff requirements for guidance of further development and refer
these back with the original paper to C.X.D. for action.
Case 3- Development and Definition of Function occurring together
There were cases where the development of a piece of material and its use would
go hand in hand, because the requirement preceded the development (or vice versa) in
the course of exercises or training.
In such cases, the man on the spot generally took the
development and the idea to quite an advanced stage before he put it up to the higher
These cases, though generally comparatively minor, often gave rise to technique
and material of the greatest practical value.
Papers from ships and establishments containing
reports of such ideas or developments would go, in the first instance, to C.X.D.
who would
decide, according to their nature, whether they should first be seen by his staff of by the
Thereafter they would be handled as Case II or Case I above, whichever
It was essential that the closest liaison and co-operation was maintained between the officers
on the operational staff and those concerned with development, as this was the only possible way
to deal with two aspects of the same problem. The new organisation facilitated this and often
enabled a definite proposal to be put up for decision to C.X.D. Or the Member of the Council as the
case may be, by the staff officer, who first saw the paper, having discussed it with his apposite
number, thus saving a lot of minuting and time. Any modifications affecting existing
referred to Rear-Admiral Landing Craft and Bases (R.A.L.B.) and trials were arranged by R.A. L.B.
or A.A. Q.M.G. Untortunately this personal liaison link, so necessary between the planners and the
development side, was not
for example, no one in the
Experimental Section
knew of the Dieppe raid until it was over. The outcome of this was that C.X.D. was immediately
authorised to attend all planners' meetings.
WO 277/21
27
3ф
