This will leave D.C.O.(I.) responsible for the Combined Training Centres (C.T.C.s),
It is suggested the hasic am hibious training for the Army should follow the normal procedure
The general line on which instruction is given
the staff training
will be laid down by
wing and the two dryshod wings.
doctrine, and H.C.O.R. has been asked to attend the meeting and confirm the doctrine it is proposed
A meeting of all stafts is now planned to start at Bombay C.T.C.,
on 7th March, to discuss
to teach
Cevion, it would have the advantage of being close to the next S.E.A.C., H.O., but this advantage would
movements and supply arrangements for troops in India are controlled.
The direction of this hosin training should. it is considered. be undertaken in Delhi where all the
Should direction be moved to
Ce sloal as bast have the does not change much, and to attempt toe tid what still must be done would
G.H.Q., India, by post and signal would be
Furthermore, this H.Q. in Ceylon will probably
core e, Stas, per ions move east. It would then become necessary to move the Basic Training H
Formation Training
8. Formation training, that is final operational training is usually the concern of the Commanders
of Operations.
ramphibious operations the Navy and Air Force insist on final training being the
business of the Force Commanders.
Similarly, the formation training of the 8th Army and the Ist Army
has been the concern of the Commanders of those Armies assisted as necessary by
organisations; movement, embarkation, etc., have to be undertaken by the Base H.Q.
base
It would seem
reasonable that this policy in India should be on similar lines.
This would mean placing the Formation
Training Staft under command of 1lth Army and for G.H.Q, through Southern Army, to give all the
assistance that will be needed to mount collective exercises.
Development of Technique
9. Technique must advance as a result of training experience, operational experience and planning.
Development must immediately be available for all training organisations and must progress whether
S.E.A.C., H.Q., is in Delhi, Ceylon or Singapore.
10. It is suggested S.E.A.C., that is H.C.O.R., in collaboration with C.s-in-C. and D.C.O.(I.) should
determine what technique should be developed.
That is, the direction should come from the higher
authority and it should then be farmed out to D.C.O.(I.) who is in a position to get the personnel and
equipment and craft for G.H.Q. (I.) and C.-in-C., E.F., to carry out the enquiry.
11. An example is the proposal to develop the technique of a force equipped with amphibians.
The directive would come from S.E.A.C. (H.C.O.R.) wherever he may be, to D.C.O(I.) ; this force would
be formed and mounted by G.H.Q.(I.) and be attached to the most suitable C.T.C., or be assisted by the
most suitable training wing.
The results would be sent to S.E.A.C.
In this particular example it would
be well if the G.1 of the proposed division with a small staff, undertook the experiments; he would have
had no prior landing operations experience and will need the advice and help of the C.T.C.
Material Development
Supreme Commanders level.
13. Minor developments can be undertaken by the C.O.D.C., or workshops in India.
Large scale
developments such as tank and craft development cannot be undertaken in India as factories and labour,
particularly skilled labour, is already fully occupied.
To build factories and bring labour from England
would hinder projects already approved, would tend to increase inflation and would not produce the goods
until probably the need for them is past.
Craft development is in any event an Admiralty responsibility, and requirements are now going to
the United Kingdom for fulfilment, e.g., new design support craft.
undertaken by the Air Ministry.
Aircraft development is similarly
14. It is in fact difficult to be sure of policy until definite requirements arise.
Alterations to existing
equipment can be done by the service organisations in the East, rem, alterations to craft by dockyard
and repair staffs, alterations to vehicles by this organisation under
us harbour construction are only built when there are the manufacturing
"C.-in-C.,
India.
Area aerodromes
facilities in the U.K., and
Co modifications of beach equipment can be tackled by the Combined Operations Development
Centre (C.O.D.C.) assisted as necessary by G.H.Q. (I.) (India).
Provision of Special Equipment
95. The question of the provision of special equipment is, in the main, answered by the preceding
produce
i highly specialised equipment does ned a his, ly shila manufacturing organisation to
made, than to attempt its manufacture in India.
It will certainly be quicker and more economical to send an officer to the U.K. to get something
16. It is only when the demand concerns the material that is particularly available in India that i
may he trice ta reflect the limited antive camarita Tedia fa that farture ne thanarialised
The use of bamboo for roadway
should the need arise it would be for S.E.A.C. (H.C.O.R.) to ask the Principal Administrative Officer
(P.A.O.), G.H.Q. (I.), to provide.
construction is an example nachen India could hip;
236
Provision of Special Personnel
swimmers,
17. The personnel under consideration are those special parties such as folbots, S.O.E., boom breakers,
etc
required.
It will therefore
It is clear that planning will decide what
be for S.E.A.C.
and by what dates for the Commander-in-Chief to find and train the she nies.
numbers of each type of specialist will be
(H.C.O.R.) to determine the numbers that are to be found
18. In this
operations should be located near Trincomalee,
connection it seems clear that all parties depending upon naval craft for training in
that they should for training and administration come
under one Officer who should in turn be responsible to the C.-in-C., Eastern Fleet (E.F.) for their training.
Parties not depending on craft for their training, namely Camouflage " B" and " False beach removers
could be attached to
Promulgation of C.O. Information
planning staffs, formations, landing craft and bases,
and circulation of C.O. information
for the use of training staffs,
Naval and Air Staffs Headquarters, can either b
lone by D.C.O. (I.), in close touch with H.C.O.R. or by H.C.O.R. in close touch with D.C.O.(I.). Whicheve
does it must, however, be suitably located and have the staff to collate,
Delhi is the best position for
the staff to be situated,
While D.C.O. (I.) is at present the authority responsible for this duty because he is
in touch with Chief of Combined Operations (C.C.O.) and D.C.O., M.E.,
This responsibility could hardly rest at S.E.A.C.
and is responsible for the training
naval, military, and air developments is promulgated by
the Departments of Admiralty, War Office,
and Air Ministry, or by Commanders in the field, as the result of training and operational experience.
20. It is suggested this publication of information should continue to be the concern of D.C.O.(I.)
and that the advisers for the planners should continue to come from the staff of H.C.O.R.
liaison that now exists between H.C.O.R., and D.C.O.(I.) must continue.
The information they each
get must be shared if trainers and planners are both to be served. C.-in-C., E.F., has already agreed that
experiences gained in exercises and operations are to be sent to D.C.O. (I.) It would be a great help if a
copy of all lessons learnt, and new ideas that may arise could automatically be sent to him so that
training, whether at the Staff College, in landing craft flotillas, or formations may be kept abreast of the
21. The following is a summary of the conclusions reached above :—
(a) Basic training, as required by S.E.A.C., should remain the concern of the D.C.O. (I.).
(b) Formation training should be the responsibility of Commanders-in-Chief and Force Commanders.
The formation training staff should come
under the orders of 11 Army Group and his staff
should work in the closest collaboration with C.-in-C., Southern India®
(c) Technique should be approved by S.E.A.C., and should be given to D.C.O. (I.) to develop.
quantitative equipment should continue to be produced in the U.K.
(e) The numbers sciali amphibious poore resui on i be proied by ta, and the
dependent upon naval resources for training to be the responsibility of the
Remainder to join similar existing organisations in India.
(f) D.C.O. I.) to remain the authority responsible for promulgating
combined operations to training staffs and establishments, naval units and forces,
and Air Force formations.
H.C.O.R. to advise planners, and H.C.O.R. and D.C.O.(I.) to
remain in the very closest touch.
v0274
+17
WO 277/21
27
3ф
FORMATION AND COMPOSITION SMALL OPERATIONS GROUP S.E.A.C.
On the formation of the South-East Asia Command in 1943, Admiral Mountbatten asked the Chief
of Combined Operations for several Combined Operations Pilotage Parties and Groups of the Special
Boat Section to be placed under his command.
C.O.P.P.7 arrived in India in August, A " and
1943, and was
joined at Cocanada by C.O.P.P.8 in the middle of November.
In February,
"R
Groups S.B.S. arrived.
These parties all led an independent existence, although grouped in the same area.
Operations Group.
In the meantime, it had been decided to group all such parties in S.E.A.C. together as the Small
The object was :—
(a) To retice the minder of independen at at no with which SACS. A. Hoadquarters
(b) To simplify administration and provide a common base.
c) To ensure that as far as possible training and equipment of parties were standardised and
that all units benefited from the experience gained in operations and training.
237
