Division, to assist him in the duties involved in training in the division in the
operation and maintenance of " Weasels ".
In June, 1944, the need was stressed by S.T. for early training for drivers
and workshop
personnel in the operation of these vehicles, in view of the
tacts that all M.29s in the United Kingdom had been placed at the disposal
ot 21 Army Group, whose eventual requirement of drivers for these vehicles
might be up to 1,000; that, for the war against Japan, it was assumed that
every R.A.S.C. driver must be able to drive a " Weasel", as well as a normal
vehicle; also the construction of the M.29 threw a great part of the main.
tenances tasks on the workshop personnel, and the latter consequently re.
quired a thorough knowledge of these vehicles.
Pack Transport and Ration Packs
In 1943, planning was taking place at War Office in connection with a
project for mountain warfare in the Mediterranean theatre, and the question
of the carriage of rations and water on pack transport was considered.
Allied Force Headquarters represented that special packing of rations
would be required to fit pack saddlery, as the existing
compo pack was
uneconomical for the purpose, being too bulky for its weight.
Experiments had been made in this direction however, and had achieved
the result of three 14-men Compo packs being loaded for each animal, i.e., a
load of about 190 lbs.; the animals in this case were, of course, horses, with
a pay-load of 200 Ibs.
It should be noted in this respect that the pay-load of
the pack mule normally employed by the R.I.A.S.C. mule companies was
160 Ibs., while those they had in Italy, which were Abyssinian animals, had
a pay-load ration of only 120 lb. The S.T. view was that the standard 14-men
Compo pack was about as concentrated a load of supplies as could be devised.
Containers for Water
Discussion also took place in regard to the type of container to be used
for the carriage of water on pack transport.
The Indian pakhal, or pack
water tank, was presumably not available in sufficient quantities to meet the
large requirement, and was also open to objection as being large and heavy.
Each pakhal formed one side of the standard load of an Indian pack mule,
and weighed about 80 lb. full.
The use of Jerricans was suggested, but this was undesirable, as, although
the design and capacity of this type of container made it suitable for use as
a water container, there were objections to this misappropriation, as causing
interior rusting, which was a main cause of Jerrican wastage, and there was
also the risk of confusion, with the consequence of water getting into pettol
These difficulties were later overcome.
for water containers was found, and water containers were painted brown,
instead of the olive drab of the petrol container, with the word " WATER"
embossed on either side of the can in 2-in. letters, and with the top painted
white to assist recognition at night.
To the proposal to use Jerricans for pack transport of water, howert,
Middle East raised the objection that, while the mule load was 80 lb. each
side. a Jerrican full of water weiched about 50 lb., and was not therefore an
On the other hand, a full 2-gallon can weished about 20 lb.
and therefore eight made a mule-load.
2-gallon cans were also more con-
venient for man-pack and ease of handling, and made water distribution
easier than it would be with Jerricans.
SECTION 3.-REORGANIZATION OF VEHICLE MAINTENANCE
SYSTEM
Responsibility for Vehicle Maintenance
The division of responsibility for the provision and maintenance of W.D.
M.T. vehicles, as between the R.A.S.C. and the R.A.O.C., was revised in
January, 1941, and defined as follows: -
The R.A.S.C. was made responsible for the vehicles of all R.A.S.C.,
R.A.M.C., R.A.P.C., R.A. V.C., A.D. Corps, and Intelligence Corps units;
all formation and administrative headquarters (except infantry brigade
H.Q., A.A. brigade HQ., and all headquarters of armoured formations);
all schools of arms of the corresponding services, the staff college, fire
services, all A.T.S. units and establishments, W.D. Constabulary, and
military and liaison missions.
This responsibility also involved the pro-
vision of drivers, either R.A.S.C. or A.T.S., for the vehicles.
The R.A.O.C. was made responsible for the vehicles of all regimental
units or establishments, schools, and training units, other than those of
R.A.S.C. responsibility; all headquarters of infantry brigades, armoured
formations, and A.A. brigades; all R.E. establishments, including move-
ment control, port, transportation, and works services; all R.A.O.C. units,
Corps of Military Police, and Pioneer Units; all prisoner of war camps;
and all welfare and Home Guard organizations.
In all these cases,
drivers were drawn from the arm of the service concerned, or from the
A.T.S.
Vehicle Maintenance System Criticized
The existence of two parallel systems for the provision and maintenance
of the vehicles in the Army had been, naturally, over a period of many years,
the subject of considerable discussion.
The views put forward that the two
systems should be amalgamated in the interests of economy in manpower and
cost, were considered by a succession of War Office Committees up to and
after the outbreak of war, but all of these decided that the two existing systems
As the war went on, and manpower problems became more
acute, the criticism became stronger, and had been discussed at Ministerial
In June, 1941, an Intendant-General was appointed to the Middle East
with a directive from the Prime Minister in accordance with which he was to
relieve the Commander-in-Chief of many of his administrative responsibilities,
including the supervision and control of the rearward administrative services.
The Intendant-General was to give first priority to the task of bringing to
the highest pitch of efficiency the organization for repairing and maintaining
the serviceability of mechanical vehicles of all kinds.
Towards this end, he was given the services of two independent civilian
advisers, whose task was to explore the overall situation in regard to repairs,
and the utilization of workshops and mechanical resources in the Middle
WO 277/21
WO277/26
