c. 36), and personal
his representarives
war diaries will be
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NoTE C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a
unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
nrovide data upur
which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
A.F.
It will be entered up
C.2118.
It Is to
noted that the extraction
each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer
who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
ParA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded wher
reparing a diary :
) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issue
nd decisions lane.
(i) Date location in the case of large
Move otta th past tenty fos hours present dispositions
(ji) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
of mobilisation of
important phases
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
ordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers
and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given
1 above but at the time they
occur. or come to nouce.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation o
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war carv.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for teterence
(i) A corty, if each a matise report on rations draco, to by a subordinate formation
any sketches or maps relating thereto,
ppendices will 1
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading?
ing the author. Referenc
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.211€
-All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See PASR., Volume 11).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the precedin
succeeding month direct to the ofhcer 1/c
e forwarded on the first day c
or transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attache
onths to the officer i/c 2nd Echelon
the sPECT NO The The time entered should to the time the formation or
BETE
Month and Year.. ERBRUART, 1941.
Place
Date
Hour
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required)
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form C.
Unit.21. I. of C. Tpt. Coln. R.A.S.C.
Commanding Officer Lt.Col. H.E. HOPC
References to Appendices
GULIANE.
C.R.A.S.C, and 2 IC to Ferry Control Conference at 0900 and 1800 hrs.-
Exercise continued.
A11 Officers to Commander's Conference at 1900 hrs. Exeraise discussed.
C. R.A.S.C. to London to participate in Exercise 'IONDON OUMBERTAND' ...
2 IC to Ferry. Control Conference at 0900 and 1800 hrs.
High winds caused Exercise to be suspended.
C.R.A.S.Co Co to London - Exercise 'IONDON CUMBERTAND'..
Exercise finally concluded because of bad weather.
2 TO to final Conference held by Beach Group HQ.
S Sup O 28 I of C Tot. Coln, R.A.S.C. arrived and out in 'picture!
regarding (1) rationing of Exercise personnel for Roundabout V (2)Billets
(3) Position regarding D.U.K.Ws. and general information of life at Gullane.
Colonel Hall and Colonel McDermott, Petrol and Supply Representatives, 21
Army Group, reported and 'put in picture! as far as possible about the
Exercise.
Wt.84859, 1G76 800,000 11/13 W. H. & S. 61-7676
jackso Cape
Wt.84859, 1676 800,000. 11/43 W. H. & S. 51-7676
table
le day only, and are to be finisher
ve finished:
Bulk Order are guaranteed to be available
quested, or they may have special viewing
your documents have special viewing
Enquire at the information Desk to arrange access
re documents are in use elsewhere - Enquire at the
in Desk for full detail
