WO171
гязо зо илитая
Quali
gribas deoW 107
ЗЯЗОННО 70 10Л ЗАИМО
+ ЛетоТ) ат7Я зal 223J .3.W TEMIADA дитиор нтоизяте
.. 1
HO CRASC 21 Prensport Column.
Operational Instruction No. 2 (MARBEUP).
SECRET
Copy No.
ARPX
1. Operational Urgoncy
Tho urgency of the maintenance probion will be explained to all ranks.
Each
drivor nust roalise the ossontial part
plays
in the tpt organis-
ation
Of 21 Ary Group Pool of which this column forms part, and which is the
organisation on which mintonance of the formard troops depends.
2. Routes:
Appendix 'A' sots out all Routes to be used by maintenance convoys.
These
will be adhered to subject only to local polico diversions, e.&. our 0 7 of
1521004 refers.
Every driver will bo given a route card for his particular run.
3. Report Centres.
Convoy conds vill report at all RC
These are also shown on Appendix 'A'.
on their route.
On no account will a convoy be parked noar a RO while the
convoy cond reports.
A pl rep or convoy cond will always proceed ahcad of the
Full particulars of convoys,
hovever small, will be reported and convoy
Cong Vi 11 be si mode
(Soc para 11 below).
40 Stagin Camps.
Staging camps will be set up on the maintenance route. At present the
inor untioned camp only is in existence : -
POIX Map ror M, 8647 (run by 20 Area Comat).
Plan of layout of this camp as shown at Appendix 'B'.
5. Harboring Areas.
On route MARREUF - MONDICOURT Harbouring Arcas will be receed and signed by
this HQ.
Dotails in Appondix 'G' to follow.
This Appendix also includes
particulars of Medical and Recovery facilitics on the route.
6. Reception of Pls from Coys of other Colunns.
Coys will bo prepared to rocoive Pis fron other Cors in transit in their ow
Pl Arcas when these Pls are out on detail.
Every assistance will be givan to such
Pis in che way of Wkso and Adm
7.
Rosponsibility for Haintoranao Routo.
Division of the responsibility of routes between CRASC are as shown in
Appendix 'c',
to CRASC concemed.
Any route intelliconce should be passed to this H.Q. for onward transmission
8. got Sitreps.
Ipt Sitreps vill le sumitted trice daily as per heretofore.
9. Serial Nos. of Convoys.
The new system of Serial Nos,
by which loading services can connect up the
Every vehicle windscreen will have
should obviate any time delay in loading.
know the number of his convoy and his destina ion and route.
