= NEPTUNE
dominance that had characterized Hall's participation in sports, Moon
earned a spot on the academy fencing team only by "dogged persistence"
which allowed him to become "a very tolerable sabreur." Less flatteringly,
Moon's classmates also described him as "persistent and conservative,
without the curse of imagination, or disturbing outburst of animal spirits."
In the language of the academy, he was a grind. 16
Moon's work ethic was an inherent characteristic, but it was very likely
exacerbated by both experience and circumstance. Back in July 1942, Moon
had commanded the escort for convoy PQ-17, bound for Russia around the
North Cape. It had progressed as far as the Barents Sea, north of Norway,
when the British Admiralty, having misread a code intercept, concluded
that a large German surface force was in the area and ordered the convoy to
scatter. That was a dreadful mistake, for it made the ships easy pickings for
the U-boats and aircraft, and in the end, twenty-three of the thirty-seven
merchant ships in the convoy were lost. It was hardly Moon's fault, but the
memory of it may have contributed to his determination to ensure that he
did not overlook any detail. Then, too, his subsequent assignment in Wash-
ington, working directly for the demanding and punctilious Ernest King,
could make anyone detail oriented.
Another factor contributing to Moon's regimen of hard work was his late
appointment to the command of Force U. Having initially been sent to the
Mediterranean, he arrived in England only in March. Whereas both Kirk
and Hall had six months or more in the theater, Moon had less than three
months to prepare for the invasion. Among other things, that meant that he
never had a chance to compile a compatible staff, which contributed to his
tendency to try to do too much himself. Thus as a result of character, expe-
rience, and circumstance, Moon became obsessed with work in the spring
of 1944. He worked until well past midnight nearly every day, then was up
and back at it again at four the next morning. Hall told him that "he was
trying to do too much himself" and that "he would have to delegate more
authority," but Moon continued to burn the candle at both ends."?
Even the Army officers who worked with Moon noted his obsessive
attention to detail. Collins, the commander of the VII Corps, became con-
cerned about Moon's tendency "to do too much himself instead of giving
Duck, Fox, Beaver, Tiger =
205
responsibilities to his staff." He tried to get Moon interested in a walk or a
game of tennis, but Moon always begged off, pleading that he was too busy.
Collin's repeated invitations, however, may have been the impetus for
Moon's order one day that everyone on the staff should go out and play a
baseball game, though he himself did not play.l8
Both Hall and Moon accelerated the training exercises for their commands.
Inadition to the innumerable small exercises, there were also several major
rehearsals, most of them endowed with the name of some water-loving and
presumably amphibious creature. Hall's Force O participated in three large-
sale rehearsals in January code-named Duck I, II, and III. They were followed
by Exercise Fox, and then a series of smaller operations called Muskrat, Otter,
and Mink. Gerow, the V Corps commander, was not happy with the early
exercises. He thought the embarkation had taken too long, the supplies had
ben late in coming ashore, the troops had carried too much gear, and the men
seemed confused about what to do. He wondered aloud whether in an actual
landing any of them would have gotten off the beach alive.!9
Hoping for a better show, Ramsay, Kirk, and Gerow all boarded Hall's
command ship, USS Ancon, on March 10 to observe Exercise Fox. It was a
"nice sunny morning," and all went according to plan. The two cruisers and
eight destroyers shelled the beach at Slapton Sands, further blasting the al
ready ruined Royal Sands Hotel, which had been designated as the enem,
headquarters. Then hundreds of landing craft carried the men and equip-
ment of the Ist Infantry Division ashore. The rhino ferries were particularly
effe tive in tronforing tontre and ta Com the T STs to the beach. There
was till some confusion in Army-Navy communications, but the only se-
rous difficulty was that a few of the tanks had trouble crossing the pebbly
beach and bogged down. Despite that, Ramsay was pleased. Even before
the exercise, he had confided to his diary that he had begun to "view the
future with more confidence as regards the purely naval asnects." Signifi.
cantly, perhaps, no one expressed an opinion about how the exercise might
have turned out if it had not been a "nice sunny morning."?
Ramsay was also pleased with the outcome of Exercise Beaver two weeks
later in which Moone Force U, in ite fret full-seale prercise, carried ele-
ments of Collins's VII Corps from Plymouth, Dartmouth, and Brixham to
