YUL
318 = NEPTUNE
from Cherbourg were never severe enough to imperil the invasion, though
accidents, enemy mines, and weather did cause occasional interruptions.
At seven in the morning of June 7, the USS Susan B. Anthony (APA-72),
formerly the passenger liner Santa Clara and known as the "Susie Bee"
loaded with more than twenty-three hundred men of the Fourth Infantry
Division, hit a mine, very likely one of the pressure-sensitive oyster mines
that had been dropped overnight by a German bomber. All power went
out, and the big ship began to settle. Without power, damage control was
impossible. Once it was clear that the ship could not be saved, her captain,
Commander T. L. Gray, sent out a signal to all vessels: "Come alongside, we
need help." Assuming he wanted help with unloading, a nearby LCT
responded: "Sorry, we have other orders, to which Gray replied: "We are
sinking." That brought every ship in the area to her aid, including the British
frigate Narbrough. The crew of the "Susie Bee" threw the boarding nets over
the side, and the soldiers climbed down into the sea, where rescuing vessels
picked them up. Not a single soldier or sailor was lost, but the incident
underscored the Allied assumption that it was essential to capture a major
seaport early in the campaign so that offloading could be more reliable and
efficient. To accomplish that, the men of "Lightning Joe" Collin's VII
Corps were already fighting their way northward from Utah Beach to target
the seaport city of Cherbourg. Until Cherbourg fell, however, the Allies
had a backup plan.24
THE SAME DAY the "Susie Bee" went down, men on Omaha Beach who
looked seaward witnessed a curious sight, described by one as "several
large barges, loaded with long, steel pylons and huge, odd forms made of
concrete, and two rusty, old freighters being pulled and pushed toward
the land by tugs." The freighters were the first of the so-called corn-
cobs —the derelict blockships that would be sunk to form breakwaters-
and the "odd forms made of concrete" were the giant Phoenix units
each of them as big as a city office building. Here were the first ele-
ments of Project Mulberry, the artificial harbors to be constructed off
Omaha Beach near St. Laurent-sur-Mer and off Gold Beach near Arro-
manche.25
"The Shoreline Was Just a Shambles" = 319
The very existence of this program was nearly as great a secret as the invasion
if the Phoenix caissons were so enormous that complete concealment
vasimpossible. In May, the men who were to make up the crews of the Phoenix
unts were startled to hear Lord Haw Haw* announce on Nazi Germany's
propaganda radio station, "We know exactly what you intend to do with these
concrete units. You intend to sink them off our coast in the assault." Then
Hay Haw promised that the German navy would be happy to do that for
them sinking them well before they ever made it to the coast. 26
Not everyone in the Allied high command was enthusiastic about the
Mulberry project. One of the officers who helped supervise it wrote later
that Force Mulberry was an unwanted orphan." Ramsay, Kirk, Hall, and
many of the other operational commanders were openly dubious, even
scomful, about whether it could be done at all, and even if it could, whether
it would be worth the effort. The candid-to-a-fault Hall told Admiral Cun-
ningham, "One storm will wash them all away?" Still, the skeptics knew bet-
tet than to get in the way of a project supported by Churchill, and they were
happy to leave the management of it to others while they focused on more
conventional issues. This lack of institutional enthusiasm made obtaining
materials for the project an uphill struggle. Because of that, for the men
who ran the Mulberry program, the postponement of the invasion from
May to June was critical. 27
Then, as D-Day approached, it became evident that the British simply
did not have the towing capacity needed to move all the various parts of the
Mulberry project across the Channel. Somewhat grudgingly, the Ameri-
cans agreed to contribute 25 tugs out of the 132 that were required, though
when they arrived, l1 of them proved to be relatively small yard tugs that
lacked the horsepower to move the giant Phoenix caissons through the
water. Yet somehow, in spite of skepticism from the admirals, a scarcity of
resources, an almost impossible schedule, and an insufficiency of tugs, the
* Like "Tokyo Rose" in the Pacific, "Lord Haw Haw" was a generic term applied to a
number of English-speaking radio broadcasters used by the Axis in an attempt to un-
dermine the morale of Allied soldiers and sailors. Many if not most of the broadcasts
of Lord Haw Haw were the work of an American-born British citizen named William
Joyce. After the war, Joyce was arrested, tried for treason, and hanged.
