YUL
296
= NEPTUNE
rock strata on which the enemy guns rested. The cliff crumbled away; one
of the guns flew up into the air and the other plunged down the cliff face?
A mile or two further east, Commander Clarence Boyd, captain of the
Doyle (DD-494), maneuvered his ship among the landing craft that were
swarming off the Fox Green sector of Omaha Beach. From only eight hun-
dred yards off the surf line, Boyd could see the men ashore "dug in behind a
hummock of sand along the beach, and the boats of the second wave factu-
ally the third] milling around offshore." Absent contact with fire control
parties ashore, he posted lookouts to scan the high ground behind the
beach for evidence of enemy gun positions, though visibility was "very dif-
ficult because of smoke and dust in the target area." One lookout reporteda
machine gun emplacement on a steep hill at the west end of Fox Red Beach
between Colleville-sur-Mer and Le Grand Hameau, and the Doyle fired
two salvos onto the site. The Doyle then shifted fire to a casemate at the top
of the hill and fired two more salvos, and in both cases Boyd was able to re-
port "target destroyed." More often, however, the results were less conclu-
sive. Lacking other clear sightings, Boyd simply picked out what seemed to
him to be logical places for gun positions to be and opened fire on them
even if he could not see anything there. Having completed its assignment
off Point du Hoc, the Thompson joined the Doyle off Fox Green beach, and
there her commander, Albert Gebelin, whose darkly handsome features
reminded some of "a cigar store Indian," directed his ship's fire into a clump
of trees" that he thought might be "cover for a field battery." Whether it was
or not, the trees got a thorough pounding.'ยบ
Other ships got into the act. A sailor on an LCT happened to be looking at
the vegetation along the line of bluffs when he noticed a tiny movement among
the bushes, and a second later a shell exploded on the beach. He kept his eye
focused on those bushes, and soon another small movement of the brush was
followed by another explosion on the beach. He called the skipper over and
pointed it out. The officer watched as the pattern was repeated and he noted
the coordinates on his chart. He then got on the short range TBS radio and
called the nearest of the destroyers. Almost at once a destroyer" came barreling
in there, popped over sideways, port side to the beach, and turned loose about
eight rounds of S-inch projectiles" into the German gun position."
D- Day: The Crisis =
297
Compared to the aerial bombs dropped from high altitude and the big
kell fred from ten or fifteen miles offshore, the smaller-caliber destroyer
fre was more accurate and therefore far more effective. The bigger 8-, 12-,
and 14 inch shells from the cruisers and battleships had made the ground
tale but they had left the German gun positions largely intact. Now those
positions were pounded with hundreds of S-inch shells and knocked out
ce by one. One witness recalled seeing three S-inch shells hit within
trenty inches of a narrow gun slit on a pillbox, and in at least one case a
German artillery piece was hit directly on the muzzle and split wide open.
A beach master on Omaha watching the tin cans fire into the cliff later
dimed, "You could see the trenches, guns, and men blowing up where
they were hit." There was no doubt in his mind that "the few Navy destroy-
es that we had there probably saved the invasion." With more enthusiasm
than precision, he insisted that the handful of American ships "destroyed
practically the entire German defense line at Omaha Beach." If they didn't
quite do that, they did change the trajectory of the battle. Inside an artillery
bunker behind Omaha Beach, a German regimental commander phoned
headquarters to report, "Naval guns are smashing up our strongpoints. We
areruning short of ammunition. We urgently need supplies." There was no
answer because the line had gone dead. t2
For more than an hour, from shortly before nine o'clock until well past
ten, the destroyer gunfire was virtually nonstop. And it needed to be. As the
commanding officer of LCI(L)-408 noted while heading for the beach just
before ten o lock, "If a destroyer ceased shelling a shore battery for even
a very brief time, the battery resumed fire on the craft along the beach."
Of course, the constant firing soon depleted the ammunition stores on the
destroyers. To ensure that they retained sufficient capability for emergen-
cies, the Neptune invasion order had specified that the destroyers were to
expend no more than SO to 60 percent of their ammunition before going
back to England to replenish. In this crisis, however, the destroyer skippers
disregarded that injunction. Gleaves-class destroyers carried between fif-
teen hundred and two thousand rounds of general-purpose S-inch ammu-
nition. Most of the ships in Sanders's squadron had fired off between a
quarter and a third of that during the early morning bombardment, and
