YUL
336 = NEPTUNE
control parties ashore. The cruiser Quincy sent her 8-inch shells smashing
into bridges over the Douve River above Carentan, and the other heavy
gunships fired their shells against enemy troop concentrations, tank parks,
artillery positions, and even a railroad train parked on a siding. The Army's
advance toward Carentan and Isigny allowed Kirk to consider opening
those cites as possible seaports, though because of the narrow channels that
connected them to the sea, they could be used only by small coasters and
barges. For oceangoing ships, the seizure of Cherbourg remained critical.
The going was tough in the bocage country with its thick hedgerows and
numerous waterways, but by June 14 the Allies had secured Carentan and
established a continuous front from Quineville, north of Utah Beach, to
Ouistreham, on the Orne River east of Sword Beach. By then, however, it
was a full week after the initial landings, and the opportunity for a quick
thrust up the peninsula to Cherbourg had passed. Instead, it now seemed
more important to cut off the Cotentin Peninsula at its base in order to iso-
late the city and prevent the Germans from sending reinforcements there.
Collins assigned the task to the veteran 9th Infantry Division, which began
a westward drive on June 15 in company with elements of the 82nd Air-
borne. Advance units reached St.-Saveur-le-Vicomte on the sixteenth and
pushed on rapidly overnight, and a tank company attached to the Ith Divi-
sion reached Barneville-sur-Mer, overlooking the sea, before dawn on the
seventeenth. Now that they had cut off the peninsula, it was time to turn
north for Cherbourg.
Collins reorganized his command so that the newly designated VIII
Corps under Major General Troy Middleton faced southward to ensure the
isolation of the peninsula, while three divisions of his own VII Corps (the
9th, 79th, and 4th) turned north on parallel fronts to close in on Cher
bourg, As his nickname suggested, Lightning Joe Collins was an aggressive
commander, "independent, vigorous, heady, capable, and full of vinegar,
according to one fellow officer. He had served on Guadalcanal in the Pacific
War, where he became known for his highly personal. hands-on command
style. Now he was often to be found in the front lines as his three divisions
headed northward. The advance began on June 19, the same day the storm
struck the ships off the Normandy beaches.*
THE CAMPAIGN FOR CHERBOURG, JUNE 19-25, 1944
Cap de la Hague
GERMAN DEFENSIVE LINE
Cherbourg
Valognes
79th DIV
9th DIV
Saint-Sauveur
OMAHA
Aure R.
Carteret e
Barneville-sur-Mer
English Channel
& Barfleur
Saint Pierre-Eglise
• St. Vaast-la Hougue
AMERICAN POS
Quinéville
•Montebourg
Merderet R.
4th DIV
Sainte-Mère-Eglise •
82nd Airborne
29th DIV,
Carentan*
AMERICAN LIN
'Coutances
© 2013 Jeffrey L. Ward
