4 = NEPTUNE
For Roosevelt, the surprise was less that the Japanese had attacked than
where they had attacked. After all, the State Department's interminable
negotiations with Japanese diplomats had ground to a stalemate in recent
weeks, and he knew that significant elements of the Imperial Japanese Navy
had recently left their ports in Japan's home islands and had gone to sea,
heading south. That had been sufficiently alarming that Roosevelt had
authorized official "war warnings" to all U.S. Pacific commands eleven days
earlier. He would not have been surprised to learn that Japan had struck at
French Indochina, British Malaya, or the Dutch East Indies-even, per-
haps, the American-held Philippines. But, Navy man that he was, he was
stunned, and initially incredulous, that the Japanese had managed to steam
a major striking force more than two thousand miles across the Pacific
undetected to target the American base at Pearl Harbor.
Soon enough, however, shock and incredulity gave way to anger and de-
termination. His advisors, urgently summoned to the Oval Office that af-
ternoon, found him uncharacteristically quiet and grim-faced. There was
no apparent panic or confusion; indeed, several of his visitors commented
on the president's outward calm. In a way, perhaps, the news was a relief
from the ambiguity and uncertainty of the past several months. At least
now he would no longer have to walk a precarious tightrope conducting
stylized conversations with faultlessly polite but apparently untrustworthy
Japanese diplomats. Nor would he have to parse the language of his public
statements to avoid inflaming America's powerful and suspicious isola-
tionist lobby, which strenuously opposed his open support for Britain in its
war with Hitler's Germany. With the Japanese attack, all that was swept
away. War would bring its own set of difficulties, sacrifice, and pain, but at
least the die had been cast.?
Or so it seemed. Pearl Harbor meant war with Japan without question,
but legally as well as geographically the United States remained apart from
the war in Europe, and that was a problem, or at least a conundrum. One of
the reasons Roosevelt had tried so hard to avoid a break with Japan was his
conviction that Hitler's Germany was a far more serious threat-to the
United States, to the West, and to mankind generally. Hitler's megalomani-
acal ideology was the main reason, but in addition to that, Germany was a
Germany First = 5
far more dangerous foe whose economy ($412 billion) was more than twice
that of Japan's ($196 billion).* As Roosevelt saw it, Japan's ambitions in the
Far East were worrying, but they could be dealt with later; Hitler was the
immediate and existential problem. The German Wehrmacht had already
subjugated more than a dozen European countries and was even then deep
inside the Soviet Union. Great Britain clung to survival largely on the
strength of the tenuous transatlantic supply line from America.3
It was to protect that supply line that some months before, Roosevelt
had authorized new and more elastic guidelines for U.S. naval forces in the
Atlantic. American destroyers now protected convoys bound for Britain as
far as Iceland, and they cooperated with the British even beyond that. In
September, a German U-boat skipper, frustrated by the interference of
American destroyers with his target, had fired a torpedo at the USS Greer,
and a few weeks later, on October 17, a German torpedo actually struck the
USS Kearny, resulting in the loss of eleven U.S. sailors with another twenty-
two wounded. To be sure, the Kearny was hardly an innocent bystander
since she had been engaged in depth-charging the sub at the time, but the
confrontation resulted in the first loss of American lives in the undeclared
naval war. Less than two weeks later, a German torpedo sank the USS Reu-
ben James, sending it to the bottom with a loss of 11S American sailors out
of a crew of 160. These incidents might have marked the onset of a full-scale
war, but instead both sides had backed away: Hitler because he had his
hands full in Russia, and Roosevelt because he was uncertain that the
American public would support a belligerent response. When questioned
about it at one of his regular news conferences, the president replied, strictly
off the record, "We don't want a declared war with Germany because we are
acting in defense-self-defense..... And to break off diplomatic relations,
why, that won't do any good." Then he changed the subject.+
From the beginning, Roosevelt had crafted his foreign policy with a clear
and calculating eye on what the Constitution would allow and what Ameri-
can public opinion would tolerate. He had tested the limits of both in trying
* The gross domestic product of the United States in 1941 was $1,094 billion, which
was more than the GDP of Germany and Japan combined.
