YUL
342 = NEPTUNE
the passive voice, "Concern was felt lest we fire into our own troops." In
addition, Bradley and Collins decided that the Navy ships should fire for
only ninety minutes, not the three hours Deyo suggested. 1º
Deyo objected to these restrictions, noting that they left the initiative en-
tirely to the Germans and, at the outset at least, made his ships passive tar-
gets. Collins relented to the extent that he agreed the ships could shoot back
if they were fired on, as long as the Navy gunners were sure of their targets.
Of course, that still left the initiative to the defenders, and while Deyo
remained unhappy, he had no option but to carry out his orders. He was to
show up off the city at noon on June 25, establish radio contact with fire-
support parties ashore, and respond to requested call fire. He could defend
himself if fired upon, as surely he would be, but otherwise he was to wait for
instructions. He was to stay for only ninety minutes, then withdraw."
The ships assembled at Portland on June 22, just as the Channel storm
was dissipating. That storm added a certain urgency to their mission, since
the damage sustained by the Mulberry harbor off Omaha Beach seemed to
make the capture of a full-sized seaport even more urgent. Kirk impressed
upon Deyo and Bryant that it was necessary to capture Cherbourg with
the utmost dispatch." The ships got under way in the predawn darkness, be-
tween four and five in the morning, on June 25. The sun rose as they crossed
the Channel, and in the aftermath of the storm, the day dawned clear and
bright over a sea one witness recalled as being "like a piece of glas"12
There would be no stealth in this attack. The whole operation would take
place at midday under bright sunshine. The only cover for the big ships
would be provided by the accompanying destroyers, which were to "dash
between the cruisers and battleships and the beach and lay a thick smoke-
screen." The men went to general quarters at nine-thirty that morning, and
an hour later the two task groups approached the shore separately, slowing
to five knots in order to follow the British minesweepers to their firing posi-
tions. Deyo's Nevada group took up its initial position in Fire Support Area
#1 about twenty-eight thousand yards (sixteen miles) due north of Cher-
bourg. At noon, he moved up to Fire Support Position #3, only twelve
thousand yards from the city. Meanwhile, Bryant's Texas-Arkansas group
moved into Fire Support Area #2, east of Cap Lévi. 13
"A Field of Ruins" = 343
Despite the restrictions imposed by the Army, Deyo and Bryant were
confident of success. They were certainly aware that guns ashore had a
umbe of inherent advantages over guns afloat. Shore batteries sat on a
sible fring platform; they did not have to maneuver or worry about their
engines being hit; and of course they were much less vulnerable since they
costed a smaller target, were often protected by thick walls of steel and
concrete, and could not sink. These were the factors that initially fed Ram-
sy' reluctance to accept the assignment. Yet in the twelve months prior to
D.Day, U.S. Navy gunners had grown increasingly confident, not only in
their ability to put heavy ordnance on target but also in their superiority
overshore batteries - even batteries of large-caliber guns. At Sicily, Salerno,
Anzio, and elsewhere, Allied naval guns had demonstrated their ability to
suppress and even dominate the shore batteries of the defenders. This new-
found confidence would be severely tested at Cherbourg, however, mainly
because the four 280 mm guns in the Hamburg Battery were bigger than
ay the Nary had faced so far, they were housed in heavy concrete and steel
casemates, and they were manned by sailors from the German navy, the
Kiegmarine, who were equally confident of their ability to sink ships. 4+
The Allied ships were all in position by noon. Because of the require-
ment to withhold fire until the Army requested it, the Germans opened
the battle, firing on the ships of Deyo's Group One from the batteries in
and around Querqueville at 12:06. From the very first salvos, the German
gunners proved to be remarkably— even alarmingly-accurate. The first
salvo straddled the destroyer Murphy (DD-603), and one 6-inch shell hit
the Walke (DD-723). That shell shattered the Walke's glass windshield
on the open bridge and sent large pieces of broken glass flying almost the
entire length of the ship. A sailor manning a 40mm mount amidships was
outraged when the glass shards flew past him, and he hollered: "Those
dirty
are shooting glass at us!" Only minutes later, shells landed all
around the USS Quincy, and HMS Glasgow was hit twice. The Nevada her-
self was bracketed by a three-gun salvo, with one shell landing only a hun-
dred yards off her starboard quarter. At 12:09, just three minutes into the
battle, the deck officer on the Nevada noted dryly in the ship's log: "Enemy
is getting the range rapidly"Is
