234 = NEPTUNE
Of the actual landing forces, Moon's Force U was the first to sortie. The
LCTs in the Dart River began unmooring from their nests and heading out
into the lower anchorage off Dartmouth Castle at noon on June 3. By the
afternoon, it was evident to even a casual observer that they were all getting
under way. Edwin Gale, on LCT-853, found it "quite a moving spectacle,"
not the least because the townspeople of Dartmouth, aware of what was
happening, gathered in large numbers along the riverbank, where they
stood silently waving goodbye. Cliff Underwood, skipper of the 853, turned
to Gale and said, "Edwin, you know we may not do anything as worthwhile
as this again in our lives. But it is a fine thing to be here." Gale was moved by
Underwood's words, though it did not stop him from wondering, as their
vessel passed out through the submarine net and into the open Channel, if
"we might not ever come back again."?3
June days are long in the northern latitudes, and the sun did not set that
night until after ten oclock. Throughout the long afternoon and into the
evening, hundreds of Allied ships exited from Plymouth, Salcombe, and
Brixham, as well as from Dartmouth. They moved into the Channel and
formed up into twelve separate convoys, which then turned south by south-
east, with the English coast off their port side. They crossed Lyme Bay,
where three LSTs had come to grief during Exercise Tiger in April, and
headed for a position south of the Isle of Wight designated as Area Zebra,
where they would rendezvous with the four other invasion forces due to
sortie the next morning. Providentially, there were no German air recon-
naissance missions during these crucial hours. Very likely this was due to
the unsettled weather, though at least one senior U.S. officer found it
"simply incredible"24
The weather remained a concern, for as soon as Moon's vessels left their
several harbors, they were hit with four-to-six-foot seas, strong winds, and
intermittent rain. The smaller ships suffered the most. That included the
several fifty-six foot long landing craft control ships, intended primarily
for use as navigational aids to mark the eventual line of departure. An
officer on one of these (the I.CC-60) recalled that the sea was "abusively
choppy and disagreeable." It was particularly nasty on the open bridge,
where the "bitter winds and raw sa spray" challenged the enthusiasm of
"A Hum Throughout the Country" =
235
oficers and crew alike. These conditions also affected the Seabees on the
rhino ferries being towed by the LSTs. The wind and current tended to
slew the rhino barges off to one side, so they proceeded crab-like, acting
like kind of sea anchor for the ships towing them. The big hemp towlines
would lie slack on the water, then jerk taut, sometimes knocking the Sea-
bees off their feet. It also put a great strain on the towlines and made it
ifficult for the towing ships to maintain their position in the formation.
Soon the careful structure of the convoys began to unravel. Moreover,
since the rhinos were essentially flat metal barges, they offered no protec-
tion at all from the waves that sloshed across their decks or the cold winds
that whipped around them. The Seabees had to stamp their feet to keep
their lower legs from going numb.?s
That same night, three hundred miles to the north, the gunfire support
ships for the invasion left Belfast, in Northern Ireland, and the Firth of
Clyde, in Scotland. Even after the sun eventually set, there was a full moon
whose light struggled to pierce the heavy cloud cover. According to U.S.
Nary Rear Admiral Carleton F. Bryant, who commanded the Omaha Beach
bombardment group, the result was "a kind of half twilight" that struck him
as "erie. Bryant led a mixed command of two American battleships (Texas
and Arkansas) plus two British and two French cruisers. Another Ameri-
can, Rear Admiral Morton Deyo, commanded the bombardment group for
Utah Beach, which consisted of the battleship Nevada (a Pearl Harbor sur-
vivor) and three heavy cruisers. The bombardment groups for Gold, Juno,
and Sword Beaches were made up entirely of Royal Navy warships, in-
cluding the battleships Warspite and Ramillies, and all these ships headed
south through the Irish Sea on a course to clear Land's End before dawn on
June 4. The captain of a Royal Navy destroyer operating in the Irish Sea
looked out over the starboard quarter of his ship that night to see the fight-
ing tops of several battleships and heavy cruisers coming up over the ho-
rizon. He identified most of the British ships, which were followed by
others with the distinctive higher freeboard of American warships. Here are
the lions of the great armada, he thought, and the flags of two nations bent
together. The very sight of them erased any doubt he had about the success
of the forthcoming operation.26
