YUL
332
= NEPTUNE
Occasionally German prisoners and wounded American soldiers shared
passage on the same ship, and that sometimes proved awkward. Some of
the wounded Americans objected to sharing passage with enemy soldiers,
even wounded enemy soldiers. On one LST, Pharmacist's Mate Ralph
Crenshaw noticed that when he provided medical treatment to a wounded
German, the Americans nearby muttered aloud that he should let the man
die. Sensitive to the mood on board, when a boat came alongside with an-
other load of prisoners, Crenshaw refused to let them board. The American
offcer in the boat obiected. insisting that he had orders But Crenshaw told
him he would not be responsible for their safety if the officer persisted in
putting them on the ship. 49
The one group that neither the Allies nor the prisoners wanted anything
to do with was the SS troops. That, apparently, was just fine with the SS
troops. An American sailor on LST-371 noted that the SS soldiers "were all
well dressed, with very good uniforms." When they were herded into the
tank deck of an LST, they "immediately set up an area separate from the
other German troops," even posting a guard detail to keep others away from
their little corner of the ship. One observer believed that the SS soldiers
showed as much disdain for the other Cermans as they did for the Allies so
Like the ships that carried the wounded back to England, those LSTs
assigned to carry prisoners operated a kind of shuttle service, as these terse
entries from one crewmember's journal testify:
Sunday: To France with American GI's and heavy equipment.
Monday: Back to Portland with prisoners.
Thursday: Back to France with American troops.
Sunday: To Southampton with prisoners. S1
TWO WEEKS ARTER TETE TATTIAT. TANDINES Ramsay. Kirk and the other
Neptune commanders could be generally satisfied. The crossing had been
virtually bloodless, and the landings, while confused and costly, had been
ultimately successful. The U.S. Navy and Coast Guard had played the cen-
tral role in getting the troops ashore on the American beaches, and the
"The Shoreline Was Just a Shambles"
= 333
Royal Navy had performed flawlessly off the British and Canadian beaches.
The ships had sustained the soldiers with naval gunfire support and main-
tained a robust line of supply even in the face of bad weather and furious
opposition. Despite the loss of the Mulberry harbor at Omaha Beach, the
supplies continued to pour in, meeting and even exceeding expectations.
The Allies had lost one major troop carrier (the "Susie Bee") and several
destroyers as well as hundreds of small landing craft, but the losses had
been less than projected. Only one task now remained for the men and the
ships of Operation Neptune: seizing a major seaport.
