12
= NEPTUNE
more difficult. It would mean that a subsequent invasion of Europe would
have to be mounted from ports on the American Eastern Seaboard; instead
of a twenty-mile-wide channel, an invasion fleet would have to span the
width of the Atlantic Ocean. 13
After laying out his argument, Stark presented four strategic alterna-
tives, which he labeled A, B, C, and D. The last of them was his preferred
option. Called "Plan Dog" in Navy lingo, it asserted that if the United
States should find itself at war with both Germany and Japan, it would re-
main strictly on the defensive in the Pacific and devote its "full national
offensive strength" to the defeat of Nazi Germany. "Should we be forced
into a war with Japan," Stark wrote, "we should…. avoid operations in the
Far East or the mid-Pacific that will prevent the Navy from promptly mov-
ing to the Atlantic forces fully adequate to safeguard our interests and poli-
cies in the event of British collapse." Though others had been making
similar arguments since June, Stark's advocacy was crucial, for it put the
Army and the Navy on the same side of the strategic debate. Moreover,
Stark went further than Marshall had by proposing that because of the
likelihood of a future war against Germany, the United States should at
once initiate a series of staff conversations for joint planning between Brit-
ish and American senior officers.!4
Knox embraced both the argument and the conclusions of Stark's his-
toric memo, and he commended it to the president. Roosevelt was char-
acteristically noncommittal. He agreed wholeheartedly that Germany
was the principal enemy. He was loath, however, to endorse any particu-
lar plan, for it was a central component of his administrative style to
keep all his options open. He was also concerned about Stark's sugges-
tion to open formal staff talks with the British, for he worried about the
impact that might have on domestic American politics. Though he had
just been reelected to an unprecedented third term (that very week, in
fact), he knew that formal staff talks with an active belligerent would be
an overt violation of American neutrality. If news of it leaked to the pub-
lic, there would be a roar of outrage, and not merely from the isolation-
ists. Consequently, while he approved the talks, he made sure that they
would be purely professional, without any input from or participation
Germany First = 13
by political leaders, and that nothing decided in them would be binding
on the government.
THE ENSUING AMERICAN-BRITISH CONVERSATIONS, known historically as
the ABC conference, took place in Washington from late January to early
March 1941. Nonbinding they may have been, but the fact that they took
place at all formalized the emerging Anglo-American partnership.
Roosevelt stayed out of it. Initially, he thought about asking Undersecre-
tary of State Sumner Welles, a man whose advice he trusted, to attend the
meetings and act as his eyes and ears, but on further thought he decided
that only serving officers should participate. Sensitive to that, the Army-
Navy Joint Planning Board stipulated, "In order to avoid commitment by
the president, neither he nor any of his Cabinet should officially receive the
British officers." Even Stark, whose idea the conference had been, took part
only to the extent that he and Marshall offered a brief formal welcome to
the team of British officers. Then they got out of the way. Is
Stark and Marshall did, however, compile a list of the goals for the
conferees, the central one of which was "to determine the best methods
by which the armed forces of the United States and the British Com-
monwealth can defeat Germany and the powers allied with her, should
the United States desire to resort to war." When they routed that memo
past the president, Roosevelt picked up his pen, crossed out the word
"desire" and replaced it with "be compelled." It was not his only change.
The Marshall-Stark planning document offered six guidelines for the
delegates, the first of which was "the defeat of Germany and her allies."
Roosevelt was completely on board with that, but he paused while read-
ing the next guideline: that the United States would exert "its principal
military effort in the Atlantic or in the Mediterranean region." That ref-
erence to the Mediterranean bothered him. He did not want the United
States to focus its main effort on the protection of British imperial inter-
ests from Gibraltar to Suez. Again he picked up his pen and inserted the
word "navally" in front of "in the Mediterranean." "Navally" wasn't even
a word, but at least it placed a theoretical limit on the role the United
States might play there. 16
