CHAPTER 7
"SOME GOD-DAMMED THINGS
CALLED LSTS"
Sense im the very day of an atar and even er, Altes
strategic planning had been severely circumscribed by the scarcity of
available shipping. As Brooke noted in January 1943, "The shortage of ship-
ping was a stranglehold on all offensive operations" It was not that the Allies
had failed to see this coming. As early as 1936, the United States had begun
subsidizing the construction of fifty new merchant ships a year under the
Merchant Marine Act. Three years later, the government doubled the number
of subsidized ships to one hundred, and doubled it again the next year. In
January 1941, nearly a full year before Pearl Harbor, Roosevelt had declared
an "unlimited national emergency" and used that to justify an even bigger
shipbuilding program. Nevertheless, once the war began, the need to supply
both Britain and Russia while simultaneously fighting a war in the Pacific re-
vealed just how desperately short of shipping the Allies were. And it got
worse. During 1942, German U-boats sank more than a thousand Allied
ships in the North Atlantic. For a time it seemed possible that this U-boat on-
slaught might eliminate Allied sealift capability altogether!
"Some God-Dammed Things Called LSTs" =
147
Defending the Atlantic convoys required hundreds of new destroyers,
especially the new, smaller, destroyer escorts (DEs), plus dozens of small
auxiliary aircraft carriers (CVEs). As Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox
wrote in February 1943, it would be impossible to conduct any operations
in Europe at all "unless escort vessels can be provided much more rapidly."
Itseemed clear to him that building new escorts was the nation's highest
industrial priority. King agreed. Arguing that "one ship saved was worth
two ships sunk," he, too, wanted to put escort ship construction at the top
of the nation's priority list.?
On the other hand, it was equally critical to build more cargo ships. At
the very least, the Allies had to replace the hundreds of ships already sunk
by the Germans, and others being lost almost daily. The deputy adminis-
trator of the War Shipping Administration, Lewis W. Douglas, protested
that making escorts the highest priority would jeopardize the program for
bulding cargo ships and weaken the ability of the Allies to maintain the
transatlantic convoys. After all, escorts would be useless if there was noth-
ing for them to escort. Knox disagreed. "It does us little good," he wrote, "to
produce one hundred cargo ships a month if we do not produce enough
escort vessels during that month to enable us to protect them when they go
to sea' In a kind of chicken-and-egg dilemma, the Allies had to decide
whether it was more critical to build escorts to protect the convoys, or
replace the cargo ships they were supposed to protect.?
And now there was a third imperative. All of the agreements solemnly
accepted by the Combined Chiefs of Staff and the heads of government
about invading occupied France on May 1, 1944, would be meaningless if
the Allies could not produce the thousands of landing ships and landing
cat needed to carry the invasion force to the beaches. Landing craft had
constituted a bottenect for the Torch landings, and again for the invasion
of Sicily and Italy. The invasion of France would require far more. Without
teal rousands of new landing craft, any talk of a cross-Channel opera-
tion was simply fatuous.+
There is an inextricable connection between strategic planning and
logistical realities, and ship construction is especially determinative. Even
more than in the production of tanks, trucks, or planes, shipbuilding requires
