YUL
346 = NEPTUNE
firing." Alas, not all of them hit the water. One 9.4-inch shell struck the
Texas, plowed through several deck levels, and came to rest in the warrant
officers' stateroom directly above the ship's magazine for 14-inch ammuni-
tion. It, too, was a dud.* Another shell hit the top of the Texas's armored
conning tower, and this one did explode, smashing up the bridge area, kill-
ing the helmsman, and wounding eleven others. Captain Charles Baker,
having just ordered a turn to starboard, had left the bridge to watch the
maneuver when the shell struck, or he, too, would have been a casualty?0
At 1:10, under the impetus of this rapid and accurate fire, Bryant ordered
the task group to turn away northward while the destroyers Plunkett and
Hobson made smoke to cover their withdrawal. The small minesweeper
Chickadee also ran the gauntlet of enemy fire to lay a protective smoke-
screen. Texas and Arkansas circled to starboard and continued to fire from
twenty thousand yards (just over eleven miles), but the guns in the Ham-
burg Battery had a range of forty thousand yards, and Bryant's maneuver
did little to retard either the frequency or the accuracy of their shelling?
While they dueled with the German batteries, the Navy ships also
responded as best they could to call-fire requests from Collins's forces. The
smaller batteries near Querqueville received a lot of attention, since those
guns could be turned to face landward as well as out to sea. The destroyer
Ellyson closed to within a mile of one battery and fired twenty-seven rounds
of S-inch ordnance "full salvos and ranid fire" in a single minute. The Ellyson
ceased fire only because the ensuing smoke so obscured the target that the
spotters could no longer see it. Either the object of the Ellyson's fury was
wrecked or the German gunners decided to lie low for a while, because the
battery ceased firing?~
By I:20, the ships had been on station for eighty minutes, and according
to their orders they were supposed to retire at 1:30. It was obvious, how-
ever, that the German defonces had not been suppressed, and Devo radioed
Collins to ask, "Do you wish more gunfire?" Collins may have been avay
from his headauarters when the querv came in. for he did not reply until
* That shell remains on board the USS Texas to this day and can be seen by visitors to
the battleship, which is anchored off Houston as a museum ship.
"A Field of Ruins" = 347
20, when he answered, in effect, "Yes, please." He asked if the Navy ships
and continue firing until 3:00, as Deyo had initially suggested.23
Because most of the Querqueville batteries had been silenced by now, at
katemporarily, Deyo ordered the Quincy to steam eastward and join Bry-
antin the ongoing battle against Battery Hamburg. Some of the smaller bat-
is ear Cap Lévi had been suppressed, but the Hamburg Battery
remained defiantly active even though it was now the target of nearly every
sipin Bryant's group, plus the Quincy. With eight ships firing at once, their
shells created great clouds of smoke and dust around the target, and the
spotters could not tell which ship had fired which shell, making corrections
impossible. The Navy gunners simply fired into a curtain of smoke. Only
when they spotted the bright orange stab of a muzzle flash could they deter-
mine the location of an enemy battery, and even that provided merely a
bearing to the target. In spite of these difficulties, at 1:35 the Texas finally
landed a l4-inch shell directly on one of the big German guns, putting it
out of action. The other three, however, continued to fire, and soon the
Texas was bracketed again. At 2:51, Bryant ordered the task group to turn
away for the second time while the destroyers again made smoke.?4
Before it was over, the Texas fired more than two hundred 14-inch shells
and the Arkansas fired fifty-eight 12-inch shells at the Hamburg Battery.
Quincy and the five destroyers added more than six hundred 8-inch and
Sinch rounds. Yet at three oclock, when Deyo ordered a general with-
drawal, three of the big guns there were still in action. The Tuscaloosa con-
tinued to fire until she was beyond range, but so did the Germans, and
because their range was longer, they got the last word. At 3:10 a shell that
was almost a taunt landed just twenty-five feet from the Texas, flinging sea-
water and shrapnel across her deck. Again Bryant ordered the destroyers to
make smoke. As the Kriegsmarine gunners in Battery Hamburg watched
the Allied task force disappear over the northern horizon, they may well
have congratulated one another on having driven off the enemy.?s
Bryant put the best face he could on the operation in his official report,
writing that although his ships were "hopelessly outranged and continually
harassed by enemy fire over a period of two hours and twenty minutes,"
they were "smartly handled and continued the engagement until ordered to
