YUL
308 = NEPTUNE
The tanks, trucks, jeeps, and artillery pieces that had been lost during the
assault had to be replaced, and thousands more had to come ashore to pro-
vide mobility and firepower to the invading army. And all of this had to be
accomplished swiftly so that the Allied force in Normandy would be strong
enough to withstand the German counteroffensive when it came, as it inev-
itably would. Not to be forgotten were the displaced French civilians of
Normandy cowering in their basements or driven from their homes alto-
gether; they, too, had to be fed and supplied. Fulfilling all these essential
needs constituted a logistical challenge of the greatest magnitude. As Eisen-
hower had put it in a letter to Marshall in February, "From D day to D plus
60 this thing is going to absorb everything the United Nations can possibly
pour into it."?
IT GOT OFF TO A POOR START, especially on Omaha Beach. In spite of all
that had gone wrong, the Allies had managed to land an impressive number
of men and vehicles on D-Day, but the delivery of stores and supplies fell far
short of the pre-invasion goal. According to the original schedule, the first
loads of military cargo were supposed to start coming ashore by H plus
three hours, that is, at about 9:30 a.m. That schedule was exploded almost
at once, for at 9:30 on the morning of D-Day, virtually nothing at all was
moving on Omaha Beach. Consequently, instead of the 2,400 tons of sup-
plies that were supposed to be landed that day, the actual total was only
about 100 tons. Moreover, the buildup over the ensuing several days also
fell significantly short of the official targets. The goal was 8,000 tons per day,
but during the first four days of the invasion, the Allies landed a total of only
4,581 tons on Omaha Beach. One reason for this was the obvious reality
that, as Hall put it rather laconically, "obstacles still impeded access to the
beach, and because of that, ships of the follow-up supply convoys from
England had to loiter offshore waiting to be unloaded. Not until the eve-
ning of June 9 was the beachfront sufficiently cleared of obstacles and
wreckage to allow unrestricted use of the waterfront. As a result, the move-
ment of supplies across the beach fell so far behind schedule that even Halls
famous equanimity was tested. "The general progress of unloading," he
wrote, was "far too slow."?
"The Shoreline Was Just a Shambles"
=309
Asecond factor that affected the offloading process was that the Army
commanders who were fighting the Germans inland sent back urgent—
and sometimes frantic — requests for particular items, especially ammuni-
ton In an effort to respond to those requests, beach officers had to first
figure out which ships contained the needed supplies and then resequence
the landing schedule to give them priority. Ships that were in position and
ready to offload were ordered to stand off while others containing the
reededitems were brought in, and this, too, caused delays. Hall complained
that this slowed down delivery, but Army commanders insisted that
inloading must be done according to priorities." Hall appealed to Bradley,
and on June 10 he got permission from Bradley's chief of staff, Major
General William Benjamin Kean, to unload all ships as fast as possible re-
gides of priorities." As Ramsay put it, "Empty the ships and [the] priori-
is wiltake care of themselves." After that, the pace of unloading picked up
signifcantly, though periodic demands to prioritize certain kinds of sup-
plies caused occasional difficulties.+
A third factor that impeded the offloading schedule during those first
few days was Ramsay's decision that on Omaha Beach at least, the big and
valuable LSTs were not to go ashore to discharge their cargoes until the
beaches were no longer within range of enemy artillery. Two LSTs had
attempte to land on D-Day and had been badly battered — the 133 was
standed on the beach, and the 309 had to back away and offload into
smaller craft. Though Ramsay did authorize sending the LSTs onto the
Bitish beaches, and even onto Utah Beach, as early as June 7, he insisted
that this should not be done on Omaha Beach "except in an emergency." As
serious as things were, Hall could not in good conscience label a slowdown
in offloading an "emergency, and so for the first several days almost every-
thing headed for Omaha Beach initially had to be unloaded into smaller
craf offshore. This was already standard procedure for the transports and
Liberty ships, and including the LSTs in this protocol put an additional
strain on the small craft and consumed both time and manpower.S
While the LCTs and Higgins boats carried the soldiers, the work of
transporting the vehicles and heavy cargo fell mainly on the big, flat, barge-
like rhino ferries, which had six times the capacity of an LCT, and ten times
