200 = NEPTUNE
astern. Often, an LCT commander would try to "crab" his vessel into the
narrow space by coming alongside fairly fast (to ensure that the rudders
would take hold), then backing down on all three screws at once while
holding the helm hard over, hoping to slide into place. If he misjudged the
moment, it could result in a collision, sometimes with significant damage.
Another approach was to make what the LCT skippers called a "Chinese
landing," which meant coming alongside stern first and backing into the
space. It was much like parallel-parking a car—if the car was 120 feet long,
weighed 286 tons, and had no brakes. 1o
Even when the LCT was safely moored alongside, the danger was not
past. Since the L.CT was coming to collect a cargo, it was empty and "rossed
up and down like a cork," as one skipper put it. The mooring lines had to be
loose enough to accommodate this movement but tight enough to keep the
LCT alongside. Fenders were thrown over the side to minimize damage as
the two vessels thumped violently together. Then the real work began:
cranes on the big transport ship would lower the jeeps, trucks, and other
cargo over the side of the transport down into the empty L.CT. With the
ICT rising and plunging, choosing the right moment to unshackle a two-
and-a-half-ton truck was a touchy and even dangerous task. Eventually the
cargo shift would be complete, and the LCT could unmoor and head for
the beach 11
An alternative to using LCTs to do this was to employ what was called a
"chino ferry, which was essentially a self-propelled raft made up of giant
pontoons constructed out of sheet metal. A rhino ferry could hardly be
called a vessel, for it had no hold, no cabin, and no working parts at all other
than two outboard motors that allowed it to move independently at about
two or three knots. They were manned by men of the Construction Bat-
talion, called CBs or Seabees. Despite their minimalist design, the rhino
ferries proved so effective in rehearsals that on D-Day many of the LSTs
towed a rhino ferry behind them during the Channel crossing.!2
The worker bees of the landing exercises were the little Higgins boats
(American) and ILCAs (British). They were used not only to carry troops
and light vehicles (mostly jeeps) to the shore but also for a wide variety of
mundane tasks: carrying messages from ship to ship during periods of
Duck, Fox, Beaver, Tiger = 201
radio silence, ferrying officers between ship and shore, conducting rescue
work, picking up supplies, and making mail runs. They were essentially the
ieps of the naval war.
Though the German air Blitz of English cities had ended, occasional
bombing raids punctuated the Allied training schedule and added another
level of wartime realism. Often the German planes came over at night, and
the gunners on the hundreds of Allied ships opened fire, sending thousands
ofrounds of red tracer fire into the dark sky. On mornings after such raids,
many of the ships in the harbor found their decks littered with shell frag-
ments, most of it spent ordnance that had fallen back to earth. During these
raids, the Germans frequently dropped mines in the harbor, which kept
Allied minesweepers busy. Minesweeping was a noisy activity, as explosions
took place all across the harbor. The concussions were so great that men on
ships halfa mile away could feel them in their feet. Even so, the sweepers oc-
casionally missed one or two. Watching from the deck of his LST one day,
Donald W. Nutley observed a Higgins boat making a mail run across Plym-
outh Harbor when it hit a mine and exploded. The coxswain was hurled off
the boat like so much wreckage. Nutley watched as the man flew "high into
the air, end over end, and landed flat out on the deck of an LCT with a loud
thud." Naturally, he assumed the man had been killed. Then, "all of a sudden,
he got up, staggered around like a drunk, and walked away.!3
THE COMMAND TEAM in charge of training included not only Ramsay,
Vian, and Kirk but also two U.S. Navy rear admirals, John Wilkes and John
Jimmy" Lessie Hall Jr. Wilkes's job was largely administrative, since he
was responsible for the landing craft themselves as well as the practice fa-
cities and the enormous supply depot at Exeter. In this capacity, he bore
the delightful acronym of COMLANDCRAB. While Wilkes supervised
the craft themselves, Hall's job was to schedule and organize the exercises,
which he did from an office in the British Naval Academy at Dartmouth.
Hall's job soon underwent a dramatic change, however. The expansion of
the initial landing force to five divisions not only led to the division of
Ramsays command into Eastern and Western Task Forces under Vian and
Kink, it also caused those task forces to be subdivided into task groups, one
