208 = NEPTUNE
much of a difference in the end. Right up to D-Day itself, he referred openly
to "those damned Mulberries." Even Hughes-Hallet, whose offhand remark
had set it all in motion, came to see the Mulberry project as an example of
"wasteful and ridiculous excess."27
Besides the artificial harbors, another Allied initiative was dubbed Pluto,
which stood for "pipeline under the ocean" and was designed to meet the
Allied army's voracious appetite for fuel. The jeeps, trucks, and tanks car-
ried to the beach by the thousands of landing craft would require enormous
amounts of gasoline and diesel fuel to keep going during the land campaign.
Carrying that fuel across the Channel in a virtually infinite number of
jerrycans (initial estimates were for 26.3 million of them) seemed both
daunting and a bit absurd, but until Cherbourg was taken, there was no
port where tankers could offload. It was Arthur Harley, chief of the Anglo-
Iranian Oil Company, who suggested that the solution was to run a flexible
four inch hose encased in a dozen reinforced layers across the bottom of
the Channel from Britain to France. By the eve of D-Day it was in position
and ready to deploy.?8
There were other, less ambitious innovations, many of which sprang
from the mind of a British major general named Percy Hobart, the erst-
while commander of the British 79th Armored Division, and coinciden-
tally Montgomery's brother-in-law. Hobart, who sported owlish glasses
and a brush mustache, developed a whole series of unconventional weap-
ons that collectively came to be known as "Hobart's Funnies." Many of
them were contraptions added to either a Sherman or Churchill tank to
give it special capabilities. One, called an AVRE (for Assault Vehicle, Royal
Engineers) mounted an oversize short barreled gun capable of firing a huge
40-pound shell for blasting German pillboxes. Another, called a "fail tank"
carried a fantastical rotating cylinder of chains that pummeled the ground
to its front to detonate mines in its path. Still another fired self-propelled
Bangalore torpedoes, and one, appropriately nicknamed "Bobbin," boasted
a giant spool of matting that unfurled as it advanced so that it could traverse
boggy ground. There was even one with no turret at all whose function was
to act as a movable ramp so that tanks behind it could drive over the top of
it to scale walls and other impediments. To one American officer, it seemed
Duck, Fox, Beaver, Tiger = 209
that nearly every vehicle "had some kind of Rube Goldberg contraption
hooked up to it." The Americans were intrigued by some of these innova-
tons but on the whole preferred to rely on more conventional weaponry
plied with overwhelming force. There was one device, however, that the
Americans found interesting enough to adopt in large numbers. It was
called the duplex drive tank 29
Conceived by an Austrian immigrant to Britain, Nicholas Straussler, the
duplex drive (or DD) tank was supposed to solve the problem of getting
amor ashore with the first wave of infantry. To do that, thirty-four-ton
Sherman M4 tanks were equipped with giant waterproof canvas shrouds,
like water wings, that wrapped all the way around the tank, virtually obscur-
ingit. When deployed, the shroud was so high that the tank driver, standing
ona platform behind the turret, could not see over the rim without a peri-
scope. When inflated, the shroud contained enough air to keep the tank
aloat, or, more accurately, to keep it from sinking, since the tank itself was
suspended below the waterline with only about nine inches of canvas show-
ing above the water. The tank's engine was connected to drive shafts that
tumed twin propellers astern. In theory at least, a tank so equipped could
drive off the ramp of an LCT several miles offshore —beyond the range of
German artillery — and swim to the beach on its own without attracting the
heary gunfire that would be directed at an amphibious ship. Essentially an
amphibious stealth weapon, the DD tanks would crawl up onto the beach
"Ike abig bug coming out of the water," as one sailor put it. Once ashore,
the shroud collapsed and the tank resumed its terrestrial character. Eisen-
hower and Bradley witnessed a demonstration of some duplex drive tanks
in February, and they were sufficiently impressed to include them in the
planing for D-Day. Soon enough, the DD tanks became part of the regular
landing exercises. 30
Their performance was mixed. They worked satisfactorily as long as the
seas were relatively calm, but they were slow and cumbersome, and steering
by periscope was problematic. At one rehearsal, attended not only by
Montgomery, Ramsay, and Leigh-Mallory but also by King George him-
self the D tanks arrived both twenty minutes late and in the wrong place.
On other occasions a DD's propellers broke down and an LCT had to be
