CHAPTER 10
"A HUM THROUGHOUT
THE COUNTRY"
T WAS HAPPENING AT LAST, and all over England people could sense
it. As hard as Allied leaders tried to conceal the timing of the invasion,
the acceleration of events at the end of May created an almost palpable
sense of anticipation. On May 26, one resident of southern England
recorded in his diary, "England is expectant, almost hushed." The weighted
stillness did not last. Within days, there was hectic, even frenetic, activity at
each of the 171 embarkation ports located along the southern coast, up on
the Bristol Channel, in the Thames estuary, and as far north as Scotland.
Much of the equipment and supplies for the invasion had been pre-
positioned near these ports, and locals had grown used to seeing camou-
flaged piles of military hardware and car parks filled with military vehicles.
That proved to be only the beginning, however, for as the day of departure
drew near, vehicles began moving shoreward in long caravans along
Britain's narrow roads. They did so mostly at night to keep hidden from
German reconnaissance aircraft, but they could not be concealed from
the local population. A resident of Dorset recalled, "Our nights echoed to
"A Hum Throughout the Country" =
223
the ceaseless clatter of heavy tanks lumbering down the Bournemouth-
Southampton Road." Aware that something special was happening, people
in the small villages came down to the road to watch, flashing the V-for-
ritorysign as the tanks and trucks rolled past.'
Justafter midnight on June 2, Seaman George Hackett was sleeping in
his tent near Dartmouth when he was awakened by the commanding of-
fierof LCT Flotilla 17 and told to get the jeep. The CO had to go to Tor-
quay, east of Dartmouth, to meet with the other commanders for a briefing.
Ashe drove the lieutenant through the dark with his headlights partially
obscured by black tape, Hackett became aware of "a strange sound" that
file the air. It was a kind of deep, persistent drone, and it grew louder as he
drove, until the very air seemed to throb with it. When he joined the main
road south, he realized its source: hundreds of diesel trucks were on the
move, one after another in an endless caravan, all heading south. As he
joined that caravan, Hackett speculated that this was probably happening
alang the Channel coast, at Falmouth, Plymouth, Exmouth, and else-
where, creating "a hum throughout the country.
At the same time, hundreds of amphibious ships assembled at the em-
bakation sites. They, too, moved mostly at night, and as furtively as pos-
sible, though near-absolute Allied command of the air made them relatively
secure from enemy discovery. Once on site, most of the ships officers
attended briefing sessions ashore. Those commanding the LCTs and LCIs
inthe Dart River received their briefing on the large parquet quarterdeck of
the Britania Royal Naval College. After listening to the details of the oper-
aion, they were told what they should expect during the invasion. It was a
pretty grim recital. The first menace was the mines, and the skippers were
cautioned to take special care to stay within the swept lanes, passages eight
hundred yards wide marked by red and green dan buoys, as they crossed
the Channel. In addition, they were told that "strong and persistent attacks
byenemy E-boats and submarines are to be expected, as well as "heavy and
persistent enemy air attacks with bombs, glider bombs, aerial mines, and
possibly torpedoes' Finally, it was possible - perhaps even likely - that the
Germans would use poison gas. The briefing officer concluded that they
should not worry, however, because the Allies had a comfortable margin of
