= NEPTUNE
grudging truce they had managed to engineer between Henri Giraud and
Charles de Gaulle. Somewhat awkwardly, the two French rivals shook
hands for the benefit of the cameras, and afterward Roosevelt announced,
almost cavalierly, that the Allies had agreed to demand the "unconditiona.
surrender" of the Axis powers.
Roosevelt later claimed that as he watched Giraud and de Gaulle shaking
hands, it reminded him of Grant and Lee at Appomattox, and that recalled
to his mind Grant's demand for unconditional surrender at Fort Donelson.
The idea of announcing a policy of unconditional surrender, he asserted, just
popped into his head. Like many of Roosevelt's stories, this was more fable
than fact. He had discussed the policy with the Joint Chiefs at their planning
session in the White House almost three weeks earlier, on January 7, and had
confirmed it with Churchill at Casablanca. Moreover, it was not a flippant or
thoughtless notion. Roosevelt knew that the Nazis had seized power in the
1930s in part by claiming that Germany had never been defeated on the bat-
tlefield in World War I but instead had been "stabbed in the back" by Jews,
social liberals, and communists at home. He wanted to ensure that no such
claim could be made this time. Moreover, making unconditional surrender
an official policy would reassure Stalin that Britain and America would not
make a separate deal with Germany behind his back, and perhaps it would
also restrain Stalin from trying to make a deal of his own. 4
Afterward, there was much conversation in the press and elsewhere about
whether announcing a policy of unconditional surrender effectively backed
the Axis into a corner and thereby made less likely an early end to the war.
Some speculated that the announcement undercut efforts by dissidents in
Germany who wanted to remove Hiter from power. Whatever the merits of
such speculations, it is unlikely that Roosevelt's announcement changed
either the course of the war or Stalin's views on a separate peace. In the
meantime, there were more immediate and tangible issues at hand: there
was still North Africa to be conquered, Sicily to be invaded, and a chief of
staff to be appointed for the cross-Channel invasion of Europe.
IN MARCH 1943, while Eisenhower was reorganizing his forces in the
wake of the humiliating American defeat at Kasserine Pass, a relatively
Casablanca to COSSAC = 105
obscure British major general named Frederick Morgan learned that he
had been selected to coordinate "plans for cross-Channel operations this
year and next year." No one —Morgan included—was quite sure how se-
rously to take the assignment. After all, one of the elements of British
strategy was a massive disinformation campaign, subsequently code-
named Fortitude, a vast conspiracy involving bogus radio transmissions,
nonexistent units, and even double agents, that was designed to keep the
Germans confused and off balance. And, as his new orders made clear,
one of Morgan's responsibilities was to conduct "an elaborate camouflage
and deception scheme" to tie down German forces along the Channel
coast. On the other hand, his orders also specified two other objectives:
' return to the Continent in the event of German disintegration" and the
development of plans for "a full scale assault against the Continent in
194 as early as possible." Of course, having three assignments somewhat
mudied the waters and led Morgan to wonder what had priority: the
misdirection campaign, the possible but entirely contingent emergency
operation, or planning for an actual full-scale assault. Whatever the inten-
tons of those who had written his orders, Morgan had no option but to
take all three charges seriously.!5
The eldest son of a middle-class businessman in Kent, Morgan had not
attended Sandhurst —the Royal Military Academy, designed to turn
'sandemen cadet" into line ofcers, and the school where Churchill had
von his commission as a young subaltern. Instead, Morgan had matricu-
lied a Worich, the military school for artillery and engineering off-
cers. Rather than focus on leadership and tactics, his curriculum had
centre on trigonometry and engineering. His background and scien-
tiê trining set him apart from the scions of the aristocracy who domi-
waited the higher ranks of the British Army, and in class-conscious Britain,
that mattered. At least he looked the part. Forty-nine years old in 1943,
Morgan might have been conjured by central casting in Hollywood to
play the role of a British officer. He was slim and pale with sandy hair—
it town with hints of red a fine straight nose, a brush mustache just
begining to gray, and, like Eisenhower, was seldom to be seen without a
cigarette held between the first two fingers of his left hand. He approached
