60
= NEPTUNE
everywhere is never ending. Moreover, the program received a near-mortal
blow that summer in consequence of the arrival in Washington of two for-
eign emissaries: one of them a handsome, urbane, charming English aristo-
crat, and the other a bespectacled, humorless, cold-eyed Russian realist.24
The realist arrived first. Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov was Stalin's
foreign minister and the man who had negotiated the 1939 pact with Ger-
many's Joachim von Ribbentrop to divide Poland between them-the doc-
ument that gave Hitler the green light to invade Poland and start the war.
Now, with Russia fighting for her survival, Molotov had flown from Mos-
cow to ask what the Western Allies were willing to do to ease the pressure
on the Red Army. In London Molotov signed a twenty-year Mutual Assis-
tance Agreement with the British, but Churchill had declined to give him
any guarantees about a second front, and so Molotov flew on to Washing-
ton, where he arrived on May 29 to talk to Roosevelt. As Churchill had
done, he stayed in the White House during his visit, and there was an awk-
ward moment at the very start when a White House butler unpacking his
luggage found a loaded pistol alongside a loaf of brown bread and a sausage.
Upon inquiring what he should do about the weapon, he was told to leave
it where it was and say nothing. The fact that Molotov had felt the need to
bring his own sustenance and means of self-defense speaks volumes about
his state of mind.
Molotov was a tidy, diminutive man whose round spectacles gave him an
owlish, academic aspect, and his prim and dour demeanor clashed jarringly
with that of the ebullient and gregarious Roosevelt. Moreover, their con-
versations were complicated by the fact that each of their statements had to
be laboriously translated. There were often lengthy delays as the two inter-
preters discussed the nuances of each comment between themselves before
offering a translation, and as a result, the talks proceeded haltingly. Roo-
sevelt asked Marshall, King, and Hopkins to be present at the first full meet-
ing on May 30 when he invited Molotov to "put the situation before them"
and "treat the subject in such detail as suited his convenience." Molotov got
right to the point. Hitler "was the master of all Europe, he said, and given
his strength, he "might throw in such reinforcements in manpower and
material that the Red Army might not be able to hold out." He suggested
"We've Got to Go to Europe and Fight"
= 61
that Hitler would try "to deal the Soviet Union a mighty crushing blow"
that summer. He therefore wanted to know: could the Western Allies
"undertake such offensive action as would draw off 40 German divisions" ?25
Roosevelt responded that the United States considered it an "obligation
to help the Soviets," but its efforts were severely constrained by the limits of
"ocean transport." Molotov waved off that concern by asserting that "the
difficulties ...would not be any less in 1943." "If you postpone your deci-
sion," he said, "you will eventually have to bear the brunt of the war" and
"next year will unquestionably be tougher than this one." He cut to the
chase: his government wished to know "in frank terms" what position the
Western Allies took "on the question of a second front." He had asked
Churchill the same question, but the prime minister had deferred to Roo-
sere: So now he asked the American president directly: could the United
States "undertake such offensive action"?
Roosevelt turned to Marshall. Were developments "clear enough so that
we could say to Mir. Stalin that we were preparing a second front"?
Marshall answered with a single syllable: "Yes."
Rosevelt then turned back to Molotov and told him he could "inform
Mr. Stalin that we expect the formation of a second front this year."
No doubt alarmed by the chasm of difference between "preparing" a sec-
ond front, which he had affirmed, and actually establishing one "this year,"
Marshall quickly added the far more conditional observation that "we were
making every effort to build up a situation in which the creation of a second
front would be possible." It was as far as he could go without openly contra-
dicting the president. 26
The rest of Moloto's visit passed more prosaically. Roosevelt raised
ohe issues, including Finland, which the Russians had invaded in 1939,
and the postwar management of the liberated territories, though at least
trice he reiterated the American determination to "set up a second front in
1942' Roosevelt asked Molotov if the Soviets would accept a cutback on
bir promised. end-Lease shipments in order to free up more shipping for
that second front. At that, Molotov bristled. Demonstrating his instinctive
distrust, he asked what would happen if Russia agreed to the cutbacks
and no second front materialized. Roosevelt sought to reassure him, but
