206 = NEPTUNE
Slapton Sands. The beach assault took place on time and according to plan.
The Special Engineer Brigades cleared paths through the obstacles with
their bulldozers, tractors, and motorized road graders; the assault units
secured the beachhead and made a rapid advance inland; and the Navy
managed to keep the troops supplied, bringing some eighteen hundred
tons of supplies and ammunition ashore by nightfall?1
WHILE THE PRACTICE LANDINGS CONTINUED, others sought creative and
innovative ways to enhance Allied chances in the great invasion. The most
ambitious of these was a proposal to construct one or more artificial harbors
off the landing beaches. The origins of this project dated back to the summer
of 1943 when the COSSAC planners were discussing the seizure of Cher-
bourg. They had drawn up a schedule to get the first wave of Allied forces
ashore, but it was evident that without the use of Cherbourg's port facilities,
it would be difficult to expand the initial foothold. What if Cherbourg did not
fall in accordance with the Allied schedule? In the midst of that discussion,
British Commodore John Hughes-Hallet said, apparently in jest, "Well, all!
can say is, if we can't capture a port we must take one with us." There was
general laughter around the table, until someone said: Well, why not??
The initial idea was to sink some old ships off the landing beaches to
serve as a breakwater in case of unsettled weather. From the beginning, this
was both a British idea and a British program. At the Quebec conference,
advocates of the scheme set up a demonstration in a hotel bathroom. Admi-
rals and generals crowded into the loo to watch as Mountbatten's science
advisor, Professor J. D. Bernal, placed some small paper boats in one end of
a partially filled bathtub. An officer then swirled the water around in the
other end with a back brush. That caused the paper boats to bounce around,
and they soon swamped and sank. After replacing them with new paper
boats, Bernal then placed a barrier in the tub. (In one version of the story it
was a life vest, in another a loofah.) Again the officer vigorously swirled up
the water, but this time the barrier absorbed the wavelets, and the paper
boats were undisturbed. It was hardly a scientific experiment, but it carried
the day, and the plan to erect an artificial breakwater off the landing beaches
became part of the Neptune-Overlord plan that was adopted at Quebec?
Duck, Fox, Beaver, Tiger = 207
Over the ensuing months, however, this relatively modest proposal took
melife ofits own and morphed into a far more ambitious program. Spurred
on by Churchill, who was ever an enthusiast of innovative approaches to
war, it grew to include one or more artificial harbors with special off-
loading piers and causeways into the beach. Eisenhower had already sug-
gated that because tanks might bog down in the shingle of the invasion
beaches, it would be desirable to construct a causeway from the low-tide
mark to the top of the beach. Now British planners went beyond that to
propose the construction of causeways from pier heads well offshore all the
way into the beach itself.24
The overall project was given the name Mulberry. The breakwater was
called a "gooseberry, which was to be made up of derelict vessels dubbed
comcobs. Like some lab experiment gone horribly awry, the program
eventually grew out of all proportion to the original idea. The 149 Phoenix
cassons needed to construct artificial harbors alone consumed more than
bala million cubic yards of concrete, thirty thousand tons of iron reinforce-
ment bars, fteen million feet of steel tubing, and fifty miles of steel wire.?s
These enormous demands drew upon already scarce matériel and labor
resources and occupied shipways and building yards needed to maintain
and repair the landing craft and warships. Even if all the pieces of the
Mulberry program could be assembled in time —which was by no means
certain -there were not enough tugs to move them all into place. Instead
of cooling enthusiasm for the project, however, these discoveries triggered
a frenzied effort to find more resources. Stark warned King that unless
many more tugs could be made available, the project could not be com-
Pleted in time to meet the perceived need. 26
In the cultural legacy of the eventual Allied victory, the artificial harbors
oft he Normandy beaches have come to symbolize the ultimate triumph of
Anglo-American ingenuity and resourcefulness. Yet many of the opera-
tinal commanders both at the time and afterward were markedly re-
strained in their enthusiasm. After inspecting a site where the gigantic
Phoenix caisons were being fabricated, Ramsay decided they were "even
more formidable & abortion like than I anticipated." He thought it would
be the devil" to tow them into place, and wondered if they would make
