126
= NEPTUNE
astern that had a scoop on the bottom and a spout at the top. The high
plume of water it generated provided a visual guide to the officer of the
deck on the next ship in column.
Troop convoys sailed with an especially heavy escort, often consisting of
a U.S. Navy cruiser as the escort flagship, plus six to eight destroyers. By
1943, many troop convoys also included an escort aircraft carrier, a rela-
tively new type of vessel that was particularly effective against the U-boat
threat. Even so, the convoys executed a zigzag course, periodically changing
their heading all at once, a maneuver that inevitably produced temporary
confusion and disorder until the skippers managed to regain their assigned
positions in the convoy pattern. By now, the Allies had secured the upper
hand in the U-boat war, due in part to the construction of more than 260 new
American escort destroyers, as well as the highly secret (Ultra) decrypts of
German radio messages that allowed the code breakers to give convoys ad-
vance notice of where danger lurked. That made the crossings much safer, if
not necessarily more comfortable. In the whole of the war, though the Ger-
mans sank nearly twenty-eight hundred Allied ships, not one troopship
escorted by U.S. Navy ships was ever lost *
The troopships were crewed by civilians in the merchant marine. Only
the gun crews who manned the 3- or S-inch gun for use against submarines
and the 20 mm anti-aircraft guns were in the U.S. Navy. It was tough duty.
The soldiers had to endure only one crossing, but the ships crews remained
on board for the round trip, and then repeated the journey again and again.
Still, because the merchant sailors were paid more than either the soldiers
or the Navy men, there was some inevitable grousing and petty rivalry. The
Army ran the galley (kitchen) and the sick bay (hospital). For the soldiers,
this was the worst of all possible worlds: despite being consigned to Nep-
tune's element, they never enjoyed the rumored ambrosia of Navy chow
and had to make do with Army rations.
Food was a particular concern for those who sailed on British ships such
as the "Queens." Of course, the GIs complained about food as a matter of
* Late in 1944 a Belgian troopship, the Leopoldville, carrying American soldiers from
England to Cherbourg and escorted by Royal Navy warships, was sunk by the
Germans with the loss of 802 American soldiers.
Brits and Yanks = 127
habit, but on British ships they had more justification than usual. L
they were served two meals a day in six sittings to accommodate th
numbers. Even then, they had to eat standing up, for there was not er
100m for tables and chairs. Breakfast generally consisted of a bowl of s.
catmeal, sometimes with prunes in it. When it wasn't oatmeal, the
be served kippered herring or kidney stew. Such fare would have m
groans even ashore, but it was particularly discouraging at sea. As O.
asked rhetorically: "Can you imagine anything worse than kippered he
for breakfast after a rough night at sea?" Dinner was often stewed mu
and cabbage. It was edible, but endlessly repetitive. As a result, most o.
men who made the crossing lost weight, some as much as twenty to thi
pounds.
Men also wasted away due to seasickness. The slow convoys were esp
Gilly likely to induce mal de mer, for the slow speed made the troopshi
liable to heavy rolling, and the zigzag course only added to the sense of
stability. Not everyone suffered from seasickness, and those who w
immune sometimes made fun of those who suffered. But it was no jo.
Men who could get out to the open deck lined the rails shoulder to shoulder
and the up into the rolling and pitching sea. Those below deck threw up
into their helmets if they could get to them in time, or, as one recalled, "they
would hang over the side of their bunks and throw up onto everybody's
bunk below them." It was more than annoying; many suffered so horribly
theypayed for death. And some found it. On virtually every crossing, men
no could stand it no longer threw themselves over the side or shot them-
selves with their own rifles. This became common enough that when a sol-
dier became badly ill his carbine was taken away. At least one man died of
intenal hemorrhaging from dry heaving for five days.'
The only "entertainment" on board consisted of occasional lectures
about what to expect when they arrived, supplemented by a few pam-
phlets A movie, Welcome to Britain, narrated by Burgess Meredith, con-
ited of lessons in what not to do. It portrayed a loud, noisy, drunken
American soldier insulting British food and British valor, making fun of
Scotish kits, and, when invited into a British family's home, eating up its
entire rations for a month. A pamphlet carried a similar message. "Be
