192
= NEPTUNE
support for the landing. As early as January 21, Ramsay had provided
Eisenhower with specifics about the naval implications of a five-division
assault, and Ike had included those estimates in his request to the JCS.
Though the Joint Chiefs had agreed to postpone the assault and to accel-
erate LST production, they had not responded to the request for more
combatant ships.34
A factor complicating Eisenhower's request was that King and the US.
Navy were in the midst of choreographing a major offensive in the Pacific
that was scheduled to take place only a few days after the D-Day landings.
A massive American strike force of seven aircraft carriers, eight light carti-
ers, and seven fast battleships, plus scores of cruisers and destroyers as
wellas transports and landing ships— more than seven hundred ships
altogether —was scheduled to strike Saipan in the Marianas on June 15.
The Allies' ability to launch two major seaborne offensives on opposite
sides of the globe less than two weeks apart was testimony to the remark-
able productivity of American industry, but it was also evidence that the
Germany-first strategy had been all but abandoned.
One reason King and the Americans felt they could undertake the Saipan
offensive was that according to the original agreement set down at Quebec
and confirmed at Cairo, the escort and combat vessels for Neptune would
be provided primarily by the Royal Navy "with some augmentation from
the United States." Alas, with the expansion from three to five divisions on
five different beaches, and the creation of separate British and American
task forces, the warship requirements for Neptune now exceeded the Royal
Navy's resources. The First Sea Lord, Admiral Cunningham, was able to
add only the cruiser Sheffield, which had a bent propeller shaft, and the bat-
tleship Nelson, which was scheduled to go into the yards at Philadelphia in
May for modernization. In March, Ramsay sat down with his staff to work
out the numbers. After studying the escort and bombardment schedules,
he concluded that he needed a minimum of one additional battleship, seven
more cruisers, and fourteen destroyers. That raised his total warship
requirement to six battleships, twenty-five cruisers, and no fewer than
fifty-six destroyers. He acknowledged that this was "a huge force" and that
"the R.N. can't possibly meet this bill' Regardless of earlier agreements, he
SHAEF and ANCXF = 193
knew the additional ships would have to come from the United States Navy,
which in his view was "meet, right and proper 3s
Eisenhower backed him up. Indeed, if anything he raised the ante. "If the
decision is made to send U.S. naval vessels," he wrote to Marshall, "three or
four battleships" would be better than "a corresponding number of cruisers."
Te found the thought of those big 14-inch shells smashing into German
pillboxes and artillery positions "very comforting." Eisenhower's request
triggered a visit from King's deputy chief of staff, Rear Admiral Charles M.
Cooke Jr, called "Savvy" Cooke since his Naval Academy days in tribute to
his academic brilliance. Cooke met first with Kirk and his subordinates,
including Rear Admiral John Lesslie Hall Jr., who at this point served as
Kik's deputy and was in charge of training. Kirk had a reputation for straight
talk, but it was Hall who was blunt to the point of insubordination. He told
Cooke he did not understand "how in the world" King could deny adequate
gunfire support to so important an operation as Neptune. It was "ridicu-
lous, Hall asserted, to send squadron after squadron of destroyers across the
Allantic on convoy duty and not keep even one of them in British waters for
"the most important landing in the history of the United States. Cooke was
taken aback, and told Hall, "You have no right to talk that way." Hall was not
intimidated. "Who in God's world has a better right to talk that way than I
hare?' he asked truculently. In the end, Hall suffered no consequences for
his outburst, and King eventually ordered three older battleships, two more
crusers, and twenty more destroyers from the U.S. Navy to join the Nep-
tune force, bringing the total number of U.S. destroyers to thirty-four 36
At the same time, however, King also sent Rear Admiral Bernhard Bieri
to England with orders to join Ramsay's staff. Apparently King's view was
thatif Ramsay was going to have some U.S. Navy ships, he was also going to
harea U.S. Navy man on his staff. Ramsay bristled at that, since he assumed,
corectly, that he alone had the authority to appoint the members of his
staf. Even Eisenhower thought it presumptive, if not in fact offensive.
Betle Smith told Bieri that if Ramsay wanted to send him home, he was
within his rights. Instead, Ramsay accepted Bieri, though he also made sure
that he understood he worked for ANCXF and not for King. Ramsay put
Bierito work on a committee doing postwar planning.37
