YUL
278 = NEPTUNE
The fire was so intense on Omaha Beach that on some of the LCTs, the
soldiers balked at leaving the ship at all. Beach master Joel Smith watched
one LCT come ashore, and noted that the minute it dropped the ramp, "a
German machine gun or two opened up, and you could see the sand kick
up right in front of the boat." The soldiers could see it, too, and, as Smith
noted, "no one moved." The Navy ensign in command of the boat "stood up
and yelled" at the same moment that, for whatever reason, everything sud-
denly got quiet, so Smith clearly heard his plaintive entreaty: "For Christ's
sake, fellas, get out! I've got to go and get another load."16
It was not an isolated case. Don Irwin, commanding LCT-614, which
was carrying five jeeps, two bulldozers, and sixty-five men, approached the
beach under heavy fire. When the 614 grounded and Irwin dropped the
ramp, the first two soldiers who stepped forward were immediately shot
and had to be pulled back into the well of the boat. After that, the rest of the
soldiers simply refused to leave. During the pre-invasion briefing, Irwin had
been told that if the men hesitated to disembark, he was to compel them to
do so, "at gunpoint if necessary. But Irwin was unwilling to do that. Bullets
were "pinging and ricocheting off the ship" he recalled, and it was evident
to him as well as to them that walking out into that fire was a death sen-
tence. His own crewmen begged him to retract: "Skipper, let's get out of
here!" they pleaded. Irwin tried to comply, but the anchor needed to winch
the boat off the beach had snagged on something, and the LCT would not
budge. Irwin ordered all engines back full, then all ahead full, then back
again, but the 614 was well and truly stuck. For almost ninety minutes the
614 remained on the beach, fully loaded and under nearly constant fire, un-
able to move. Not until high tide, near ten o'clock, did it manage to retract.
When the crew of the 614 finally got the anchor up, they found that it was
hooked into a sunken Higgins boat."7
Other ICTs were stranded on the beach due to damage from mines or
gunfire or, like the 614, encumbered by wrecked and sunken vessels, jeeps,
and even tanks. One Mike boat attempting to retract found its propellers
had snagged on something in the water. Two men jumped over the side to
clear the obstruction, which turned out to be "the bottom half of a man
entangled in the screws" Even when there were no obstructions, withdrawal
D- Day: The Beaches
279
as not an easy matter. When LCT-612 was ready to retract, Ensign Horace
"Sip Shaw ordered a young sailor, whom he remembered only as "Helpy,"
to wind up on that winch and get us off the beach." The young sailor hung
his i rest on the exhaust pipe next to him to have more freedom of move-
ment, and engaged the lever to wind in the stern anchor. A German ma-
chine gun had the range, and a storm of bullets "just blew that life jacket to
a million pieces." More bullets flew all around the sailor, thudding into the
whelhouse of the LCT only inches away. Shaw was amazed. "He didn't bat
an eye, that guy," Shaw remembered. "He just plain wound up that winch,
got that anchor up, and got us off the beach."Is
NOT FAR BEHIND THE LCTS were the troop-carrying LCIs, each of
them packed with two hundred or more soldiers. Because the LCIs
werelightly armored, they had been assigned to later waves, when, pre-
sumably, the beach would be relatively secure. During the approach,
'Spray over the bow kept the men wiping their faces,"
and they could
see very little beyond "a smoky haze over the approaching land," as one
sailor recalled. When the beach finally became visible, the men began
to discern "shattered Higgins boats on the beach and men running to
take cover." Obviously, the beach was not secure at all. 19
The first LCI to land on Omaha Beach was LCI(L)-91, commanded by
Coast Guard Lieutenant (j.g.) Armend Vyn. As he approached the beach,
in any case it was "blocked by what appeared to be a sunken tank." Maneu-
vering around the tank and then though "a maze of stakes topped with teller
mines," he nudged his vessel aground at 7:40. Though there was still nearly
a hundred yards of water between the ship and the beach, he dropped the
twin ramps on either side of the bow so the soldiers could disembark. With
machine gun bullets smacking into the ship's bow and clanking against the
twin ladders, the soldiers were naturally reluctant to venture down the
ramps, and disembarkation was excruciatingly slow.?o
Because of that, and because of the swiftly rising tide, Vyn continuously
pushed forward with the engines "to keep grounded." Soon, however, it was
impossible to go further "without detonating mines on the stakes" on both
