210
= NEPTUNE
dispatched to tow it in. The tanks were so heavy, however, that even with all
three of the LCT's 225-horsepower engines running flat out, they could
hardly be moved. "We just had to wrestle with it and keep pulling," an LCT
skipper recalled, and eventually he got it close enough to the beach that a
bulldozer could tow it onto dry land. Sometimes they couldn't be saved.
During Exercise Fox, two of them swamped and went to the bottom. Long
after the war was over, one of them was salvaged, and it remains on Slapton
Sands today as a memorial. 31
Superficially similar but in fact quite different from the DD tanks were
the DUKWs, which were essentially amphibious trucks used to carry
cargo, especially ammunition, to the beach.* While the DD tanks were
land vehicles with water wings, the DUKWs (which everyone called
"ducks") were essentially boats with wheels, and therefore far more reli-
able a vessels and also more nimble ashore. Built by General Motors and
powered by Chevrolet engines, they weighed six and a half tons each and
could make five and a half knots afloat and fifty miles per hour ashore.
They had been used succesfully during the landings on Sicily and in laly
and were therefore less of a gimmick than most of Hobart's "Funnies"
Even so, with only about a foot of freeboard when fully loaded, they, too,
could take on water in rough seas and lose their marginal buoyancy??
IN LATE APRIL, Don Moon and "Lightning Joe" Collins prepared to con-
duct "Exercise Tiger" the last full scale rehearsal of Force U before the inva-
sion. The plan was for Moon's amphibians to put the bulk of Collins's VI!
Corps ashore at Slapton Sands, from which it would advance to "capture"
the town of Oakhampton, twenty-five miles inland. In order to duplicate as
closely as possible the actual Utah Beach landings, now only five weeks
away, the beach was prepared with two lines of steel tetrahedrons and
barbed wire; even live mines were put in place.33
* DUKW" was not an acronym. Instead, the letters indicated its model type. D indicated
that it had been built in 1942; U stood for "utility"; K meant that it had front-wheel
drive; and W indicated that it had two rear axles, Since the DUKs were considered
trucks that could float rather than boats with wheels, they were assigned to motor
transport and operated, for the most part, by African American drivers.
Duck, Fox, Beaver,
Tiger = 211
Moons force involved a mix of American landing craft and Roya,
waships. Such an arrangement was no longer novel or even notewe
though there were some awkward aspects to it. One was that in the E
Nary, the flag officers serving as Commander in Chief, Plymouth
Commander in Chief, Portsmouth had full authority over all vessels,
any nationality, when they were in port. Only when the ships cleared th
habor did command authority shift to the task force commanders. It
adition, Kirk was concerned that his zone of authority did not extend to
the French city of Cherbourg at the end of the Cotentin Peninsula, which
remained the responsibility of the C in C Plymouth. That worried him,
because it was from Cherbourg that any German surface units would
sotte to assail his right flank. Some weeks before, Kirk had sent his chief
ofstaff, Rear Admiral Arthur Struble, to ask Ramsay to change that. Stry
ble may have picked a bad day, for there was a palpable sense of annd
ance in Ramsay's reaction. Ramsay listened to Kirk's request to chan
the command boundaries, then blurted out: "You Yanks want everything
No, I won't do it. They're going to stay where they are." And they did.
These arrangements created a certain ambiguity about the Allied naval
command structure and a potential for confusion- even, as it proved,
catastrophe.34
Almost all of Moon's Force U took part in Exercise Tiger. That included
tventy-one LSTs, twenty-eight LCIL)s, and sixty-five LCTs, plus nearly a
hundred smaller vessels and the usual escort of warships. Moon and Col-
lins watched the exercise from Moon's flagship, the attack transport Bay-
fed Other interested viewers watched from shore. That audience included
much of the top brass at both SHAEF and ANCXF. Even Eisenhower
attended, bringing Tedder, Leigh-Mallory, and Omar Bradley with him
from London on a special train called "Bayonet." Kirk sent Moon a short
note to let him know that Eisenhower was coming, and like all naval mes-
sages, it contained what was called padding at the beginning and the end
of the message to confuse enemy code breakers. Such padding consisted
of nonsense phrases picked at random by the radioman from a thick
book: Ominously, the padding that was added to the end of Kirk's message
was: "No luck "35
