120 = NEPTUNE
his diary, "as he does not begin to understand a strategic problem." The un-
dercurrent of inter-Allied hostility was best personified by the American
chief of naval operations, Ernest King, who announced challengingly that he
would not authorize "a single additional warship" to another Mediterranean
adventure, and (according to the official minutes) employed some "very un-
diplomatic language" in the process. After so many contentious months, the
British and Americans simply did not fully trust each other. 38
A decisive element in resolving the dispute was the fact that the United
States was by now clearly emerging as the senior partner. It was the United
States that was producing the ships, the planes, the tanks, and, soon enough,
the manpower that would be used in the proposed operation, and this gave
the Americans incalculable leverage. It was also the key factor in deciding
who would become Supreme Allied Commander. Ever since Eisenhower
had been named to command Torch back in 1942, some Britons, Brooke
included, had expected that a British officer would command the eventual
cross-Channel operation. According to Brooke, Churchill had promised
him the command at least three times. Such an appointment had seemed
logical in 1942, perhaps even in early 1943, but by the late summer of that
year, the growing preponderance of American strength undermined such
an expectation. At Quebec, Churchill himself suggested to Roosevelt that
an American should be named to command the cross-Channel invasion.
Roosevelt was gratified, perhaps even relieved.
Churchill then broke the news to Brooke. Churchill wrote later that
Brooke "bore the great disappointment with soldierly dignity, but in fact it
was a terrible blow. Years later, Brooke wrote that as he listened to Churchill
deliver the news, he felt "swamped by a dark cloud of despair" Almost as
bad was the casual, matter-of-fact way Churchill did it. "Not for one
moment did he realize what this meant to me" Brooke wrote. "He offered
no sympathy, no regret.'39
Other issues got a hearing at Quebec as well. The CCS discussed the
Burma campaign, the role of China in the Pacific War, even Sumatra in the
Dutch East Indies. Indeed, Churchill adopted Sumatra as his new hobby-
horse, arguing that the Allies should seize airfields there in order to bomb
Singapore. Even Brooke recognized this as another peripheral diversion
Casablanca to COSSAC = 121
and sought to rein him in, with little success. Still nursing resentment of his
cavalier treatment, Brooke recorded in his diary that Churchill "behaved
like a spoilt child that wants a toy in a shop."40
There was an odd moment on August 19 when Mountbatten insisted on
demonstrating the practicality of his somewhat bizarre idea to use giant,
specially constituted slabs of ice as mobile aircraft platforms in the North
Atlantic. He arranged to have two blocks of ice brought in to the dining
100m of the Château Frontenac, which was being used as a conference
room. One of them was ordinary frozen water; the other was composed of
Spercent wood pulp, which yielded a frozen substance that Mountbatten
called "Pycrete. To demonstrate its resilience, he challenged the members
of the CCS to try to break it. Hap Arnold gave it a try, spitting on his hands
and swinging a heavy meat cleaver, though with no visible effect. Then,
drawing his pistol, Mountbatten announced that he would fire a bullet into
each frozen block to show how different they were. That announcement led
toasudden scraping of chairs as admirals and generals scrambled to get out
ofthe way. Mountbatten fired a bullet into the first block of ice, which shat-
tered spectacularly. Then he took aim at the block of Pycrete. The bullet
bounced off the hardened ice and ricocheted about the room, causing
three and four star admirals and generals to dive for the floor. Brooke and
General Sir Leslie Hollis actually collided, skull to skull, under the table.
Outside the room, junior staffers wondered if the Americans and British
had finally started shooting at each other.41
Command to that the final aarpement une anti limactic Churchill and
Roosevelt formally approved "the outline plan of General Morgan," and the
CCS endowed it with a name: Operation Overlord. The naval aspect of the
plan, including the sealift to England and the cross-Channel movement it-
self. was Oneration Neptune. Like many others. Morgan was struck by the
historical weight of the moment. As he put it later, "This campaign would
absorb the bulk of the resources of United States and the British Empire. If
they did not suffice, the future hardly bore thinking about.**2
