80 = NEPTUNE
operator heading for a beach at full speed was to throttle back as he
approached the shore. To do so, however, meant that the vessel might
ground on an offshore sandbar while still some distance from the beach.
The coxswains had to be trained to keep the throttle wide open as they
approached the shore in order to run the boat over any sandbars and up
onto the beach as far as possible. Even while the men or vehicles were being
discharged, the engine was held at full throttle to hold the boat in place.!3
Important as they were, the Higgins boats were not a complete solution
to the problem of assaulting a defended beach. As the battle for France had
demonstrated, World War II was a mechanized war where tanks were an
important component —arguably the key component-in any ground
campaign. And as the debacle at Dieppe had shown, getting tanks onto a
beach from ships offshore was particularly challenging. There were a lim-
ited number of LCMs (Mike boats), and in any case shuttling back and
forth to carry one or two tanks ashore at a time simply would not do. Some
way had to be found to land many tanks - scores of them, even hundreds of
them — all at once. Eventually this would be resolved by what was perhaps
the most important vessel of the war: the Landing Ship, Tank (LST). In the
fall of 1942, however, there was no such vessel in the U.S. Navy. And so,
once again, the Allies had to improvise. The Americans addressed the issue
by purchasing the Seatrain New Jersey, a commercial ship that had been
built to carry a hundred fully loaded railroad cars between New York and
Havana in effect, a kind of early container ship. Purchased only days be-
fore the Torch invasion armada left Norfolk, she was rechristened USS
Lakehurst (APM-1) and loaded with 250 Sherman tanks. That was certainly
enough armor to make an impact on the battlefield; the problem was that
the Lakehurst's V-shaped hull meant that she drew more than twenty-three
feet of water when fully loaded, and could not discharge her cargo over a
beach. None of those 250 tanks could come ashore until the Allies seized a
working seaport.!4
The British addressed the problem differently. They had been thinking
about the difficulty of unloading tanks across a defended beach much
longer than the Americans — since Dunkirk, in fact— and they had tried it
at Dieppe, though with less than resounding success. As a result, they had
The Mediterranean Tar Baby E
developed an early prototype of a tank landing ship. Like so much else, the
impetus for this vessel came from the fertile mind of Winston Churchill.
Early on, he advocated a ship that could carry sixty heavy tanks and steam
right up onto the beach to unload them through massive bow doors that
opened like a giant cupboard. Unable to build such vessels from the keel up
due to the scarcity of both steel and building ways, the British converted a
handful of existing flat-bottomed oil tankers originally designed to operate
in the shallow waters of Venezuela's Lake Maracaibo. As with the American
reliance on the Seatrain New Jersey, it was not a perfect solution. While
these ships drew only four feet of water at the bow, they drew fifteen feet at
the stern, and as a result, on any beach with a gradual incline, the ship's stern
was likely to touch bottom while the bow was still some twenty or thirty
fet from the shore. That required extending a very long and rather precar-
ious bow ramp to the beach. By the time of Torch, the British had one large
version of such a ship (called a "Winston"), and three smaller versions
called "Winettes"). * The Winettes could carry up to twenty of th
American-made Grant tanks, but their long bow ramps took thirte
minutes to deploy, which was not ideal when under fire.
Inaddition to the transports and the landing ships, each of the invasion
forces also required a warship escort, not only to ensure safe arrival at the
beach but also to provide naval gunfire support against targets asho
«grement, the U.S. Navy would escort the American invasion force a
the Atlantic from Norfolk to Morocco, and the Royal Navy would do
same for the invasion groups from Scotland to Algiers and Oran. Thi
" His notewothy that the Winston was designed to carry the Churchill tank, a circum-
since that underscores both the impact that the prime minister had on virtually every
«pet of Bitish weaponry as well as on planning and strategy, and his unembarrassed
vilignes to cept these tributes as appropriate. Though the official designation for
the Viets was LIST I), they were substantially different from the American-built
LSTs that were used at Normandy a year and a half later.
Tie were two versions of the thy year an ank: Those sent to Britain under Lend-
Let were dubed the "General Grant; those retained and used by the Americans
ne abed the "General Lee? Thus it couse be said that the British deployed a
"Yankee" tank while the Americans used a "rebel" tank. Both versions suffered from
the at thy cried a relatively small gun (37 mm) and were therefore no match
forthe German Mark IV tank, which had a 75 mm gun.
