108
= NEPTUNE
good beaches and nearby ports, but it was farther away, which meant that
Allied planes would have a shorter time over the beaches and landing craft
would have a longer turnaround, effectively doubling the number of vessels
needed. Then, too, the terrain behind the beaches at Normandy was carved
up by hedgerows in a landscape that was known locally as the bocage
country. That would make a breakout from the landing beaches more
difficult.
To choose between these alternatives, Morgan assigned teams of offi-
cers to make the best possible case for each site. They engaged in a kind
of parliamentary debate as each team argued its case and defended it
against verbal challenges. It was a useful way to bring out the strengths
and weaknesses of each site, though it also bred a spirit of competition
between the study groups as their passionate arguments transformed
them into genuine advocates rather than merely briefers. In the end,
Morgan concluded that despite the obvious geographical advantages
of the Pas de Calais, Normandy offered the best chance to spring a
surprise.?20
The second issue Morgan had to deal with was how many Allied divi-
sions would be needed. The coast of Normandy could accommodate only
so many men at a time, and that necessarily limited the initial landing to
only a few divisions. The more important question for the planners was
the total number of divisions needed to complete the conquest of occu-
pied France and drive on to Berlin. Back during the Arcadia conference,
Churchill had suggested that such a campaign would require forty divi-
sions (twenty British and twenty American); the Eisenhower-Marshall
Roundup plan had called for forty-eight divisions (eighteen British and
thirty American). In his plan, Morgan envisioned no fewer than one hun-
dred divisions (fifteen British and eighty-five American). Assuming a di-
vision strength of fifteen thousand men, Morgan's plan called for the
deployment of one and a half million men. It was stunningly ambitious.
In the entire war from Pearl Harbor to V-J Day, the United States man-
aged to create a total of only eighty-nine Army divisions, and Morgan's
preliminary plan called for the deployment of eighty-five of them in a
single operation. The monumental scale of his plan contributed to the
Casablanca to COSSAC = 109
perception by some, both inside and outside Norfolk House, that Morgan
and his team were not serious.*
Indeed, that perception —that Morgan and his COSSAC team were
pat of the disinformation campaign rather than a legitimate planning
group- contributed to Morgan's most intractable problem, which was
that many in the British military bureaucracy did not take him or his
command seriously. By now detailed planning was well under way for
Husky the invasion of Sicily, which was set for July. After that, who knew:
maybe Sardinia, Greece, Italy, even the Dodecanese Islands had been
mentioned. By contrast, Morgan's project seemed both distant and un-
cetain, another time-consuming exercise, perhaps even (as Morgan him-
soften assumed) a hoax. Such doubts bred what Morgan later called a
corosive and potentially explosive" mood at Norfolk House. Despite
that there was no alternative except to work as hard as they could what-
erer the final result of their labors.?1
EISENHOWER'S LONG-DELAYED VICTORY in Tunisia prompted yet an-
other round of high-level talks about what to do after the presumed
success of Husky. In mid-May, Churchill and the British chiefs of staff
Favagain to Washington for another conference, this one code-named Tri-
CalL ta Churchil who led off and by asking the key question: "TORCH
ins over, HUSKY was near, what should come next?" Of course Churchill
ere asked a question unless he already had the answer ready, and he
quickly supplied it: "To get Italy out of the war by whatever means might be
Alt every top-level conference so far, the British had come better pre-
pered than the Americans, arriving with both elaborate arguments and de-
caled as aready in hand, and inevitably those plans had become the
The United States felded a total of 94 divisions during the wat, including Marine
Cops disions in the Pacific. For purposes of comparison, Nazi Germany fielded 37S
trions ad the Soviet Union 491. Thoush German and Russian divisions were sig-
icaly maller than a full-strength U.S. Army division, especially by 1944, the
onell rel American mobirengon was far less than that of either its British and
Russia allies or its European foe.
