YUL
276 = NEPTUNE
result of these and other incidents, of the twenty-five boats employed in the
first wave, only three remained available for subsequent ones.!
THE SECOND AND THIRD WAVES heading for Omaha Beach were only
minutes behind the first. In addition to the Higgins boats, these included a
large number of the bigger and stouter LCTs. As the men on board them got
close enough to peer through the smoke to see what was happening ashore,
they were horrified. "For Christ's sake, they're pinned down, a soldier on
one LCT called out to no one in particular. Of more immediate concern to
the boat drivers was the fact that there was almost no place for them to go.
The few gaps between the obstacles created by the NCDU teams were
clogged with sunken tanks and wrecked and damaged Higgins boats, as well
as other, more grisly impediments. Ensign Karl Everitt, driving his LCT
toward the beach, felt compelled to throttle down to avoid running over the
many bodies floating in the water. He did not want "to cut them up with my
screws," so he stationed men in the bow with boathooks to push the bodies
out of the way. Coxswain George Poe, driving a Higgins boat, also saw that
"the water was full of men, some dead," but he did not slow down, fearing
that if he did, his boat would not be able to clear the sand bar.?
The congestion along the beachfront and the artillery fire from the bluffs
played havoc with the prescribed formations of the approaching landing
craft. Guide ships had escorted them to the departure line. After that, the
beach masters were supposed to direct them to appropriate landing sites.
But the beach masters those who were still alive - were no more in con-
trol of the situation than anyone else. Coxswains and LCT captains maneu-
vered back and forth off the shoreline, often getting in one another's way as
they searched desperately for an open section of beach. The result was that,
as Hall put it in his subsequent report, "all semblance of wave organization
was lost." More prosaically, a sailor on one of the landing craft recalled that
"we ran into one another like little Dodgem cars." 13
Ensign Bill O'Neill, executive officer of L.CT-S44, lay prone atop the
wheelhouse as his ship approached Omaha Beach as part of the second wave
at about 6:45. He was watching the chaos ashore when he spotted a beach
master signaling frantically. O Neill stood up to give him the go-ahead signal,
D- Day: The Beaches = 277
the eter then read the ensuing message, which was: "Stay low. Keep your
head down." Muttering furiously at such useless advice, O'Neill flattened
himself back onto the deck plates atop the wheelhouse. As he scanned the
shore, however, he saw that there were no openings— only mined obstacles
and wrecked landing craft. His skipper was just a few feet away, standing on
the lader down into the wheelhouse where he could both see and give helm
orders. O'Neill looked over at him and, disregarding the niceties of rank in
the excitement of the moment, said, "What the hell are you doing here?
Vilget us all killed!" He suggested that they try further off to the right,
and the skipper ordered an abrupt turn to starboard. The 544 cruised west-
ward along the beachfront for more than a mile before finding a likely gap in
the obstructions and turning for shore."*
Other L.CTs did the same. One of them, LCT-305, made several attempts
to land. During the first, she was raked by machine gun fire that severely
wounded her commanding officer; during the second, the Army captain in
command of the embarked tanks declared the site too dangerous. On her
third try, with her executive officer now in command, she nudged up onto
the each just to the right of the 544. As she did so, she struck a mine that
broke her in half, and at almost the same moment, two German shells hit
her, one forward and one aft, smashing up what was left of her hull. On the
other side of the 544, LCT-25 also struck a mine that flooded her engine
room, and soon afterward she was hit by a phosphorus shell, after which the
whole ship "erupted in flames. That caused the onboard ammunition to
cook off, and within minutes the LCT-25, too, was a total wreck.'s
Amazingly, with all this going on around her, the 544 was able to land
her cargo, which consisted of a bulldozer leading half a dozen jeeps all tied
together like a child's pull toy. The bulldozer clawed its way ashore, drag-
ging the mostly submerged jeeps. But of course they were nowhere near
their assigned beach and completely separated from the rest of their unit.
Despite orders to retract at once, the crew of the 544 stayed long enough to
gather up some of the wounded. With the sailors at the 20 mm guns pro-
viding what cover they could, members of the crew ran out onto the sand to
drag wounded men back aboard, and only then did the 544 successfully
retract.
