226 = NEPTUNE
England and Scotland, some 176,000 men, more than 20,000 vehicles, and
uncounted tons of equipment was embarked into thousands of transports
and landing craft. Harried junior officers bearing clipboards sought to
ensure that every soldier, vehicle, and crate was brought to the correct site,
placed on the proper vessel, and stowed in the necessary order?
Of course, the Allies had been preparing for this moment for more than
a year, and part of that preparation involved the construction of more than
two hundred special embarkation platforms, known as "hards": broad,
paved ramps that sloped down from the roadway into and well below the
waterline, giant cousins to the small launching ramps used by pleasure
boaters today. To construct these hards, the area was first graded into a
gently sloping beach, then covered with thousands of pre-formed rein-
forced concrete rectangles weighing 350 pounds apiece. Laid out across the
loading area, these giant concrete tiles formed a pattern that resembled a
segmented Hershey bar, which led some to refer to them as "chocolate."
The hards were more useful than conventional piers for loading the landing
ships because several I.STs and L CTS at a time could nose up to them and
drop their ramps right onto the chocolate allowing the tanks, trucks, and
jeeps to make their way down the concrete slope and up the ships ramp
into the hold.8
Of the five invasion forces, the 865 ships of Moon's Force U had the
longest voyage, from the West Country of England to the assembly area
south of the Isle of Wight, so they would be the first of the five groups to
leave port. The ships began to embark the men and equipment of Major
General Raymond "Tubby" Barton's 4th Infantry Division at ports along
the south coast of Devon from Salcombe to Torquay on Thursday, June 1.
The character of a ship's cargo varied depending on its specific assignment,
but a typical IST might carry twenty tanks, twenty trucks, a dozen jeeps
with trailers or artillery pieces, plus some 350 officers and men who were
assigned to vertical racks of bunks running along the port side of the ship.
Officially, their scheduled departure time was 8:00 p.m. on Saturday,
June 3, though some vessels began to depart as early as noon that day.
Further up the Channel at Weymouth and Portand, the amphibs of
Hall's Force O also began to load up, though they were not scheduled to
"A Hum Throughout the Country" =
227
depart until 7:00 a.m. on June 4. Hall's fifteen large transport ships, two
dozen LSTs, thirty-seven LCI(L)s, and more than 140 LCTs took on board
men of Major General Clarence Huebner's 1st Infantry Division, plus two
Regimental Combat Teams (the 115th and 116th) of the 29th Division. In
some cases the loading process reunited Navy crews with infantry units
they had carried during one or more of the many rehearsals. A sailor on
IST 498 at Weymouth peering over the bow to watch the soldiers march-
ting up the ramp noticed the patches on the men's shoulders that marked
them as belonging to the 29th Division. It was somehow comforting to him
that they were boarding old comrades, though he also felt that it was differ-
ent this time. "Everybody knew what was up," he insisted.'
Still further east, at Southampton, Portsmouth, and Newhaven, British
ISTs boarded the Tommies of the British Second Army, for the invasions
ofSword and Gold Beaches, and men of the Canadian Third Division, who
would assail Juno Beach. The British soldiers were outfitted with studded
boots, and many of them found walking on the steel decks of an LCT or
IST a precarious undertaking. The shiploads varied only slightly from the
American LSTs. LST-S43, for example, part of Force J, for Juno Beach, took
onsity six vehicles that included both light and heavy trucks, two artillery
pieces, and twelve tracked armored vehicles known as Bren gun carriers,
plus 354 Canadian officers and men. Other LSTs swallowed up some of the
big 40-ton Churchill tanks that had steel treads which scarred up the decks
or the ICT like they were sand papered. °
At all of these sites, vessels had to be combat loaded, which meant not
only that the items that would be needed first had to be loaded last, but also
that the tanks and trucks had to be backed in, reversing gingerly up the
ramps so that they would all be facing forward when the LSTs reached the
target beaches. Then each vehicle had to be carefully positioned to ensure
that everything fit and that the weight distribution would leave the ship on
an even keel. Once that was done, crewmen crawled under the vehicles to
secure them to the deck with chains so that they did not careen about and
smash into one another during the expected rough crossing.
The whole process of loading, positioning, and securing the vehicles,
plus boardino the men and assioning them to their respective billets, took
