YUL
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
S IN EVERY PROJECT, I am indebted to the many people who went out of
their way to help me find resource materials, provide information and insight,
and make valuable suggestions about the remarkable story of Operation Neptune and
the Allied invasion of Europe.
At the National Archives (Archives II) in College Park, Maryland, Nathaniel Patch
directed me to U.S. Navy and Allied sources; Timothy Mulligan brought my attention to
German sources I would otherwise have overlooked, and even translated them for me.
John Hodges of the Naval History and Heritage Command (NHHC) in the Washington
Navy Yard was helpful with both sources and logistics during my visits, and managed to
dig up Rear Admiral Morton Deyo's description of the naval bombardment of Utah
Beach out of Samuel Eliot Morison's old files. Evelyn Cherpak, archivist at the U.S. Naval
War College and editor of Hewitt's memoirs, assisted me with the Kent Hewitt Papers.
Both Jennifer Bryan and David D'Onofrio were unflaggingly cheerful and welcoming
during my visits to the Special Collections Room of Nimitz Library at the U.S. Naval
Academy. The late Stephen Ambrose spent years collecting hundreds of oral histories of
D-Day veterans, which he then had transcribed and which are now deposited with the
Eisenhower Center (which he created) at the National World War Il Museum in New
Orleans. All students of World War II are indebted to Ambrose, and I am grateful as well
to Lindsey Barnes, the senior archivist and digital projects manager at the museum, who
was gracious and generous when my wife, Marylou, and I conducted research there.
Similarly, I am grateful to Reagan Grau, archivist at the National Museum of the Pacific
War in Fredericksburg, Texas, who made available not only the museum's oral history
collection but also the extensive and valuable papers of the LCI Association, which are
archived there. Janis Jorgenson at the U.S. Naval Institute was once again an invaluable
aid in helping me find and identify suitable photographs, as was Richard Porter, the mu-
seum director at the Britannia Royal Naval College in Dartmouth, England.
I am grateful to Otis Bingemer, who served on LST-325 at Normandy and who gave
me a tour of his former ship at Evansville, Indiana. Of the more than a thousand LSTs
built during the war, LST-32S is the only one still in operational condition. Sold to the
Greek navy after the war, the 325 was decommissioned by the Greeks in the 1970s.
A handful of U.S. Navy World War II veterans, by then in their seventies, determined that
