228 = NEPTUNE
about two and a half hours for each ship. When that was completed, a two-
man team of officers, one each from the Army and Navy, certified that the
load was both complete and accurate. The LST captain signaled his readi-
ness to the port captain by flag hoist, and upon receiving clearance, he or-
dered the ramp raised and the bow doors closed, then backed the packed
vessel out into the harbor, where it dropped anchor at a previously assigned
position. As soon as it cleared the hard, another LST came in to take its
place. Once a loaded ship was at anchor, no further communication with
the shore was permitted. "1
By June 2, it had become evident to all that this was no mere rehearsal.
Not only was it simply too large for an exercise, but in addition almost eve-
ryone noted that during all the previous exercises the weather had been at
least tolerable. More than once when the Channel was rough, a rehearsa!
had been postponed until the weather moderated. Now, despite whitecaps
in the Channel and a strong gusting wind, the work never paused. On the
other hand, the weather was so bad that some wondered if a crossing was
even possible. The fully laden LSTs, riding low in the water, rolled dizzy-
ingly even in the protected harbors, and many of the embarked soldiers
were already puking over the side. On board LST-S30, Armond Barth was
sure "we weren't going anywhere.""12
Loading the smaller LCTs took less time simply because they could hold
only four or five vehicles each, though the process was prolonged because
there were so many of them — 142 of them in Moon's force alone. Like the
bigger ISTS, they were packed to the thwarts. George Hackett watched
with growing alarm as his vessel settled lower and lower in the water while
the Sherman tanks and "deuce and a half" Dodge trucks backed slowly into
the well deck. By the time the skipper pulled up the ramp, the vessel rode so
low in the water that Hackett wondered if it might not be swamped by the
four-foot Channel swells.I3
Unlike the big LSTs, which would remain ofshore during the initial
assault, the L.CTs would actually run right up onto the beaches just behind
the first wave, and given the uncertainties of amphibious landings, it was
not impossible that they could be stranded there. Because of that, the LCT
crewmen were issued shoulder arms. though what they got ware Way
"A Hum Throughout the Country" = 229
Nar I-vintage. 30 caliber bolt-action rifles still packed in greasy cosmoline,
a box of ammunition, an eight-inch knife, and a helmet. The prospect of
having to do battle with the Wehrmacht with such weapons was sobering.
The LCT crewmen were also required to wear special chemically treated
overall that were supposed to protect them from a gas attack. Upon don-
ning them, many sailors wondered if poison gas might not be preferable.
The treated clothing smelled like rotten eggs, and the stench was so pow-
ful that some sailors gagged. "These clothes covered all of our bodies
from the neck down," a sailor recalled, "and they were hot as hell, itchy, and
the odor was unbearable." The treated material did not breathe at all, and
one sailor described it "like walking around in a steam bath all day and in a
suit of ice at night." Even the sailors' traditional white hats were dyed blue,
presumably to make them less visible at sea, though many of the sailors
resented having to sacrifice this particular tradition to some planner's
notion of security.!4
The LCT officers also wore the malodorous gas outfits. Their orders
instructed them to ensure that they had a full supply of "foul weather gear,
ran gear, combat boots, overshoes, gloves, [and] mittens." As a result,
they looked more like well-padded North Sea fishermen than naval off-
(ers- and smelled like them, too. The briefing officers on shore had
Impressed upon them that this gear could save their lives, but it was some-
what embarrassing during the subsequent crossing when a U.S. Navy
LCT passed a Royal Navy ship and the Americans saw that the British
had not bothered with any of this. With characteristic sangfroid, the
Royal Navy officers were wearing double-breasted service dress blue uni-
Corms with white officer's caps. A bit chagrinned, perhaps, many of the
Americans discarded their smelly gas suits as soon as they could. Once
the LCTs were loaded, they, too, backed away from the hards one by one
to anchor in the outer harbor, their open cargo holds covered by camou-
flage nets to make it more difficult for enemy aircraft to determine if they
were full or empty.!s
The huge 492-foot attack transport ships that could carry fifteen hun-
dred soldiers at a time were too bio to come into the hards and anchored
further out. To board them, soldiers with sixty-pound packs strapped to
