162
= NEPTUNE
The LST construction program also had to compete for manpower. With
millions of Americans in the Army, the labor pool for shipbuilding con-
sisted mainly of three groups: those who had been rated 4-F by their draft
boards, older workers, and women. Just as millions of young men were
turned into soldiers in a matter of weeks in Army boot camps, so, too, were
inexperienced and unskilled workers turned almost instantly into ship.
builders. Teenager Clendel Williams was rated 4-F by his draft board
because he was underweight (six feet one inch and 118 pounds), so he
sought a job at the Evansville, Indiana, shipyard. "The interviewer only
glanced at my application," he wrote later. "There was no physical, nor an
eye examination. One person took my picture and another one finger-
printed me. Within a few minutes I was handed a badge with my picture
and number 4214 on it." After attending welding school "for a few weeks,
he was certified as a "three position welder" and set to work building LSTs.
Women also joined the workforce in unprecedented numbers. Though this
aspect of what was, in effect, a social revolution was most evident in the
aviation industry, women also went to work in the nation's shipyards as
drafters, drivers, and welders. Indeed, the shipbuilding industry had its own
version of "Rosie the Riveter" in "Wendy the Welder." By the end of the
war, a full third of the ninety thousand workers at the Richmond, Califor-
nia, shipyard were women. 26
In most of the shipyards, the workers employed the task system. Teams
specialized in a particular function - cutting sheet metal, fabrication, elec-
trical, piping, or carpentry— and they completed all the work of that type
on one ship before moving on to the next ship on the next building way.
They labored in three shifts around the clock, earning fifty cents an hour,
which, after deducting $1.40 for "old age benefits" (the new Social Security
program), yielded $18.60 for a forty-hour week, though sixty-hour weeks
were common. Workers who left at the end of the day shift at 4:00 p.m.
jostled past hundreds of others coming in for the swing shift. At dusk, giant
floodlights on towering stanchions lit up the shipyards, and the work con-
tinued without a pause. At midnight, workers from the swing shift gave way
to those working the night shift, and so it went around the clock, seven days
a week. The welding machines were in use twenty-four hours a day, handed
"Some God-Dammed Things Called LSTs" = 163
offrim one shift to another. Yet due to the finite number of building ways,
the production of LSTs continued to lag behind anticipated need.27
One effort to deal with the labor shortage was Andrew Jackson Higgins's
idea to hire large numbers of underemployed black workers to build Lib-
ety ships. By local tradition, blacks were not admitted to skilled-labor jobs
in the South, including shipbuilding, because white workers simply refused
to work alongside them. As a result, thousands of able-bodied blacks
remained idle even as the demand for labor grew. Higgins's idea was to
build two separate shipways, one employing all white workers and the
other relying on only black workers. Segregated they might be, but at least
black workers would find lucrative employment that was otherwise una-
railable. Higgins planned to challenge the workers on each building way to
demonstrate their skill and work ethic by outproducing the other group.
anapproach that might have led either to healthy competition or a race riot.
any case, it never happened, for in making the switch from Liberty ships
and LSTs to escorts in 1942, the contracts Higgins had been promised were
among those that were cancelled.28
FOR THE NORMANDY LANDINGS, the COSSAC plan called for 250
Lal(L) personnel carriers, 900 LCTs, 480 Mike boats, more than 1,000
Higgins boats, and 230 LSTs. The construction of all of these except LSTs
proceeded apace. Smaller landing craft, such as the Higgins boats, did not
require building ways and could be contracted out to independent boat-
yads and metal fabricating firms, some of them hundreds of miles from
deep water. In the last six months of 1943, even as the construction of LSTs
laged more then fue thousand Higgins boats were delivered to the fleet
One event that did affect the production schedule of these smaller boats,
a well as the LSTs, occurred almost exactly halfway around the world on
November 20. 1942 On that date five thousand IS. Marines assaulted the
tiny island of Betio in Tarawa Atoll, the first step in what would become
knovn as the Central Pacific Drive, a campaign that would lead from Kwa-
lein to Saipan, Iwo Jima, and Okinawa. At Tarawa, however, the Higgins
boats got hung up on the offshore coral reefs despite their shallow draft.
That compelled many of the Marines to wade more than a quarter mile to
