YUL
286
= NEPTUNE
such a momentous decision would utterly shatter the carefully scripted inva-
sion plan, and in any case it would be difficult to do, since successive waves
of landing craft, only ten or fifteen minutes apart, were already heading
shoreward, and recalling them now would only introduce more chaos. Nev-
ertheless, Kirk alerted Moon that some of the Omaha force might be shifted
over to Utah, and Moon told his senior beach officer, Captain James Arnold,
that "the show on Omaha didn't go quite according to plan" and that they
might have to "take on a little extra burden." To prepare for that, Moon ordered
the LSTs of Force U to move to within four miles of the beach.?
On Jimmy Hall's flagship, USS Ancon, a mile or two inshore of the
Augusta, both Gerow and Huebner were finding their enforced idleness all
but intolerable. The few reports from Omaha Beach came in with agonizing
slowness. This was largely due to the fact that three-quarters of the radios
belonging to the landing teams had been smashed or water-soaked in the
initial landings.
Then, too, the radiomen themselves were either dead,
wounded, or too busy trying to stay alive to submit regular reports. Des-
perate for information, Gerow sent his assistant chief of staff, Colone! Ben-
jamin Talley, in a DUKW to investigate. Talley maneuvered back and forth
across the beachfront, closing to only five hundred yards off the beach, and
reported to Gerow that things were very bad indeed. He confirmed that the
men ashore were pinned down by heavy fire from the high ground, and that
the beachfront was so congested that the LCTs were milling around like "a
herd of cattle "33
Gerow went up onto the bridge of the Ancon and confronted Hall in
what the latter described as "a state of alarm. Wasn't there something more
that could be done? Gerow asked. Hall, the big, lantern-jawed, three-sport
athlete who had felt no qualms in lecturing both Savvy Cooke and Freddy
Guingand, was unperturbed, or at least he proiected a demeanor of uncon-
cern. He explained that the attack was still developing, and even if it had
temporarily stalled, the way to fix it was simply to continue with the land-
ings. He assured Gerow that it was all going to work out. Perhaps in an
effort to get him off the bridge, Hall told Gerow that he could probably
get a better understanding of what was happening ashore by reading the
incoming message traffic down in the operations room.34
D-Day: The Beaches = 287
Nary Captain Lorenzo Sabin, who witnessed their conversation, offered
the unsolicited suggestion that perhaps Hall could employ the two re-
mining rocket firing LCTs that had been held in reserve. Gerow seized on
tatidea and urged Hall to do it, but Hall shook his head. The slapdash
iming protocols on the LCT(R)s would put too many Allied soldiers at
rist, he said, and was unlikely to do much good anyway. The way to change
the tide of battle, Hall repeated, was to continue landing more men and
equipment. He assured both Gerow and Sabin that "the enemy was not
guing to [be able to stop the landings" and that eventual victory was "only
amatter oftime." Sabin thought that "everyone except Admiral Hall seemed
to be tense, worried, and disturbed." For his part, Gerow could not simply
wait and do nothing, and he decided to commit the 115th Combat Infantry
Team ahead of schedule. While that contributed to the growing American
pover ashore, it also added to the confusion and congestion on the beach. 35
General Huebner, the strict, no-nonsense commander of the ist Divi-
son, which was known as the "Big Red One," was also on board the Ancon,
and he was worried, too; after all, those were his men being slaughtered on
the beach. Huebner was busy doing what Hall had suggested to Gerow:
reading the battle reports in the operations room as they came off the tele-
type machine on thin strips of paper, much like the tape from a stock ticker.
Huebner spread the strips of paper out on a table and read them eagerly. By
eight-thirty he concluded that the situation on the Omaha beaches was
dire, and he sent his chief of staff, Colonel Stanhope Mason, up to the
bridge to express his concern. Once again, Hall adopted a patient, confi-
dent demeanor. Mason listened, but he was not the one who needed con-
vincing, and he urged Hall to go down and talk to Huebner. Perhaps in an
effort to communicate the seriousness of the moment, Mason hinted that
Huebner was considering a withdrawal.
Hall had no intention of leaving the bridge, nor did he have any notion
of sanctioning a withdrawal. He reminded Mason that until Huebner
established his headquarters ashore, the general did not have the author-
ity to consider a withdrawal, much less order one. Only the naval com-
mander could do that, and Hall had no intention of doing so. "I don't
want to leave the bridge because there's so much that I can see and do up
