20
= NEPTUNE
to sea. After dark, however, the Potomac rendezvoused with U.S. Navy war-
ships off Martha's Vineyard, and the president and his entourage transferred
to the heavy cruiser Augusta, which then turned toward Canadian waters.
The next day, as the presidential party steamed northward, reporters on
chartered boats off Martha's Vineyard watched through binoculars as a man
wearing an old sweater, sporting pince-nez glasses, and with a cigarette
holder clamped firmly in his teeth sat at the stern of the Potomac with a fish-
ing pole in his hands. The reporters sent daily bulletins ashore announcing
that the president was enjoying his vacation. Even the Secret Service was
fooled.28
The elaborate charade was designed to mislead both the Germans and
the opposition press, for Roosevelt was on his way to meet the British
prime minister in Placentia Bay, on the south coast of Newfoundland near
Argentia. The meeting was Roosevelt's idea. It was a measure of how much
the Anglo-American relationship had evolved since the ABC staff talks
back in March. Whereas on that occasion he had remained aloof, he was
now willing, even eager, to meet personally with Churchill, who more than
anyone else personified Britain's resistance to Hitler's war machine. In addi-
tion, Roosevelt was the kind of face-to-face politician who was confident in
his ability to affect events by the force of his personality. He wanted to take
the measure of Churchill, to ensure that this "former naval person" under-
stood American policy, and he also looked forward to hearing Churchill
provide one of his already famous analytical disquisitions on the course of
the war to date.
On August 9, the Augusta and the rest of the American squadron, which
included a battleship and no fewer than seventeen destroyers, was anchored
in Placentia Bay in a dense fog. Around noon, an enormous gray shape
materialized out of the mist as the newest King George V-class Royal Navy
battleship Prince of Wales cruised slowly into the anchorage. Displacing
44,000 tons and bristling with ten 14-inch guns, the Prince of Wales was the
newest and largest of the Royal Navy's warships, and she still bore the scars
of her recent successful fight with German battleship Bismarck. The fact
that Churchill had chosen her to carry him to the rendezvous with Roo-
sevelt was a measure of just how crucial he believed this meeting was??
Germany First = 21
Roosevelt sent his naval aide, Captain John R. Beardall, over to invite
Churchill and his staff to dine on board the Augusta that night. It was not to
be a formal state dinner, the president told Beardall, just an informal gath-
ering where he and the prime minister could talk comfortably. Churchill
accepted, of course, and the evening was a great success. The two heads of
government got on splendidly, and Churchill did not disappoint those who
had anticipated a detailed and vivid tour d'horizon of the war.
The next morning, Roosevelt returned the visit by attending church
services on board the Prince of Wales. Symbolically, at least, this was the
high point of the conference. The officers and men of the two naval services
sat together on the broad deck of the Prince of Wales and sang familiar
hymns in a common language. It was Roosevelt himself who urged the in-
clusion of the Navy hymn "Eternal Father" with its reference to "those in
peril on the sea." Afterward, Roosevelt toured the big new battleship, which
was fated to be sunk only four months later in the South China Sea by Japa-
nese bombers. Both men reveled in the tour, with Churchill acting the role
of guide, showing off the crown jewel of the Royal Navy—his Royal Navy—
while Roosevelt, an apt and eager student of all things naval, did not have to
feign interest. A witness recalled that both the president and prime minister
had "a fine time."30
The formal meetings themselves were mostly anticlimactic. Churchill
urged Roosevelt to issue a hard-line ultimatum to the Japanese. He had his
own purposes in doing so, of course, but Roosevelt demurred. Far from
seeking a "back door to war," Roosevelt wanted to keep the Japanese at
arms length until Hitler could be dealt with. He told Churchill that rather
than back the Japanese into a corner, he wanted to give them a "face saving
out. In the end, Roosevelt sent Japan a somewhat ambiguous note pro-
claiming only that "further steps in pursuance... of military domination"
would compel the United States to safeguard its "legitimate rights and
interests. "31
During the lengthy Atlantic crossing to Newfoundland, Churchill had
prepared a position paper on how the war should be run if and when the
United States got into it. His paper envisioned a war characterized by
blockade, bombing, subversion, and propaganda. By isolating Germany
