106
= NEPTUNE
problems with seriousness of purpose, an organized mind, a professional
commitment, and a wry sense of humor.!6
With Eisenhower in Africa, Morgan took over the available space in Nor-
folk House and began to assemble a staff. The group had to have a name—
an identity-and it was Morgan who came up with COSSAC, an acronym
for "Chief of Staff, Supreme Allied Commander, though no one knew yet
who that commander would be. Not only was it logical, but it served a sec-
ondary purpose of contributing to the disinformation campaign, since
many individuals outside Norfolk House assumed that the unit must have
something to do with the Russians, who, after all, were the ones who had
Cossacks.
Morgan and his nascent COSSAC team took up their multiple and even
contradictory assignments in April and May. As part of the disinformation
campaign, they sought to encourage the German assumption that the Allies
might assault either Norway or the Pas de Calais in France that summer.
For Norway, they invented a new and entirely fictional force - the British
Fourth Army-which was supposedly headquartered at Edinburgh, and
they coordinated the release of hundreds of coded radio signals that im-
plied both its existence and its purpose. It was subtly done and may have
helped convince Hitler to keep a substantial force in Norway to defend it
from this phantom army. For France, the COSSAC team managed a pro-
gram of controlled leakage" to convince the Germans that yet another fic-
tional army — the British Sixth Army — was encamped around Luton, north
of London, and preparing to attack Calais. It was only partially successful.
To be sure, the disinformation campaign kept the Germans guessing, but in
December 1943, Vice Admiral Fredrich Rieve of the Kriegmarine specu-
lated in his official war diary that the Seine River estuary as well as the
Cotentin Peninsula" constituted the most likely target for Allied "amphib-
ious assaults on the greatest scale." 17
In addition to these impostures, COSSAC also developed a plan to move
quickly onto the continent in case of a German collapse. Though such a
thing seemed remote in the spring of 1943, Britons remembered how
swiftly the Germans had fallen apart in 1918, and Churchill in particular
never quite abandoned the notion that another such collapse might
Casablanca to COSSAC = 107
occur at any moment. If it did, and if the western Allies were unready to
renter the Continent, Stalin's armies might march through Berlin and all
the vay to the Channel—a prospect nearly as appalling as leaving Hitler in
charge. So Morgan's team assembled a plan for a kind of updated Sledge-
hammer that they dubbed Roundhammer—a conflation of Roundup and
Sledgehammer. 18
twas the third assignment —the creation and development of a plan for
a full-cale invasion of continental Europe in the spring of 1944—that
dominated the COSSAC agenda. It is unclear how seriously Churchill in-
tended this charge to be. Neither he nor the Combined Chiefs gave Morgan
ay specific guidance; Morgan did not even have access to Eisenhower's
142 plan for Roundup. For all practical purposes, he had to start from
scratch with no preconditions or limitations. Professional that he was, he
simply got on with it.
He began by identifying an appropriate landing beach for the assault and
then calculating the number of divisions needed to secure it. For this he
neded detailed maps, and the CCS had not supplied him with these, ei-
ther. Morgan had to send his aide to scrounge around the London book-
shops for Michelin travel maps. These were then cut up and taped together
onto the wall at Norfolk House. The resulting montage, Morgan later
dimed, trigered an epiphany. By spreading out the coastal maps from
Spin to Holland, he saw that instead of being an island on the periphery of
Europe, England was really at the enter of a giant arc of possible targets.
Netheless, fer much study, Morgan and his team narrowed their focus
to two its on the French north coast: the Pas de Calais, where the English
Chanel narroved to only nineteen miles, and the coast of Normandy east
of the Cotentin peninsula, an area known as Calvados and famous for its
potent apple brandy,.19
The advantage of the Pas de Calais was that the beachhead could be cov-
ted by land-based air from Allied bases in East Anglia, and the short dis-
kare between Dover and Calais meant a quick turnaround for scarce Allied
kanding raft. The downside was that these very factors made it the obvious
kit a cause of that, the Pas de Calais was the most heavily defended
stretch of coastline in German-occupied France. As for Normandy, it had
