YUL
340 = NEPTUNE
who had commanded the bombardment group off Utah Beach on D-Day
and who bore a passing resemblance to John Wayne. Deyo divided his task
force into two groups. Group One, under his direct supervision, included
many of the same ships he had commanded on D-Day: the battleship
Nevada, the heavy cruisers Tuscaloosa and Quincy, and the British light
cruisers Enterprise and Glasgow, plus six destroyers. Group Two, with Rear
Admiral Carleton F. Bryant in command, consisted of the battleships Texas
and Arkansas plus five destroyers. Their overall mission was not to capture
Cherbourg or even to smash it up. After all, the whole point of the cam-
paign was to seize the port facilities intact—or as intact as possible. Rather,
their job was to support Collins's ground attack by eliminating some of the
hardened defensive positions and suppressing the enemy's heavy guns.
To do that, Deyo proposed first to attack the German coastal batteries
that protected the seaward approaches to the harbor. Allied intelligence
reported that these consisted of twenty concrete casemates housing guns
that ranged in size from 155 mm (6 inches) all the way up to 280 mm
(11 inches), and for the security of his command, these would have to be
suppressed before the ships could turn their attention to the landward
defenses. The Germans had only four of the big 280 mm guns, all of them
in Battery Hamburg behind Cap Lévi, about six miles east of the city, and
they would be the responsibility of Bryant's two battleships. Many of the
smaller G-inch guns were clustered around the village of Querqueville,
three miles west of the city, and Deyo expected that his cruisers should be
able to take care of them. Once the coastal batteries were silenced, the task
force would take positions off the city to respond to call-fire requests from
Collin's men ashore. Deyo planned to stay there for at least three hours,
from noon to 3:00 p.m. on June 25.'
At almost the last moment, however, Bradley and Collins decided that
they did not want Deyo's ships to shoot at all except in response to specific
requests from spotters ashore, and even then, they were not to fire more
than two thousand yards inland. Recalling the friendly-fire casualties dur-
ing the air assault three days before, Collins wanted to ensure that none of
those big 12- and 14-inch shells came crashing into his own front lines,
which were now less than a mile from the city. As Deyo put it, employing
THE NAVAL BOMBARDMENT OF CHERBOURG,
JUNE 25, 1944
English Channel
FIRE SUPPORT AREA #1
Track of USS NEVADA,
USS TUSCALOOSA,
plus supports
Track of
USS ARKANSAS,
USS TEXAS,
plus supports
[FIRE SUPPORT AREA #3
USS PLUNKETT,
* HOBSON,
making smoke
Ile de Pellea
Hamburg
German
Us 9th DIV
Cherbourg
US 79th DIV
us 4th DIV
