= NEPTUNE
soldiers could not live on British rations." From the start, the GIs were allo-
cated more meat (12 ounces per day) than British soldiers (8 ounces per
day) and far more than the ration for British civilians (4 ounces per day).
On the other hand, most of that meat was mutton, or sometimes pork. For
many Americans, "meat" was synonymous with "beef," and beef was in very
short supply in England, where most of the cattle were dairy cows. Ameri-
can sailors fared little better. In September 1943, Stark had decreed that
U.S. naval personnel should call on the Royal Navy for "general stores, serv-
ices, fresh provisions, and fresh vegetables, bread, cakes, and pastries." Un-
fortunately, the Royal Navy was no better off than the troops ashore, and
sailors on U.S. ships got mostly powdered eggs, powdered milk, and pow-
dered potatoes. Their principal meat was Spam, "with some bologna thrown
in now and then." For soldiers and sailors alike, vegetables were also a
problem. They were plentiful enough, but the GIs objected to both the type
and the quality. The most readily available vegetable was Brussels sprouts,
which Americans almost universally despised.* Even the bread, instead of
being made of enriched wheat flour, was made of barley and oats."
If food was a source of complaint, the Americans in Britain seemed never
to be short of what the British called "sweets": candy and gum. From the
beginning, Marshall had recognized that a civilian conscript army had to
have access to certain benefits, including Hershey bars, chewing gum, and
Coca-Cola, as well as American made cigarettes, regular mail service, and a
well-stocked post exchange, or PX. Despite the shipping problem, each
American division was allocated thirty-two thompung pt of supplies,
which gave the U.S. Army a higher "tail-to-teeth" ratio (tons of supply per
front-line soldier) than any other military service in the world. Almost at
once, these American luxuries became a kind of ersatz currency in the de-
veloping relationship between American occupiers and British residents.
Chewing gum had been all but unknown in Britain until the arrival of the
* The scarcity of vegetables extended to the upper ranks. When a member of Ike's staff had a
chance to include a private package on an airplane coming from the States, he begged an
American supply officer to ship him a crate of fresh vegetables. When it arrived, the entire
staff gathered around to see what wonderful comestibles it contained, though when the lid
was pried off, it revealed an entire crate of fresh Brussels sprouts.
Brits and Yanks
—135
Americans, but the GIs seemed to be constantly working on a wad of gum
with their big white American teeth. British children, especially the boys,
found that they were nearly always successful when they approached a GI
task: Any gum, chum?" Soon it was a common sight to see British school-
boys happily chomping away on their sticks of American gum.I8
Quite beyond the question of housing and food, the interaction of the
Americans with their British hosts involved a number of more complex
ises. British law had long established the precedent that soldiers of any
nationality were "subject to all the duties and liabilities of an ordinary cit-
izen" when in the British Isles. That meant they had to abide by the same
lavs, and were subject to the same penalties, as everyone else. Under U.S.
lan, however, American soldiers who committed a crime, regardless of
where that crime occurred, were subject only to U.S. military law and only
to U.S. military courts. It was an indication of British willingness to do al-
most anything to accommodate the Americans that Parliament quickly
passed a special act exempting American soldiers from prosecution for any
crimes they might commit in England. Interestingly, the law did not apply
to the Canadians, French, Poles, Norwegians, or any other nationality that
aso had soldiers in England — only to Americans.19
That kind of special treatment bred resentment among some Britons, es-
peilly those in uniform. Eisenhower recognized that the British soldiers
bad grounds for resenting the favored treatment that American soldiers re-
ceived. "Our scale of pay is much higher," he noted, "our ration is more
diaborate; the amount devoted by the [American] Red Cross and the
Govement for recreation and amusement is greater." In addition, British
solies felt that the carefree Americans simply did not take things seri-
orady enough. Even when on watch, British officers noted that American
soldiers "leaned on their rifles, chewed gum, and smoked cigarettes, and
generally adopted a most unsoldierly-like attitude." Off duty, they swag-
gered into the pubs, talked loudly about how they had come over to pull
British chestnuts out of the fire, then plunked down ostentatiously large
bil white odoring their pints. A poll taken by a British newspaper revealed
that the Americans were less well regarded in England than the Czechs,
Dutch, Russians, French, or even the Italians, who until late 1943 were their
