NEPTUNE-OVERLORD COMMAND STRUCTURE
Eisenhower
SHAEF
****
Smith
Chief of Staf
Tedder
Deputy
****
SHAEF and ANCXF = 177
bie read simply: "C-in-C." Arriving a bit early, Ramsay looked over these
amangements, turned to Leigh-Mallory, and remarked, "I say, L-M. What is
this? There are three ruddy Cs-in-C in this set up." Before Montgomery
arived, they rearranged the placards and the chairs so that the three of
them sat side by side at the head of the table. Montgomery said nothing
about it at the time, though when Ramsay confronted him about it later, he
insisted that the table arrangements had not been his doing, and he apolo-
gived for any perceived slight.®
AIMOST FROM THE START, there was general agreement among
the
"Cosin-C" that the plan Morgan had crafted for Overlord simply would not
do. Morgan had based all his plans on an initial assault force of three rein
forced divisions, not because he believed three divisions were sufficient
because the Combined Chiefs had told him there would be only eno
slit for three divisions, and Morgan had planned accordingly. Now th
the invasion was more than a vague ambition, it struck almost eve-vone
thata three-division assault force was entirely too weak. After all, th
had employed seven divisions for the landings on Sicily. Even be.
knew he was going to be appointed to command Overlord, Eisenhowe
concluded that the invasion of France "was being made on too narro
front and with insufficient land forces. Before he left for the United States
on New Year's Eve, he sent for Montgomery, who was preparing to fly to
London, and told him to do what he could to "increase the troop lift in
OVERLORD.
By the time Eisenhower arrived in London in mid-January, his trio
commanders had all agreed that the initial invasion force had to be increa
from three divisions to five. Since this also necessitated adding two n
landing beaches, it effectively doubled the length of the invasion fros
which would now extend from the Cotentin Peninsula on the west to th
Ome River on the east, a distance of nearly fifty miles. Five reinforce
divisions would attack in the initial assault, with two more to follow that
same afternoon. In his memoirs, Montgomery claimed credit for insisting
on this increased commitment though, in fact, the initiative had come
from Eisenhower. Montgomery's principal contribution was to encourage
