YUL
330 = NEPTUNE
reacted similarly. One man who was pulled from the water onto a rhino
ferry seemed not to know where he was or what was happening. Someone
put a coat in his hands, but he stood there dripping, apparently confused by
what he was supposed to do with it. After a minute or two, someone put it
around his shoulders. The man never moved. 44
After triage at the aid station, the wounded were loaded onto LCTs or
Mike boats, or in a few cases into DUKWs, for the trip out to a waiting LST.
It proved possible to lay twenty wounded men, end to end and side by side,
on the open cargo deck of a Mike boat. The boats then retracted from the
beach and ferried the wounded out to empty LSTs, where cranes hoisted
those who were not ambulatory on board in their Stokes stretchers. Carried
down into the tank deck, either they were placed on racks arrayed along the
bulkhead or their stretchers were chained down to the deck using the same
tie-downs that had secured the tanks during the passage from England.
Navy pharmacist's mates and others cut away their damp and filthy cloth-
ing, often clotted with dried blood, and covered them with fresh blankets.
For the most serious cases, several of the LSTs had makeshift operating
rooms at the far end of the tank deck below the galley. There, Navy doctors
performed hundreds of operations, many of them involving amputations.
Afterward, the removed limb was affixed to a piece of iron and dropped
over the side. Despite the conditions and the circumstances, the doctors
did remarkable work. A pharmacis's mate on board one LST remembered
that the doctors "worked for hours... removing shrapnel, patching bullet
wounds, and trying to calm down some men that were completely out of
their minds."45
Not every ship had a doctor. Off Sword Beach, a leaking DUKW filled
with several badly wounded British soldiers had to go to four different ships
hefore it found one that had a doctor on hoard. Five minutes after the last
man was taken off the DUKW, it sank alongside. As a result of the doctor
shortage, pharmacist's mates often found themselves not only setting
splints and administering plasma transfusions but also performing opera-
tions, even when the task was well beyond their training. On Moon's com-
mand ship Bayfield, Pharmacist's Mate Second Class Vince del Guidice was
in charge of head wounds. When he removed the helmet from one U.S.
"The Shoreline Was Just a Shambles"
= 331
Amy Ranger, he saw that a shell fragment had cut off the crown of the
man's skull, so his brains were spilling out. Instinctively, he tried to push
them back into place, but the wound was mortal and the soldier soon
died.to
In addition to wounded Allied soldiers, the returning LSTs also carried
prisoners of war. Many of these prisoners turned out not to be Germans at
all butrather men —boys, really — from one or more of Hitler's conquered
eastern European nations: Poles, Lithuanians, and Russian-speaking Geor-
gians More than once, a prisoner was startled when an American of Polish
extraction spoke to him in his native language. By the third day of the cam-
paign, these men were surrendering in large numbers, and the beach mas-
ters had difficulty accommodating all of them. When a platoon of GIs
marched more than two hundred prisoners down to Omaha Beach, a Navy
lieutenant asked them, "What in hell am I supposed to do with them?" The
American soldiers essentially shrugged—they had fulfilled their assign-
ment to deliver them to the beach, and they prepared to return to the front.
The Navy lieutenant assigned four sailors with old carbines to guard the
two hundred men, but he need not have worried, for they were "meek as
lambs, though one of the men assigned to guard them, Navy Signalman
Second Class Bill DeFrates, was haunted for years afterward by "the blank
stare in the eyes of a defeated soldier."47
Most of the prisoners were embarked in LSTs dedicated to that pur-
pose. In such cases, the men were simply herded into the tank deck until
no more would fit. Vernon Paul on LST-983 estimated that there "must
have been a thousand of them" packed "like sardines" into the tank deck of
his ship. They were fed K rations, and probably were happy to get them.
Most of the prisoners were utterly submissive, lining up when and where
they were told, and obeying orders without murmur. There were excep-
tions, however. On one occasion, when a Navy officer ordered a group of
prisoners to embark onto an LCT by walking out through the surf, a
German officer objected that his men would get their feet wet. The
American in charge was utterly unsympathetic. We got our feet wet when
we came ashore, he told the German; you can get your feet wet going
the other way.48
