172
= NEPTUNE
was, however, the problem of what to do with Morgan, now a lieutenant
general, who had presided over the Overlord planning for the last six
months, and who knew the issues and circumstances better than anyone.
Morgan had known from the start that he would eventually step aside for a
more exalted boss, but he had assumed that he would remain as deputy
commander, or perhaps chief of staff. Instead, Eisenhower selected a British
air marshal, Sir Arthur Tedder, as his deputy commander. Eisenhower was
convinced that the coordination of air and ground forces during the inva-
sion would be critical, and he had worked closely and companionably with
the handsome, pipe-smoking Tedder in the Mediterranean. Eisenhower
also brought his own chief of staff from North Africa, the gruff and irrev-
erent but highly efficient Major General Walter Bedell Smith, whom Ike
(and others) called "Beetle" Eisenhower tried to let Morgan down easy,
complimenting him on "the fine work" that he and the COSSAC team had
done, and assuring him that Brooke had "an important job awaiting you"
That turned out not to be the case, however, and Morgan stayed on as a
deputy to Smith, helping to manage the staff work with two other three-
stars: Sir Humphrey Gale and James Robb. To his credit, he bore neither
Eisenhower nor Brooke any ill will and continued to labor with cheerful
enthusiasm, though with tongue in cheek he told an associate that he knew
the reason he had been retained on the staff. "If something goes wrong they
want me right here to put the blame on."2
The rest of the SHAEF command team remained largely intact. Because
the overall commander of Neptune-Overlord was an American, the three
men who would exercise direct command of the ground, air, and sea aspects
of the invasion were all British. Churchill himself had picked the com-
mander of the ground forces. Though Eisenhower would have preferred Sir
Harold Alexander, the prime minister instead chose Field Marshal Bernard
Law Montgomery to head what was labeled the 2lst Army Group, made up
of American. British and Canadian forces Fil cut ain 101n three
years older than Eisenhower), Montgomery had become famous in Britain
after his victory at El Alamein in 1942, which had won him a knighthood.
Though his actual performance in that campaign was more competent than
brilliant, his status as national hero apparently went to his head, for he
SHAEF and ANCXF = 173
exuded an ego-driven self-confidence that many, including Tedder, found
embarrasing, even offensive. George Patton (who found fault with many)
thought him "a little fellow of average ability [who] thinks himself a Napo-
leon- he is not." Even Eisenhower, who got along with almost everyone,
found Montgomery a strain to work with and confessed to Brooke that he
did not know how to handle him. In some respects, Montgomery was
the Douglas MacArthur of the European war—a man with evident mili-
tary talents who was victimized by his own unbridled ego, his haughty
demeanor, and a tendency to preen. He was also somewhat dismissive of
Americans, believing that they exhibited more boisterous enthusiasm
than good sense, and he thought they had made a "dog's breakfast" of the
campaign in Italy. He was therefore glad to put Italy behind him and fly
to London to prepare the decisive stroke of the war.?
Command of the air assets for Overlord went to Air Marshal Sir Trafford
Leigh-Mallory, a former fighter pilot whose friends called him "L-M.""
Leigh-Mallory would soon be overshadowed by Ike's deputy, the bomber
pilot Tedder, but it was just as well that SHAEF had so much Air Force
brass in the high command, for almost at once squabbling erupted over
how to utilize air assets during the invasion. The Combined Chiefs of Staff
in Washington suggested that the organization of tactical air forces for
Overlord should rest in its hands. Eisenhower resisted that, arguing suc-
cessfully that control of the air forces over the invasion beach must reside
with the invasion commander —that is, himself. The next battle was with
the champions of strategic bombing, Both British Air Marshal Sir Arthur
Harris, known as "Bomber Harris," and American Lieutenant General An-
dev "Tooey" Spaatz, were convinced that Germany could be bombed into
submission if the air attacks were relentless. They were therefore reluctant
to withdraw their bombers from that mission to support the invasion.
Eisenhower won that fight, too. Even then, Spaatz and others argued that
the bombers should conduct an "oil strategy" by targeting wells and refin-
eries, rather than the "transportation strategy" against railroads and bridges
that Ike wanted in order to isolate the invasion beaches. And finally, there
was a dispute about which air forces would support which invasion beach.
Some thought that American planes should cover American beaches while
