THE MEDITERRANEAN TAR BABY,
JULY 1943-JANUARY 1944
GUSTAV LIN
•Rome
CORSICA
SHINGLE
January 1944
SARDINIA
Turrhenian
WESTERN TASK FORCE
U.S. Sth Arm
LGEN Clark
Mediterranean
Naples
Salerno
ITALY
Overation
AVALANCHE
September 1943
*SICIL}
onlan
TUNISIA.
MALTA
Mediterranean
Tripoli
LIBYA
© 2013 Jeffrey L. Ward
Casablanca to COSSAC =
117
in what was code-named Operation Avalanche. Here the landings were
touch-and-go, and at one point Clark actually considered a withdrawal,
though in the end the Allies managed to hang on. Technically, at least, Italy
had been "knocked out" of the war, thus fulfilling Churchill's ambition.
Nevertheless, the German Tenth Army remained in Italy, and it dug in
along what the Allies called the Gustav Line. The campaign soon bogged
down into a lengthy slugfest. Once again the Mediterranean tar baby had
absorbed the Allies punch and held it fast. Fighting in Italy lasted until the
end of the war.31
IT DID NOT, HOWEVER, DERAIL the decision made at Trident. While
Morgan's revised instructions called for him to continue with the "decep-
tion scheme," they now emphasized that his principal focus should be on
'mounting an operation with target date of May 1, 1944 to secure a lodg-
ment on the Continent from which further operations can be carried
out. There was still no designated operational commander. Churchill
told reporters that preparations had not yet reached the point when "the
executive commander has to be chosen," and so Morgan, as COSSAC,
continued to plan a major amphibious operation without knowing who
would execute it. 32
Worse, Morgan found little support from the British military establish-
ment. Institutional reluctance to invest heavily either materially or emotion-
ally in a major cross-Channel operation was in part a legacy of Dunkirk as
well as of dark memories of Passchendaele and the Somme. In addition,
Britons at almost every level had difficulty absorbing the idea that so vast an
operation was even possible. The Americans threw around absurd num-
bers: Roosevelt mandated the construction of twenty-four million tons of
shipping, while Marshall claimed to be raising an army of sixteen million
men. The British found it hard to get their heads around such numbers.
As Morgan put it, it was almost impossible for British officers "to overcome
entirely the effects of a lifetime of niggling, cheeseparing, parsimony, and
making do that had characterized their entire professional experience.
And finally Morgan encountered die culty navigating the British political
bureaucracy, that hodgepodge of offices and committees, some of them a
