142
= NEPTUNE
each other. In prewar days, drivers might pause there to discuss the weather
or local events before proceeding. Once the hundreds of thousands of
Americans began arriving, however, the country lanes became the source
of much cursing and gear grinding by the drivers of the oversize two-and-a-
half-ton American trucks (the famous "deuce and a half") that plied the
roads in an almost unending stream from the summer of 1943 until the in-
vasion began the following year. The Americans built 17 miles of new roads,
widened 230 miles more, and built five new bridges, but in spite of that,
between July 1943 and March 1944 there were some twenty-four thousand
reported traffic collisions on these country lanes, a full quarter of them at
speeds of less than five miles per hour, which suggests they were incurred as
vehicles sought-unsuccessfully — to maneuver past each other while their
drivers colored the air with scatological imprecations.31
FROM THE BEGINNING, the Anglo-American partnership had traveled a
bumpy road. Despite subsequent talk about the "special relationship, and
the much-publicized friendship between Churchill and Roosevelt, the
tension between the two English-speaking allies never fully disappeared.
First at the conference table, then in North Africa and Sicily, and finally in
England, the cultural collision of Brits and Yanks threatened but never
quite broke the partnership. Mostly this was due to mutual need. The Brit-
ish needed American men, American money, and American equipment,
and they were willing to surrender convenience, pride, and even a little bit
of sovereignty to get them. The Americans needed the British, too. Most of
all, perhaps, they needed Britain itself - the base from which the invasion
would be launched, though they also needed British experience even if they
too often undervalued it.
If the cultural and institutional differences were evident in the Allies' di-
vergent approaches to grand strategy, they were also evident in the day-to-
day operations of the military forces. As Morgan put it, "It seems that the
word command' has two different meanings in our two services." In the
United States Army and Navy, it was common practice for senior officers
to outline an objective along with a rough timetable, and then delegate
the details of its execution to their subordinates. The British found that
Brits and Yanks = 143
approach slipshod at best, and very likely dangerous. In their view, it was
essential to ensure that there was complete agreement and understanding
ofvittually every facet of an operation up and down the chain of command.
This was especially true of any operation in which Winston Churchill had a
stake. Indeed, it was Churchill himself who offered what was perhaps the
most overt expression of this view. "In practice," he wrote, "it is found not
sufficient for a Government to give a General a directive to beat the enemy
and wait to see what happens." To him it was clear that "a definite measure
ofguidance and control is required from the Staffs and from High Govern-
ment authorities." By which, of course, he meant himself. 32
Another significant difference, not unrelated to the first, was that while
the Americans were always in a hurry, the British tended to adopt a more
careful, analytical approach to most issues, an approach that struck the
Americans as old-fogeyism. The British were aware that the Americans
thought them cold and reluctant. One very senior British officer wrote his
wife, " No doubt after years of war we look more closely at things before we
say what we will or will not do, whereas the Yanks are new at this game and
have the enthusiasm of beginners." He also recognized an important re-
ality. "They are as good for us as we are for them.""33
To the British, evidence of this "enthusiasm of beginners" was manifest
in the American tendency to throw around nearly unimaginable numbers
and seemingly impossible deadlines. The very idea of assembling two mil-
Lion men and five thousand ships in a relatively short period of time struck
the British as not only naive but evidence of hubris. In this, at least, both
sides were right. The Americans were naive, and their boastful confidence
cetainly bordered on hubris; they undoubtedly benefited from a strong
dose of British realism, especially in 1942. Yet the British also underesti-
mated the American ability to produce previously unthinkable numbers of
ship, planes, and tanks. Morgan saw all of this in his dealings with both
sides When the Americans proposed a particular operation, Morgan wrote,
a common British response was something like this:
My dear boy, sall this really necessary? Well, if it really is, couldn't
we do it just as well with half the bother? At any rate we can't get
