102
= NEPTUNE
was to seize that victory by brute force. To the British, it was to be a victory
lap; to the Americans it was a death grapple. In the long history of the alli-
ance, this gap in perceptions was never bridged.'
After three days, the two sides were no closer to an agreement than they
had been at the start. Brooke pushed for Sicily, Marshall for Brest, and King
for expanded operations in the Pacific, and at times the conversations be-
came "very heated." It was Dill who broke the deadlock. As a British officer
who lived in Washington and met every day with the JCS, he had a foot in
each camp, and he knew just how much each side could give in order to
reach an agreement. Moreover, Dill was one of the few besides Churchill
who could stand up to Brooke. In a private meeting, Brooke told Dill that he
would "not move an inch," and Dill shot back, "Oh yes, you will!" After some
effort, he obtained Brooke's grudging agreement to several minor points.
Then he went to see Marshall, and wrung similar concessions from him. As
a result, when the Combined Chiefs met with Roosevelt on January 18, they
were able to tell him that they had reached an agreement. The invasion of
Sicily, code-named Husky, would go ahead, but the Allies would simultane-
ously continue the buildup of troops in England "for a thrust across the
Channel in the event that the German strength in France decreases."10
Though technically a compromise, Marshall and the Americans had
once again given way on the main point. King was pleased that the war
against the U-boats would receive the highest priority, and he secured ap-
proval to proceed with a Pacific offensive in the fall; Marshall got approval
for a buildup of Allied forces in England. Nonetheless, the British won the
big prize: authorization for an expanded Mediterranean campaign, a cam-
paign that, once under way, would very likely draw more and more assets
into the fight. Once again, the Allies had agreed to punch the tar baby, and
the Americans knew that they had been outmaneuvered. Following the
final session, the American brigadier general Albert C. Wedemeyer, who
had assumed Ike's old job as head of war planning, was resting in his room
when Vivian Dykes, his British counterpart, stopped by for a drink. Wede-
meyer and Dykes were old friends, having served together at Fort Myer in
Virginia before the war. When Dykes sat down, Wedemeyer looked at
him sharply and said, "Your people have no intention of ever crossing the
Casablanca to COSSAC =
103
channel. It was not so much an accusation as a statement, and Dykes did
not deny it. Instead he sucked thoughtfully on his pipe and responded,
"There is no accounting for Winston."l1
For his part, "Winston" appreciated that the Americans might feel hard
done by (to use the British phrase) at the outcome of the conference, and he
sought to ease their disappointment by suggesting that perhaps it was time
to name a commander for the cross-Channel attack. Though Brooke hoped
that when the time came, he might be that eventual commander, others ex-
pected that it would probably be an American, most likely Marshall. Given
that, Churchill proposed the appointment of a British chief of staff as a
deputy commander. Marshall supported the idea. While Churchill's pur-
pose may have been to offer the Americans a harmless consolation prize,
Marshall saw that appointing a deputy commander or a chief of staff for the
big invasion made such an invasion real in ways that mere assurances of fu-
ture support did not. It also meant that the organizational and administra-
tie work could begin at once, and that would speed the execution of the
invasion when it finally did occur. And so, on January 22, the CCS agreed
"hata British Chief of Staff, together with an independent U.S.-British staff
should be appointed at once for the control, planning and training of cross-
chanel operations in 1943." Whatever Churchill's motives in suggesting it,
it was the first tangible step toward the beaches of Normandy,.!2
Nine days later in Stalingrad, German field marshal Friedrich von Paulus
surendered 91,000 men including sixteen generals, all that was left of his
amy 0/265,000, to the Russians. It was the greatest Allied victory of the war,
and almost certainly Stalin reflected on the fact that while the British and the
Americans talked, the Russians fought - and won-battles. To ensure that
no one missed the point, on February 23, the anniversary of the founding of
the Red Army, Stalin released an order of the day that contained this sen-
tence: In view of the absence of a second front in Europe, the Red Army
alone bears the whole burden of the war?' 13
One more aspect of the Casablanca conference requires mention here, if
oly because it commanded so much attention from newspapers at the
tine and from historians since. After the final session of the conference on
January 24, Roosevelt and Churchill met with reporters to showcase the
