YUL
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliographical Note
Though a complete bibliography follows, several particularly useful sources
deserve special mention. On strategic issues, an indispensable source is a
fifty-eight-volume history of the United States Army in World War II that is
often referred to by historians as "The Green Book" series because of the
binding. These detailed studies on particular campaigns of the Second
World War were sanctioned and funded soon after the war by the Office of
the Chief of Military History (formerly the Historical Division, Depart-
ment of the Army). Though they were authored by different scholars, they
constitute a kind of quasi-official military history of the United States Army
during the Second World War. Many of them include invaluable maps-
large, detailed, full-color fold-out maps placed in sleeves at the back of the
original volumes. The most useful volumes for this study were Mark Skinner
Watson's Chief of Staff: Pre-War Plans and Preparations (1950); Maurice
Matloff and Edwin M. Snell's Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1941-
1942 (1953); George F. Howe's Northwest Africa: Seizing the Initiative in
the West (1957); Maurice Matloff's Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare,
1943-1944 (1959); and Gordon A. Harrison's Cross-Channel Attack (1951).
They are listed individually in the notes and bibliography.
A parallel version of this source from the British perspective is a six-volume
set entitled Grand Strategy, which was authorized and published by Her Maj-
esty' Stationery Office between 1956 and 1976. Like the American Green
Book series, the volumes have different authors and were published at differ-
ent times. Volumes 3 and 5 proved most useful for this project. Volume 3,
Bibliography = 401
overing the period June 1941 to August 1942, is divided into two parts
beause .M.A. Gwyer, who wrote Part I, found himself unable to complete
(easinment, which was taken up by the general editor, J. R. M. Butler, who
ompleted Part II. Both volumes (collectively listed as Volume 3) were pub-
ited in 1964. Volume S, which covers the period from August 1943 to
September 1944 and includes the cross-Channel attack, is by John Ehrman
and was published in 1956.
On the naval side, the semiofficial history of the U.S. Navy during the
war was supervised and written by Samuel Eliot Morison and consists of
fen volumes. The most useful volumes for this book were Operations in
Noth African Waters, October 1942-June 1943 (1946) and The Invasion of
France and Germany, 1944- 1945 (1955). All fifteen volumes are available in
a new paperback edition from the Naval Institute Press.
In the belief that history is essentially the product of the decisions made
and actions taken by individuals, I have relied heavily on memoirs, letters,
and especially oral histories in the compilation of this narrative. There are
several particularly rich sources of these, including those recorded and
transcribed as part of the U.S. Naval Institute's Oral History Program; the
large collection assembled by Stephen Ambrose at the Eisenhower Center,
located in the National World War Il Museum in New Orleans, Louisiana;
and the LSI Association Collection at the National Museum of the Pacific
War in Fredericksburg, Texas. In addition to these archival holdings, sev-
eral published works include important firsthand accounts. Among these
are Assault on Normandy, edited by Paul Stillwell; Neptunus Rex, edited by
John Prados; and Eyewitness D-Day, edited by D. M. Giangreco with Kath-
ryn Moore. Also, Joseph Balkoski's excellent books on Omaha Beach and
Utah Beach include a large number of firsthand accounts. All of these are
listed separately below.
In the notes for this work, I have cited the most readily available source.
For example, whenever the minutes of a Combined Chiefs of Staff meeting
are included in the published Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS),
I cited the printed source, citing the originals in the National Archives only
for those meetings where the minutes were not published. Similarly, when-
ever possible, I have cited the published versions of the diaries of Alan
