262 = NEPTUNE
Though Deyo's orders were to open fire at 5:50, his gunners were getting
antsy. "Shells splashed all around us," a boatswain's mate on the Quincy
remembered, "and shrapnel skittered across the deck." One near miss
opened a hole in the skin of the Quincy and flooded a storage compartment
filled with Oh Henry! candy bars. The captains of the various Allied ships
asked permission to reply, but Deyo turned them down; he wanted to wait
for the air spotters to arrive so that the first salvos had maximum effect. But
as German marksmanship improved, Deyo changed his mind. At 5:36 he
gave the order to "commence counter-battery bombardment. 32
In an unpublished postwar memoir, Deyo offered a vivid description of
the process of loading and firing the 8-inch guns on a heavy cruiser. First
came "the shrill ascending song of the ammunition car speeding upward
from the magazine." That was followed by "a metallic thump" as the shells
dropped into the loading trays. A pneumatic rammer shoved the rounds
into place, and soon afterward the three turrets, each with three 8-inch
guns, pivoted out to port to face the target. All nine barrels rose gracefully
in response to the calculated target data. Two quick buzzes signaled "stand
by, then one buzz, then, as Deyo put it: "Flash! Jar! Lurch!" and twenty-four
hundred pounds of high explosives were sent screaming toward the beach.
Among the early Allied targets were the German radar stations: big
metal dishes, twenty feet across, called "Giant Würzburgs, that could scan
out to sea some forty-three miles and direct the fire of artillery ashore.
Even hefore the bombardment began, ships in the Allied fleet had inter-
cepted electronic emissions as the Giant Würzburgs sought to obtain tar-
geting coordinates for the German gunners. Until the radar sites could be
destroyed by gunfire, the Americans used onboard transmitters that sent
out bursts of electrical energy designed to jam and deflect the radar beams.
While employing this technology, the electronics technicians on Tusca-
osa were much relieved to sep the enemy radar sweep past them and then
"wander off"34
The Nevada added her big guns to the assault at 5:47. Giant black and red
fireballs roiled from the muzzles of her 14-inch guns, the big ship lurched
sideways, and fifteen thousand pounds of high-explosive shells flew in a
single ten-gun salvo toward the German batteries behind Utah Beach. The
D- Day: The Invasion =
263
concussion created by the firing of those big guns was so powerful that one
silor on board thought it would pull his clothes off; several suffered nose-
bleds Men on LCTs miles away felt their ship's hull move beneath them. It
mas particularly daunting for the soldiers in the Higgins boats already
headed shoreward since the shells passed directly over their heads, sound-
ing like a freight train that was about to run them down. Many instinctively
ducked. The shells could not be seen as they streaked toward the targets,
but the air friction they created generated a small red light that allowed
niness to follow the line of shot through the predawn twilight. 35
The biggest naval guns off Utah Beach belonged to a curious vessel offi-
cilly dubbed a "monitor." It was HMS Erebus, essentially a fat-bodied light
cruiser with an oversized turret on its foredeck that boasted two 15-inch
guns. Those guns fired shells weighing 1,920 pounds each and had a range
ofnearly twenty miles. Early in the bombardment, the Erebus targeted the
German batteries on the Iles Saint-Marcouf, the small islands off the coast
above Utah Beach south of St. Vaast-la Hougue. There, the German guns
were encased in bunkers with concrete walls thirteen feet thick. Neverthe-
les, the big guns on the Erebus silenced them before they could be used to
enflade the landing beaches.
Off Omaha Beach, RADM Carleton Bryant commanded the bombard-
mentships of Force O, led by the battleships Texas and Arkansas. Both were
older vessels, laid down in 1910-11; indeed, the Arkansas was the oldest
American battleship still in service. She was so old, there were no showers
ortoilets on board - the men washed from buckets, and the toilet facilities
consisted of a metal trough with salt water flowing through it. Both ships
had been built using rivets instead of welds, and occasionally when they
fired a fill alvo, a rivet or two would pop loose. Despite their age, however,
they were superb gun platforms, and they fired their big shells at a low,
almost fat trajectory into the high ground behind Omaha Beach. Ensign
Donald Irwin was driving LCT-614 toward Omaha Beach when his ears
were assailed by "the most ear-splitting, deafening, horrendous sound
have ever heard" as the big shells passed overhead. He looked back at the
Texas, her guns till weathed in smoke, and from his vantage point it looked
as if those big 14 inch guns "were pointed right at us. To Ensign Victor
