YUL
312 = NEPTUNE
The Allied beaches were relatively secure from air attack during the day-
time, when Allied planes ruled the skies, though one bold German plane
did manage to land a 550-pound phosphorus bomb on HMS Bulolo, the
headquarters ship for Force G. The more serious danger was at night, when
German bombers flew regularly over the beaches dropping flares (to illu-
minate the targets), bombs, and mines. Though these Luftwaffe raids were
less ferocious than the Allied planners had feared, the Germans did have
several weapons that, had they been employed in large numbers, might
have changed the course of the battle. One was the pressure-sensitive oyster
mine, for which the Allies had no effective countermeasure. German planes
dropped these into the waters off the Normandy beaches in their nightly
raids, and while those mines claimed several ships, there were simply not
enough of them to halt the invasion.
Another weapon with the potential to change the course of history was
the rocket-propelled Henschel H.S. 293 radio-guided aerial bomb, the
forerunner of air-launched guided missiles. German bombers could carry
two of these, one under each wing, and launch them miles away, guiding
them into the target by radio signals. The Allies were aware of the threat
and had developed a countermeasure. When a ship recognized the tone
emitted by these radio-guided bombs, it sent out a one-word warning to
the fleet: "Vermin!" Thus alerted, the ships employed radio jammers
designed to throw the bomb off its course.
This was generally effective,
though several radio-guided bombs did find their mark. The brand-new
Sumner-class destrover TICS Meredith may have been a victim of such a
weapon. At an hour past midnight on June 7-8, the Meredith was rocked
by "a violent explosion" that "appeared to lift her up and throw her for-
ward." She began to list to starboard almost immediately and, dead in the
water, drifted shoreward. With the main deck awash, her captain, Com-
mander George Knuepfer, ordered abandon ship. Curiously, though, the
Meredith did not sink, and the next morning two salvage tugs began to tow
her back to England. En route there, she was rocked by a near miss from a
2,000-pound bomb that shook the ship so violently she broke in half. She
went to the bottom having suffered the loss of thirty-five killed and an-
other twenty-seven wounded."
"The Shoreline Was Just a Shambles" = 313
A third German anti-ship weapon, one of an especially desperate char-
it was the so-called human torpedo. A pilot drove a modified torpedo
the surface that carried another torpedo, this one with a warhead, slung
demeath. It was not a suicide weapon; the pilot would release the tor-
god ata ship and then turn away. The Germans deployed forty-seven of
bose of the Normandy beaches, but they succeeded in sinking only three
minesweepers. Of course, there were also losses from more conventional
napons. Only a few hours after the Meredith was hit, a mine exploded
ander the USS Glennon (DD-620), and when the destroyer escort USS
Rod (DB-695) came to her aid, she, too, hit a mine. Both vessels were lost.
During the nightly air attacks, gunners on the Allied ships responded
wich fury. There were literally thousands of anti-aircraft guns in the Allied
mada, and, confident that planes flying at night were almost certainly
hostil whenever the gunners heard the sound of aircraft overhead, they
simply aimed skyward and pulled the trigger. So much flak was hurled into
the night skies that spent rounds fell back to earth as if it were raining bul-
lets Admiral Bryant, on USS Texas, recalled that "shrapnel fell on our decks
lie snow. Inevitably, some of that spent ordnance inflicted casualties on
Alied sailors. One Seabee on a rhino ferry felt a slight thump on the collar
of his life vest, followed by a fierce burning sensation all down his front.
Ripping open his life vest, he saw that a spent tracer round had entered his
colla and burned an ugly welt all the way down his chest. Soon enough,
orders came down that the relatively inexperienced gunners on the am-
phibious ships should hold their fire, not only to reduce friendly-fire inci-
dents but also because all those tracer rounds going up into the sky actually
assisted the Germans in locating Allied shipping. It proved much safer
simply to darken ship and hold fire. As one sailor put it, "We hid." 2
Off Utah Beach, Moon ordered the gunners on the Bayfield not to fire at
allet they expose their position. Nevertheless, one night when a German
bomber got closer and closer, the gunners could not restrain themselves.
When they opened up, the pilot of the bomber followed the line of tracer
fire to land a SOO-pound bomb only fifty yards off the stern of the Bayfield.
The big ship "shook like a rag doll." Men were knocked to the deck and
clouds of dust fell from the overheads. Moon himself was bounced around
