252 = NEPTUNE
demolition teams a brief window to attack the obstructions, and the swiftly
rising tide would narrow the width of the beach as subsequent waves of in-
fantry came ashore. 16
A problem with this solution was that at two hours after low tide, the
sand bars off Sword Beach near Caen did not provide sufficient deep water
to allow the British LCTs to pass over them; not for another hour would
there be enough water to provide clearance. Thus while H-Hour was 6:30
on the American beaches, it was 7:25 on Sword Beach. The asymmetry of
the landings concerned Eisenhower, who would have preferred to strike all
five beaches at once, but in the end he bowed to the tyranny of the coastal
geography.
Nervous but confident, the soldiers on the American transports lugged
their oversized packs and their nine-and-a-half-pound Garand M1 rifles
onto the weather deck and lined up to board the Higgins boats. On a few
ships, the soldiers climbed into landing craft that were suspended at the rail
and were lowered along with the boats; on most, however, the Higgins
boats were lowered empty save for their three-man Navy crews, and the
soldiers climbed down into them on the scramble nets. Each soldier had to
remember to hold the vertical supports on the nets rather than the hori-
zontal ropes so that the man coming down after him did not step on his
hands. Then, near the bottom of the net, he had to time his last-second
jump into the Higgins boat carefully since the boats were rising and falling
dramatically with the Channel swells. Some mistimed their jump and suf-
fored lacerations and the necasional broken leg. The iniured were brough
back on board bearing the dubious distinction of being the first to be
wounded during the invasion. As soon as the boats filled up with their des-
ignated complement, the Navy coxswains cast off and motored away to join
boats from other transports that were circling in a holding pattern nearby.
This process took shout an hour. on the Thomas Tefferson (APA-30), for ex-
ample, it took exactly sixty-six minutes.17
Not all the soldiers disembarked at once. Even with twenty or more Hig-
gins boats per ship, the big transports could land only about five hundred
men at a time-roughly a third of their onboard total. The rest would have
to wait until the boats returned sever hours later to carry them ashore in a
D- Day: The Invasion = 253
subsequent wave. The invasion of occupied France was not to be accom-
plished in a single dash shoreward, but in a series of waves ten to fifteen
minutes apart all day long, and indeed over the next several weeks. For
more than nineteen hours, from before dawn until after ten that night, the
coxswains in their Higgins boats and LCAs and the ensigns in their LCTs
shuttled back and forth from the transports and the LSTs to the beach car-
rying troops and equipment ashore. For them, as much as for the soldiers
they carried, June 6 was truly the longest day.!8
Once inside the Higgins boats, the soldiers could see nothing. The high
sides of the boat were above their heads and, heavily burdened as they were,
they stood uncomfortably and precariously side by side, jostling up against
one another as the boat lurched shoreward through the severe chop. Sea
spraysmacked them in the face and drizzled down into their clothing. Some
who had avoided seasickness during the Channel crossing succumbed to it
now, and the smell of mal de mer on the deck and on their boot tops added
to the general discomfort of all. To many, the circling seemed endless. Then,
just after 4:00 a.m., with the sky turning from full dark to dove gray, the
landing craft were taken in charge by a small patrol boat or an escorting de-
stroyer and led shoreward at a leisurely five knots. At that rate, the journey
would take another two and a half hours, and they would arrive at their
target beaches precisely at H-Hour. By then, however, many of the soldiers
were so worn out from the journey and from seasickness that their battle-
worthiness was questionable. As one Higgins boat approached the beach, a
soldier hoisted himself out over the thwarts to vomit into the roiling sea,
provoking his sergeant to order him, "Get your head down. You'll be killed."
The soldier dich' move, answering, "I'm dying anyway? 9
FROM THE START, the planners had wrestled with the question of how to
get at least some of the tanks ashore with the first wave of infantry so that
the takers would housemes Sending in the scarce I STs with
the fist wave would subject them to unacceptable risk. Not until the ene-
my big coastal guns had been neutralized could the LSTs run up onto the
beach and spew out their massive cargoes of tanks and trucks. For the
titiasult, therefore, the Allies relied on a few score specialized ICTs.
