26 = NEPTUNE
the end of the broadcast, there was an obscure reference to a Japanese air
raid on American shipping in Pearl Harbor-or was it Pearl River? The
fleeting reference and the fact that the story had not led the news was con-
fusing. What exactly had happened? When Churchill's valet, Frank Saw-
yers, came in to clear the table, Churchill asked him about it, and Sawyers
confirmed it. "The Japanese have attacked the Americans," he said. Churchill
came out of his chair, pacing about the room and declaring that he would
call the Foreign Office that very minute to arrange for a declaration of war
against Japan. It was Winant who suggested that perhaps he should first call
Washington. And so Churchill went to his study and placed a call to the
White House. After a few minutes Roosevelt came on the line. "Mr. Presi-
dent, what's this about Japan?" Churchill asked. "It's quite true," Roosevelt
told him. "They have attacked us at Pearl Harbor. We are all in the same
boat now."!
Churchill's immediate and instinctive reaction was elation. Leaping at
once to the conclusion that this would bring America fully into the war, he
believed it meant nothing less than victory —not at once, of course, but
eventually, and without question. For more than a year Britain had strug-
gled virtually alone against Hitler's war machine, suffering privation due to
the U-boat blockade, enduring almost daily bombing attacks, and antici-
pating imminent invasion. During those months, Churchill had personified
British defiance and determination, alternately shaking his fist at the Nazis
and mocking their pretensions while simultaneously calling for sacrifice
("blood, toil, tears, and sweat") from the British population. He had prom-
ised ultimate victory, but those promises had been more a measure of his
resolve than genuine expectation. For all his bulldog defiance, he had been
compelled to act the supplicant to the wealthy and powerful Americans,
accepting the concessions, however demeaning, that Roosevelt demanded
in exchange for American support in order to allay the suspicions of Ameri-
can isolationists and convince them that the United States was not giving
anything away. When in June 1941 Hitler's armored divisions had smashed
their way into Soviet Russia, England was no longer alone, and Churchill
had begun to hope. Now, with the United States in the war, hope changed
to certainty. He was convinced that with Russian manpower, American
Arcadia w
27
wealth, and British grit, "Hitler's fate was sealed." His mood soared. "England
would live; Britain would live; the Commonwealth of Nations and the
Empire would live." The evening was still young by Churchill's standards,
and after seeing his guests off, he got to work at once, calling members of
the cabinet and arranging for a special session of the House of Commons
the next day. As usual for him, it was a late night. At last, in the early morn-
ing hours of December 8, he headed for bed. As he wrote later: "Satiated
with emotion and sensation, I went to bed and slept the sleep of the saved
and thankful."2
When he woke the next morning, his euphoria remained, though it was
leavened now with his ubiquitous political calculation. He was convinced
that Hitler would declare war on the United States and thus bring the
Americans fully into the global conflict, but he worried that despite the
tentative agreements of the ABC conference and the confirmation of those
agreements at Argentia, the particular character of the Japanese attack
might force Roosevelt to direct American wrath against Japan and relegate
the war in Europe to a secondary theater. Churchill did not think that Roo-
sevelt would willfully betray his commitment. He knew, however, that
Roosevelt was an elected leader of a democratic society and necessarily
sensitive to the mood and temper of his citizens. He thought there was
"a serious danger that the United States might pursue the war against Japan
in the Pacific and leave us to fight Germany'"3
Equally worrisome was the possibility that the Americans might slow or
even halt the river of goods and supplies that came from the United States
via Lend-Lease (or, as the British called it, Lease-Lend). Britain had be-
come dependent on this supply line, and an interruption of it would
threaten Britain's survival as much as a triumph by the U-boats would. On
this issue, Churchill's concern was not unfounded. One of the many knee-
jerk reactions in the United States to the news of Pearl Harbor was a War
Department order to stop all L.end-Lease shipments at once. In New York,
thirty ships already loaded with war matériel for Britich armies in the Mid.
dle East received orders to postpone their departure. Alarmed, Churchill
asked his friend Max Aitken, the British newspaper baron better known as
Lord Beaverbrook, to call Harry Hopkins in Washington and see ifhe could
