68 = NEPTUNE
the idea up with the JCS, King naturally thought it a splendid idea. So Marshall
prepared a memo for the president in which he advocated a complete reversal
of American strategy: "If the United States is to engage in any other operation
than forceful, unswerving adherence to BOLERO plans," he wrote, "we are def-
initely of the opinion that we should turn to the Pacific and strike decisively
against Japan; in other words, assume a defensive attitude against Germany,
except for air operations; and use all available means in the Pacific.43
Long after the war was over, Marshall admitted to his biographer, Forrest
Pogue, that his proposal had been "a bluff" designed to get the British to
back down. Roosevelt, however, was an old poker player and recognized it
for what it was. He received Marshall's astonishing memo at Hyde Park,
discussed it briefly with Hopkins, and then called Marshall's bluff by asking
him to show his cards: that is, to produce a detailed plan that included a list
of Pacific targets, a timetable for the landings, a logistics program to sup-
port them, and an explanation of how such a move would help the Russians.
Marshall had to confess he had no such plan, and so on Monday, July 13,
Roosevelt officially rejected the proposal, saying that it would be like
"taking up your dishes and going away." At the same time, he reiterated to
Marshall that he must find a way to get United States troops into combat in the
European theater that year, and to accomplish that, he was sending Marshall
back to London with King and Hopkins to reach a final agreement with the
British. He signed the memo "Franklin D. Roosevelt, Commander-in-Chief,
a not-so-subtle reminder of the chain of command. 44
Marshall, King, and Hopkins landed at Scotland's Prestwick Airport on
July 18. Churchill had sent a special train to bring them to Chequers, where
he planned an elaborate dinner. Marshall and King, however, still resent-
ful of what they perceived to be British faithlessness, instead boarded a
train that took them to Euston Station in London and made their way to
Claridge's Hotel. Churchill was furious at the snub, and Hopkins took it
upon himself to play peacemaker, going out to Chequers to try to calm the
irate prime minister. He may have done more than that. Circumstantial
evidence suggests that he also shared with Churchill that Roosevelt had
taken the Pacific option off the table. That, of course, greatly strengthened
Churchill's hand in holding out for Gymnast. 4S
"We've Got to Go to Europe and Fight" = 69
The showdown came on July 22. Ordered by Roosevelt to obtain an
gement for a 1942 operation, Marshall and King pushed hard for Sledge-
hammer, or at least a modified version of it. Churchill and the British were
unmovable. Churchill had made a permanent lodgment a condition of any
cross-Channel effort, and the wherewithal to establish and maintain such a
foothold simply did not exist. As Hopkins listened to the back-and-forth,
he saw that the two sides had reached an impasse, and he scrawled a note to
Narhall "' feel damn depressed.*46
Marshall suggested a compromise in which serious preparations would
begin at once for Gymnast but a decision to execute it would be postponed
until September in order to assess circumstances at the time. The British
were willing to accept that, but Hopkins was not. He feared that postponing
the decision until September would mean no action at all in 1942. He
abled the president privately to suggest that Roosevelt should intervene.
He should not only support Gymnast, Hopkins suggested, but also set a
date for its execution, suggesting October 30, 1942, which was, not coinci-
dentally, four days before the congressional elections. Accepting Hopkins's
adrice, Roosevelt ordered Marshall and King to abandon Sledgehammer
and choose instead one of several alternatives: North Africa, Norway,
Egypt, or Iran. Given those choices, there was really only one possible out-
come, and Hopkins cabled the final decision to Roosevelt that night in a
single word: "Africa." Roosevelt's reply was similarly terse: "Thank God."47
Churchill, of course, was delighted, writing Roosevelt that it was now
*it caad" for the new plan, which he rechristened Torch. He hap-
ply embraced the proposal that an American should be designated as the
creall commander of the operation, and even accepted the unpleasant
cly of going to Moscow to break the bad news to Stalin. Churchill con-
tined to act and to speak as if this commitment to Torch would have little
tito Roundup in 1943. He certainly implied as much to Stalin, telling
the Rusan leader that in addition to Torch, the Allies planned to land
birit divisions in France in the spring. He may even have believed it.
Two months later he claimed. Derhans disingenuously. that he was "aston
the at the execution of Torch was likely to affect a 1943 cross- Channel
train. ROosevelt, too, optimist that he was, clung to the notion that the
