246
= NEPTUNE
washed over the thwarts and sluiced across their crowded decks. One LCT
officer recalled that "the water would come in over the top front of the boat
and flush out the back." Occasionally when an LCT nosed into a trough in
the waves, its stern would rise out of the water and, lacking any resistance,
its propellers would spin out of control as the engines emitted a high-
pitched whine. Then the LCT pushed up into the next wave, the stern set-
tled back into the sea, and the engine noise returned to normal. There was
no place to escape the elements, and the embarked soldiers "huddled to-
gether in their trucks and kept as warm as possible." Navy crewmen tried to
keep them supplied with hot coffee, but even that proved difficult. Unlike
the steak-and-eggs breakfasts served on some of the larger ships, men on
the smaller LCTs got only more boxes of the despised K rations.®
It was even worse for the men on the rhino ferries. In order to make their
way into the overcrowded harbors the night before, many of them had
uncoupled from their tows, and they now proceeded to the rendezvous site
on their own, "chugging along," as Arthur Struble put it, at two or three
knots, propelled by their twin outboard motors. A few of the rhinos had
been designated as repair barges, and those had a Nissen hut in the middle
of the deck that offered some refuge from the elements. On others, enter-
prising Seabees had cut a hatchway into one of the pontoons and set up
Spartan quarters inside, though because the rhinos had only two feet of
freeboard, the Channel's four-foot swells washed over the flush deck and
down through the contrived hatch, rendering those ersatz quarters unus-
able. There was nothing for it but to huddle together in the middle of the
rafts and endure the discomfort. Kirk and Struble, moving swiftly past them
in the commodious Augusta, noted that on some of the rhinos, the Seabees
had built open fires on the deck to fight off the cold or to warm their rations.
To Kirk, they were "just like Robinson Crusoe" and they reminded Struble
of Boy Scouts on a campout, though Bill O Neill, passing by on an LCT, felt
sorry for the men who were "leaning into the wind and spray" and "un-
doubtedly completely miserable."
After nightfall, a prerecorded message from Eisenhower was played on
board all the invasion ships. The I-MCs squawked to life, and the men
heard the voice of the Supreme Allied Commander speaking in his flat,
THE CROSSING, JUNE 5-6, 1944
•Southampton
Portsmouth
ENGLAND
Isle of Wight
ZEBRA
"Piccadilly
Circus"
Channel
English
GERMAN
Swept channels
*Bruneval
Le Havre
Bay of the Seine
[ОМАНА)
Isigny
Вауеайх
GOLD TUNO
SWORD
Caen*
NORMANDY
FRANCE
© 2013 leffrey L. Ward
