AMERICANS IN BRITAIN, DECEMBER 1943-MAY 1944
SCOTLAND
ULSTER
6 counties
65,708 in December 1042
79,905 In May 1944
North
WESTERN MIDLANDS
4 counties
79,992 in December 1943
191,350 in May 1944
Irish Sea
Liverpool Manchester
Dublin
IRELAND
WALES
Bristol Channel
Appledore.
EAST ANGLIA
3 counties
131,463 in December 1943
174,249 in May 1944
Birmingham
ENGLAND
London
Southampton Portsmouth
WEST COUNTRY
7 countie
4,312 in Day mber 19
Atlantic Ocean
Slant.u c
NORMANDY
FRANCE
Brits and Yanks = 133
nould order a halt. Consulting his clipboard to confirm the street number,
hewould then announce: "Two men are going to live here. Okay, Jones and
Smith, go up, knock on the door, and introduce yourselves. That's where
you're going to live.". Then the column marched on. Jones and Smith had no
option but to walk up to the door and knock. Awkward as those first
moments were, for the most part the program was quite successful. The
soldiers themselves considered it "a great treat," and the homeowners re-
ceived a small stipend, critical to many families in a society that had never
managed to climb fully out of the Depression before the war struck. By and
large the British welcomed the Americans, and some remained in contact
with them for the rest of their lives. Is
For their part, the GIs recognized that they were not in Kansas anymore.
One big difference was simply the scale of things. The huts were more
crowded, the roads much narrower, the shops smaller, and the space allot-
ted for almost any activity severely restricted. Britain was not only a small
country, it was, to American eyes, a tiny country with miniature-scale eve-
thing, from trains to food portions. The natives were just as impressed
with the much larger scale of almost everything American, from their big
trucks to their big American teeth. One Hampshire resident watching the
arival of the Americans from her window recorded her astonishment at
the size of everything." And it was not only the size but the quantity. She
tood positively spellbound by the unending procession of American mil-
lary equipment" as it rolled past her home. In a society where scarcity had
been the hallmark of daily life for most of a generation, such abundance was
positively world-shattering.16
Feeding and supplying an army of a million men was an enormous logis-
tis problem, and given the limits of Allied shipping, it made sense to sup
plythe American occuniers with locally produced food whenever possible
The British were willing enough, even in some cases eager, to take on this
reponsblity seeing it as a way to pay back the United States for all the
support it had provided through Lend-Lease. They even referred to it as
ire end L ease. The dificulty was that the American troops recoiled
at the kind of fare that was available in Britain in 1943. This was not entirely
unexpected. Roosevelt himself had decreed the year before that "American
