64
= NEPTUNE
pedals. The president was in a good mood, in part because of splendid news
from the Pacific of an American naval victory near Midway that had
resulted in the sinking of four Japanese aircraft carriers. That eased concern
that assets might have to be funneled away from Europe to prop up the
Allied position there. The president insisted on giving the prime minister a
tour of the estate, and Churchill subsequently admitted that he had "some
thoughtful moments" as Roosevelt steered his vehicle along the bluffs
above the Hudson River with freewheeling joie de vivre.32
Meanwhile, Brooke sat down in Marshall's Washington office with Dill,
King, and Eisenhower. It was a typical hot and sticky summer day in the
capital ("stinking hot," Stimson called it in his diary), the building had no
air-conditioning, and the British were still in their winter uniforms. Never-
theless, they got down to work at once. Brooke began by noting that the
justification for the Bolero buildup was still valid —on that, at least, there
was "complete unanimity of opinion. The problem was that they needed a
contingency plan in case the Russians failed to hold out against the German
spring offensive. It was clear, he said, that "logistic factors" made a cross-
Channel invasion into France impossible for 1942, so some alternative to
Sledgehammer must be found, and the only practical one was Gymnast—
the invasion of North Africa. Marshall suggested that before abandoning
Sledgehammer, they should wait to see whether the Russians held out,
and how the buildup in England was progressing, Perhaps they could post-
pone making a decision until September 15. Brooke disagreed. That would be
too late "to modify existing plans,, and would come too late to help the Rus-
sians anyway. The planning must begin now for Gymnast. Dill concurred.33
Marshall felt betrayed. Just two months earlier, the British had agreed
"wholeheartedly" to a strategic blueprint that they now insisted was impos-
sible. Ernest King was equally annoyed and far less restrained. King's
daughter once quipped that her father was the most even-tempered man in
the U.S. Navy—he was always in a rage. Whether that was literally true, it
was true enough now. King announced angrily that he was "entirely opposed
to any idea of carrying out Gymnast in 1942. He lectured the British that
"great risks" had been taken by American servicemen in the Pacific who
went without needed equipment and supplies so that deliveries could be
"We've Got to Go to Europe and Fight" = 65
made to England for the invasion of Germany. To abandon that invasion
now would mean that those sacrifices had been made in vain. Marshall, too,
fought back, though with less emotion. The key to defeating Germany, he
insisted, was "overwhelming power," and the only place where that could be
plied was in "North West Europe." The Americans got unexpected sup-
port from the Royal Navy when Admiral Sir Charles Little declared that it
was reckless to open yet another front in Africa when "we were not able to
maintain our existing sea communications."34
In the end, it hardly mattered. The decision that counted was being made
that same day up in Hyde Park. Marshall and King always worried when
Roosevelt and Churchill met alone together, and they were right to be con-
cerned. After their adventurous automobile tour of the estate, Roosevelt,
Churchill, and Hopkins sat down in Roosevelt's small study, where, as
Churchill ruefully noted, the Americans "did not seem to mind the intense
heat." Any attempted invasion of France in 1942, Churchill asserted, "was
certain to lead to disaster" besides which it "would not help the Russians,"
which, after all, was the main point. It was inconceivable that they should
do nothing, so it was necessary to consider what was within their reach. In
this wayhe worked his way back to the plan he had proposed at Arcadia: an
invasion of French Northwest Africa. 35
Roosevelt was far more agreeable to the idea than his uniformed chiefs
were. He had never fully abandoned the idea of invading French Africa, and
had signaled as much in a meeting with his war cabinet only three days
before. As always, Marshall had vigorously opposed it, and because of that,
though Roosevelt was now inclined to accept Churchill's logic, he would
not commit himself without talking again to Marshall and King. To do that,
Rosere, Churchill, and Hopkins boarded a train for an overnight jour-
iy back to Washington. Arriving early the next morning, Churchill was
bissfully relieved to reenter his air-conditioned guest room in the White
Hose, and after refreshing himself, he joined Roosevelt in his study. He
hadben there only a few minutes when a courier brought in a pink flimsy—
a copy of a cablegram - and handed it to Roosevelt. The president read it
silently, then told the courier to "give it to Winston." The first words of the
resage tre the prime minister chalk white: "Tobruk has fallen."36
