YUL
302 = NEPTUNE
though Everitt had to roll several dead soldiers out of the way to find room.
He saw some Army engineers attempting to screw several lengths of Banga-
lore torpedo tubes together in an effort to blow a hole through the thick
coils of barbed wire that obstructed the Vierville draw. Rather than sit and
watch, Everitt and his crewmen "started screwing those tubes together."
When they had fifty to sixty feet of it assembled, they tried sliding it for-
ward, but it got entangled in the wire and they had to pull it back and start
over. All the time they endured heavy machine-gun fire. Eventually they got
the tubing in position and pressed the plunger, and the subsequent explo-
sion folded the barbed wire "back right up against that cliff and [it] stayed
there." Everitt remembered what happened next: "Well, boy, those guys
went out of there like a stampede.... They just come off that ground and
they headed for that opening." Everitt and his boat crew went with them,
advancing all the way to the top of the ridge, where they met up with those
who had climbed the face of the cliff. After that, having had enough of Army
life for one day, Everitt and his men returned back down to the beach where
they saw that the tide had gone out and left their LCT sitting high and dry
impaled on a beach obstruction. They had to wait for the next high tide to
get it off the beach. 22
THE TIDE WAS CHANCING ON SHORE TOO. The fahting wae ctill intense,
but it was no longer one-sided. As Hall had foreseen, the influx of more and
more Allied men and equipment, aided by the accurate destroyer fire,
finally tipped the balance ashore. The seventeenth wave landed around
noon, and even if the line of landing craft did not resemble the neat forma-
tion envisioned by the planners, the boats managed to discharge their men
and vehicles. Meanwhile, soldiers from the 116th Regimental Combat
Team (RCT) who had successfully assailed the bluffs west of Vierville
found their way into the town from above. Other soldiers from the 115th
RCT that Gerow had decided to commit early made their way to the top of
the bluffs near St. Laurent, and men from the 16th RCT ascended the bluffs
between Colleville and Le Grand Hameau. By one o'clock that afternoon
they had captured Colleville itself. At about the same time, shellfire from
the Texas took out the last German strongpoint in the Verville draw, which
D- Day: The Crisis
= 303
slowed seventeen tanks from the 743rd tank battalion to push their way up
the gap and into Vierville itself. At one-thirty Gerow reported to Bradley
the men were off the beaches and advancing onto the high ground 23
An hour later, the first elements of Force B, carrying the rest of the 29th
Division, arrived off Omaha Beach. In addition to a dozen LCIL)s packed
vith infantry, it included HMS Oceanway, a former U.S. Navy Landing
Ship, Dock (LSD) that had been turned over to the British under Lend-
Lease only two months earlier. Hall sent her to Fox Green Beach near Col-
keil, and there he flooded her well deck and disgorged her twenty Mike
boats, each preloaded with one M4 Sherman tank. By five o'clock the men
and the tanks were ashore and backing up the move inland. The commander
of the 29th Division, Major General Charles Gerhardt, also went ashore.
Gethard was something of a showman who wore twin pearl-handled revolv-
eins in route to the beach in an LCT, he was annoyed when the boat's com-
mander, Ensign Curtis Hansen, turned away to look for a better landing site.
Gerhardt exploded. "Get ashore!" he yelled. "I've got work I've got to do in
there and run this invasion." Hansen, however, had been briefed on exactly
this se, and he recited the prescribed statement: "General, I'm in charge
of this small boat until we hit the beach, and then you are in charge." Ger-
hardt was stymied, for he, too, knew the protocols. "You are right, Ensign,"
hesaid, and he remained uncharacteristically silent until they landed some
ten or fifteen minutes later. 24
By then, General Huebner was also ashore. He found that the morning
assault had separated many of his officers from their commands, and that
many of his Ist Division units were intermingled. He therefore focused
most of his energies on restoring order, and at midnight he reported to Hall
that he had established continuous front line "from Vierville through St.
Laurent to about a mile south of Colleville." (See Map, page 292.) Though
well short of the official objective for D-Day, it was a significant accom-
plishment in light of all that had gone wrong.?s
By 6:00 p.m. on June 6, while Omaha Beach remained a dangerous place,
the momentum had clearly shifted. German long-range artillery continued
to lob shells onto the beach, and fighting — some of it hand-to-hand - still
raged on the high ground behind it, but it no longer seemed likely that the
