= NEPTUNE
thousand of them, making them the most numerous of any vessel built
during the war. They were the workhorses of the amphibious war, carrying
soldiers and Marines to beaches from Sicily to Saipan?
Another vessel in this general category was the somewhat larger Landing
Craft, Mechanized (LCM), sometimes called a Mike boat since "Mike" was
the phonetic code for the letter M. The 1944 Navy training manual called
the LCM "a big and chunky older brother to the LCVP." Of all-steel con-
struction, each Mike boat displaced thirty tons and could carry a single
Sherman tank, which is why they were sometimes called "tank lighters."
They had twin diesel engines, which made them quite maneuverable, though
that also meant they required a particularly skilled coxswain. With a range of
130 miles, they could cross the Channel on their own, though they, too, had
to be brought across the Atlantic as deck cargo on larger vessels, often sev-
eral at once. By the time of the landings in Normandy, the United States had
produced more than eight thousand of these small tank carriers.
2. A second category of landing craft consisted of larger vessels that
were capable of crossing the English Channel on their own to deliver tanks
and infantry onto the assault beach. The larger of them was the Landing
Craft, Infantry, or LCI, which the sailors affectionately called "Elsies." The
most common type was the ICIL) — the second L standing for "large" -
which were just over 158 feet long and displaced 230 tons. They could carry
up to two hundred men each, though they were relatively fragile with little
armor, and since they lacked bow doors, they could not carry vehicles of
any kind. To disembark their human cargo, they pushed as far up onto the
beach as they could and deployed twin ramps on either side of the bow.
The other vessel in this general category was the Landing Craft, Tank
(LCT), which could carry four or five tanks or heavy trucks in its open
cargo bay. In the course of the war, both Britain and the United States pro-
duced several versions of the LCT. By 1943, the United States was building
the Mark VI, which at 119 feet was considerably shorter than an LCI but
both sturdier and better armored, displacing 286 tons. The key feature of
this type of landing craft was that upon beaching, it could open its bow
doors, deploy a ramp onto the sand, and allow the trucks or tanks in its
open well deck to drive out under their own power.
RELATIVE SIZES OF ALLIED LANDING CrAFt
USS Texas (BB-35)
USS Herndon (DD-638)
LST
LCI (L)
LCT (USN version)
LCM (Mike boat or tank lighter)
LCVP (Higgins boat)
Rhino Ferry
