CHAPTER 15
"A FIELD OF RUINS"
YUL
ROM TIE BEGINNING, Allied planners had assumed that even affer
obtaining a foothold on the beach, sustaining the kind of massive
buildup needed to conquer a continent required seizing a major port on the
French coast. The Neptune operational plan called for the deployment
ashore of eighteen fully equipped divisions during the first two weeks, and
almost no one believed it would be possible to do that over an open beach.
Even if that proved feasible, surely it would be impossible to maintain such
a pace during the long period the Allies needed to build their force up to a
million men or more without a working seaport. The Allies made effective
use of the small Norman ports of Courseulles-sur-Mer on Juno Beach and
Port-en-Bessin on Gold Beach, but they were both small harbors incapable
of handling deep draft ships. For that, the Allies needed to seize a major
seaport. The selection of Normandy as the Allied objective necessarily
meant that the harbor in question had to be Cherbourg, the city at the tip
of the Cotentin Peninsula. Consequently, one of the first Allied goals once
the beaches were secure was for the VII Corps of "Lightning Joe" Collins,
"A Field of Ruins" = 335
inding both the 4th Infantry Division and the scattered and much-
Hodied 82nd Airborne, to push northward up the east coast of the penin-
sula to size Cherbourg in a swift coup de main.!
I'dich happen. Cherbourg remained in German hands for three weeks
after D-Day, and when the Allies finally did seize it on June 27, its value as a
seport had been all but eliminated thanks to the Nazi penchant for smash-
in and wrecking anything they could not possess. The campaign for Cher-
bourg was the capstone of Operation Neptune, and though it was eventually
successful, in the end it did not allow the Allies to shift the logistical focus
of the invasion from the Normandy beaches to a functioning seaport. In-
stead, in this, as in so many aspects of the invasion, the key to Allied success
was the ability of the participants to adjust, adapt, and get on with it.
BISENHOWER VISITED
THE
BEACHHEAD on June 8. Accompanied by
Ramsay and Montgomery, he crossed the Channel on the British minelayer
Apollo and surveyed all five of the landing beaches. He was concerned by
the slow progress of Montgomery's forces toward Caen, where the Ger-
mans were focusing their counterattacks, and he also worried about the sit-
uation on Omaha Beach. He met with Bradley, who by now had established
his headquarters ashore, and expressed his unease that the American en-
caves on Utah and Omaha Beach were still separated from each other. Four
regiments had already begun an advance northward along the coast toward
Cherbourg, but Eisenhower decided that it was more important to unify
and stabilize the beachhead before continuing that drive, and Bradley con-
curred. It is possible to imagine them in Bradley's headquarters bending
over a map as Eisenhower pointed out the revised objectives. First he
wanted to eliminate the pocket of German resistance near Sainte-Mère-
Eglise, which would unify the 4th Division with elements of the 82nd Air-
borne, and then he wanted Bradley to seize the city of Carentan, on the
Taute River. That would unify Omaha and Utah Beaches and make both
beaches more secure. Only then would it be possible to turn north toward
Cherbourg?
Navy warships provided gunfire support for both of these efforts, firing
their big guns ten or fifteen miles inland in response to requests from fire
