18 = NEPTUNE
it roused the slumbering Russian bear, which eventually developed into a
ferocious military giant. Hitler believed that the defeat of Russia would be
only moderately more challenging than the defeat of France had been, and
to ensure it, he applied overwhelming force. More than a hundred divisions
crossed the Soviet frontier on that first day. The Germans achieved com-
plete surprise and were soon deep inside the Soviet Union.
Roosevelt now had to decide whether Russia, like Britain, should be eli-
gible to receive Lend-Lease matériel and equipment. It was one thing to
provide war matériel to America's British "cousins" it was quite another to
send arms and military equipment to Stalin and Communist Russia. In the
end, pragmatism trumped ideology, and soon convoys of American ships
were crossing the Atlantic bound not only for British ports but also on the
long and arduous haul around the North Cape of Norway to Soviet ports
on the White Sea. That strained American sealift capability further and also
complicated the U.S. Navy's undeclared war against German U-boats.
Indeed, by midsummer the situation in the Atlantic was becoming crit-
ical. Frank Knox insisted that it was folly to dispatch valuable war supplies,
which had been built by American workers and paid for with American
money, via American ships, only to see those ships sunk en route to Britain.
Stark agreed, arguing that unless the U.S. Navy became more active in
convoy protection, the effort to supply Britain would become "hopeless."
But how far could Roosevelt extend American naval protection over those
convoys before it became a hostile act? He had already pushed the bound-
aries of neutrality beyond any generally accepted meaning of the term, and
he was aware that there was a line that, if crossed, would constitute active
belligerency. He worried far less about the legal niceties of such a line than
he did about the reaction of American voters. Though he was a trained
lawyer, his instincts were entirely political. Consequently, he acted incre-
mentally, expanding America's commitment to convoy protection bit by
bit, as if probing the limits of what the country would tolerate.
In mid-July, as Roosevelt and Hopkins sat in the White House, the pres-
ident tore a map of the Atlantic Ocean out of the pages of National Geo-
graphic. Spreading it out on a table, he took a pencil and drew a north-south
line on it from a point two hundred miles east of Iceland down to the
Germany
First =
19
Azores, roughly approximating the twenty-sixth parallel. He suggested to
Hopkins that the U.S. Navy should assume full responsibility for policing
the area west of that line, thereby allowing the thinly stretched Royal Navy
to focus its attention on the war zones closer to Europe. It was not only an-
other step toward active American belligerency in the Atlantic but another
tie linking the British and American navies.26
By now, the American Atlantic Fleet, under the leadership of Admiral
Ernest J. King, was operating under full wartime conditions. Even before
the Greer incident in September or the Kearny and Reuben James torpedo-
ings in October, American warships in the Atlantic came to general quar-
ters with sufficient regularity that it became almost routine. At night the
ships ran blacked out, and day or night they steered zigzag courses to throw
off any hostile submarine that might be lining up for a shot. It was both rea-
sonable caution in an active war zone and valuable training for war if and
when it came.
FROM TIME TO TIME, Roosevelt managed to escape from Washington and
spend several days or even weeks at sea, sailing or fishing. He was good at
both, and he genuinely enjoyed them. Ashore, even the most routine ac-
tivities were difficult and occasionally humiliating, especially when it in-
volved his having to be carried from one place to another: At sea, however,
he could maneuver a sailboat with a simple command and a hand on the
tiller; he could land the biggest of fish from his fighting chair using his pow-
erful arms and shoulders, developed from years of compensating for his
ruined legs. Immune to seasickness, he may also have derived satisfaction
from the fact that while others struggled, often unsuccessfully, to maintain
their dignity as the boat swooped and plunged through the waves, he always
remained master of himself. Because some of his advisors could not match
this aplomb in the midst of an active sea, they often dreaded invitations to
accompany him.27
Roosevelt's offshore vacations were frequent enough that the press took
little notice of it when in August 1941 the White House announced that the
president was leaving on another fishing trip. On August 3 he boarded the
presidential yacht Potomac at New London, Connecticut, and headed out
