16
= NEPTUNE
from two nations sought to execute a coordinated military campaign. The
Americans, historically wary of placing U.S. soldiers under foreign com-
mand, made sure to include a cautionary note: "As a general rule, the forces
of each of the Associated Powers should operate under their own com-
mander." And if a theater strategic commander somehow did end up con-
trolling the forces of another nation, he was not to disperse national units
but keep them unified so that, as much as possible, they could remain under
the command of their own officers.?
One important outgrowth of the ABC conversations was the agreement
to establish formal and permanent military missions in each capital. Each
country agreed to send a senior admiral and a senior general to the cap-
ital of the other. Roosevelt had already sent Ghormley to London as an
observer, but such representatives would now do much more than merely
observe, for the new heads of mission were to engage in "collaboration in
the formulation of Military Policies and plans" with their host nation, as
well as "represent their own individual Military services." It was not quite a
formal alliance, and the United States was still technically neutral, but the
ligaments of unity were growing and strengthening.?2
The lengthy report (twelve single-spaced typed pages plus another fifty-
four pages of annexes), dated March 27, 1941, made the usual rounds in both
capitals. In Washington, Secretary of the Navy Knox initialed his approval
on May 23, and Secretary of War Henry Stimson gave his okay on June 2.
But underneath those was a third notation, also handwritten: "Not Approved
by President. It was not that Roosevelt disagreed with the report's conclu-
sions or recommendations. After all, he had already indicated his strong sup-
port of a Germany-first strategy in case of war, and he believed that having a
contingency plan on the shelf was all to the good. He was unwilling, how-
ever, to have his hands tied, or to be formally associated with a document
that came perilously close to collaborating with a belligerent power. To this
point at least, the Anglo-American partnership, such as it was, was limited to
staff-level conversations and kept secret from the general public?3
EVEN AS BRITISH AND AMERICAN OFFICERS discussed possible future
cooperation against Hitler's Germany, the U.S. Navy was already at war
Germany First = 17
with his U-boats in the Atlantic. Only six days after the ABC conference
ended, Roosevelt discussed new and more extensive responsibilities for
the Navy in the U-boat war. He contemplated bringing more warships
from the Pacific to the Atlantic, and ordered Stark to prepare an expanded
and more aggressive convoy program. The new instruction, which I
sevelt endowed with the Orwellian name of "Hemispheric Defens
No. 1,, authorized U.S. Navy warships to attack without warnin
German U-boat operating in the western half of the Atlantic Ocean.
it could be implemented, however, Japan signed a neutrality pact wit
Soviet Union. That removed one more restraint on the Japanese, and o
vinced Roosevelt to retain in the Pacific the warships he b
consid
moving to the Atlantic. Instead, therefore, Roosevelt a
spheric Defense Plan No. 2," which authorized U.S. Navy
to report the location of U-boats to convoys and to their esci
less, it was one more tentative step toward open warfar
surface navy and German undersea hunters.24
Then on June 10 came news that a German U-boat
United States merchant steamer, the Robin Moor. There
alties, for the German U-boat commander had stopped
demanded to see its papers, and then, deciding that it was ca
band goods (some target rifles and ammunition), ordered th
and crew to evacuate into lifeboats before sinking the ship. I
had occurred weeks earlier, but news of it had been delayed unt
boats were found and the passengers rescued. Though it lach
and the carnage of the Lusitania sinking back in 1915, it wa
casus belli if Roosevelt wanted to make an issue of it He mi
an ultimatum, as Wilson had done back when Roosevelt had
tant secretary of the Navy. Instead, Roosevelt merely deliv
message to Congress that fell well short of an ultimatum. L
ignored it. As it happened, he was preoccupied by other issu
later his armies plunged into the Soviet Union. 25
With hindsight, it is evident that Hitler's decision to attack
Union while the British remained defiant on their island was t!
point of the Second World War. It meant a two-front war for Ger
