= NEPTUNE
Eisenhower continued to defend the Anvil operation, though privately
he began to lose heart. "It looks like ANVIL is doomed," he wrote in a mem-
orandum for his diary. "I hate this." Though it was the stalled campaign in
Italy that intensified the crisis, the real culprit, in his view, was the war in the
Pacific. That war was "absorbing far too much of our limited resources in
landing craft, he wrote. Despite the initial strategic decision to fight Ger-
many first— an agreement to which all parties had subscribed —"we are
fighting two wars at once—which is wrong."!7
For months, the several constituencies squabbled over the scarce land-
ing craft, and especially the LSTs. Alan Brooke, who was in the middle of it,
wrote in his diary that distributing LSTs was like "one of those awful jigsaw
problems when it becomes very difficult to fit in all the right pieces." In fact,
it was more like a slide puzzle: vessels shifted from one theater to another
necessarily left a vacuum somewhere else. Eisenhower proposed bringing
twenty LSTs and twenty-one LCIL)s from the Mediterranean in exchange
for AKAs equipped with boat davits for amphibious operations. The JCS
offered a different solution: sending twenty-six LSTs in the Mediterranean
to Britain for Overlord in exchange for twenty-six new LSTs from America
originally scheduled for the Pacific. Sir Henry "Jumbo" Wilson, who was
the Allied commander in Italy, wondered why the new LSTs from America
couldn't go directly to Britain so he could keep the twenty-six he had. The
answer was that the new LSTs wouldn't be ready until late May or early
June, which was obviously too late for Overlord. But as far as Wilson was
concerned, that was too late for him, too, for it would leave him without any
ISTs for nearly three months. Brooke and the Britich Chiefs of Staff insisted
that an attempt to execute Anvil would strip Wilson of his operational
reserve and jeopardize the entire campaign in Italy. The Americans were
not especially alarmed by such a prospect, since they were perfectly willing
to close down the Italian campaign in exchange for opening a new front in
southern France. But instead of seeing that as a rational choice, the British,
and especially Brooke, saw it as evidence of American obtuseness. On Val-
entines Day, Eisenhower wrote to Marshall that "the IST appears to be the
one great question in the landing craft problem to which no really satisfac-
tory answer now seems apparent."18
SHAEF and ANCXF = 183
Throughout this period, the waters were muddied further by Churchill,
whose behavior was even more eccentric than usual. The prime minister
hadsufered a physical collapse after the Tehran conference, and he spent a
fillmonth in Marrakech gathering the strength simply to fly back to Brit-
ain. Even after his return in mid-January, his behavior was erratic. He
seemed to have trouble tracking a line of argument, and he became obsessed
bytangential issues such as his old notion of conducting a landing on Suma-
tra. Brooke was nearly apoplectic in trying to keep him focused on the
issues at hand. "I just cannot get him to face the true facts!" Brooke wrote in
frustration. "It is a ghastly situation.""19
Meanwhile, as February turned to March, there was still no resolution
concerning Anvil. Ramsay found "the continual delay... [v]ery unsatisfac-
tory," and wrote in his diary, "This battle of the Chiefs of Staff is wearing
everyone down." Tempers grew short. After yet one more cable from Amer-
icain which the Joint Chiefs confirmed their support for Anvil, Brooke all
but threw up his hands. "Marshall is quite hopeless," he wrote in his diary.
" have seldom seen a poorer strategist! He cannot see beyond the end of
his nose. In Brooke's view, Ike was no better. "Eisenhower has got abso-
lutely no strategical outlook and is really totally unfit for the post he holds,"
Brooke wrote, though he had to admit, "He makes up [for it], however, by
the way he works for good cooperation between allies."20
By March, Eisenhower was wavering. Much as he wanted to support
Marshall, he saw that clinging to Anvil not only was logistically dubious but
was damaging the alliance. Moreover, he just could not make the numbers
add up. I he counted every LST' currently on hand and raised the "service-
blity ratio from 85 percent to an unrealistic 95 percent, then added all
the ships currently in the construction pipeline, he would still be fifteen
ISTs short on D-Day. In addition, there was the inevitable attrition conse-
quent to all of the hazards of simply going to sea in wartime. By March,
several LSTs had been sunk by the U-boats or damaged in training exer-
cises; one of them (LST-228) broke her anchor chain in Horta, the chief
port of the Azores, and crashed into the rocks. Such losses, unfortunate at
any time, were especially worrisome given the circumstances. On March
20, Eisenhower gave up. He reluctantly confessed to Marshall that it was
