128
= NEPTUNE
friendly but don't intrude," it advised. "Don't make fun of British speech or
accents." One rule that the GIs found particularly hard to follow was "Don't
criticise the food, beer, or cigarettes." A relatively easy one was "Never criti-
cise the King or Queen."
The first Americans to arrive in the British Isles were those who had been
sent to Ulster, the six counties of Northern Ireland, only weeks after Pearl
Harbor. They stepped ashore in Belfast on January 26, 1942, to be wel-
comed by a crowd of dignitaries and a band from the Royal Ulster Rifles
playing its version of "The Star Spangled Banner." The government of the
Republic of Ireland, however, was far less enthralled. Irish president Eamon
de Valera portrayed the arrival of the Americans in Ulster as an "invasion"
and their occupation as a violation of national self-determination. There
were few serious incidents, however, and by the end of 1943 there were
more than sixty-five thousand American GIs in Northern Ireland. By mid-
1944 their numbers had grown to nearly seventy-four thousand?
A far larger number of Americans more than a million of them-
arrived in England in the aftermath of the decisions at Washington and
Quebec in 1943, most of them disembarking at various ports on the west
coast of Britain between Bristol and Liverpool. For many of these new
arrivals, the first reaction was how impossibly green everything was, which
began to make sense when they realized how frequently it rained. For others,
the dominant impression was the physical evidence of the consequences of
war. Those who arrived in Liverpool could count the hulks of sunken ships
littering the harbor. When his transport docked at Avonmouth, near Bris-
tol, one GI recalled seeing his "first look at bomb damage,"
" all the more
impressive because at least come of it was abbarently quite recant To and
his fellow soldiers suddenly appreciated that death could come from the
sky at any moment, and with that understanding, "fear ran through the ship
like a shot." Other GIs had a quite different reaction. Having read about the
Blitz and seen movie newsreels depicting the damage it wrought, they had
concluded that there were probably not two bricks still standing on top of
each other in all of Britain. Yet here were whole streets that were perfectly
intact, with pedestrians and cyclists (though few automobile drivers) going
about their business.®
Brits and Yanks = 129
Those Americans who traveled in one of the slow convoys —which was
most of them—were happy enough to set foot on solid ground again,
though some found it surprisingly difficult. As they moved down the gang-
plank and stepped onto the soil of Britain, they "rolled and staggered" as if
drunk, unable to readjust to walking on a platform that didn't pitch and roll.
After disembarking and being jostled into formation, they were marched
ofl to the local train station. Many were astonished by the miniature (to
American eyes) trains whose passenger coaches were divided into small
dosed compartments that ran down one side of the car. Some asked where
the dub car was, and were disappointed to be told that there was none. The
Gi never knew where they were during their travel within England be-
cause all the identifying signs in the train stations had been removed to
confuse the Germans in case of an invasion. Some GIs took the trains all
the way south to the Channel coast, into Plymouth or Portsmouth, where
the bomb damage was more extensive. On one train filled with newly
aried Americans, there had been a lot of joking and laughing during the
trip south until the train slowed down to enter a city. The GIs then saw "row
aft row, street after street of gutted two-story houses, and the entire train
suddenly became completely silent.?
Other trains discharged their human cargo at anonymous campsites well
avay from the coast. Those who arrived in the summer of 1943 often found
themselves assigned to vacated British barracks: two-story brick Victorian-
ea cavalry barracks with one toilet per floor. One set of barracks even dated
back to the Napoleonic era. After these were filled, GIs were more likely to
be sent to newly constructed campsites on the Salisbury Plain in south
central England, best known to Americans as the site of Stonehenge. After
the men piled out of the trucks, they were handed sandwiches and coffee
and sent of to stow their gear. "We were given one horse blanket and a fold-
ag co, one veteran recalled, "and pointed to the sleeping quarters." 0
The man charged with supervising the logistical arrangements for this
infux was Major General Tohn Clifford Hodges Lee, who ran the Services
of Supply (SOS) command. Lee was a humorless, self-centered, and un-
compromising martinet who wore his Old Testament religiosity on his
dere. Eisenhower called him a "modern Cromwell'; Patton, with less
