92
= NEPTUNE
the day after that. By then Patton was leading an advance southward toward
Casablanca. Efforts to convince the French that their best interest lay in
welcoming the Americans bumped up against French concepts of duty and
honor, and the Americans met heavy resistance. French cruisers and
destroyers charged out of Casablanca harbor, steaming boldly into the
midst of the invasion fleet. The brand-new Richelieu-class battleship Jean
Bart, though unfinished and immobile in port, fired her big 15-inch guns at
American ships offshore. Luckily, the USS Massachusetts landed a 16-inch
shell on the only turret of the Jean Bart that could bear on the American
fleet, jamming it and putting it temporarily out of action.
Casablanca surrendered on November 11 (fittingly, Armistice Day), but
the delays in executing the landings and the battle for the city meant that
the transports and cargo ships had to remain off the landing beaches longer
than intended. That gave the German U-boats an opportunity to find them.
As Hewitt noted, "the anchorage at Fedhala was not a completely secure
one," and the American ships were sitting ducks. Spending four days in one
spot proved to be one day too many. On the evening of November 11, U-173
fired a spread of torpedoes into the anchorage, hitting the transport Joseph
Hewes, the tanker Winooski, and the destroyer Hambleton, all within a ten-
minute period. The next day, torpedoes from U-130 struck three more
troopships, all of which sank, though by then they had discharged their
priceless cargo. Nevertheless, the losses demonstrated the inherent danger
of lingering too long off an invasion beach 33
Elsewhere, the assault went more according to plan. At Safi, a hundred
miles to the south, the attempt to seize a port by a coup de main actually
worked. Two American destroyers, Bernadou and Cole, carrying 197 com-
mandos, steamed boldly into the port. The French opened fire, but French
defenses at Safi were less robust than at Algiers or Oran, and the American
commandos stormed ashore and secured the port. That allowed the big tank
carrier Lakehurst to follow them in and unload her cargo of Sherman tanks at
the jetty. By November 12, the Americans had their foothold in Morocco.34
SECURING THE BEACHHEAD was only the first step. Within twenty-four
hours of the initial landings, Eisenhower was urging Allied forces to "rush
The Mediterranean Tar Baby = 93
eastward without delay" in order to seize Tunisia before the Germans
brought in reinforcements. At first he hoped to do this within a matter
of days. After two weeks, he was hoping "to complete the occupation...
bymid December." By the end of the year, he was looking for success "early
in March." With almost comical understatement, the official historian of
the campaign wrote in 1957: "Succeeding operations in the Mediterranean
area proved more extensive than intended."35
The "rush eastward" was derailed by several factors. One was the need to
consolidate the ports to ensure the continued movement of supplies; an-
other was the need to build new airfields and repair existing ones in order to
provide air cover for the advance; a third was that American forces and their
equipment had to be moved from Morocco to Algeria, a movement exacer-
bated by the perpetual shipping problem. Ike noted that "from the day we
started, the problem of inadequate shipping restricted his movements.
Now, once again, "the old shipping problem rises up to smite us." Instead of
sending the 250 Sherman tanks that had landed at Safi to Algeria by sea, they
were hauled more than eight hundred miles overland on North Africa's
rickety and unreliable single-track railroad. Nor did the weather cooperate.
The postponement of the assault from October to November meant that the
ensuing ground campaign took place during the rainy season, when swift
movement - or any movement — was inhibited by muddy roads. 36
Then, too, Eisenhower was sidetracked and frustrated by interminable
negotiations with various French leaders. Concluding that the Americans
had come to stay, the French agreed to join the anti-Axis alliance. But there
was a bitter debate among several self-appointed candidates about who
should emerge as the leader of the French contingent in that alliance. The
Alies had counted on General Henri Giraud to rally the French to their side,
but Giraud declared that he would play no role at all unless he was given
supreme command of all Allied forces. As always, Eisenhower remained
outwardly calm, though inside he was seething, and he unburdened himself
(Marshall " ind myself getting absolutely furious with these stupid Frogs,"
he wrote bemoaning the necessity of dealing with little, selfish, conceited
oms that call themselves men" Eventually, Eisenhower made a deal with
Admiral lean-Francois Darlan granting the Frenchman authority over all nf
