56
—~FPTUNE
agreement while disguising their skepticism. In the long run, this disin-
genuous pose damaged the mutual trust within the Anglo-American
partnership, especially when the British subsequently sought to rein in
American enthusiasm. As one senior British officer wrote later, it would
have been far better had they said from the beginning, "We are not going
into this until it is a cast-iron certainty." Instead, they responded with the
equivalent of a parental "We'll see." Is
Finally, the British outlook was affected by Churchill's concern for the
political ramifications of strategic decisions. There is nothing the least bit
dishonest or inappropriate about such concerns. Securing political objec-
tives is the very purpose of war. British objectives and American political
objectives, however, were not fully congruent. Churchill's emphasis on the
Mediterranean was driven in part by his strategic goal of (as he put it)
"closing the ring" around Germany. But it was also a product of his determi-
nation to protect British imperial interests, a goal that was antithetical to the
Americans, Gibraltar, Malta, and Suez were stepping-stones through the
Mediterranean to India, the jewel of the British Empire. It is noteworthy that
in addition to the formal title "King and Defender of the Faith," George VI,
like his predecessors back to Victoria, also bore the title "Emperor of India""
As the king's prime minister, Churchill took that seriously, and keeping
India and the rest of the British Empire intact was for him a principal war
goal. Some of the sharpest exchanges between Churchill and Roosevelt
during the war concerned the future political status of India. It was in reac-
tion to American criticism of British rule in India that Churchill announced
to the Commons later that year: "I have not become the King's First
Minister in order to preside over the liquidation of the British Empire."
Despite these various concerns, the British did not reject the idea of a
1942 cross-Channel invasion out of hand. Indeed, the British Chiefs of
Staff spent many days and weeks studying various alternative scenarios for
landings in either the Pas de Calais or the Cotentin peninsula. They worked
up several plans for quick coastal raids or the establishment of a permanent
bridgehead, and some British officers became keen advocates of an early
offensive. But in the end, the numbers just did not add up. Any landing in
1942, even a small-scale raid, would have such a tiny margin of error as to
"We've Got to Go to Europe and Fight" = 57
be nearly suicidal, and was unlikely to be of any significant help to the
Russians. By the time Marshall and Hopkins arrived in England, Churchill
had concluded that a cross-Channel operation in 1942 was simply out of
the question. 16
Marshall and Hopkins arrived on April 8, and they met the next day with
General Alan Brooke, Dill's successor as chief of the Imperial General Staff
and Marshall's counterpart.* Sporting a David Niven-style pencil mus-
tache, Brooke was a small, neat, birdlike man, which was appropriate since
bird watching and bird photography were his life's passion. From the begin-
ning, however, Marshall and Brooke talked past each other. In part this was
because of the phenomenon, observed by many over the years and gener-
ally attributed to George Bernard Shaw, that Americans and Britons were
one people divided by a common language. Brooke, an Ulsterman, not only
spoke with the Gaelic accent of Northern Ireland but did so in a rapid-fire
delivery that often left the Americans entirely perplexed. Moreover, Brooke
also had a lower dental plate that occasionally got in the way of his machine-
gun pronouncements. Since the Americans were unwilling to pester him
with constant requests to repeat himself, much of what he said flew past
them without ever finding purchase. For his part, Brooke understood
Marshall's soft Virginia-accented speech well enough — it was the content
of that speech that he thought absurd. Brooke liked Marshall personally
(a pleasant and easy man to get on with, he noted in his diary) but found
his arguments so "fantastic" that he concluded Marshall was "no strategist."
Brooke conceded that Marshall was "a good general at raising armies," but
"his strategical ability does not impress me at all!" — the two exclamation
points underscoring his incredulity!7
Marshall's central argument was that the Allies must somehow halt the
drip, drip, drip of the continuous drain of resources to secondary theaters
and get serious about the necessary buildup for the eventual invasion of
* Brookee name occasionally creates confucion for American readers He was elevated
to the peerage at the end of the war, and in selecting his title he conflated his two
names to become Viscount Alanbrooke, which is how his name appears in the notes
and biography of this book. During the war, however, he was Alan Brooke, and his
friends called him "Brooksie."
