242 = NEPTUNE
After a sleepless night, the SHAEF command team met again at South-
wick House at 4:00 a.m. While the weather had begun to improve, it was
hardly ideal. Nevertheless, Stagg came into the room smiling. The wind
would remain "fresh," he said, and while it was evident that the crossing
would be "uncomfortable," the weather would improve throughout the day,
and indeed for the next several days. Eisenhower got up from his chair and
walked about the room, his head bent forward and his hands clasped be-
hind his back. No one spoke. Everyone understood that the decision was
his alone. His next words would decide the fate of thousands, and quite
possibly change the course of history.
"O.K." he said. "We'll go."39
The various commanders left to pass the news. Eisenhower headed down to
Portsmouth to watch men boarding the LCI(L)s and to chat informally
with some of the soldiers. Now that the decision had been made, a weight
was lifted from his shoulders and he talked easily and confidently. After-
ward, he met briefly with members of the press, and as he did so, the morn-
ing clouds parted just enough to allow "a quick flash" of sunlight. If Monty
had been there, he might have made some remark about "the sun of Auster-
litz" the gleam of light that presaged Napoleon's greatest victory back in
1805. Since it was Ike, he merely said, 'By George, there is some sun."O
CHAPTER 11
D-DAY: THE INVASION
A MONG TUS FIRSE CRAFT Lo sortie on june 5 were the minesweep-
ers that would clear channels for the invasion forces. Though less
glamorous than combat, and too often underappreciated, minesweeping
was (and is) a complicated and dangerous business. Stark believed that
"minesweeping is one of the most vital and critical parts of our forthcoming
operation," and Ramsay insisted that "the mine is our greatest obstacle to
success." Despite the advent of advanced sweeping gear, minesweeping
remained an imperfect science. The mines were not merely cleared away or
"wept, the way one might sweep a kitchen floor; they were deliberately
detonated, hopefully in a way that did not also sink the minesweepers,
though occasionally they did!
The German mines off the Normandy beaches were not as numerous as
the Allies feared, mainly because Hitler had decreed that a full deployment
of mines should be postponed until it was clear where the Allies were com-
ing ashore. Still, the mines that were there proved particularly challenging
because they relied on a variety of technologies. So-called Katie mines rested
