232 = NEPTUNE
"What is your name, Admiral?"
"Windsor."
"First name?"
"George""
The quartermaster dutifully recorded on his clipboard that the ship had
been visited by Admiral George Windsor.20
Churchill, too, could not resist inserting himself into the frenzy of rep-
arations. He was a regular visitor to Southwick House, where Eisenhower,
Ramsay, and others felt obliged to provide him with updated briefings,
and the prime minister also visited several of the embarkation sites. More
problematically he announced to Ramsay his plan to cross the Channel
himself on the British cruiser HMS Belfast so that he could be present
when Allied guns opened on the French coast. When Eisenhower
expressed his opposition to this idea, Churchill overrode him. Churchill
conceded that Eisenhower had command authority over the invasion
force, but he insisted that the American general did not have the right "to
regulate the complement of the British ships in the Royal Navy? Ike
backed down, but Churchill still had King George to contend with. At first
the king was enthusiastic about the idea and suggested that he, too, should
board the Belfast and take part in the invasion. Soon enough, however, he
appreciated how reckless it was to create a situation where a chance bomb
or shell could produce an inestimable psychological victory for the Axis.
He told Churchill that neither of them should go. Churchill was a dutiful
and even enthusiastic monarchist, but he rebelled at being told that he
could not go to sea, even by the king. He was after all (as Roosevelt often
called him in their correspondence), a "former naval person." When
George VI reminded Churchill that the prime minister required the
king's permission to leave the country, Churchill replied that being on
a king' ship was technically not "out of the country." George VI saw that
the key to resolving this impasse was not an authoritarian declaration but
an appeal to Churchill's sense of duty. On June 2, even as the invasion fleet
letter to his prime minister:
"A Hum Throughout the Country" = 233
Please consider my own position. I am a younger man than you, I am
a sailor, and as King I am the head of all these Services. There is
nothing I would like better than to go to sea, but I have agreed to stay
athome; is it fair that you should then do exactly what I should have
liked to do myself? I ask you most earnestly to consider the whole
question again, and not let your personal wishes, which I very well
understand, lead you to depart from your own high standard of duty
to the State?
Churchill stayed behind.
AS THE MOMENT OF DEPARTURE NEARED, many men in the invasion
amada, sensing the imminence of action, took the opportunity to write a
latter home professing their love to their families, asserting their will-
agness to die if necessary, and asking to be remembered. Some wrote their
parents, others their wives. In this, there was little difference between the
ranks Ensign Edwin Gale assured his father that he was proud to be "one of
the chosen thousands who are going to strike the blow that is going to win
the war." Admiral Don Moon wrote his wife that he would do his best to
cary the country's banner high and apply all power to the enemy's defeat."
Both pledged their "devotion and love" to their families.22
The time of departure varied from port to port, and even from ship to
ship, with the more distant and slower vessels leaving first. Indeed,
some elements of the Allied armada were already at sea well before the
amphibious ships began to load their cargoes. The first to leave port
were the "corncobs" —the derelict ships that would be sunk off the
target beaches to form the "gooseberry" breakwater. They had left the
small port of Oban, in northern Scotland, under tow on May 31. Trav-
eling at only three to four knots, it would take them ten days to get to
Normandy, by which time, presumably, the beaches would be secured.
The next to depart were a pair of four-man midget submarines, the X-20
and the X-23, which left Portsmouth under tow on June 2 to take up
positions off the British beaches, where they would act as beacons and
guides for the invaders.
