10 8
- NEPTUNE
turned to October, and October to November, the president made no
formal announcement about it.
One reason for his hesitation was the pushback he was getting from the
other members of the Joint Chiefs. Both Ernie King and Hap Arnold
insisted that Marshall could not be spared from his current job. Secretly
they may have believed that no one else could manage the mercurial pres-
dent and give him not only the kind of direct and honest advice he expected
and deserved but also the subtle guidance and direction that, in their
opinion, he needed. They also suggested that appointing Marshall to com-
mand Overlord would be a demotion from being chief of staff. As Arnold
wrote General Thomas T. Handy, the assistant chief of staff for operations,
sending Marshall to Europe to command Overlord would make him "just
another Theater Commander.' Roosevelt might have resisted these objec-
tions from the JCS, but soon Marshall's pending appointment became a
political issue as well. Rumors that Marshall would be relieved from his
post and sent to Europe found their way into the press. Republican newspa-
pers, ever suspicious of nefarious plotting by the New Dealers, portrayed it
as a scheme to get the forthright and honest Marshall out of the way.?8
Marshall himself maintained a professional silence about the whole issue,
but he did have concerns about how wide the supreme commander s author-
ity would reach. He believed that whoever commanded Overlord should
also have strategic control of Mediterranean operations. An advocate of uni-
fied command since Arcadia, Marshall was convinced that it was essential
that one man "should exercise command over the Allied force commanders
in the Mediterranean, in northwest Europe, and of the strategic air forces."
That was anathema to Churchill, not only because it would put the entire
European war in the hands of an American but also because the prime min-
ister continued to harbor hopes of extending Mediterranean operations into
the Balkans and the Greek Islands, something that was unthinkable if an
American was in charge. As far as the British were concerned, Overlord
would be an independent and completely separate command, and a British
officer would have his own independent command in the Mediterranean.
Such a narrowing of the authority of the supreme commander made it some-
what less "supreme" and was one more factor for Roosevelt to consider?"
"Some God-Dammed Things Called LSTs" = 169
Roosevelt had still not made a decision, or at least had not yet announced
one, when he left to attend yet another conference with Churchill-and,
for the first time, with Stalin—at Tehran in November 1943. En route to
that meeting, Roosevelt and Churchill stopped in Cairo, where they met
with the Chinese leader Chiang Kai-shek. There, Roosevelt first broached
with Marshall the possibility that he might not be selected to command
Orerlord after all. The president hated personal confrontation and there-
fore sent his alter ego, Harry Hopkins, to sound out the general on the
question. Marshall told Hopkins that he would "wholeheartedly" accept
any decision the president made. Thus assured, Roosevelt himself talked to
Marshall the next day. Roosevelt wanted to know how Marshall felt about
the possibility of staying on in Washington as chief of staff. Marshall again
professed that he would be happy with any job the president assigned to
kim, and asserted that "the issue was too great for any personal feelings to
be considered." At the end of their conversation, Roosevelt signaled his
likelyintent by telling Marshall, "I feel I could not sleep at night with you
out of the country. 40
At Tehran, a number of the old issues were revisited. Churchill could not
help reprising some of his now-familiar, even tedious arguments about con-
tinuing Mediterranean operations at the expense of delaying Overlord by a
month or two, but he elicited little support. Stalin made it clear that such an
option would provide no significant relief to the embattled Red Army.
Russian armies, he noted, were facing 210 German divisions on the Eastern
Front plus 50 more divisions made un of Hungarians. Finns, and Roma-
nian, for a total of 260 enemy divisions - perhaps two million men. He
hardly needed to add that this was ten times the number of Germans the
western Allies faced in Italy, and fifty times the force that the Anglo-
Americans planned to put ashore in Normandy, though the numbers
were skewed by the fact that British and American divisions were nearly
twice as large as the actual (as opposed to the theoretical) size of German
The issue of landing craft came up as well. Marchall acknowledged that
"the question of adequate landing craft" especially "those capable of carry-
ing 40 tanks° (sic), was "the chief problem" in planning the cross- Channel
