52 = NEPTUNE
The meeting did not begin well. Churchill-like, Roosevelt began with a
rambling discourse in which he reviewed many of the problem areas
throughout the world from the Middle East to China, with particular
emphasis on the Mediterranean. Only with some effort did Marshall get
the president to focus on the issue he had come to discuss: an early assault
on Europe. As Marshall explained it, his plan had three elements, each sub-
sequently endowed with a code name. A build-up phase (Bolero) would
begin at once and involve "the movement to the British Isles of U.S. air and
ground forces comprising approximately one million men." The invasion
phase (Roundup) would consist of an amphibious assault by those men on
"beachheads between Le Havre and Boulogne" in northern France on or
about April 1, 1943. A third element (Sledgehammer) was a contingency
plan for a small-scale invasion of France in the fall of 1942 in case of a
Russian collapse, or if German forces became so "completely absorbed
on the Russian front" that it created an opportunity. Though public
speaking was not Marshall's strong suit, Stimson thought he "made a very
fine presentation."
Roosevelt listened carefully but showed little enthusiasm. One problem,
surely, was that Marshall's plan envisioned no direct action against Ger-
many, or anyone else for that matter, for over a year. What were American
forces — those one million men—to do in the meantime? Asking the Rus-
sians to wait a full year for any significant relief was unlikely to strengthen
their confidence in Anglo-American support. Stalin was instinctively suspi-
cious, even paranoid, about his partnership with the western Allies, and he
was already convinced that Churchill was willing to fight the Germans to
the last Russian. (Or, as Churchill might have put it, to fight the Nazis to the
last Communist.) Learning that the Anglo-Americans were planning to
stay out of the European continent for another twelve months while the
Russian army bore the entire burden of the war might encourage Stalin to
reconsider his options. In addition, Roosevelt worried about the patience
of the American public. The country was still enraged by the Japanese attack
on Pearl Harbor, and sending soldiers off to cool their heels in England for
a year or more would surely increase public pressure to send at least some
of them to the Pacific. The president believed it was "very important to
"We've Got to Go to Europe and Fight" = 53
morale to give this country a feeling that they are in the war..., to have
American troops somewhere in active fighting across the Atlantic." He was
deeply committed to the Germany-first concept, but he feared that unless
U.S. soldiers got into action somewhere in Europe soon— preferably that
summer— that strategy might become politically unsustainable.®
These factors led Roosevelt to ask Marshall about North Africa. Though
he had previously written to Churchill that Gymnast was not possible, he
had done so principally because of the scarcity of shipping. On the other
hand, if enough ships could be found to carry a million men to England,
surely there would be enough for an assault on North Africa.'
Marshall opposed it. If the Russians showed signs of a collapse, he coun-
tered, Sledgehammer could be implemented, but to embrace an invasion of
North Africa would draw resources away from the vital front and inevitably
postpone the crucial and decisive thrust into northern France. Marshall's
plan already included the dispatch of an American division to New Zealand
and the delivery of planes to China; further dispersions would so scatter
U.S. assets that the necessary buildup in England would be compromised.
Hopkins agreed. Though he, too, appreciated the importance of early
action, he supported the central elements of Marshall's plan. On the other
hand, Hopkins also saw that no plan was likely to succeed without
Churchill's backing. Instead of submitting this plan to the Combined
Chiefs, therefore, he suggested that Marshall should carry it personally to
England to gain the prime minister's support. Roosevelt liked that idea, in
patt because it would allow him to keep the question in play and see what
developed. He declared that Marshall should immediately fly to London to
see Churchill and that Hopkins should go with him.!o
Roosevelt wrote Churchill to tell him that Marshall and Hopkins were
on their way with a plan which I hope Russia will greet with enthusiasm,"
and which could be labeled "the plan of the United Nations." He followed
that up with another cable in which he declared that Marshall's plan
"had my heart and mind in it." Despite these endorsements, there was an
inherent and fundamental disconnect between the views of the president
and his Army chief of staff. To Marshall the key was an invasion of occupied
Europe, something that could not be undertaken until the spring of 1943;
