YUL
280
= NEPTUNE
sides of the ship. One mine off the port bow did explode, blowing a two-
foot hole in the forward hull and injuring two soldiers. Going further would
endanger the ship itself. Even though he had offloaded only 60 of the 201
soldiers on board, Vyn backed away from the beach and hoisted the signal
Baker Queen to notify nearby Higgins boats that they should come along-
side to assist in landing troops. But those Higgins boats that were still afloat
were all on missions of their own, and Vyn saw that he would have to find
another landing site. He spotted one further along the beach and again
pushed his ship ashore. As he did so, a mine exploded under the ship, and
almost simultaneously a German artillery shell struck the bow. "Within
seconds," Vyn reported, "the entire well deck was a mass of flames." There
was not enough water pressure in the hoses for the crew to fight the fires,
and the ship could not retract without sinking. Reluctantly Vyn gave the
order to abandon ship.?1
At that moment, the 91's sister ship, LCI(L)-92, was also headed for the
beach. Though crewmen on the bow could see that the 91 was "enveloped
in flames and smoke," the 92 pushed on nonetheless. The men on board
could feel the concision of near misses as tall funnels of water erupted on
both sides. Then "a terrifying blast lifted the whole ship upward with a sud-
den lurch" The concussion threw men to the deck, and the heat was so
powerful that one crewman felt like he was in "the midst of a blast furnace.
Only seconds later, "another shattering explosion shook the ship like a toy
boat. Like the 91, the 92 had been struck by an enemy shell only seconds
after hitting a mine. The mine "blew out a hole in the starboard side big
enough to drive a Higgins boat through," and the shell landed among the
soldiers who were bunched forward preparing to disembark. Forty-one of
them were killed instantly. Another shell hit the starboard ramp, and sol-
diers and sailors began jumping over the side, though others stayed on
board and tried to fight the fires. The rising tide pushed the crippled
LCI(L)-92 sideways up onto the beach, a complete wreck. Like the survi-
vors of the 91, the crew of the 92 and those soldiers who made it off the ship
joined the growing mass of humanity on the beach.?2
It was a mess. Lieutenant (ig)) Hatry Montgomery, skipper of LI(L)-
489, reported that craft of all description were maneuvering in all directions,"
D- Day: The Beaches =
281
making it impossible for him, or anyone else, to steer a straight course. He
could not get to the beach because it was completely congested with "debris,
viteckage, broached and sunken boats, burning tanks and vehicles." Those
soldiers who had landed, and those sailors forced to join them when their
ships were wrecked, sheltered precariously behind that low ridge of shingle,
pressed facedown into the sand as they sought to avoid the machine gun bul-
lets passing only inches over their heads. Soon German mortar fire would
ense even that limited protection. And all the while, the relentless tide con-
tined to mount the beach, faster than some of the wounded could crawl,
reducing slowly but inexorably the narrow strip of land where men could still
live. At eight-thirty, the beach master on Omaha notified Admiral Hall that
"they were stopping the advance of follow up waves?" Only two hours after it
had started, the invasion of Omaha Beach had stalled. 23
BY THEN, THE BRITISH AND CANADIAN FORCES had landed on Sword,
Juno, and Gold Beaches.
The British version of the Higgins boats, the
wooden-hulled L.CAs, which carried thirty men each, began heading for
the beach at 6:00 a.m., and they crunched up onto the sand at 7:25, not
quite an hour after the Americans. The British and Canadians also faced
ferocious resistance, but they had several advantages that the Americans
on Omaha Beach did not. First, the naval bombardment there had been far
more effective, especially on Sword Beach. Second, the German defenders
at Sword and Juno Beaches lacked the advantage of occupying high
ground and the ability to create a crossfire over the beach. Finally, the as-
saulting troops had better tank support, since far more of the swimming
DD tanks had made it successfully to shore. Several of the DD tank crews
at Sword Beach found that their engines had been compromised with sea-
water while en route to the beach, though that did not prevent them from
playing a role in the attack. Using their stern propellers, they pushed their
tanks as close to shore as they could, and then, with most of the tank still
awash in the surf and only the turret exposed, they opened fire on the
German gun positions. One coxswain of an L.CA returning from Sword
Beach for a second load, shouted up to the deck of the transport: "It's a
piece of cake!"24
