170
= NEPTUNE
attack, though he assured the Russians that "the schedule of production
had been stepped up" and he was confident that Overlord could take place
on time as planned. 42
It was Stalin who raised the issue of who would command it. When Roo-
sevelt told him that the decision had not yet been made, the Russian pre-
mier stated that while he did not expect to have a voice in the decision,
someone should be named, he should be named soon, and he should have
complete authority. Though he did not say so, the implication was that
unless and until the Anglo-Americans named a commander, it was hard to
take their promises of an imminent invasion seriously.43
That may have encouraged Roosevelt finally to get off the fence. He had
hesitated until now partly because it was his administrative style to delay. In
addition, however, despite a somewhat selfish desire to keep Marshall in
Washington, he did not want to deprive him of his place in history. Student
of history that he was, the president knew that generals who operated
behind the scenes seldom won the kind of public credit that fell to success-
ful operational commanders. He resolved his dilemma by convincing him-
self that this war was different, that future historians would not-could
not-overlook Marshall's manifest contributions even without an active
field command. That meant that Marshall could stay in Washington, where
he was essential, and still earn his place in the history books.44
Having made the decision, Roosevelt did not wait long to act on it.
Returning from the Tehran Conference, the president summoned Eisen-
hower to meet him in Cairo prior to a quick trip to Sicily to hand out some
medals. As soon as the two men settled into the back of the president's car
at the airport, Roosevelt turned to Eisenhower and said, "Well, Ike, you are
going to command OVERLORD"45
CHAPTER 8
SHAEF AND ANCXF
ISENHOWER LEFT NORTH AFRICA on the last day of the year to fly
back to the United States. Between quick trips to visit his son, a cadet
at West Point, and his mother in Kansas, he spent a quiet few days with his
wife at the Greenbrier resort in West Virginia, which was being used as a
convalescent hospital by the Army. After that, Ike traveled to Washington
to discuss his new command with Marshall. He had planned to return to
Africa afterward to say goodbye to the "happy family" he had worked with
for more than a year, but Marshall encouraged him to fly instead directly to
England. On January 15, he flew to the Azores, and then on to Prestwick
Airport, near Glasgow, where he boarded a train for London, arriving there
on January 17. With that, COSSAC ceased to exist and was replaced by
а w acronm: SHAEF, which stood for Supreme Headquarters, Allied
Expeditionary Force!
By then, a number of the men that would make up the command team
for Neptune- Overlord were already in place, and Eisenhower had promised
Marshall that he would disturb the present setup as little as possible." There
