94
= NEPTUNE
North Africa in exchange for his cooperation. Eisenhower may have thought
that one "Frog" was as good (or as bad) as another, but Darlan had been a
prominent Nazi collaborator, and the British and American public response
to the arrangement was outrage. Ike survived the criticism, and the awk-
wardness of working with a former collaborator ended when Darlan was
assassinated by a French monarchist on Christmas Eve.37
Most of all, however, the Allied advance into Tunisia was slowed by the
Germans, who rushed reinforcements into North Africa and established
strong defensive positions before the British and Americans could exploit
the surprise of their initial landings. As a result, what was supposed to be a
quick dash turned into a lengthy slog. The low point was a surprise German
counterattack at Kasserine Pass in February 1943. Directed by Field Mar-
shal Erwin Rommel, who justified his reputation as "the Desert Fox" in this
campaign, two German Panzer divisions smashed through American
defenses and advanced for three days before withdrawing. The Americans
lost some twenty-five hundred men and more than a hundred tanks. This
debacle was a wake-up call for American arms, and for Fisenhower as well.
It forced Ike to reassess his assumptions about the timetable, and to make
several changes in command, including urging the promotion of George
Patton. Some British soldiers, who had been fighting in North Africa since
June 1940, saw Kasserine Pass as a kind of comeuppance for the brash
Americans. A few punned on the popular George M. Cohan World War I
song "Over There" by replacing the line "The Yanks are coming" with "The
Yanks are running."38
Eventually Eisenhower and the Americans recovered, but it took six
months-until May 1943 —for the British and Americans to drive Axis
forces from the continent. It was a significant victory: at a cost of seventy
thousand casualties, more than half of them British, the Allies inflicted sim-
ilar losses on the Germans and Italians, and also took more than a quarter
of a million prisoners. Of course, even after this victory, the Allies were no
nearer to Berlin than they had been in Scotland, and during that same
period, the Russians had been continuously engaged in the ferocious Battle
of Stalingrad, inflicting more than three-quarters of a million casualties on
the Germans while suffering over a million casualties of their own. Despite
The Mediterranean Tar Baby = 95
the North African victory, the Russians might still ask, with some asperity,
ifthe western Allies were holding up their end.
Notwithstanding Stalin's disparagement, Torch was very likely all that was
possible for the Anglo-American forces in 1942. The many errors and disap-
pointments of the campaign proved that Churchill and the British had been
corect in their assertion that the Allies were not ready to leap across the
Channel. By the end of the campaign, even the most sanguine American—
Eisenhower included—had come to appreciate that if they had launched
their plywood Higgins boats and modified Caribbean freighters filled with
inexperienced soldiers and untested commanders against German-occupied
France in the fall of 1942, the consequences would have been fully as disas-
trous as the British had predicted.
IN THE LATE NINETEENTH CENTURY, the American folklorist Joel Chan-
der Harris published a series of tales from the Old South derived from
stories he had heard while living among the South's African-American
community. In one of the best-known of those tales, B'rer Rabbit con-
founds his nemesis B'rer Fox by constructing a mannequin made of tar —a
tarbaby- and placing it by the road. When B'rer Fox becomes annoyed that
the mute figure refuses to acknowledge his greeting, he strikes it with his
Eit, which sticks fast. Angered, he then strikes it with his other fist, and then
with i fet, until he is entirely embedded in sticky tar and rendered helpless.
Though there was no trickster figure to lure the Allies into their Mediter-
ranean adventure, in November 1942 the Allies had hurled their fist into
North Africa and it had stuck. In the extended campaign for Tunisia, they
employed their other fist. By the time the Allies secured the victory in May
1948, there were eight hundred thousand British and American soldiers in
North Africa. As Marshall and Eisenhower had predicted, the lengthy cam-
paignall but ensured that the invasion of Europe would be delayed for at
estay ar. Churchill had argued from the beginning that an invasion of the
European continent in 1942 was simply beyond reach. Now, however, it
«emed likely that Torch had made a cross-Channel invasion the following
Jar equally impractical. Still, the landings in North Africa and the cam-
paign for Tunisia did constitute an important, even vital apprenticeship for
