188
= NEPTUNE
put Vian in an awkward position. To him, being second in command of
Neptune was a far more desirable billet than being the administrative head
of amphibious operations. He was therefore concerned when Churchill
invited him to dinner, unsure of what he would say if the prime minister
offered him Mountbatten's job. As usual at Chequers, dinner was quite late,
and the guests didn't sit down to eat until nearly 11:00 p.m. The party broke
up at 2:30 in the morning without any job offer being extended, and Vian
thought he was off the hook. Apparently the dinner had been an audition,
however, because Churchill sent for him at eight the next morning, receiv-
ing him in his bed, and made the expected offer. Vian swallowed hard and
told the prime minister that he would prefer the job with Ramsay, "which
was operational and a fighting one." Churchill did not press the issue. He
may have been pleased that a veteran Royal Navy officer preferred a fighting
command to administration, and perhaps wished that he could have one,
t00.26
Vian's responsibilities under Ramsay were redefined after the cross-
Channel operation was expanded from three divisions to five, for that
meant there would be five landing beaches as well, too many for a single
naval task force to cover. Ramsay's command was divided in half: a Western
Task Force responsible for the two American beaches (initially code-named
Oboe and Uncle), and an Eastern Task Force for the two British beaches
(Sword and Gold) and the Canadian beach (Tuno). In that new arrange-
ment, it seemed only logical that Vian should assume command of the
Eastern (British) Task Force, and he jumped at the opportunity. Instead of
being second in command of the whole operation, he would be first in
command of half of it.27
The new assignment seemed a natural for Vian, a fighting admiral with
an enviable war record. Curiously, however, administering the various ele-
ments of a disparate command did not come naturally to him. Impetuous
as he was in fending off Italian battleships, he seemed ill at ease administer-
ing a force that consisted of hundreds of LMs, LCTs, LI(L)s, and LSTs,
as well as minesweepers, destroyers, and cruisers. He often referred issues
that he might have handled himself up the chain to Ramsay's office, and
soon enough Ramsay's staff began to grouse about it. After a long meeting
SHAEF and ANCXF = 189
with Vian on March 3, Ramsay wrote in his diary that his Eastern Task
Force commander "strikes me as being a little helpless." "In fact," he wrote,
"feel that I am organizing his part of the show as well as my own."?8
That was certainly not the case with the officer assigned to command the
Western (American) Task Force, Rear Admiral Alan G. Kirk. As with Vian,
Ramsay also enjoyed a friendly relationship with Kirk, one that had begun
two years before when Kirk had been the American naval attaché during
Ramsa's command tenure at Dover. They, too, had been regular golf part-
ners, and knew each other as "Alan" and "Bertie." Like Vian, Kirk had played
anactive role in the landings in Sicily, after which, at the request of Admiral
King, he had flown out to the Pacific to discuss amphibious operations with
members of Chester Nimitz's staff. In the fall of 1943, however, he was back
in England and assigned to Ramsay's staff. Upon his return, Kirk called
Ramsay up and invited him to have lunch. Ramsay's cool refusal suggested
to Kirk that he had made a gaffe. Since their golfing days, Ramsay had
gined two more stars and was now vastly Kirk's superior. To make amends,
Kick hurried over to Ramsay's headquarters to report to him formally and
officially?9
Just as Vian had assumed that he would be Ramsay's deputy, Kirk's initial
assumption was that he would be Ramsay's chief of staff. But with Ramsay's
command now split, Kirk was the logical person to take over the Western
(American) Task Force. For Kirk, this was great news, for, like Vian, he
much preferred a fighting billet to administrative duties. Some weeks
before, he had reported to the British First Sea Lord, Admiral Andrew
Cunningham, whom he had known for years, and Cunningham had teased
him by saying that as Ramsay's chief of staff, he was likely to miss out on most
ofthe action. During the invasion, Cunningham told him, "you'll be with
Admiral Ramsay in a big bomb shelter down the south coast of England."
"Oh no" Kirk replied. "I don't expect to be there at all. I expect to be on
my flagship off the coast of Normandy."
His riposte was as much bravado and bantering as genuine expectation,
but as it happened, he was correct. His appointment to command the West-
em Task Force meant that he would be an active, indeed central, player in
the invasion 30
