32
= NEPTUNE
placed such an operation at the center of his planning documents. As a
young man, Churchill had been fond of declaring, "The only punch worth
throwing was a knockout punch." But not now. Not this year. He thought
that if the Allies secured command of the seas and gained air superiority
over the continent, and if they could produce the vast amount of materials
necessary, an invasion of Europe might be possible "during the summer of
1943. Even then, he wrote, the invasion would require "nourishing on a
lavish scale," and such an enterprise was simply not possible in 1942.12
Meanwhile, Churchill did not dismiss the suggestion in the ABC report
that an accelerated bombing campaign and economic privation in Europe
might lead to significant unrest among Hitler's unwilling subjects. He never
gave up on the idea that "an internal collapse is always possible." That was
no sure thing, of course, and so it was necessary to prepare "for the libera-
tion of captive countries of Western and Southern Europe by the landing at
suitable points, successively or simultaneously, of British and American
armies strong enough to enable the conquered populations to revolt." 13
A central conundrum in this view was that if an invasion was not possible
until 1943, what were the Allies to do in the meantime? The summer of
1943 was eighteen months away, and surely the Allies could not spend all
that time merely accumulating the necessary wherewithal for the eventual
thrust onto the continent. This was especially true in light of the facts that
the Russians were dying by the hundreds of thousands on the Eastern Front
and the American public, eager to avenge Pearl Harbor, wanted to send
forces to the Pacific. Given those pressures, it was absolutely essential to do
something in the Atlantic theater in 1942, and for Churchill that something
was obvious: "A campaign must be fought in 1942 to gain possession of, or
conquer, the whole of the North African shore. He argued that such a cam-
paign would close the ring around Hitle's European empire, forestall an
Axis move into Iberia (Spain and Portugal), and, by regaining use of the
Mediterranean sea lanes, obviate the need to send Middle East convoys all
the way around Africa. Finally, it would compel Vichy France to choose
sides once and for all. With the United States now in the war, French antip-
athy for the British would be ameliorated; they might even be encouraged
to rejoin the Allied cause. At the very least, an Allied presence in North
Arcadia m
33
Africa would compel the Germans to occupy the rest of France, which
would tie down more German divisions and thereby provide relief to
the hard-pressed Russians. For all these reasons, Churchill argued, "the
Northwest African theater is one most favorable for Anglo-American
operations." But first he had to sell that idea to the Americans.14
The Duke of York eased into the commodious anchorage at Hampton
Roads, Virginia, on December 22. The official itinerary called for Churchill
and his party to journey from there to Washington by boat, but Churchill
was in a hurry, and he arranged to have a plane fly him from Hampton to
Washington's National Airport, where he was met by Roosevelt. The two
men greeted each other as old friends. During the drive to the White House,
Churchill found it a bit jarring that despite the onset of war, much of the
city was brightly lit with Christmas illuminations. It had been three years
since there had been any Christmas illuminations in London. Churchill
moved into the White House, where he was assigned the Rose bedroom on
the second floor, directly across the hall from Harry Hopkins. Is
Over the next several days, Churchill became, in effect, a member of the fam-
ily. Given his habit of staying up late and sleeping in, he missed every breakfast,
but he had lunch with the president and Hopkins each day, and he was there
every afternoon for cocktails at what Roosevelt puckishly called "the Children's
Hour." After drinks, which Roosevelt mixed himself, Churchill personally
pushed Roosevelt in his wheelchair over to the elevator to go down to dinner.
He later insisted that he did so "as a mark of respect, likening it to Sir Walter
Raleigh spreading his cloak for Queen Elizabeth, a somewhat labored analogy.
Aware of Churchills nocturnal habits, Roosevelt stayed up later than he liked
after dinner so as not to miss out on the conversations with Churchill and Hop-
kins. Both the British and American senior officers worried about these private
sessions between president and prime minister. The Americans feared that the
wily Churchill would convince Roosevelt to act in support of British interests
rather than those of the United States. They were aware of Roosevelt's rather
haphazard administrative style and his habit of agreeing, at least initially, with
whatever views were presented to him most recently. Meanwhile, the British
heads of service feared that decisions would be made, and deals struck, that
would force them into some untenable or unrealistic commitment.
