WO 171/2474
LATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
y of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
subordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment of strength.
officers and the
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
atments (Sec. 36), and
(vin) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.-
occur, or come to notice.
-Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
and his representatives.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
ny, war duties will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009)
NoTE B.- See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
NOTE C.-
or sub-
init will be referred, thre
1 he questi, to dant whether or not, to the tidy should he deft t a 2).
(ii) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
for reference.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
and to provide data
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
on which to base future improvemente
organisation and administration.
in army training, equipment,
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
their formations or units any ideas, opinions ande
n regard to weapons.
lav De of beneit for che
equipment, tactics, organi
ommendations, based on factual experience
Sation and inter-service
o-operation which
ater for the History of the War research in the
Army, as well as material likely to be of value
(iv) Copies of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
they shou any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
PSe Vol dities will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the
entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work
PARA. 3.-Omitted: J
PARa. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
ana decisions taken.
(i) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
AR Dua.
Division Residue Party,
Documentation of Residue Party is being done by 0, 1/0 43
for in Residue Party of tiis Coy, wilch is operating on Light Soolas.
Apparent defloieney of 1 Sgt, 1 Cpl and 35 Deivers is accountod
time the information or order reaches
the unit concerned.
SPECT NOT Te time me entered securd be the time the inform ith text, if tenche
Sheet One
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
g 2nd Line Petrol 14,400 galls.
,000 galls Petrol fron C.P.D. Somerhill to complete 2nd Lou
1,000 galls, remainder$ for training purposes.
Army Form
Unit 506 Div. IPs Coye, RodoS.C.
Ma Jor
Commanding Officer D.G. Wilkinson, R. A.S.C
2118
References to Appendices
REINFO.
s attended one day course on "British Way and Purpose"
піPiсь
Por d
G. 0
sion
1 and
xes
70
21ng
ion
trom within Divisional RaA.S.C.
for Captain will be filled
sification
ng purposes.
•1 pumps.
the Company.
3 0f
11Se
Ty.
JUN
TIT.
