WO 171/2474
14625865
AR Duan
ZW
FSR, Val 1, Sec. 174
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
PuRL-1 A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
mation of the particular command or appointment by :—
F) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
7) Unit commanders.
) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
) Officer ie G.H.Q, 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 38), and
personal staff.
(r) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
kept from the first day of embodiment.
Nonz A.- In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
Store B. - See also A.C.I: 2044 of 1941, paras, 1, 3, and 7.
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
Score C ey queri, the do the with chant, to the diady should ho st t a hit
PARA, 2. A war diary is Secret
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
important phases.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NoTE. —Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARa. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
the war diary.
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
later for the History of the War,
(iv) Copies amy outant and relevant aemi-ficial letters by commanders of formations,
they should be included).
luding any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
ort. —It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the
(See PA. Voll diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the erical workmande
PARA. 7.- (FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
PARA, 3.-Omitted.
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows:—
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued
car ding month direct to the fies appen die
a decisions take
" Day heaties in the smel
Move or tade in thor at trenty four hours and present dispositions,
(ili) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the un Co. No. The the or in even told lo the tao be siren i the roder roche,
FEIT
Month and Year March 1944
Place
HYTHE
Date
Hour
2 Mar
SHERT ONE
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
Delete headina not remunred).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form C 2118
Unit 506 Div. Troops Goy. Ro AoS.C.
Major D.G.
Commanding Officer Wilkinson, ReAS,C
References to Appendices
WAR DIARY a CoPIEs
Go Jo1l S.
C. S.X.
6 "
7"
No. 4 M. T. Inspection Staff R.A.S.C. arrived to carry out inspection of
vehicles and M.T records.
Capt. S. Pimley posted to this Coy from 505 Inf.Bde., Co yo ,.Ro doS. C.
It.V. I. Gurd promoted to Captain and posted to 505 Inf. Bde. Coy., Ro 4. S. C.
Major Wilkinson attended 12 Cotps Aam. Study Day at Tunbridge Wells.
6,000 galls Petrol issued to 170 Tk Bde Coy. , Ro A. S. C.
2/Lt.K.A. Betts proceeded on Messing Officers Course at Aldershot.
All rifles zeroed at Hythe Rifle Ranges.
All Brens zeroed at Hythe Rifle Ranges
Rifle Classification Firing carried out at Hythe Rifle Ranges.
13"
18"
Capt. Go da Hotter posted from 43 Dit R. A.S. C.
Rifle and Bren Classification Firing continued at Hythe Rifle Ranges.
ItaJ.S. Bailey posted to 136 Petrol Depot, Banbury.
Map Reading Exercise for officers and N. C. Os on Motor Cyeles
2/Lt.K.A. Betts posted to 708 G. T.
Coy., Bradford, Yorks.
5973. Wt.22661/1499. 300м, 8/42, 6253. Wt.38128/345. 200M. 11/42. Wy.L.P. Gp. 858.
AR DIARIES SECTION™
APH 1944
G.H Q. 2nd Echelon
