14625865
WO 171/2474
ION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
mobilisation or
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affeeting
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
dinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks of
and the number
ot other ranks or
In addition in the case of units on the L.. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
followers and of animals should be noted.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
36), and personal
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE. —Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
15 representatives.
occur, or come to notice. At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
ar diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
NoTE C.-
Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
he War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
na to provide data non
which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
Cail he need up nail cach entry tail a by the of of depilat to me it, ..
om a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
VoTt.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
PARA. 3.- Omitte].
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
*) And decist os ters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
deing the at treat fos he raid precent dispositions.
(iri) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
the wi cre No. T The ot intered should be the time the intre in here, tent..
AR Duan
Liaise with sit. Bowden
nomally in the fode tid iT
bring all the
ensure thut a
will bivouse with tl
dst good proch on -10n shopa, publis housed
Books are broughte
t their disposal.
re out of bour
rkness
Month and Year.
February 1944
Date
dour
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army l'orm C 2118
Unit 506 Div Ips COy., R.A.S.C.
Commanding Officer D.G..
wilcinson, RokeS.C
References to Appendices
WOR THING
587.
10
12.
16
hand
Troop carrying - Infantry of 21h Inf Bde to South Downs for training.
Preparations for move back to Coy Location at Hythe.
Coy
returned to Hythe.
heir norms
1 locations
Vehicles used to transport 21, Inf Bde back to
Coy paraded at RYE with other units of 43 Div for General Montgomery! s
spection.
Div R. A. S. C.
galls petrol issued to 54, 504, 505 Int Bde Coys., RedeS. Co
reverting to Composite Coys.
Practice firing PIAT at Arpinge Training Area.
Classification Sten at Hythe Ranges
Major Wilkinson attended 43 Div Skeleton Exercise VIVERN IV.
Major Wilkinson attended 43 Div R.A. S.C. Skeleton Exercise ADMAR III.
43 Div R.A.S.C. re-organised into Composite Coys.
2nd Line holdings of
armunition for Div Troops units plus all Mines A/T and explosives received.
Major Gen Thomas, Div Condr and Staff Offioers from Div HQ inspected the.
Lator 3 Ins and Capt Moulder attended 43 Dir RodeS Ca Skeleton.
Exercise
"Mopping Up" by Personnel Selection Board.
Commenced 43 Div RoA.S.C. Exercise RUNS II.
Company moved by Craft.
5978. Wt.22661/1199. 30031. 8/
6253. Wt.38126/345. 2003. 11/42. Wy.L.P. Gp. 653.
