pg_0016.pdf:
27 Ard Bde Maintenance Project - 2u6 Faition.
Section 15
OVERLORD.
TOP SECRET
64
Copy No...
POLICK
1.
For first few days all Ord stores will be issued through Ordnance Beach
Detachments (ORDs).
Arter D + 7 issues will be made from 27 Arnd Bde
Ord Fd Ik, and Vote 7 and 8 stores from A. D.O.S. dun.
2. 3.0.0. lands D + 5; B.0.W.O. D + 6.
RESERVIS
3. Unit Rescrves
Inits will
ensure that the reserves to which they are entitled are up to scale.
J.A.M.T.O.s, Vehicle Kits, spare tyres and wheels, Armament and Signal Stores
will be landed in unit tpt.
4.
Reserves under Div. armagements
Reserve signal stores, nine dotectors, and stretchers will be landed on
D day into Sector Stores Dumps.
(b) Further reserve signal stores and mine detectors will be landed on third
tide into OBDs,
(c) Landing reserves containing operationally essential ord stores will be
brought in as follows:
On second tide
27 Amd Bde (Approz. 120 tons)
On D + 2
Flails.
(a) Beach Maintenance Packs, which are scaled on a divisional basis,
and
include first and second echeion spares,
are being landed from D + 10
onwards.
The contents will be available for issue on D + 17.
5. INDENTS
(a) Up to inclusive D + 7
Unit demands will be accepted by O.B.Ds. in any for.
Where practicable
indents will be used,
and in any case the fullest information
of the
stores required must be giron.
Once a demand has been made it will not
be confirmed in any other way.
(b) D + 8 onwaras,
Unit demands will be submitted as at present (see 27 Arnd Bde Ord. Fd. Pk.
letter and Appx. 270FPS/12 of 12 May,)
6. CONTROL OF SPORDS AND VELICIAS
(a) During the assault period issue will be made on demand except for
certain controlled stores.
b) A11 vehicles are controlled.
c) Stores to be controlled will be those listed in the monthly Census of
War Office Controlled Stores, AIG 1000 series.
and vehicles will be demanded in daily change report
o ADOS (through B.O.0. when landed who will arrange issue on priorit:
given by Div HQ.
(e) For details of Daily Change Report, see Section 19, paragraph 6.
7. AG AND DECONTAMINACION TOTTUG AND EQUIPMENT.
(a) On landing,
all troops will earry capes and light respitators complete
with eyeshields, ointment and cotton waste.
(b)
after landing the policy is that the minimum scale of gas equipment
will be carried subject to the guiding principle that no man will be
separated from his personal 4G equipment except for a definite period
or for a particular operation where the risk has been accepted by
the. Comd concerned.

