pg_0004.pdf:
27 Arma Bde Maintenance prodest - 20d Blition
OVERLORD.
TOP SECRET
64
Copy No......
Rection 1.
CHERAL.
IVERINET ON
1. 27 Amd Bde will maintain Armd Regts (whother or not they are temporarily!
placed under cond Inf Baes) and other units under coma.
SCOrE
2. This project covers the special arrangements for maintenance of men and
landing on D and D + 1, with certain general instructions
applicable
the whole formation until disembarkation on the far shore
has been completed.
OUTLINE PLAN
3. In the initial phases maintenance will be over the beaches.
4. During D day am and POL will be landed under Div, arrangements fron
LOTs and pre-loaded vehicles into Sector Stores Dumps.
A surmary of
contents of Sector Stores Dumps available for 27 Armd Bde is at Appx "F".
5. On D + 1 Beach Maintenance Area (EMA) will open, with separate areas for
supplies, water, P.O.I., amn,
and ordnance stores.
Thereafter
Beach
Maintenance will
continue unti? ports are opened,
but a subsidiary Div
Adm Area will be formed when sufficient adm units are landed.
6. Unit tpt landing on D and D + 1 will be pooled under Bae arrangements.
7. Provided the tactical situation permits, a proportion of AFV am will be
dumped on I day fwd of third lateral in a ide dump close to Bde A Ech.
8. Spocial arrangements have been made to replenish tanks with petrol. and
derv late on D day. Other vehicles will replenish on D day from reserves
brought in on unit vehicles.
9. RESEEDS +
(a) Army are assessing and phasing in reserves as follows:-
By D + 1
By D + 2
= 11
day for all troops ashore.
days for all troops ashore.
By D + 3
2 days
for ell
treops ashore.
By D +14
5 days for all
croops ashore.
(b) As a precaution against bad weather, six dunb barges loaded with
1500 tons ammunition and 230 tons of supplies will beach on D + 1
and will be unloaded as
(o) A proportion of armunition and petrol, oil and lubricants coasters
que to arrive daily between inclusive D + 2 and D + 7 will be phased
forward to arrive one day ahead of schedule. Thus, a reserve of these
commodities will be available afloat. This will also ensure that
beaches are fed to their maximum clearance capacity.

