pg_0009.pdf:
- 2
6. Drawings at Sector Stores Dumps will be under control of BRASCO.
Replenishment fwd of 1 Ech and formation of Bde A Ech dump will be the
responsibility of OC H. &
Spe of the senior regt present in the absence
of DAi & QMG Or Staff Captaiz
7. Sector Stores Dumps will stogo and EMA Open for ann early on D + 1.
Div Pro will direct too ascordingir.
REFTENISHMENT OF DD SONS AND CHEAPANCE OF PORPOISES
8, Porpoises towed in by C Sqn 13/18 H will replenish DD tanks as a
priority commitment.
Contents of porpoises (other than any which are left by 13/18 H on the
beach) will be cleared by amn Mis in accordance with instructions
to be issued seperately.
EMPLOYMENT OF FIRST LINE TORRIES
9. (a)
First line lorries of 1318 H landing on D day will de waterproof in
Vehicle Transit Area,
or other suitable area clear of beach and fwd
routes,
and proceed forthwith to a
point to be notified.
There they
will wait dispersed until directed to Be A Ech by Staff Captain or
his representative.
(1)
As soon as the tactical situation permits a proportion of these
lorries will run a shuctle service to bring forward amn from Sector
Stores Dumps to Bde dunp.
Iorries will be returned to Sector Stores Dumps singly or in groups
of two or more on orders of Offr in charge of Bde A Ech dump (see
Oard
He will hand the dur of each lorry a slip of paper to
show natures required
Crews will remain on each lorry to load and unload amn, until
required to
their place in tanks.
Loading of lorries at Seotor
Stores Dumps will be assisted by personnel of Beach Group.
(e)
First line lorries of Bde. H.Q., Staffs Yeo and E.R.Y. landing on
third tide will be met in vehicle Iransit Area under arrangements
to be made by Bde.
and directed to Bde. A Ech. or Regtl. A Echs
in accordance with the tactical situation.
First line lorries will be returned to units as soon as practicable
after third tide.
REPLENISHMENT EWD. OF 3UP A ECI.
Regtl. M. Ps will be notified to Bde A Ech. by R/I or message by Regts
guides provided by unit will conduot vehicles
It is essential that sgn guides are ready at Regtl M. P.
to arrival of vehicles, so that no delay to their turn-round can occur.
Demands for ann. will be on a sqn basis and will state nature and
approximate number of rounds required.
sqn to another.
the minimum number of lorries required
to make up sgn amn. holdings will be sent fwd of Bde A Ech.
Every vehicle will return direct to Bde A Echo as soon as it has
completed replenishment of sgn to which it was directed. Any amn.
remaining on vehicles will be dumped at Bde A Ech.
11.
DECOPPERING ROUNDS
Decoppering rounds for 17 par., 75 mm., and 37 mm will be available
in B. M. do
on D.+ 2.

