United States Army Logistics
30
operation would arrive in packaged form.
No naval vessels carrying men and
vehicles would be permitted to carry bulk cargo.
Fourth, since the navy would
not allow lighters to arrive prior to the second tide on D-Day, the initial assault
wave would have to make do with what it carried. American forces would have
to contend with these difficulties for the operation to succeed.
FUSA planners quickly arrived at solutions.
First, engineers went over the
invasion area with a magnifying glass to find the areas most suitable for supply-
related activities.
They also studied the minor ports in the area to ensure that
every possible ton of supplies would arrive as soon as possible.
To bridge the
gap between the first and second tides on D-Day, the navy grudgingly supplied
eighteen landing craft, tanks (LCTs) which FUSA intended to beach at the end
of the first tide to supply engineering equipment and ammunition.
Each LCT
was to carry supplies, a truck, and the necessary men to unload the craft. In
addition, the navy supplied eighty-seven landing barge, vehicles (LBVs) of fifty-
ton capacity each.
Under the original plan the LBVs would have crossed the
English Channel empty and then ferry goods from ships to shore.
By having
them arrive loaded, planners ensured that valuable supplies arrived on the beach
at a critical time.
To prevent bad weather from stranding the assault forces on
the beach, plans called for the construction of twelve 1000-ton barges to be
towed across the channel by tugs and beached as an emergency reserve.'
Fortunately for logistical planners, Operation TORCH, the 1942 invasion of
North Africa, had highlighted the
greatest logistical problem that supply
personnel had to overcome, the need for an efficient system to move supplies
over the beach until a port became operational. 18 During the North African
landing, many supply ships arrived improperly loaded,
with supplies needed
most in the deepest holds and ships manifests often lost or misplaced, thereby
hindering assignment of unloading priorities.
Naval personnel had handled the
unloading of ships, often dumping supplies haphazardly on the beach in their
haste to unload.
Since U.S. amphibious doctrine at that point, detailed in an
obsolete manual, FM 31-5, Landings on a Hostile Shore, assigned the army the
task of sorting and distributing supplies from the beach to the forces inland,
confusion reigned on the beach.
The shore parties had only a single-page
standard operating procedure to guide them in their work.!9
This inefficient
movement of supplies inland hampered operations.
Complicating
matters
further, beach personnel found much of the packaging did not hold up to the
rigors of amphibious operations.
proved to be neither waterproof nor resistant to breakage.
The cardboard and corrugated paper boxes
Therefore,
North African landing pointed out the need for army beach parties to supervise
the unloading of materials over the beaches.2
That led to the development of
the Engineer Special Brigades (ESB) which followed the assault troops ashore
on OMAHA and UTAH beaches, the fifth and sixth on OMAHA Beach under
the command of a headquarters, Provisional
(reinforced) on UTAH Beach.
Engineer Special Brigades as
The "Beach Maintenance
Brigade Group and the
Plan," described
Landing Craft and Wool Drawers
31
specially trained and equipped for the technical organization of beaches, to regulate and
facilitate the landing and movement of personnel and equipment on and over the beach
to assembly areas and vehicle parks, to unload cargo ships, to move and receive
supplies into beach dumps, to select, organize, and initially operate beach dumps, to
establish and maintain communications, and to evacuate casualties and prisoners of war
over the beach to ships and craft. 22
The Operation OVERLORD plan called for ESBs to remain under FUSA
control until an army rear boundary was set, after which the Advance Section,
COMZ would take command of the rear area including the ESBs.
As FUSA
moved forward, the ADSEC COMZ would take over responsibility for logistical
installations and activities left behind.
ADSEC's planned responsibilities, in
addition to eventually overseeing the ESB's activities, included opening,
repairing, and operating the ports of Cherbourg and Barfleur (see Map 2-1).
ADSEC personnel planned to open and repair the ports of Isigny, St. Vaast, and
Grandcamp before turning them over to the ESBs; to develop and operate bulk
POL (petrol, oil and lubricants) installations; repair and operate the rail system
in Normandy; set up fixed signal communications installations; prepare to take
over FUSA supply dumps and beach operations following the declaration of an
army rear boundary; prepare to supply COMZ personnel through Cherbourg
following its restoration; and coordinate activities with the navy. 23
ADSEC planned the opening of ports and constructing of a bulk POL system
in great detail; the successful construction of both depended on precise
scheduling and timing. Any failure to open ports to cargo handling or to put the
POL pipelines into service as planned could easily prove disastrous, thus the
port rehabilitation and POL pipeline schedules (see Tables 2-2 and 2-3) received
a great deal of attention. Of all the ports, Cherbourg was the most essential to
successful implementation of the logistical plan, and the accuracy of estimates
regarding Cherbourg were critical in that much of the invasion plan depended
on scheduled supplies arriving through that port.
Until ADSEC put Cherbourg
into operation, FUSA would depend entirely upon the ESBs for all their supply
needs
Should the transshipment of supplies through Cherbourg fall short of
expectations, the success of the landing would then hang on the performance of
the ESBs.
Establishing a basic scheme to get supplies ashore was only half the
battle for logistical planners.
They also had to determine precisely
what
supplies the assault forces would land with and those needed to maintain the
forces ashore while building up reserves at the same time
What does a soldier take when assaulting an enemy-held beach? Plans called
for the American assault forces to land with supplies for two to five days of
operations. Each unit was to carry a five-day supply of C, K, and D rations,
of which no more than two-days supply was to consist of D rations. The
invasion plans called for all vehicles to land with full fuel tanks, except for
motorcycles, which were to have only one-third of a tank. 25 Each assault force
vehicle carried additional gasoline, in two to fifteen five-gallon cans, depending
on the type of vehicle. 26 The detailed POL orders even extended to a provision
