118
United States Army Logistics
the Military Railway Service and pipeline units, to move supplies. Ultimately,
only the rapid repair of the French railway system and the construction of
military pipelines allowed logistical
personnel to create the
forward and
intermediate base areas that provided long-term supply stability. 12
The Military Railway Service had the difficult task of rehabilitating the
wrecked French railway system linking Normandy, Paris, and points east.
The
slow pace of advance in June and July and the thorough destruction of the rail
lines directly behind the invasion beaches by Allied airpower limited their use
early in the campaign.
The first railway troops that arrived in France on June
17 and 24 had the first train operating between Cherbourg and Carentan on July
11, although scattered German units continued to fire on trains and cut
communications cables from time to time.!3
By the end of July, the Military
Railway Service had conducred 333 American train runs carrying a total of
31,907 tons of freight and 4,524 passengers within Normandy.
Despite difficulties, the engineers continued to expand the rail system,
running a secondary line from Cherbourg to St. Hilaire running through
Coutances, Folligny, and Avranches.
From St. Hilaire, they extended the
railhead through to Fougères, then on to Mayenne and eventually to Le Mans,
but the railroad did not become a vital part of the supply system until August
12 when railway officials decided to send thirty-two trains over the hastily
repaired track to Le Mans, the first six trains of which arrived on August 17.15
Repair troops put a single track to Chartres in operation by August 27, and
three days later the first train reached Paris.16
By the end of August, with 750 miles of track in operation, the railway
enginers repaired the lines as quickly as possible, laying rails across hastily
filled bomb craters. Bridges often had to be crossed at ten miles per hour or
less to avoid their total collapse, while the use of liberated locomotives and
rolling stock in varying states of repair also limited operations. As train crews
made most early runs at night to avoid German ground and air attacks, single
track operations led to collisions. The Military Railway Service did not run the
lines as efficiently as American railroad personnel would have liked, but as one
officer pointed out, "economists and field armies rarely follow the same
textbooks, "17
In September both FUSA and TUS A began receiving substantial rail support.
In the FUSA sector, trains operated as far forward as Chartres at the beginning
of the month. By Septmber S the first trains arrived at Soissons, three days
before ADSEC extended the Red Ball truck route to the city.
By mid-
September, 6,000-7,000 tons per day arrived in Paris by rail, with 5,000-6,000
tons continuing on to the front from there! On September 17, trains reached
Hue, east of Soissons, and the next day an ammunition train reached Liége,
Belgium, as FUSA established Army Supply Point 121 near the city (see Map
6-1). The completion of a bridge over the Meuse on September 25 advanced
rail service further eastward.9
In the TUSA sector, the railhead reached
Sommesous on September 7, and then Lérouville and Verdun on September 14.
By the twenty-fourth, the first rail shipments reached Toul and the operation of
Railnet in France. Mid-Sentember 1011
RAILROAD NETWORK, SEPT. 15, 1944
Double Track Railway
Single Track Railway
• Caen
St. Nazaire
Source: Adapted from Map 17, "Railways in use, Mid-September 1944," in Roland G. Ruppenthal, The European Theater of
Operations: Logistical Support of the Armies U.S. Army in World War II, vol. I (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1953), 548-549.
