21
The "Complicated Set-Up"
United States Army Logistics
20
success of the operation." Calling for the continued use of the combined
ETOUSA and COMZ staffs, Lee reported the only major problem was SHAEF
interference in purely American administrative matters from time to time."
On D-Day, June 6, 1944,
General Eisenhower issued a directive to the
commanding generals of FUSAG, COMZ, FUSA, Third United States Army,
and United States Strategic Air Forces, clarifying the organization and command
of American forces for the initial, transitional, and final stages of Operation
OVERLORD,
the invasion of Normandy.
It pleased Lee on several points.
COMZ would not come under FUSAG control at any time, and ADSEC would
come under the immediate control of COMZ Headquarters when detached from
FUSA.
It appeared that FECZ would be coordinate, not subordinate, with the
FUSAG detachment at Twenty-first Army Group, and that the commanding
general COMZ would control the United Kingdom base section and,
most
importantly, that COMZ would remain responsible for dealing with the War
Department on routine administrative matters.
Moreover, Crawford's proposal
that the theater service chiefs be assigned to SHAEF died from lack of support,
and the theater chiefs remained at COMZ Headquarters.?9
General Bradley, as the commanding general of FUSAG and FUSA, also
found certain points to his liking.
The directive implied that Bradley would
inherit FUSA's
command
authority,
including
control
of supply
and
administration, when FUSAG moved to the Continent.
He also interpreted the
directive to mean that since COMZ had been under FUSA, it would then be
under his control on the Continent until SHAEF Headquarters arrived in France.
The directive also eliminated the deputy theater commander position, a decision
applauded by most FUSAG and SHAEF staff officers.80
Eisenhower's directive did not end the struggle between the competing
organizations.
By June 6, 1944, the American command and supply system was
confused at best, in disarray at worst.
Little appeared to have been learned
from the organizational disorder experienced by the American Expeditionary
Force in France in 1917-1918.
A variety of commands existed and often
worked against each other.
The American forces may have begun their planning
for eventual operations on the Continent in 1941, but tracing the development
of the American command system demonstrates that by D-Day, the system
remained short of peak efficiency.
With command responsibilities clouded as
Operation OVERLORD began, it did not bode
well for the success of the
invasion. In fact, such confusion indicated that the Americans had not prepared
properly for the campaign.
When General LeRoy Lutes, the director of plans
and operations, Army Service Forces, was sent by chief of the Army Service
Forces, Brehon Somervell, in late April 1944 to check on the COMZ,
reported to Eisenhower before returning to the United States that Lee's staff was
"not the tops," but was "learning," and concluded there was
weaknesses." He was wrong in that regard.81
"time to remedy
Even with three years to prepare,
General Eisenhower had to intervene and deal with fundamental organizational
matters just a few days before the greatest amphibious operation in military
history commenced.
1. Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater, "Organization
and Command in the European Theater
of Operations," The Administrative and
Logistical History of the European Theater Of Operations, pt. II, vol. 2 (Paris:
Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater, 1946), 294.
2. Roland Ruppenthal, The European Theater of Operations: Logistical Support
of the Armies, The U.S. Army in World War II, 2 vols. (Washington, D.C.:
3. Richard M. Leighton,
"Preparation for Invasion: The Problem of Troop and
Cargo Flow Before D-Day," Military Affairs 10 (Spring 1946), 2-39.
5. Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater,
The Special Observers (SPOBS) and United States Army Forces in the
British Isles (USAFBI)," The Administrative and Logistical History of the European
Theater of Operations, pt. I, 5, 200.
6. Merle Miller, Ike:
The Soldier as They Knew Him (New York: G. P.
(warrant officer, COMZ
Headquarters), letter to author, April 24, 1991.
7. Dwight D. Eisenhower, Crusade in Europe (Garden City, NY: Doubleday
& Company, 1949), 236.
8. U.S. Army Special Train 'Alive', September 11, 1943, File 16, U.S. Army,
European Theater, Historical Division Records, 1941-1946, Box 2, Record Group 332,
National Archives. (Hereafter RG 332, NA).
9. George C. Marshall to James E. Chaney, May 14, 1942, in Royal B. Lord,
Ralph M. Hower and Thomas C. Roberts, Organization and Functions of the
Report of the General Board United States Forces, European
Theater no. 127 (1945), 1-4.
10. Lord, Hower and Roberts, Organization and Functions of the Communications
11. Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater, "Organization
and Command in the European Theater of Operations," The Administrative and
Logistical History of the European Theater of Operations, pt. II, vol. 1, 32; Lord,
Hower, and Roberts, Organization and Functions of the Communications Zone, 2. Lee
believed that Army Chief of Staff George Marshall and the commanding general of the
U.S. Army Service Forces, Lieutenant General Brehon Somervell shared his views and
Lee operated on the assumption that the chief of staff's
directive of May 14, 1942, supported his viewpoint.
12. John C. H. Lee's Diary, May 16, 1942, File 102, Box 17, RG 332, NA.
13. James G. Harbord, The American Army in France,
1917-1919 (Boston:
Little, Brown and Company, 1936), 385.
14. John C. H. Lee,
"Service Reminiscences," 82, Box 2, Henry B. Saylor
Papers, Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library.
15. Historical Division, "Organization and Command," pt. II, vol. 1, 32.
"Service Reminiscences," 82.
17. Eisenhower, Crusade in Europe, 49-50.
18. Harry C. Butcher, My Three Years with Eisenhower (New York: Simon and
