120
United States Army Logistics
the St.
Germaine-Chalons-Verdun
rail
link
supplemented TUSA truck
operations, moving approximately 14,500 tons of cargo.
TUSA credited the rail
link with saving 693,000 truck miles and 139,000 gallons of gasoline. 20
In the
fifty days from August 1 to September 20, railway engineers had rehabilitated
3,355 miles of track and repaired thirty-six bridges averaging 106 feet in
length. 21
Opening the rail lines east of Paris before the lines from the west reached the
city put railroad operating battalions into service as early as possible and eased
the transition when the lines from Normandy reached the city. 22
The first truck-
rail transfers took place on September 29.
Whereas the railroads had only
moved 137,189 tons during the entire first three months on the Continent, by
the end of September rail tonnages leaving Paris reached 9,000-10,000 tons per
day with 11,000-12,000 tons leaving Soissons and Sommesous. 23
Moreover,
by this time railroad personnel had moved more cargo than the Red Ball Express
truck system. 24
As engineers enlarged the rail system in the FUSA sector in October, they
opened a rail loop running north from Liége to Vise then east to Welkenraedt
and back through Herve.
FUSA established the Liége-Eupen service area
around the rail loop. In the middle of October, the engineers repaired the
bridge on the east side of Pepinster and put it into operation. 25
The arrival of
the railhead at Trooze provided large quantities of gasoline and allowed FUSA
to establish a bulk fuel decanting facility, which enabled the army to increase
its POL stocks from a 8-day reserve on October 1 to 4.5 days on October 10.26
The reserve levels increased steadily thereafter.?
While the Military Railway Service worked day and night, military pipeline
personnel did the same, operating under COMZ oversight in France.
importance of, and need for, centralized control of the various units involved
led Lee to assign all bulk POL construction and operations within COMZ to the
Military Pipeline Service on September 23, thus placing the pipeline under his
direct control.28
While the fighting raged in Normandy, stocks of POL proved adequate, but
once the Americans broke out and drove across France, the fuel situation
immediately became critical as the time needed to deliver gasoline increased
from twelve hours in July, to twenty-four hours by mid-August. That doubling,
resulting from increased distance between users and fuel depots, meant POL
units needed twice as many trucks to maintain the July level of fuel delivery, at
a time when combat units' use of gasoline surged far above July levels. While
it was clear that creation of an efficient pipeline system to move bulk fuel to the
front was the only long-term solution to the
gasoline delivery problem, it
developed slowly. Although construction of the Major System, which originated
in Cherbourg, did not begin as scheduled, by August, POL engineers had laid
a gasoline pipeline to Le Haye du Puits, where they constructed a 5,000-gallon
storage tank, and established the first Major POL. System decanting point with
a capacity of 250,000 gallons a day (see Map 6-2).30
TUSA operations in August.
The pipehead supported
With the breakout from Normandy underway,
Map 6-2
POL Pipeline Systems in France, September 1944
Cherbourg
• Dartem
St. Vaus
Minor System
4" Lines
Bulleroy
St. Lo
a Granville
Major System
6" Lines
Vire
Le Havre
• Caen
Falaise
Aviation Gas & Argentan
Domfront
L'Aigle
Allencon
Motagne
Villaines-
Mayenne
„ Laval
POL PIPELINE SYSTEMS
Mid - Septmeber, 1944
Versailles
Dreux
La Loupe
Chartres
Dourdon
Nogent-le-Rotrou
Le Mans
Etampes
Source: Adapted from Map 16, "POL Pipelines in Mid-September 1944," in Roland
G. Ruppenthal, The European Theater of Operations: Logistical Support of the Armies
U.S. Army in World War II, vol. I (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1953), 511.
