United States Army Logistics
164
subsequent campaign did not develop as planned. Henry Aurand, the Normandy
Base Section commander, in excoriating the American preoccupation with
planning, concluded,
the plan for crossing the Normandy beaches was so detailed that no command direction
was possible once the plan was put into effect. It simply had to work.
From this it can
be seen that planners can never take "calculated risks.
That is a function of
commanders
... As a result of this British indoctrination of the U.S. military [a by
product of amphibious orientation and Gallipoli experience], there grew up in every
U.S. headquarters countless scores of bright eyed young men with too much rank, who
were sure they were a gift to mankind because of their planning talents, and were
equally sure that their particular general was extremely fortunate to have them plan his
operations. The higher the level of command, the greater the number of planners, until
they reached a numerical climax in Washington, about which the less said the better.
May such misfortune never be visited upon us again?
Had the logisticians developed a supply system and plans with built-in flexibility
and had SHAEF taken into account the Normandy terrain features and their
impact on operations, the planners could have avoided many of the serious
problems they had to deal with once Operation OVERLORD commenced.
As soon as operations began on the Continent, distribution difficulties
developed: Cherbourg and its port did not fall into American hands as planned
and the channel storm destroyed MULBERRY A, the artificial port, just as it
neared completion.
Only the exceptional efforts of the
Engineer Special
Brigades on the invasion beaches prevented a disaster for the Americans.
Additional problems encountered included incorrect tonnage estimates for many
bulky items, a shortage of service troops, faulty documentation procedures,
mixed cargo loads, civilian, instead of military, railway crews, and "inadequate
communication between COMZ and Normandy Base Section and between
sections and their depots. "3 These various difficulties resulted in much of the
distribution plan being discarded.
While the delay in breaking out of the
beachhead aided supply personnel in the short term, since they had to move
supplies a comparatively short distance to the front, the unexpectedly rapid pace
and range of the subsequent advance across France in late August and early
September added hundreds of miles to the supply network and added to the
maintenance burden. General George S. Patton summed up the distribution
problems pithily in pointing out that an army is like a piece of spaghetti:
"You
can't push a piece of spaghetti; you must pull it." This also applies to supply;
unfortunately, the COMZ did a mighty job of pushing.'
The planning shortfalls and distribution problems led to supply shortages.
Whether ammunition early in the campaign or gasoline later in the summer, the
shortages impacted on operations. Surges of demand were well out-of-phase
with supply.
Thus, the army, after months of artillery ammunition shortages,
ended the war with more ammunition in European storage than was fired during
the entire eleven-month campaign.'
Correct planning and an adequate
distribution system could have eased the shortages. On the other hand, it should
165
Conclusion
not be forgotten that shortages were not exclusively the result of COMZ actions.
Failures of accountability and inspection contributed to shortfalls as supply
personnel could not locate needed items and placed additional requisitions,
thereby adding an additional burden to an already overburdened supply system.®
Perhaps more critically, many U.S. senior officers were indifferent toward
supply matters. Although tolerating no insubordination in the conduct of tactical
matters, they often "recklessly violated logistics orders themselves."' Beyond
that an "us versus them" relationship between the combat and service forces
hindered the supply efforts.
Finally, the American army had weak supply
discipline. Some saw the American soldier's only rule when it came to anything
for which he had no immediate need: "he eats it, drinks it, destroys it, or
throws it away.
Wherever American troops traveled, they left a trail of
discarded equipment in their wake. What they did not throw away they often
sold or bartered for something useful such as food.
In contrast, German
soldiers, knowing
that replacements were unlikely, abandoned very little
personal gear.®
While such criticism of the supply system is valid, the American supply
system in Europe did move millions of tons of cargo and performed well enough
to support an Allied victory. Out of the victory came a widespread sense that
the volume, not the quality of effort had prevailed, the American "arsenal of
democracy" materially overwhelmed the Axis powers.
Moreover, the World
War Il experience became the baseline for subsequent operations.
The scale and
pattern of the World War II logistical effort became the model for the U.S.
military's postwar management and tactical style, through Vietnam and the
Persian Gulf War.
Yet it should not be forgotten that, despite doing it's part
to defeat Germany, the
"COMZ was the greatest organization
to meet
emergencies that the world has ever seen.
But it should have been the
organization which let no emergencies occur.")
NOTES
1. Royal B. Lord, et al., Supply and Maintenance on the European Continent,
Report of the General Board United States Forces, European Theater, no. 130 (1945),
2. Henry S. Aurand, "SHAEF-ETOUSA-COMZ: A Lesson in Organization for
National Defense," 6, Box 63, Henry S. Aurand Papers, Dwight D.
Eisenhower
Presidential Library.
3. Lord, et al., Supply and Maintenance On the European Continent, 65-66.
4. Everett Busch,
"The Quartermaster Supply of Third Army:
Part I,"
Quartermaster Review 26 (November-December 1946), 76.
5. G. C. Reinhardt, "The Logistical Command: Its Origin and Place in Modern
Warfare," Military Review 30 (January 1951), 27.
(January-February 1982), 49.
