88
United States Army Logistics
Not until mid-September would ammunition shortages once again hinder
American operations.
As ordnance personnel dealt with the ammunition situation, a new set of
supply difficulties reached serious proportions.
Although FUSA reports did not
include quartermaster and engineer Class II and IV items on the critical
shortages list until mid-July, those had appeared fairly early in the campaign.
On June 14, all VII Corps Class II and IV requisitions had to include the
signature of an officer and the statement:
"I hereby certify that the items
requisitioned plus similar items on hand are within authorized allowances. "6s
Moreover, as of June 23, a large list of engineer Class IV items, fifty-nine in
all, required the approval of the FUSA engineer supply officer before they could
be issued. 56
In mid-July, the shortages reached the point that they began appearing on
FUSA reports.
While the invading forces arrived with new gear for the most
part, weeks of fighting led to much worn-out or lost equipment.
The shortages
resulted from a number of factors.
First, planned Class Il and IV shipments
arrived late or were deliberately delayed to land higher priority cargoes. 67
Second, the replacement factors upon which Class II and IV items had been
requisitioned proved inaccurate as troops wore out or lost items at much higher
rates than planned.
Third, conditions on the Continent placed unanticipated
demands on the supply system. Many of the Third Army units which arrived
on the Continent prior to its formal activation on August 1 lacked required
equipment. Thus, even before entering combat, these units taxed the supply
system on the Continent. Their shortfalls had to made good from continental
Table 4-7
Authorized Ammunition Expenditures for the
2nd and 5th Infantry Divisions for the Period,
0600 July 26 to 0600 July 30, in Rounds per Weapon
Weapon
Second
Infantry Div.
Fifth
60 mm (HE)
Infantry Div.
81 mm (Light)
81 mm (Heavy)
66
44
44
mm (Wp
4.2 inch (WP)
30
4.2 inch (HE)
15
11
105 mm howitzer M3
44
62
42
Source: "Message to Commanding Generals Second and Fifth Infantry Division,
Subject: Ammunition Expenditures, July 25, 1944," in "V Corps G-4 Section Journal,
July 25, 1944," RG 407, NA.
89
BARs and Mortar Shells
reserves. For example, on June 24 FUSA informed the quartermaster,
ordnance, signal, engineer, chemical warfare, and medical services that they had
lo remedy essential combat deficiencies" before the Eighty-third Infantry
Division could be ready for combat. Only the timely arrival of replacement
equipment would correct the situation.
Quartermaster items critically short included one- and two-burner and
Tienty-man cooking outfits, storage and large wall tents, graves registration
forms, and crosses.
These shortages, except for possibly the cooking outfits,
while inconvenient, did not materially affect the course of the campaign.
siortage of graves registration items is particularly difficult to understand since
the casualties for the operation proved lighter than expected. Plenty of forms
should have been available.
While the First Infantry Division reported no critical quartermaster item
shortages in June, scarce division engineer supplies included artillery fire control
equipment, squad and platoon equipment, demolition kits, drafting equipment,
and camouflage nets.70
marking pencils, map pins, helmet nets, 4-by-8-foot sheets of plywood,
electrical plugs, wrist compasses, large camouflage nets, topographical supplies,
D-handle shovels, green garnishing, paint, lumber, acetate, and screw type
sockets.
As with quartermaster shortages, the lack of these items proved
inconvenient but did not seriously hinder the war effort.
Class Il and IV equipment shortages included more than just shovels and
camouflage nets. When, on June 26, the V Corps commander asked for the
immediate shipment from the British sector or United Kingdom of steel assault
ladders like those used by the rangers on D-Day, FUSA informed V Corps that
none were available." Of the five produced, one had been lost, three remained
somewhere on the beach, and one had been returned to the United Kingdom.
After FUSA offered nine-foot wooden fire ladders instead, V Corps authorized
the Second Division to draw wooden ladders and look for the three assault
ladders still on the beach.?2 Informed by FUSA on June 28 that some of the
scaling ladders had been recovered from the beach, V Corps informed the
Second Division that they could pick them up.?3
Class Il and IV signal shortages ranged from radio sets and reel units, to
sound-ranging paper.
As V Corps G-4 visited the headquarters of the Second
Armored Division, First Infantry Division, Sixteenth Infantry Regiment, Second
Battalion, Sixteenth Infantry Regiment, and Company
"E"
of the Second
Battalion, Sixteenth Infantry Regiment on June 24, each reported satisfactory
supply, except for
the
Second Battalion,
which lacked
sound-powered
telephones. 4 On July 13, the V Corps reported a shortage of rolls of paper for
sound-ranging recorders. The Seventeenth Field Artillery Observation Battalion
wanted 500 rolls, a month's supply, since only a six-day supply remained of
what they had brought ashore.
FUSA Headquarters replied that it had 2,000
rolls on order from the United States and 1,000 rolls from the United
Kingdom. 75
While the lack of a shovel here or there represented an
inconvenience, had the unit run out of sound ranging paper they would have
