45
Landing Craft and Wool Drawers
United States Army Logistics
44
Ordnance planners found Class V planning for Operation OVERLORD
easier than quartermaster planning for Class III items.
Each time the invasion
troop list changed, the FUSA ordnance officer and ammunition officer had to
recalculate ammunition tonnages for the operation,
while planners had to set
arbitrary limits on the ammunition tonnage needed for the operation because of
limited beach capacity.
The requisitions, completed in six days beginning April
8, 1944, calculated ammunition expenditures to the last round. They prepared
separate requisitions for every landing craft arriving on D-Day and D+1, a
single requisition for each day of the operation from D+2 to D+ 14, and one
for the period D+ 15 to D+30.
ADSEC handled requisitions for continental
operations for the period subsequent to D+30.
Ordnance personnel also
prepared special requisitions for Greenlight shipments. 48 Two months before the
actual invasion, ordnance planners had the unenviable task of predicting the
tempo of the campaign to come.
Although any miscalculation would have dire
effects on the upcoming invasion and subsequent operations,
determining
ammunition requirements proved more of an art than a science.
Ordnance personnel based ammunition planning upon basic loads, units of
fire (U/F), and scales of maintenance.
A basic load equaled the quantity of
ammunition normally carried by a unit for a particular weapon.
ETOUSA used
the U/F, an arbitrary number developed to simplify
the requisitioning and
distribution of ammunition, to regulate the expenditure of ammunition.
Since
headquarters allowed a unit to expend so many units of fire a day, maintenance
rates represented the amount of ammunition expended on an average day.
Ordnance officers usually stated maintenance levels in fractions of units of fire.
For example, FUSA might require one-third unit of fire of 81 mm mortar
ammunition on an army-wide basis to avoid dipping into its reserve supply.
Maintenance levels were sometimes based on a specific number of rounds per
gun per day for a particular unit.
Thus FUSA might require 45 rounds of 105
mm artillery ammunition per gun per day to maintain its stocks of ammunition.
After hours of calculating and recalculating, the staff arrived at ammunition
expenditure rates and supply requirements for each American beach to D + 30
(see Table 2-10).49
Ordnance planners calculated ammunition maintenance rates for the period
subsequent to D+30 using expenditure rates rather than units of fire.
addition to normal daily expenditures, the ordnance plan called for the
accumulation of ammunition reserves on the beaches, each to have two units of
fire of ammunition on hand on D+2 and four-and-one-half units of fire on
D+ 14.50
Ordnance planners knew that if their basic assumptions were correct the plan
would work, but that unfortunately any number of things could go wrong.
the plan to succeed the unit-of-fire figures, arbitrary at best, had to be correct,
the unloading of ammunition had to go as planned, and the expenditures of
ammunition by type had to match the ammunition requisitions submitted in
April, Like the overall Operation OVERLORD plan, the Class V plan lacked
Rexibiliy; ordinance officers could do very litle plan, the invasion began other
Table 2-10
Class V Maintenance Rates for Selected Weapons
Subsequent to D+30
Rounds-per-Weapon-per-Day
1.5
Carbine
30 cal Rifle
45 cal Pistol
50
.50 cal Machinegun
37 mm & 40 mm Antiaircraft
90 mm Antiaircraft
81 mm Mortar
75 mm & 76 mm Self-propelled
75 mm Howitzer
105 mm M3 Howitzer
25
10
10
20
20
155 mm Gun
X in Howitzen
240 mm Howitzer
10
BAR
30 cal Machinegun
45 cal Submachinegun
37 mm Antitank
57 mm Antitank
60 mm Mortar
4.2 in. Mortar
3 in. Self-propelled gun
105 mm M2 Howitzer
155 mm Howitzer
4.5 in. Gun
8 in. Gun
Bazooka Rockets (R/D/D)
16.3
45
25
30
15
600
Pyrotechnics (R/D/D)
60
Source: Communications Zone, Ordnance Plan, in "Communications Zone Plan for
Operation OVERLORD," reel 53, U.S. Army, U.S. Forces,
European Theater,
Historical Division, Records, 1941-1946, Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential LIbrary.
Note: R/D/D = Rounds-per-division-per-day
than rely on emergency requisitions and ration the available
supply
of
ammunition.
The lack of sufficient lift and discharge capacity combined with
the lead times involved in getting supplies moved through the logistical pipeline
all but eliminated any flexibility within the system.
Logistical problems were not confined to supplying the combat forces on the
Continent.
While POL and ammunition planners were already lamenting the
shortage of sea lift capacity, some of the scarce shipping space had to be
allocated to the Civil Affairs Section.
The SHAEF allocation of some 34,500
tons of supplies for Civil Affairs, D-Day to D+90, included food, blankets,
clothing, soap, sanitary and medical supplies, POL, and other items to meet the
minimum needs of liberated French civilians.
In addition, for D+90 to
D+ 180, the supply system pipeline contained 89,000 pieces of agricultural
equipment and 2,625 tons of seeds for distribution on the Continent.S1
Considering that the planned maximum capacity of OMAHA Beach totaled only
5,000 tons, the Civil Affairs tonnage allocation equaled seven of the first ninety
days of OMAHA beach capacity and tied up valuable shipping space. Although
the majority of Civil Affairs tonnage would arrive after D+14, the landing
