United States Army Logistics
51. Richardson and Allen, Services to Dependent Groups, 12.
52. First United States Army, Civil Affairs Plan, annex 18 in First United States
Army Operations Plan NEPTUNE, in First United States Army Report of Operations,
20 October 1943-1 August 1944, (N.p., n.d.), appendix E and F.
53. Roland G. Ruppenthal, The European Theater of Operations:
Support of the Armies, The U.S. Army in World War II, vol. 1 (Washington, D.C.:
54. Harold L. Mack, "The Critical Error of World War II," National Security
Affairs Issue Paper No. 81-1 (Washington, D.C.: National Defense University, 1981),
55. Ruppenthal, Logistical Support of the Armies, 186-187.
56. First United States Army, Terrain Estimate, annex la in First United States
Army Operations Plan NEPTUNE, in First United States Army Report of Operations,
20 October 1943-1 August 1944, (N.p., n.d.), 124.
57. Martin Blumenson, The European Theater of Operations:
Breakout and
Pursuit, The U. S. Army in World War II (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1961), 42.
Chapter 3
Over the Beach: Distribution
Difficulties, June-July, 1944
All supplies during the first phase of Operation OVERLORD arrived over the
beaches (see Map 3-1). An artificial port (MULBERRY A), the occupation and
rehabilitation of the port of Cherbourg, and the creation of a bulk POL system
eventually supplemented beach operations.
As the invasion succeeded and the
battle for Normandy intensified, logistical planners dealt with a supply system
that achieved much but failed to operate as planned. Each subelement in the
supply distribution system-beach operations, the artificial port,
the port of
Cherbourg,
and the
bulk POL system-presented supply personnel with
unforeseen difficulties to overcome if combat forces ashore were to maintain
momentum and then break out of the Normandy beachhead.
The movement of supplies over the beaches fell behind from the outset. The
ESB personnel had to prepare the beaches before large quantities of materiel
could arrive.
The Engineer Special Brigades (ESB) found that the "plan could
not be followed, but improvisation proved successful where blueprints failed."1
On OMAHA Beach, lead elements of the Provisional Special Brigade Group,
the Fifth and Sixth ESBs, under the command of Brigadier General William M.
Hoge, landed early on D-Day and paved the way for the support elements that
followed by clearing the beaches as quickly as possible, locating and securing
supply dump sites, and establishing the initial emergency supply dumps. By the
end of D-Day, when the combat engineers had cleared German mines from
several small fields overlooking OMAHA beach, DUKWs (amphibious trucks)
loaded with gasoline began arriving.
Several of them were set ablaze by
German gun fire.? The V Corps beaches remained under fire for nearly twenty-
four hours, but despite German shelling and snipers, the engineers rapidly
established the OMAHA Beach Maintenance Area (BMA) and began unloading
cargo.3
To the east, the First Engineer Special Brigade, commanded by Brigadier
General James E. Wharton, organized the UTAH Beach Maintenance Area.
As
at OMAHA, supply activities on
D-Day dealt primarily
with opening the
beaches and clearing sites for planned supply dumps.
By the end of D-Day,
