United States Army Logistics
98
short supply. As the establishment of the headquarters over several days led to
increased disorder, Moses argued that COMZ personnel took over from ADSEC
so hastily that they displaced people who knew the most about the supply system
and its problems. This occurred as the Allied armies' pursuit of the retreating
Germans required maximum effort from the supply services.
In September, bewilderment over command arrangements continued. Supply
issues then confronting the Americans were closely linked to the broad-versus-
narrow front debate that raged between Patton and Montgomery, and their
staffs.
Beyond that, dissatisfaction with the COMZ's ability to move supplies
forward grew in many quarters!8 The decision to divert supplies northward to
Montgomery for Operation MARKET GARDEN and General Lee's movement
of the COMZ Headquarters to Paris upset many field commanders as well.
General Patton considered the diversion of supplies to Montgomery "the
momentous error of the war," when the Third Army failed to receive even
promised supplies when all "supplies- both gasoline and ammunition— had to be
thrown in that direction," a view opposite that of Montgomery, who argued that
SHAEF, meaning General Eisenhower, missed a strategic opportunity in
September 1944 when he failed to divert sufficient resources northeastward."'
Not one to remain silent, Moses continued to express his strong views in
September. Writing Bradley again to express his dissatisfaction with COMZ
and the command arrangements, he began by apologizing for the lengthy note,
but claimed a need to get the matter "off his chest in writing." He observed
that the logistical situation had not functioned satisfactorily for the last month
and that he could not understand why the COMZ, that is, Lee, could not fulfill
its responsibility to supply the forces in the field. Moreover, Moses stated he
"felt justified in complaining about the poor service."
Lee's movement of
COMZ Headquarters to Paris, just three weeks after arriving on the Continent,
particularly pained Moses, who saw the move as unnecessary and a waste of
limited transport assets and a disruption of the logistical system as combat forces
suffered shortages of gasoline. Moses concluded by urging Bradley to take up
the COMZ matter with Eisenhower.20
The chaos caused by the COMZ Headquarters move was illustrated in the
experience of Brigadier General James Stration, ETOUSA/COMZ G-4, who
flew to Valognes on September 9 to find that the COMZ Headquarters had
moved to Paris. Only two members of the COMZ G-4 section remained and
"no suitable communications had yet been established for the operation of the
COMZ Headquarters Paris." Moreover, COMZ had made no arrangements to
train Normandy Base Section personnel in supply procedures to take over when
the headquarters left. General Stratton ordered the two remaining COMZ G-4
officers to stay behind and train the replacements sufficiently to "obviate all
possibility of error."21
Lee responded to the criticism from Moses, Stratton, Patton, and other field
force commanders by stressing that COMZ had "to make some changes in
(COMZ) plans based upon actual experience in Normandy."
Moreover, he
insisted the move to Paris was necessary and felt no regrets, because "it should
99
Confusion Continues
be clear that, as in combat so also in supporting combat, one should be as far
forward as possible."
Stressing
the
importance
of Paris as a key
communications and
transportation
center,
Lee
argued
that
effective
communications with the War Department in Washington, D.C. "could not have
been done except in Paris. "22
This argument gave little consolation to combat
forces waiting for supplies and hearing how COMZ officers had requisitioned
the best hotels in Paris.
The importance of Paris to the overall supply system
in the long run is clearly self-evident, whether or not Lee's rapid move to Paris
enhanced or harmed the supply effort is unclear.
Certainly Moses believed
Lee's actions impaired the supply effort.
Eisenhower also thought that moving COMZ Headquarters to Paris hindered
the supply effort. After learning of the move, Eisenhower wrote Lee expressing
his displeasure, informing him that he had "issued orders that the main
headquarters of L of C line of communications, that is, the COMZI is not to
be in Paris." Ike did not want COMZ in Paris, but ordering it back to Valognes
would only compound the damage already done.
Since he had not learned of
the move until Lee had the operation well underway, Eisenhower ordered him,
as much as possible, to "immediately stop the entry into Paris of every
individual who [was] not needed at that spot for an essential duty, and these
essential duties will not include provision of additional facilities, services, and
Lee for the move and called it "extremely unwise.
As command and supply arrangements began to mesh, on October 17, Lee
issued a circular defining the COMZ base section's responsibilities.
intended the move to "achieve decentralization in administration and in the
supervision of operations. "24 While the logistical situation remained critical, the
supply organization was assuming its final form. The American halt in Eastern
France allowed a
transportation system in France.
buildup of infrastructure
and improvement
of the
Moreover,
it appeared that the port of
Antwerp would soon be in Allied hands, handling thousands of tons of cargo.
On October 23, as Eisenhower wrote Marshall regarding the supply situation,
he stressed the importance of Antwerp to the overall supply system, since the
"logistical problem had become so acute that all plans had made Antwerp a sine
qua non to the waging of the final all-out battle. "25
The need for a major port
remained, especially since Cherbourg had not met expectations, and cancellation
of the Quiberon Bay operation in early August had eliminated the largest port
project contained in the original Operation OVERLORD plan.
With the
Germans holding on to the channel ports tenaciously, Antwerp became the key
to the Allies long-term supply needs, and its opening in late November vastly
eased supply difficulties.
As Moses, Bradley, Lee, and Eisenhower continued in their struggle to
clarify the relationships between SHAEF, TUSAG, and the COMZ, COMZ had
its own internal command relationships to define. Its headquarters had to deal
behind the combat troops and,
under the immediate control of FUSA, was
53
