United States Army Logistics
150
items located or often produced before being shipped to France. All of that
took time. As of November 5 only 50,000 of 2.7 million wool field jackets had
arrived in the European Theater, and planners estimated the last would arrive
in late March or early April. 35
It appeared that the Army Service Forces
assumed that forces in Europe did not need winter clothing until they
requisitioned it or that they would place requisitions well in advance.
While corps and division records indicate shortages and often give the
impression that such shortages were very serious, determining the impact of
Class Il and IV shortages is most difficult.
On September 2, 1944, for
example, the XII Corps gave woolen clothing and blankets top supply priority
for the first time. In early October, the V Corps listed winter clothing as its
highest supply priority. Overcoats, overshoes, and extra blankets were in short
supply. By the end of the month, a critical antifreeze shortage had developed
as winter neared. By the end of the month, the V Corps had 80 percent and 50
percent of required overshoes and antifreeze respectively. 37 In early November,
V Corps' priority changed from winter clothing and antifreeze to tires and tubes
for 1.5- and 2.5-ton vehicles to meet a growing crisis.
Division records are equally detailed.
The records of the First Infantry
Division, for example, indicate that on August 31 the First Infantry Division G-
4 reported shortages of 278 M1 grenade launchers, 1 second echelon number 1
tool kit, and 85 600-by-16 tires, but no signal, quartermaster, or engineer
shortages at that time.?8 On September 30, the G-4 reported the unit's shortfalls
as 20 bazookas, 20 BARs, 173 6-by-16 tires and 66 7.5-by-20 tires, but no
critical signal shortages as the rapid advance had precluded laying signal wire,
or of critical Class Il and IV items. 39
In October, the division saw heavy
fighting which resulted in losses of equipment.
On October 31, the First
Division asked for 6.30-caliber machine guns, 1 57 mm gun carriage, 8 60 mm
mortars, 8.30-caliber machine gun tripods, 48 BARs, 250 600-by-16 tires, 240
600-by-16 tubes, 52 750-by-20 tires, and 51 750-by-20 tubes, as well as a long
list of clothing items including 6,850 cotton undershirts, 5,700 pairs of light-
wool socks, and 2,894 pairs of trousers.
The division received no trousers
throughout the entire month. Additional deficiencies included, for example, 135
BAR belts, 250 canteen cups, and 38 barber kits.40
The records of other divisions present a similar story. The Thirtieth Infantry
Division shortages in September, for example, included watches and binoculars
as well as other QM Class Il items, while in October it needed .30-caliber eight-
round clips, tires, and tubes. 4
The problem with corps and division Class Il and IV shortage lists is
determining the importance of selected items. Could the efficiency of the First
Infantry Division, for example, really be affected by the lack of a single second
echelon number 1 tool kit? When the G-4 stated that the division had no critical
Class II and IV shortages, what did he mean?
perceive any critical deficiencies. If he had then he would have reported it.
It appears that he did not
study of logistics during this period is largely a study of perceptions.
The
The
quartermaster historian noted that "nothing short of divine prescience could have
151
Gasoline and More
brought about accurate anticipation of continental needs for tentage or for any
oher of the multitudinous supplies demanded by armies fighting in a foreign
country.
n42 Such a statement brings into question the army's ability to plan
future operations.
The logisticians could and should have done better
overcoming the shortages.
When Class Il and IV items were unavailable on the Continent, rear-area
personnel resorted to numerous improvisations.
Ordnance troops used French
factories to produce needed items. French facilities, for example, rebuilt nearly
500 engines a day and had produced tires, valves, distributer points, bearings,
gaskets, and tire patches by the end of 1944.43
Most FUSA contracts with
French manufacturers related to Ordnance Class II and IV.
Since COMZ filled
only 1.5 and 9.85 percent of such requisitions in August and September,
Ordnance personnel negotiated thirteen contracts in September,
the
most
important with the Gnome Rhone factory in Paris for the overhaul of radial tank
engines. 4
FUSA received the first tank engines from the factory
in late
September. 45 Fabrique Nationale Des Armes de Guerre in Liége produced parts
tor small arms, the Englebert Tire Company in Liége, produced tires and tubes,
and the T. Hanrez Atellerie in Monte Sembe rebuilt 60 mm and 81 mm mortars.
During October these contracts began to bring results.
The use of French and
Belgian facilities intensified in October as fifty-nine FUSA contracts were
negotiated calling for the production of cylinder head gaskets, 6- and 12-volt
batteries, rammer staffs, grinding wheels, typewriters, and so forth. 46
In addition to French and Belgian production, captured enemy materiel also
supplemented American stocks.
U.S. forces provided captured vehicles and
weapons to authoried resistance groups and POW camp security forces.
The
engineers used large quantities of German construction supplies such as cement,
hardware, asphalt, tar, and lumber.
The Signal Corps used German wire, while
the Quartermaster Corps issued clothing, leather goods, blankets, paper, textiles,
and mess equipment to U.S. troops.4)
To get supplies to the troops as rapidly
as possible, the Quartermaster Service sold captured German PX items such as
shaving cream, after-shave lotion, hair brushes, shoe brushes, and stationery to
the troops.
Since demand for such items exceeded the supply arriving from the
United Kingdom and the United States, the use of German items proved a
successful improvisation. 48
When items were available on the Continent but tied up due to distribution
difficulties,
the combat units at the front often responded with various ploys.
Most American soldiers, sailors, airmen have historically been very skilled at
"supply improvisation" —at supplementing the official system by whatever means
necessary.49
The U.S. Army in France in the summer and fall of 1944 is a
perfect example.
Despite the difficult conditions encountered in Normandy and
during the pursuit across France, American combat forces were most resourceful
in procuring much of what they felt they needed, and often more.
The combat
unit's supply personnel quickly discovered that to get needed supplies for their
unit required either manipulating the supply system,
"scrounging," or stealing
needed items from whoever had them, "moonlight requisitioning."
A former
53
q4
