United States Army Logistics
42
56-by-54-inch skids which held sixty cans in two layers.
The POL plan called
for 16,476 long tons of POL, in balanced 1,234-long ton loads of 375 skids of
MT-80, 152 skids of diesel, 2 skids of kerosene, 42 skids of oils and greases,
to arrive from D+3 to D+14.4 Using skids made handling of POL over the
beaches much easier.
While packaged fuel could meet the immediate needs of the assault force,
any hope of sustained operations depended upon a pipeline system to distribute
fuel in great quantities to the combat forces.
According to the POL plan, the
"theory of bulk fuel distribution, embodying the use of temporary military pipe-
line systems on a gigantic scale, was introduced and accepted. "42 The POL plan
envisioned two pipeline systems,
the Port-en-Bessin Project (known as the
Minor System), and the Cherbourg Project (known as the Major System).
See
Map 2-2.
The heart of these systems were four- and six-inch pipelines to be
completed at a rate of five and four miles per day respectively.
Engineers
calculated the daily capacity of the four-inch line at 650 long tons and the six-
inch line at 1,515 long tons.43 In addition to pipeline systems on the Continent,
the British were to complete PLUTO (pipeline under the ocean), a submarine
pipeline from the Isle of Wight to Cherbourg, to supply the British with fuel. 4
The Advance Section, COMZ was to oversee the construction of the POL
systems. The first phase of the Minor System, to be completed by D+ 10, was
to include loading and unloading facilities, two six-inch pipelines as well as a
1,000-barrel gasoline storage tank at Port-en-Bessin.
Plans called for the
eventual construction at Port-en-Bessins of four 1,000-barrel and four 5,000-
barrel gasoline tanks.
The remainder of the Minor System, to be completed by
D+16, included a gasoline and diesel ship to shore line as well as 15,000
barrels of diesel storage and 5,000 barrels of fuel storage at Ste. Honorine-des-
Pertes and a four-inch line at Balleroy with one 5,000-barrel and one 1,000-
barrel storage tank. 45
The Major System, to originate at Cherbourg, required the capture of the
city before construction could begin.
The Engineer Section, ADSEC, stood
ready to begin reconstructing Cherbourg as soon as the city fell into American
hands.
The plan called for Cherbourg to fall on D+8.
The engineers would
begin work the next day and complete the Major System at Cherbourg by
D+ 14.
Such plans made little sense, especially since planners estimated that
the port would be wholly destroyed by the Germans before its capture. 46 The
planned maximum storage capacity of the Major System totaled 536,000 barrels
or 22,512,000 gallons, with six six-inch lines coming ashore at Cherbourg, five
unloading tankers anchored offshore, and a sixth PLUTO extending to the
United Kingdom.
Two six-inch gasoline lines and one six-inch aviation fuel line
were to run southward from Cherbourg through Le Haye du Puits, Coutances,
Avranches, Fougères, and Rennes, to Laval.
gasoline line would run south through Craon to Châteaubriant. 47
Upon reaching Laval one six-inch
The planned
pipeline system ran southward, anticipating the American drive into the Brittany
peninsula.
MAP 2-2
POL Pipeline Plan
Cherbourg
• Barfleur
• a Haev.
du-Puits
Carentan
St. Vaust
Vierville-sur-mer
Port-en-Bessin
* Bulleroy
St. Lo
• Vire
Le Havre
Avranches.
Domfront
Caen
• Argentan
Alencon
L'Aigle
, Motagne
Fougeres
Kennec
Villaines-
la-Juhel
Mayenne •
Laval
Le Mans
Dreux
Chartres
Janville
Châteaudun
POL PIPELINE PLAN
Major System
Minor System
Source: Adapted from Map 9, "OVERLORD Rail and Pipeline Plans," in Roland G.
Ruppenthal, The European Theater of Operations:
Logistical Support of the Armies
U.S. Army in World War II, vol. 1 (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1953), 316-317.
