United States Army Logistics
62
opened, fuel dump personnel had no way to refill empty jerricans. The ESB
personnel did not want stacks of empty cans cluttering the already congested
beaches. To deal with the resulting glut, FUSA's Administrative Order number
1 contradicted the QM SOP by directing units not to bring empty cans into the
beach maintenance dumps, ending the rule of "no fuel without an empty can"
early in the operation." Until decanting became possible, combat units collected
empty jerricans at division and corps can-collecting points.
The increasing
disregard for exchanging the empty-for-full-can concept that developed during
this period contributed to the shortage of empty cans later in the campaign. so
Coasters and prestowed DUKWs with five-gallon cans began arriving on
D+1.
The next day ESB personnel closed the emergency beach dumps and
opened the first planned Class III beach dumps.
With the creation of the beach
maintenance areas, the ESB personnel began moving the POL inland. LSTs
loaded with POL began arriving on
June 17 following the completion of
MULBERRY A's inner harbor."
The port of Isigny opened on June 17, and
another, at Grandcamp, opened on June 20.6г
On June 22 bulk POL began
arriving from tankers off shore, and 486 tons of POL arrived at the port of
Isigny on June 24, fourteen days after American forces captured the facility.
During the first three days of its operation, 2,093 long tons of cargo, 90 percent
of which included POL, landed at Isigny. 53
Construction of the Anglo-American bulk fuel distribution system began on
June 10.
Unloading facilities at Ste. Honorine-des-Pertes and Port-en-Bessin
pumped its first fuel on June 23.64
At Ste. Honorine-des-Pertes, engineers laid
pumped it is marine lines (Tombola lines) which enabled tankers to unload
from 4,000 feet offshore to onshore storage facilities. Additional pipelines ran
west from Ste. Honorine-des-Pertes to the eastern end of OMAHA beach to a
U.S. Navy fueling barge that provided small naval craft with fuel.6o
though the great channel storm wiped out the unloading facilities at Port-en-
Bessin, engineers made storins wip during June unloaded 18,910 barrels of
gasoline and 2,990 barrels of aviation fuel. While plans called for the Minor
System to connect with the Maior System near St. Lô, before that could take
place, Cherbourg and St. Lô had to be captured and the fuel pipelines laid.
The delay in capturing Cherbourg delayed the construction of the Major
POL System, which was to originate at Cherbourg and distribute fuel through
pipelines to the front line.
Engineers went to work the day Cherbourg fell.
Although the Germans had destroyed the cargo-handling facilities of the port,
the Americans captured the POL facilities virtually intact, and Quartermaster
personnel quickly restored Cherbourg's most valuable asset to service, the Digue
de Querqueville, which had been the largest petroleum off-loading point on the
Continent before the war. 69
The Americans also put into use 500,000 barrels
of storage tank capacity after thoroughly cleansing it of naval oil residue.
The first elements of the Major System included the six-inch, eight-inch, and
twelve inch pipelines from the Digue de Querqueville tanker berth to the storage
facilities ashore. The port began receiving bulk fuel on July 26, a month after
Cherbourg's liberation. Although discharge figures for the remainder of the
Over the Beach
month totaled 101,290 barrels of gasoline, transporting fuel from Cherbourg to
frontline units remained difficult. While the first pipeline out of Cherbourg
reached Le Haye du Puits on July 31 and St. Lô on August 11, Port-en-Bessin,
the heart of the Minor System, off-loaded 311,765 barrels of gasoline and
51,880 barrels of aviation gasoline during the same period."
Work on the Major System went forward as rapidly as possible, but the
system had little impact on the operations in Normandy in June and July.
After
Operation COBRA, plans for running POL pipelines south to Laval and west to
Rennes and Châteaubriant changed as a result of the diminishing importance of
the Brittany peninsula. As operational plans changed, pipeline units laid out
new routes.
Beginning at Lessay, just south of Le Haye du Puits, the new
pipeline route ran southwest to St. Lô, Vire, Domfront, Alençon, Chartres, and
ended at Dourdan, where POL planners intended to build the principal fuel
The full impact of the Major
storage and dispersing point west of the Seine,
System, however, would not be felt until the breakout from Normandy and the
pursuit across France in August and September.
As the Minor System and then the Major System came on line, large-scale
decanting of bulk fuel commenced on June 26 with an initial capacity of
200,000 gallons. The arrival of a tank truck company greatly facilitated POL
delivery, since fuel could then be moved forward in 750-gallon (later 2,000-
gallon) tank trucks.?3 Once in operation, POL truckheads decanted 100 gallons
of fuel per minute, and by July, decanting capacity reached 600,000 gallons per
day.?4 With the arrival of bulk fuel in Cherbourg, the refilling of jerricans
began there on July 28. By August 1, fifteen million gallons of gas had been
decanted on the Continent.
By the end of July, the POL distribution system, although improving daily,
remained rather limited. The Minor System functioned as intended, supplying
the forces in its immediate vicinity, and the Major System had a growing
storage capacity, 514,00 barrels (See Table 3-1), but construction of pipelines
to the front had just begun. Until the engineers completed the Major System
pipelines to the south, the combat troops had to rely on packaged fuel to meet
their POL requirements.
Although confined to the Normandy beachhead, the number of vehicles in
France steadily increased along with fuel consumption in June and July 1944.
POL consumption for the first fifty-six days, according to FUSA records,
totaled 15,689,078 gallons of gasoline and 308,952 gallons of engine oil.?5 The
First Army's fuel consumption increased steadily throughout June and July even
though the number of vehicles in the army remained fairly constant. (For FUSA
vehicle totals and gasoline useage in June and July, see Table 3-2.)
The
preparations for and subsequent start of Operation COBRA, the breakout from
Normandy, required moving men and supplies, all of which required gasoline.
As a result, total fuel consumption increased, not just because the number of
vehicles on the Continent increased, but because each vehicle on the Continent
was burning more fuel. Fuel consumption jumped from six gallons per vehicle
per day during the last week of July to eighteen gallons per day during the first
