114
United States Army Logistics
61. Mack, "The Critical Error," 16.
62. Ibid.
63. Russell F. Weigley, Eisenhower's Lieutenants: The Campaigns of France and
Germany, 1944-1945 (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1981), 418.
64. Ibid. 12.
65. Raymond G. Moses, "Untitled Comments on ETO Organization," Folder:
Organization and Command in the ETO, Raymond G. Moses Papers, 8.
66. Moses, et al., Organization of the European Theater of Operations, 76.
67. "Memorandum, Raymond G. Moses to Omar Bradley, September 26, 1944,"
Raymond G. Moses Papers.
68. Aurand, "SHAEF-ETOUSA-COMZ," 17.
69. Lee, "Service Reminiscences," 94.
70. Lord, et al., Supply and Maintenance, 28.
71. Moses, Organization of the European Theater of Operations, appendix 30, 4.
Chapter 6
Across France: Distribution
Difficulties,
August-September, 1944
One reason why the
American supply
distribution system
functioned
sirl trughout June and July was that the distances from depots to the
trini we relatively short, that is, less than twenty-five miles.
Beginning
Juy 25, however.
when American forces broke out of Normandy and
sequently drove west, and then eastward across France, stresses on the
distribution system
dramatically as
a function of
distance.
Pradoxically, as James Huston so aptly pointed out in The Sinews of War, it
remed that "a breakthrough, the aim of all offensive operations, was the one
contingency against which they were unable to prepare."1 Logistical elements
bond incasily difficult to mere the recuirements of the advancing combat
lives While supply personnel had confronted problems
in
transporting
supplies to the Continent, they found moving materiel out of Normandy much
more difficult. As of September 1, Normandy depots contained 90 percent of
al the supplies on the Continent? Development of the rail system managed to
roduce that figure to 73 percent by the end of October? The COMZ met its
primary responsibility of moving supplies forward with varying degrees of
success, but often disappointing forward units.
COMZ planners, envisioning
a slow buildup and an incremental advance, had not prepared for a rapid drive
across France in August and early September.*
Supply personnel on the invasion beaches and in the liberated channel ports
worked diligently to land supplies for the combat forces under the pressure
created by the slow development of port facilities on the Continent.
Cherbourg did not fall into
American hands as planned and heavier-than-
expected resistance in Normandy delayed and eventually led to the cancellation
of Operation CHASTITY, American cargo discharge capacities in Normandy
fell short of planned levels.
Fortunately for the Allies, the Engineer Special
Brigades discharged more cargo over the beaches than anticipated,
thus
offsetting much of the port capacity shortfall.
As noted earlier, the opening of
Antwerp's port facilities in November finally restored the American forces'
487
2
D
810
1642
1653
994
