United States Army Logistics
26
Group,
the
Allied naval commander expeditionary
force,
and
the
air
commanderinchief Allied Expeditionary Air Force, on February 1, 1944, the IJP
provided a "basis for planning by subordinate commanders. "S
Short and to the
point, and issued less than three months before the anticipated May assault on
the Continent, the IJP outlined the basic parameters of the upcoming operation,
such as the time and place of the landing and which forces would participate.
Section "J" of the initial joint plan
delineated planning responsibilities.
SHAEF ordered the First United States Army (FUSA) in association with the
Western Naval Task Force and the Ninth Tactical Air Force to plan the landing
on OMAHA and UTAH beaches; and the Second British Army (SBA) in
association with the Eastern Naval Task Force and the Second British Tactical
Air Force to plan the landing on SWORD, JUNO, and GOLD beaches.®
The
plans of the various echelons, all of which dealt primarily with tactical and
logistical matters,
poured forth over the next four months.
The IJP's section "M" dealt with administrative matters, outlining the basic
logistical parameters within which all had to plan.
The two invading armies
expected to handle their own lines of communications.
This meant that FUSA
and SBA had to oversee the "working of their own beaches, ports (including
'Mulberries') and base installations. "8
In short, each army intended to manage
its own supply effort.
The IJP made it clear that the "limiting factor in the
initial stages [of the invasion]" would likely be "the ability to clear stores landed
over the beaches. "9
The estimated beach capacities for the period D-Day to
D+ 8 supported this conclusion. Planners calculated that supplies arriving over
the beach would only be sufficient to maintain the invasion forces and build up
adequate reserves if the armies kept "overheads" to a bare minimum. 1º
The
invading armies could only take what they needed to the Continent, nothing
extra.
FUSA, with its IJP mandate, jumped into the planning process with vigor.
Although FUSA took responsibility for the American assault on OMAHA and
UTAH beaches and looked forward to commanding all American forces on the
Continent until the activation of a second U.S. field army, American logistical
planning envisioned a gradual transfer of authority over supply
matters.
The
resulting scheme diversified the planning effort for Operation OVERLORD.
The IJP dictated that FUSA, guided by Twenty-first Army Group, would plan
supply operations on the Continent for the period D-Day to D+ 14.
time, the Advance Section, COMZ, supervised by FUSA,
At that
would take over
supply operations. Beginning D+41 the forward echelon. COMZ would take
charge of logistical matters on the Continent. When the COMZ Headquarters
arrived on French soil, approximately D+90, it would assume command of
supply operations for the remainder of the war."
Consequently,
no single
organization oversaw logistical planning for the operation from start to finish.
on February 25, 1944, FUSA issued its plan for the invasion of Europe (see
Table 2-1 for the FUSA operation NEPTUNE table of contents).
Operation
NEPTUNE, the code name for the landing phase of the invasion, and its twenty-
Table 2-1
First United States Army Operations Plan NEPTUNE
Table of Contents
I. Situation
1. General
2. Supporting Naval Forces
3. Supporting Air Forces
4. Supporting Ground Troops
5. Enemy and Topographical Information
II. Mission
6. Mission of First U.S. Army
7. Time and Date
III. Operations
8. V Corps
9. VII Corps
10. 101st Airborne Division
11. 82d Airborne Division
12. XIX Corps
13. VIII Corps
14. General
IV. Administrative
15. G-1 Plan
16. G-4 Plan
17. Medical Plan
18. Quartermaster Plan
19. Ordnance Plan
20.
Engineer Plan
Engineer Special Brigade Plan
22
Finance Plan
24.
Advance Section, COMZ Plan
Civil Affairs Plan
