106
United States Army Logistics
with the decision to abandon the Operation CHASTITY plan in favor of trying
for a quick defeat of the German army in France, a logistical gamble that almost
succeeded. 53
Bradley ordered that efforts in Brittany be directed against St.
Malo and Brest.
Moreover, belief that Antwerp would soon be available led
COMZ Headquarters to recommend to SHAEF that port development be limited
to Cherbourg and the channel ports.
Certain of the eventual opening of
Antwerp, COMZ planners supported the call for a pursuit of the Germans rather
then a move into Brittany.
Eisenhower, in a letter to Army Chief of Staff Marshall on August 7 that
further confused the issue, listed capture of the Brittany ports as the first
objective of the American forces. This is perplexing, since only the VIII Corps
operated in Brittany while most of the army moved eastward. st
As has been
seen, the port situation remained critical until Antwerp commenced operations.
A study by the COMZ G-4 plans branch dated August 18 concluded that bad
weather would limit beach unloading after October 1, which meant that the
Americans needed another 51,000 tons of cargo capacity as an offset. The only
solution appeared to be immediately opening the Brittany ports and completing
the Quiberon Bay project.
Moreover, a British need for five to ten thousand
tons of Cherbourg's capacity would further reduce supplies available to the
Americans. Unless additional unloading facilities were acquired, the Americans
would face serious supply shortages. 3s
On August 25, another port report from COMZ Headquarters concluded that
since the development of the southern Brittany coast did not seem likely and the
Americans still needed new facilities, the north coast Brittany ports would have
to be made operational. Ports slated for use included Granville on the south
coast, Morlaix, St. Brieuc, Cancalc, and St. Malo on the north coast (see Table
5-1). 56
Little came from these recommendations. The port of Morlaix, as per the
original plan, opened September 5.
The opening of the other ports did not
occur as expected. Granville became strictly a coal port as did St. Brieuc,
although planners originally intended both to discharge stores as well. Cancalc,
not included in the original plan, never became operational, since COMZ
abandoned it when they decided to concentrate on Le Havre and Rouen further
north, and to increase the capacity of Cherbourg.$
Only the opening of
Antwerp with its vast capacity to handle cargo ended the American forces'®
supply shortages. The failure of port plans developed in late July and August
demonstrated the difficulties of opening ports and the heightened controversy
arising from the abandonment of the Quiberon Bay project.
The question of whether capturing Quiberon Bay and establishing it as a
major port would have eased the American supply situation in late August and
September or would have enabled the Allies to win the war in the fall of 1944
lay at the center of an often forgotten debate that has continued since 1944.
Mack has most strongly propounded the view that failure to mount Operation
CHASTITY led to the supply difficulties encountered by Patton's Third Army,
hus, preventing an Allied victory in the fall of 1944. Placing the blame for the
107
Confusion Continues
Table 5-1
Ports
Communications Zone, Planned vs. Actual
French Port Openings and Capacities (Tons/Day), August 25, 1944
Planned
Capacity
Planned
Opening Date
Actual
Capacity
Planned
Opening Date
Morlai
St. Brieuc
Cancalc
Granville
St. Malo
3,000
2,000 #coal
1,500 #stores
3,000
5,000
4,000 #coal
1 Sept
3 Sept
5 Sept
15 Sept
1 Oct
2,115(1)
(2)
1,625(3)
2,000 stores
5 Sept
16 Sept
N/O
22 Sept
N/O
Source: Royal B. Lord, et al., Supply and Maintenance on the European Continent,
Report of the General Board United States Forces, European Theater no. 130 (1945),
NIO = Never opened.
(2) Only 5,000 tons of coal discharged.
(3) Never achieved target capacity. Best month, November, when discharges averaged
1,625 tons a day.
failure on Eisenhower, Bradley, and Patton himself, Mack argued that the three
officers did not pay enough attention to logistics.
In criticizing Patton, Mack
stressed that his failure to see the importance of Brittany occurred because no
one informed him of the strategic necessity of the CHASTITY port. He pointed
out that Robert Allen, historian of the Third Army, had asked why Bradley
made no effort to clear the Brittany peninsula. 8 Therefore, according to Mack,
had Patton been enlightened about the longterm importance of the Quiberon Bay
port he would have devoted more time and effort to operations in Brittany. 59
Mack claimed that although Bradley grasped the Channel port's importance,
he did nothing to implement the program.
with the necessity of capturing Brest; he never made the slightest attempt to
capture Quiberon Bay and carry out the CHASTITY plan."
Bradley's claim that the advance that uncovered the channel ports of Le Havre,
Rouen, and Antwerp, "made the capture of lower Brittany ports unnecessary,
was ridiculous, since Antwerp did not become available until November 26.
The Brittany ports could have, according to Mack, been available much
sooner. 60
