United States Army Logistics
Mount, tripod, cal. 30 M1917A1
Launcher, grenade M7
Rifle, automatic, cal. .30 M1918A2 (BAR)
Carriage, motor, multiple gun M15
Carriage, motor, multiple gun M16
Launcher, rocket, AT, 2.36 in. M1A1 (Bazooka)
Truck, 1/4 ton, 4x4
Ordnance Class V:
Cal. 45
Grenades, hand, fragmentation
105 mm M2
155 mm M1
8 in. Howitzer
Signal Class Il and IV:
Radio Set, SCR-300
Radio Set, SCR-536
Medical Class Il and IV:
All medical supplies on requisition for Air Supply
Quartermaster Class Il and IV:
None
Engineer Class II and IV:
None
Chemical Warfare Class Il and IN:
None
The reports indicated that FUSA dealt with three overlapping types of supply
shortages, all arising primarily from stiff German resistance in the hedgerows
of Normandy and the resulting problems. First, the close-in static fighting led
to greater-than-anticipated demands for ordnance early in the campaign.
Through early July the most serious deficiencies usually involved ordnance
Class Il and IV items. Second, beginning in late June with the storm that raged
in the English Channel disrupting supply deliveries, Class V items dominated
the daily critical shortage reports. In the ammunition crisis that peaked in mid-
July, the dearth of the most commonly used shells, 105 mm howitzer, and 81
mm mortar, continued through the end of the month, but then improved
dramatically following the breakout from Normandy. Third, the need for
Quartermaster and Engineer Class Il and IV supplies increased in July as the
initial stocks brought to the Continent had either worn out or been expended.
The unexpected need for ordnance items delayed the arrival of badly needed
Class I1 and IV replacement items as ammunition was deemed a higher priority
item. Moreover, replacement rate calculations for Class I and IV items proved
inadequate.
The first supply difficulty, the ordnance Class Il and IV crisis, that began
as soon as American troops landed in Normandy deepened as the combat forces
moved inland, as the fighting from hedgerow to hedgerow and field to field
required weapons with high rates of fire or the capability to lob explosives.
75
BARs and Mortar Shells
Combat units preferred .30 caliber machine
guns,
BARs,
Thompson
smachineguns, rifle grenades, hand grenades, rocket launchers known as
kazokas, and mortars to root out the enemy. As shortages of all these items
quickly developed and soldiers clamored for more firepower, FUSA and V
Carps Headquarters strove to meet
the supply demands of subordinate
commands. They appraised the COMZ of the changing situation while, through
channels, pushing for rapid delivery of crucial materials.
ADSEC personnel
mate extensive use of emergency supply measures such as Red Ball Supply,
Grenlight Supply, and Air Supply whenever possible. For example, aircraft
flew in considerable numbers of dozer blades for medium tanks to help break
through the hedgerows.?
What FUSA could not obtain through the supply
system, it redistributed from available stocks to meet temporary shortages while
i awaited delivery of needed materials.+
Finally, the combat unit's supply
personnel often by-passed the entire system and improvised solutions to
ordance problems that, while failing to end the shortages, went a long way to
reducing their impact on operations.
The hedgerows made mortars one of the infantry's most important support
napons. While FUSA listed mortars as being temporarily out-of-supply
throughout June and July, the shortage appeared anything but "temporary.
From June 19 to July 7, mortars appeared on the critically or temporarily out
o supply list on sixteen separate days. The situation became so serious that on
July 3, the V Corps G-4 received a message from the FUSA ordnance section
ordering all independent tank, armored field artillery, and tank destroyer
batalions to turn in all 81 mm mortars to the corps' ordnance battalion without
delay for distribution to the infantry divisions.'
The reports seem to indicate
that reallocation of those mortars solved the problem, since beginning July 8,
the 81 m mortar was no longer deemed in critical or temporarily short supply.
The 4.2-inch mortars of the chemical mortar battalions, originally used as
smoke projectors, also proved invaluable.
Although their range was shorter
than that of heavy artillery, their high explosive shells were just as effective and
mortar units usually responded to fire requests faster than artillery units.
Ammunition and replacement front and rear springs for these weapons often
appeared on critical shortage lists.
In addition to mortars, combat units clamored for M7 grenade launchers,
which, when attached to the Mi rifle enabled it to fire rifle grenades.
Planners
had greatly underestimated the importance of rifle grenades in hedgerow fighting
and, more importantly, had miscalculated their loss rate.
Soldiers frequently
lost the M7s in battle, since they had to attach and detach the devices to their
rifles because they could not fire regular ammunition with the M7 attached.
With soldiers removing the M7 when not in use, many were lost while running,
crawling, and fighting in the hedgerows.
Division G-4 requested help from
V Corps Headquarters,
qu
