96
United States Army Logistics
Moses, as FUSAG G-4, expressed further displeasure with the command
arrangements throughout June and July, and continued to push his interpretation
of the American organization's structure. Moses believed that FUSAG, when
activated, would command all U.S. ground forces on the Continent, except the
COMZ, and that all administration of the armies would go through FUSAG.
Moreover, the army group would be responsible for the "general coordination
of matters in the field which affect all commands."
Even though COMZ and
FUSAG were both subordinate commands of ETOUSA,
COMZ matters affecting the fighting forces should receive
"guidance" from
FUSAG, and that the administration of the armies would be through FUSAG.?
Moses constantly argued that "there will be many problems of a service
nature arising between commands-between FUSAG or armies and the
Communications Zone," and the ETOUSA Headquarters staff would have to
become acquainted with the operations of the commands to take prompt action.
After the war, Moses, commenting on the June 18 document, observed "they
were not ready at all. "4
The basic problem with having the ETOUSA staff
handle disputes between subordinates such as FUSAG and COMZ, was, as he
pointed out, that the COMZ staff and the ETOUSA staff were one and the
same, which gave the former a decided advantage in the power struggle with
FUSAG (later 12th Army Group-TUSAG).'
After Eisenhower revised the organization and command structure of the
U.S. forces in Europe on July 19, 1944, and the following week saw a flurry
of memo, letters, and orders as Generals Bradley, Lee, and Moses attempted
to clarify their responsibilities and argued the finer points of the revised
organization.
The revisions included relieving Lee of his position as deputy theater
commander, thus streamlining the relationship between ETOUSA and COMZ?
However, his chief of staff, Lord, became ETOUSA deputy chief of staff in
addition to his COMZ position, now reporting to SHAEF Chief of Staff Bedell
Smith, who also served as ETOUSA chief of staff. Lord's position as ETOUSA
Deputy Chief of Staff now enabled him to give orders to General Lee in
Eisenhower's name, and then to be told by Lee, as Lee's chief of staff, to carry
them out.* Moses did not believe that the principals could wear so many hats
and remain objective when it came to settling disputes with TUSAG.
are unclear.
Eisenhower's reasons for relieving Lee of his deputy theater commander post
It may have stemmed from Moses's concerns regarding Lee
heading both TUSAG's superior command, ETOUSA, and its coordinate
command, COMZ., since the order seemed to make COMZ coequal with
TUSAG.'
Major General Henry S. Aurand, commanding general of the
Normandy Base Section established in August, alluding to a conflict between
Lee and Walter Bedell Smith, noted that "Bedell will deny any part of being a
logistician; he hates them. "1o
Whatever the reason, the change did little to alter
basic relationships between the various commands and commanding officers.
Lee, as head of the COMZ, remained in charge of American administration and
supply in Europe. Since the July 19 order stated that for administrative matters
97
Confusion Continues
the COMZ Headquarters was the ETOUSA Headquarters, and anything relating
to administration and supply had to go through Lee's COMZ Headquarters.
To clarify the command situation even further, Eisenhower issued a
memorandum on July 20, "merely in order that all of us [U.S. elements of
SHAEF staff| have a common understanding as to the outline of procedures to
be followed in carrying on so-called American administration in this Allied
theater of operations." He restated the main points of his July 19 message and
stressed to the chiefs of the general and special staff sections that SHAEF and
ETOUSA functions had to be kept separate. Bedell Smith's memorandum of
July 2 stressed that same message again; that is, those individuals wearing two
has, in this case SHAEF and ETOUSA, had to keep their two jobs separate."
Whether this flurry of activity to inform the SHAEF and ETOUSA staffs of
General Lee's role in the system arose from friction between Lee, commander
of the COMZ and former deputy theater commander, and Smith, SHAEF chief
of staff, as suggested by Aurand is unclear.
In any case, Eisenhower, Smith,
and Lord tried to clarify the SHAEF, ETOUSA and COMZ staffs relationships.
The fact that Lee no longer held the deputy theater commander post resulted in
few changes, since Lee had never really been more than the deputy theater
commander for supply and administration. His position as head of the COMZ
made him that by default. 12
The mid-July confusion regarding the organization of American forces took
place as ETOUSA activated new commands.
The Twelfth Army Group, under
Bradley, became operational at noon on August 1, commanding the First and
Third Armies, headed by Generals Courtney Hodges and George S. Patton,
respetively. Hodges had been deputy commander of FUSA under Bradley 13
General Bradley
and TUSAG
Field Marshal
Bernard
Mongomery's command as part of the Twenty-first Army Group until SHAEF
Headquarters moved to the Continent, expected September 1.14.
The situation in early August highlighted problems
American command and supply system.
arising from the
TUSAG, and COMZ all seemed to converge in early August.
The logistics difficulties of FUSA,
As FUSA
declared the rear boundary on August 2 and turned command of ADSEC back
to COMZ, COMZ Headquarters moved to the Continent and established its
headquarters at Valognes in Normandy.
With the COMZ Headquarters
activation on August 7, FECZ ceased to exist. FECZ's former personnel and
organization comprised the major portion of the COMZ Headquarters on the
Continent for a considerable time. IS
At the same time, ADSEC's detached Base
Section Number Three (Cherbourg Command) soon became the Cherbourg Base
Section, 16
system.
The activation of TUSAG did little to quiet Moses's criticism of the supply
He and his assistants argued that they were "familiar with many
deficiencies in the operation of the Communications Zone . .
never have existed. "17
which should
He viewed Lee's arrival with the COMZ Headquarters
on August 7 as a disruptive influence. First, it took longer to move the COMZ
Headquarters personnel to the Continent than planned, since airlift remained in
