Chapter 1
The "Complicated Set-Up":
Establishing the Supply
System
Since the American military buildup in Europe during World War II was aimed
at the invasion of Nazi-occupied France and the subsequent defeat of Germany,
all American logistical activities undertaken in the United Kingdom prior to D-
Day, June 6, 1944, had that ultimate goal in mind. The U.S. Army took two
and a half years and relied on the experience of military operations in North
Africa, Sicily, and Italy to develop a command and supply system for the
Normandy invasion.
Although planning for operations in Europe began before
the United States became a belligerent, by June 1944, the U.S. command system
often baffled those trying to make it work.
When Lieutenant General Jacob
Devers, then commander of the European Theater of Operations, United States
Army (ETOUSA), in December 1943, referred to the command arrangement in
Europe as a "complicated set-up,
" he could just have easily been referring to the
supply system that the Americans had in place on D-Day, June 6, 1944.'
Although war plan "Black" had addressed the contingency since the 1920s,
American preparations for war with Germany began in earnest in September
1940 when the Ghormley mission, led by Rear Admiral Robert L. Ghormley,
the assistant chief of naval operations,
met with British planners to discuss
future operations. Planning intensified in January 1941 when American, British,
and Canadian staff officers met in Washington, D.C. for a series of American-
British Conferences, later known as ABC-1.
Those staff meetings led to the
promulgation of the
"Germany First" strategy, plans for
the eventual
establishment of an American theater of war in Europe and the exchange of
military missions.
Shortly thereafter, on May 19, 1941, the Special Observer
Group established a headquarters in London. Major General James Chaney, an
Air Corps officer who had observed the Royal Air Force during the Battle of
Britain, took command.
Anything but observers, the Special Observer Group
laid the foundation for an expanding effort that began with the American
occupation of Iceland and led to the development of a vast network of U.S.
bases in the United Kingdom.
After Germany declared war against the United
