152
United States Army Logistics
warrant officer with the Fifth Armored Division observed wryly that "the
overall supply system was good, but if you knew the ropes it was even better. "so
Frontline personnel developed ingenious ways of exploiting the supply system
to their benefit.
Gifts, bribes, and barter often produced satisfactory results at
the depots.
Units that lacked suitable offerings often used a little trickery or
deception to get what they wanted.
Hoarding-ordering more than needed or
maintaining reserves above authorized levels-provided units
with safety
margins.
Stripping damaged equipment of useable parts,
and the use of
unreported captured German supplies was beneficial.
A little Yankee ingenuity
often solved supply problems, and many veterans reported the widespread, if not
universal use of
''Aggressive'
methods (overrequisitioning, swapping with
other units,
demanding,
begging,
liberating,
etc.)"
to obtain the required
weapons, ammunition, gasoline, vehicle parts, and foodstuffs. 51
The American forces found whiskey and other alcoholic beverages a prime
trade item.
A warrant officer in a medical unit noted how alcohol, which the
unit was authorized as a medical item,
"opened all doors."
When he needed
ambulance tires, he
"spotted a regular army master sergeant (at the supply
depot), and traded him a case of Old Taylor for a dozen ambulance tires which
the sergeant kindly marked, 'Inspected and Condemned.'"
At the end of the
war, this particular warrant officer's narcotic books showed the dispensing of
approximately 600 bottles.
It seemed that a resourceful soldier with a supply
of whiskey could usually get his unit what it needed. 52
Supply personnel for medical units were not alone in appreciating the utility
of a well placed bottle. When the 704th Tank Destroyer Battalion, for example,
wanted to replenish its armor-piercing ammunition with the newest type of 76
mm high velocity armor-piercing (HVAP) shells, depot personnel informed them
of new rationing restrictions limiting them to one case of the new shell for every
three of the other types (high explosive, armor-piercing, and incendiary) that
they requested.
Half a case each of cognac and vermouth led the sergeant at
the ammunition dump to allot the 704th a full load of the new shells. They
were, after all,
"tank destroyers. "53
The 749th Tank Battalion's executive
officer often took liquor with him when he drove to the rear to pick up spare
parts, and a platoon sergeant of the unit pointed out that "a bottle here and there
often solved the supply problems.'
items.
In addition to alcohol, German weapons and souvenirs made excellent trade
Since a Second Armored Division supply officer occasionally sent
captured German weapons and war souvenirs to the rear to boost the morale of
the rear-area troops, his unit received preferential treatment and depot personnel
usually gave his parts orders priority. ss
While the soldiers considered trading whiskey or souvenirs for equipment or
supplies perfectly appropriate, stealing supplies from other units was seen in a
different moral-ethical light.
Veterans rarely used the word
"stealing" in
recollecting the war.
Thus the executive officer of the Second Armored
Division's Maintenance Battalion stated that,
don't admit to stealing
supplies but if they were available we got them. "56
An officer from that
153
Gasoline and More
division's quartermaster section echoed those sentiments, when claiming that the
division standard operating procedure called for getting supplies, regardless of
means, to accomplish an assigned mission. 57
Acquiring supplies destined for other units usually involved trickery or
deception of some kind. In one case, a veteran of the 191st Tank Battalion, part
of the Sixth Army Group advancing northward from southern France, recounted
that his unit had
moved so far and fast that we had outdistanced our gasoline supply trains.
Patton's
outfits, some 25 miles away, had plenty of gas but would only turn it over to their
units. So we got smart, painted his outfits insignias on a couple of trucks and a jeep
and went to the dump and got away with two 6-by-6s loaded fully with gas that kept
19 rolling until our trains caught up with us.58
In another case, a supply sergeant recounted a conversation he had had with his
captain regarding gasoline.
The captain asked if the sergeant could get some gasoline. He replied that he could get
it if the captain wanted it. At that point the officer gave the sergeant some drivers and
men, and they went down to the Red Ball Express line and highjacked five truckloads
of gasoline. The next day the 630th Tank Destroyer Battalion was on the move again. 5ยบ
By the end of the war, American combat units had become experts at acquiring
gasoline, by methods both subtle and direct.
The shortages led to less "illegal" improvisation and strenuous efforts by the
combat divisions.
seven trucks to the rear on a 700-mile round trip to bring up ammunition to
ensure an adequate reserve. 60 The Thirtieth Infantry Division ordnance officer
demed the .30-caliber M1 eight-round cartridge clip shortage serious enough
lo order all troops to salvage their .30-caliber M1 rifle clips and turn them into
amy supply points. 61
As a result of the shortages, units were very reluctant to part with supplies,
whether gasoline, small arms, ammunition, or food. Ignoring orders from army
and corps headquarters, units routinely hoarded supplies. 62
The 609th Tank
Destroyer Battalion, for example, carried extra rations, automatic weapons, and
ammunition as insurance against supply disruptions. Those proved indispensable
during the Battle of the Bulge when the battalion gave all its reserves to the
101st Airborne Division troopers who had arrived at Bastogne with only their
personal weapons and the clothes on their backs.63
Keeping combat units' vehicles running became increasingly difficult as spare-
parts supplies dwindled. During the first two weeks after the invasion, as tires
became scarce, only one tire and wheel remained among the sixty quarter-ton,
4-by by trucks recovered and evacuated. * Cannibalization became so severe that
higher headquarters prohibited it. A VII Corps administrative order ordained
that the removal of any part or accessory from any ordnance items for repair
of another item (commonly termed cannibalization) is strictly prohibited, except
