102
United States Army Logistics
headquarters was dispensed with. You never went around with a piece of paper in your
hand getting people to initial it to prove that they had 'concurred'
and to bind
themselves by their concurrences.
Their word was enough, and your word that they
had agreed was enough...
One of the most important elements in the signal success
of the First Army staff procedures was General Omar Bradley's ideas on what he called
operational control. A general commands an army.
To assist him in planning,
training, supervising, supplying, and using that army he has a general staff and a
special staff 35
This attitude toward paperwork explains the COMZ complaint that FUSA's
oversight of ADSEC in June and July left much to be desired as the logistical
personnel were accountable for everything down to the last paper clip.
Compounding this problem, since ADSEC moved forward as the army
moved forward and turned over facilities to the base sections following behind,
ADSEC had little interest in developing permanent facilities and organization.
Building infrastructure for another organization was far from ADSEC'S
immediate needs. Thus when ADSEC moved forward, it left a mess behind,
and to make matters worse, those who knew the most about the problems moved
forward as well, leaving new personnel to take care of matters about which they
knew very little. When the base section personnel finally took over the supply
facilities in the army rear, literal mountains of materiel had to be inventoried
and organized before utilization, and it took months for base sections to restore
order. 36
While ADSEC worked on the Continent supporting FUSA, the FECZ strove
to gain an identity of its own. FECZ remained a COMZ organization in search
of a mission. COMZ Headquarters never implemented the original plan to have
FECZ represent them on the Continent in the interval between FUSA'S
declaring a rear boundary to the activation of the COMZ Headquarters. FECZ
personnel had interpreted Eisenhower's June 6 organization statement to mean
that FECZ would not be an intermediate headquarters between ADSEC and
FUSA but rather a staff coequal with the FUSAG attachment at Twenty-first
Army Group Headquarters.
Brigadier General Harry
Vaughan,
FECZ
commanding general, arrived at the interpretation that the FUSAG branch would
handle field matters while the FECZ branch would handle COMZ matters. The
process did not develop as Vaughan anticipated.3
FECZ arrived in small groups. The reconnaissance party of ten officers and
twenty-one enlisted men commanded by Colonel George S. Speidel, arrived at
UTAH beach on June 18, moved to the ADSEC Headquarters at Catz, and then
on to Château Servigny which later became FECZ Headquarters.
The recon
party did little but visit the beaches and supply dumps and report back to
London. A daily activity report submitted by Speidel on June 20 reported on
storm damage to MULBERRY A and noted that supply dumps behind UTAH
beach were "in excellent condition throughout with all supplies and materials
stacked and inventoried."
Speidel also detailed a discussion with the FUSA
deputy quartermaster who reported, "No difficulties in supply have been
encountered by that office. "38
While the accuracy of the report is impossible to
103
Confusion Continues
emine, and he may have found a dump in good condition, it is a surprising
antradiction to the many reports of chaos elsewhere. It seems more likely that
the pot effected the FECZ experience in Normandy, an organization out of
touch with reality and in search of a mission.
As the recon party worked to pave the way for the next element of the
kadquarters, Lee personally assumed command of the FECZ on June 26,
relieving Vaughan as deputy forward commander, and eliminating that position.
Vaughan then took command of the United Kingdom Base Section. Lee also
relieved the FECZ chief of staff, Colonel F. M. Albrecht and made him COMZ
copy chief of staff. Albrecht was put in charge of the day-to-day operation
of the FECZ, responsible for preparing for the arrival of COMZ Headquarters
on the Continent.
The lead elements of the COMZ Headquarters,
with
ropresentatives of the general and special staff sections under
Albrecht's
supervision, soon arrived in France. 39
FECZ would no longer be the COMZ
representative on the Continent.
The FECZ Command Party landed on July 14.
COMZ Headquarters
delayed the arrival of the FECZ Operating Party, which did not arrive until
mid-. gust, in days after Lee abolished FEZ. On July 15, Albrecht and the
COMZ forward echelons of the general and special staff sections established
themselves at headquarters near Château Pont Rilly and Château Servigny. 40
At the first staff meeting, Albrecht pointed out that the meeting
sat of the Communications Zone Headquarters on the Continent as ade
i dear that the Advance Section represented "the agency that deals with the
amy [First Army] and that Communications Zone troops are under Advance
Section during the Army period. "al The FECZ did not operate as planned prior
to the invasion; in mid-July its mission included the following:
First, FECZ
would have full control and supervision of COMZ activities on the Continent
When both ADSEC and base sections began operating in France. Second, FECZ
would provide general coordination of COMZ sections.
Third, FECZ would
provide staff coordination with Twenty-first Army Group and TUSAG. Fourth,
FECZ would provide assistance to ADSEC where needed. *2 Albrecht and the
FECZ never had the opportunity to exercise these responsibilities
On August
7, COMZ Headquarters became operational on the Continent, and Lee abolished
the FECZ, ending the debate over whether or not FECZ constituted a separate
command. After the war, the general board concluded that the "absorption of
Forward Echelon by COMZ proved to be the only solution to the problem.
1t43
In addition to ADSEC and FECZ concerns, establishment of COMZ base
sections did not proceed as planned. Changes in tactical plans and the decision
to abandon the Quiberon Bay project led to the activation of additional base
sections and numerous revisions of the existing base section organization. * The
cadres of the new base section staffs came from the headquarters of the United
Kingdom base sections. The Brittany Base Section transferred from the Eastern
Base Section in the United Kingdom, while the core of the Normandy Base
Section Headquarters came from the XVIII district of the Southern Base Section
in the United Kingdom.
The Northern Ireland Headquarters staff became the
42
5
3
