United States Army Logistics
100
handling supply operations on the Continent. FECZ began arriving in mid-June,
and, as its various headquarters sections reached France, it began preparing the
way for the arrival of the COMZ Headquarters. Pre-invasion plans soon fell by
the wayside as COMZ grappled with problems that should have been
anticipated, but which were not.
When ADSEC Headquarters arrived on June 9 and set up its command post
in Normandy, its personnel, under the direction of FUSA, went to work getting
supplies to the army.
On June 16,
Advance Section COMZ Forward
commenced operations on the Continent. 26 ADSEC Headquarters sites included
Catz, Le Mans, Étampes, Reims, and finally Namur, Belgium, on October 25.27
ADSEC performed COMZ functions in France, serving under FUSA until it
declared an army rear boundary, at which point ADSEC continued representing
the COMZ until the COMZ Headquarters arrived. 28
At that point, ADSEC
continued advancing with the troops while COMZ activated base sections to
their rear
Like the combat forces, the COMZ organization expanded in early August,
as it defined the mission of ADSEC as providing direct administrative support
to the armies, except for those advancing westward into the Brittany peninsula.
ADSEC operated between the rear boundary of the armies and the forward
boundary of the base sections.
To handle supply in Brittany, the COMZ
activated Base Section Number One.
Base Section Number
Cherbourg Base Section, became operational on August 7.
Number Two remained in reserve.
Lee assigned the Cherbourg Base Section
the tasks of developing the ports of Cherbourg, St. Vaast, and Barfleur;
constructing an army rest camp at Carteret; developing COMZ installations and
activities on the Continent; and commanding all COMZ troops within their
boundaries. 29
When the COMZ. Headquarters became operational on August 7, it took
over such ADSEC functions as control and diversion of shipping from the
United Kingdom and the United States; liaison with the U.S. senior Navy
Headquarters on the Continent and the Allied Naval Commander Expeditionary
Force; the call up of supplies and equipment from the United Kingdom and the
United States including allocation of Red Ball and air-lift tonnages; the control
of phasing to the Continent of service troops; the planning and operational
instructions for bulk POL storage and distribution; the location of COMZ dumps
not including those temporarily established by ADSEC Headquarters or Base
Section Number One Headquarters for the support of units in their zones of
responsibility; and the direction of administrative planning on the Continent.
In addition, all stock control teams attached to ADSEC reverted to COMZ
Headquarters control, 30
and thus hindered
ADSEC's relationship with FUSA, TUSAG, and the COMZ confused many
responsibilities. "31
ADSEC's ability to discharge its "loosely defined
Its problems arose from its mission and organizational
structure. While ADSEC viewed itself as a supply agency, in fact, COMZ was
the functional supply agency.
Therefore, the service chiefs often believed that
Confusion Continues
101
ADSEC went too far, that the organization exceeded its authority. Yet because
ADSEC was across the channel from the COMZ Headquarters, it often had to
at for the headquarters and exercise authority that the COMZ Headquarters had
not clearly defined. Thus the relationship between ADSEC and COMZ often
became strained.
ADSEC had a similar relationship with FUSA. The First Army did not
declare a rear boundary as planned, but established an ADSEC forward
boundary on June 20 placing area 1-including Cherbourg, UTAH,
and
OMAHA beaches-under ADSEC control. That gave ADSEC control over the
boundary was declared.
hours August 2,32
The establishment of the rear boundary and of COMZ Headquarters on the
Continent August 7 brought to light more major problems with American
logistics. First, FUSA ran the army supply system rather loosely, viewing
results as more important than bookkeeping.
is personnel had a short-term focus. Finally, when the base section personnel
forward.
Since FUSA devoted its attention to fighting Germans, it had little interest
in or concern for keeping administrative matters as tidy as the COMZ would
have liked. Thus, when FUSA advanced and turned over its supply dumps,
ADSEC usually inherited a mess. Supplies were haphazardly strewn around,
and paperwork often proved incomplete or nonexistent.
Nor did ADSEC
personnel have much time to correct the problems, since they devoted all of
their energies to keep supplies moving forward and had no time or spare
manpower to put matters in proper order. 33
General Bradley made his view of logistics clear when he stressed results
over paperwork, as follows:
These officers could issue orders themselves to these troops. They did not have to lose
time sending papers around, and submitting them, and getting them formalized. It was
a workable shorteut, this scheme of operational control by those section chiefs of the
special staff and it required mutual understanding, broad military skill, and utmost
confidence. 34
Whether or not his statement indicated a lack of interest in logistics, it certainly
demonstrated Bradley's disdain for routine paperwork.
Elbridge Colby, a First Army staff officer, described the FUSA staff in
action. They "worked together with a minimum of formality and a maximum
of fluid cooperation."
Moreover,
you would call the quartermaster on the phone: "Say, is it all right to do this?" and he
would answer:
"Surel"
All the cumbersome formality of many high
