Conclusion
undertaking in American military history. Despite the ultimate victory of U.S.
forces over the Wehrmacht the key question remained, Why had not the U.S.
supply system performed better?
An examination of the ETOUSA-COMZ
organizational development, the logistical plans, supply distribution difficulties,
and supply shortages in France in the summer of 1944 answers the question.
The Americans could have done a better job of supplying their forces.
American Operation OVERLORD planners had two years to establish and
put into operation a system for supplying the European theater of operations,
drawing on the significant but brief experience of World War I as an example.
Despite advantages of time and precedent, the creation and evolution of the
Services of Supply became an ongoing power struggle between the theater,
COMZ, and field headquarters' staffs. The resulting disharmony and disputes
over lines of authority hindered both planning and operations on the Continent.
Far from a smooth-running machine,
the logistical system sputtered across
France, coping unevenly with one unanticipated contingency after another, only
avoiding disaster
because supply personnel successfully overcame
obstacles on an ad hoc basis.
Moreover, while the supply organization developed over a two-year period,
most detailed Operation OVERLORD planning took place in the four months
before the operation. As comprehensive invasion plans were produced quickly,
the resultant pressure and enthusiasm of the planners shaped the development
of contingency plans.
As a result,
"all advance planning estimates [especially
those relating to port availability and capacities] were overoptimistic. "i
Time
constraints, the scope of the operation, and a lack of hard planning data all
contributed to the creation of a supply system resembling a great machine
which, when activated, procured and delivered supplies based on requisitions
placed months in advance.
Mainly built to support Operation NEPTUNE, that
is, the invasion phase, the supply phase could only be adjusted slightly if the
