United States Army Logistics
148
of combat during the crucial period, September 4-13, to improve the corps fuel
situation. 19
VII Corps' First Infantry Division, on the other hand, strictly
rationing gasoline and limiting its advances in September, required 900 gallons
to move one mile tactically, and often traveled twenty-five miles or more each
day.
That required 25,000 to 30,000 gallons of gasoline each day, against
which the division received an average of 10,000 gallons a day during the
month. 20 Obviously, the division could not maintain the pace established in late
August without receiving gasoline at the rate it had grown accustomed too.
There were other side effects of the fuel shortage than impaired mobility. T/5
Frank C. Nodine of the Ninety-third Signal Battalion reported that radio
communications became increasingly difficult as the fuel shortage intensified
because his unit lacked the fuel to idle their truck engines and charge their
transmitter batteries, sometimes causing his unit to shutdown.2
A mid-
September respite proved temporary as FUSA warned its corps that gasoline
supplies would be limited from September 20 through the end of the month.
Fuel deliveries did not increase until early October when the supply system
finally began catching up with demand.
The Third Army's XII Corps had a similar experience. In late August and
early September, its G-4 section found itself "dumbfounded" by the Class III
supply situation, when it received only 25,390 gallons of 750,000 gallons of fuel
requested on September 2. As a result, Major General Manton S. Eddy, the XII
Corps commander, had to alter his tactics.
His "preference for maneuver, his
penchant for the long swinging left hook, had to be modified to a pattern of
short hard right and left jabs. "22
Each corps lacked sufficient gasoline to
maintain the advance into Germany because the distribution system could not
meet the demand without the large-scale use of rail tankcars and pipelines.
Trucks alone just could not do the job. For these reasons the fuel shortage,
more than any other factor, hindered operations.
could "eat their cartridge belts, but my tanks have gotta have gas. "23
Patton argued that his men
Occasionally, captured gasoline aided the American advance.
The XII Corps,
for example, captured 100,000 gallons of fuel at Chalons on August 29, but
since the corps used 200,000 gallons a day the German gas did not end the
shortage, just eased it a bit. In another case, XII Corps' Eightieth Division,
captured a trainload of gasoline, but unfortunately only one car contained 60-
octane fuel, barely suitable for truck use, and the remainder being 100-octane
aviation gas. 24
In fact, American units often found German gasoline unsuitable
for use in their trucks. Fuel captured by TUSA at Reims on August 31 was
out the hard way.
tested at too low an octane rating for use in American engines.?5
One unit found
When the 602nd Tank Destroyer Battalion captured a
German airfield and a large stock of aviation fuel, they used the gasoline and
damaged a number of armored car and half-track engines as the high octane fuel
burned the valves. 26
As noted earlier, in addition to food, ammunition, and fuel, combat units
required large quantities of regular equipment and supplies.
lacked thousands of different items needed to function at peak efficiency.
At times the army
The
149
i and More
rize catalog alone, for example, included 350,000 separate items from
a pigs to firing pins to twenty-ton howitzers and forty-ton tanks. A 2.5-
rock had 3,800 parts while an M1 rifle had 85.2 Winter clothing presented
atonal problems as each of some two million U.S. soldiers required a
roplete set.
As with Class I, III, and V items, shortages of Class Il and IV items that
heroed at the front resulted from over optimistic expenditure rates and
Kiribution difficulties. Predicting expenditure rates for each of the thousands
' tims proved impossible.
The
demand for woolen clothing
items in
Crimes Europe, for example, exceeded the production rate in the United
Sizes by a factor of two.
Pre-invasion estimates were that woolen underwear
rod last four months; they only lasted two, just as flannel shirts, overcoats,
taras, a overshoes also lasted only half as long as planned.28
As a
alt, pre-invasion requisitions did not meet the post-invasion demand.
Units often contributed to the Class Il and IV shortfall by reducing their
rustin of such items to get as much fuel and ammunition as possible.
Catal Omar Bradley later blamed part of the subsequent winter clothing
stage on this practice?' When units did place requisitions, depot personnel
had trouble filling them.
During August, FUSA received only 16 percent of all
coquistioned Class Il and IV supplies, including such badly needed items as
replacement engines for medium tanks, tank
tracks, and tires.
During
Sprember, FUSA received only 10 percent of all Class Il and IV items
requisitioned which by then included such badly needed items as parts for
artillery pieces and smaller weapons,
truck engines, and
tank engine parts,
At one time or another, acetate, blank forms, water immersion heaters,
opewriters, field ranges, medals, canvas, officers clothing, mosquito headnets
and gloves, tentage and paulins all appeared on the First Army shortage lists. 31
Third Army critical shortages included similar items.
On September 16, 1944
for example, steel helmets, wool trousers, forks and spoons, raincoats, and wool
drawers appeared on the list.32
Other unavailable items included maps, pipeline
pumps, and field wire.
The First Army's use of field wire averaged 66,400
miles per month in the summer of 1944 against an allocation of 35,000 miles
per month.
The map shortage became so severe that topographic personnel
printed additional maps, using French paper stocks and the backs of ten million
captured German maps.
Even these emergency measures failed to meet the
printers' needs-they required even more paper.
To keep the fuel flowing at
peak levels, POL personnel required 2,000 pipeline pumps by November.3
Most GIs cared little for pumps, but they all wanted winter clothing.
Cold
weather arrived before the winter clothing for many troops.
providing cold-weather
gear was
in
part due
delays
in the
flow
requisitioned items.
Eighty percent of the requisitions for wool drawers for the
European theater, for example, arrived in the United States in September and
October, and Quartermaster personnel requisitioned 82 percent of the
wool
undershirts after
August. 34
Once received, requisitions had to be processed,
48
810
442
1653
994
