United States Army Logistics
58
establishing transfer points due to shortages of cranes and trucks meant that once
ashore the DUKWs often spent valuable time hauling cargo inland, an inefficient
use of an amphibious vehicle.
Beach personnel did not establish the first
transfer points until D +5 and even then a shortage of cranes to transfer cargo
nets from DUKWS to trucks limited operations.28 Third, in efforts to speed the
unloading, crews routinely overloaded the DUKWs, which normally carried
three tons, a half-ton over the design limit to start with, to loads of from five
to seven tons.29
The overloading increased the wear-and-tear on the vehicles
and accelerated their need for maintenance.
Fourth, since supply planners had
not anticipated the increased demands,
maintenance units often lacked the
necessary parts to keep all the DUKWs in service.
With little time for
maintenance and few spare parts, the crews often used the vehicles until they
had to be written off.
Maintenance personnel then stripped defunct vehicles of
a number
2.5-ton truck
interchangeable, to keep as many vehicles as possible in service in Parts
were
The composition of cargo arriving in a particular load often drove the ESB
personnel to distraction. When a DUKW pulled alongside a cargo vessel, a net
would be lowered into the cargo hold of the ship.
A gang of men would load
the net from all sides with sufficient cargo to make a load.
The tonnage would
be "correct," overloading the DUKW without sinking it, but the cargo handlers
did not always load a uniform cargo.
Thus, one DUKW might be carrying a
variety of supplies when it reached the beach.
ESB personnel ashore then had
the difficult task of subdividing a load of cargo and moving the various items
to the appropriate dumps.
If each DUKW contained only one class of supply,
the whole load could be delivered to the appropriate dump easily and efficiently.
Because
considered the
speed of
unloading crucial,
not
the
convenience of the ESB personnel ashore,
began arriving loaded with bulk cargo of the same type. 31
the problem eased only when ships
One of the most important factors in the
rapid buildup of troops in
Normandy involved the
"drying out" of LSTs, a maneuver which involved
beachine an on fine trying ouloading cargo directly onshore once the tide
had receded, and refloating the vessel at the next high tide. 32
"Drying out" was
desirable because the gradual slope of the beaches often forced the LSTs to drop
their front ramps in four or more feet of water, which naturally destroyed or put
out of service many inadequately waterproofed vehicles.
Although the LSTs
were designed for beaching,
smaller vessels, could be safely
the navy had to be convinced that LSTs, like
"dried out" on the Normandy coast.
Navy
officials, fearing that the LSTs would break their backs on the uneven beaches
or that the steep Atlantic tids would break their bacesitated to authorize LST
Considering he is would sink the ladies the elaborate nature of
the logistical planning for the operation, and the fact that the navy had already
beached LSTs successfully in the Medite, an an and the Pacific, the navy should
have tested beaching LSTs long before the actual invasion. As cargo discharges
quickly fell behind schedule, the navy tested the technique and found no serious
problems, and from D+2 on "drying out" of LSTs was a common occurrence.
59
Over the Beach
No LSTs used in this way suffered any significant damage, as the navy beached
as many as twenty-five to thirty at a time, presenting quite a spectacle up and
down the Normandy coast. 34
The problems did not end once supplies reached the beach. The desire for
a higher proportion of combat forces early in the operation delayed the arrival
of support elements, leading to a gap between the supply of, and the demand
While a lag in the buildup of engineer and ordnance maintenance
companies, quartermaster (QM) truck companies, and so forth, did not hinder
operations in June and July, it did "foreshadow increasing difficulty in future
operations. "35 The ESBs had to deal with a shortage of personnel. On the night
of D+9, truck drivers on UTAH beach had to unload their own vehicles
because of manpower shortages in the dumps.
Support units assigned to
combat units often detailed troops to help on the beaches.
For example, a
company of the 126th Ordnance Maintenance Battalion often labored with the
beach personnel.37 At times, supplies piled up on the beach faster than beach
personnel could move materials inland, allowing high tides to overrun and ruin
The identification and disbursement of ammunition became a major problem.
At one point, with trucks to move supplies inland in short supply, a twenty feet
high pile containing everything from small-arms ammunition, high explosives.
chemical shells, and blasting caps grew on the beach. Ordnance personnel had
to work their way through the stack carefully sorting the materials as they
went? According to a member of the 126th Ordnance Maintenance Battalion,
the "hasty and indiscriminate unloading of ships and the inability to identify and
report huge stocks dumped on the beaches" resulted in chaos that slowed the
movement of supplies inland to those that needed them. 40 Thus, until a major
port opened, ESB personnel on the beaches struggled to meet supply needs
ashore.
Recognizing that Cherbourg might not fall as scheduled or that its port might
not be useable as soon as anticipated, logistical planners counted heavily on the
British plans, in development since 1942, to construct artificial anchorages and
a port known as MULBERRY A off the American beaches. 41 Construction of
the protected anchorages,
began on D-Day after
surveyors located the sites for
blockships-obsolete warships and merchant
vessels of the American, British, Dutch and French fleets-and positioned
them. 42
Of the two gooseberries planned for OMAHA beach, one served as the
foundation for MULBERRY A.
The prefabricated port included numerous
components, all towed from the United Kingdom.
The outermost breakwater
consisted of bombardons, large floating constructions, 200 feet in length, 25 feet
high-water line.
across, and weighing 1,500 tons, located approximately 5,000 feet out from the
These enclosed an outer harbor, while 1,000 to 1,500 yards
closer to the shore a row of sunken ships known as corncobs and large concrete
caissons known as Phoenixes created another breakwater to shelter the inner
harbor.
The floating and sunken breakwaters protected a series of piers,
pierheads, and moorings for large vessels, such as liberty ships, and smaller
