Table 2-1 (Continued)
V. Command and Control
25. Command
26. Signal Plan
Annexes.
1. Current Estimate
Organization of Assault and Follow-up
2a. Priority of Units for Build-up
3. G-1 Plan
4. Intelligence Plan
G-4 Plan
Medical Plan
Quartermaster Plan
Ordnance Plan
Engineer Plan
10.
Chemical Warfare Plan
Engineer Special Brigade Plan
Prearranged Naval and Air Bombardment Support Plan
Air Plan
14.
Signal Communications Plan
Air and Coast Defense Plan
Passive Air and Fire Defense, and Civil Defense
17.
Advance Section, COMZ
Civil Affairs
Assault Plan (Allocation of craft to first 3 tides).
Forecast of Operations
Artillery and Naval Fire Support Plan
22.
23.
24.
Mounting
Build-up Control
Planning Time Schedule
Special Operations Plan
Smoke Plan
Source: First United States Army, "Operations Plan NEPTUNE," annex 2 in First
United States Army Report of Operations, 20 October 1943-1 August 1944, (N.p.,
n.p.), 94, 96.
29
Landing Craft and Wool Drawers
six annexes covered every aspect of the assault on the Continent.
It appeared
that very little had been left to chance and that everyone had a plan.
The American supply scheme for the invasion seemed relatively simple and
foresaw three distinct phases.
At first the needs of the invasion forces would
be met with materiel requisitioned at preplanned levels-automatic supply.
Once the American forces secured a foothold on the Continent and supply
facilities began functioning, supply would become semi-automatic with the
issuance of controlled items and ammunition being based on status reports.
When the COMZ had the major ports and rear-area supply facilities firmly
established and the supply system operating smoothly, all logistical support
would be entirely by requisition. In practice, the second phase lasted until the
end of the war. 12
The invasion plan envisioned the assault forces maintaining themselves
logistically by landing packaged supplies over the beaches until engineers could
repair captured port facilities, making the delivery of bulk cargoes possible.
To
increase the quantity of supplies arriving over the American beaches and to
ensure against the failure to capture
Cherbourg on schedule (D+8), the
Americans anticipated the construction of an artificial port, MULBERRY A, off
OMAHA beach.
By the evening of D+3 supply personnel expected to have a
two-day reserve of supplies ashore.
Through close liaison,
British and U.S.
organizations on the Continent arranged for the use, by mutual agreement, of
equipment not otherwise available. 13
To deal with unexpected supply requirements and delivery difficulties the
logistical planners created several emergency supply systems.
These included
"Red Ball Supply," which set aside 100 tons of shipping space daily for delivery
within five days of the requisition, starting with D+3.
"Greenlight Supply"
provided for the daily substitution of up to
600 tons
of
predesignated
ammunition in the place of scheduled Engineer Class IV supplies. 14 Greenlight
would commence on D+ 14 with the requisitioned items arriving within six
days. '5
Finally,
"Air Supply" set aside 6,000 pounds per day for delivery
within forty-eight hours as soon as air fields became available on the Continent.
Additional
emergency supply measures included
special parachute-packed
supplies for units cut off by enemy forces.
The packages, specifically tailored
for ranger, tank, motorized infantry, and tank destroyer battalions as well as
infantry regimental combat teams, provided three days of supplies.!6
Supply
planners were
uncertain
if these
measures
would be sufficient to meet
unforeseen supply emergencies.
FUSA planning
for
the invasion's initial phase, D-Day to D+14, dealt
primarily with the assault landing and beachhead problems.
The FUSA G-4
section planners based their logistical planning for the assault phase of Operation
NEPTUNE on several facts and assumptions. First, pre-invasion reconnaissance
indicated the
beaches
had
few exits and
very
little slope.
Second.
meteorologists predicted bad weather for 20 percent of the time in the weeks
immediately following the invasion.
Thus, every fifth day, the weather would
disrupt the unloading of supplies.
Third, all supplies arriving early in the
