United States Army Logistics
The establishment of the European Theater of Operations. United States
Army (ETOUSA) on June 8, 1942, only muddied the command arrangements
further. USAFBI became ETOUSA with Chaney still commanding, his third
title in a little over a year.
After Chaney had served as ETOUSA commander
for sixteen days, the War Department ordered him back to Washington on June
20, 1942.
Apparently after General Marshall and Major General Dwight D.
Eisenhower visited England in April and May respectively, they had agreed that
Chanev
lacked the proper
attitude
command
the
european
theater.
Eisenhower noted Marshall's concern that "American officers on duty in London
were not familiar with the broader problems and obiectives
of the
war
Department. "17
When Eisenhower assumed command of the ETOUSA on June 24. 1942.
he recognized that he had organizational problems to deal with. 18 Lieutenant
General Brehon
Somervell,
chief of Army Service Forces
had
warned
Eisenhower that "one of the major encumbrances, if not the major encumbrance.
upon the progress of the Allied Expeditionary Force in France in 1917 - 1918
lay in bad organizational control of its SOS, and particularly in its being forced
to adopt an organization radically different from that existing in the Wai
Department. "19
That warning represented yet another call for American forces
in the European theater to be structured along the lines of the March 9, 1942,
War Department organization.
As Eisenhower set out to avoid difficulties
similar to those of the AEF, he appointed Lee responsible for all administrative
and supply activities related to operations undertaken in the theater, authorizing
him to communicate directly with the War Department and British officials on
such matters without reference to ETOUSA Headquarters. 20
This arrangement, which resembled the World War I system,
was worked
out by Generals Eisenhower and Lee and their ETOUSA and SOS staffs and
lasted nearly a year.
The ETOUSA Headquarters assigned the technical service
chiefs with administrative functions (the adjutant general, air technical section,
antiaircraft section, senior chaplain, inspector general, judge advocate, provost
marshal and special services to ETOUSA Headquarters
The
remaining
technical service chiefs commanding organizations with service functions (the
Army Exchange Services, Chemical Warfare Service, Depot Services, Corps of
Engineers,
Finance Department, Ordnance Department, Quartermaster Corps,
Medical Department and Signal Corps) were placed under SOS Headquarters.
Those chiefs not located at SOS Headquarters assigned representatives to the
theater headquarters to coordinate their activities. 21
This arrangement resulted
in the creation of two headquarters. ETOUSA and SOS. both with general and
special staffs (see Chart 1-1).
The staft arrangement represented an unhappy
compromise but Operation TORCH, the upcoming North African invasion
demanded that some arrangement. even one less than desirable. be accepted as
quickly as possible 22
To deal with the lack of office space in London.
Tee
ordered the SOS Headquarters to be established at Cheltenham, ninety miles
west of London. He later claimed that since the "British custom of getting to
work late in the morning albeit they worked late in the night" hampered the
Chart 1-1
Command and Staff Organization, European Theater of Operations,
United States Army, 20 July 1942
Comm
nanding General
Chief of Staff
Deputy Chief of Staff
General Staff
Commands
Services
upply
Theater Special Staff
Surget
Staff Channel
Source: Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater of Operations. "Organization and Command in the European
Theater of Operations," The Administrative and Logistical History of the European Theater of Operations, pt. II vol. 1 (Paris:
Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater, 1946), 71.
