United States Army Logistics
130
who drove the Red Ball trucks as to those who drove the tanks," while Patton
asserted, "the truck is our most valuable weapon."74 During its eighty-one days
of operation from August 25 to November 17, 1944, Red Ball truckers moved
412,193 tons of supplies forward.?S
Although the rehabilitation of the supply
infrastructure in France, especially transportation facilities, combined with the
capture of Antwerp ended the need for the Red Ball Express and other routes,
by late December 1944, 198 quartermaster truck companies, 10,900 vehicles,
were in service in Europe.?6
Fourteen of these companies operated POL
tankers, each of which carried 4,000 gallons of fuel."
In spite of its general success, numerous problems with organization,
maintenance, and personnel lowered the overall efficiency of the Red Ball
Express.
Since the Red Ball crossed the boundaries of several commands,
confusion developed concerning who had authority over what. On September
27 and 29, for example, both the chief of transportation and the Seine Base
Section complained that ADSEC representatives had made unauthorized
diversions of cargo and changed consignments at truck-to-rail transfer points
under the Seine Section's control. Another organizational issue involved the use
of convoys. Since ADSEC's Red Ball procedures directive did not deal with
their size, the Normandy Base Section noted, that only 30 percent of the trucks
on the Red Ball route moved in organized convoys. On September 13, ADSEC
Headquarters ordered that the "integrity of company-unit convoys must be
preserved to the fullest possible extent at all times.'
A shortage of manpower seriously hindered Red Ball operations, slowing
loading and unloading of convoys, delaying maintenance and road repairs, and
leading to confusion on the routes since ADSEC lacked sufficient military police
for traffic control? At the height of the operation 24,000 vehicles a day passed
through St. Lộ and 17,000 through Pont Herbert on the Vire river in a twenty-
four-hour period, respectively.80
Maintenance, however, proved the most serious drag on the Red Ball Express
system. In the rush to move as much cargo as quickly as possible drivers often
neglected truck maintenance, and often loaded six to ten tons of cargo on the
2.5 ton trucks."1
battalions. "82
As a result, some units were derisively called "truck destroyer
As the twenty-four-hour-a-day operational pace wore out trucks,
many even after major efforts were made to repair them, they were just written
off. 83
The maintenance plan put forth on September 2 that called for servicing
2,300 of the projected 7,000 Red Ball trucks per day proved unrealistic. The
maintenance plan in place called for a "40-and-8 system,"
company's forty trucks working while eight were serviced, proved totally
inadequate for Red Ball operations.
with each truck
On September 26, as the COMZ. G-4
considered "a rapid and total disintegration of a large number of vehicles," he
foresaw a possibility that "the rails taking over soon may just save the situation,
as a remedial action cannot wait more than two more weeks. "84
The existing repair facilities could not handle the workload. As of September
28, little over a month after the Red Ball commenced, ordnance personnel,
handling 1,500 repairs daily, replaced 600 trucks daily with exchange vehicles,
131
N of which were replacing trucks wrecked not due to mechanical failures.
Seventy of these could not be fixed, but maintenance personnel cannibalized the
wrecked vehicles for spare parts. Another 700 to 800 sat in the shops each day,
awaiting extensive and time-consuming repairs.8s
Repair facilities often just did not exist. On September 15, for example, no
mobile maintenance units operated between Mortagne and Chartres and the
Seine. The twenty-seven companies of the Twenty-seventh Quartermaster
Group received no maintenance between September 10 and 12. No ordnance
service was available at the St. Cyr diversion point on September 10 and 11,
and on September 15 a patrol found some vehicles that had broken down along
the route three to five days earlier.®
Common maintenance
differentials burned out for lack of oil and grease, dirt in gasoline cans, loose
nuts and bolts resulting in drive shafts falling off, as well as transfer cases
losening, wheels coming off, and fenders and bodies
breaking off.
Underinflated tires led to serious problems, especially as overloading became
A shortage of spare parts delayed maintenance, since fan
bels, spark plugs, and distributor points often could not be found.
es
unavailable, a Transportation Corps report noted that while truck units would
need 180,236 tires for the seventy-five-day period beginning October 9, only
2,000 were on the Continent and 46,596 in the United Kingdom. In September,
the Quartermaster Corps issued 55,059 750-x-20 tires against an average of
29,142 for the proceeding three months.
Another unforeseen source of trouble
came from another logistical sector.
Maintenance units reported that 65 percent
of tire losses resulted from running over C ration cans littering the highway.
Finally, a shortage of tols presented problems, as units transferred vehicles so
often that most tools were lost or unaccounted for.®? One company of forty-one
vehicles, for example, had retained only a single pair of pliers and one crescent
Weather led to further wear and tear on vehicles.
a sea of mud which ruined even new trucks in a few weeks: the excessive use
of low-gear and four-wheel drive wore out transmissions and water seepage
destroyed brake drums." When the Ninth Army received five truck companies
just off Red Ball duty in late October, the Army G-4 reported that maintenance
personnel found only 60 percent of the trucks in operating condition;
remainder needed immediate maintenance.
of the trucks it received,
The Sixth Army Group reported that
maintenance, the highest technical levels of repair.'°
Personnel problems also hindered Red Ball operations. Individual drivers got
lost trying to find army supply dumps, and convoys often arrived at their
destination to learn that the army had moved forward." The drivers practiced
poor gasoline-can discipline and often failed to recycle jerricans.
the army as a whole suffered from a shortage of these, they littered the ditches
along the Red Ball route."2
Drivers exhausted by too many hours behind the
wheel had accidents."3 At one site marked "steep hill and dangerous curve,"
5
3
