Map 3-1
U.S. Normandy Beaches
Cherbourg.
Monteburg
Utah
Beach
Ste. Mere-
Eglise
^ La Haey-
du-Puits
Omaha
Beach
Carentan
Isigny
2 St. LO
Port-en-Bessin
Bayeux
Caen
outance.
Vire
U.S. NORMANDY BEACHES
Beach Maintenance Area
Mulberry A
55
Over the Beach
supply troops had Class I, III, Engineer IV,
V, and medical supply dumps
functioning on UTAH beach. 4
German artillery
and snipers kept supply
operations on UTAH beach under sporadic enemy fire for four days and forced
beach personnel to move a Class V dump to avoid its destruction.
By D-Day's end, only a few tons of supplies had arrived ashore on OMAHA
and UTAH beaches-not an auspicious start considering the supply plan.
The
ESB personnel expected to handle 2,400 tons of cargo over OMAHA Beach on
D-Day, increasing to 10,000 tons a day by June 18, and 15,000 tons per day by
August 5. The U.S. forces projected the arrival of 2,250 tons of cargo to arrive
over UTAH Beach on D-Day, with tonnage increasing to 5,700 tons per day by
June 13 and 10,000 tons per day by August 5.
Although no discharge records
for D-Day and D+ 1 can be found, there is little doubt that the shore personnel
did not achieve the planned tonnages, thus putting the supply schedule behind
at the outset.
By midnight of D+2 only 6,614 of the 24,850 tons planned for
D-Day to D+2 had arrived ashore—26.6 percent of the plan.
Cumulative
discharges reached 31 percent of the plan by midnight of D+3. Only 28,100
tons, or 46.6 percent of the 60,250 tons of supplies scheduled, actually arrived
over OMAHA and UTAH by midnight of D+4.
Obviously, initial tonnage
estimates for both beaches proved overly optimistic.
After the first few days the ESB personnel had cleared the beaches of
obstacles and debris, and organized the beach maintenance areas sufficiently to
begin unloading operations in earnest.
Normal unloading began on D+3, and
as a flow of supplies over the beach began, problems developed all along the
supply line from the United States and United Kingdom to the supply dumps in
France.* Before long, chaos reigned in the ports in England, and many ships
arrived off Normandy incorrectly loaded.
Others carried unknown cargoes,
lacked manifests, or anchored too far offshore, hindering unloading operations.'
Some crews showed a tendency to overload the small landing craft used to ferry
the cargo ashore, and the crews responsible for such ferry vessels as DUKWs
and Rhino ferries overworked and overloaded them, adding to the deterioration
of the craft in question.
The many ferry vessels along with the landing ship, tanks (LSTs) proved
crucial to the Normandy supply effort.
These vessels made the movement of
large quantities of cargo possible. The DUKWs, 2-5 ton amphibious trucks,
carried material directly from offshore cargo ships to on shore supply dumps.
Tugs towed the Rhino ferries, large pontoon barges with outboard motors,
across the channel, where they were used to unload LSTs and cargo ships; their
large capacity usually allowed two to unload an LST.
Rhinos proved very
difficult, if not impossible, to sink because of their cellular construction. If a
section became damaged, engineers took parts from other damaged Rhino ferries
and constructed a new one. 10
half_11
Crews often used Rhinos until they broke in
The LST, a 327 foot, 1500 ton vessel, carried 2,000 tons of tanks,
vehicles, and guns which could roll off the ship and onto the beach. 12 These
three vessels proved invaluable during the Normandy operation and were in very
short supply, 13
