United States Army Logistics
128
September 6 to 8,559 tons on November 16, for a daily average of 6,922 tons.*7
Total tonnages moved by truck and rail during the period September
6 to
November 16 equaled 813,592 tons, an
average of 11,300 tons daily,
unfortunately for the pursuing American combat units, most of the cargo was
transported late in the period.68
The Red Ball Express and Military Railway Service proved unable to deliver
even the 3,500 tons a day COMZ promised in early September.
The flow
increased later in the month when U.S. railway troops put more of the French
railway system into service, but deliveries failed to keep up with promised
increases in daily allocations.
Moreover, ADSEC often sent "filler" tonnage
when it did make deliveries, that is, anything on hand to replace out-of-stock
items. Since the depots lacked many needed Class II and IV items, FUSA
requested a general policy change early in October, calling upon COMZ to
make "every effort to fill requisitions as submitted."
FUSA argued that if a
depot did not contain an item requisitioned, depot personnel should backlog the
order and make up tonnage with Class I or Ill goods, and when shorted items
became available later, they would be shipped in Class I or Ill space. After a
team of Twelfth Army Group officers followed requisitions through the system
to see what happened, the delivery of requisitioned supplies improved.
The supply predicament in mid-September, already critical, became even
worse when General Eisenhower ordered COMZ to transport 500 tons of
supplies daily from the Bayeux area to Brussels to support Operation MARKET
GARDEN, on what became known as the Red Lion Route. Since the Red Ball
Express could not spare any vehicles, the Twelfth Army Group Headquarters
stripped the 26th, 95th, and 104th U.S. Infantry Divisions of all trucks except
for a bare minimum needed for housekeeping duties. These provided twenty-
five provisional truck companies and antiaircraft units moved another ten. In
the end, COMZ assigned provisional units to the Red Ball route,
whose
experienced units, with their African-American personnel were shifted to the
Red Lion, which operated from September 16 to October 12.70
Of the 17,556
tons of oil, coal, and ammunition moved, over half went to the British."
routes:
At the same time, COMZ diverted trucks from the Red Ball to two other
the Green Diamond route, which moved 15,590 tons of rations and
ammunition from Cherbourg and the beaches to rail transfer points at Dol
between October 14 and 31, and the White Ball Express route,
transported 140,486 tons of supplies from Le Havre and Rouen to rail transfer
points in Paris and Reims between October 6 and December 13.72
COMZ Headquarters did not begin metering the efficiency of the Red Ball
system until late September when they checked the loading and unloading times
for sixteen convoys.
The service troops loaded one convoy in eleven and one-
half hours, another in thirty-nine, while unloading times for all sixteen ranged
from eleven to thirty-six hours.?3
sampled 228 convoys during the period October 11-20 (see Table 6-4).
To get a more detailed picture, headquarters
The Red Ball Express was judged invaluable. General Eisenhower stated that
the "spectacular nature of the advance was due in as great measure to the men
Vumber of Convoys
Table 6-4
Average Red Ball Express Convoy Loading Times
by Cargo, October 11-20, 1944
Minimum Time
Maximum Time
6.3
Cargo
Quartermaster Class I & II
Juartermaster Class III
Ordnance Class V
Engineer Class II & IV
Signal Class II & IV
Medical Class II & IV
Chemical Warfare Service Class II & IV
Source: "Red Ball," RG 332, NA. 8.
