United States Army Logistics
132
eight gasoline semitrailers and tractors went over an embankment from a single
convoy.
The next day eight more 2.5-ton trucks repeated the performance."4
Drivers fatigued by round trips that often ran 48-65 hours often carried out
sabotage.
Ordnance personnel reported "many instances" of tampering with
wiring, shorting of ignition systems, smashing of distributors, and similar bits
of damage committed to put vehicles out of action."s
Beyond that, drivers often stole cargo. Brigadier General Pleas B. Rogers,
the commander of the Seine section, saw gasoline thefts as the most serious
black market offense, since soldiers could "fight without cigarettes but not
without gasoline." He charged that as Patton's tanks reached the Siegfried Line
and ran out of gasoline, "army trucks lined the length of the Champs Élysée in
Paris with Gls selling gas by the canful and cigarettes by the carton. "96
Finally, a further hampering of the Red Ball Express came in September, in
the middle of the transportation and fuel crisis, General Lee diverted substantial
truck and air transport to move COMZ Headquarters from
Valognes in
Normandy to Paris. The transfer, which took two weeks to complete, included
uprooting a tent city built for 11,000 troops, including 560,000 square feet of
hutted office space. The transfer began just two days after construction of the
tent city had been completed. By mid-October, with Americans occupying 90
percent of Paris hotel space, COMZ Headquarters used 167 hotels, the Seine
Base Section occupied another 129, and the Supreme Headquarters and other
organizations twenty-five."7
Transport aircraft flying emergency supplies supplemented the trucking
operation and from July 1 to August 25 aircraft moved 11,174 tons of cargo
forward, including 785 tons of medical, 4,791 tons of ordnance, 530 tons of
signal, 453 tons of engineer, 4,591 tons of quartermaster (mostly fuel), and 24
tons of chemical warfare items.? As aircraft flew fuel to forward decanting
facilities, on August 27, they delivered 25,635 gallons of fuel to TUSA, and on
September 11, 247,340 gallons of gasoline arrived at Renneville and Étain.
While FUSA received its first airlifted packaged gas on September 14, bulk air
deliveries did not begin until September 20. The next day, the first bulk fuel for
TUSA, 12,000 gallons, arrived in the fuel tanks of bombers." During the last
days of September, air deliveries to Florennes, Belgium, and Clastres, France,
amounted to 1,171,285 gallons, while TUSA received gasoline from an airfield
at St. Dizier, France. Each handled 100,000 gallons a day, 100 Bombers carried
1,500 gallons in wing tanks which ground personnel decanted into jerricans. 101
Air delivery of fuel gave FUSA 248 tons a day from September 20 to October
S when the bad weather halted air supply operations. 102
In September, aerial resupply, 5,580 aircraft sorties, transported 12, 745 tons
of fuel, 270 tons of ammunition, and 2,295 tons of miscellaneous supplies for
the COMZ.
operations from October 1 to November 18 moved another 3,458 tons of critical
items, 103
Of the latter, 1,240 tons consisted of food for Paris.
Airlift
Poor planning characterized air supply operations. Units often duplicated
requests, and supplies were often delivered to the wrong airfield, or the aircraft
133
Across France
arrived to find no trucks waiting to haul the materiel away. With the lack of
forward airfields hindering air supply operations, TUSA requested construction
units to build airfields immediately behind the front. When these were opened,
Air Force combat units often moved in and prevented their use by cargo planes.
In early September, preparations for First Allied Airborne Army operations in
Holland ended air supply missions. While FUSA and TUSA had been receiving
as much as 1,200 tons per day, average daily airlift from mid-August to mid-
September totaled only 500 tons for the two armies. 104
Despite diversion of
transport planes to Operation MARKET GARDEN, the total tonnage moved by
air peaked in September, after which deteriorating weather and improving
supply flow on the ground led to a decrease in supply sorties.
by air during the summer and fall of 1944 included the following:
2,595 tons
in June; 4,025 tons in July; 8,040 tons in August; 28,540 tons in September;
11,005 tons in November; and 6,570 tons in December.
capability during the crucial August-September period, the distribution system
failed to meet the supply requirements of the advancing armies.
At one time or
another, the Twelfth Army Group, COMZ, ADSEC, and the field armies have
been blamed for the failures.
Generals Eisenhower and Bradley have been accused of contributing to the
supply problems. Historian Russell Weigley, for example, argued that Twelfth
Army Group's diversion of a heavy corps with two infantry and two armored
divisions into Brittany, took fuel away from the main drive eastward. Wiegley's
apraisal of the decision to take the Brittany ports as incorrect, contrasts with
Harold Mack's view of Eisenhower's and Bradles is refusal to imple ment
Operation CHASTITY as a cause of the failure
of the supply system. 105
Weigley based his view on the hypothesis that the war could have been ended
in 1944 if all resources had been devoted to the drive eastward.
Unlike
Weigley, Mack believed only the establishment of a proper supply system based
upon the Brittany ports would have
enabled
an
Allied
victory
before
Christmas. 10 Both interpretations disregard unavoidable distribution problems.
Had Twelfth Army Group sent the VIII Corps eastward instead of into Brittany,
Third Army distribution problems would have become critical much sooner.
Since ADSEC found it impossible to supply the Third Army as it drove
eastward, how would it have supplied two additional armored divisions over
those distances? Even if captured quickly and put rapidly put into operation, the
Brittany ports could only have unloaded cargo, not moved it forward. In either
case, the distribution system itself was the weak link in the American supply
system.
COMZ, the agency responsible for delivering supplies, blamed supply
difficulties on unforeseeable events and failed plans such as the failure to
acquire ports as scheduled, a shortage of service troops, the use of civilian train
crews, and poor communications between COMZ and base sections. Moreover,
COMZ argued that FUSA had contributed to the supply difficulties. As noted
earlier, when COMZ took over the supply system on the Continent from FUSA
