104
United States Army Logistics
Base Section Number Two staff. The Channel, Seine, and Oise Base Sections
evolved from the Western, Central, and Southern Base Sections in the United
Kingdom, respectively. 45
The base sections handled all COMZ responsibilities within their sectors
except for exempted activities such as the military railway, military pipeline,
theater signal communication, and motor transport services.
Other duties
handled by the COMZ Headquarters included the distribution of supplies among
depots, interdepot transfers of supplies, the issue of controlled and critical items,
and the assignment of troops and units to sections and base sections. 46
The base section organization did have problems.
The responsibility for
repairing roads and railroads, for example,
rested with the base section
commanders and proved to be a problem since they had not also been given the
authority to get the job done.47
COMZ, for instance, established the Military
Railway Service as an exempted service.
Base section commanders had no
authority over the military railways, as a result military railway officers felt
little obligation to cooperate with base section staffs.48
In addition to organizational matters, other factors affected the development
of the American supply system. When the invasion forces failed to advance as
rapidly as planned early in the operation, by D+50 the Allies were still stuck
in the Cotentin peninsula instead of controlling the entire Brittany peninsula, and
then when the Allies moved forward faster than anticipated, by D+120 the
Allies had moved beyond the projected D+270 phase line,
problems developed which required atenin. 270 hase ine an for su had
anticipated occupying most of the Brittany peninsula by mid-July, at that point,
FUSA was compressed into the Cotentin Peninsula with only one major port,
Cherbourg. When it became clear that American development of the Brittany
ports which had dominated long-range Operation OVERLORD planning - Brest,
Lorient, St. Nazaire, Nantes, and Quiberon Bay-had not occurred as planned,
supply officers scurried to find every available ton of discharge capacity
available.
All available engineer assets were concentrated at Cherbourg to raise its
output to 20,000 tons a day as quickly as possible. 49
The planners realized that
a port's discharge capacity depended on several limiting factors such as berthing
space in the port, number of cranes, storage capacity ashore, or the road and
rail network linking the port to the combat forces inland. Once a port's storage
areas were full, materiel had to be moved from the port before further unloading
from ships.
The road and rail system out of Cherbourg limited port capacity
more than the ability to unload ships. Since the Americans did not implement
a major road or rail development program, the maximum discharge rate peaked
at 15,000 tons a day. In addition to Cherbourg, the Engineer Special Brigades
maximized the discharge capacities of the invasion beaches.
Except for the
major storm of June 19-21, the weather during June, July, and August proved
favorable for beach operations, although MULBERRY A, the artificial port, off
OMAHA beach contributed little since the storm virtually destroyed it. So
105
Confusion Continues
The shortage of discharge facilities intensified the Quiberon Bay debate.
The foundation of long-range supply planning in the original Operation
OVERLORD plan was Operation CHASTITY, which foresaw the opening of
Quberon Bay on the southern coast of the Brittany peninsula by July 30.
It
panned a discharge rate of 7,000 tons a day by September 4. The original plan
l operations in France recognized that the
Cotentin peninsula
with its
tigerows, swampy areas, and poor road network did not favor establishing a
ra maintenance area. Brittany, on the other hand, with its better road and rail
network, ports, and more open spaces,
was much better suited for such
faitis, but unfortunately, when July 30 arrived, the Germans still held
Quiberon Bay. 51
On July 18 a "spearhead" committee, including army and navy officers,
eamined the port situation and made recommendations to deal with the lack of
discharge capacity on the continent.
The committee suggested that planning for
Quberon Bay be continued and that a port facility be constructed at Cancalc,
east of St. Malo, and that the planned discharge capacity of Brest and Rade de
Bes le increased in case Quiberon Bay did not develop as planned. " Although
not included in the original OVERLORD-COMZ plan, the committee reported
that developing Cancalc would be more economical and quicker than waiting for
the Quiberon Bay facility.
While the original plan called for the ports of Brest
and Rade de Brest, considered one port by the Americans, to be captured by
July 25 and developed to handle 3,200 tons by August 6 and 5,300 tons by
October 4, the committee recommended raising the planned daily tonnage levels
by 1,500 tons and to increase the rail exit to handle 12,000 tons a day.
With
regard to MULBERRY A the committee ruled that the time and effort required
lo repair the artificial port, severely damaged in June by the Channel storm,
outweighed any expected benefits.
All these recommendations depended upon
a rapid breakout from Normandy and the capture of port facilities in good order,
and more importantly, a general advance into the Brittany peninsula.
Since the
Americans never utilized the ports considered by the committee, its work was
in vain.
At the height of the port crisis, Eisenhower and Bradley exchanged mixed
signals. After the Twelfth Army Group became operational on August 1, one
of General Bradley's missions as TUSAG
commanding general
implement Operation CHASTITY.
He instructed Patton to detach Major
General Troy H. Middleton's VIII Corps from his Third Army to carry out the
plan.
Colonel Harold Mack, a member of the logistics planning staff for
Operation OVERLORD, argued that from August 1 onward, the American high
command treated Operation CHASTITY as a minor operation.
As early as August 2, both Eisenhower and Bradley had decided against
wasting resources in Brittany.
With the growing momentum of the breakout
presenting an opportunity to inflict a major defeat on the German forces in the
Normandy area, diverting resources to move into Brittany would mean allowing
the surviving German forces to escape.
Forces credits the success of Operation COBRA, the breakout from Normandy,
