United States Army Logistics
States on December 11, 1941, the need for a headquarters in the United
Kingdom to handle the expected influx of American troops became apparent.
The War Department redesignated the Special Observer Group,
the United
States Armed Forces, British Isles (USAFBI) on January 8, 1942.2
General
Chaney,
still in command, supervised the development and
implementation of the BOLERO plan, which called for a massive military
buildup in Great Britain in preparation for an invasion of Northwest Europe—a
"second front."3 With that mission in view, Chaney organized his headquarters
along traditional staff lines with general and special staff sections.
As men and
materiel began to arrive in the United Kingdom-the first 4,000 American
troops landed in Belfast on January 26, 1942-Chaney recognized the need for
an organization to oversee the administrative and supply needs of the increasing
flow of American forces. On May 1, Chaney cabled Washington, D.C. a plan
for creating a "command to be known as the Services of Supply, USAFBI."s
The War
Department replied that it was about to create just such an
organization, which became the SOS/USAFBI with Major General John C. H.
Lee commanding.
Major General John C. H. Lee's background was well suited to his role as
commanding general of the Services of Supply (see photograph 1).
An
engineer, Lee had graduated from key army schools, including West Point
(1909); the Army General Staff College at Langres, France (1918); the Army
War College (1932); and the Army Industrial College (1933).
During World
War I, Lee had helped with the planning of the St. Mihiel and Meuse-Argonne
offensives.
In the 1930s, Lee oversaw numerous harbor and river projects.
these experiences prepared Lee for the greatest "engineering"
project of the
war—the massive buildup of soldiers and materiels in the United Kingdom for
the invasion of German-held France. Although many officers considered Lee's
personality his greatest shortcoming, it may have been his greatest strength.
Putting it simply, Lee had a reputation for being difficult to work with; his
nicknames included "Jesus Christ Himself" Lee, John "Court House" Lee, and
even "Garbage Can" Lee because he sometimes stood by the garbage cans to see
what the enlisted men were throwing away after a meal. Eisenhower recalled
that Lee was "considered a martinet by most of his acquaintances
[where
as] I sometimes felt he was a modern Cromwell. "7'
Others viewed Lee's
maintaining of his own train (which he viewed as a necessity) as evidence of an
inflated view of his own importance.'
General Chaney soon tangled with "Court House" Lee, since each held
different views on the organization of the SOS in the United Kingdom.
In early
May, General Chaney had received a cable from Army Chief of Staff George
Marshall detailing the organization of the Services of Supply.
Marshall assigned
"to SOS operation of the supply and administrative services of the theater with
the theater headquarters maintaining only a minimum of these."9
Marshall
wanted U.S.
Army
forces in the
United Kingdom to parallel the War
Department organization, which had been restructured on March 9, 1942, to
include a Ground Forces Command, Air Forces Command,
and Services of
The "Complicated Set-Up"
Supply.
Chaney incorrectly concluded that the cable directed him to organize
an SOS in the United Kingdom, just as Lee's SOS/USAFBI staff prepared to
sail for Europe. Clearly, the U.S. Army did not need two SOS organizations
in the United Kingdom, but questions persisted regarding the organizational
structure of U.S. forces in the European Theater of Operations and the role of
the SOS within that structure for the remainder of the war.
By the time Lee arrived in England, May 24, 1942, and activated the
SOS/USAFBI Headquarters, he had formed definite ideas about Services of
Supply authority. He was under orders to
plan in detail and to operate the supply, transportation and administrative services which
serve the Theater as a whole,
including procurement, receipt, storage and issue of
supplies and equipment; salvage and maintenance operations; construction; quartering;
training of SOS personnel; graves registration service; army postal service; evacuation
and hospitalization of sick and wounded; recreational facilities; claims; Army Exchange
Service and fiscal operations.?º
The SOS Headquarters included the four general staff sections with slight
modifications, G-1 (personnel), G-2 (intelligence and public relations), G-3
(training), and G-4 (supply) in addition to the various technical service chiefs.
In developing the SOS organization, Lee argued that the "SOS should take
over virtually all supply and administrative functions in theater. "11
to use General James Harbord's supply plan from the Great War as a basis for
SOS/USAFBI. 12 Harbord had discovered in 1918 that channeling supply matters
through the general headquarters led to delays and inefficiency, and General
John J. Pershing, commander of the American Expeditionary Force, had given
him authority to deal directly with the War Department on nonpolicy matters.
Harbord had thought this necessary, as communications forwarded through the
theater headquarters "lost their identity as his" and did not receive the attention
that he felt they should.
Harbord had believed that the
commander of the SOS should "command" not coordinate. 13
versus theater headquarters control of logistics became a source of contention
within the American command system in Europe in World War II just as it had
in World War I.
The U.S. Army never resolved this issue to the satisfaction
of everyone involved.
Chaney and the USAFBI staff saw no need for a competing organization.
Lee later wrote that his "welcome
was
not particularly warm at Chaney's
headquarters because we were really uninvited guests-having been sent over by
Marshall to organize a plan prepared in Washington and about all of which
Chaney and his staff were not fully acquainted. "14 Most of the staff at USAFBI
took exception with Lee's organization of the SOS. Any authority given to Lee
over
administration
and supply matters
especially the
G-1 and G-4.15
reduced that of the theater staff,
According to Lee, Chaney and his staff "had
expected to be the command and staff nucleus of any major American effort. "16
They objected to theater activities being transferred to SOS.
