Chart 1-4
Organization of Consolidated ETOUSA/SOS Headquarters,
17 January 1944
Theater Commander
Deputy Theater Commander
Chief of Staff
Deputy Chief of Staff
- 8
Agent
Quartermaster
Petroleum
Field For System
1!
services
15
The "Complicated Set-Up"
personnel, inasmuch as ETOUSA General Order Number 6 stated that officers
would fill similar positions for the
Base Sections
I. S. Forces
Theater of Operations," The Administrative and Logistical History of the European Theater of Operations, pt. II vol. 2 (Paris:
Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater, 1946), 4.
Source: Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater of Operations. "Organization and Command in the European
appointed to ETOUSA staff positions
COMZ. 56
Opposition to the latest reorganization soon developed with some officers
challenging the view that the staff consolidation would save manpower by
the staff
still
had
the
same amount of work
that
to do.
pointing out
Consolidation also precluded the movement of the Theater Headquarters to and
in the field.
If forward and main echelons were needed to keep up with the
advancing field headquarters, why consolidate the two headquarters in the first
place?57
In addition,
the field and air elements, represented by the Ground
Forces Command and the Army Air Forces Command, considered themselves
equals of the COMZ as set forth in the War Department organization.
The
appointment of
Lee
as
deputy
theater
commander
complicated matters,
especially since as theater commander
General Eisenhower usually stayed at
SHAEF Headquarters.
The FUSAG staff objected to the new arrangements on
the grounds that a coordinate command,
the COMZ, had too much power over
the allocation of supplies because Lee served as both COMZ and deputy theater
commander.
Eisenhower's chief of staff,
Bedell Smith, felt that the deputy
theater commander position should have never been created, and some officers
believed that the new consolidated headquarters would focus too much attention
on supply and not enough on theater matters since most personnel dealt mainly
with logistics. 58
As a result, the field and air commands often by-passed both
ETOUSA and COMZ and took concerns directly to SHAEF, thus cutting
ETOUSA out of the command loop.
Finally, critics argued that many supply
matters, especially at the base section level, required no action at the theater
level-the reverse remained true as well. 59
The January 1944 reorganization gave Lee, as deputy theater commander,
ETOUSA G-4, and the commanding general COMZ oversight of all American
administrative and supply functions in the United Kingdom.
However, he still
lacked jurisdiction over administrative and supply matters related to planning
operations on the Continent.
SHAEF controlled planning for the Normandy
invasion
and subsequent compaign.
Crawford, as SHAEF G-4, oversaw
American logistics while Lieutenant General Sir Humphrey Gale, SHAEF chief
administrative officer, handled British supply matters.6ยบ
SHAEF made 21st Army Group responsible for the initial invasion and put
Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery in tactical command of the campaign until
the Allies firmly established themselves on the French coast and enlarged the
beachheads sufficiently to accommodate
another
army group.
FUSAG
coordinated its supply activities through Montgomery's headquarters. To meet
this requirement, SHAEF ordered an American Administrative Group (AAG),
commanded by Moses, who commanded FUSAG G-4 Section as well, attached
to Montgomery's 21st Army Group. 61
Moses took the entire FUSAG G-4
section with him to his new office at 21st Army Group Headquarters, which
along with the AAG, and FUSAG, lay beyond the control of Lee and COMZ.
