United States Army Logistics
18
problems, since both FUSAG and FUSA questioned FECZ's role and authority
on the Continent.
No one, not even the FECZ commander, seemed to fully
grasp how the unit fit into the overall organization.
The FECZ debate arose from two main points of confusion.
First, how
would the new organization fit into the overall command structure? Since the
First United States Army Group, the First United States Army, and the Advance
Section, Communications Zone all questioned FECZ authority,
did
the
organization constitute a separate headquarters?
Second,
the relationship
between FECZ and ADSEC remained unclear.
The missions of the two
organizations changed much too often. This left the two commanders and their
staffs unsure of their responsibilities, and the resulting confusion only hindered
operations.
Generals Bradley and Moses, FUSAG commanding
general and G-4
respectively, took issue with a March COMZ directive redefining the mission
of the FECZ, as it implied that the FECZ and FUSAG were coordinate
attachments with no jurisdiction over each other.8 As the FUSAG Headquarters
interpreted the command setup, Moses, as AAG commander, controlled FECZ.
Unfortunately, FECZ often did not recognize that authority and tried to by-pass
Moses and deal directly with COMZ Headquarters. 9
Neither
Bradley nor
Moses wanted an additional headquarters inserted in the command structure
between FUSA and ADSEC, and saw the FECZ as such.
ETOUSA quickly
informed Moses that FECZ had no command status, being a forward echelon
of the COMZ Headquarters, nothing more.
ETOUSA Headquarters finally
issued a directive to all service chiefs stressing
that FECZ was not an
independent command, and would be absorbed when COMZ Headquarters
arrived on the Continent. While ETOUSA Headquarters continually assured all
involved commands that FECZ had no headquarters status, many saw it acting
like one.
Defining FECZ and ADSEC missions proved as difficult as determining
FECZ's place in the overall command structure.
With FUSAG, FUSA, and
ADSEC questioning his authority, Major General Harry Vaughan,
FECZ
commanding general, sought a clarification of his position. Since Lord, COMZ
chief of staff, agreed with FUSA that no additional headquarters would be
established between the Advance Section and First Army, he stressed that FECZ
should not engage in those detailed operations that remained an Advance Section
function. He wanted FECZ to "supervise and coordinate," not handle day-to-
day functions during the early stages of the operation? Vaughan countered that
he could not "supervise and coordinate" activities of the Advance Section if it
remained beyond his authority, especially since Lee had assigned to the Advance
Section COMZ operations on the Continent until COMZ Headquarters came
ashore. Furthermore, an April directive from Lord to Lee transferred planning
responsibility for the supply operations subsequent to D + 90 back to the COMZ
Headquarters. It also ordered Vaughan to return "the general staff section and
service personnel required to assist on the planning for the period subsequent to
D+ 90" upon the completion of their planning assignment.?' Vaughan wondered
19
The "Complicated Set-Up"
how he would carry out his supervisory role on the Continent up to D + 90 if he
had to return his general staff and service personnel. 72
Similarly confused, Colonel Evert G. Plank, ADSEC commanding officer,
informed FECZ Headquarters that the operation of his unit was "hampered at
present by being unable to define its responsibilities with respect to the various
COMZ functions which will be performed on the Continent. "73
Plank could
plan only if he knew precisely what he had to plan for.
FECZ Headquarters,
not exactly sure of their own place in the command setup, responded with a
memo delineating the responsibilities of both ADSEC and FECZ. FUSA would
control the supply effort, determine supply requirements, and submit them to
ETOUSA during the first phase of Operation OVERLORD, D-Day to D+20.
At that point FUSAG would determine supply requirements and submit them to
ETOUSA through ADSEC until D +41 when FUSAG would begin determining
supply requirements and
submitting
them to ETOUSA
through
FECZ.
Beginning D+90, the COMZ Headquarters would handle supply efforts on the
Continent.
Each organization would conduct the logistical planning for the
phase of the operation when they would be in charge of logistical matters.
Unfortunately for Colonel Plank, this arrangement lasted less than two weeks.
FECZ transferred responsibility for COMZ activities during the second phase
from ADSEC to FECZ,
eliminating the period when ADSEC represented
COMZ on the Continent.
Colonel Albrecht, FECZ chief of staff, stated that "it
is the intention of this headquarters to assume full supervision and control of all
Communications Zone activities at that time (D +20). "74 Plank and his staff had
a difficult time meeting their responsibilities as rapidly as they changed.
Confusion relating to the status and responsibilities of the forward echelon
required action at the highest levels.
Eisenhower, as theater commander, dealt
with the issue.
As late as May 27, just days before the planned landing, he
made it clear that FECZ would exercise staff supervision over United Kingdom
base sections and on the Continent.
Eisenhower
countered the common
perception held by FECZ, ETOUSA, COMZ, and other staffs that FECZ
represented a separate command headquarters by calling for a "COMZ deputy
forward commander" for FECZ and stating that it constituted an element of
COMZ, "not a separate command headquarters.
The problem did not end
until COMZ Headquarters arrived in France and absorbed FECZ in August,
1944.
While Eisenhower tried to settle the FECZ question, SHAEF entered the
logistical debate once more.
Crawford, SHAEF G-4, proposed a major
reorganization of the American system-one week before the planned invasion!
He suggested moving theater G-4 functions from COMZ to SHAEF, including
the technical service chiefs.
After the war General Moses pointed out that
Crawford's proposal came "at least eight months too late and it would have been
asinine to make the shift just before D-Day
with the big job
of the
COMZ-crossing the Channel and operating on both sides of it—only a week
or so away.
"76 Lee sounded alarm bells immediately with a letter to Eisenhower
pointing out that "the confusion occasioned by this proposal, may jeopardize the
