154
United States Army Logistics
by ordnance personnel under the supervision of an officer. "65
Such orders had
limited impact since combat units viewed cannibalization as just another way of
keeping as many vehicles as possible serviceable.
As the parts shortage became more critical, units not only cannibalized
wrecked vehicles, but went after any vehicle they could find, and units kept
theirs closely guarded.
For the 126th Armored Maintenance
Battalion,
"moonlight requisitioning" of spare parts was the order of the day. A tank
destroyer company commander illustrated the problem in plain terms, pointing
out that "if you were going down the road and had to go into the woods to get
comfortable, you would have to watch your vehicle because the first other
vehicle that came along would stop and someone would jump out with a tire
wrench, etc." Having done some "requisitioning" of his own, he recounted two
episodes:
A medic in a jeep was bringing a wounded infantryman out of a woods. The medic got
wounded and another infantryman drove them into a village.
The two wounded men
were taken into an aid station and the driver [the unhurt infantryman] headed back into
the woods.
The jeep just sat there.
One of my Sergeant's looked at it-looked at
me—1 nodded —he drove it away —[it was] a whole jeep of spare parts.
During the Battle of the Bulge. I had to go up to a small village and took a short cut
through a field.
A new division had just moved out of the area, they hadn't learned
yet, and there was one of their jeeps stuck in a snow drift with no one around it. I
radioed the motor sergeant, told him where I was and what I saw. On the way back,
just the chassis was sitting there in the snow. 6
Although not proud of what he had done, the tank destroyer company
commander concluded that his job was to "take care of the men of Company A.
and [hel did it as best [hel could as long as some one else did not personally get
harmed," a prevailing attitude with regard to
"moonlight requisitioning.
When the American supply system and informal methods failed to obtain
Germans stores often provided needed items, since as they
withdrew eastward across France, they left behind vast amounts of supplies.
Short of spark plugs, the 126th Armored Ordnance Battalion captured a German
repair depot containing thousands of spark plugs usable in American vehicles
that ordnance personnel quickly put to work. 69
When items just could not be obtained officially or unofficially, U.S. forces
either manufactured them, acquired them from the French, or did without.
Often, the combat troops relied on "good ole American know-how," or what
was known as a "field expedient."
At one point, the tire shortage became so
severe that the 602nd Tank Destroyer Battalion had to leapfrog their vehicles
The battalion pooled the available wheels and tires to advance as
many vehicles as possible, then removed the wheels. hauled them back to the
remaining vehicles, and moved those forward.
However inconvenient and
wasteful of fuel, such improvising enabled them to carry out their mission.?º
155
Gasoline and More
The most common supply improvisations involved food. Although the
American Army during World War Il was the best fed army in the world, the
soldiers found most field rations unexciting and often unpalatable." For soldiers
accustomed to ample fresh vegetables, meats, and dairy products, a few days or
weeks of field rations led most troops to find ways to supplement or improve
Combat veterans learned early that having a few condiments on
hand, salt, pepper, onions, and so forth, added a little flavor to the often bland
rations.?2 Collecting vegetables from gardens and fields when passing through
an area, the soldiers ate potatoes, onions, carrots and even rutabagas.
While the troops sought out eggs whenever possible, the American love of
meat could not be suppressed for long;
the soldiers liked smoked meats
best-they were ready to eat and kept well. After farm boys enlightened their
city-bred comrades that smoking usually involved hanging meat in a fireplace
chimney, when units entered a village, they inspected the chimneys, which,
according to one GI, often produced "many pleasant surprises."7s If the soldiers
found preserved meats unavailable, the fresh kind would do.
farmers raised rabbits or guinea hens which the GIs found easy to butcher and
prepare. Slaughtering hogs and cattle involved more work, but when the end
result was a thick juicy steak, anything was possible.?6
provide fresh beef appeared to be a widespread practice. A veteran of the 183rd
Field Artillery Regiment recalled eating steaks and hamburgers a number of
times. The first cow which his unit devoured was the victim of an Allied bomb.
When its meat ran out, another cow turned up dead, and "the ole cow wasn't
exactly hit by accident."
At least three other times, French cattle were
sacrificed to the appetites of the 183rd."
Even though French farmers
complained about missing cattle, the attempts by military police (MP) to keep
the Gls in check did not always succeed.
A member of the 630th Tank
Destroyer Battalion recalled some MPs arrived while his unit roasted a hog and
tried to make something of it.
Outnumbered and apparently hungry, the MPs
adopted the attitude "if you can't beat them, join them," and helped "eat the
While American combat units devised many ingenious ways of improving
their supply situation, it is difficult to determine
improvisation on the overall prosecution of the war.
the
effect
of supply
From the perspective of
Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force or U.S. Twelfth Army
Group, supply improvisation had little if any impact on the fighting of the war.
The diversion of a truckload of gas here, of a few cases of ammunition there,
or the fate of a roast pig were of little concern to the high command.
Nevertheless, it appears that supply improvisation had several negative effects.
Rear-area
maintenance units
complained about
cannibalization,
materials sometimes caused problems, and French farmers were often unhappy.
More importantly, improvisation distorted the supply-and-demand information
upon which the supply system depended for planning.
are few accounts of combat units being hurt by their neighbors'
At the same time, there
activities,
although some units had their gasoline shipments diverted, or found a supply
