United States Army Logistics
56
A lack of transfer points ashore and a shortage of trucks meant that the
DUKWs often wasted time driving inland to unload.
A shortage of supply
handling personnel hindered the unloading and contributed to the chaos. Getting
supplies from the ships to appropriate supply dumps behind the invasion beaches
proved to be a monumental task, a task fraught with many pitfalls.
In the rush to move men, vehicles, and supplies across the channel, the
English ports quickly became congested and overwhelmed by the requirements
of the Normandy operation.
By D+6, as the loading and movement of troops
and equipment almost stopped,
transportation personnel threw out the craft-
loading plans and began indiscriminate loading of units to expedite their
movement across the channel. Thus, improvisation took over when the detailed
planning and requisition process failed. 14
Distribution problems continued once the supply ships reached Normandy.
The ESB personnel often had no idea what cargo sat offshore.
The procedures,
based on experience from Operations TORCH in North Africa and HUSKY in
Sicily, had all been worked out in advance.
When ships sailed for France from
the United Kingdom, the authorities were to transmit the ships' manifests and
sailing information to FUSA by aircraft or naval vessel. FUSA would then
notify the ESBs which ships to unload first, based on the army's priorities.
That plan failed from the very beginning, as ships began arriving off the beach,
with no one ashore knowing what
they contained
because the
necessary
manifests had not arrived. 's
Thousands of tons of supplies not immediately
needed piled
up
the beach as supply personnel
unloaded ships searching
desperately for ammunition and other items needed immediately. 16
As the
situation grew critical, General Bradley pleaded directly to Eisenhower for help
from the top while the ESBs improvised, trying to deal with the problem from
their end, sending officers in DUKWs to look for ships ready to unload cargo."
The problem of identifying ships, cargoes, and unloading priorities became so
severe that FUSA abandoned the priority system and on D +4 ordered that LSTs
and LCTs be unloaded as they arrived.
On D+5. FUSA expanded the order
to unload all ships without delay.
cleared. 18
D+9 the backlog in ships had been
Improvisation had dealt with the immediate crisis but difficulties persisted.
In July, the lack of proper manifest reached crisis proportions again when a
shortage of 81 mm mortar shells developed.
husbanded their few remaining shells, the FUSA
While mortar crews at the front
G-4 frantically
called for
shipment of more mortar ammunition from the United Kingdom and the United
States. Shipping officials dispatched loads of ammunition, but, again because
of communication difficulties, manifests often did not arrive on time.
not know when they arrived, or where the shipments went.
FUSA did
Ordnance personnel
conducted ship-to-ship searches to locate the missing ammunition." Eventually
nearly every mortar shell in the United Kingdom ended up off the French coast
or on the Continent; the shortage continued even though at one point 145,000
tons of ammunition sat off shore. 20
57
Over the Beach
In the rush to unload ships, additional difficulties developed. The standard
cargo vessel, the liberty ship, had five hatches, two with fifty-ton capacity
booms and three with six- to nine-ton booms.
As with the DUKWs, crews
routinely overloaded these booms, which sometimes broke under the strain. 21
Further delays developed when beach personnel found that many of the cargo
ships arriving offshore shortly after the invasion had been loaded in the United
States in the expectation that they would discharge their cargo in a major port
with the necessary unloading facilities.
Since Cherbourg did not fall on
schedule, these ships had to unload over the beach, a task complicated by the
method of cargo stowage.
Faced with an ever-increasing demand for supplies
and fortunate in that German air activity proved to be less than anticipated
FUSA authorized the use of hooded lights to speed up unloading.
commenced around-the-clock operations on D+6.22
Until either the completion of MULBERRY A or the port of Cherbourg
opened, the ESBs were able to utilize only two means of transporting supplies
from ships offshore to the inland supply dumps.
were used to unload supplies directly onto the beach, an effective but limited
technique.
Second, larger vessels, anchored offshore, transfered cargo to
landing craft or amphibious vehicles (DUKWs) which then ferried it ashore.
Both methods depended on ferry craft to succeed.
plans, the use of ferry craft did not go as scheduled. In light of the persistent
shortages of ferry craft, planners had based their calculations on the optimal use
of the available vessels to meet the supply needs ashore.
But in Normandy,
confusion
reigned as the scope of the operation scattered the ferry craft
throughout the invasion area and poor army-navy communication hindered
reorganization efforts.? Some requests for ferry craft were delayed as long as
forty-eight hours-an excessively long time when trying to get scarce items
ashore. 24
Merchant sailors loaded DUKWs by placing two tons of cargo in a net in a
ship's cargo bay, lifting it, swinging it outboard, and lowering it directly into
a DUKW alongside.
Once ashore,
the cargo would be transferred by cranes
from the DUKW to a truck at a transfer point on the beach.
The truck would
then haul the net and cargo to a forward supply dump.
DUKWs would pick up
an empty net from a previous trip, and return to the ship for another load. By
transferring the load to a truck on the beach, the ESBs got the most from the
limited supply of amphibious trucks.
This system worked effectively once
sufficient cranes to establish transfer points and trucks to move the materials
inland reached the beach. 25
DUKW usage, however, did not proceed as smoothly as planned, since their
drivers met with a host of problems.
First, many ships, at the direction of the
naval officer-in-charge, anchored too far offshore in an effort to avoid enemy
artillery fire. As a result, many DUKWs traveling up to fifteen miles to reach
the beach, ran out of fuel and sank when their bilge pumps, powered by the
vehicles' engines, stopped as well. 26
The navy's cautious policy
impossible for the (ESBs) to meet [their tonnage targets. "27
ration second, toad i
"made it
