Chart 1-2
Command and Staff Organization, European Theater of Operations,
United States Army, 21 March 1943
ETOUSA
Commanding General
Deputy Commanding
General
Chief of Staff
Staff at Theater Headquarters
G-1
G-2
G-3
The "Complicated Set-Up"
relations) and G-3, SOS (training) continued at Cheltenham.
Division of the
SOS into administrative planning and operations echelons became permanent. 35
After commanding ETOUSA for only two months, Andrews died in an air
crash on May 3, 1943,
in Iceland.
Lieutenant General Jacob Devers, an
artillery officer, replaced Andrews.
Devers, after gaining General Marshall's
attention, had been selected to command the Armored Forces in 1941, and was
then the youngest major general in the army. 36
Four ETOUSA command
changes within a year (Chaney, Eisenhower, Andrews, and Devers) did little to
improve the overall continuity of the American command system, but the arrival
of Devers brought a sense of stability to ETOUSA Headquarters for the first
time.
Section
Section
= E
Mayc
Gener
Adjutant
General
Command
Eighth
Alr rorce
Corps
Services
of
Supply
Theater Special Staff Under SOS
Provisioning
Agent
Medica
Transors
Source: Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater of Operations.
"Organization and Command in the European Theater of Operations," The Administrative
and Logistical History of the European Theater of Operations, pt. II vol. 1 (Paris:
Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater, 1946), 207.
theater staff and vested in the SOS complete supply responsibility for the
theater. "37
Devers also reorganized the special staff sections within the SOS
Headquarters and eliminated the "G" sections.
A new chief of administration,
Colonel Edgar Fell (formerly G-1), took charge of the administrative services
and Colonel Royal B. Lord (formerly G-4) assumed command of the technical
supply services as chief of services.
Furthermore, the G-2 and G-3 sections
were combined in the SOS's new training and security division (see Chart 1-
Devers' ETOUSA reorganization continued in July 1943 with the arrival of
Major General Robert W. Crawford from the Middle East, where he had been
commander of the Services of Supply. Since locating qualified officers with a
knowledge of logistics and sufficient rank to serve on the COSSAC staff with
the British proved difficult, Crawford was destined for the G-4 slot at Supreme
Until President Franklin Roosevelt and Prime Minister Winston
Churchill selected the supreme commander for the impending
Crawford needed an assignment. 39
On July 24, Crawford became Lee's second-
in-command as the deputy commander of the SOS and chief of services.
Colonel Lord, the former chief of services, stepped down to become deputy
chief of services for planning.
A deputy chief of services for operations took
charge of activities at Cheltenham.
On August 19, Crawford assumed the
position of SOS chief of staff in addition to his other duties and took over SOS
planning with his headquarters
Cheltenham, Brigadier General William Weaver took command as field deputy
These changes eliminated the division of the chief of services'
Colonel Lord took over the recombined divisions as chief of operations. Lee,
as commanding general of the SOS and G-4 ETOUSA oversaw the entire
organization.
At a staff conference on August 23, Lee praised Devers for creating a sound
organization "bringing together the G-4 and SOS functions."
With Crawford
in London planning and coordinating activities at the theater level and Weaver
