Chapter 5
Confusion Continues: The
Communications Zone on the
Continent
The confusion which characterized the American command structure prior to the
Normandy invasion continued throughout the summer and fall of 1944.
from functioning smoothly, the administrative and supply arrangements, which
had evolved over the two and one-half years preceding D-Day, remained
disjointed. There were three main problem areas:
First, the relationship
between European Theater of Operations, United States Army, the Twelfth
Army Group (TUSAG) and the Communications Zone remained muddled as
Generals Eisenhower, Bradley, Moses, and Lee each attempted to define and
expand their authority over administrative and supply matters.
Second, the
relationship
between
the
COMZ
Headquarters
its
subordinate
organizations - Advance Section, Forward Echelon and the base sections— and
the combat forces ashore-First United States Army and later Twelfth Army
Group-did not develop as planned. Finally, the Quiberon Bay issue, the debate
over the need for a major Brittany port, and the decision to abandon the project
affected the American supply situation.
These problem areas arose both from
inadequate prior planning and tougher-than-anticipated German resistance in
Normandy.
The debate regarding the responsibilities and authority of the various
American commands,
ETOUSA-FUSAG (redesignated TUSAG
when the
headquarters staff began operating in France)-COMZ, which, had culminated
in the June 6 memorandum on the organization of the American forces in the
European theater, continued long after D-Day.
On June 7, the day after Allied
forces landed in France, ETOUSA Headquarters officially designated the
Services of Supply as the Communications Zone (COMZ). The SOS had been
known as the COMZ since the beginning of 1944 so the order formalized an
existing situation. With Lee still in command, the name change did not modify
the supply organization's mission.' The consolidation of ETOUSA and COMZ
staffs earlier in the year, which had caused so much confusion prior to the
invasion, continued.? Basic command relationships remained unclear and open
to conflicting interpretations.
