76
United States Army Logistics
been ordered and V Corps could expect delivery in three or four days, the
problem persisted and the First Infantry Division reported a shortage of 487
M7s on June 30? Again V Corps' ordnance officer informed First and Second
Division G-4s to expect sufficient M7s to arrive by air in the next day or two,
and on July 3 reported that 1,600 M7s would soon be flown in from the United
Kingdom.®
To meet the demand for rifle grenades, COMZ began delivering the M1
grenade projector, designed for use with fragmentation hand grenades, to
Europe in early July. On July 4, V Corps announced that corps units could
expect 10,000 M1 grenade projectors in the near future.'
Such a move
suggested that either the production of M7s proved inadequate to meet the
army's needs, or more likely, the COMZ could not locate the M7s they had in
stock. The M1 grenade projectors did not alter the overall situation. A July 24
memorandum from FUSA indicated that the M7 shortage in the infantry
divisions remained very serious. According to a V Corps memo the ordnance
troops had "no immediate possibility of replacing them" and a "command
telegram has requested delivery from [thel United States within the next thirty
days."
To deal with the shortage, on July 24, only a day before the commencement
of Operation COBRA -the planned breakout from Normandy-FUSA ordered
all noncombat elements to turn in all their M7s to army ordnance units while all
antiaircraft and tank destroyer units had to turn in one-half of theirs. The move
came too late to get the MTs to the troops attacking the next day, and they had
to make do with what they had on hand. 1º
Nor did emergency air shipments and alternate weapons such as the M1
grenade launchers alleviate the shortage of M7s. The breakout from Normandy
and pursuit across France failed to end the problem, and the M7 remained on
the FUSA shortage list throughout June, July, and August.
FUSA reported
daily shortages ranging from 1,754 to 6,017 M7s, as the number of M7s short
within the army, fluctuating from day-to-day, hovered around three to four
thousand. When they were available, the troops used rifle grenades to clear
hedgerows and buildings, providing their own artillery support on the spot.
necessity in the hedgerows.
In addition to grenade launchers, infantrymen found automatic weapons a
The nature of the hedgerow fighting, close-in
intense clashes to drive the Germans from one hedgerow to another, one
farmhouse to another, led to heavy losses of automatic weapons.
Moreover,
combat units deemed inadequate the number of such weapons authorized in the
tables of organization and equipment. The demand for these weapons, through
both official and unofficial channels, resulted in serious shortages of machine
guns, submachine guns, and BARs.
The combat units, constantly looking for anything that would give them an
edge in the close-in hedgerow fighting, attempted to acquire additional automatic
weapons in a variety of ways."
For example, on June 16, the commanding
general of the Second Infantry Division requested three hundred Thompson
submachine guns. Corps gave him twenty-five and advised that the remainder
77
BARs and Mortar Shells
be obtained by redistributing weapons within the division.
Later that day, the
V Corps G-4 arranged with the First and Second Infantry Divisions' G-4s for
a swap of rifles for submachine guns. 2 Considering the repeated demands for
automatic weapons, one wonders if the men of the First Division knew their
commanding officer had traded away some of their submachine guns.
In any
event, the arrangement did not satisfy the commanding general of the Second
Infantry Division.
A July 5 priority message to V Corps Headquarters detailed
his substitution of one submachine gun for an M-1 rifle in each rifle squad. He
wanted to use the weapons in the same capacity as BARs, which required large
amounts of ammunition above his normal allocation.
When the general
requested that the basic load for his sub-machineguns be increased to 1,000
rounds per weapon, the corps ordnance officer denied his request, concerned
that the increased demands on the ammunition supply could not be met. 13
When going through channels did not achieve the desired results,
the
frontline units often resorted to unofficial means of acquiring what they needed.
A favorite technique involved trading. 14
For instance, the heavy weapons
company of the 3rd Battalion, 134th Infantry Regiment, 35th Infantry Division
evolved into a light weapons company as its executive officer replaced most of
the unit's heavy machine guns with light machine guns, BARs (a favorite in the
hedgerows), and Thompson submachine guns.
Recovering weapons from the
battlefield, salvaging damaged weapons, and shrewdly trading in the rear areas,
he exchanged German Lugers and submachine guns with rear-area personnel for
U.S. automatic weapons,
thus
unofficially altering his unit's
table of
organization to fit existing conditions. How he handled the bookkeeping later
remains a mystery. Undoubtedly, he wrote off the unit's heavy weapons as lost
to enemy action. 15
The Twenty-ninth Infantry Division also had "an amazing
knack for acquiring extra, unofficial weapons," especially BARs, of which most
of the division's squads soon had two instead of the one authorized. 16
The combat elements traded amongst themselves as well. For example, each
lank crew member had a .45-caliber submachine gun known as a "grease gun."
Tankers came to hate these weapons because the hinged ejection port cover also
served as the safety.
Sometimes, when they climbed in or out of the tank, they
would catch the ejection port cover on something, and as it snapped open, the
weapon would accidentally discharge.
After several accidents, the men of the
749th Tank Battalion began looking for an alternate weapon.
The answer to
their dilemma became apparent one day when the tankers noticed that
artillerymen, who had 45-caliber pistols, often had to deal with German
snipers.
In a short time, the tank crewmen had pistols and the artillerymen
carried grease guns."
The tankers thought that they got the better end of the
deal.
To deal with the shortages, some ordnance units improvised their own
automatic weapons by modifying semiautomatic carbines to make them fully
automatic.
In addition to making internal modifications, ordnance personnel
manufactured a thirty-round magazine to support the increased rate of fire.
When the fuses on bazooka rockets regularly failed to explode upon hitting
