Chapter 7
Gasoline and More: Supply
Shortages During the Pursuit
The pace of the advance during the breakout from Normandy and the subsequent
pursuit across France defined the supply
difficulties encountered by
American forces.
As with the build-up phase of the operation, First United
States Army G-4 Daily Situation Reports, Third Army After Action reports, and
the V Corps G-4 Operations Journal reveal how the American forces dealt with
four distinct yet overlapping supply shortages.'
As the American forces pursued the Germans across France in August,
shortages developed that eventually brought the entire U.S. Army in Europe to
a halt in mid-September.
At one point or another, serious ration (Class I),
gasoline (Class Ill), ammunition (Class V), and regular equipment (Classes II
and IV) deficiencies
hindered operations.
Although ration
requirements
remained relative es stant throughout the period and supplies on the Continent
met the needs of the armies in the field, shortages at the front resulted when
combat units utilized cargo space allocated for rations to haul other types of
supplies,
usually jerricans of gasoline.
The
rapid advance
required
large
quantities of fuel and precipitated a serious gasoline crisis in early September.
Only when the Military Railway and Pipeline Services began
moving large
quantities of bulk fuel forward from the beaches in mid-October did the crisis
ease.
After the Germans began to regroup and stand their ground, the demand
for ammunition increased dramatically.
Thus, ordnance shortages developed as
artillery use increased to repulse the German
Vire-Mortain attack in mid-
August, and as the Americans reached the German West Wall and the Metz
defenses in mid-September.
The COMZ found it difficult to move required
ammunition to the guns.
Moreover, the shortage of regular equipment and
supplies,
which developed in late July,
intensified throughout
August and
September.
The need to distribute winter clothing further strained the logistical
system.
FUSA's daily critical shortage lists illustrated the logistical shortfalls
encountered during the period.
