United States Army Logistics
108
Harold Mack concluded that responsibility for the failure of Operation
CHASTITY rested with Eisenhower and Bradley. Arguing that Eisenhower
failed to establish a supply organization capable of meeting its responsibilities,
Mack observed that the
COMZ could have done a much better job had it had a different organization. Lee, its
commanding general, was not the man for the command. The whole supply setup from
Supreme Headquarters down was badly organized.
It could not have adequately
supplied the combat forces without the facilities of the south Brittany ports and
Fallroads 61
On the other hand, General Bradley failed for three reasons. First, he
overestimated the ability of the German forces in Brittany to threaten the
western American flank.
Second, he never trusted Patton and his tactics.
Third, he underestimated the logistical need for obtaining the use of Quiberon
Bay and railroads running east from there. Mack concluded these mistakes cost
the Americans dearly in the long run, extending the war into 1945 and ensuring
Soviet control of Eastern Europe. 62
While Russell Weigley similarly criticized Eisenhower and Bradley, unlike
Mack, he argued that the U.S. forces should not have entered Brittany or
assaulted Brest as the cost outweighed any potential gains.
The move into the
peninsula consumed valuable supplies while the German destruction of the ports
ensured no immediate increase in cargo discharge facilities on the Continent.
Thus, while "far greater opportunities beckoned to the east,"
American
resources were squandered in Brittany in August and early September. 63
The debate over whether or not U.S. forces should have pursued a Brittany
strategy centered around costs versus benefits. Mack's basic argument is
interesting. If the Brittany ports had been captured quickly and put into
operation immediately, they would have materially affected the outcome of the
This assertion raises several questions.
First, if American forces had
concentrated on seizing the ports, how long would it have taken? Given the
tenacity which they held onto the other ports, German defenders would have
probably held out for days, if not weeks, and battle damage and demolition
might have been extensive. Second, how long would it have taken to put them
into operation considering Germany's ability to destroy facilities? Third, even
if the engineers put them into service in a timely manner, how quickly could the
railroads have been restored?
Did the Americans have the transportation
capacity to move the supplies all the way to Patton's forces from Brittany?
How does the performance of the Red Ball Express truck route fit into Colonel
Mack's calculations?
Opening ports earlier did not increase the number of
trucks available to move supplies forward. These questions that lie at the heart
of the Mack argument will be examined later. 54
Although the American command and supply organization in the summer and
fall of 1944 functioned, how efficiently or effectively is another question.
While combat forces blamed the supply services for their difficulties, COMZ
109
COnfusion Continues
blamed the combat forces, the weather-anyone or anything other than
themselves.
That view and the self-congratulation arising from the Allied
victory flavored the postwar general board reports. With victory over Germany
mitigating any serious criticism, many problems that the army confronted were
masked, limiting the supply services' ability to learn from their mistakes.
Nevertheless, everyone involved had something to learn from the operations in
France.
Moses, the Twelfth Army G-4 and staunchest critic of the system, chaired
the general board that reported on the organization of the European theater of
operations, and "estimated that 50 percent of the work of the Twelfth Army
Group G-4 section throughout the campaign had to do with such coordinating
matters which might have been done by a theater staff under different
organizational conditions. "6s Criticizing the command organization in Europe,
Moses saw the lack of a separate, distinct theater staff as a hinderance to
operations.
The combining of ETOUSA general and special staffs with the
COMZ general and special staffs meant there was no organization to adjudicate
differences between the COMZ and the field and air forces over supply
priorities, transportation, and facilities. Moses, representative of the combat
forces, believed such adjudication was necessary because COMZ, in its capacity
as the ETOUSA staff, gave it excessive powers and an unfair advantage. Not
surprisingly, Lee wrote a dissenting letter for inclusion in the report.
With little good to say about the COMZ, Moses asked that since ADSEC
had six months to do nothing but plan and prepare for operations on the
Continent, why had it not functioned more efficiently? Moreover, Moses, in
placing responsibility for the supply problems with COMZ, noted that when
COMZ Headquarters moved to the Continent in early August, it caused
considerable confusion at a crucial time in American operations.67
Aurand, echoing Moses's
criticism of COMZ, argued that
Department's COMZ organization was flawed from the beginning. In an effort
to duplicate the War
Department organization, COMZ Headquarters
had
centralized control while organizing the entire system along functional lines,
thus leading to confusion and inefficiency.
Aurand's vivid description of
COMZ Headquarters in Paris supported his argument:
officers and WACs, bending over these [great files] and making out requisitions, and
requisitions, and requisitions without end.
They were predicting how many of each
gadget would be needed six months hence, based on what was thought to be on hand
in depots scattered all over France, and what was thought the armies had consumed.«8
While Moses wanted the power relationship between field forces and COMZ
equalized, Aurand wanted the COMZ organization itself reworked from the
foundation up.
Victory reduced the impact of their criticism.
Lee, as COMZ commanding general, and Lord, as COMZ chief of staff,
defended the great record of the COMZ.
Lord headed the general boards that
examined supply operations in Europe, the reports of which blamed other
