Chart 1-3
Command and Staff Organization, European Theater of Operations,
United States Army, 27 May 1943
G-1
G-2
ETOUSA
Commanding General
Deputy Commanding General
Chief of Staff
Deputy Chief of Staff
G-3
G-4
SOS
G-5
Inspecto
Technical
Section
Adjutant
General
Commands
services
Righth
Air Force
Jroune
Supply
celand
Base
Command
school
Center
Assault
Theater Service
Functions Under SOS
Chief of
Chief of
Administation
Services
HEE FEE
Medical
Ouartermaster
Service
Source:
Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater of Operations.
"Organization and Command in the European Theater of Operations," The Administrative
and Logistical History of the European Theater of Operations,
pt. II vol.
1 (Paris:
Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater, 1946), 215.
11
The "Complicated Set-Up"
at Cheltenham coordinating the field work, the supply system met with Lee's
approval. 4 For the first time, Lee felt that he had combined the ETOUSA G-4
and SOS functions and gained control of planning and operations related to the
administration and supply of American
forces
in the European theater of
operations.
Lee celebrated too early. On September 20, 1943, Devers ordered Brigadier
General Raymond Moses to "plan and organize small theater G-4 section. "41 It
appeared that a separate ETOUSA G-4 would soon be designated, stripping Lee
of the command.
When Devers received approval in October to organize an
army group, Moses became First United States Army Group (FUSAG) G-4,
leaving Crawford with the new theater G-4 position. On October 8, 1943, as
Crawford became the ETOUSA G-4, Lee continued as the commanding general,
services of supply, while Lord moved up to SOS chief of staff and SOS deputy
commander.
The changes transferred supply planning to the theater level since
that function went with Crawford when he moved up to the theater headquarters.
Crawford served less than two months before being designated COSSAC (later
Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force) G-4 on December 1, 1943,
the theater G-4 position was again left vacant, since according to Moses, Devers
decided to await Allied agreement upon a supreme commander for the invasion
of Northwest France.
This resulted in consolidation of the ETOUSA G-4 and
commanding general SOS positions under Lee once again. 42 The game of
musical chairs continued.
The reason for these changes and the return to the combined SOS
commanding general and ETOUSA G-4 two months later is unclear. According
to Raymond Moses, FUSAG G-4, the promotion of Crawford to the ETOUSA
G-4 resulted from a debate over the creation and subsequent organization of
FUSAG.
Moses believed that a theater G-4 was essential to the conduct of
future operations on the Continent, arguing that the FUSAG G-4 should deal
with the ETOUSA G-4, a superior command, not SOS, a coordinate command. 43
If Lee remained in control of both organizations then FUSAG would not receive
equal consideration.
It seems likely that Generals Lee and Crawford had a personality conflict.
In his "Service Reminiscences," Lee mentioned that Crawford had come from
the Middle East, that for a time he served as theater G-4, and that he went on
to be SHAEF G-4, but gave no indication that Crawford ever served with the
SOS.44
It is not clear why, but Moses also alluded to a personality clash
between Lee and Crawford, and they did disagree later over the organization of
the supply system and the relationship between SHAEF and the ETOUSA-SOS
Headquarters.
As the invasion date approached, ETOUSA activated additional commands,
further complicating the American organizational structure.
The activation of
the First United States Army (FUSA) in August and the First United States
Army Group (FUSAG) in October
1943 brought the relationship of the new
units to the SOS into question, the debate over which mirrored the ETOUSA-
SOS controversy. The confusion emanated from the War Department on down,
