United States Army Logistics
Plans called for MULBERRY A to have three pierheads, two
pontoon causeways and moorings for seven Liberty ships, and five large and
seven medium coasters when completed, with a capacity of 5,000 tons of cargo
and 1,400 vehicles per day. 43 Construction of the prefabricated MULBERRY
began on D+1, with completion expected around June 24.
The construction proceeded rapidly.
On D + 4 the naval personnel completed
the OMAHA GOOSEBERRY and, three days later, the UTAH GOOSEBERRY.
On D + 10, the first LST pier went into operation at OMAHA with one vehicle
landing every 1.16 minutes.
By midnight on June 17, U.S. Navy engineers had
placed all twenty-four bombardons and thirty-two of fifty-one phoenixes, along
with mooring facilities for two liberty ships and had completed the western LST
pier with work on the eastern pier well under way.
As this work progressed,
construction had begun on pontoon causeways at both U.S. beaches; the first
and second pontoon causeways at OMAHA entered service on June 10 and 20,
At UTAH, the first pontoon causeway opened on D+7, a second
on D + 10. As engineers completed each section of the artificial anchorage they
benefitting unloading operations greatly, and supplies
moved forward to American units.
Thus, the initial operations of the artificial
port appeared to prove the validity of the artificial port concept. 4
As the Engineer Special Brigades consolidated the OMAHA and UTAH
Beach Maintenance Areas and MULBERRY A construction neared completion,
the tonnages moving across the beaches increased.
On D+ 8 and D+9, 14,765
and 14,744 tons, respectively, arrived ashore, a victory for the ESBs since the
plan called for landing only 13,700 tons per day.
The cumulative tonnage totals
surged rapidly, and by June 18, 77 percent of the planned tonnage had arrived
on the Continent.'' Reserves on hand totaled approximately nine days of Class
on the Continent ys serVes (ammunition), including 3.4 units of fire of
artillery ammunition and three units of fire of small-arms ammunition. 46 All
signs indicated that the movement of supplies over the beach in conjunction with
MULBERRY A would soon surpass 100 percent of planned tonnage.
Unfortunately, that upward trend in cargo flow ended abruptly on June 18
as the worst channel storm in fifty years hit the Normandy coast, halting all
MULBERRY A and forcing the Americans to abandon the artificial port.
the 13,234 vehicles, 58, 722 troops, and 48,200 tons of supplies scheduled to
land between June 20 and June 22, only 1,160 vehicles, 5,695 troops, and 3,916
tons of supplies arrived. 47
Estimated losses,
cargo and vehicle discharges
delayed by the storm, and resulting damage included 140,000 tons of supplies
and 20,000 vehicles.48
General Bradley, touring the beaches following
"was appalled by the desolation, for it vastly exceeded that of D-Day
As General Eisenhower, SHAEF and ETOU A commander, flew the length of
the beaches the day the storm ended. he counted more than 300 wrecked large
vessels and hundreds of additional smaller craft damaged,
salvaging. 50
many
beyond
61
Over the Beach
The storm sharply limited ammunition supply ashore. Artillery ammunition
expenditure had been restricted as early as D+9, four days before the storm,
due to greater than anticipated expenditures by the combat forces and the slower
than planned buildup of reserves.
With no supplies coming ashore because of
the storm,
the ammunition supply situation became even more critical. 51
To
ensure an adequate reserve, FUSA limited ammunition expenditures to one-third
unit of fire per day.
To meet pressing needs,
the Combined Air Transport
Operations Room, a section of the Allied Expeditionary Air Forces, oversaw the
air delivery of 500 tons of ammunition per day for three consecutive days to
avert a serious shortage. 2 The air lift required 200 sorties per day. 53
As an
emergency measure,
General Omar
Bradley
authorized
beaching
eight
ammunition coasters on June 20 and ordered five prestowed liberty ships to
Normandy
from
the United Kingdom,
while eleven ships
loaded with
ammunition sailed from the United States to serve as a prestowed reserve. 54
Beaching the coasters worked well enough during the storm, so the innovative
practice was continued afterward. However, daily tonnage figures did not reach
pre-storm levels until the end of the month. 5s
June 23, the day after the storm subsided, 9,996 tons landed over OMAHA
and 6,399 tons over UTAH.
As beaching of coasters offset the loss of many
DUKWs and small landing craft to the
severe weather, June 24, 25, and 26
tonnages over OMAHA increased to 11,562 tons; 12,994 tons; and 14,449 tons,
respectively. Following the storm the capacity of the beaches and minor ports
rose steadily, and while the ESBs soon had landing facilities operating at peak
capacity, they hoped for the benefits of a standard port.
The destruction of MULBERRY A during the great channel storm made the
capture of Cherbourg even more important than originally planned.
The port,
initially scheduled to fall on June 14, later changed to the June 22, did not come
under American control until June 27.57
Although the engineers went to work
rehabilitating the port immediately, the work took longer than anticipated as the
Germans had done a thorough job of destroying many of the port's vital
installations.
After the first cargo landed at Cherbourg on July 16, the tonnage
arriving at the port increased gradually, but July 31 tonnage totaled 3,898 tons,
only 25 percent of what arrived
OMAHA
beach. 58
In late June and
throughout July, American forces depended almost entirely on the beaches for
their supplies.
With MULBERRY A and the port of Cherbourg, both vital
elements of Operation OVERLORD
planning, remaining unavailable, the
increasing supply requirements of the combat troops on the Continent had to be
met almost exclusively by cargo delivered across the beaches.
The distribution of POL presented supply personnel with yet another set of
problems.
POL arrived on the Continent in one of two forms, packaged or
bulk. The success or failure of the packaged fuel concept depended on the reuse
of gas cans as all fuel prior to June 22 arrived in packaged form, that is in five-
gallon cans.
Although the army quartermaster standard operating procedure
(QM SOP) which specified that empty cans had to be exchanged for full ones,
was a sound concept in theory, until bulk fuel arrived and decanting facilities
