United States Army Logistics
since Army chief of staff, George Marshall, envisioned one Supreme ETOUSA
Headquarters and commander administering all American forces in the theater.
He stressed that the Army
Group, Army Air Force,
Commanders should all be relieved of administrative responsibilities as much
Once activated, FUSAG would command all American forces on
the Continent, absorbing the "duties and responsibilities of the present European
Theater of Operations Headquarters" in the process and operating under the
direction of the Supreme Allied Commander.
Consequently, Marshall wanted
the FUSAG Headquarters controlled directly by General Omar Bradley under
General Dever's supervision and
not to "be merely an offshoot from, or
apparently envisioned
ETOUSA as the supreme headquarters primarily responsible for administrative
under the Supreme Allied
Commander, handled all operational matters on the Continent.
Marshall's views did little to abate the power struggle underway in the ETO.
General Omar Bradley, FUSAG commander, and General Raymond Moses,
FUSAG G-4, fought any reduction in FUSAG powers.
Bradley "insisted that
Marshall's reference to relieving his headquarters of administrative details did
not mean that he was not in charge of planning, but that for the time being
FUSAG was not to have command with its attendant administrative burdens.
Moses took comfort in Marshall's belief that the initial U.S.
Army Group be
"separate and distinct."
He worried that Lee's SOS would take over the
FUSAG G-4 position as it had ETOUSA G-4.
At the same time, General Lee
interpreted Marshall's statement that the field commanders should be relieved
of "as many administrative functions as possible" to mean that the FUSAG G-4
would have limited administrative and supply functions.
Therefore, the SOS
would handle the functions.
Lee
and
Moses sparred
repeatedly
over
administrative
and
supply
jurisdiction.
When the SOS proposed that the commanding general of the
Communications Zone also be the G-4 of the proposed field headquarters, The
SOS proposal met stiff resistance.
After General Moses assumed the FUSAG
G-4 post, Lee countered with a new proposal calling for the creation of an SOS
deputy chief of staff and deputy chiefs of services, each with a small staff
attached to FUSAG. 48 If Lee and the SOS could not have direct control via the
FUSAG G-4. he saw attachment of an SOS staff as the next best option.
General Moses, FUSAG G-4, objected vehemently on the grounds that it, like
his earlier proposals, would bring the G-4's impartiality into question when
facing difficult resource allocation decisions.49
attached to FUSAG would be making
If adopted, Lee's SOS staff
recommendations regarding overall
logistical and administrative matters while under the direct control of one of the
army group's subordinate commands.
Moses argued, therefore, that a staff
dependent upon the SOS commander for their positions could not give objective
recommendations to the FUSAG G-4, and judged Lee's proposal "so wrong that
it should not be considered for a minute," and rejected assignments requiring
him "to work with any part of the SOS "so
He concluded that "he should be free
13
The "Complicated Set-Up"
from entanglements with any commander,
an arrangement that would be
impossible if the FUSAG G-4 also commanded the Communications Zone on
the Continent. Sl
General Carter B. Magruder,
echoed this sentiment after the
war, arguing that "a logistician must not only have integrity but also complete
freedom from any suspicion of a conflict of interest. "52
Lee and the SOS, in
trying to gain control of the administrative and supply activities of FUSAG, both
directly and indirectly, found a worthy opponent in Moses.
When Eisenhower returned to the United Kingdom on January 16, 1944, as
the Supreme Allied Commander for the upcoming invasion, he selected his staff,
and absorbed COSSAC into his headquarters, now known as SHAEF (Supreme
Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force), which oversaw all aspects of the
planning and execution of the Normandy invasion and coordinated all Allied
efforts to defeat Nazi Germany.
In addition to being the Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force,
Eisenhower also took command of the ETOUSA.
After General Marshall
transferred Devers to the
recommendation, the activation of SHAEF added yet another element to the
debate over lines of authority within the
American command structure. 53
Although head of both ETOUSA and SHAEF, Eisenhower relied primarily on
his SHAEF staff.
Since SHAEF had operational control of U.S. forces,
developed strong G-2 (intelligence) and G-3 (operations) staffs to supervise
American combat operations.
With SOS in control of most of the G-1
(personnel) and G-4 (supply) functions, the ETOUSA Headquarters identity
crisis continued as Eisenhower reorganized it once again.
He combined
ETOUSA and SOS staff sections "in the interest of efficiency and economy" and
named Lee, as commanding general of the SOS, as deputy theater commander
as well.
Eisenhower
informed
Lee
that he would delegate the primary
responsibilities of theater commander to him and ordered him to consolidate "all
of the Services of Supply activities in this theater and to do it now and not to
consider it as merely a plan.
Within the newly merged headquarters a chief
of administration and chief of operations took over G-1 and G-4 functions
respectively.
Major General Walter Bedell "Beetle" Smith SHAEF chief of
staff, assumed the position of ETO chief of staff in addition to his SHAEF
duties.
Colonel Lord, SOS chief of staff, became ETO deputy chief of staff. 55
Thus, a growing number of officers held positions with both ETOUSA and SOS
(see Chart 1-4).
Eisenhower's consolidation re-established the
division of the ETOUSA
Headquarters into "G"
sections.
The chief of administration of SOS became
ETOUSA G-1, the training and security division of SOS became ETOUSA G-2
and G-3.,
and the chief of
services
of
SOS
became
ETOUSA
G-4
Administrative and operating
respectively.
services
continued under the G-1 and G-4
Consolidation of staffs did not eliminate duplication of effort.
Although the two headquarters,
ETOUSA and COMZ (by this time, SOS was
widely referred to as COMZ -- the Communications Zone) remained physically
separate, the two headquarters, with different sets of stationery, shared the same
