United States Army Logistics
156
depot unable to meet their requisitions because some other unit received more
than their authorized allotment, or had vehicles disappear while left unguarded,
these accounts do not appear in unit histories or interviews with veterans.
Perhaps this is because wronged units did some improvising of their own to
recover what they lost. This aspect of "supply improvisation" requires further
investigation.
The soldiers that improvised appear to have benefited the most. Beyond
enabling units to complete missions that otherwise would have been delayed or
thwarted, supply improvisation improved the morale of the troops.
French
farmers and army headquarters may have frowned on the slaughtering of cattle,
but such events appear repeatedly in unit histories as high points. Out of all the
privations and ordeals of war, soldiers remembered that stringy steak that stuck
fast to the bottom of their mess kit because they had no cooking oil.
Not only
did fresh food raise morale, successful supply improvisation efforts represented
a victory over the rear-area types, and the system, despite the fact that its the
system that was ultimately keeping them supplied.
The rivalry between the
combat arms and the support services is highlighted by the phenomenon of
supply improvisation, seen as a way of beating the system and getting what was
needed. A great sense of satisfaction to the troops, supply improvisation,
American ingenuity and shortsightedness at its best, seems likely to remain an
unofficial part of wartime routine as combat units strive to improve their day-to-
day conditions, to accomplish their mission, and return home.
Shortages from August through October resulted primarily from planning
and/or distribution deficiencies and affected both the Sixth and Twelfth Army
Groups. Fuel, ration, ammunition, and other shortages up to that point were
directly related to transportation difficulties on the Continent.
When the Red
Ball Express was unable to move sufficient materiel to maintain the pace of
advance achieved in late August, the American drive toward the Rhine came to
a halt in September, a victim of the growing gasoline shortage.
The inability
of the German army to reform and launch an immediate counterattack that could
take advantage of those
American
consequences.
difficulties
prevented
any
serious
By the time the Wehrmacht had the resources to conduct
offensive operations, the American distribution system, the railroads and
pipelines, had caught up with the frontline. Army records indicate that serious
shortages developed, that the units usually did not receive everything they
requisitioned, and that while the supply system could have operated more
efficiently, both combat and supply units shared responsibility for the supply
shortages.
The records of subordinate units and veterans'
recollections
demonstrate that perceptions of the American supply situation often vary greatly
between those reporting few problems and those detailing various difficulties.
Ascertaining the strategic impact of the shortages encountered in August and
September of 1944 is difficult at best.
Despite the shortages encountered, the
American forces pursued the German Army across France, 350 miles, in less
than a month. Although the pursuit did come to an end in mid-September when
the supply system failed to keep pace and shortages developed, to categorize the
Gasoline and More
halt as a failure of the supply system is to oversimplify the issue.
While the
combat units blamed the COMZ and its rear-area personnel for its inability to
the supply system performed to its fullest potential or in the end just worked
well enough to assure an Allied victory.
Could the supply system have better
fulfilled its mission? If the ETOUSA-COMZ power struggle had been avoided,
had operational and logistical plans been developed that took into account the
defensive potential of the Normandy terrain, and had the logistical
plans
included some flexibility to adjust to changing operational realities, the supply
system could have performed much better.
Emergency supply measures should
be the exception, not the rule. Fortunately the U.S. forces in France found they
could get by with less in times of shortage and often successfully improvised to
meet their immediate needs. One wonders where the army would have been
without the valiant efforts of emergency supply organizations such as the Red
Ball Express.
NOTES
1. While army, corps, and divisional records provide an overview of the supply
shortages encountered by American forces in France during the period of the breakout
and pursuit, interviews with veterans provide the combat soldiers' views of the supply
2. Third United States Army, "G-4 Section," in After Action Report, 1 August
1944-9 May 1945 (N.p., 1945), 17. The tonnage broke down as follows: 742.61 long
tons of Class I; 2050 long tons of Class II and IV; 2057 long tons of Class III; and
1850 long tons of Class V.
3. Charles B. MacDonald, "Why Didn't They Let First Army Win the War? It
Might Have Done So in the Fall of 1944," Army 9 (April 1959), 51.
4. First United States Army, First United States Army Report Of Operations, 1
August 1944-22 February 1945 (N.p., n.d.), 62-63.
6. Royal B. Lord, et al., Supply and Maintenance on the European Continent,
Report of the General Board United States Forces, European Theater, 130 box 12
7. First United States Army, First United States Army Report Of Operations, 1
August 1944-22 February 1945, 46.
8. Everett Busch, "Quartermaster Supply of Third Army: Part I," The
Quartermaster Review 26 (November-December 1946), 75.
9, Lord, et al., Supply and Maintenance, 37.
10. First Infantry Division, "Report of Activities of G-4 Section for the period 1
August 1944 to 31 August 1944," Box 5833, RG 407, NA.
11. Roland G. Ruppenthal, "Ammunition Supply in the Battle for Brest," Military
Review 30 (December 1950), 40-41.
12. Russell F. Weigley, Eisenhower's Lieutenants: The Campaigns of France and
Germany, 1944-45 (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1981), 552.
