United States Army Logistics
134
they found it a mess.
FUSA had been more interested in moving supplies than
doing bookkeeping.
On August 18, COMZ Headquarters ordered the service
chiefs to survey their holdings and provide weekly inventories from then on,
resulting in the first definite and detailed report of supplies on the Continent.
The bookkeepers, unappreciated by the combat forces, had arrived in force. 107
Henry Aurand, commander of the Normandy Base Section and thus in a
position to see the day-to-day operation of the distribution system, blamed
COMZ's inefficient organization for the distribution problems, arguing that the
Transportation Corps should not have been allowed to run the ports. Since the
Transportation Corps moved cargo, any cargo,
there was confusion when the Chief of Transportation produced figures of huge
tonnages handled over beaches and through ports while the combat forces were
screaming for supplies.
Only then did it become apparent that the Transportation
Corps' desire was to handle record tonnages for tonnage sake-and no matter what the
tonnage was made up of. Just listen to one of Lee's famous staff meetings and hear
Plank of ADSEC plead: "Please, oh, please, stop sending me stuff I don't need. "108
A ton of cargo moved made port officials look efficient, but if ADSEC needed
something else, a ton of cargo moved and not wanted took its place.
on the other hand, in evaluating its own performance, noted that by utilizing all
transportation assets, they had delivered the total tonnages called for by the
armies, but that items delivered were not always what the combat units ordered.
Since the armies often seemed to order supplies without knowing if requested
items were on the Continent, dump commanders often shipped what they had,
including materiel that the armies did not request. 09 Thus, ADSEC saw that
they had performed their function in delivering what they had at the requested
tonnage levels, and if supply dumps lacked all the required items, that was
someone else's problem.
needed and expected the supply system to have the items in stock. If supplies
did not arrive as requested, it appeared that COMZ or Twelfth Army Group
diverted them elsewhere.
Elbridge Colby, First Army staff officer,
appraising why the race across France had been "badly crippled for lack of
gasoline," argued that fuel had been diverted to "the British to enable them to
take the channel ports, to capture the V-1 bomb launching sites, and to bring
them faster into Antwerp which was badly needed to relieve the supply
situation. "10 Moreover, a FUSA After Action report noted that since the period
of supply difficulties "marked the start of the Communications Zone as an
operational entity and the First Army's dependence on the rear for supply,"
COMZ had let them down.!"!
Although the supply distribution system performed minor miracles in August
and September the U.S. Army in Europe encountered the combined effects of
time, space, and friction.
While port and beach personnel handled as much
tonnage as possible under the circumstances, railroad and pipeline crews worked
135
Across France
day and night to push the supply infrastructure forward, and truck companies
ashed themselves and their vehicles to their limits and beyond.
Despite such
a momentous effort, no army could have moved over a million men forward 700
miles in a month, in close linkage with major Allied forces, without incurring
sply problems. That the American supply system did as well as it did in spite
di bureaucratic infighting, the collapse of overly complex plans,
and the
tsulting confusion is a tribute to the rank and file supply personnel involved.
Despite all the difficulties and the subsequent debate regarding the placement of
blame, in the final analysis responsibility for the many logistical problems
encountered lies with the senior leadership.
1. James Huston, The Sinews of War: Army Logistics, 1775-1953 (Washington,
2. Ronald Andidora, "The Autumn of 1944: Boldness is not Enough,"
Parameters 17 (December 1987), 74.
Forces (Washington, D.C.: War Department, 1947), 161.
Bral FrOm hen The arosers, vol. V of The Papers of Dwight David Eisenhowez:
Johns Hopkins University Press,
William Whipple, "Logistical Bottleneckat the Ports: Why Patton Couldn't Get to the
Rhine in '4," Infantry Journal 62 (March 1948), 7.
5. Randolph Leigh, 48 Million Tons To Eisenhower: The Role of the Services
i Supply in the Defeat of Germany (Washington, D.C.: Infantry Journal, 1945), 44.
6. Huston, The Sinews of War, 533.
7. Ambrose, "Eisenhower as Commander,
8. Royal B. Lord, et al., Supply and Maintenance on the European Continent,
Report of the General Board United States Forces, European Theater, no. 130 (1945),
9. Lutes, Logistics In World War II, 162.
10. Leigh, 48 Million Tons to Eisenhower, 44.
11. Lord, et al. Supply and Maintenance, 46; Huston, The Sinews of War, 531
12. "An Examination of some Problems Encountered by ADSEC
and Their
Solution Before and During the European Operations," in "History of G-2 Section, HQ
Advance Section COMZ, December 43 - 1 July 1945," Box 10, RG 332, NA, 19.
13. Joseph Bykofsky
and Harold Larson,
The Technical Services:
The
Transportation Corps: Operations Overseas, U.S. Army in World War II (Washington,
D.C.: GPO, 1957), 286.
14. Leigh, 48 Million Tons to Eisenhower, 38.
15. Ibid., 40-41.
16. Raymond G. Moses, "Field Force Logistics: 12th Army Group G-4 Section,
31 July 1945," 7,
Box 46,
Smith,
Walter Redell.
Collection of World War II
Documents, 1941-1945, Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library.
17. Leigh, 48 Million Tons to Eisenhower, 40-42.
94
