United States Army Logistics
productivity of his staff, he had asked for a headquarters site out of London. 23
Although there
were SOS representatives at Eisenhower's headquarters
in
London, two headquarters in different cities limited coordination between the
two organizations.
Lee divided the SOS Headquarters staff at Cheltenham into Operating
Services (ordnance department chief, quartermaster corps chief, etc.), headed
by a chief of operations,
G-4 SOS; and Administrative Services (inspector
general's representative, provost marshal's representative, etc.), headed by a
chief of administration, G-4 SOS.2 The SOS Headquarters staff conducted its
day-to-day business
a means
administration and supervision of operations.
The number and size of base
sections
in the United
each a small-scale
SOS
Headquarters, varied over time.
Initially, the SOS authorized the creation of
Northern Ireland, Western, Southern, and Eastern Base Sections.
Each took on
a character of its own as the war progressed.
The Northern Ireland Base
Section, most fully developed in the summer of 1942, serviced U.S. V Corps
and served as a marshaling point for troops destined for TORCH.
The Western
Base Section, with its major ports, became the entry zone for hundreds of
thousands of troops and millions of tons of cargo.
The Army Air Force
dominated the Eastern Base Section with its relatively flat terrain. The Southern
Base Section, an excellent training ground with its rolling hills, became the
major marshaling
area for
the
Normandy invasion.?s
Guided by SOS
Headquarters, the base sections handled administrative matters and kept the
American forces in the theater supplied.
In
the
late
summer
of 1942.
as the
Headquarters and Allied commanderinchief of the Allied Expeditionary Force,
Eisenhower focused his attention on North African operations.
took much of the ETOUSA staff with him to the newly created Allied Forces
Headquarters (AFHO) to handle the planning for Operation TORCH, and as
most of the U.S. combat troops in the United Kingdom were slated for North
Africa, ETOUSA Headquarters had
little
operations on the Continent. 26
Since such planning focused on administrative
and supply matters, ETOUSA Headquarters continued to be in conflict with
SOS.
The former suffered from an identity crisis which Lee and the SOS did
their best to exploit.
In November 1942, after Allied forces landed in North Africa, Lee renewed
his efforts to gain total control of all administrative and supply functions in the
European Theater of Operations. In a draft SOS reorganization plan, he argued
that the
general
staff at ETOUSA Headquarters
should
"be relieved
administrative and supply details, so that they could devote their time to joint
planning with the Allied Chiefs. "27
The ETOUSA staff, rejecting Lee's
proposal as an attack on what little power they had left, argued that there must
"both active combat and communications zones which of necessity
are
superimposed one upon the other.
With no combat operations underway, the
ETOUSA staff engaged in a constant jurisdictional battle with the SOS
The "Complicated Set-Up"
In January 1943, the Casablanca Conference resulted in agreements about
the line of advance after North Africa
and further
American and Allied
command changes, including the appointment of Lieutenant General Frederick
Morgan, a key planner at Combined Operations, as the chief of staff to the
Supreme Allied Commander (COSSAC). Throughout 1943, the COSSAC staff
began comprehensive planning for a cross-channel invasion.
the activation of the North African Theater of Operations on February 6, 1943,
ETOUSA received a new commanding officer, Lieutenant
General Frank
Andrews, an Army Air Force officer, who replaced General Eisenhower then
in command in North Africa. The decision taken at Casablanca to make the
Anglo-American strategic bombing of Germany,
POINTBLANK, a main priority, combined with the fact that at the time only
the Eighth Air Force had the ability to conduct offensive operations made
General Andrews an excellent choice.
his earlier SOS reorganization proposal and sought to be redesignated as the
deputy theater commander for supply and administration with the G-4, ETOUSA
under his command. Such a move would give Lee control of "both the planning
and operational side of supply. "29
proposal on the grounds that the SOS worked well enough and that Lee had
sufficient authority to do his job, Andrews proceeded to reorganize the SOS (see
Chart 1-2). 30
to be chief of staff, influenced Andrews to accept "rather fully our [Lee's]
organizational plans to coordinate the operational and support organizations for
OVERLORD. "31
delegated "functions and responsibilities to his subordinate commanders who
could issue appropriate orders without reference to higher headquarters," and
assigned all administrative and supply services to Lee for
supervision, operational
however, retained control of those services which dealt primarily with admin-
istrative functions. 33
The new organization moved the SOS Headquarters and
the chiefs of services back to London.
While Lee saw this latest reorganization as favorable, he hoped for a still
better arrangement. A key issue remained unresolved-the planning relationship
between the ETOUSA G-4 and Lee. 34
this issue vital after the activation of the North African Theater of Operations
left them little to do but plan for future operations on the Continent. Any threat
to their planning function brought into question the very existence of the
ETOUSA Headquarters.
Although SOS Headquarters went to London, operations remained divided
between London and Cheltenham.
The administrative and planning services, the
offices of G-1, SOS (personnel) and G-4, SOS (supply), moved to London;
while operational elements, the offices of G-2, SOS (intelligence and public
