United States Army Logistics
16
Thus a struggle arose over authority to plan U.S. Army administration and
supply of operations on the Continent (see Chart 1-5).
In a controversial COMZ Headquarters memo, possibly drafted by Lee
himself, it was proposed that Lee be made chief administrative officer (U.S.)
SHAEF, in addition to his other duties, as the American counterpart to General
Gale who would become chief administrative officer (British) SHAEF. 62 COMZ
wanted to take over 21st Army Group and FUSAG G-1 and G-4 activities on
the Continent, further consolidating its control of administrative and supply
matters.
Following several conferences in early February 1944, Lee, Lord,
Bradley, Bedell Smith, and Crawford concluded that since Lee, as deputy
theater commander, was already the chief administrative officer (U.S.), and
already wore two hats, there was no reason to appoint Lee to another position.
Although unable to gain direct control of logistical planning for continental
operations, COMZ could not be completely ignored.
As a result,
COMZ
Headquarters created two new
organizations: (1) the
Forward Echelon,
Communications Zone, and (2) the Advance Section, Communications Zone.
These were established in February 1944 to assist the combat commands with
logistical planning for continental operations. Since any logistical planning by
the AAG, for U.S. Army units assigned to the 21st Army Group, ultimately
required COMZ input on supply matters, SHAEF ordered a COMZ special
planning staff, designated the Forward Echelon, Communications Zone (FECZ)
and organized by Colonel Frank M.
Albrecht, attached to 21st Army Group.
It was responsible for the initial planning, development, and operation of the
COMZ on the Continent and, along with the AAG (Moses and his FUSAG
staff), closely cooperated with the 21st Army Group administrative staff.63 The
ETOUSA Headquarters directive decreed that the AAG would "exercise the
required overall general staff coordination between activities in the army areas
and activities in the Communications Zone. "64
The COMZ Headquarters also charged FECZ with overseeing the operations
of the newly organized Advance Section,
Communication Zone (ADSEC).
Attached to FUSA, with Colonel Evert G. Plank commanding, the COMZ
organized the Advance Section to bridge the gap between the advancing armies
and the base sections planned for the Continent.
ADSEC would take over
"army supply dumps, roads, ports, rail nets, and operate in the rear of the
combat zone. "65
During the initial phase of the landing, the Advance Section
would handle all logistical activities for FUSA.
After the creation of an army
rear boundary on the Continent and the arrival of sufficient COMZ assets, the
FECZ would "supervise detailed planning and operations conducted by
the
Advance Section.
FECZ would assume control of the Advance Section and
"conduct and direct the detailed planning of subsequent Communications Zone
activities" from D+42 to D+90, when the COMZ would take over.
Of all the administrative organizations created in the European theater of
operations during the war, none caused as much confusion as the Forward
Echelon, Communications Zone.
Throughout its existence, the FECZ's mission
remained confused at best, and its relationship to ADSEC caused serious
Chart 1-5
(A) Organization for Planning and First Phase of Operation OVERLORD
ETOUSA
SHAEF
War Office
COMZ
Allied
Expeditionary
Air rorces
Forward
21 Army
Group
Kritish
Admin.
Naval Forces
First Army
British
Second Army
Command Channel
Administrative Channel
Base
Jub-Area
(B) Planned Setup When FUSAG Became Operational
SHAEF
War Office
U. K.
Base Section
ETOUSA
COMZ
FECZ
FUSAG
21 Army
Group
Section
Base Section
TICI
First Army
U.S.
Third Army
Second Army
Command Channel
Administrative Channel
Source:
Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater of Operations.
"Organization and Command in the European Theater of Operations" The Administrative
and Logistical History of the European Theater of Operations, pt. II vol. 2 (Paris:
Historical Division, United States Forces, European Theater, 1946), 36.
