Introduction
XVI
General John C. H. Lee, COMZ commander, summed up the problem shortly
after the war when he wrote,
Because the events of World War Il are so close in time, organizations and events are
associated with the names of the individuals who participated in them.
Consequently,
it is necessary to name names.
As will be shown later, an analysis of World War II
leads to the inescapable conclusion that those charged with its conduct either lacked
knowledge of the logistics art, and the basic principles of organization; or they chose
to disregard one or both?
Colonel Harold Mack, a Transportation Corps officer with the logistics planning
staff for Operation OVERLORD, echoed this sentiment, pointing out that "all
the postwar memoirs of leading generals, which read so smoothly and reveal
nothing but success, can't hide the facts, which history has the right to know. "3
Problems existed with the American supply system in France in the summer of
1944.
Since few scholarly examinations of the logistical system have been
undertaken, Roland G. Ruppenthal's argument put forth shortly after the war has
been almost universally accepted.
He suggested that, despite using all reserves
supplies and available transportation assets, the American advance came to a
halt in September 1944 as a result of serious shortages of rations, ammunition,
and gasoline. As with official army comments, Ruppenthal ultimately concluded
that despite the difficulties the system worked well enough to assure victory.
He used the Allied defeat of Germany as his benchmark for measuring the
success of the logistical effort.
In 1977, Martin van Creveld countered with the thesis that American
logistical planning for Operation OVERLORD was much too complicated and
that logisticians overestimated the supply needs of the American Army
France, thereby creating the perception of a supply shortage that adversely
affected the planning of subsequent military operations. Van Creveld concluded
that "it seems difficult to reconcile the pessimism of the Allied planners with the
superabundance of the means at their disposal. "4
Van Creveld utilized a new
benchmark in evaluating the American logistical effort. Rather than muting his
criticism because the Allies had won the war, van Creveld compared the level
of American supply with those of other armies and concluded that the American
army was lavishly supplied in contrast to others, therefore,
Americans done better?'
why had not the
Van Creveld asked the key question. Its answer lies in an examination of
the SOS (COMZ) organizational development, the logistical planning for the
Normandy invasion, distribution difficulties encountered following the invasion,
and supply shortages encountered on the Continent.
Such an approach reveals that under the leadership of General John C. H.
Lee, the COMZ oversaw all American supply activities in Europe and suffered
through one crisis after another.
First, a two-year power struggle between
competing staffs and personalities within the European Theater of Operations
Headquarters caused confusion and limited the efficiency of the SOS. Second,
xvii
Introduction
the logisticians developed an overly complex and inflexible supply plan for
Operation OVERLORD, planning which, as usual, did not survive contact with
the enemy. Third, events on the Continent did not allow for the development
of the supply system envisioned in the plans.
The liberation of ports fell behind
schedule, and the engineers failed to put the railroads and pipelines into service
as rapidly as anticipated.
These delays caused a significant cargo discharge and
distribution problem which necessitated emergency measures.
Fourth, all of
these problems led to the development of serious supply shortages at the front.
The nature of the shortages changed over time but the effect remained the same:
the shortages impacted the efficiency of the combat units.
The soldiers reacted
to the shortages as best they could, improvising whenever possible to mitigate
the effects of the supply shortfalls.
Although the United States fielded the most well equipped and supplied
military force during World War II and emerged from the war victorious, the
Army Service Forces often functioned at less-than-peak efficiency
and
encountered difficulties that should have been anticipated.
NOTES
1. Royal B. Lord, et al., "Supply and Maintenance on the European Continent,"
Report of the General Board United States Forces, European Theater, no. 130 (1945),
28; Theater Service Forces, European Theater,
"Broad Phases Of Organization and
Operation for Supply," operational study no. 13 (Headquarters TSFET Office of the
Theater Chief Quartermaster, 1 November 1945), RG 407, NA, 1.
2. Henry S. Aurand, "SHAEF-ETOUSA-COMZ: A Lesson in Organization for
National Defense," 6, Box 63, Henry S. Aurand Papers, Dwight D. Eisenhower
Presidential Library, 1.
3. Harold L. Mack, "The Critical Error of World War II," National Security
Affairs Issue Paper No. 81-1 (Washington, D.C.: National Defense University, 1981),
4. Martin van Creveld, Supplying War: Logistics from Wallenstein to Patton
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977), 215.
Operation OVERLORD much too complicated and that subsequent operations proved
that they accomplished the drive across France with fewer supplies than anticipated.
He argued that the logisticians overestimated the supply needs of the American army
in France thereby creating the perception of a shortage.
affected the planning of subsequent military operations. Van Creveld concluded that "it
scems
difficult
superabundance of the means at their disposal (Supplying War, p. 215)."
Germans could do so much with such limited logistical support, why couldn't the Allies
with their "superabundance" of logistical support not do better.
did not suffer from a genuine supply shortage.
Thus, the Americans
Van Creveld placed responsibility for
the September halt on the American logistical planners, both in the rear and at the
front.
Although van Creveld raised a key issue, supply planning, he disregarded the
fact that armies, like the societies from which they are created,
characteristics, expectations, and requirements.
have different
