pg_0002.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING AND DISPOSING OF THE
(F.S.R., VOL. I., 174.)
OBJECT.
1.
The objects of a war diary are two-fold: -
(a) To provide information from theatres of war in sufficient detail and in such a form as to provide data
upon
which to base future improvements in Army training, equipment, organisation and administration.
The views and constructive, recommendations of commanders are welcomed for this purpose.
(b) To furnish an historical record of the war.
A section of the War Office has been established to scrutinise war diaries as soon as they arrive in the United
Kingdom in order to extract all possible information of value under 1 (a) above.
It is therefore of the utmost
importance that completed diaries should be submitted promptly in accordance with the terms of para. 11 below.
GENERAL.
A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: —
(a) Each branch of the staff at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and area or sub-area
on the L. of C.
(b)
Unit commanders.
(c)
Commanders of a headquarters or unit on detachment.
(d)
Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(e) Heads of Services and their representatives.
Note: In the case of headquarters, sections of the various branches may keep separate war diaries or one
combined war diary as is found convenient.
Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of: —
(a) Cover;
(b)
Index as printed on cover;
(c) Narrative;
(d) Appendices.
5. All details of the unit and formation (if a detachment is concerned, the name of the parent unit), period
covered and folio numbers of appendices will be shown on the cover.
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
6.
The war diary will be signed once, as a report, by the commander of a unit, head of a branch, or senior staff
officer.
It is a secret document.
The extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a war diary is an
offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
The narrative is intended to supply information not given in the appendices.
The narrative should be written up daily. It should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give
a precis of any of them.
(a)
(b)
Account of operations with notes of topographical and climatic factors affecting them.
Notes of how orders were carried out.
Nature and description of field engineering works constructed.
(e)
Note of any administrative difficulties encountered and action taken to overcome them.
Note of how time not accounted for above was spent.
(f)
Brief notes of the time of receipt and issue of orders and important messages and a reference to the
Appendix letter and folio number; and, only if necessary, a very brief note of the contents.
(g) Intermediate movements of unit or formation.
(h) Notes of any important visits paid and received by commanders and senior staff officers. It is equally
important to make a note of the reason for the visit and decisions taken.
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted.
APPENDICES.
9. GENERAL.
Assignment of copies of the war diary.
or othe Assignment documen is he area, to copies will be made aer, appreciation, letter laying down policy
e made at the time specifically for the war diary
t is essential that copies of all important documents should be placed in the war diary, includin
ommanders' " personal'
and demi-official messages which contain instructions of operational iniportance.
Grouping of the Appendices.
The appendices will be assembled in the GROUPS shown on the cover,
NOT in simple chronological order.
This is intended to make assembly and reference easy.
Where there are no documents to be included in the appendices the word "NIL" should be entered in
the appropriate space in the index.
In cases where additional appendices appear suitable for the branches of certain headquarters or for certain
units the relevant papers should be inserted by groups and lettered accordingly, beginning with
10. NoTES.
Appendix "A."
The forms which constitute this appendix are intended for use by operational units and
headquarters of divisions and below.
The form will be completed whether the unit or formation is engaged in
active operations or not.
* Formations and units belonging to the Canadian Army will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate.
1.O.R.R. Tho Staffordshire Yeomanry.
WAR, DIART..
August 1911.
Volume 56.
ORTETNAL.
Location - Groat Yarmouth.
Ang. Ist.
2nd.
Reveille 0700 hrs. Routine as usual.
A.Ao and Reace.
Tt1 and R0000, To 2a te had to So p0 train 1e at On in.
San. prodead on leave on the morning
A and B.
Son to contime training at WhaT. PREPON CAP.
HQ, to remoin in Gt. Yamouth and to proceed on leave on 22 Aug.
C. Sqn and RH. proceed on seven days leave:
Routine as usual for other personnel remining with Unit. ChA
spip
3rd - 10th
11 th
12th.
13th.
14th.
15th.
16th.
17th.
18th.
19th.
20th•
21st.
22nd.
23nd.
24-th.
Details as for 2nd. Ang.
Reveille 0700hrs.
Routine as usual.
Leave personnel returned.
Unsul tablo parsonal calotnod unit ant vara Intor posted to zAd. Iner
Routine
as usual.
A and B Sqns. move fron Fritton to Button-on-Stathen.
c. Sqn.
nove fron Great Yarnouth to Fritton.
1o20 33/336383494
Capt.
T.N.C. List appointed Adjutant.
Capt.I. A. Norman posted to C. Sqn.
1. Officor and 14 mon left for Prance to relieve the maintenance party.
40 men unsuitable to tho Unit were posted to And. Reft. Unit.
Routine
as usual.
Routine
as usual.
Lieut. Boone joined the Regiment.
Routine as usual.
Routine as usual.
WAR DIARIES SECTION
No...
yep
6 SEP 1944
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Routine as usu 1.
Major. M. A. Spencer-Weirn appointed Detrehnent Cormander 1/c. Stuffs. Yeo.
Dotails Bubton-on-Stather.
Routine as usual.
Routine as usual.
Mantonanco party return fron France and arrive at 0630hrs in leaven Shp
join the Rogt. in Great Yarnouth the same day.
Routino as usual.
Injor LoA Biddle M.C. arrived in the evening to take over 2nd. in Command
of the Regiment.
Routine as usual.
Major L.A.Biddle- M.C. appointed 2nd. in Command of the Regiment
Routine is usual.
MajOr jOr•C.J.W. Turnor und Capt. Gullat.Giba rojoin tho Unit fron Hospita. 22p
F.G.C.M. held for the purpose of trying Tpr. Busby.
Major. Brinkly
(Royal Norfoll Regt) President of the Court.
Routino as usual.
It. Derbyshire rejoined the Rogt. fron hospit 1:
Major.C.R.Parquhar
and lajor G.J.. Turner proceed on leave.
9 Scout ars arrive for the Rogt. fron 12 A.r.V. Depot, Coventry.
A and B.
Sans. proceed on loave fron Burton-on-Stather.
C. Syn and R.H." tank Troop move fron Fritton to Burton-on-Stather.

