pg_0004.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING AND DISPOSING OF TH
WAR DIARY
(F.S.R., VOL. I., 174.)
OBJECT.
1. The objects of a war diary are two-fold: -
upon which to base future improvements in Army training, equipment, organisation and administration.
The views and constructive recommendations of commanders are welcomed for this purpose.
(b) To furnish an historical record of the war.
2.
A section of the War Office has been established to scrutinise war diaries as soon as they arrive in the United
Kingdom in order to extract all possible information of value under 1 (a) above.
It is therefore of the
importance that completed diaries should be submitted promptly in accordance with the terms of para. 11 below.
GENERAL.
3. A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: -
(a) Each branch of the staff. at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and area or sub-area
on the L. of C.
(b) Unit commanders.
Commanders of a headquarters or unit on detachment.
(d)
(e)
Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
Heads of Services and their representatives.
Note: In the case of headquarters, sections of the various branches may keep separate war diaries or one
combined war diary as is found convenient.
4.
Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of: —
(a) Cover;
Index as printed on cover;
(c) Narrative;
(d) Appendices.
5. All details of the unit and formation if a detachment is concerned, the name of the parent unit), period
covered and folio numbers of appendices will be shown on the cover.
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
6.
The war diary will be signed once, as a report, by the commander of a unit, head of a branch, or senior staff
officer.
It is a secret document.
The extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a war diary is an
offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
7. In order to ensure accuracy and completeness and to save work, as much important information as possible
will be conveyed in appendices consisting, with one exception, of copies of documents issued and received in normal
Tou duc.
The narrative is intended to supply information not given in the appendices.
NARRATIVE (AF C 2118)
8. The narrative should be written up daily.
It should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give
a precis of any of them.
It should contain: -
(a) Account of operations with notes of topographical and climatic factors affecting them.
(c)
Notes of how orders were carried out.
(d)
Nature and description of field engineering works constructed.
Note of any administrative difficulties encountered and action taken to overcome them.
Note of how time not accounted for above was spent.
The type of training, etc., should be specified.
Brief notes of the time of receipt and issue of orders and important
messages and a reference. to the
Appendix letter and folio number; and, only if necessary, a very brief note of the contents.
(g) Intermediate movements of unit or formation.
(h) Notes of any important visits paid and received by commanders and senior staff officers. It is equally
important to make a note of the reason for the visit and decisions taken.
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted.
APPENDICES.
9. GEnERAL.
Assionment of copies of the war diary.
When an operation order, appreciation, letter laying down policy
or other important document is prepared, two copies will be made at the time specifically for the war diary
It is essential that copies of all important documents should be placed in the war diary, including
commanders' " personal" and demi-official messages which contain instructions of operational importance
Grouping of the Appendices.
The appendices will be assembled in the GROUPS shown on the cover,
NOT in simple chronological order.
This is intended to make assembly and reference easy.
Where there are no documents to be included in the appendices the word "NIL" should be entered in
the appropriate space in the index.
In cases where additional appendices appear suitable for the branches of certain headquarters or for certain
units the relevant papers should be inserted by groups and lettered accordingly, beginning with "K."
10. NOTES.
Appendix " A." The forms which constitute this appendix are intended for use by operational units and
headquarters of divisions and below.
The form will be completed whether the unit or formation is engaged in
active operations or not.
* Formations and units belonging to the Canadian Army will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate.
ORIGINAL.
WAR DIARY.
Volume 57•
Soptenbor. 1914...
WAR DIARIES SECTION
at /o ton - Great Yamouth
11 OCT 1944
outine as usual
Major. Tell. Goodner and flout. ?.Dol. logo ion rotined helP hoppital and
rejoined the Regiment.
nd.
Routino as usual. 188.
3rd.
Normal Sund y Routine.
A11 personnel of HI. Sqn. aro to be confined to billets w.e.f. Reveille
4th. Sept.
A large nuiber of promotiona and appointents of 0.Rs. appeared in Orders.
Lieut. Sinclair and 30 0.Rs.
travelled to 19 A.F.V.
4th.
5th.
6th.
7th.
8th.
9th.
Norm 1 routine with packing and loading of vehicles continued on ordors
that this work is to be completed by midnight.
Son. Landers conference held at R.H.7. at 1400 hrs.
Speci 1 D.Rs. vere sent to Cimbridge to collect movement ordors.
Movenent Orders received in the ovening and the Road Party are to leave as
soon as possible the following day.
Capt. Fimin's perty still at 19
A.F.V. Depot.
The Roots,
tanis were loaded on to trensporters of 450 Coy. R. A.S.C. at
Fritton.
The rod party set off at approx. 1000hs. and proceeded under Cond. of
Major T.H. Gardner to Stevenge, via Nemorket,
They were socomodnted at
Stevenage Transit Cam for the night. A hot meal ms served on arrival.
The renainder
personnel remined at Tormouth and are to travel by train
on 6th. Sept.
The train party arrived at A.18. Camp(About 6 milos fron Gosport) and the
rond party joined then later in the day, after a good run fron Stevenage
via Tatford and North London Suburbs then Aldershot and Farnhan to A.18.
On arrival at A.18 personnel had n hot meal and accormod. tion was found for
then in tents, excopt for vehiclo drivers who slept in their vehicles, as
vehiclos were parked at the sida of the main road.
The Tani: Party from Inchester
and Fritton arrived on transporters at
Transit Canp A.19 near Gosport.
All personnel except the Tink Party ranained at A.18 for the whole day.
but were allowed out in the evening.
Durin the dey 24 hour ration packs
were issued also emergency rations and other equipment required for a sea
journey.
The tanks remained at 1. 19.168
AIl personnel left A.18 during the morning at convenient intervals and
proceeded to the outskirts of Gosport where they embarked on one or other
of two L.S.Ts. which as soon as loaded drew out into deep water at approx.
1600hrs.
Good meals wore served whilst on board nd the majority of
personnel wore accormodated in bunks but a few had to sleep on deck with their
vehicles.
The tanks moved early to the hards at Gosport but after waiting all day were
still not loaded at night, and at 2030hs moved to Camp A.16 (North of
Farehan for the night)
The L.S.Ts. drew against piers at approx 1400hrs after an uneventful. and calm
arossin: On disembarking, all personnel and vehicles proceeded to 60
Transit Camp, whore parties reformed.
Food was provided and some personnel.
slopt in tonts but the majority of the road party remained with their
vehicles on the parking ground.
The tanke and party loft A.16 at first light and about midday started to load o1
on the I..C.T. (4)s.
Throo trangorters and tunics and 1 - 3 tonner of R. A.3.C.
on each L.O.T.
Trinsporters were loaded on the cruft with considerable
diPPioulty by D.8.
ta sotors
The first vive of L.C.Ts. left for France at 2300hrs.

