09/10/2
NO 171/1316
NOTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
or stout will be queti not dudle wether on not to ver dhary should the kept by i,
The War Othce, London, s.W..
and to
rovide data dian is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
organisation and administration
which to base future improvements in army training, equipment
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R.., VOL. 1, 174).
of mobilisation or
(iv) Detailed account of operations
imprations props raphical and climatic.
Exact hour of i
ordinate command
mportant occurrences, factors affecting
Clear sketches showing positions of troops ai
(*") Changes in establishment or streneth.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
c. 36), and personal
in aig ton the nucle then this. followers and of animals sport, be.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
As regards casualties the names and ranks
Should be noted
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice
his representatives.
war diaries will be
1, or Events should be entered up, not in the order (y given th ve hit at tho time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(*) A cope of each field retum (A.F. W.3008
and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
toutine odder or instruction issued during the period covered by the cure op ration of
(i) Corries of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands it no longer required
(i) A copy of each narrative of report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, includin
and each will the text of taps relating t
NOTE.- t should be made 1a
or other person mentioned in para. I, hot the officer who initials the entries is the
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
Is to do the clerical worommande
(See FiR, Voi diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, ete.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
ParA. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded wher
prepanns & clary
(*) Imd decisit os te
instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(1) all eaten terent during the ot trenty our hour and present dispositions.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(i) The duplicate copy, cleatly marked as
the SPECTAT. NOTE
"in the tire catered should be the time the inform tiner order rais
subject: - Le
Instructions
nate star, contained in .. elate ligence
d Intelligen
2. i/c.
ORIGINAL WAR DIARY
SHEET
INTELLICINCE SUMMARY.
(Erase beading not r
equired)
Army Form G,
1. Unit 5th Bh., The King'a Regiment.
Commanding Officer Lieut-Colonel D.H. V. Board.
References to Appendice:
Month and Year February 1944
Hous
super&
ELGIN
G.O. holds conference of all Unit ends to settle points arising for Ex
"Crown". Movement offrs explain details of move ete to all concerned.
Slight fell of snow in
Final preparations for Ix. "Crown" being made.
evening. Weather cold
First party landing "Wetshod" leaves for assembly area - 2 1/c, Staff Capt
and craft load leave Elgin far final embarkation on L.C.Is, Ips accomodated!
in tented camp in assembly area.
General Sir Bernard Montgomery visited 185 Bde Group and inspected and
Certain serials landing
talked to parade at Brakla Camp near Nair.
Very cold day.
"Wetshod" for Ex "Crown" left for embarkation.
C.O.,I.O., and O.C. 84 Fa Coy RE embark on HQ ship for Ex "Crown".
still
C.O. sees Div HQ about new accomodation for
cold and wet early morning.
Message received that Ex. "Crown" had been
Beach Group in Elgin Area.
postponed for 24 hrs and all tps who had embarked would disembark.
Wt 13474/1805
1,200,000 7/40 BPL 51-7171 Forma C9118/22
8L9/12L OM
VIBILLI OM
ZILLI OM
688/121 ON
228/LL L OMA
180E/121 ON
- 99E/LLI OM
1 00E/LLL OM
