448.
DOCUMENTATION - AF's W5251
State 0 2st as an one shoe an ult in the Ca at a a tenth,
required and will not be shown.
and 'rits'.
The form will be completed in
These colns are not
the instructions contained in the Pamphlet 'Casualty and Strength States
ARO 132/44.
accordance with
Provision of and Accounting for Personnel' published as Appx to GRO 31/44 and
Serial numbers of drafts and nunbers of offrs and OR received
will continue to be shown in the ramarks coln in accordance with ARO 132/44
Wherever possible the printed form of AF W5251 will be used.
order of battle.
Care will be taken to ensure that the retum conforms to the current
totals.:
Care will also be taken to avoid errors in addition and in transcribing
Attention is drawn to note 6 on MF W5251.
from a fmn or unit.
449.
PERSONNEL PRC
(145/4)
DING TO UK
to ut a vortant that do mentat in in at of all me on setuming
Soon thou t on the de teh penna to t in ot do gated be thn tho
separate instructions have been issued in Second. Army letter SA/203/A dated
Oct 44.
3.
on the Fom
With the exception of Courses, therefore, the "authority for retum" space
The space on the Pro-forma for "signature
officer ordering despatch" will be filled in by the OC unit of the officer or OR
proceeding to Uk.
It is emphasised that, provided the unit can quote an appropriate
authority in accordance with paras 2 or 3 above, there is no need for personnel
to call at HQ Second Army
their way to UK.
In the following cases it will
be necessary
to call at HQ Second Army:
Personnel proceeding on compassionate leave on instructions
from this HQ who will call at Welfare Branch, HQ Second Army
(Rear) in order that their application may be finally approved.
Personnel who require
authority of G(Ops)A HQ Second Army
(Main) to proceed to Uk for special temporary duties.
Personnel required for interview at HQ Second Army before
proceeding to Uk.
Unless instructions
their onward transmission to port of embarkation.
convenience, to
COMPASSIONATE LEAVE
Ref CRO 259/44.
The attention of nits is drawn to the necessity for unit tpt, when
conveying leave personnel to HQ Second Army for
embarkation papers,
in order to take
the personnel to the embarkation point.
personnel and also drivers and others with them must carry at
Least 24 hrs rations
together with blankets in case of a long wait at the
point of embarkation.
(42/A)
451.
BURIAL RETURNS - AF W3314
It has been reported that units are forwarding
AF's W3314 to Graves
Registration Units in such quantities at a time as
to indicate that these
forms are not being rendered as speedily as possible after burials have taken
olace.
Units will ensure that these forns are NOT held up but are disposed of in
accordance with instructions, at the earliest opportunity after burial, no
how few there may be.
Belated rendering of AFs W3314 (especially in
large bundles) only causes
unnecessary work and queries, and makes it difficult for
graves to be registered
in the normal way, owing to the moves of the Graves Registration Unit.
(33/A)
WIRETESS SETS DEST
ROYED BY ENEMY ACTION
In order to support claims being made on 21 Army Group for further issues
of free wireless sets units will report through usual channels to DADAWS 12 Corps
the nunber of wireless sets destroyed by enemy action.
priority may be given in the replacement of sets so destroyed.
It is hoped that
concerned.
111 such claims must be certified by the Officer Commanding the unit
(23/A)
BLACKOUTS
successive occupants of the property.
move, for use by
455.
(158/A)
Many fires have been caused rocently by Petrol Cookers being used in barns
stacked with straw.
Orders will be issued by all units that Petrol Cookers will NOT under any
(375 Q)
OFFICIAL WAR PHOTOGRAPHS
Reference Corps Routine Order 4V./W.
Official war photographs are now available for viewing at Information
Room Main Headquarters i2 Corps, and NOI at Q Rear Corps.
(318 Q)
9B
WO 171/313
14625659
Return by (20/11/2025 1:
1679
