INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING AND DISPOSING OF THE
WAR DIARY
(F.S.R., VOL. I., 174.)
OBJECT.
I. The objects of a war diary are two-fold: -
(b) To furnish an historical record of the war.
PPENDIX "Z
FFICER
ONLY
W3006 - 3009
нД 12 вор.
179 boy KASC
and detachments;
Army Form
C2118B for
obvie pite Fis are Cot a for pre and eached, the pree heading for
3. 'A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: -
(a) Each branch of the staff at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and area or subarca
the L. of C.
(b) Unit commanders.
(8) Can auditary a headquarted pr unimon detachment.
Note: In the case of headquarters, sections of the various branches may keep separate war diaries or one
4. Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of: —
c) Narrative
d) Appendices
Sovered dedi in the as a penition if stin on i concerned, the name of the per unil, pid,
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
the war diasy will be signed one exacter, l te come ap of in pe man or in tur
I be colve to ensure accuras and complet one and po save cople of dach impran info racine a positio
will be convey nd rape indies cord so supply information not given in the appendices.
NARRATIVE (AF C 2118)
written up daily. It should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give
8. The of any of shout
regular information is given in the
nay the best fong e cad conscutive days, a dear division being shown; but a fresh one
and "C." The signal log and messagés kept by units or formation headquarters will be
red for reference. rinas and duplicates.
in the he rope of such
and host sion an be de in th, hould be made in the narrative,
tript there rein, de, in statement strength states (eg, AF W 3008
APPX
i canne his it goy:
Appendix "Z" will be prepared and disposed of as shown in paras. 12-14 below.
DISPOSAL OF WAR DIARIES.
It. War diaries will be disposed of as follows: —
(9) in Can a 0 an a on a Chin, at Army Group.
Wo in duple cope diario it inations are required at an intermediate address for
OTHER FORMaTIONs AND UNITS.
Hi not 7 8 a go, Co on Eidon, at Army Group.
Echelon as soon
the
"appendices for the
time a tie are for and to or the malian A mo will forward a duplicate copy of the war diary at the same
be a thy dicken t pe co outa to is are far thay me tipient, copie, of the war diary will
Lined in in in one ion i ain a me in are darie in forcos are it instructions con-
SECRET SUPPLEMENTARY WAR DIARIES.
UNDERC ERotion, date, etc., will be
APPENDICES.
or other tiport do copie prepare die, ple in prete the penin are in don eig
commander esperin that copter ofil impet it one it to pot not in pared
NOT in urine oh one cal order. The sa
The appendice will te ascembe in the croun
the GROUPS shown on the cover,
the appropria chep are the documents to be included in the apendies the word "NI." should be entered in
unite the rate a pre a it prate go in or he brings, can vance or to ceria
headquaten die in he for white for wil the opedi are incite for u ty or or get at
active operations or not.
• Formations and units belonging to the Canadian Army will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate.
WO 171/313
14625659
Return by (20/11/2025 15:13:02
TOP SECRET
APPENDIX "Z" TO
Wariary Prom
(formation or unit).
to...
downge posit stickiedication should the given on the inner envelope of the date on which the contents can be
original duplick nor top SECRET supplementary diaries may be despatched as soon as receipt of the
i an epine at it to ye stead one are
