pg_0002.pdf:
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING AND DISPOSING OF THE
WAR
DIARY
(F.S.R., VOL, T., 174.)
1. The objects of a war diary are two-fold: -
(a) To provide information from theatres of war in sufficient detail and in such a form
as to provide data
upon which to base future improvements in Army training, equipment, organisation and administration.
The views and constructive recommendations of commanders are welcomed for this purpose.
(b) To furnish an historical record of the war.
A section of the War Office has been established to scrutinise war diaries as soon as they arrive in the United
Kingdom in order to extract all possible information of value under 1 (a) above.
It is therefore of the utmost
importance that completed diaries should be submitted promptly in accordance with the terms of para. 11 below.
3. A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: —
GENERAL.
(a) Each branch of the staff at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and area or sub-area
on the L. of C.
(b) Unit commanders.
(c) Commanders of a headquarters or unit on detachment.
d) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(e) Heads of Services and their representatives.
Note: In the case of headquarters, sections of the various branches may keep separate war diaries or one
combined war diary as is found convenient.
4. Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of: -
(a) Cover;
b) Index as printed on cover;
(a) Appendies.
All details of the unit and formation (if a detachment is concerned, the name of the parent unit), period
covered and folio numbers of appendices will be shown on the cover.
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
6. The war diary will be signed once, as a report, by the commander of a unit, head of a branch, or senior staff
offcer.
It is a secret document.
The extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a war diary is an
offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
7. In order to ensure accuracy and completeness and to save work, as much important information as possible
will be conveyed in appendices consisting, with one exception, of copies of documents issued and received in normal
routine.
The narrative is intended to supply information not given in the appendices.
NARRATIVE (AP C 2118)
8. The narrative should be written up daily.
a precis of any of them.
It should contain:-
It should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give
Account of operations with notes of topographical and climatic factors affecting them.
Notes of how orders were carried out.
Nature and description of field engineering works constructed.
Note of any administrative difficulties encountered and action taken to overcome them.
(e) Note of how time not accounted for, above was spent.
The type of training, etc., should be specified.
t) Brief notes of the time of receipt and issue of orders and important messages and a reference to the
Appendix letter and folio number; and, only if necessary; a very brief note of the contents.
Intermediate movements of unit or formation.
() Notes of any important visits paid and received by commanders and senior staff officers. It is equally
important to make a note of the reason for the visit and decisions taken.
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted.
APPENDICES.
9. GENERAL.
or other important document is prepared, to copies will be made at the are sation, let to layine do dia policy
Assignment of copies of the war diary.
command i senial ta co den -ofia messages dich cot in it erona of operation impliery, including,
Grouping of the Appendices.
The appendices will be assembled in the GROUPS shown on the cover,
NOT in simple chronological order.
This is intended to make assembly and reference easy.
Where there are no documents to be included in the appendices the word "NIL" should be entered in
the appropriate space in the index.
unis the cavan pread sional a pendice ay a suitable to the recordinot rein head quarters or for certain
10. NOTES:
Appendix " A." The forms which constitute this appendix are intended for use by operational units and
headquarters of divisions and below. The form will be completed whether the unit or formation is engaged in
active operations or not.
* Formations and units belonging to the Canadian Army will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate:
Army Form C. 2110.
ORIGINAL
Monthly
regardinon tained
War Diaries
and Intelligence
F.S.
will be
not
avallabie
the
Month and Ye
prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year
Sep.!
1944
WAR DIARY
or
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Unit..
9th. Ba. DR. 1.
Commanding Offcer do Col. MS. MOGG D.S.0.
References to Appendices
Summary of Events and Information
Date
Hour
Place
Date
DOULLENS
AMIENS
0001
The
Ba. was assembled a the main road south from
AMIENS, once more under a
mmand s/151 Bde, with th
WAR DIARIES A
156CT 1044,
Echeloni
0800 The C.0. went 6
up ready to move. Tes order wen to take over the
position occupied ly 8D21. west of AMIENS; there
ee guarding da bridge at 0760, and f-d anth.
andes went to 8 D.L.l., t arranged the takeove
Deo tree mes co plated. Cames pat do were set are
WL.47T24 693 2,000,000 8/43 W.
1530 paa

