On 25th April, 15 Infantry Brigade from France
immediately relieved 148 Infantry Brigade which by this time was reduced to
5 officers and 400 other ranks.
Command was assumed by Major-General
B. C. T. Paget,
who had arrived with a small-staff and with representatives
of the base sub-area which was later to be established at Andalsnes and
The base sub-area staff, although attached to General Paget, was
responsible to General Massey in London.
Andalsnes, a small fjord-side town, was formerly a tourist centre for the
Romsdal area.
The port was reported to have a peace-time capacity of some
700 tons a day, but the damage inflicted to the area, the limited periods of
darkness during which work was possible and the fact that the length of the
quay prohibited more than three hatches of the large ships in use being
worked at any one time, reduced the effective daily capacity to little more
Molde, situated on the southern short of the Nordmore peninsula, had
perhaps superior port facilities to Andalsnes, but the limited road communica-
tions dictated that all stores for the fighting troops had to pass through
Andalsnes, a journey of 70 miles overland but only 20 miles by water.
Such
stores as were landed at Molde had therefore to be transported by small
of communication from Andalsnes to Dombas and Lillehammer
consisted of a valley surrounded by hills rising steeply sometimes to over
Through this valley all road and rail facilities had to pass.
single road passing through it did not exceed 18 feet in width, and was not
capable of surviving the heavy and erratic traffic of war.
As far as the one
railway was concerned, the position was even less satisfactory, for over the
part of the line the enemy was faced by no defences and could
Both road and rail communications were heavily
attacked from the air and interruptions were frequent, but at no time was
complete destruction of either achieved although the road on the Andalsnes
side of Dombas was, for most of the campaign, almost impassable.
The immediate requirements were to ensure that ample stocks of all com-
modities were sent forward at once, to provide for interruption of the L. of C.
by enemy action, and to provide against the onset of the thaw which would
inevitably have made the road impassable to traffic.
It was intended that as Andalsnes itself could be used only as a transit
area, all base installations and depots should be sited forward along the
L. of C., as near Dombas as practicable.
Sites for forward depots in the
Dombas area were therefore reconnoitred, but the course of operations did
rot permit them to be established. In any case the few administrative units
landed were on a minimum scale and it is unlikely that, with the personnel
available, they would have been able to operate forward depots.
The R.A.S.C. contingent consisted of a detachment of supply personnel
sufficient to set up small base supply and petrol depots and one or two
Ordnance were represented by a handful of men who were
kept fully occupied retrieving equipment iettisoned on the quayside by units
bereft of transport moving to the forward areas.
Transport was provided by an L. of C. infantry brigade company equipped
with 3-ton vehicles which, owing to the nature of the terrain and roads,
were completely unsuitable for operations.
WO 277
1 0
The lack of labour necessitated the nightly employment at the docks
of all available personnel on shore, all of whom had to perform their normal
duties by day.
Labour and transportation units were urgently required yet,
owing to the limited unloading time available, the lack of concealed bivouac
areas and the inadequate communications, the arrival of such additional
units would have resulted in increasing the target exposed to air attack,
forming a vicious circle, which it would have been difficult to break.
General Paget later stated that the base sub-area personnel should have
given way to the essential labour without which it could not function. In
the light of events this would appear to be a sound argument for it is evident
that the small force was eventually overstaffed by a number of administrative
officers out of all proportion to the labour available to operate the docks
or depots.
Enemy air attack continued against the congested jetties and, on 26th
April, a large quantity of ammunition and a number of rations were lost by
By the next day, not only the quayside but virtually the whole town
had been destroyed, only the telephone exchange on the outskirts remaining
On 26th April, the Norwegians withdrew on Andalsnes for rest and
refitting, leaving the entire responsibility for the defence of the valley on the
Their withdrawal down the single road inevitably caused delay to
the maintenance vehicles attempting to reach the British troops.
On 27th April, the base commandant (who was also D.A. and Q.M.G.
of General Massey's headquarters in England) reported that the position at
Andalsnes was such that he intended planning to evacuate. The next day
General Paget repudiated this report, but stated that he must have adequate
This air support was, however, not forthcoming and, as the
further maintenance of the force along the existing L. of C. could not be
assured, evacuation was ordered on 28th April. By the adroit use of the
railway, which fortunately remained more or less intact, the G.O.C. extricated
Brigadier Morgan's brigade and some Norwegians as well as 15 Infantry
For one whole day the withdrawing force fed by a supply train
hid in a long railway tunnel waiting until the night came when they were
able to proceed under cover of darkness.
During the nights 29th and 30 April, and Ist May, the force was with.
drawn by road and rail from Dombas and after fighting five rearguard actions
the last battered troops were evacuated by 2nd May.
"Sickle Force" was adversely affected by the same major administrative
difficulties as " Maurice" was at Namsos, namely: —
Lack of A.A. protection of the base.
Confusion caused by changes of plan and subsequent dislocation of
shipping programmes.
Failure to send administrative parties at the outset of the operation.
The first two deficiences were perhaps forced on the planners by circum.
stances beyond their control.
The last, however, is quite inexcusable. It
resulted in an improvised base organization having to be established by
148 Infantry Brigade from their already slender resources.
was if anthing subsequently worsened by the arrival of the next convoy for
