In October, 1940, the basis of planning was changed and G.H.Q. were
informed that, for planning purposes, it could be assumed that the following
forces, together with the equivalent of a further two divisions for internal
security, would be based on the Middle East: -
By June, 1941-10 Infantry divisions.
2 Armoured divisions.
By March, 1942—18 Infantry divisions.
3 Armoured divisions.
The effect of this information was that a decision was taken to expand
all the existing accommodation as far as possible, and to develop a new
area known as Bir Victoria located north-west of Cairo, between the Cairo-
Alexandria road and the western branch of the Nile.
This was considered
suitable for up to three divisions.
In addition there was, of course, the
necessity for providing still more transit camps, P.W. camps and training
schools, and all the many other minor accommodation needs.
In so far as medical installations were concerned it had been decided
that though the medical services were primarily the responsibility of "A"
branch, the allotment of sites and the construction of general hospitals and
of base depot medical stores would be the responsibility of " Q
in conjunction
with the D.D.M.S.
The development of hospital areas in
Egypt came, broadly speaking, under three headings: —
Expanding existing civil and military hospitals.
Taking over hotels and public buildings for use as hospitals.
The siting and construction of new hospitals in the newly developing
base areas.
The first two headings provided minor difficulties compared with the
third, which was so gravely prejudiced by the shortage of building materials
that a decision had to be taken in October, 1940, for all further hospitals
to be tented.
Huts would be allowed only for nurses, operating theatres,
sanitary annexes and a very few special wards.
As far as possible hospitals
were sited in
or close to the areas selected for base
development.
Thus
one group
was located in the Qassassin-Tel-El-Kebir area, another at
Firdan, a
third at Kantara and a fourth at Helwan.
Base depot medical
stores were sited at Tel-El-Kebir and at Kilo 118 on the Cairo-Suez road.
The Palestine Base
In contrast to Egypt a plan for the development of a base in Palestine
had existed before the war.
The fact that Haifa was the only possible
port of entry, combined with the general physical and topographical charac-
teristics of the country, had limited the selection of suitable base areas
to the immediate vicinity of the port, with possible subsidiary areas in
southern Palestine for the troops located there.
It had therefore been
decided to establish permanent base installations in the area Haifa-Khayat
Beach on the narrow coastal plain, which was connected both by rail and
sea with Egypt and the Suez Canal, and which provided access by sea
to shipping from the United Kingdom, either via the Mediterranean or the
Cape route, and from India and the Far East via the Red Sea and the Suez
In addition, Haifa was the terminal point of the vital oil pipe-line
from Iraq and the projected overland routes from India via Baghdad.
had also heen decided to establish small subsidiary base installations at
Sarafand, near Lydda in southern Palestine.
170
1 ф
Shortly after war broke out, Palestine was ordered to plan for the hold-
ing of reserves for 60,000 troops, its share of three divisions of the nine
originally scheduled for the Middle East.
In effect, existing resources of
military and hired accommodation, together with depots already approved
and under construction, were nearly sufficient for all requirements, and it
struction necessary.
is unusual to have to record that there was not a great deal of new con-
The chief difficulty lay in the provision of the adminis-
trative personnel to man the base, and this did, indeed, strain the resources of
The chief centres for such new construction as was found essential were
tion storage had been made.
Khayat Beach and Sarafand, although at this stage no firm plan for ammuni-
Construction was carried out under contract.
stores depot in its original location later suffered from the fact
that desultory Italian bombing in the area tended to drive away civilian
labour, and it then became necessary to find a new site at Kiryat Motskin
which had already been laid out as a timber store.
Similarly it had been
intended to lay out the base ammunition depot in the Haifa area but it
was soon realized that its vulnerability would be too great, and eventually,
in July, 1940, it was decided to establish a rail-served depot at Wadi Sarar
There were permanent barracks at Haifa, Sarafand and Acre which
could be used for personnel.
Temporary accommodation was also required
and this was split between northern and southern Palestine, that in the
north being specially located with a view to the defence of the frontier.
By September, 1940, however, shortages in building materials, in particular
cement and timber, menaced the entire programme.
These
resulted in the cancellation of amenity hutting in camps, far greater use
being made of tentage, with hospitals, as in Egypt, only partly hutted, and
the use of concrete framing etc. for huts to obviate use of timber.
" Teeth versus Tail"
It would appear axiomatic that fighting troops without the means to
keep them supplied with ammunition, rations, vehicles, petrol and medical
attention can be of little fighting value.
General Wavell had insisted from the first on the absolute necessity for
the establishment of the administrative services on a proper and adequate
basis in order to be prepared for the maintenance of the reinforcements of
fighting troops arriving in the Middle East.
This "battle" (as it became)
for administrative manpower continued throughout 1940 and increased in
intensity upon the alteration of the planning basis from nine to fourteen
divisions which, together with developments in Crete, Greece and the Sudan,
inevitably increased the need for the further reinforcement of the administra-
On 5th December, 1940, in view of the increase in the planning basis.
G.H.Q., Middle East, submitted a demand for additional administrative units.
This produced from, sue il.G.S. to C.-in-C. Middle East a personal cable
which is a good illustration of the " teeth v. tail" argument: —
"Am disturbed that so few of the 35,000 soldiers going to you in
