18 British Division, which had been en route for the Middle East, and had
been diverted to Singapore, was still at sea, except for one brigade group
which had landed some ten days previously.
General Percival thereupon decided to authorize a general withdrawal
to Singapore Island, in anticipation of which, certain preliminary steps had
already been taken, as, for instance:-
An outline withdrawal plan had already been issued.
The A.A. defences in south Johore had been thinned out.
Preliminary naval action had already been taken.
The organization of the Singapore Island defences had been planned.
Arrangements had been made to breach the Johore Causeway.
The withdrawal took place without incident on the night 30th-31st January
with little interference from the enemy's air force.
31st January all troops had been withdrawn and a gap of 70 feet blown
in the causeway.
The operation of withdrawing the whole force through the bottle-neck
of Johore Bahru and over the causeway,
with the
possessing
21r
superiority, had been an anxious one.
In spite of heavy losses which we
had suffered on the mainland, the successful accomplishment of the operation
was a matter for much satisfaction.
THE DEFENSIVE IN ASIA 1941-1942
SECTION 2-THE FALL OF SINGAPORE
The Island of Singapore is oblong in shape with a maximum length from
east to west of 27 miles, and a maximum width from north to south of
It is separated from the mainland of Malaya by the Straits of
Johore across which ran the 1,100 yards long causeway in which the
breach was made after the withdrawal from the mainland.
The town of Singapore, situated in the south of the island, extended
for some 6 miles along the water front with a depth of about 11 miles.
Immediately to the north was an extensive residential area covering several
From Singapore town main roads radiated in all directions,
the principal being that known as the Bukit Timah Road, which, crossing
to the mainland by the causeway, became the main artery to the north.
The pre-war population of the town was in the neighbourhood of 550,000,
but by the beginning of the siege it had swollen
to nearly a million.
There were few places of any size outside the town.
were the large villages of Paya Lebar on the Serangoon Road, which ran
north-eastwards to the Seletar air base,
Road, which ran out to the causeway. (See Map 26.)
The only hill features on Singapore Island are the Bukit Timah group of
hills, which lie just north of that village,
Bukit Mandai, some 3 miles north
of the Bukit Timah range, and the Pasir Panjang ridge, 4 miles in length,
which runs to the western outskirts of Singapore town.
built-up areas, the Island, like the rest of Malaya, was thickly covered by
WORTY
1
and other plantations, while on the northern and western coasts
there were extensive
swampy areas, which by 1941, owing to extensive
drainage works, had lost much of their value as military obstacles.
The Singapore Fortress Area
The Singapore fortress area comprised the Island of Singapore, the
adjoining islands and the Pengerang area in south Johore.
fortress in the original sense of the term, but rather a large defended and
inhabitated area, with a maximum length of about 35 miles and a maximum
width of about 15 miles, which included the town of Singapore.
Before the outbreak of hostilities with Japan,
no defences had been
constructed on the northern or western shores of Singapore Island.
deficiency, naturally, gave rise to much controversy after the fall of Singapore,
but, before suggesting a lack of foresight on the part of the local military
authorities, it must be borne in mind that the primary object of such defences
as existed was not to hold the island, but to protect the naval base.
Not long after the beginning of the Malayan campaign it became clear
that we might be driven back to Johore, and even to Singapore Island, and
orders had been issued, during December, to the fortress commander to plan
new defences to meet this contingency.
Shortages of labour and materials had, however, then intervened. All
the troops on the island had their allotted tasks in manning the defences,
and the three military labour companies were fully employed on essential
As we have seen, civil labour failed to an increasing
extent as air attacks became heavier, and priority had to be given to the
In the allocation of defence stores, priority was given to forward
locations, and the loss of a large amount of engineer materials in dumps.
on the mainland resulted in shortages of several important items, particularly
steel rods for making reinforced concrete.
Nevertheless, a great deal of work was done, but it cannot be claimed
that Singapore was a fortress, and it is certain that the troops withdrawing
from the mainland, many of whom had never seen Singapore before, were
disappointed not to find the immensely strong fortress which they had happily
visualized when en route to their new station.
The first week after the withdrawal was necessarily spent in re-grouping
and preparing and implementing the plan of detese, which, in outline, as
as follows :—
(a) Every endeavour to be made to prevent the enemy landing, or, if
he succeeded in landing, to stop him near the beaches and destroy
him, or drive him out by counter-attack.
(b) The defence of the island (other than the A.A. defences, which were
kept directly under H.Q. Malaya Command) to be organized into
three areas, the Northern Area,
Southern Area and the
The garrisons allotted to the area were as follows, the total number of
troaps available for the defence of singapore being between 75,000 and 85,000.
Northern Area: 3 Indian Corps, consisting of two divisions, one
British (18) and one Indian.
295
