Should invasion have taken place it was the intention of the Government
that the civilian population should "stay put" and that the feeding of the
population would continue under arrangements made by the Ministry of
This policy and these arrangements applied equally to the Home
Guard.
There would, however, be areas in temporary occupation by the
enemy or where fighting would actually be in progress.
In these areas
Home Guard detachments would almost certainly be involved in fighting
and their maintenance as civilians would be impracticable.
During such
periods Home Guard detachments would be fed by the army units with
which they
were involved and certain reserve supplies for this
purpose
were held in police stations about the country.
PETROL
Normally petrol was supplied against indent by the local officer i/c
supplies, R.A.S.C.
Petrol pumps were hired by the officer i/c supplies to
suit unit requirements and were filled and replenished by the
Petroleum
Board on behalf of the R.A.S.C.
Lubricants were supplied against indent
from command supply depots.
Corps petrol depots under corps control were formed within easy reach
of second line transport to hold stocks of petrol that would normally be
carried on wheels in third line transport on the basis of 75 miles.
Issues
of petrol from these depots were normally limited to 25
per cent. a week
for turnover purposes.
The main supply depots generally contained a petrol depot which held
further stocks under control of commands.
In general, commands were self-sufficient for about 600 miles, e.g.: —
First line—100 miles.
Second line—50-75 miles.
Third line—50-75 miles.
Command Reserve (in Command Depots)—100 miles.
Main Supply Depots—200-300 miles.
First and second line stocks of petrol for all units having an operational
role were held either in pumps or in unit transport on the following scale:-
First line—100 miles.
Second line—75 miles.
In addition, certain reserves in tanks were held by the Petroleum Board for
use by A.D.G.B. units.
The normal system was to operate for as long as possible, but, if necessary,
it could be modified or superseded by the usual system of supply in the
field modified to meet home conditions.
follows: —
The main modifications were as
Home Organization
War Office Petrol Reserve Depots.
Field Force Equivalent
Main Supply Depots.
Base Petrol Depots.
Corps Petrol Depots.
Advanced Base and L. of C. Depots.
Corps Petrol Parks.
The main stocks of petrol reserves in the country were, of course, held
under Petroleum Board arrangements in various major installations.
246
WO277
1 P
The attacks by submarines and aircraft against our lines of communication
were seriously jeopardizing our petrol supplies and as a result the most
stringent economy measures were introduced at home, as in other theatres,
to ensure that consumption of petrol was kept at an absolute minimum by
Amongst the measures introduced to this end were:-
M.T. " holidays" were ordered, i.e. one vehicle maintenance day each
week when, except for vital requirements, all vehicles were to be kept
This order not only provided great economy in petrol
and rubber but also improved the general standard of maintenance.
At a later stage the dangerous shortage of natural rubber resulted in
a second M.T. holiday being introduced into the week.
supplies were,
whenever possible, delivered on the " milk
principle and this system was expanded to include returned
stores, salvage and any other commodities possible.
As. far as posible without prejudicing operational requirements,
transport employed in administrative duties was pooled on a geographical
basis and neighbouring units combined their transport resources.
Measures to control loss by leakage in containers were tightened up.
locations of petrol pumps were frequently reviewed so that
"dead" mileage could be obviated.
In the tuition of drivers great emphasis was laid on the avoidance of
waste of petrol by bad driving methods, e.g. engines being left running
The outbreak of war, the mobilization of the B.E.F. and the preparations
threw responsibilities on the R.A.O.C.
than on any other service.
The existing structure con-
sisting of the large War Office depots, Branston (Clothing), Chilwell (Vehicles),
Bramley (Ammunition), Weedon (Weapons), etc., was supported by only a
few command depots and these were entirely inadequate to deal with the
To meet the anticipated increased holdings,
search for accommodation for clothing, stores, necessaries,
Additional buildings were requisitioned in all commands and
new construction was planned.
The incoming tide of receipts was switched
from one depot to another as fresh accommodation was found and exploited.
The diffioulties in developing new major ordnance installations were many,
since the auxiliary services required, such as road making, lighting, etc.,
entailed considerable engineering work which a the time wins at a premiu.
Hence, even by the time the B.E.F. returned many of the new dépots had
The pre-war method of stocking was based in general on six months'
maintenance plus foreknown liabilities
accommodation stores and tentage,
wastage plus the greatest number out
at any one time was the basis of calculation.
proved quite satisfactory in maintaining ion peace-time Army, were not
adequate to meet the new situation, and, together with the fact that war
production was not in full swing, soon resulted in the R.A.O.C. operating
on what was little more than a hand to mouth basis.
