the rail-head dumps would be taken over by the B.A.Ds., the staffs thus
released moving forward to operate the new rail-heads.
These new rail-heads
would initially be stocked by
the six thirty-six hour A.S.E. trains, and subse-
quently by further trains loading at the B.A.Ds. and sent forward as rail-heads
absorbed the ammunition.
In the event there was little or no opportunity to move any appreciable
portion of the dumps forward, and the ammunition remaining in them was
The Progress of the Battle
By 12th May, the first stages of Plan "D" had been successfully
completed and 1, 2, 3 and 44 Divisions were in their new positions, the
first three formations having been lifted forward by troop carrying com-
panies, R.A.S.C. On the same day the C.-in-C. requested the War Office
to expedite the despatch of 1 Armoured Division, asking that it should be
shipped to the nearest available port and loaded tactically so that it might
engage in operations as soon as possible after landing.
Events then moved rapidly.
On 14th May the first signs
of danger
could be seen from the Sedan area, where the enemy had effected a crossing
of the Meuse.
The next day saw the Dutch Army laying down its arms.
In
the
meantime. the execution of Plan "D" was proceeding according
to plan and ahead of schedule.
The occupation of the Dyle line was, however, short-lived. On 16th May
withdrawals of the French on the right of the
British and the increasing
momentum of the enemy attack made it clear that a
prolonged defence of
the Dyle position was impracticable and, on that night, orders were issued
for the force to withdraw to the line of the Escaut.
By the next morning the situation had become grave.
and mobile forces were reported to have crossed the Oise, and the break-
through was now directly threatening the communications over the Somme
at Amiens and Abbeville, and the rearward areas generally.
were given for the three " Pioneer" divisions (12, 23 and 46) to be despatched
L. of C. area south of the Somme.
The decision was now taken by "Q" to discontinue the use of the
Amiens— Arras railway, in view of the situation south of Arras,
and to maintain the force by the more northern line running through Eu
and
Abbeville to Bethune.
In addition every trainload
of ammunition
available was ordered to the Hazebrouck area.
This switch of rail com-
munications was timely in that the line through Amiens was cut during the
next day.
By 19th May, although Abbeville with its road and rail communications
over the Somme was intact, there was little doubt in the mind of the C.-in-C.
that the enemy forces in the area would shortly break through to the coast,
and completely cut off the force from the base.
The O.M.G. of the
B.E.F.
therefore requested the War Office to open an emergency base to be served
by the ports of Boulogne, Calais and Dunkirk, and to arrange immediate
shipments of supplies and stores.
52
WO27
1
The next day the situation around Arras worsened and the likelihood
of the enemy reaching the coast increased.
The possibility of the force
being divorced from the base now gave rise to operational repercussions.
Lord Gort, in outlining the various courses of action that remained open to
him, wrote: —
operations could be undertaken.
the administrative situation made it unlikely that sustained
on the point of being interrupted.
Communication with the bases was
The mobile echelons of gun and
small arms ammunition were full, but once they were exhausted I could
not safely reckon on being able to replenish them."
On 21st May communication across the Somme was finally severed.
Map 7 clearly illustrates the finality with which the B.E.F. was cut off from
its base.
The formations south of the river consisted of 1 Armoured Division
(which had started to arrive on 17th May but was never able to join the
main body of the B.E.F.), 51 Division (returning from the Saar), the portions
of 12 and 46 (Pioneer) Divisions which could not be despatched forward,
three unbrigaded infantry battalions, the contents of the reinforcement depots
and the personnel of the administrative services and installations.
initially placed under the Commander L. of C. Area, but on 23rd May the
War Office appointed a separate G.O.C. to command the defences south of
the Somme, and these troops then ceased to be the concern of the B.E.F.
Shipments of stores to the ports south of the Somme had already been
stopped, and orders were now issued for the return of as much equipment,
especially ammunition, as possible to the United Kingdom where it was
Ships en route were
recalled, and a considerable tonnage which had been off-loaded at the docks
was re-loaded-some on to the same ships that had brought it out.
On 26th May orders were received for the B.E.F. to withdraw to the
coast and to return to the United Kingdom over the beaches, and through
the ports, east of Gravelines.
Maintenance during the Withdrawal
The administrative picture covering the period from the time the L. of C.
was cut until the receipt by Lord Gort of withdrawal orders can best be
summarized by quoting the following further extract from his despatches:—
"The decision to maintain the force through the Northern ports was
finally taken on 21st May and the headquarters of a Base Sub-Area
together with a section of Q.M.G.'s staff, in
close touch with the British and French Naval authorities.
Rail communication in the area was by now precarious, and plans
were worked out on the basis of establishing dumps, one in each Corps
area, which could be wholly maintained by road.
by this time, greatly complicated by the numbers of improvised forces
which the quickly changing situation had made necessary: most of
the three divisions for pioneer duties,
Some were within reach of Corps, but others
were not and these had to be dependent on fortuitous sources of supply,
or else live for a time on the country.
