The organization of rail transport, including new construction,
was under
the Director of Railways, who controlled a railway operating department,
a mechanical department and an engineering maintenance department. At a
series of meetings with the French Railways (S.N.C.F.) it was agreed that a
proportion of the total available French military transport would be allocated
to the B.E.F., but this was found insufficient for the needs of the force
and some 80 locomotives had to be imported via the Harwich-Calais route
complete with crews and rolling stock.
Nevertheless there was always a
shortage of wagons and engine
power for the B.E.F.,
and this was of
course aggravated by the length of the L. of C. in the initial stages.
construction carried out by the B.E.F. was almost entirely
confined to work in rail served depots with their attendant connecting lines
and marshalling yards.
The only exceptions were the construction of hospital
sidings for ambulance trains, and feeder lines to the sites of new airfields
in Northern France which required the delivery of a large tonnage of materials
for the construction of runways.
In accordance with the transportation policy agreed with the French
authorities, British railway operating troops were mainly engaged in working
the traffic in the Rennes.—St. Malo.—St. Nazaire.—Nantes area.
Railway workshops were established for the repair of British locomotives
and stock, for the maintenance of dock lines and for outdoor machinery, for
the repair of railway construction plant and for the repair and manufacture
Two mobile workshops had been sent out from
the United Kingdom by train ferry and were located at Rennes and St.
At the time of the final evacuation disused sheds at Rouen and
St. Nazaire were being fitted out as workshops for service repairs and a
certain amount of general repairs and, in addition, negotiations were in hand
for use of part of a locomotive workshop near Paris as a heavy repair shop.
An ambulance train maintenance section was located at Dieppe and a further
section was projected for Etaples.
All these workshop and repair units
were later combined into a Chief Mechanical Engineer's department.
Transportation stores depots were opened at Château Brave and at St.
Jacques near Rennes.
The depot at Château Brave was capable of holding
100 miles of track and materials.
About 30 miles of track and a certain
amount of material and plant were also stocked at Carquefou.
Had not
construction been interrupted by operations a further depot would have
been opened at Motteville, east of Lé Havre.
As early as December, the shortage of rolling stock began to make
itself felt, and this, together with the scarcity of road transport, made it
necessary for use to be made of the considerable river and canal network
in France.
The Director of Inland Water Transport arrived early in Janu-
ary, and agreement was quickly reached with the French for the use of
barges and coastal vessels.
The initial use of water transport was for the
movement of bulk petrol, but later a start was made with the movement of
timber cut by forestry companies near the banks of the River Seine.
March consignments
of sand and aggregate, loaded from quarries near
In the southern base, inland
water transport was used for moving supplies from the dock at Nantes to
the base supply depot at Redon.
36
WO27
R.A.S.C. Transport
Of the 25,000 M.T. vehicles shipped to France during September and
October only 2,000 had been in military service before the outbreak of war.
The remainder were obtained from commercial sources under the Impress-
ment Scheme.
It was not long after the arrival of the force that the cry-to be so
often repeated in other theatres during the next four years-of shortage
of R.A.S.C. transport began to be heard from the B.E.F.
A demand in
early October for three additional reserve M.T. companies was met by the
despatch of four troop-carrying companies; an alternative which was not
wholly satisfactory since the extra lift thus obtained was still not sufficient
to meet the growing demands.
As previously mentioned, the majority of the base installations were
rail served and it had been hoped that R.A.S.C. road transport would not
be required for other than those depots which were established at some
distance from stations.
The opening of new ports, the extension of the
main base and the proposal for an advanced base, together with the ever
growing daily maintenance commitments, threw an immense strain on the
R.A.S.C. transport resources, which were further reduced by the consider-
able damage inflicted upon vehicles as the result of the carriage of a large
amount of road-making material.
Rail and inland water transport facilities
always had to be augmented by M.T. in order to cope with the increasing
volume of stores imports, and demands were continually made on the War
Office for further general transport units.
By the end of February a total of nearly 19,000 R.A.S.C. vehicles had
been shipped to France,
accompanied by 2,700 tons of spare parts and
accessories, and 30,000 tyres.
The road transport units were covering a daily
average total of some 250,000 miles to maintain the force.
The base M.T. stores depot R.A.S.C. opened in the vicinity of Nantes
but was handicapped by being some miles from the docks and by not having
The advanced M.T. stores depot, after spending some
weeks in the rear of the base depot, was eventually moved forward to the
Rouen area, where it opened in December.
The arrangements for the supply
of spare parts for R.A.S.C. vehicles, although prejudiced by the difficulties
mentioned above and the variety of makes and types of vehicles in use,
were at no time unsatisfactory and improved consistently as time went on.
The heavy repair shop, R.A.S.C.,
which relied almost entirely upon the
M.T. stores depot for its supply of material, was located some fifteen miles
away at St.
Etienne.
The unit carried out repairs to complete vehicle
assemblies and major components, and was also capable of turning out 18
completely overhauled vehicles weekly.
Any vehicle casualties in excess
of this figure were returned to the United Kingdom for repair under Ministry
of Supply arrangements.
Headquarters of the vehicle reception depot R.A.S.C. was at Nantes and
sections were located at Le Mans, Nantes and north of Amiens.
length of the L. of C. often necessitated R.A.S.C. replacement vehicles for
the forward units travelling a distance of over 400 miles from the vehicle
The expansion of the force had thrown a great load on the R.A.S.C.
base M.T. installations which could not have been entirely foreseen in the
37
