Owing to
the fact that the quayside was already piled high with stores,
and that a French ship was still unloading transport and equipment on to the
one useable jetty, only the headquarters staff, some dock labour and a portion
of the howitzer battery (less ammunition) could be got ashore.
The arrival
of the howitzer battery and the field ambulance was completely unexpected
by General de Wiart.
The next night saw the arrival of a light A.A. battery,
also unexpected but none the less welcome, although the acclamation that
greeted the news of its landing was somewhat dampened by the fact that
they had Bofors guns but no predictors.
On 28th April, General de Wiart received the message that his recom-
evacuate his force had been agreed in principle because the
chances of getting any air support to combat the enemy attacks were practi-
cally nil, and the possibility of Namsos being rendered completely inoperative
had to be considered.
The administrative state of the force about the time when the decision
was taken to evacuate may be stated briefly as follows:
Docks: Fit only for one small ship at a time and hopelessly congested.
Rail: The use
of the one railway from Namsos became impossible
after the first few days as a result of enemy air attacks.
Supplies: Adequate for the force for perhaps a further 14 days but
scattered over the countryside in small dumps.
Steps had been taken
to organize local purchase of milk and vegetables and to make bread.
Transport: The only 15 trucks brought with 146 Infantry Brigade had
to be driven by Norwegian drivers since no M.T. drivers had accom-
panied the brigade.
Not more than 40 civilian trucks were available for
hire.
Petrol: About 1,000 gallons.
Ammunition: 30,000 rounds of S.A.A. for each battalion with 60,000
rounds as reserve.
Ordnance : Nil.
Medical: Nil, apart from stocks held by regimental medical officers
who had lost a large proportion of their limited equipment.
The field
ambulance arrived too late to be effective.
The evacuation was completed during the night 2nd/3rd May but owing
to the speed at which it was carried out, neither stores nor equipment could
It is impossible to record what should, or should not, have been done to
maintain the troops who took part in what Mr. Churchill has called "the
muddy waddle forward at Namsos".
General de Wiart was never told that
the whole concept of the plan had been changed and never had a clearly
defined directive as to the size of force that would have to be maintained.
Further, the administrative staff arrived too late to do other than assist in the
evacuation, and the administrative units
the abandonment
"Hammer" earmarked for the force were
activities until practically nothing remained of the original grouping.
de Wiart, however, has made the following comments:
WO217
1 0
" The project for the landing at Namsos appears to have violated nearly
all the conditions for the success of such an operation which have been
thought out in pre-war staff exercises.
No appreciation giving full weight to the administrative problems was
produced.
The administrative staff which was to implement the plan had no
opportunity to study the problem beforehand and was gravely handi-
capped by no arrangements being made for a reconnaissance party in
advance and for sound administrative arrangements to be made from the
start.
No protection was arranged for the base installations."
The last comment is perhaps the most significant. The enemy had virtual
air supremacy throughout.
Unless enemy bombing could have been pre-
vented it would have been impossible either to organize the base or develop
the dock and railway facilities to serve adequately any force that might have
been based on Namsos.
Andalsnes (" Sickle ")
different series of misfortunes befell the troops taking part in the
southern half of the abortive " pincers" movement on Trondheim but here
at least we inflicted some damage to the enemy.
148 Infantry Brigade, with one light anti-aircraft battery under command,
landed in the Andalsnes area during the evening of 18th April under the
command of Brigadier H. de R. Morgan whose instructions were to land
in the Andalsnes area, secure Dombas and then operate northwards against
the enemy in the Trondheim area.
However, as a result of an urgent appeal
from the Norwegian C.-in-C., Brigadier Morgan decided he must deviate
from his original orders to advance on Trondheim and move south to assist
the battered Norwegian forces who were in urgent need of assistance around
Lillehammer.
Accordingly on 20th April he moved his brigade by train and M.T. to
Lillehammer and came into action alongside of the Norwegian forces south
of the town.
Severe fighting began.
The enemy at once reacted strongly,
and during the next two days both the British and Norwegian troops were
forced to withdraw slowly along the road to Dombas, and on 24th April
were in position around Otta.
During this period the brigade had operated independently, living entirely
upon such supplies as could be taken with them.
No base facilities had
randed not were any administrauve personnel avanable to operate them had
Such administrative organization as was essential had to be
improvised from personnel who could ill be spared from the front.
The ship carrying Brigadier Morgan's first line vehicles, artillery and
mortars had been sunk Brid, die o orto make the most of the infinitesimal
amount of civilian transport available during the
continued withdrawals,
supplies and other equipment had been jettisoned.
only a shortage of food, mutts aid is and shovels had suffered the same fate,
the men were lying in the open er pepueull view of enemy aircraft and
