preceding 1939 it is certain that the efficiency of the command would have
been increased.
Had heavy air bombardment occurred at the beginning of
the war—as was anticipated-it is certain that A.A. Command would
at
an early stage have been rendered immobile, thus necessitating a large-scale
-and uneconomical-diversion of transport from other essential purposes.
As in the case of transport units, no ordnance installations existed under
control of A.A.
Command headquarters.
The only
storeholding depots,
known first as A.A. mobilization stores and subsequently as A.A. ordnance
depots (A.A.O.Ds.), were divisional troops controlled by the A.D.O.S. in the
same way as divisional ordnance field. parks of the field army.
A.A.O.Ds.
originally held all ordnance stores for A.A. units but it was decided in 1941 to
confine their holdings to Vote 9 (warlike) stores and ancillary items, remaining
stores being issued either from command ordnance depots or barrack stores.
Upon the disbandment of A.A. divisions in 1943, A.A.O.Ds. were withdrawn
into A.A. Command control and were made the responsibility of D.D.O.S. at
H.Q., A.A. Command.
The A.A. workshop
organization developed on much the same lines.
Nucleus R.A.O.C.(E) installations were formed at the outbreak of war into
A.A. divisional workshops which, on the disappearance of divisions, became
A.A. workshop companies controlled by D.D.M.E., A.A. Command through
A.A. groups.
Originally these workshops were located in fixed sites, but
subsequently, as A.A. units increased in mobility, they tended to move more
and more frequently.
As the war progressed, and as the defence of the homeland against air
attack increased in complexity, so did the importance of maintaining A.A.
equipment throw more and more work on R.E.M.E.
So great did its share
in the operation of equipment and the keeping of it in action become, that
at a later stage of the war, a War Office committee had to be appointed
with the object of enlarging the scope of unit maintenance and limiting
that of R.E.M.E.
instantly or replaced called for most of the work of examination and repair
to be carried out on the site; only a minor proportion of the R.E.M.E.
personnel were therefore available for the second echelon workshops.
any scientific military undertaking, the most important of the administrative
services is R.E.M.E. It is essential that it should be on a working basis
before war breaks out.
In general only first and second echelon repairs to armaments and vehicles
were carried out by A.A. Command, although first, second, third and fourth
echelon repairs to electrical and radar equipment were also executed.
Other
repairs were relegated to static workshops of the home command. In addition,
a considerable amount of research and experimental work was carried out
by R.E.M.E. in A.A. Command concerning such matters as remote control,
recognition and location of aerial targets, and many others.
have no place in this history.
These, however,,
A.A. Command.
It is indeed difficult to resist the temptation to devote more space to
The foregoing paragraphs do not pretend to achieve more
than an outline, with the minimum of detail, of the arrangements made
for the maintenance of the gun and searchlight crews which comprised the
army element of the Air Defence of Great Britain.
It must, however, be
270
WO27Y
1 0
stated that, despite the many complexities of administration, relations between
A.A. Command, Fighter Command and the army commands were always
most cordial, and difficulties, at first appearing insoluble, were almost always
surmounted by mutual co-operation.
THE HOME THEATRE
SECTION 4-THE " BOLERO" PROJECT, 1942-1944
It will be noted that this section covers a period rather outside the
chronological limits of the remainder of Chapter V.
This is done deliberately
because the authors are convinced that "Bolero" finds its proper place in
this chapter and, although the intake of U.S. troops continued until 1944,
the arrangements for their reception belong most definitely to 1942.
Continent jointly with the British by the spring of 1943. This plan was
known as
"Marshall" and the resultant commitment for which the War
Office and the Air Ministry were jointly responsible was known as " Bolero".
One of the first steps taken was to form the " Bolero" Combined Committee
(London) which was an inter-departmental committee given the responsi-
bility of
co-ordinating the
preparations for the reception,
governing plans
and administrative
accommodation and maintenance of U.S.
Forces in the United Kingdom and developing the United Kingdom
accordance with the requirement of plans for the invasion of Europe.
The formation of the "Bolero" Committee was followed by the Q.M.G.
issuing a directive stating terms of reference and laying down the War Office
responsibility for the reception, accommodation and maintenance of U.S.
Ail executive action was to be taken by the War
and the commands concerned
and a new War Office branch, Q (Liaison), was formed under a D.O.M.G.(L)
to deal exclusively with planning and policy concerning Anglo-American
Commands were to be responsible for detailed planning and in
Southern Command, where the major portion of the U.S. troops were to
be located, a Q(L) section was formed.
A smaller Q(L) staff looked after
U.S. interests in Eastern Command and the staff of Western Command was
suitably increased to deal with the commitment through normal channels.
Before the inception of "Bolero" a "token" U.S. Force had arrived in
Northern Ireland and by 3lst May, 1942, numbered some 36,000.
problems to arise under "Bolero" had therefore previously been
resolved in minor form and this " preliminary canter" was of considerable
assistance in the initial stages of planning.
The Brigadier Q(L) at the War
Office, in the capacity of colonel i/c administration Northern Ireland, had
actually been responsible for the administration of this token force, and his
experience was thus of very great value.
