The "Bolero" Committee
Early meetings of the " Bolero" Committee were of the first importance
since a sound basis for planning was vital.
The terms of reference of the
committee as laid down by the Q.M.G. were : —
•(a) To prepare plans and make administrative preparations for the
reception, accommodation and maintenance of U.S. forces in the
United Kingdom and for the development of the United Kingdom
in accordance with the requirements of the "Round-Up"
(Note.-"Round-Up" was the name given for a projected joint
operation on the Continent to be launched by U.S. and British forces
The plan was later postponed and substituted by operation
in Torch" (the invasion of North Africa in 1942) after which planning
for the invasion of Europe in 1944 was continued under the title of
" Overlord". (See Chapter XI, Section 1).)
(b) The responsibility for
carrying out the plans and
approved by the
Committee were to rest with the
departments concerned.
Arrangements for co-ordination between
departments in regard to particular matters were to be made where
necessary, by means of committees dealing with particular subjects.
(c) The committee was to act under the general authority of the adminis-
trative chiefs of staff, i.e.
The Fourth Sea Lord (Admiralty).
The Quarter-Master-General (War Office).
Air Member for Supply and Organization (Air Ministry).
Senior Civil Staff Officer (Civil Departments).
to whom major matters of policy requiring decision or arbitration
had to be referred.
In this connection the Senior Civil Staff Officer
mentioned above was also a member of the Home Defence Executive.
He was chairman of the " Bolero" Committee.
(d) The London committee had to work in close touch with the " Bolero"
Committee, Washington.
necessity for speed.
The predominant feature of the committee's early deliberations was the
The object was essentially to be prepared by April, 1943,
for "Round-Up". Thus just under a year was allowed for the task of pro-
viding for the movement and reception of the U.S. contingent of about one
million men, their accommodation, and the
facilities to enable them to take part in the operation.
necessary storage and other
Every minute counted,
decisions had therefore to be made immediately, and action taken at once to
implement the decisions whatever the risk, without, of course, disturbing the
defence or organization of the country in its role as the main support area.
Finance was the first hurdle to be surmounted, and after considerable dis-
cussion, approval was obtained for a block grant of £50,000,000. It is of
interest to record that within this sum the " Bolero" construction programme
was successfully carried out.
at half-an-hour's notice, to estimate the cost of the programme.
(The story is told that the E-in-C was asked,
He did some
272
WORT
1 8
calculations on a minute sheet, took a deep breath, and said " Fifty million
pounds ".
spent was only half a million pounds short of this figure.)
At the termination of the project it was found that the total sum
Map 24 illustrates the large number of British troops which had to be
moved from Southern Command and the vastly increased numbers of United
States troops with which it was originally intended to replace them.
of the re-accommodation in other commands of the British troops thus
uprooted were known as " Bolero Repercussions".
In the event, the troops which had to be accommodated in Southern Com-
mand were many more than the first estimate, while, partly on account of
tactical considerations, U.S. troops had also to be located in the Western
Command.
Still more troops had to be located in almost all parts of the
country for L. of C. and other essential functions.
The American Forces
The fact that no parallel organization to the Royal Air Force existed at
that time in the U.S. Forces, and that the U.S. Army Air Force was an integral
part of the U.S. Army, called for a firm division of responsibility to be laid
down between the War Office and the Air Ministry in this respect.
Respon-
sibilities in connection with the provision of accommodation fell under two
heads:
(a) The provision of works services, including the construction of accom-
modation.
(b) Reception arrangements.
For the provision of works services, the following definition was agreed
(a) Where works services were required at an existing Air Ministry instal-
lation, e.g. aerodromes, in connection with personnel, stores, arma-
ment, equipment, etc., provided for the working of the installation
or its immediate protection, responsibility for provision rested with
the Air Ministry regardless of the type of unit, stores, armament, etc.,
concerned.
(b) Where a new American installation was required for purely air force
use (e.g. a new aerodrome, or aircraft base assembly shops) responsi-
bility rested with the Air Ministry and included all ancillary services.
(c) Where works services (including accommodation) were required other
than at an existing Air Ministry installation or other than in con-
nection with a new installation wholly required by the Air Force as
in sub-paras. (a) and so above, responsibility rested with the War
Department regardless of the dye, of unit, stores, equipment, etc., for
which the services were required.
273
