It had been difficult to keep pace with the necessary increase of stocks
of ammunition owing to the extension of the
"period before relief"
and
the great increase in the garrison.
Nevertheless, when hostilities started, the
stocks of most types was satisfactory, though in some natures, notably light
A.A. and 25-pr., there were shortages.
With an almost unlimited supply of petrol in the Netherlands East
Indies, it had been possible to build up large reserve stocks.
The army
stocks were held chiefly in large 60-gallon drums.
The R.A.F. stocks
were dispersed and the main air force petrol reserve was held in specially
constructed underground tanks on Singapore Island, a little south of the
The Asiatic Petroleum Company held large reserve stocks for
civil use, both on Singapore Island and at certain places on the west coast.
It is doubtful at that stage whether even the most pessimistic of apprecia-
tions or forecasts would have visualized that the time would come when
petrol stocks in Singapore
would be reduced to a little more than the
contents of vehicle tanks.
The supply problem was complicated with the Australian ration differ-
ing from the British, and with the Indian and other Asiatic troops having
their own specialized rations.
Nevertheless, approximately 180 days' reserve
stocks of all types had been accumulated before hostilities broke out.
In
order to build up reserves, the meat ration of British (though not Australian)
troops was reduced in the autumn of 1941, and replaced by other com-
modities,
the full meat ration not being so necessary in the climate of
Malaya as it was elsewhere.
Cold storage accommodation for frozen meat
existed at
Singapore and Penang, and a few rail refrigeration cars were
available for meat distribution to troops on the mainland.
The food supply for the civil population of Malaya and Singapore
was a very complicated problem, and had been the subject of much study
for several years, culminating in September, 1939, in the appointment of
a Food Controller.
In peace-time only the rice-growing areas of Malaya
were self-supporting, and to all other areas especially to Singapore-rice
had to be imported, chiefly from Thailand and Burma.
In Singapore and
other large cities, stocks for both Europeans and Asiatics were laid down,
while in each State rice stocks were accumulated under local arrangements.
In addition, a number of cattle were brought from Bali in the Netherlands
East Indies.
It is probable that when
hostilities broke out, a minimum
of 1 indies Is ires bare held in the more important food commodities,
though in some of the others the reserves were on a smaller scale.
Although a rationing scheme had been under consideration for some
years, little result had been achieved by the Civil Government by the summer
of 1941.
Committees appointed to examine the problem reported that the
difficulties in producing a scheme for the Asiatic population were so great
that they could not put forward a satisfactory solution.
As a result, when
hostilities broke out, a modified scheme existed for the European popula-
tion, but there was no scheme for the Asiatics.
able scheme,
experiences it andears that it should have been nossible to produce a work
In the light of subsequent
although it is equally true to statussia during the campaiga
there was no serious shortage of foodstuffs for the civil population.
There was little or no danger of a water shortage in Malaya, except on
Singapore Island, which was dependent upon reservoirs and rain catchment
288
WORTY
areas from which the supply could be continued indefinitely, provided that
their control remained in our hands and the machinery for distribution con-
It will be seen later that this reservation was one of the
most important factors leading up to the surrender of the island.
The hospital accommodation which had been prepared in peace-time
became quite inadequate for the increased garrison.
their own base hospital which was housed in one wing of the new civil
hospital at Malacca.
The base hospital for other Europeans, of all three
was on Singapore Island, as was the hutted hospital for Indian
On the mainland, forward hospitals were established in suitable
accommodation taken over for the purpose.
With a view to increasing the hospital accommodation in the Singapore
area, in the event of active operations, arrangements had been made with
the owners of certain large houses for a portion of them to be used, if
required, as overflow convalescent hospitals.
The civil medical services
were well developed, and large reserves of medical supplies for both civil
and military use were available.
The N.A.A.F.I. organization had been expanded to supply the needs of
the increasing British garrison and, by arrangements with the Government
of India, it had, in 1941, undertaken responsibility for the Indian troops.
This latter branch of its activities had, however, never been fully developed.
Under pre-war arrangements, most N.A.A.F.I. goods were admitted duty
areas where most of the troops were then stationed. The
subsequent difficulties and delays experienced in obtaining similar conces-
sions for imports into other parts of Malaya provide a striking example
of the complications of the constitutional organization of Malaya as it then
There were Red Cross organizations working for both British and Indian
troops, the Australian Red Cross being responsible for all British troops.
In Malaya, as elsewhere in the East, the accommodation problem differed
widely from that in European countries.
There were no farms or large empty
houses, and billeting on the larget Asiatic re ulation had obvious dray-
In most places there were good schools, and these were made avail.
able, when the emergency demanded, by the civil authorities.
A limited
amount of tentage was also available.
A great deal of new construction, however, became necessary.
This took
the form of wooden hutconstruction, however, contractors.
The camps were
sited tactically and, as is nts arcted by seven tactical requirements are
predominant, not always in the happiest locations from the point of view of
hygiene and comfort.
Some of those in the north had been erected in rubber
These were thoroughly
plantations with a view to prothing them with cover from air observation.
unsatisfactory because the thick rubber tree-tops
prevented the sun and lieun trista tetrating to the camps, which, in conse-
quence, were dark and depressing.
ditions by thinning the repressin and Ate ensuring that the occupants were
Attempts were made to improve con-
sent at intervals to other ree-tops a a hange of air, but some of the troops,
owing to these conditions, laces for as sighting it, when hostilities began, as
they would have been otherwise.
289
12090
