around Rheims containing such installations as supply, petrol and ordnance
depots and
workshops.
Similarly a small maintenance area
was located
around Metz to cater for the Saar force.
The establishment of the latter
was the cause of much administrative difficulty because the L. of C. thus
formed ran right through the French sector.
Incidentally
these frequent
moves to the Saar were of great value in that they introduced the B.E.F. to
the French
system of military traffic control; a system which the British
were later able to improve upon.
The ports in use in the initial stages were Nantes, Cherbourg, St. Nazaire
and Brest, where an allotment of berths had been arranged during the pre-war
staff talks.
After disembarkation was completed it was found that the
French did not consider that this arrangement was to continue, and a certain
amount of local adjustment had to be made to enable the maintenance
programme to be carried on.
It was finally agreed, however, that certain
berths were to be allotted to the B.E.F. in absolute priority, while others
were to be
made available for intermittent use, details being adjusted by
local port commissions in accordance with the existing shipping situation.
Other ports later taken into use included Havre, Caen, Fécamp, Rouen,
St. Malo and Boulogne, while Marseilles was used for trooping to and from
the East and for the import of a small amount of special stores from the
East.
In addition, throughout the whole period, Calais and Dunkirk were
in use for the import of rolling stock, vehicles and loaded wagons by train
ferry.
It is of interest to note that the relatively small force was served
by over a dozen ports and to compare this with other theatres in which
far larger numbers of troops were served by far fewer ports.
For example,
only six ports were available in India for the maintenance of the India/
S.E.A.C. force of two and a half million men.
Map 5 shows the main types of traffic passed through the various French
ports from U.K. during the period September,
1939, to May, 1940, while
Diagram 3 shows the monthly tonnages of the main commodities shipped
during the same period.
The base marshalling yard was at Rennes, upon which the railway
lines from St. Malo, Brest, St. Nazaire and Nantes converged.
L. of C. then ran for about 220 miles from Rennes to Alençon and through
Mezidon and Rouen to Abancourt, which was the British regulating station
and was specially built by military labour.
(Abancourt later became the
base marshalling yard for traffic from Caen, Le Havre, Rouen, Fécamp
The L. of C. then ran for about a further 50 miles from
Abancourt through Amiens to the rail-heads which were located in the Arras
Extensive use was made of billetting throughout the base area and
personnel were quartered in houses, shops,
use was made of any covered premises available, while those for whom no
quarters could be found were sheltered under canvas.
This was unfortunate
in that the winter of 1939-40 turned out to be one of the severest for many
years and many soldiers unused
considerably from exposure.
such extreme conditions
34
WO27
1
Much difficulty arose over
the inadequacy of depot accommodation
owing to the fact that the reconnaissance party that had gone to France before
war broke out, though it may have known that the force was to consist of
four divisions, was not able to go further than an official statement made in
March, 1939, to the effect that the British would send two divisions.
Accommodation had therefore been earmarked by the French in all good
faith on a two-division basis.
The result was that each of the services inevitably experienced accom-
modation difficulties in varying degree; several instances will later be
Some of these difficulties were, of course, due to other reasons,
such as lack of imagination in that several of the buildings earmarked for
specific administrative installations were found to be quite unsuitable (e.g.
a glass factory at Redon was earmarked for a supply depot; on occupation
it was found that the entire floor space was covered with powdered glass).
The criticism has been made that, when it was found that buildings were
unsuitable, insufficient consideration was given to the possibility of storing
goods in the open or under canvas and the search for alternative covered
accommodation continued.
Stores were, of course, in such short supply that
it was of the greatest importance to preserve them by keeping
under cover if at all possible.
The threat of air attack also demanded that
all dumps etc., in the open had to be dispersed and extensively camouflaged.
While it is true to say that slavish adherence to the mistaken principle that
depots cannot be sited elsewhere than in permanent accommodation, results
in quite a lot of wasted effort, it does seem that this criticism is overstated
as far as the B.E.F. was concerned.
Ordnance stores were, it is true, almost
always stored in buildings, but supplies, petrol, ammunition and R.E. stores
Movements and Transportation
Movement control in the theatre was controlled by Q (Movements) at
G.H.Q. and was organized as shown below:-
Kali-head
Kali-nese
uh-Are?
P MANS
Sub-Area
M.C.
LE HAVRE
Sub-Are?
LE HAVRE
FECAMP
ROUEN
M.C.
DIEPPE
BOULOGNE
Sub-Area
BOULOGNE
CALAIS
DUNKIRK
Suh-Area
NANTES
BREST
CAEN
ST. NAZAIRE ST. MALO CHERBOURG
B* 2
12090
