ahead with a view to offensive operations.
The Fortress
The first stage may be referred to as the "fortress" stage.
The B.E.F.
was on the Continent, fighting a desperate withdrawal battle.
The troops
available for home defence consisted of a few weak, ill-equipped divisions
and a large number of administrative, static and garrison or depot troops
scattered all over the country in locations chosen for administrative conveni-
ence rather than for operational necessity.
With the enemy firmly installed in Norway and rapidly approaching the
Channel Ports it was becoming unpleasantly plain that no part of the coast-
line of England could be considered secure against invasion, and that the
troops available would be quite insufficient to maintain a
continuous line
of defence.
It was therefore decided to withdraw the field army formations
to central positions in the country, in G.H.Q. reserve, to operate as a mobile
counter-attacking force.
The remainder of the available troops were to be
used in guarding ports, aerodromes, centres of communications and of
industry, and such other vulnerable points as were notified to G.H.Q. by
the Committee of Imperial Defence.
The end of May thus found the country a fortress-
-although a weakly
held one.
The Royal Navy guarded the sea frontiers which for 400 years had
been our guarantee against invasion.
The Royal Air Force, the eyes of the
country, kept a constant watch for any enemy activity that might result in an
attempt to invade, and was ready to direct its bombers and fighters to attack
the invading fleets from the time they set out from the Continental ports
until they flung themselves against our shores.
England was an armed camp.
to the Government earlier in the month
The all-embracing emergency powers voted
under
(Defence) Acts,
the Emergency Powers
1939 and 1940, secured that the whole resources of the
community would be rendered immediately available when required for any
purpose connected with the Defence of the Realm.
empowered to issue Defence
The Government was
Regulations by Order-in-Council without
previous reference to Parliament, covering any aspect of defence.
The regulations which were made are far too numerous to be detailed
herein and it is sufficient to state from the military viewpoint that despite
the very considerable trespass they allowed upon the traditional rights and
liberties of the civil population, any less extreme measures would not have
enabled commanders to take such local action as was necessary to ensure
that the greatest use was made of their available forces.
Large areas around
the coast were evacuated of all non-essential personnel, mine-fields were laid
in varying degrees of depth and discrimination.
The building of beach walls
and anti-invasion ditches, involving the use of thousands of tons of concrete
alone, were put in hand.
Pill-boxes and gun emplacements were installed
either by new construction or by the modification of existing buildings which
were arbitrarily requisitioned.
Pleasure piers and any other features which
234
WO277
1 0
might facilitate an enemy landing were destroyed, dismantled or put out of
effective action.
the main routes of entry into London.
Road blocks were erected in great number, especially on
The Local Defence Volunteers
The most important defence measure taken during this stage was, how-
ever, the formation of the Local Defence Volunteers or L.D.V. which later,
at Mr. Churchill's suggestion, was renamed the Home Guard.
For some
months past the Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces, had been considering
methods whereby the vast reservoir of manpower outside the armed forces,
both able and anxious to take some active part in the defence of the home
country, could be harnessed in some way to the Army. An increasingly large
number
of volunteers had been approaching the War Office and other
authorities, but there was no way of accepting their services except by enlist-
ment in home defence battalions, which entailed full-time service.
The opportunity to make use of these men had now arrived. Britain
was threatened, her Army was locked in a desperate struggle on the Continent,
her Navy and Air Force, willing though they were to meet the most violent
onslaught, were already stretched to the utmost to meet their world-wide
On 14th May, the Secretary of State for War broadcast an
appeal for men to come forward and join a Corps of Local Defence Volun-
The force was to be under the command of Commander-in-Chief,
Home Forces, and co-ordinated locally by G.O.Cs. Commands and Areas.
Its purpose was evident in its title.
The response was enormous, men arrived
at police stations to enrol even before Mr. Eden had completed his broadcast.
Within a week a quarter of a million men had answered the call.
Their
main duties may be summarized briefly as follows :—
Guarding of vulnerable points.
Provision of anti-parachutist observation posts.
Manning of road blocks.
Keeping a check on the activities of possible fifth columnists in their
The Re-equipment of the B.E.F.
This first stage in the defence of Britain was virtually ended when the
B.E.F. returned from France.
The arrival of these 300,000 men threw the
emphasis on the lack of equipment rather than of manpower.
The B.E.F.
arrived home completely unequipped and disorganized.
Before its formations
could play their full share in defence they had to be re-formed and re-
equipped.
England was, to all intents, what was later called an " administra-
tive desert "
The greater part of our war production was either destroyed
on the battlefields of Flanders and the beaches at Dunkirk or in enemy hands.
In spite of the difficulties the B.E.F.
was re-equipped mainly as the result
of super-human efforts on the part of the R.A.O.C.
G.H.Q. Home Forces
notified the priority for re-equipping amongst divisions, and the War Office
depots at Didcot, Branston, Weedon, etc., collected complete equipments and
delivered in bulk either to divisional ordnance dumps or 10 command ordnance
depots, whichever was more convenient.
235
1* 2
12090
