with the various directors.
The fallacy of this belief had already been proved
by the lamentably poor administrative arrangements made for the Norwegian
campaign.
The establishment of an operational headquarters in England,
the opening of the Middle East as a major operational theatre of war, and
the probability that the war would extend still further to other theatres,
showed the vital necessity for a staff-both policy-making and executive-
to assist the D.Q.M.G. in co-ordinating the work of the various Q.M.G.
directors in complete harmony with operational requirements.
This was the genesis of the Q(Ops.) staff.
In the first instance it was
modest
establishment of one A.Q.M.G.
D.A.Q.M.Gs., one responsible for contact and liaison with G.H.Q., Home
Forces, and the other to co-ordinate the requirements of operational areas
Later on, the branch divided into two, Q(Ops.) Home and Q(Ops.)
Overseas, and during 1943 and early 1944 underwent very
considerable
expansion mainly resulting from the demands of the " Overlord" planning.
The nomenclature of Q(Ops.) Home and Overseas was abolished in 1943
and gave way to the organization shown below: —
Brigadier Q(Ops.)
Colonel Q(Ops.)
Q(Ops.) 1
Q(Ops.) 2
Q(Ops.) 3
Operational maintenance
Administrative
Operational maintenance
in theatres not dealt win
planning for Operation
in IIK. and liaison with
by Q(Ops.) 2 and Q(Ops.) 3
" Overlord'
G.H.Q., Home Forces
During the height of planning for operation " Overlord" the Q(Ops.)
branches were given the status of a directorate under the Director of Adminis-
trative Planning and still further increased in size.
Q(Ops.) 1 was relieved
of all territorial duties except those concerning the newly-formed South-East
Asia Command while a new territorial branch known as Q(Ops.) 4 was
About the same time,
Q(Ops.) 5 was formed to deal with the Joint Administrative Planning Staff
of the War Cabinet and the Directors of Plans for forward operational
The newly-formed Director of Administrative Planning also held
the ex officio appointment of Deputy Director of Military Training (Adminis-
tration) and, in order to fulfil this function, a branch known as O(Ops.)
(Development and Training) was formed.
formed to deal with matters affecting more than one theatre and to act
as the secretariat of the Q.M.G.
This represented the zenith of the development of Q(Ops.).
About the
time of the launching of " Overlord the directorate was further increased
by temporary increments but, shortly after D-Day, it began to run
and Q(Ops.) branches underwent considerable contraction.
down
Q(0ps.) 3 was
absorbed into Q(Ops.) 2 while Q(Ops.) (Co-ord.) was incorporated into
the Colonel Q(Ops.).
0(0ps.) 5 under a Deputy Director of Administrative Planning, who replaced
The work of Q(Ops.) (Co-ord.) had fluctuated a
great deal but had not really provided whole-time work for a first grade
staff officer-moreover some of its work was closely linked with planning
problems. On the other hand, forward planning provided far more work
WOLTI
1
than Q(Ops.) 5 could cope with.
The combination of the two, although
producing a rather unorthodox organization, was, in fact, as economical a
one as could be devised for the work it did. (A further result was that it
kept the feet of the planners as near to the ground as possible, since the co-
ordinatory work that passed through the branch had the effect of keeping
them in touch with current matters.)
By the end of the war the Directorate of Administrative Planning was as
follows: —
D, of A.P. and D.D.M.T.(Adm.)
Brigadier Q(Ops.)
Q(Ops.) (Dev. and Trg.),
Administrative doctrine and develop-
ment. Maintenance and supply by air.
Beach group organization
and pro-
cedure.
A uministrauve
Training in
conjunction with the M.T. Directorate.
Compilation
of
administrative por-
Mons
vamoulel
and
manuals.
School of Military Administration.
D.D. of A.P.
Q(Cips.) 1
Operational mainten-
ance in the Far East.
Q(Ops.) 2
Operational mainten-
ance in Europe, U.K.
Africa (less
East),
Middle
Malta.
Gibraltar,
Atlanuc
Islands, W. Indies.
Q(Ops.) 4
Operational mainten-
ance in all theatres
not
WILD
Q(Ops.)
and
O(Ops.) 2.
Q(Ops.) 5 (J.P.)
Q(Ops.) 5' (Co-ord.)
Joint planning and co-ordina-
Co-ordination within Q(Ops.)
tion.
future
Administrative a vect
on all subjects affecting more
than one
branci.
Strategical and Future Plan-
loint.
nino ectious.
W.O. mem-
Section ta.
section
he Planing Soctiona for
bers of Joint Administrative
Princioal
Planning Section.
incers
Committee papers
(other than operational and
strategical planning).
The creation of Q(Ops.) and the appointment of the Director of Adminis-
trative Planning were fully justified and undoubtedly filled an omission. Army
administration improved in direct relation to the expansion of Q(Ops.) and
amply demonstrated that, in matters of administration, the War Office had
previously been a bottle-neck holding up business to a considerable extent.
Nearly all planning and inter-Service questions had a greater bearing on the
Army than on the other Services; this was inevitable, especially as the Army
was responsible for many of the maintenance requirements of the other two.
The Army had thus to take the lead but, until the creation of 0(Ops.), had
no agency through which it could properly do so.
Q(Ops.) could also per-
form, as the war progressed, and the occupied countries were one by one
liberated, an invaluable service in relating the increasing requirements of
civil affairs to the operational situation.
Q(Ops.) was one of the few staff branches in the War Office which were,
in the true sense, operational.
That is to say, it was a direct War Office
source from which the staffs of overseas commands could get immediate
For this reason, information was
action taken on operational requirements.
