WO277
February, and by Ist March the force had cleared the Mescelit Pass and were
halted some twenty miles
north of Keren, while regrouping and
preparing
THE CAPTURE OF KEREN
By Ist March the outline plan for the assault on Keren was complete.
In brief, 4 Indian Division was given certain specified objectives left of the
road, while 5 Indian Division attacked on the right.
consecutive so that each division could have maximum fire support.
date was fixed for 15th March and it was decided, in order to allow the
dumping programme to continue unhindered as long as possible and also
for security reasons, that 5 Indian Division should not come forward until
the last possible moment.
The artillery programme for 4 Indian Division
required the dumping in gun positions of 300 r.p.g. with a further 450 r.p.g.
That for 5 Indian Division was provisionally estimated at 500 r.p.g.
Administration remained on a divisional basis, 4 Indian Division's installa-
tions were north of the road, and those of 5 Indian Division south.
exception was in the medical arrangements, under which 5 Indian Division
was super-imposed on 4 Indian Division, the whole being co-ordinated by
the A.D.M.S. of the former.
The battle started with the Italians fighting back more determinedly than
at any other time in any other theatre of the war.
Initially, progress was
limited and at times non-existent, and administratively the battle of Keren
is chiefly remarkable on two counts; one, the distressingly high rate of
casualties (in all, there were 500 killed and 3,000 wounded) and secondly, one
of the early instances of supply by air took place.
Much use was made of the Italian narrow-gauge railway for evacuating
casualties, and two tunnels provided welcome cover as the route was under
shell, machine-gun and mortar fire most of the way. It was used only for
They were retained in pre-arranged
collecting places and normally evacuated by night on flats capable of holding
nine stretcher cases or thirty sitting cases.
The flats generally arrived during
the afternoon loaded with supplies and, on arrival at Hummet, were met
by collecting post personnel and taken to the advanced dressing station.
serious cases there was no alternative to evacuation by road either by night
The road trip was, however, exposed to shell and mortar fire. Either
method of evacuation meant initially a long stretcher carry.
clearing station was located at Agordat, from which casualties were trans-
ported by motor ambulance convoy to Kassala where they could be entrained
Troops advancing from Fort Dologorodoc had encountered very strong
opposition and became pinned down under heavy fire.
Communications
were broken and on 17th March both food and ammunition were dropped by
the R.A.F. using a Wellesley and a Vincent.
This was the first recorded
case of supply by air in the Middle East and, apart from the fact that the
supplies were scattered over a large area, being dropped in four separate
loads, the effort was a success.
800 men were dropped.
In all 400 boxes of S.A.A. and rations for
Throughout the battle the mules were invaluable and were constantly
used for supply of forward troops. A camel train was also formed by 5 Indian
Division and allotted to brigades.
Hard rations were used initially, and it
was not until 20th March that the field service scale was re-introduced. Water
was a constant problem and, after early difficulties over the supply of con-
tainers, was sent by mule with the rations.
During the initial period when
4 Indian Division was attacking alone, 5 Indian Division was called upon
to provide as many as 300 men as carrying parties to man-handle supplies
at the point beyond which the mules were unable to go.
The morning of 27th March saw a rash of white flags appearing one
after the other on the various peaks and hill-tops of Keren. The battle had
lasted from 15th to 27th March and had, as already stated, cost us 500 killed
and 3,000 wounded, of which fortunately there was a high proportion of slight
casualties. These figures were regrettably high, though when viewed in their
proper perspective against the true significance of the victory at Keren, they
are of much less consequence.
Nearly 3,000 tons of ammunition-all of which was brought some 150 miles
over second rate roads-were fired, and caused the enemy considerable
casualties, although he managed to extract the greater part of his artillery
and a fair number of infantry units from Keren.
While 5 Indian Division followed up the retreating enemy 4 Indian
Division, less one brigade which was to operate along the coast to Massawa,
concentrated on clearance of the battlefield. It was then to move back to the
desert and take no further part in the campaign.
THE CAPTURE OF MASSAWA
5 Indian Division, advancing on Asmara, were now encountering road-
It must be borne in mind that Asmara is the
centre of a plateau about 7,000 ft. high.
to Ad Teclesan, in all about 2,000 feet. Parts of the road ran almost parallel
to the enemy positions crowning the heights and there was virtually no flat
ground in the area.
Thus, there could be no deployment of vehicles or
guns off the road, yet the road-blocks encountered had to be outflanked.
This all took time, and once the troops were deployed off the road their
maintenance became difficult. The mules used at Keren had not caught up.
The delay was, however, short and in the early hours of Ist April
emissaries arrived saying that they had been ordered to cease resistance and
Our leading troops
to ask that Asmara be treated
accordingly entered it the same day.
Now that Asmara was in our hands, the capture of Massawa intact became
the main object. Action to this end was three-fold.
brigade was ordered on Massawa from Chelamet. Secondly, a further Indian
infantry brigade was sent down the main Asmara-Massawa Road, to co-
operate and, finally, it was made quite clear to the civil authorities of Asmara
that the future welfare of the civil population depended in no small measure
on the degree of co-operation afforded by them in preventing sabotage and
destruction of communications, shipping, railways, etc.
The civil authorities
