troops already landed, and with the assistance of further reinforcements
which arrived during July, it was possible to build up an adequate base at
Reykjavik, and to establish advanced
R.A.S.C. and R.A.O.C. depots at
Akureyri and Seydisfjordur.
The Canadian troops were being gradually
replaced by British which saved the "@" staff no little complication since
the Canadian scales of accommodation stores etc., were considerably higher
than the British.
It was feared that to have the two scales in use con-
currently, might have led to some discontent among the British, as was
frequently the case later in the war when British and Commonwealth troops
were fighting side by side.
The authorized supply reserves for "Alabaster" were initially ninety
days, plus thirty days transit margin but, in view of the difficulty of procur-
ing and ensuring regular shipping, it was decided to increase the transit
margin to sixty days making a total of five months.
The question of reserves
in Iceland became the subject of much discussion between the War Office
and force H.Q., which represented that in view of the paucity of local sea
transport, the danger of strong gales, the possibility of ice formation isolating
the northern and eastern sectors for long periods, the lack of internal road
communication and the threat of enemy action, it was essential that the
reserve be increased to six months at least. The War Office considered these
claims and finally gave approval for the authorized reserves to be increased
by thirty days which, with a transit margin of sixty days, made a total of
Movement to and from the United Kingdom was not difficult and ran
smoothly, but coastwise traffic round the island met with
since terrific gales sometimes made shipping quite impossible.
craft used for the carriage of stores were often delayed by storms, sometimes
as many as ten being held up for a week or more.
Should they run into a
gale there were few ports in which they could harbour, and they just had to
shelter as best they could in some small fjord until the storm subsided.
Road movement around the island was not of sufficient volume to give
rise to serious difficulty to the movement staff.
As we have seen, the rail-
way problem did not exist but this did not stop several enthusiastic movement
control personnel from disembarking carrying R.T.O. armbands, armed with
green and red flags and equipped with over a million railway warrant forms
which had been issued by a thoughtful War Office.
Maintenance of the outlying garrisons was by re-shipment from Reykjavik,
except for petrol and coal; for supplying these, the vessels arriving from the
United Kingdom did a "milk-round", discharging parts of their cargo at
Reykjavik, Akureyri and Seydisfjordur.
This worked smoothly except for
periodic interruption by bad weather, and a certain amount of loss and
damage by pilferage and double handling.
Approval being given to the holding of increased reserves by the force
enabled stocks to be well dispersed and thus, although by the end of 1940
the feeding strength had risen to a peak of 23,000 all ranks, maintenance
was always on a sound footing.
Welfare became the prime consideration
and every effort was employed to prevent the troops from falling victims of
the greatest
danger to an occupational out-post-boredom. Although not
WO217
1
relevant to this volume, it is of interest to note that the practice of broad-
casting to the troops was born in Iceland.
Icelandic Radio's " air"
The force bought an hour of
and built up a good programme of "live" and
The composite force was now re-named Iceland (c) Force* and the
divisional sign of a Polar Bear was adopted which, while it was symbolically
appropriate perhaps, gave rise to a certain amount of amusement to the
local population. The polar bear is not indigenous to Iceland.
Shortly after the entry of the U.S.A. into the War, discussions took
place between the British and U.S. authorities and it was decided that the
Americans should be mainly responsible for the occupation of Iceland, but
that a number of R.N. and R.A.F. personnel would remain together with a
small number of troops. The relief was to be known as operation " Galloper".
The question of maintaining the future garrison was discussed for some
time and it was finally decided, early in 1942, that the U.S. Army would
assume responsibility for the provision of supplies for the British personnel
remaining, who would continue on the British ration scale except that U.S.
rations would be substituted where necessary.
agreed that three months reserve British rations should be left, and that
one D.I.D. would remain to maintain the R.N. and R.A.F.
Operation "Galloper" began in April, 1942, when command of Iceland
(c) Force was handed over
to the Commanding General, Icelandic Base
Section U.S.A. ; by the end of the same year the relief of the British troops
had been completed.
Iceland was, to all intents and purposes, a peace-time station. The force
which originally landed there, although it did so primarily from protective
and preventative considerations was, at the same time, equipped for offensive
There can therefore be few lessons of value to be
gleaned from the occupation except those of local significance, but a study
of the force in the initial stages emphasized the fact that some of administra-
tive shortcomings experienced during the
Had the Icelandic forces of occupation been drawn
into battle, the improved administrative assistance allotted from the outset
would materially have facilitated the course of operations.
* Note-The " (c)" was inserted after "Iceland" to avoid risk of confusion with signed
communications referring to " Ireland".
D 2
12090
