It must, however, be noted that administrative as distinct from operational
control remained with India throughout the campaign despite the various
changes of command.
In fact, owing to the
inadequacy of signal com-
munications,
the lack of road and rail communications, and operations
elsewhere, such operational directives as were received were usually out of
date by the time they arrived.
Apart from a few personal visits by General
Wavell, such assistance as could be given from outside came almost entirely
from India, which would appear to prove the mistakes of transferring control
elsewhere.
It is of interest to note that although the operational control of Burma
was thus three times transferred from one command to another during the
earlier part of the campaign, General Wavell remained throughout personally
responsible in the capacity either of C.-in-C., India, or C.-in-C., South-West
Pacific, except for a period of about one week.)
It has to be remembered that everything was staked on the retention of
Singapore
and Malaya; in fact the only reason for putting
Burma under
the Far East Command was because it was the air route for reinforcing
aircraft.
This accounts, of course, for the shortage of troops, equipment and
stores in Burma.
It was anticipated before the war that a land attack would
be
most likely to
come through the Shan States rather than through
Tenasserim or Rangoon.
In this event a base at Rangoon, supplied by
sea, with advance bases at Mandalay and Taunggyi, would have been well
situated.
As things turned out Rangoon's sea communications were threatened
by the loss of Singapore.
The land attack came from a quarter which
made Rangoon's position very exposed, and its rail and road communications
with upper Burma ran towards rather than away from the enemy.
This changed situation was appreciated at a very early stage and the
truly stupendous task of moving the base to upper Burma was undertaken
with, in the circumstances, remarkable success.
Considering the shortage
of staff, administrative units and transport, panic among the transportation
staff and labour, and the demands of operations, including the re-equipment
of many units, the administrative staff deserve very great credit for what
they achieved.
Not only were stores and supplies sufficient to maintain the
force until the withdrawal, but it was calculated that, in spite of considerable
losses at Prome, they might well have sufficed to maintain it until the end
of the monsoon when road communications with India might have
established.
It was, of course, the failure to hold the Japanese advance
rather than any administrative breakdown that led to the loss of Burma.
Both the Commanders concerned have paid their tributes to this achieve-
ment by the administrative staff.
It may be noted, however, that it was
only possible because the loss of Rangoon was visualized at a very early
stage and steps were ordered to be taken to prepare for the eventuality.
though they were at the time.
306
WORT
1
Communications
The main line ran from Rangoon northwards to Mandalay where it
again fanned out in three directions,
Lashio the terminal of the " Burma"
westwards to Ye-u,
extreme north.
Road", and to Myitkyina in
eastwards to
Other lines operated by the Burma Railways originated from
Rangoon from where they fanned out to the terminus at Prome, 150 miles
N.N.W. of Rangoon, to the
east through Pegu
Sittang river bridge, thence through
and thence across the
estuary at Martaban by ferry to Moulmein.
Bilin to Ye, crossing the Salween
It was estimated that the line from Rangoon to Lashio could carry
15,000 tons a month over and above the normal maintenance of the military
and civil needs of the country, although the section from Rangoon to
Mandalay could carry a great deal more.
The restricted tonnage on the
remainder of the line was due to lack of suitable locomotives for the hill
sections north and east of Mandalay.
Before the outbreak of war no military transportation staff existed in
the theatre, and although the transportation directorate in India continually
urged the necessity of speed in organizing the Burma Railways for war, the
fact that the theatre was under War Office control precluded any executive
action being taken by India.
Finally, after urgent representation by General
Hutton, a transportation directorate was formed in Burma towards the end
of January, 1942, some seven weeks after war broke out, and although
strenuous efforts were then made to co-ordinate the various transportation
agencies on a firm war footing,
the immediate situation was such that
little could be done except improvisation to meet the needs of the moment.
Inevitably much loss of effort and strained relations between the military
authorities and civilian interest resulted.
In the event, the railways remained a civil organization with the exception
that shortly before the fall of Rangoon the railways in southern Burma were
but the speed of the Japanese advance was such that this
change had little effect except to result in a marked improvement in the
morale of the railway personnel.
Owing to the
passage of the great rivers, Irrawaddy, Salween and
Chindwin, through Burma, water transport was a major method of move-
ment of bulk stores to the north.
The outbreak of war found river transport
facilities already stretched to the utmost owing to the heavy load which
had been imposed since the opening of the "Burma Road" for aid to
China.
Craft consisted of the large fleet of river steamers owned by the Irrawaddy
Flotilla Company, a considerable fleet of small government vessels, a few
specialized craft owned by the oil companies, and a large number of native-
owned power craft ranging from small motor-boats to a few barges of a
capacity of up to 150 tons.
The disposition of this craft was mainly
in lower Burma with the heaviest concentrations at Rangoon and in the
delta area.
Up country on the Irrawaddy were paddle-steamers plying to
and from Rangoon, while the rawin had a small fleet of stern wheel
steamers.
Government craft were spread thinly over all waterways, and at
Moulmein on the mout of we siveen were a few launches and creck
307
