which were invariably stowed in the bottom of ships' holds.
After strong
representations
were made to London, action was taken for later shipments
to ensure that these rations were loaded in more accessible positions.
A provisional ration scale specially designed for consumption in Arctic
climates was brought into use, but it was thought that the scale used in
France by the B.E.F. would be more suitable for the warmer weather and,
had the campaign extended into the summer, it is likely that this would
All coal and coke had to be forwarded in sacks on account of transport
An approach was made by the local inhabitants for permission
to purchase coal from army stocks, and a ruling was obtained from the War
Office that provided that stocks were adequate there was no objection to this
until such time as normal conditions were restored.
arrangement was subsequently effected regarding supplies of yeast for the
civilian population. A small petrol depot landed with the force, and on 26th
April some 14,000 gallons were landed. Previously all petrol and lubricants
had been purchased locally.
There was little opportunity of obtaining any indigenous supplies by local
purchase except fresh
and the amount of this available soon became
severely curtailed as a result of the requisition of the " puffers."
contribution to the ration was, however, made by the small field bakery which
started baking fresh bread at an early stage, after the personnel had cleared
over 24 feet of
By the end of the month it was
issuing an average of 8,000 lb. daily, half by civilian and half by military
production, and this output was doubled within a further month.
Apart from the very few unit vehicles which accompanied the force and
availability of locally hired transport, the sole source of road
vehicles was one section of a reserve M.T. company, R.A.S.C.
civilian transport continued to show disappointing results and on one occa-
sion, when transport was urgently required for a tactical move in the early
stages of the operation, orders had to be issued for the commandeering of
all vehicles on the streets.
This obviously caused a certain amount of dis-
content amongst the inhabitants and was not repeated.
The intelligence
reports had indicated that a considerable number of ponies would be avail-
around Harstad, but there were hardly any to be found as the
Norwegians had long since commandered or removed most of them.
of sledges was also considered but it is not known to what effect.
Difficulty was experienced in operating such civilian vehicles as could be
found, because in the main they belonged to men who had been called up to
the Norwegian Army and were driven by anybody left in the town who pro-
fessed to be able to drive. No British military personnel were utilized for
some time owing to their unfamiliarity with the vehicles and the extreme
weather conditions.
The complete lack of any intelligent foresight in detailed planning is illus-
trated by the fact that none of the cars and light lorries accompanying the
first flights was equipped with wheel chains, notwithstanding the normal:
N
WO217
climatic conditions of the theatre. The deficiency was in time remedied by
recourse to local purchase, but not before considerable delays had been
caused by the two-wheel drive vehicles being more or less immobilized.
The first despatches of mail left on 2lst April but the first mails from the
United Kingdom did not arrive until 6th May.
This was one of the results
of the quite nonsensical excess of security which surrounded all the arrange:
ments.
It was quite inexcusable that three weeks elapsed before any mail was
received by the troops, despite the fact that ships from the United Kingdom
were arriving almost daily.
Progress of the Operations
H.M. Government decided on 20th April that there should be one com-
mander of all operations naval and military-in the Narvik area, and on
that date Admiral of the Fleet the Earl of Cork and Orrery (previously Flag
Officer Narvik) assumed command of all forces in the area. General Mackesey
retained command of the military forces and incidentally continued to deal
direct with the War Office on matters concerning administration.
It was
hoped that by this move General Mackesey, relieved from major responsi-
bility, would feel free to adopt bolder tactics and agree to an assault on
Narvik.
Mr. Churchill records that the result was contrary to this expectation
and that the G.O.C. steadfastly persisted in his refusal to run what was
admittedly a desperate risk.
Until 24th April, the force was therefore concerned solely with consolida-
tion of the Harstad base
and with making contact with the Norwegian
Plans for prosecuting the land operations
nevertheless, constantly under consideration. On 24th April a naval bombard-
ment of Narvik was carried out with the object of making the enemy
surrender, thus enabling the town to be occupied.
not, however, achieve the desired result.
Arrival of Reinforcements
On 28th April a contingent of Chasseurs Alpins arrived in the theatre.
These first-class troops trained as they were to snow conditions found
themselves very seriously handicapped to the point of immobilization by
the soft deep snow.
Their small proportion of ski troops in each battalion
and a lack of snow shoes for the remainder proved serious handicaps.
The French troops were alleged to be in possession of 60 days supplies.
They also brought some administrative personnel with them.
of a common-user nature were to be
provided from British sources on a
repayment basis.
An unusual twist to the common experience of "Q" was
that the French possessed a liberal scale of transport but insufficient drivers.
In general it was intended that the French would operate their own
supply depots, drawing their rations from the main British depot to which
special items of the French ration had been despatched.
was not possible to follow any pre-conceived plan since the French failed
to arrive with their 60 days reserves.
The fact that the force was now settling down and stores were arriving
in greater quantities, and also she arrival of the Chasseurs Alpins followed
73
