or the Caucasus.
At the same time it was laid down that the maintenance
system must be so developed as, not only to meet local needs, but to ensure
the maximum possible delivery of supplies to Russia.
The story of the
"Aid to Russia" L. of C. which was then developed through Iran and Iraq
to Russia is more fully told in Chapter IX (Volume II).
The British Occupation of Syria
Yet another of the many diversions of military effort from the Middle
East in general and from Palestine in particular in the first six months of
1941 was provided by the short campaign in Syria, which was made necessary
by the German infiltration into the country assisted by the Vichy Government.
Starting on 8th June and ending on 14th July, it entailed considerable
operational effort, although from the administrative point of view it presented
no real problems except that of the necessity of finding transport for yet
another force.
The only mobile formation available in Palestine had already
been sent
to Iraq after which the remainder of the troops in Palestine
became virtually immobile.
Resources of civil transport had been greatly
reduced by the necessity of hiring on a large scale for the Iraq force.
The general plan for the entry into Syria was an advance on a broad
front.
An Indian infantry brigade had arrived from the Sudan and was to
occupy the general line of the Yarmuk railway, while 7 Australian Division
(less the brigade now contained in Tobruk) was to advance in two columns,
one via Merj Iyun, and the other along the coast road.
Free French troops
would meanwhile pass through the Indian infantry brigade to Damascus.
This force, though admittedly too small, was, at first, all that could be
spared, but about a week later, by dint of using transport direct off ships,
further reinforcements of just over brigade strength were despatched.
Later
the force located in Iraq assisted, and an armistice was asked for on 11th
The force was maintained by road from rail-head at Haifa on the
F.S.D. system (by now becoming normal practice in the Middle East) but,
except for difficulties usually encountered in the distribution of supplies in
mountainous country, there was little of administrative note and it is not
It is mentioned merely because, like
those in Iraq and Iran, it called for a diversion of Middle East effort from
what was the main theatre-the Desert-to which we must now return.
Re-organization in the Desert
After the loss of most of the armour of 2 Armoured Division, the re-
equipment of 7 Armoured Division became of major importance.
Some
tanks were now coming out of workshops in the Delta,
but the A.F.Vs.
arriving
from
the
United
Kingdom
constituted
the
chief
source.
Unfortunately the
modifications
required
by
these
tanks on arrival
in the theatre proved far more difficult
put in hand than
had
been expected, and though, as already stated, the most careful preparations
had been made well ahead to ensure that only the minimum delay should
arise, it was found impossible to complete the task by
the end of May.
Difficulties arose such as the cranes in
"I" tanks from the hold of one ship, with the result that the ship had to
Alexandria being unable to
sail to Port Said where cranes of suitable capacity were available.
198
1 p
majority of tanks required considerable overhaul in addition to the amount
of work normally entailed in applying desert camouflage and equipment and
fitting special filters. Other factors such as the necessity for training the
personnel of 7 Armoured Division with tanks which, in some cases, were
new to them, also arose and, finally, the earliest date possible to resume the
offensive was found to be 15th June.
The administrative position in the Desert was by this time based on the
supply of the forward troops by means of F.S.Ds. within second line reach.
At " boxes" in fortresses such as Matruh, heavy reserves were held against
possible encirclement though, otherwise, the tendency was to limit forward
holdings.
Matruh, for example, as a fortress held 75 days' supplies for the
garrison, with Bagush holding 60 days. Commodity rail-heads were in use,
One of the chief difficulties over administration for the forthcoming attack
was in finding adequate transport. The second line resources of formations
taking part had to be brought up to scale and this could only be done by the
allotment of third line transport.
Sufficient third line transport had neverthe-
less to be retained to allow for the maintenance of existing F.S.Ds. and
for the establishment of new depots if necessary.
It was the intention to
establish additional F.S.Ds. once the advance progressed, one in the Halfaya
area and two more over the frontier. For this purpose convoys were specially
pre-loaded before the operation, first to establish the F.S.D. at Halfaya and
then to load again for stocking subsequent F.S.Ds.
It was intended to bring on a
tank battle and, after the enemy forces on the frontier had been defeated,
it was hoped that the advance might then be continued to the Tobruk and
El Adem area where the Tobruk garrison would make a sortie in force.
Initially the attack went satisfactorily, but later the position deteriorated and
finally our forces withdrew, having lost some 25 cruisers and 70 "I" tanks.
This was a great blow. Although the cruisers had mostly been knocked
out by enemy action, a large proportion of the "I" tank casualties were
due to trivial mechanical breakdowns which had entailed the abandonment
of the tank owing to lack of sufficient time in which to carry out repairs,
and owing to lack of transporters with which they might have been recovered.
Indeed at this time, the shortage of transporters and of any adequate recovery
system for tanks was the more manifest in contrast with the far more efficient
German methods, and it became of paramount importance to remain in
possession of the battlefield in order to recover broken-down but repairable
tanks.
None the less, the enemy had by no means escaped injury.
Nearly 50
of his tanks were estimated to have been knocked out together with a great
deal of transport.
Although, no doubt, a number of these were recovered
and repaired, he seemed to have taken sufficient punishment to make him
remain on the defensive on the frontier, thus enabling 7 Armoured Division
to be withdrawn to Matruh to refit.
Not only was it an occasion for 7 Armoured Division to refit but for
the whole Desert Army to re-organize.
The relief of General Wavell by
General Auchinleck came on 5th July, 1941, at the end of a period when
the various campaigns described in this chapter had followed each other
199
