groups which functioned directly between Headquarters
A.A.
Command
and A.A. brigades.
Map 23 illustrates how these A.A. formations were
superimposed over the home commands.
It is essential when studying A.A. Command to take note of two important
variations from the normal chain of administrative control.
Firstly, neither H.Q., A.A. Command nor A.A. corps exercised executive
administrative responsibility in respect of the maintenance of their subordinate
formations in the same way as Army or corps H.Q. would do in the field.
With the exception of certain units of a specialist nature concerned with the
supply and maintenance of technical equipment, command and corps troops
did not exist.
The "Q" staffs and services at these headquarters had little
more than advisory and liaison functions with regard to maintenance.
Secondly, it must be clearly understood that A.A. divisions were in no
way comparable to divisions of the field army.
They were of no fixed size
or composition,
and were sometimes up to four times as large as field
army divisions, and covering many thousand square miles of country.
were not mobile and were perhaps more properly analogous to areas from
an administrative point of view.
Home commands were responsible for the day-to-day maintenance of
A.D.G.B. units within the policy laid down by A.A. Command Headquarters.
During 1939 and 1940 the results, as can be imagined, were not entirely
successful, especially in the London
District where an A.A. unit might
have the experience of receiving identical (or conflicting) instructions from
Eastern Command (through London District) and from A.A.
Command
(through 1 A.A. Division).
There were three major repercussions arising from this unsatisfactory
state of affairs.
Firstly, no clear-cut directive had been laid down as to a
proper division of responsibilities between A.A. Command and the home
This had the inescapable effect of A.A.
advantage of the general confusion and playing one side against the other so
that duplicate issues of attractive items could often be obtained, or of
earnestly endeavouring to sort out the tangle, thus collecting bulky files
but no material reward.
Secondly, and very naturally, the G.O.C.-in-C. A.A. Command could not
obtain full efficiency in a situation whereby he had not full control of the
troops under his command.
Lastly, an adequate standard of staff duties
could neither be introduced nor maintained in the command, composed, as
it was, almost entirely of officers and men of the Territorial Army.
Although
their spirit was never in doubt they had had insufficient administrative and
staff training to be pitchforked into such a confused situation without relative
loss of efficiency.
It is obvious that auxiliary forces will, in the future, be largely respon-
sible for the defence of this country against air attack, and it is important
that a nucleus of selected officers and
men from these forces should be
earmarked in peace-time and given adequate administrative training so that
when an emergency occurs they are fitted to take up "A" or
appointments without delay.
"O" stafi
It is a mistake to rely upon seconded regular
personnel in this respect, because often such officers may not bแบน of the
best material or, on the other hand, it they possess the qualifications that
WO27
1 8
make good staff officers they are quickly transferred to fill the many appoint-
which appear on the outbreak of a major war as a result of the
inevitable expansion of the Army.
As time went on these difficulties, especially those due to inexperience,
receded into the background, and in the early part of 1941 liaison between
A.A. Command and the home commands improved.
None the less it
became very clear that the time was overdue for the appointment of an A.A.
Reorganization
Committee to investigate and to make recommendations
regarding the reorganization of A.A. Command including its relations with
non-anti-aircraft formations.
Like the Gale Committee, this committee was able to make recommenda-
tions covering a wide field and most of them were accepted by the Army
These recommendations formed a basis for the relations existing
between A.A. Command and army commands for the duration of the war
and were published in July, 1941, through an Army Council Instruction.
Their main repercussions on routine
are briefly described
The home commands remained responsible for all executive action in
respect of the allotment of accommodation and the settlement of bills relating
A.A. Command, however, was responsible for the general policy
for accommodation of A.A. units and for formulating demands on home
In this connection the latter retained all control of barrack and
fire services except from the disciplinary aspect.
Accommodation problems
were responsible for the major problems of the A.A. Command "Q" staff,
particularly after the introduction of A.T.S. at gun sites.
Supply policy, naturally, rested with " Q" at A.A. Command, who were
responsible for arranging collection from command supply depots and for
distribution to units, and also for the custody of reserve rations which were
held in command depots as AA the custody of reserv
The sole responsi-
bility of the home commands was therefore confined to the provision and
storage of rations to meet A.A. Command requirements.
Collection was made by the supply sections of the A.A. divisional com-
R.A.S.C.,
very difficult to combine economy in
which were certainly overworked.
It was obviously
delivery of rations to a la economy in transport with s and detachments.
transport with a reasonably early
After delivery by R.A.S.C. to number of literas normally necessary for
the rations to be further broke batery and delivered no troops and detach-
ments at their sites under unit arrangements.
batteries and troops etc., were often very considerable,
The road distances between
more particularly
and it was not without considerable effort
was maintained.
both on the part of the RAs. a it was than a regular daily delivery
in the case of searchlight units,
This was partly due to the fact that the A.A. divisional
A.A. units.
companies were not increased proportionately to the ranid formation of new
More work had rocordinale, to be done with the existing
12090
267
K* 2
