One other new unit which had been specially created in the light of
experience in the desert and was now provided for the first time for these
operations was the H.Q., L. of C. transport column, R.A.S.C.
having the more mobile role, was allotted four of these units, which were
intended to control the increasingly large number of general transport com-
panies that were being employed
13 Corps, operating on a much shorter
.. of C., was given only one column H.Q
Operations: November-December, 1941
Soon after dawn on 18th November, 30 Corps crossed the frontier wire
near Maddalena
and by evening had reached its tactical positions.
The
corps had with it six days' rations, six days' P.O.L. at 50 miles a vehicle
a day and five days' water at & gallon each man/ vehicle.
The first administrative task of 13 Corps was to establish F.M.C. No. 50,
which opened for issues on 19th November on the east side of the frontier
wire just south of Sheferzen.
Almost immediately heavy demands of petrol
were made by the New Zealand Division which had done considerable night
running and this, coupled with the arrival of a petrol convoy from
Forward
Base with uncased tins resulting in enormous leakage, quickly
reduced petrol stocks.
30 Corps, after crossing the wire, had duly established F.M.C. No. 62
some twenty kilos south of Gabr Saleh.
F.M.C. No. 63 was also established
some ten kilos south of F.M.C. No. 62.
No. 2 Forward Base was working well under operational conditions and
the desert rail-head which opened on 18th November was working satis-
factorily although it was clear that the heavy rains in the central sector and
which had washed out the railway in some places and
bogged transport, would have an effect on its working. On 19th November
this foreboding was justified, no trains arrived at desert rail-head from
Hohalfa, although trains already on the desert stretch between arrived and
No trains arrived on 20th November and the water supply
at rail-head reached a low level owing to the non-arrival of rail-borne water.
An emergency demand for 37 mm. ammunition for the American "Honey
light tanks was made and met by air.
This type of ammunition was con-
sistently short during the operations; it seems that stocks were occasionally
flown in direct from U.S.A.
Trains began arriving again at rail-head on
21st November, but the railway did not properly get into its stride until the
following day when 1,600 tons were unloaded.
Although the Germans had been taken by
surprise and all went well
for the first three days, they quickly recovered and seized the intiative,
Our tanks and anti-tank guns were no match for the enemy's and, although
it had fought with the utmost gallantry,
30 Corps was compelled to retire
on 22nd November, having lost two-thirds of its tanks and leaving
garrison of Tobruk-which had duly made its sortie with a huge salient
On 24th November,
the enemy made a powerful counter-stroke
to the frontier.
his tank losses had been grossly exaggerated.
By this time it was abundantly clear that first reports of
Not only had he at least as
many tanks as we had, but they were better and he
was in a position to
recover more of them from the battlefield, which was in his hands.
WORT
1
The enemy tanks crossed the frontier line at several points, overrunning
amongst other things F.M.C. No. 50 of 13 Corps and completely disrupting
communications.
Considerable anxiety arose as the enemy tanks proceeded
eastwards, and the defence of the rail-head areas had to be rapidly organized.
The breakdown in communications led to some confusion since the extent
of the German penetration was unknown.
But the enemy had failed to use
or destroy the stocks in F.M.C. No. 50, much of the fuel being buried and
otherwise concealed, and the scattered transport and administrative units
soon reassembled and the F.M.C. was reorganized. Many who were captured
either escaped or were set free by the Germans who found P.W. an encum-
brance. By 27th November, however, the capture of Sidi Rezegh by the New
Zealand Division and the establishment of contact between Eighth Army and
Tobruk Garrison led to the German armour breaking off from the frontier
area.
As soon as a corridor to Tobruk was open 13 Corps Main Headquarters
and the administrative echelon of New Zealand Division moved into the
fortress.
By now, owing both to hard fighting and the inevitable disorganiza-
tion of maintenance, this division had run very short of supplies and ammuni-
tion.
In fact it had been necessary for 13 Corps to send a maintenance convoy
for the New Zealand Division to 30 Corps' F.M.C. No. 62 where a tank
escort could meet it and protect it.
13 Corps Rear Headquarters was, however, instructed to remain on the
frontier and temporarily to become H.Q., L. of C. Frontier Area (later H.Q.
Frontier Road-head). In effect it became responsible for third line maintenance
of 4 Indian Division (less one brigade) a brigade of New Zealand Division and
a miscellaneous collection of troops on the L. of C. (Later 2 (S.A.) Division
relieved 4 Indian Division).
Troops were maintained either from F.M.C.
50 or from rail-head as convenient.
After about a week the F.M.C.
was handed over to 2 (S.A.) Division, and Rear H.Q. moved forward to
join Main H.Q. in Tobruk, closing down as H.Q. Frontier Road-head.
The battle of Sidi Rezegh now entered into a second phase during which
the enemy recaptured the position and, as a result, Tobruk was once more
isolated with a greater commitment than before and with smaller resources.
The length of front to be defended had nearly doubled
and the number
of tanks available was reduced to 20. The fighting around Sidi Rezegh had
been of the utmost severity and, indeed, the casualties in both men and
tanks had, since the start of the offensive, been severe.
Considerable regrouping now took place. 13 Corps was to advance west-
wards while 30 Corps captured the track junction El Gubi and closed on El
Adem from the south, the role of 30 Corps still being to neutralize and
destroy the enemy's armoured forces.
However, by the time 13 Corps began
its advance the enemy had begun to withdraw, leaving forces at Bardia and
on the frontier by Sollum.
The enemy, who consistently maintained smaller
forward reserves than we did, was no doubt considerably embarrassed by
the destruction of one of his dumps containing 50,000 gallons of petrol and
10,000 gallons of diesel fuel, but he continued his withdrawal in good order
to Gazala.
Pursuit was closely pressed by motorized columns, the R.A.F. maintained
continuous attacks on his vehicles, and on 10th December, the Polish Brigade
broke out of the western perimeter of Tobruk and the eight month siege
of Tobruk was ended.
217
