original plan,
but, by March, arrangements had been
made to duplicate
the existing organization by the despatch of an additional three units.
however,
were still in England when active operations began, and
were eventually diverted to other theatres.
In November, 1939, arrangements were made between the War Office
and the India Office for the provision of four animal transport companies,
with wheeled animal transport, for the purpose of getting ammunition, rations,
etc., over badly shelled ground to forward positions; or for use on roads
which for any reason might have been difficult for M.T. vehicles to negotiate.
In the second week of January " Special Force K6" arrived in the theatre,
composed of the four companies complete with their ancillary units, a total
of nearly 2,000 mules and 500 carts with 1,700 R.I.A.S.C. personnel.
companies, one of which was provided by Cyprus, were later added to the
"K6" Force for which six sections of R.A.S.C. vehicles each consisting of
seven lorries were provided by the War Office to serve as second and third
The C.-in-C., in his despatches, specifically mentioned the
high standard of the animal transport companies.
usefulness on many varied occasions, especially in the Saar position where
they carried up supplies through thickly wooded areas almost to the front
On the other hand they were somewhat of an embarrassment in other
Under frosty conditions they were unable to move about on the
paved French roads and they required a disproportionate amount of M.T.
to fetch their forage from rail-head.
Supplies
Turning to the supply services of the R.A.S.C., the following units were
included in the first contingent: —
Two Base Supply Depots.
Two Field Butchery and Cold Storage Depots.
Two Field Bakeries.
One Supply Personnel Company.
The supply personnel company has already been mentioned as the source
of the various detail issue depots set up in the ports and on the L. of C.;
the remaining units were for allotment one each to the northern and southern
bases, where temporary premises were at once opened until permanent depots
could be established.
In the northern base a temporary depot (for about 7,000 tons) was opened
at St. Tregonnec, moving later, as will be seen from Map 2, to an area near
L'Hermitage, where a 20,000 ton depot had been constructed.
Similarly,
in the southern base an old factory at Redon with a capacity of approximately
5,000 tons and served by canal from
Nantes was utilized pending
the
construction of a 20,000 ton depot at St. Gildas.
Upon the opening of the
advanced base, warehouses in the dock area of Le Havre were used as a
depot for about 35.000
tons, pending the completion
of a
permanent depot of the same capacity at Abancourt, scheduled for June
but never opened.
The necessity for forward reserves had been foreseen in the maintenance
project, and supply personnel were earmarked for the siting of a field supply
depot.
This was eventually opened at Doullens and held, originally, a
reserve of seven days for the force of four divisions.
38
WO27
The "Field Service" ration scale taken into use had been approved in
1937 and included a tinned equivalent to the fresh items, a need brought
to light during the closing stages of the First World War.
Troops were
placed on this ration immediately after the four-day voyage rations, and
the scale was favourably commented upon by everyone.
(In this connection
it is of interest to note that one general officer considered that the scale
was too generous and could well be reduced.
progressed the scale
In point of fact, as the War
was modified from time to time with little ill-effect,
but this development could mostly be attributed to the general shortage of
foodstuffs, and to changes in the composition of the ration, rather than to
the ration being considered excessive.)
The field butcheries and cold storage depots were located at St. Nazaire
and Le Havre and were later increased by two further units; one opened
at Boulogne and the other was earmarked for Dunkirk where the question
of using existing storage and the building of cold stores was under con-
We also had a small share in a cold storage depot at Metz
Certain reserves of frozen meat held on military account
in the United Kingdom and amounting to 1,600 tons had been shipped to
France by 16th October, and a further 700 tons was despatched during the
This total of 2,300 tons represented about 40 days' consumption
for the whole force, and subsequently shipments were made in accordance
with demands submitted by G.H.Q. provided that adequate cold storage
space was available.
A total of over 25,000 tons of frozen meat was
despatched to the B.E.F. during the period September, 1939, to May, 1940.
Three field bakeries were in all despatched to the force; two operated
in existing buildings at Bolbec (Le Havre) and the balance was split up in
sections throughout the L. of C.
The supply reserves initially authorized for the base depots were 15 days
Automatic shipments were scheduled until
the second week in October, by which date it was estimated that a reserve
of some 30 days would have accumulated.
In fact, in the early stages the
supply position was anything but satisfactory owing to ships arriving short-
On 18th September the situation was such that the War
were unsuccessfully requested by G.H.Q.
to stop the despatch of
After further representation a delay of 24 hours
was authorized.
The situation then improved progressively and by 31st
October reserves in the theatre amounted to 50 days for 250,000 men.
situation had been very serious, and it was only by making very large
purchases locally that a crisis was averted. The French Army
Service " was of much assistance in this respect.
Later a central purchasing
board was set up in Paris to co-ordinate all local purchases of all com-
This filled a much-needed want, because previously the purchasing
officers of the various formations and services were frequently found to be
bidding against each other.
Supplies were sent forward from the base depots to rail-heads, where
collection was effected by divisional or corps troops supply columns using
the normal double echelon system then in force, bulk being usually broken
in the vicinity of rail-head.
39
