the enemy had concentrated nearly the whole of his forces on the river line
of the Juba, there was very little left between the river and Mogadishu, and
it was appreciated that after the capture of Mogadishu- a necessary step
from an administrative point of view-
-there would still be little opposition
against an advance on Harar.
The distance, however, being so great-804
miles from Mogadishu to Harar-the force had to be reduced to three brigades
and many units stripped of transport to provide the necessary road main-
tenance link.
11 (A) Division began the advance on Mogadishu on 23rd February, and
on the evening of 25th February
elements entered the town after having
covered 275 miles in some sixty hours.
From an administrative point of view
the operation was fairly straightforward-the columns moving as before,
self-contained, having stocked up from the supplies now coming in by sea
to Kismayu.
On the other hand the rate of off-loading in the port was
insufficient to allow 12 (A) Division to operate northwards until the end of
February, when
light forces
achieved considerable success, reaching the
Abyssinian border at Dolo on 5th March.
The capture of Mogadishu offered an unfortunate example of the " biter
February, the Royal Navy had dropped from the air a
number of magnetic mines in the entrance of the harbour, and the opening
of the port for the maintenance of the British forces was considerably handi-
capped by our failure to clear these mines owing to the absence of the
special equipment required, and some valuable time elapsed before the harbour
(This instance would seem to furnish evidence that naval and
military liaison was not all it might have been, although it must be
remembered that at the time the mines were dropped the probability of our
capturing Mogadishu so soon was most remote.)
As a result of Mogadishu
being temporarily unusable, the small port of Merca-some 50 miles along
the coast to the south—was developed as a temporary base, using tugs and
lighters captured at Mogadishu.
The most valuable assistance both in the organization of Merca and in
the clearaose of Mogadishu was given by some 200 officers and men of the
Merchant Navy who had been liberated on the capture of the latter port.
They also helped nobly in the handling and the reconditioning of the tugs
Although Mogadishu was only a lighterage port and thus unusable like
Berbera) for about four months in the vear owing to a heavy swell which
made it impossible for lighters to lie alongside ships, it did have certain
advantages over Kismayu, limited though its resources were.
Rail access
existed and both road and dock approaches were metalled.
Though the
miscellaneous dock equipment had
been
damaged by the retreating Italians, repair work was fairly successful and,
once the approaches had been swept, unloadings soon topped 500 tons a
day. In particular, excellent and extensive warehouse accommodation existed
almost undamaged.
The one drawback was that it was now nearly March,
and May would see the start of the monsoon season and the virtual cessation
of port working.
146
WO27T
18
In and around Mogadishu the spoils of war were extensive and most
An enormous amount of engineer stores was found which almost
sufficed for the remainder of the campaign, and although petrol was at first
supposed to be non-existent, the offer of rewards resulted in the disclosure
of the whereabouts of 350,000 gallons of M.T. spirit and 80,000 gallons of
aviation spirit—a very useful contribution during the period before the ports
The large ordnance and ammunition dumps found were
somewhat naturally of rather more limited use, but it certainly seemed that
the enemy had been far from short of essential stores.
In one respect the capture of the ports of Mogadishu and Kismayu was of
little help, and that was in the replacement of vehicles.
shipping suitable for the carriage of M.T. was available and the land L. of C.
from Kenya, now some 800 miles in length, had still to be kept open for the
The road had deteriorated seriously-much of it having broken
up—and the effect of this 800 miles on a new vehicle was considerable.
THE RE-CAPTURE OF BERBERA
When permission had been requested from G.H.Q., Middle East, for an
advance as far as Harar, General Cunningham had asked at the same time
for the port of Berbera to be re-opened in order that the enormously long
L. of C. from Mogadishu could be eliminated by transfer to Berbera as a base.
From Mogadishu to Gigiga is 744 miles by road, while Berbera to Gigiga is
only 204 miles.
By such a switch some 540 road miles would be saved.
Agreement by G.H.Q. to this suggestion involved a plan being made for the
recapture of Berbera by a combined force from Aden, in co-operation with
the advance of East Africa Force.
However, the problem of the moment which remained to be solved was
No respite could be allowed for the accumula-
tion of reserves and reorganization of transport.
forward dumps and no alternative to road transport except the narrow-gauge
railway for the first 70 miles to Villa d'Abruzzi, which the South African
engineers rapidly got going, everything depended on the efforts and initiative
On 1st March, with petrol tanks filled with Italian petrol, a mobile
column began the advance on Gigiga.
Administrative resources, or the lack
of them, rather than opposition, was the factor determining the strength of
The speed of the advance averaged 65 miles a day and
Dagabur, 590 miles north of Mogadishu, was reached on 10th March by a
small column.
Gigiga was reached by this column on 17th March and was
occupied with but little opposition.
Meanwhile the remainder of the division
were following up by stages as the progressive build-up of stores along the
The threat offered by the advance on Gigiga, through which ran the only
passable road between British Somaliland and Abyssinia, so perturbed the
Italians that a force of two Indian battalions from Aden was able to make a
successful attack on Berbera from the sea on 16th March, occupying the town
with but little opposition.
Immediately the port fell into our hands, supplies
and stores began to be unloaded for East Africa Force in order that the
