The Indian brigade which had recently landed at Rangoon was ordered up
to reinforce 17 Indian Division on 3rd February.
tion had landed without its transport,
and its arrival
Unfortunately this forma-
was the source of
considerable embarrassment to the divisional "O" staff until the transport
arrived.
Martaban was now subjected to a good deal of shelling and bombing and
small parties of the enemy succeeded in crossing the Salween at different
points.
On 10th February he began an attack which developed the next day
when our troops were forced to withdraw.
17 Indian Division shortly after-
wards made a further withdrawal back to the line of the Bilin river.
The Withdrawal across the Sittang
At about this time a convoy of 17 ships was due in Rangoon, carrying
much needed reinforcements of fighting troops,
stores.
administrative units and
The labour situation at Rangoon was, as will
seen later, so
uncertain that the G.O.C. did not feel justified in accepting the whole convoy.
He therefore arranged that all ships should return to India except those carry-
ing troops who might be expected to influence operations e.g. : 7 Armoured
In view of subsequent events
it seems clear that the administrative units and stores would only have been
an embarrassment if they had landed ; they would have greatly prejudiced the
evacuation of Rangoon and the subsequent withdrawal to India.
personnel and stores formed a most valuable asset to India, which was at this
period drained almost dry of both.
In anticipation of the arrival of 7 Armoured Brigade the first armoured
formation to operate in Burma-every effort had been made to strengthen
bridges and to convert railway bridges for the passage of A.F.Vs. in order
to give the tanks as large an area in which to operate as possible.
The brigade
arrived in Rangoon on 21st February and, thanks to excellent work being
carried out by the staff at the port, it was sent forward in time to participate
Meanwhile, on the Bilin river front, relentless attacks continued against
the tired 17 Indian Division and it was obvious that, unless effective delaying
action could be taken until T Armoured Brigade arrived, there was a grave
danger of the total destruction of the division, in which case Rangoon would
virtually be left open to the enemy.
It was therefore decided that, in view
of the major obstacle afforded by the Sittang river only 20 miles back, a
withdrawal should be carried out while it was still possible so as to form
a strong line on the west bank of the Sittang.
The withdrawal across the river was bound to be a difficult operation
because only one railway bridge and no road bridges existed.
bridge was, however, converted just in time to carry M.T.
The railway
a lorry got off the roadway and blocked the bridge, greatly delaying the
passage of the withdrawing division.
adjustable landing stages had been placed in macition to aacist in carvin
A power ferry with three boats and
M.T. but owing to some mistake, or panic,
early stage in the operation
for
which they had been provided.
and were of no
use in the contingency
WORT
Communications over this particular area were difficult: apart from the
railway, there was a road only as far as Waw some ten miles west of the
to the other side of the river.
east side there was no road until Kyaikto ten miles
Every effort was made to complete the road
and the conversion of the railway bridge for the passage of vehicles but,
when the time
came for withdrawal, only the latter had been completed
and dusty track through the
It may be added that the Sittang river at this place was very wide and
The rapidity of the current, the enormous rise and fall
of the tide, and the existence of a bore, were considered to render it unsafe
for navigation, and nobody but a very strong swimmer could hope to cross
it by that means.
During the withdrawal to the river our troops were very heavily bombed
and machine-gunned in a sharp attack which resulted in many casualties,
and the loss of a number of transport mules which stampeded.
by 23rd February, 17 Indian Division had retired behind the Sittang river
The withdrawal had not been accomplished,
however, without the experience of a major disaster.
The reinforced enemy had made an outflanking movement followed by
an attack from the rear which severed contact between the troops defending
the bridge-head and the bulk of the division.
The troops cut off amounted
to just over two brigades.
As the pressure increased it was decided that
the bridge should be blown.
The destruction of the bridge left the troops
on the other side in a very precarious position and although many of
them were able to make good their escape by swimming
few were able to bring back their arms and practically all transport and
equipment had to be abandoned.
Even thus briefly described it will be clear that the Sittang river battle
was nothing less than a disaster.
The Division had lost practically all
equipment, transport, guns and ammunition. The men who eventually were
collected had, in some cases, retained their rifles but mos had lost them
while swimming the river, and others had to discard some of their uniform,
even including boots.
Steps were of course taken immediately to distribute such transport, arms
clothing and equipment as could be made available, e sough this amounted
A large number of men who were unarmed and completely ex-
hausted had to be put on trains and evacuated to reinforcement camps, and
rested, re-armed and re-equipped.
17 Indian Division was thus reduced to
less than half strength and now
amounted to less than 3,500 all ranks;
for these there were only sufficie amounte a to one man in every two.
The division was re-organizent ine too weak brigades and took up a
position at Pegu, where it was joined by 7 Armoured Brigade.
stage maintenance of the forward troops presented no difficulty as the base
depots in and around Rangoon were within easy reach and communications
The security of pandoon itself was now. however of nrimary concern.
After a battle the chief characteristic of which is a maximum effort by
manpower.
pause in order to bring up attacking reinforcements.
the attacking forces often find it necessary
Thus, although
