in hand before the capacity of the L. of C. could be increased, the most note-
worthy being the two roads driven southwards to Tamu and Tiddim and
beyond, to Burma, which became the sole L. of C. to the frontier.
The former (the " Manipur Road ") was of paramount importance. It ran
from rail-head at Dimapur for 138 miles to Imphal via Kohima, and rose to a
height of 7,000 feet at Mao.
Since the withdrawal of " Burmarmy" it had
been entirely reconstructed to a two-way all-weather road and was extended
to Palel and Tamu.
The second road, the road to Tiddim-
once described
as 400 miles of boulders held together by
dust-was left behind by the
development of operations, but the road to Tamu fully justified the amount
of labour expended on it; it was later extended still further to Kalemyo and
Kalewa.
Difficulties in construction were, of course, immense.
route was hilly and beset with acute bends.
The section to Palel and Tamu
included several new bridges, and its lower portion was built over the famous
"Saddle" ridge a great feat of engineering under bad weather conditions.
In 1942 the "Manipur Road" was broken some four miles north of Kohima
during an exceptionally heavy monsoon which also caused a break in the
railway between Parabatipur and Amingaon.
As this occurred when the
frontier defences were being strengthened and when refugees were pouring into
India from Burma, the interference to maintenance can be imagined.
road was eventually restored after many weeks of hard work in torrential
rains followed by landslides.
Eventually the whole road was widened by
cutting into the face of the rocky hillsides.
During the period of repair, traffic forward was strictly controlled by
4 Corps on a "
gate" system between Dimapur and Imphal, convoys being
divided into two classes,
"fast" and " slow
" Fast" convoys took about
six hours to cover the journey, whereas " slow" convoys took over a day
with scheduled stops at staging camps.
THE "LEDO ROAD"
The story of the development of the road communications between Assam
and Burma is not complete without mention of the "Ledo Road"
or the
" Stillwell road" as it was subsequently called.
Even before the war, the British had prospected the Patkai mountains for
a road from Assam into North Burma,
but engineers had stated that its
construction was impracticable.
The project was, however, kept in mind
throughout 1941, and in 1942 the need was apparent. Finally, it was agreed
that General Stilwell could construct a road to join up with the old "Burma
Road" and thus re-open land communications with China.
To this end he
was allotted all the resources that the U.S.A. could make available.
Barely two
years afterwards the
"Ledo Road" joined hands with the " Burma Road"
at Bhamo and became a highway stretching from Assam to Kunming, over a
thousand miles in length.
THE ADVANCE BASE AT MANIPUR ROAD
The key to the maintenance of the troops of S.E.A.C. served by the
"Manipur Road" L. of C., or to Gene tao pivells troops served by tho
"Ledo Road", and partly to the U.S.A and chinese forcess China served
"Hump" service,
was without doubt the advance base developed
around the Manipur Road Station on the Bengal and Assam Railway.
350
WO277
RESTRICTED
Originally a wayside halt in the heart of dense and malarial jungle, this
was develoned into a rail-head handling between 1.000 and 2.000 tons a day
and containing depots of considerable size.
cutting wholesale into the jungle and.
These had to be established by
although very
strict anti-malarial
measures were taken, it remained a most unpleasant and unhealthy spot tor
me whole of the war. Further reference to the advance base at Manipur Road
is made in Chapter XIII concerning the S.E.A.C. operations.
ACHIEVEMENT OF THE ASSAM L. OF C.
In 1943, the capacity of the Assam L. of C. was 3,000 tons a day. The
task set India Command by the Chiefs of Staff was to increase that daily
tonnage capacity to 7,400 by January, 1946.
In point of fact, it was increased
to 9,000 tons a day by January, 1945, India Command thus beating the daily
lift ordered by 1,600 tons a day, and the target date by one year.
It must,
however, be borne in mind that 50 per cent. of the capacity of the Assam
L. of C. was absorbed by the U.S. forces for building the
"Ledo Road"
and for supply to China, and it is still a moot point whether the dividends
gained from the "Ledo Road" were proportionate to the effort expended
At Diagram 8 will be seen a diagrammatic lay-out of the lines of com-
munication between India and Assam, and eastern Bengal as at October,
1944, i.e., about half-way towards full development.
Shown thus diagram-
matically it provides a better illustration of the complex problems involved
that can any amount of written explanation.
The story of the S.E.A.C. operations in Burma will be told later.
chapter has endeavoured to illustrate the effort required to build up the
biggest Allied overseas base, without which the Fourteenth Army— the largest
army in the world could not have achieved victory over a battle front almost
as long as the Russian front against Germany.
"In the Fourteenth Army we went short of everything. I have said
sometimes that the only thing available in sufficient quantity was brains!
However, the shortages were not the fault of India, and throughout the
campaign if something was in India and it was possible to get it for us
along the Heath Robinson line of communication, it came to us."
(General Sir William Slim.)
(12090) Wi. 8483-9412 500 3/52 D.L.
