WO171/895
'ION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
f mobilisation or
rdinate command
36), and personal
is representatives.
ar diaries will be
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
nuE de deti thought whether or not to the diay short te off by ault,
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret. Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
It will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
A.F. C.2118.
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTr.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. l, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(ii) Daily locations.
Maily locates in Moves ois dein the at tenty-four hours and present dispositions.
iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff
(iv) Detailed account of operations. Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
!
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
if cera ton in the case of trit on the to l hang a in stores, tran spot, be noted.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice. At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above).
to aped, an ache milde in ete decino her a ming the author. References
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
6) Te forwarheroise ordered, tof the salon month dirt to the he ding ich in
for transmission to the War Of the saceling mont dit alto pendii/ce at chela,
of the diaries of units will ho
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to record offices at home torse months tc
the inFECT NOT. The time eered stold he the tim the ten in me tear er roches
DUMFRIES
prepared in sunscripion e
JAN 44
Month and Year....
1200
1115
1730
1730
1430
DUMF RIES
DUMFRIES
0001
WAR DIARY
INDELIO ENGESUMMART
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
404562 SSM. MACKEY A.R. posted in from 13/18 Hussars to fill
vacaney of SSM on W.E.
Squa Cond lectures on "Tk Delivery" to 148 RAC•
" 13/18 Hussars.
" 13/18
Comd, 27 Armd Bde inspected Sgn.
Sgn exercise "ALERT" - day and night ra moves; day 8
night small arns firings harbouring & defence in
harbour•
Sqn re-designated "266 Forward Delivery Sga RAC".
Comd 137 TDU visited Sgn and stayed night in
Sgn.
Offrs' Messe
Army Form C. 2: 10.
Unit. 266 UND DELIVERY SEN, RAC.
Commanding Officer. Capt. J.H.G. MITCHES.
References to Appendices
Ла Нему!
i capti
Comd, 266 Fwd Delivery Sqn,
