WO171/895
WAR
DIARY
36), and personal
is representatives.
var diaries will be
cope sona
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
Ta Van in ty a in at whether e no a he day should to best to a sat
and Po provide data on i See. is object is to furnish a historical record o operations,
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
organisation and administration.
TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
f mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
rdinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NotE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
oF other peroe hel he made clear, hot the officer who is to the in dier is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omittedl.
PARA. 4.— In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
() Ind deant osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i) at tate in feement ur unthe pot torent fu hour and present dispositions.
(ji) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(See P.s., Vol faries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
to tradiaricion to the Und within a persod, i a cava
of the diaries
the unit concerned.
SET No. The tie neved tocold be so tink the fren in the order reaches
Month and Year JUN 44
WAR DART
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Army Form C. 2117
Unit 266 F. D. SQN
Commanding Officer CAPT J.H.C. MITCHELL
SQN He e majority replacement AFVSe CrewS in S/Camp
TIL BURY 2JUN
marshalling asea. completion of water proofing
San embarked on various craft during the evening.
convoy set sail for FRANCE
BERNEVILE 8 JUN 1800 San disembarked on NAN beach and moved to 27 asd
bde "A" ech asea
HERMANVILE " "2230 san He established. Following delivery took place:-
13/18M-19 SHERMAN III ; Stal/S YEO - 5 SHERMAN ITI; I ERY -
6 SHERMAN III. TOTAL - 30 equipments delivered. Arca
bombed one German a/c shot doun by A.A. fire.
san seryanizes and is joined by furtter craft load.
Following delivery took place: - 20 Ark Reft - 2 MI0,3; um (ge and Ectraton
7 Fd Ryt - I M7,105 mm; 2 warwicks - 5 AtK6prs.
TOTAL - 8 equipments delivered. Area bombed.
Following delivery took place: - 76 Fl Reft - 1M7,105 mm; um CaD
