INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARa. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(ii) Unit commanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NotE C.-Any question of doubt whether or not a war
diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARa. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
mile entered up naily, hach entry ration a yee fier pailed to, nep it, on.
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTr.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
(1) Imp east os ars, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i) haly otis i Nocent due the at trent fos hour ad present dispositions.
(ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
(iv) Detail as out of operation climatic ear sketches our poss, astor reping
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
changes in establishmen foster rah. as polards casabies the is should ra nos af
In addition in the case of units on the L. of Ca changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
NOTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the erder as given above but at the time they
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attacked to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(i) A cont, fadin a rect report a pratin dirt, to by suber he cont of
or maps relating thereto,
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
the unit concerned the the time entered should be the time the information or order reaches
event recorded should also be given
R. ORNE
PLUMETOT
R. ORNA.
PLU ETOT
!
PLUMETOT
COULOMBES.
telence Summarie arabier wil
Month and Year... JUL Wr
Date
Hour
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form C.
Unit. 266 FD DELIVIAN SEIT, RAC.
18
Commanding Officer Capta. JuG. ITTCHETT.
References to Appendices
2300
OC visits to lars Staffs Yeo to ascertain reactions to Battleworthy scales
San acquires a German horse.
7, 3 2 1a Ropent Coy visits to discuss ills problems.
latch
AF drop
2000 tons bonbs on area. I' of CAM. Pall of snoke covers San
Waten attack on vance
Area, shelled by 210mn German
coastal gun, casulties nil.
Area shelled.
Deliver
3 SHIRIN VO, 1 SPRAN IIIs on a dork fogey night
Deliver
Area shelled -
Deliver I SHIPM III.
ORITE commences
Corrential downpoux.
len flooded out of dugouts.
Bonbed by fragmentation bombs. Vehs donaged. No casualties. :
Bde Cond announces disbandment of 27 Arma Bde.
Deliver - 6 SHURIAN III over P. OPNE.
G. H.Q. 2nd E
Bombed. - no casualties. Staffs Yeo Rits leave for Regt.
Bombed.
Reece new anea..
Rav party noves to new area.
Receive residue of Starts Yeo tis.
2 SINAN IIIS.
Staffs Yeo leave for MNGIAND..
13/18 Royal Hussars leave for 8 Arnd Bde.
DD. SINAT VS..
Receive residue of 13/18 Royal Hussar meant
2 SITER AT VO, 3 SERIA IIIS, 4 STUART ITIS, I STUART Ve.
menon
