pg_0002.pdf:
9. GENERAL.
or other important
A spent of copies i pe par di try copies all perion ader, time citin ley eo layin var diary.
When an operation order, appreciation, letter laying down policy
commanders "personal and demi-ficial mesages which con in instructions of operation am pry, including
Grouping of the Appendices. The appendices will be assembled in the GROUPS shown on the cover,
NOT in simple chronological order.
This is intended to make assembly and reference easy.
Where there are no documents to be included in the appendices the word "NIL" should be entered in
the appropriate space in the index.
unis the relevant papers should be ponied a sar pitable fer the branches of ein hea winers or for certain
10. NOTES.
headquarters of divisions and below.
Are dision The forms which commi wil the appled weier the toite to eat is unise a ni
active operations or not.
* Formations and units belonging to the
и army
will prepare complete war diaries in triplicate.
APPENDICES.
The exact hour of occurrences should be noted.
important to make a note of the reason for the visit and decisions taken.
& Nores odiany novement is us paid and received by commanders and senior staff officers, It is equally
Appendix letter and folio number; and, only if necessary, a very brief note of the contents.
(f) Brief notes of the time of receipt and issue of orders and important messages
Note of how time not accounted for above was spent.
and a reference to the
The type of training, etc., should be specified.
Note of any administrative difficulties encountered and action taken to overcome them.
Nature and description of field engineering works constructed.
Notes of how orders wére carried out.
(a) Account of operations with notes of topographical and climatic factors affecting them.
a precis of any of them.
It should contain: —
8. The narrative should be written up daily. It should supplement and connect the appendices, but need not give
NARRATIVE (AF C 2118)
routine.
The narrative is intended to supply information not given in the appendices.
will be conveyed in appendices consisting, with one exception, of copies of documents issued and received in normal
7. In order to ensure accuracy and completeness and to save work, as much important information as possible
offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
It is a secret document.
The extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc., from a war diary is an
6. The war diary will be signed once, as a report, by the commander of a unit, head of a branch, or senior staff
METHOD OF COMPILATION.
covered and folio the bait of a pendition wil &e each en the concerned, the name of the parent unil, period.
d) Appendices.
c) Narrative;
(b) Index as printed on cover;
(a) Cover;
4. Both original and duplicate* copies will consist of: —
combined war diary as is found convenient.
(e) Heads of Services and their representatives.
Note: In the case of headquetters, sections of the various branches may keep separate war diaries or one
(d) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(c) Commanders of a headquarters or unit on detachment.
(b) Unit commanders.
on the L. of C.
(a) Each branch of the staff at the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command, and area or sub-area
3. A war diary will be kept in duplicate* by: —
GENERAL.
importance that completed diaries should be submitted promptly in accordance with the terms of para. 11 below.
Kingdom in order to extract all possible information of value under 1 (a) above.
It is therefore of the utmost
A section of the War Office has beer established to scrutinise war diaries as soon as they arrive in the United
(b) To furnish an historical record of the war.
1. The objects of a war diary are two-fold: —
OBJECT.
(F.S.R., VOL. I., 174.)
WAR
DIARY
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILING AND DISPOSING OF THE
ons regarding War Diaries and Intelligence
Instruc maries are contained in F.S.
Sid the Staff Manual respectively.
Regs.,
Vol. I
Title pages
will be prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year July 194•
WAR DIARY
IXTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required) pr
Place
Field
Date
1944
1 Jul
Hour
Summary
Information
ORKFINAL
Army Form C. 2118
Unit East Riding Yeomanry, RoA.C.
Commanding Officer It•Col. I.C. WIX AMSON, DSO.
References-
° Appendices
0500
2 Jul
0500
1000
1730
2020
Two
tps
of "C'
Sqn
carried out harrassing shots on GATMANCHES
and BIJUDE.
The situation at
the moment is that an enemy armoured counter attack is to
be
expected.
The
eneny now has
opposite the 2nd Army 8 Pz Divs: -
2 Pz Div.,
Pz Div.,
1 ss Pz Div.,
Inf Div and 3 Can Inf Div have been postponed and the general policy is to
remain in our present posns ready to meet this armoured threat.
minefields have been laid across our front.
Extensive
59 Div have arrived in the
area and have not yet taken up
a tactical posn.
Two tps of 'A' Sqn went out on Standing Patrol on the right flank in the
area of ANISY.
The Padre held Holy Communion in a roam of the chateau for all who wished
to
attend.
A message
from the Royal VIster Rifles, dug in, in the Fastern half of
CAMBES 0174, was brought to It.
E.J. SCOTTER of 3 Ty A Sgn saying that the
enemy were crawling up to a mocked out PZIW Mk. IV and Panther in the
avenue 025777, probably with a view to recovering them.
The tanks were
engaged and set on fire.
No further enemy activity was reported.
There were no casualties or
WAR DIARIES SECTION
No.
1 OCT 1944
G. H.Q 2nd Echelon
damage.
See Appendix 'A'.
3 Jul
0500
Two troops
of 'B' Sqn went out on standing patrol on the right flank. A new
unit, the 16th Gernan Air Force Div was identified on our front to-day.
A deserter from the 31 G.A.F. Rifle Regt gave the information that his coy
had been marched fran CATT
during the night to what was probably the area
Of LA BIJUDE to relieve an S.S. unit.
The bridge over the river ORNE at
064.702 was blown by the enemy at 0500 this morning.
The Royal Ulster Rifles
reported that enemy on their front were seen to be wearing blue uniforms and
what looked like a camouflage groundsheet.
22293 Wt. 33096/1140 1,000m - 12/40-McC & Co Ltd -51-8212 Forms C2118/22

