220
Preparation: 1919-1944
As the Red Army assumed the offensive and German mobility waned,
German forces increasingly suffered encirclement. At first, unused to encir-
clement, German troops often panicked and fought poorly when surround-
ed. 135 With experience, German troops learned that discipline, concentra-
tion, aerial resupply, and rapid countermeasures often allowed them to fight
their way out of encirclement. Nonetheless, the Luftwaffe's transport fleet
suffered grievously in resupplying forces trapped at Stalingrad and in
Tunisia 136 The result was much diminished lift capacity that the switch in
productive priority to fighters exacerbated. Nevertheless, air resupply did
help German forces to break out of the Cherkassy and Kamenets-Podolsk
pockets in February-March 1944, but these marked the last significant tri-
umphs of air resupply because constant action eroded transport strength 137
By summer of 1944, the Luftwaffe was a broken arm that could no longer
provide any significant support to the ground battle.
By fall of 1943 the Heer had reached its nadir. Constant attrition in the
East left it badly understrength, underequipped, and increasingly
immobile. 138 Moreover, throughout 1942-1943 the OKH had robbed Peter
to pay Paul as it repeatedly raided nonactive theaters to replenish units on
the Eastern Front. Late in 1943 the OKH vigorously tackled the problem of
waning ground combat strength as the Heer underwent its most extensive
wartime restructuring and rationalization to restore its combat power.
Between November 1943 and May 1944, Wehrmacht divisions adopted
new 1944 TO&Es that substituted firepower for manpower to create lean
formations that possessed a high teeth-to-tail ratio, 139 This rationalization
was made possible by the full mobilization ofd ierman resources for total
war. On 27 November 1943 Hitler issued his Basic Order 22 to raise an
additional 1 million combat troops through rationalization, which, in the
short term, restored German combat power.140 During the spring of 1944
average divisional stenguls increased by 19 percent, reversing a steady
three-year decline. At the same time infantry divisions received potent new
weapons tank destroyers, Panzerschreck rocket launchers, light antiair-
craft guns, and heavy mortars - which increased infantry firepower. 14)
On paper the feer rapidly restored its.combat power during the spring
of 1944; average avision manpower shortages fell from their November
14s pend to percent to only s percent by June 1944.1+2 Yet the heer
boistered its combat power at the expense of its staying powel, as it had
consistently done since 1933, by further weakening its strained logistic
base. The army found extra manpower by trimming already meager service
branches, Further reducing service provision. At the same time, it counter
acted dwindling mobility by increased reliance on horses and bicycles.
These expedients, however, reduced divisional self-sufficiency and
increased formation dependence on higher echelon service support, which
lett tonations more vulnerable to destruction when theater logistics col-
lapsed, as they did in both the East and West der ing the summer of 1944.
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
221
That the Heer shifted to strategic defense with relative ease reflected
the basic soundness of German doctrine and the growing defensive orienta-
tion of German arms production. During 1943-1944 the Heer demonstrated
that it had become as quick, agile, and skilled at defense as in attack.
German doctrinal emphasis on speed, individual initiative, and decisiveness
buttressed defensive strength as much as it did offensive striking power.
Another element that held the Heer together was the harsh, even draconian,
discipline that maintained German cohesion and order beyond what could
reasonably have been expected late in the war as defeat loomed ever
nearer. 143
The army also modified its replacement system during the winter of
943-1944 to bolster combat strength. Although the system produced qual-
ity replacements, it was inflexible and could not match the mounting com-
bat losses. The army high command increased its flexibility by raising com-
bat march battalions that combined new recruits and veteran convalescents
into fully equipped battalions, which could be directly inserted at the front
Without having to be integrated into divisional field replacement battalions.
The result was greater flexibility with little discernible reduction in cohe-
sion among replacements. 144
In November 1943 Hitler shifted Germany's strategic focus from the
East to the West, where the repulse of an imminent second front could at
least postpone final defeat. Hitler embarked on a massive resurrection of
the fighting power of the army in the West, the Westheer. By late 1943,
repeated raids on its resources to bolster the Eastern Front had so weakened
the Westheer that it was unable to repel a major Allied landing. 145 And,
because the Germans recognized that the Allies were not yet ready to strike,
there was only a modest bolstering of defenses in the West before late
1943.146
During the fall of 1943, the Westheer had extremely limited combat
power: only nineteen of fifty-four divisions were fully battleworthy, and
these were all weak coastal defense formations of negligible mobility or
offensive power. 147 All divisions were understrength and made up mainly
of second-rate garrison troops, convalescents, and foreign volunteers who
Were largely equipped with obsolete captured weapons, 48 The Westheer
had almost no operational reserves and few modern tanks. Clearly, if the
Allies could have come in 1943 the Germans could not have stopped
Between fall of 1943 and June 1944, Hitler resurrected the Westheer's
fighting power to contest the Allied invasion of France. After 3 November
1943, when he issued his Directive 51, the Westheer's combat power
increased dramatically. Young recruits and experienced veterans flowed
West alongside the Reich's latest and most powerful weapons. Meanwhile
reorganization, reequipment, rationalization, and retraining rebuilt the
Westheer's combat power. But several flaws marred these efforts, just as
