256
Normandy 1944
launched its own impromptu breakout bid on 28 July, Operation BLUE-
COAT, with a drive on Mont Pinçon and the important communications
hub of Vire. Even though the British faced a weakly held German front in
the thick bocage around Caumont, the operation failed ignominiously.
Montgomery had intended the operation to maintain pressure on the
Germans and prevent the transfer of additional enemy armor against the
Americans. But, once again, BLUECOAT was Dempsey's brainchild and
he again hoped to achieve a decisive breakout to mirror the U.S. triumph.
Montgomery, though he remained skeptical, had bowed to Dempsey
because he needed to initiate a quick offensive to prevent the transfer of
German reserves to the U.S. front, even though he realized that the buildup
for the attack was insufficient to guarantee victory. BLUECOAT was the
only offensive in Normandy where Montgomery attacked prematurely to
assist the U.S. breakthrough. 30
For BLUECOAT Dempsey had hastily recalled the 11th and Guards
Armoured Divisions from their post-GOODWOOD refit. But the need to
prevent the transfer of enemy armor forced him to launch the operation pre-
cipitately three days ahead of schedule and before the British VIII Corps
had fully assembled. The offensive saw simultaneous attacks by the VIII
and XXX Corps, with three armored and three infantry divisions.31
Dempsey thus committed massive strength against greatly thinned German
defenses. But the premature start ensured that BLUECOAT lacked the mas-
sive artillery support that habitually accompanied British offensives.
Moreover, although the German defense was weak and had almost no
armor, the front had been static since mid-June and the Germans had estab-
ished detenses in depth in the thick bocage. Dempsey committed most of
the available British armor, but he did so in one of the sectors least suited
to onensive armored operations. The result was a steady, If unspectacular
advance that failed to take advantage of the opportunities that existed to
split apart a German front that was slowly disintegrating under the pressure
of the U.S. breakthrough on the western flank.
On 1 August, General Bradley's U.S. 12th Army Group became opera-
tional and assumed command of the U.S. First Army and Gen. George
Patton s lewly acuvated Third Army. U.s. forces were now able to conduct
he fast-paced maneuver war that the peacetime army had trained and pre-
pared for. While the First Army advanced southeast and occupied Mortain
on 3 August, Pattons forces conducted a spectacular and rapid armored
advance to Salary do the 4th Armored Division took Kennes and vannes
To isolate the Breton peninsula and the 6th Armored Division raced deep
into the petitia to seize rontivy. Nonetheless, most Of the Germall forces
in Brittany were sul dole to retire in time into the fortified ports of Brest,
St. Malo, and Lorient, where they prepared to offer protracted resistance
against a thinly spread U.S. Army.
During the mist week Of August, U.S. forces for the first time assumed
A Campaign Overview
257
the defense to thwart a major German counteroffensive that aimed to seal
off the American penetration and to isolate the Third Army. The rapid
advance into Brittany had thinned the central sector of the U.S. front, a
weakness the enemy sought to exploit. On 2 August 1944 Hitler con-
demned the Westheer to total defeat when he ordered the new commander
of Army Group B, Field Marshal Hans von Kluge, to launch Operation
LUTTICH, a powerful armored counteroffensive to retake Avranches and
contain the U.S. breakout from Normandy. The Germans committed six
attenuated mechanized divisions. 32 Von Kluge chose Hans von Funck, a
daring and experienced armored comannder, and his XLVII Panzer Corps
headquarters to lead the attack.
On 5 August the Americans first detected a German buildup around
Mortain as eleventh-hour Ultra intelligence gave warning of the enemy
attack and allowed the First Army last-minute efforts to bolster its defenses
and to take up good defensive positions against the onslaught. 33 Despite
reinforcements, U.S. troops were still thin on the ground, occupied unpre-
pared positions, remained inexperienced at coordinating defensively, and
lacked the antitank capability to repel concentrated enemy armored attacks.
On the night of 6-7 August, von Funck struck west in strength toward
Mortain and Avranches, without a preliminary barrage, down the narrow
corridor between the Sée and Sélune Rivers on a 10,000-yard front with
five divisions and obtained tactical surprise. 34 Nonetheless, his troops were
too depleted and tried to achieve strategic success, and von Funck attacked
prematurely, before his forces were ready, 35
The U.S. 30th Infantry Division conducted a determined defense, espe-
cially at Hill 317 where an isolated battalion thwarted all German efforts to
push through Mortain toward Avranches 36 This stubborn combined-arms
defense disrupted the enemy advance, and the immediate commitment of
the 4th Infantry Division from reserve allowed the Americans to slow the
German drive. Thereafter, the commitment of U.S. reserves, aided by pun-
IShing Allied tactical air strikes, soon halted the offensive. 37 Bradley then
launched a concentrated counterattack northeast between Mortain and
Barenton with the recalled 35th Infantry Division that took the enemy in
the flank.38 The German forces were understrength, operating along tenu-
ous supply lines, and were subject to heavy, repeated air and artillery attack
that disrupted their push. 39 Indeed, the imbalance of forces was simply too
great to allow a restablization of the front and logistically, LÜTTICH was
doomed. Funck had neither the firepower, the infantry, nor the supplies to
recapture and hold Avranches. 40
For the first time, the defeat of the German counterattack at Mortain
presented the Allies with strategic opportunities to encircle and destroy the
German forces in Normandy, either in the Argentan-Falaise area or through
a larger envelopment along the Seine. But U.S. forces fanned out of
Normandy heading east, south, and west, dissipating their strength in the
