292
Normandy 1944
gets, which allowed U.S. aircraft to conduct blind bombing strikes in poor
visibility, as they did, for instance, during COBRA. 131 Use of radar brought
greater flexibility to air support missions. The use of carpet bombing in
direct support of American ground forces, though, brought mixed results.
Used only once during COBRA, carpet bombing, despite heavy friendly-
fire casualties, had a devastating, if ephemeral, demoralizing effect on vet-
eran German troops. However, the resultant cratering of the terrain ham-
pered movement on both sides. 132 The use of strategic bombers in COBRA,
though playing a central role in the U.S. success, revealed that strategic
bombing remained a novel, unpredictable, and dangerous instrument of
ground warfare in summer 1944.
U.S. forces became more sophisticated in employing air power in sup-
port of the ground battle in other ways. Early in the campaign, technical
advances in photoreconnaissance resulted in the fastest photo-processing
and delivery service of the war. Photographs processed at airfields in the
United Kingdom were passed to units in Normandy via a VHF facsimile
radio channel, which allowed much faster intelligence dissemination. The
detailed, rapid intelligence that this service provided facilitated the U.S.
advance in August. 133 Air superiority and growing sophistication in the
application of air power made a ground victory easier.
During the Normandy campaign U.S. forces perfected air-ground coor-
dination, and by the end of the campaign the Americans had become adept
practioners of the air-land battle. It had taken just three years for the
USAAF to perfect this system. The testimony was that the Allied success in
Normandy was the first genuine air-land battle victory of the war.
At the same time, U.S. Army quartermasters overcame many obstacles
to keep the troops adequately, if not abundantly, supplied. Massive gasoline
deliveries, in particular, kept fuel-hungry units mobile throughout the cam-
paign. 134 The rationing of ammunition, which resulted from unanticipated
expenditures in the hedgerows,
was the only significant logistic deficiency
experienced during the campaign. 135 Yet the American determination to
devise new procedures to fight more effectively in the bocage, flexibility of
commanders, army mobility, and growing skill in air-ground battle ensured
that ammunition shortages did not significantly slow progress.
The U.S. Army thus mastered combined-arms warfare. The army's
ability to learn on the battlefield, and to identify and implement lessons
learned to enhance its effectiveness, was central to its success. The army
innovated and adapted successfully because its peacetime doctrine, though
flawed,
was fundamentally sound, 136 The commitment of U.S. ground
forces to combat in the ETO within a year of entering the war, in a periph-
eral theater that minimized German and maximized Allied strengths,
allowed the U.S. Army to evaluate its doctrine, tactics, organization, and
equipment and to revise procedures, reorganize, retrain, and reequip.
Moreover, with sizable manpower and equipment reserves, the U.S. Army
could afford to and did-fight aggressively in Normandy.
The United States: The Leviathan Triumphant
293
The army's determination to learn on the battlefield during ongoing
combat operations was critically important to victory. The ninety-division
limit meant that few formations could be withdrawn from the front line at
any given time, and thus the army had to retrain in the combat zone. British
commanders who had observed U.S. forces both in earlier campaigns and
in Normandy recognized that the Americans had enhanced their combat
capabilities considerably since Tunisia. Prescient observers grudgingly
conceded that U.S. combat effectiveness was superior to their own, and one
British corps commander privately confided that "having seen a good deal
of them recently, I think there is a lot to learn from them. Their cooperation
Is excellent." 137 However, prejudice and ignorance ensured that most
British commanders continued to underestimate U.S. military capabili-
ties. 138
American adaptation and innovation occurred relatively rapidly and all
across the spectrum of military effectiveness. Tactical and technical ingenu-
ity, as well as operational flexibility characterized U.S. forces in
Normandy. The U.S. Army was able, with experience, consistently to
enhance its combat proficiency. Both the quality of basic training and of
retraining in the field showed significant improvement by 1944 in compari-
son to earlier years. The result was that U.S. forces were able both to sur-
mount virtually all the obstacles that confronted them in Normandy and,
ultimately, to vanquish the enemy.
Notes
1. Michael Doubler, Busting the Bocage: American Combined Arms
Operations in France, 6 June-31 July 1944 (Fort Leavenworth: CSI, U.S. Army
Command and General Staff College, 1988), 61-66; and Closing with the Enemy:
How G.I.s Fought the War in Europe, 1944-45 (Lawrence: Kansas University
Press, 1994), 63-68.
2. FUSA, Report on Ops., 1 August 1943-31 July 1944 (Paris: FUSA,
(1944]) 14 vols.; FUSA, Report on Ops.,
1 August 1944-9 May 1945 (Germany:
FUSA, 1945); TUSA, Report on Ops. (Germany: 1945); Elbridge Colby, The First
Army in Europe (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1969); Russell F. Weigley, Eisenhower's
Lieutenants: The Campaigns in France and Germany, 1944-1945 (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1981) Vol. I; Martin Blumenson, Breakout and Pursuit
(Washington, D.C.: OCMH, 1961); Gordon Harrison, Cross Channel Attack
(Washington, D.C.: OCMH, 1951; New York: BDD Books, 1993); Omaha
Beachhead (Washington, D.C.: War Department Historical Division [hereast.
WDHDI, 1945); Utah Beach to Cherbourg (Washington, D.C: WDHD, 1947); St.
Lô (7-19 July 1944) (Washington, D.C.: WDHD, 1946; CMH, 1984).
3. "Dislokation 709 Inf. Div., 5.6.1944," in Kurt Mehner, Die Geheimen
Tagesberichte der deutschen Wehrmachtfuhrung im Zweiten Welries, 1939-1945
(Osnabrück: Biblio, 1984), Bd. X, apdx.
4. Harrison, Alack, 305-328; Weigley, Lieutenants, 131-134; Joseph H.
Ewing, 29 Let's Go (Washington, D.C.: Infantry Journal Press,
1948); General
Board U.S. Forces in the Buropean Theater (hereafter GBUSFET) Rpt. 52,
"Armored Special Equipment," 18-19.
