86
Preparation: 1919-1944
units were thus not ready for a secondary indirect-fire role. As an illustra-
tion, by late 1943 the Allies had all but gained aerial superiority in the
ETO, yet U.S. antiaircraft artillery had absorbed four times as many per-
sonnel as the field artillery, leaving the army with large numbers of surplus
antiaircraft gunners. Consequently, massive reductions in the antiaircraft
establishment followed in 1944, with most of the gunners ending up as
infantry replacements. Because of the absence of a new mission once the
Axis air threat had diminished, antiaircraft artillery remained an underuti-
Despite the reforms initiated after Kasserine, only limited improve-
ment in U.S. air support materialized in Sicily and Italy. The army still
employed tactical aviation in Sicily primarily on air superiority missions.
Once this superiority was achieved, the USAAF shifted to close air support
and battlefield interdiction. This recipe became standard and was used on a
much bigger scale for OVERLORD in Normandy. Nevertheless, USAAF
intelligence gathering and photo reconnaissance remained poor, as did the
effectiveness of close air support missions (part of the latter problem was
that the USAAF lacked an effective dive bomber), 100 More significantly,
the two campaigns illustrated that three major obstacles to effective air-
ground cooperation remained: the problem of target acquisition; the lack of
a direct means of air-ground communication; and the poor aerial recogni-
tion skills of U.S. ground troops, which led to numerous attacks on Allied
aircraft. Given the propensity for air and ground assets to harm each other
and their inability to communicate, close air support remained an unpre-
dictable and dangerous weapon throughout 1943.101
Sicily and Italy proved especially instructive in terms of the logistic
requirements for an amphibious invasion against a defended coast. Beach
organization had clearly improved since the chaos in the TORCH landings
(technological innovation aided this improvement as Sicily saw the debut
of the DUKW amphibian truck) 102 By the Anzio landings in January 1944,
U.S. logistic support for amphibious assault had gained a high degree of
efficiency. 103
With all the Mediterranean experience under its belt, U.S. ground
forces made major strides toward becoming a powerful offensive army in
the year before D-Day. Americans learned an invaluable lesson regarding
the skill and tenacity of the enemy, thus paving the way for a successful
second front in the West. In the year preceding D-Day, the army devoted
considerable attention to improving combined-arms coordination both
among forces fighting in Italy and those stationed in the United
Kingdom, 104 The most effective means of promoting combined-arms team-
work was the principle adhered to by the Germans-
-habitual association of
combat arms in genuine combined-arms formations. But the policy of pool-
ing prevented U.S. divisions from easily developing combined-arms
expertise. The army remained wedded to pooling throughout 1943 on
87
The United States, 1939-1944: The Leviathan Awakens
grounds of economy and both because it anticipated the employment of
armor, tank destroyers, and artillery en masse in certain combat situations
and because it believed that permanent attachment would prevent training
for massed employment. 105 Combat experience demonstrated, however,
that pooling undermined combined-arms coordination. 106
Lack of available army troops also hindered combined-arms training.
Because of tactical requirements and matériel shortages, it was only in the
fall of 1943 that sufficient independent tank, tank destroyer, and antiaircraft
units became available for extensive combined-arms training with divi-
sions. Moreover, after the summer of 1943, a reaction set in against the
extreme emphasis on economy and flexibility, and a realization grew that
the army had gone too far in pooling to the detriment of building interarms
expertise. 107 Even though General McNair still opposed modification of
prevailing army organization, from August 1943 the army unofficially
began the semipermanent attachment of nondivisional troops to formations
preparing for OVERLORD in the United Kingdom.
Increased organizational flexibility from 1943 offset the decrease in
operational flexibility accorded by semipermanent attachment of army
troops to divisions. From TORCH onward the army started to make
increasing use of the regimental combat team (RCT) concept-a combined-
arms group of artillery, armor, and engineers built around an infantry regi-
ment-which added greater flexibility to U.S. infantry divisions. 108 As a
result of stepped-up training, the retreat from pooling, and greater organiza-
tional flexibility, American coordination improved in the year before D-
Day. However, serious deficiencies remained, especially among the raw
divisions in Britain, as the army's unwillingness to abandon pooling still
limited the degree of improvement possible. Despite progress, the U.S.
Army officially refused to sanction permanent assignment of army troops
to combat divisions. 109
Renewed discussion about pooling led to broader reevaluation of army
troops in general. Mediterranean combat experience had pointed to a press-
aircraft and tank destroyer units. 110 Reevaluation brought important
changes in artillery force structure too as the army increased the proportion
of medium and heavy artillery after mid-1943.Ill Growing experience also
led to a rethinking of the role and utility of tank destroyers: in light of les-
sons learned, the army reduced the number of tank destroyer units and
shifted back to towed antitank guns.
During 1943-1944 the army for the first time seriously tackled the
problem of the continuing decline of manpower quality. Combat experience
had revealed that existing manpower allocation policies eroded not only
junior officer leadership but morale and cohesion as well, and thus
increased casualties. 112 By mid-1943, the army was well aware of the exist-
ing manpower policies' adverse effect on combat effectiveness, and from
