22
Preparation: 1919-1944
foster the independence and initiative required for innovation.21 At the
same time, the army's regimental system promoted parochialism that ham-
pered battlefield cooperation by infantry, cavalry, and gunners. The army
learned the fundamental principles of modern warfare slowly, and at great
cost, on the fields of Flanders.
The legacies of World War I powerfully shaped British strategy, opera-
tions, and performance throughout World War II. The Great War had been a
disillusioning, misleading, and costly experience for Britain, and it left the
nation not only economically and financially weakened but psychologically
scarred. Most significant of all, the interwar army never escaped the haunt-
ing psychological legacies of the slaughter in the trenches as the British
people discovered after the war the true cost of the terrible battles of attri-
tion that had preceded final victory. Defense and casualty conservation-
the avoidance of undue losses-became the twin pillars of British strategic
and operational thought throughout the 1919-1945 period.
The material, psychological, and strategic legacies of the Great War, as
well as the social and political character of interwar Britain, created a cli-
mate hostile both to the maintenance of combat effective forces or to mili-
tary reform.22 The war had significantly eroded Britain's economic, demo-
graphic, and military strength, precipitating both massive demobilization
after 1919 and sweeping cuts in defense spending 23
The slaughter in the trenches had a profound psychological impact on
interwar Britain. An intellectual crisis, manifested in pacifism, wracked the
nation. Society questioned whether Britain had really emerged victorious
from the Great War, and such profound doubts led to widespread question-
ing of whether force could solve the disputes inherent in international rela-
tions. Many Britons placed undue faith in the ability of the nascent League
of Nations to resolve international disputes peacefully. Thus was born the
"never again" ethos, an instinctual rejection of the wisdom of preparing for
another major war. Pacifism and the "never again" sentiment forced the
services to justify not only defense spending but even their very existence.
Popular antimilitarism between the wars fueled both defense cuts and a cli-
mate inimical to military reform.
Domestic political concerns also contributed to Britain's reluctance to
fund defense between the wars.24 The ideological antimilitarism of the
Labour and Liberal parties and the Conservative Party's credo of commer-
cial growth and limited government all promoted defense cuts. Such gov-
ernment parsimony led to the introduction of the Ten Year Rule in 1919,
which mandated that defense estimates be framed on the assumption that
there was no likelihood of war for the following ten years. The implemen-
tation of the rule stifled preparation, crippled Britain's armaments industry,
and contributed directly to the decline in British military efficiency. It was
impossible for the army to maintain its effectiveness.25
The Great War also had significant strategic ramifications as Britain
The Interwar Period
23
abandoned the costly continental commitment it had undertaken in 1914
and reverted to the maritime strategy that had formed earlier British foreign
policy.26 Such a policy relied on continental allies and economic blockade
by the Royal Navy as Britain's first line of defense; the army reverted to
policing the empire. But to defend the empire required a large fleet and,
after 1918, also an air force, which left insufficient defense allocations to
maintain a sizeable home army for continental service. Indeed, commenta-
tors argued that a continued continental commitment would actually reduce
Britain's independence by tying Britain to French strategy.
Britain's interwar strategic and international policies, therefore, pro-
foundly shaped the condition, character, and capabilities of its army. The
abandonment of a continental commitment left the army with no clear mis-
sion between the wars, and controversy thus raged within it as to what role
it should prepare for. The army's lack of a clear mission hindered the main-
tenance of effective combat forces in the United Kingdom between the
wars. Imperial policing compartmentalized and dispersed the army in gar-
risons around the globe and reduced the home army merely to service over-
seas garrisons. It lacked balance, mobility, or the capability for rapid
deployment to the continent. Moreover, expanded British overseas commit-
ments in the 1920s stretched the army even thinner. 27 Finally, this system
made it difficult for the army to concentrate a field force in Britain in the
late 1930s in response to rising German and Italian threats.
Interwar British governments, the Treasury, much of the army, and
most of the public thus opposed contingency planning for another continen-
tal commitment between the wars. In the face of political and popular senti-
ment, it was impossible for the army to forge any kind of expeditionary
force. Even in the late 1930s, when it became clear that another such com-
mitment was unavoidable, British politicians and military theorists opposed
the re-creation of a national conscript army and supported instead "limited
liability."28 Shaped by Great War experience, the proponents of limited lia-
bility argued that Britain must avoid being sucked into another protracted
ground war on the continent. Instead, they argued that Britain should rely
on its traditional blockade-now reinforced by air power, with heavy
bombers able to strike deep into enemy territory to shatter the vulnerable
morale of enemy civilians and destroy the enemy's will to fight. The advo-
cates of limited liability argued that technological advances, especially
mechanization and the rise of air power, made a large land army redundant
and that Britain should instead rely on a small, elite, professional armored
force.
In this political, economic, and cultural climate the army had difficulty
even in subsisting. A decline in funding inevitably brought a decline in effi-
ciency. The interwar army regressed, mentally stagnated, and proved reluc-
tant to study the lessons of World War I or to preserve its experience by for-
mulating coherent doctrine. Nonetheless, in the 1920s the army remained
