preparation deficient. The ability of armed forces to adapt during wartime
and on the battlefield is, therefore, a key ingredient in the creation of mili-
tary effectiveness and in the preservation of national security.
The question of how armed forces adapt and innovate during wartime
is thus fundamental to this study. Implementing change in wartime is a
complex, multifaceted, interrelated activity that involves most functions
and facets of a military institution. To enhance its battlefield effectiveness a
military has to consider its own strategy, doctrine, tactics, organization,
training, and equipment. Equally, it must consider the same characteristics
for its opponent. It must also first recognize the need for change as well as
value change. Since modification inherently enters the realm of the
unknown, powerful evidence that the potential gains outweigh possible
drawbacks must exist for military institutions to make fundamental
changes. Consequently, combat experience provides the greatest stimulus
for adaptation. Not only do armed forces require combat experience but, to
adapt effectively, they also require mechanisms to determine, disseminate,
and distill "lessons learned" to adapt effectively. Yet, discerning accurately
through the fog of war what actually happens on the battlefield is extremely
difficult.
The character of the 1914-1918 battlefield, for example, and the les-
sons to be drawn from it were difficult to discern between the wars and
have remained that way. In the interwar period only Germany developed an
accurate understanding of the nature of warfare on the Western Front dur-
ing World War I and historians have only recently come to appreciate that
conflict's complexities.4 Moreover, necessary modifications must be dis-
seminated both to new recruits in training and to veterans in the field. Not
only must basic training be reorganized, but units in the combat zone must
also retrain in the field amid ongoing combat operations.
Innovation is also inherently nonlinear: different kinds of adaptation
bring varying degrees of improvement in combat effectiveness. Strategic
shifts and doctrinal refinement are most likely to bring the greatest benefit,
while improved organization, tactics, and weapons typically bring less sub-
stantial, and more ephemeral, rewards. Input-output yields also vary from
combatant to combatant. The process of innovation is nonlinear because it
involves numerous actors, complex technologies, and marked uncertainty
incapable of simple reduction or quantitative analysis.s
The issue of how military institutions adapt has considerable historical
significance. While economic, industrial, and demographic strength have
played major roles in determining the outcome of modern wars, militaries
still have had to win on the battlefield. The relative success and rapidity
with which rival military institutions have enhanced their combat effective-
ness has shaped the course and outcome of modern wars. National assess-
ments of the origin, nature, and extent of perceived threats have also had a
significant influence on whether military institutions innovate successfully.
Introduction
In the absence of powerful, immediate, and clearly perceived threats, mili-
tary institutions sometimes find it difficult to generate in peacetime the
necessary impetus for sweeping reform. At the same time, wartime events
can also act as major obstacles to effective adaptation. Most innovation is
thus evolutionary: adaptation emerges gradually and incrementally through
trial and error, experimentation, evaluation, and refinement. A complex
process of organizational culture, strategic requirements, combat realities,
and capacity to adapt shapes innovation. Prevailing military culture more
greatly affects the capacity for innovation-the adaptability-of military
institutions than individual personalities.? In the 1919-1945 period both the
U.S. and German militaries generally possessed a culture that promoted
creativity and innovation, while British and Canadian military culture, on
the other hand, often militated against effective adaptation. Indeed, the mil-
itary history of the twentieth century demonstrates that organizational and
institutional rigidity are major obstacles to effective innovation.
Moreover, the more narrow and specific a military problem, the easier
it is for military institutions to solve the problem by innovation or adapta-
tion. Germany addressed and solved the tactical and operational problems
associated with static, bloody trench warfare during the latter stages of the
Great War, though at the price of strategic myopia that the war could still
be won. The British Army, on the other hand, failed to develop broad mili-
tary proficiency until late in World War II because the fundamental prob-
lem was its entire approach to war and the absence of a coherent, realistic
doctrine grounded in its extensive Great War experience. The problems that
afflicted British operations during World War II were, therefore, not
amenable to easy or quick correction.
That this was the case is illustrated by the contrasting British and
German experiences with armor. Britain failed to adopt armor effectively
between the wars because there was no place for tanks in an imperial
defense force that aspired to hold on to its existing empire and that sought
to defeat aggression through a protracted strategy of attrition that took
advantage of Britain's demographic, financial, and industrial strength.& The
interwar German military, on the other hand, was institutionally predis-
posed to innovation because Germany was determined to escape the conse-
quences of its defeat in World War I, and wrest what most Germans still
considered to be its rightful place in the sun. Committed to aggression, the
Germans were able to adapt (though not without difficulty) the tank to tra-
ditional offensive-oriented Prussian strategic tenets to forge the blitzkrieg
approach of strategic deep penetration and maneuver by combined-arms
mechanized forces.
Many factors affect the ability of military institutions to adapt in
wartime: capabilities, strength, and tenacity of the opponent; time con-
straints; military commitments; and resources. Less quantifiable, but equal-
ly important, considerations include a military institution's character-its
