178
Preparation: 1919-1944
officer, he had held various staff positions between the wars. A brigadier at
the start of World War II, he was promoted to lieutenant general and chief
of the general staff in July 1940. He subsequently took command of the I
Canadian Corps in the fall of 1943 even though he had never commanded a
combat unit. His experience as a corps commander was only for a few
months before his elevation to command of the Canadian First Army. This
inexperience caused Montgomery serious doubts about his ability to lead
this army in northwest Europe. 8 In fact, of the four Allied army command-
ers slated for OVERLORD, Montgomery had the least faith in Crerar. 59 Lt.
Gen. Guy G. Simonds, commander of the II Canadian Corps, was a 1925
Sword of Honor graduate from the Royal Military College, who had served
as an artillery major at the outbreak of hostilities in 1939. He received rapid
promotion, and served in several staff positions and as a regimental and
brigade commander. He also served with the Eighth Army in North Africa,
where he had immediately impressed Montgomery. In the summer of 1943,
Simonds became Canada's youngest general when he took command of the
Ist Canadian Division in Sicily. He also briefly commanded 5th Canadian
Armoured Division in Italy before being recalled to lead the Il Canadian
Corps in January 1944. Simonds was clearly both the most experienced and
talented of the senior Canadian commanders.60
The three Canadian division commanders, however, all lacked com-
mand and combat experience. Maj. Gen. R. F. L. Keller, who had begun his
career as a permanent force infantry officer, took command of the 3d
Division in September 1943. Maj. Gen. Charles Foulkes had also begun his
career as a permanent force infantry officer. After 1939 he received steady
promotion and took over the 2d Division in January 1944, even though, like
Keller, he had not held an operational command. Maj. Gen. G. Kitching
was a Sandhurst graduate who had served with a British infantry regiment,
then commanded the Loyal Edmonton Regiment, and the 11th Canadian
Infantry Brigade. To his surprise he was promoted to command the 4th
Armoured Division shortly before D-Day, even though he had never previ-
ously commanded armored forces. 61
The roots of the uncertain leadership abilities of the senior Canadian
commanders lay in the interwar retrenchment of the Canadian military,
which meant that Canada entered World War II with an extremely small
pool of potential future senior commanders. Because the officer corps
expanded two hundredfold in the early war years, there was a constant
shortage of qualified officers. Out of necessity even mediocre officers
received relatively rapid promotion. Thereafter, the army's continued lack
of combat exposure meant that battle-experienced commanders remained a
rare commodity. Even in 1944, most senior Canadian command positions
were held by men who did not possess the experience normal for such high
rank. The Canadian Army entered the northwest European campaign with
unproven senior commanders; only Simonds was really experienced
Canada, 1939-1944: The Politics of Neglect
179
enough to perform at a level commensurate with his rank. Further, tardy
appointments exacerbated the uphill leadership task that such officers
faced: as of 1 January 1944, only one of the five most senior command
positions had been permanently filled. None of this augured well for the
operational performance of Canadian First Army in Normandy.
From 1939 to 1944 the Canadian Army had made huge strides toward
transforming an indifferent militia barely able to defend Canada into an
independent army capable of limited offensive action. Despite these strenu-
ous efforts, however, the army had not entirely succeeded in this task by
June 1944. The ground it had to cover to catch up to its adversary was truly
enormous, and the Canadians' lack of combat experience so hampered
these efforts that even five years of preparation proved insufficient to forge
a Canadian army of significant offensive capabilities. Indeed, inexperience
even misdirected much of the Canadian effort.
Another major concern that remained in 1944 was the quality of the
infantry. As early as 1941 there was evidence of serious problems with the
Canadian manpower procurement and training system. In theory Canadian
recruits went overseas only after completing four months of basic training.
But inexperience, excessive decentralization, and inefficiency led to the
frequent dispatch of undertrained recruits to Britain. The arrival of so many
"raw or nearly raw" recruits forced Canadian Reinforcement Units in
Britain to conduct additional basic training before progressing to collective
training 62 This policy produced a multiplication and duplication of the
Canadian training establishment on both sides of the Atlantic-uncon-
trolled expansion that went unchecked until late 1943 when the army half-
heartedly tried to cut waste and duplication. Decentralization also caused
considerable variety in training.
There was little improvement in training quality before D-Day: instruc-
tion in Canada and Britain remained poorly coordinated, recruits continued
to arrive in Britain undertrained, and training remained decentralized. In
1944, for example, Canadian recruits still were attending, on average, five
training centers prior to departure for Britain.63 These deficiencies in pro-
curement and training lengthened the time it took the army to produce fully
trained troops and exacerbated the difficulties of maintaining troop
strength. As a result, in May 1944 the Canadian First Army was still under
strength 64 In fact, it took the replacement shortage in the spring of 1944 to
force the Canadian Army to address the poor quality of training in Britain.
Prior to D-Day, however, the army made no sustained effort to improve the
quality of instruction.65
Yet another serious problem on the eve of D-Day was the inadequacy
of Canadian combined-arms preparation. In theory, Canadian troops had
repeatedly practiced cooperation between armor and infantry. In fact, in the
inal year before D-Day, some Canadian formations had spent 90 percent of
their training time on collective training, but the amount of combined-arms
