Preparation: 1919-1944
18
dents pursued "sound business principles" of low taxation and low govern-
ment expenditure and downsized the military, a process greatly accelerated
by the Great Depression of the 1930s. Moreover, the government directed
most of its meager defense funds to the navy, the country's traditional first
line of defense. The interwar army thus suffered such unprecedented neg-
lect that it became less combat ready than at any time in its history.3
The 1920 National Defense Act (NDA) established a 280,000-strong
regular army of nine infantry and two cavalry divisions backed by the
Organized Reserves and the National Guard. Underfunding ensured that the
army could not even maintain this modest establishment. It remained at
half strength for most of the interwar period, while the neglect of the
Reserves and National Guard left them totally unfit for modern war.
Financial stringency also forced the army to adopt desperate and pernicious
economy measures. It reduced commissioned and noncommissioned offi-
cers in grade, rationed fuel, curtailed training and maneuvers, and slashed
unit establishments. Such economy inexorably sapped combat effective-
ness.4
At the same time, doctrinal controversy, which divided the interwar
army between competing doctrines of annihilation and of mobility, further
limited the army's combat effectiveness. Basic doctrine emphasized hard
fighting as the key to victory, since the military's experience suggested that
the only proven way to defeat an enemy was to destroy its army through the
application of mass and concentration as had General Grant during the
Civil War and General Pershing in the Great War. Doctrine thus advocated
a strategy of annihilation. While the army's tactics and organization empha-
sized such application of mass and overwhelming power to crush the
enemy in battle, its weapons and training reflected its tradition of frontier
fighting and were thus more suited for tactics of mobility and maneuver.S
Doctrine reflected the nation's military experience and thus was offen-
sive in orientation. But limited combat experience ensured that neither doc-
trine nor tactics emphasized speed, surprise, or rapid exploitation. The art
of deception was virtually nonexistent, and tactics did not seek to exploit
specific enemy weaknesses. Interwar doctrine also upheld 1914-1918 con-
ceptions of combined-arms coordination that viewed infantry as dominant
and armor and artillery as supporting arms. Based on its Great War experi-
ence, the U.S. Army was well aware of the theoretical need to integrate
arms, units, and weapon systems on the modern battlefield. It proved far
more difficult, however, for the interwar army to decide exactly what mis-
sions arms of service, types of units, and weapons would have in future
war, let alone put theory into practice.
The biggest difficulty the interwar army faced, though, was that it
gained no practical experience with which to test the validity of its doc-
trine, organization, and tactics. Inevitably, therefore, the audit of war dur-
ing World War II demonstrated that the doctrine was flawed. However, cen-
The Interwar Period
19
tral to the wartime army's eventual military effectiveness was that combat
revealed that most of its doctrine was basically sound because, unlike Great
Britain, the United States had both examined and preserved its Great War
experience. Thus the deficiencies that remained could be—and largely
were-corrected during the course of the war.
Controversy also raged in the interwar army over the future role of
mechanized forces and of air power. During 1918-1920 the U.S. Army had
fielded its own Tank Corps, but the NDA abolished it and reassigned armor
to the infantry. This decision and the limited experience of tank warfare
during World War I hindered development of armored doctrine between the
wars. In the late 1920s, the army emulated the British Experimental
Mechanized Force (EMF) and created the 7th Cavalry Brigade
(Mechanized). As in Britain, the U.S. military initially envisaged mecha-
nized cavalry as fulfilling traditional cavalry roles of reconnaissance and
exploitation. However, unlike the British EMF, the 7th Cavalry Brigade
became permanent and, despite severely limited manpower, equipment, and
funding, demonstrated the potential of armored forces to carry out inde-
pendent operations. At the same time, the offensive orientation of U.S.
doctrine enabled the army to assimilate tanks into existing doctrine more
effectively than Britain proved able to. However, even though the army rec-
ognized the potential of armor between the wars, resource constraints
denied it an effective tank force prior to 1941. These limits also ensured
that the army lacked antitank capability; it remained wedded to the outdat-
ed belief that artillery should provide antitank defense, which stifled devel-
opment both of antitank weapons and of effective means of employing
them.8
Unlike the Tank Corps, the U.S. Army Air Corps (USAAC) survived
and developed as a distinct organization between the wars. Its interwar
quest for independence not only left it reluctant to cooperate with the
ground army, but led its adherents to push the independent strategic poten-
tial of air power at the expense of the tactical support of ground forces.
Thus it remained committed to building up a force of long-range heavy
bombers to attack enemy industry and destroy its warmaking potential.
While it gave some thought and resources to battlefield interdiction, the
USAAC made almost no preparation for close air support of ground forces
between the wars. So at the outbreak of World War II, the USAAC was
largely incapable of directly assisting U.S. ground forces on the
battlefield. Its failure to develop a tactical support capability reflected that
while accepting in principle the need for integration of arms within servic-
es, the interwar U.S. armed forces remained hostile to interservice coordi-
nation and cooperation, a reality reflected in the largely unimpressive joint
exercises the services occasionally held between the wars. 10
If the army's combat branches suffered badly between the wars, its
support services deteriorated even further. Alongside the inevitable decline
