36
Preparation: 1919-1944
ligible military capabilities. The War Office rated only two divisions opera-
tional, and even these remained undertrained and underequipped. Britain,
therefore, acquiesced to the partition of Czechoslovakia to postpone war
and buy time for rearmament. After Munich, changing public and parlia-
mentary opinion pushed the government into greater defense expenditures,
and, finally in February 1939, Britain renewed its continental commitment
to France and Belgium, gave its armed forces an unequivocal mandate to
prepare for war, and ordered six divisions readied for continental service. 73
That the army had only six months to prepare the British Expeditionary
Force (BEF) left it with no choice but to assume the defensive in the west.
The army required planning, resources, and time to fix its interwar neg-
lect-but none of these did it possess. That the BEF had less than a year for
serious preparation does much to explain the debacle that befell British
arms in France during May 1940.
Finally the army began to prepare a modest expeditionary force. But
without long-term planning this effort was unbalanced. Britain initially
decided to commit the BEF to the northeastern flank of the French Army on
the Belgian border in a replay of its deployment in 1914. But here the simi-
larity ended, for the 1914 BEF was a much better prepared fighting force
than its 1939 equivalent. Simultaneous rapid reequipment and massive
expansion was simply impossible to achieve in a few months, especially
given simultaneous introduction of conscription and expansion of the
Territorial Army. In 1939 Britain, therefore, cobbled together an unbal-
anced expeditionary force short on supporting arms and service elements
from a ragtag peacetime army. Dispute within the army over the wisdom of
another continental commitment, government parsimony, and the running
down of the military-industrial base all hampered preparation of the BEF.
Moreover, the government had also to channel resources to home defense,
especially antiaircraft defenses, as well as the navy and air force. Yet even
after February 1939, peacetime habits died hard and the Chamberlain gov-
ernment remained hostile to the notion and expense of a continental com-
mitment. Circumstances, therefore, severely circumscribed the army's
endeavors to fashion an expeditionary force.
Army rearmament made some progress during summer 1939. The
Mobile Division was reorganized as the 1st Armoured, and belated reequip-
ment finally began to transform it into a combat formation. The onrush of
events, however, left the army little time to contemplate broader theoretical
and doctrinal issues. As a result, the army's operational concepts in 1939
were inapplicable and outmoded for modern war—a situation that was
hardly surprising given the lack of awareness of future wartime strategic
objectives. The army went to war while in the throes of massive expansion
and equipped for imperial defense; it was intellectually and organizational-
ly ill prepared to meet the German Army on the continent.
At the same time, regimental tribalism and the absence of holistic do
37
The Interwar Period
trine led each branch to prepare for war in a narrow, parochial, and idiosyn-
cratic fashion as each considered problems and developments through a
narrow single-arms view. Given the largely unavoidable circumstances the
army found itself in at the start of the war, it was crucial that the wartime
army learn on the job to improve its combat effectiveness. However, the
interwar army failed to examine problems analytically or thoroughly; nor
did it examine, verify, or refine doctrine, tactics, or organization through
trial and error. Without central direction, doctrine, training, and capabilities
varied widely not only from arm to arm, but from unit to unit. Thus while
the Royal Artillery had partially preserved the lessons of the Great War, the
infantry had largely jettisoned its institutional knowledge. In fact, most reg-
iments did not perform realistic training nor possess common doctrine
between the wars because the army's approach remained idiosyncratic and
individual, rather than uniform.74
The interwar British military's most effective innovations were defen-
sive in orientation because defensive technology best fitted Britain's strate-
gic posture. The British armed services enhanced their signals intelligence
capability and developed defensive-oriented radar. Britain had lagged
behind Germany in radar technology prior to 1940, but the British armed
forces applied radar much more effectively. The RAF, in particular, adapted
its thinking to utilize radar effectively and developed the Chain Home
early-warning system that played an important role in the winning of the
Battle of Britain. 75 Just as geography and policy promoted offensive-orient-
ed innovation in the interwar German military, so it promoted defensive-
oriented innovation in the British armed forces.
The army that went to war in September 1939 was in the middle of
expansion from a minimal base and was thus in poor condition. Its senior
leadership lacked even peacetime operational experience. Moreover, mech-
anization since the mid-1930s had made the experience of earlier exercises
largely irrelevant in 1939. The army lacked coherent doctrine and tactics,
and training quality varied dramatically from unit to unit.
Britain also went to war without commitment to, mechanisms for, or
experience of, interservice cooperation. The RAF viewed the direct support
of ground forces as dangerous and unprofitable and therefore to be con-
ducted only as a last resort. Instead, wedded to a heavy bomber force,
which it saw as a independent strategic instrument capable of winning wars
in its own right, the RAF was only prepared to aid the army indirectly by
achieving aerial superiority and by providing occasional reconnaissance
and interdiction missions when other priorities permitted. 76 The interwar
RAF rejected the need for specialized close-support aircraft, formations,
and training. Its belief in the strategic independence of the bomber force
and the preferment the RAF consequently received placed the air force in
competition with the other services in national strategy."7 The Royal Navy,
too, despite a long tradition of overseas expeditions, failed to develop a
