290
Normandy 1944
the 30th Division, and the material and logistic weaknesses of the enemy
strike force, against the background of a rapidly deteriorating German
strategic position. 21 At the same time, the IX TAC flew deep interdiction
and air superiority missions and inflicted heavy casualties on enemy forces
retreating westward, steadily draining away German mobility as once again
the cumulative logistic effects of interdiction attacks exceeded direct
destruction of enemy equipment and vehicles. With the enemy forced to
retreat in broad daylight, tactical air strikes inflicted very heavy damage. 122
The thwarting of the Mortain counteroffensive presented Allied forces
with opportunities to envelop and annihilate the German armies in
Normandy, either between Argentan and Falaise or along the Seine River.
Yet the Allies' failure to understand and conduct war at the operational
level left them without a strategic blueprint to exploit success, which meant
that they failed to capitalize on these opportunities. The improvised theater
strategy that thus emerged in August allowed the enemy to evade annihila-
tion in Normandy. 123 The unusual caution displayed by Bradley in the sec-
ond week of August clearly reflected the lack of U.S. operational-level doc-
trine. As U.S. forces raced eastward to meet Montgomery's troops pushing
south from Caen toward Falaise they became strung out and, again, short
on supplies. Bradley believed his forces had become overextended and
feared that continuing the advance beyond Argentan would both lead to
friendly-fire casualties and a successful German breakout. A deteriorating
supply situation, with fuel and ammunition stocks dropping sharply as the
advance outran its logistic support, contributed to Bradley's caution. 124
Dwindling intelligence in the fluid conditions of August led Bradley to
believe that the majority of the enemy had already slipped out of the pocket
forming at Falaise. He planned instead to catch the Germans in a bigger
trap along the Seine, I25 In reality, however, the enemy was still in the bag,
and a U.S. push to Falaise would likely have produced a German catastro-
phe. But Bradley halted the advance on 13 August and did not resume it for
five days, thus removing possibilities for complete victory in Normandy.
Forced to improvise, Eisenhower and Bradley failed to see clearly and
grasp firmly the opportunity that had presented itself. 126
Instead, Bradley divided his forces and directed V Corps to the Seine,
which left neither prong strong enough to defeat the enemy. The Americans
had too little strength either to firmly close the door to the Falaise pocket at
Argentan, or to thrust north along the Seine after the V Corps had stormed
across the river at Mantes-Gassicourt on 19 August. By going for a classic
double encirclement the Allies got neither.
During the breakout U.S. forces continued to innovate technically to
augment their firepower. The 2d Armored Division made the first use by
U.S. forces in the ETO of rocket artillery with tank-mounted T34 launch-
ers, 2 Troops also relied heavily on mobile firepower during the pursuit.
Self-propelled 155mm howitzers provided invaluable support for armored
The United States: The Leviathan Triumphant
291
combat commands and improvised self-propelled light antiaircraft
weapons, employed extensively for the first time in a ground support role,
demonstrated their effectiveness. 128
In sum, intimate interservice coordination and growing mastery of the
combined-arms air-land battle brought success in Normandy. And the U.S.
military did not simply bludgeon the enemy into defeat as conventional
interpretation suggests. 129 U.S. troops fought under many limitations— poor
coordination, inadequate infantry firepower, lack of preparation for bocage
warfare, an inefficient replacement system, flawed attack doctrine, ammu-
nition shortages, and tactics poorly suited to German defensive methods-
that limited their combat effectiveness. Central to U.S. success, therefore,
was the professional commitment by commanders and troops alike to eval-
uate honestly their combat performance, identify deficiencies, perfect new
tactics and procedures, improvise new equipment, and retrain intensively in
the field. As a result, U.S. forces enhanced their combat effectiveness dur-
ing the campaign.
The most significant improvement occurred in interarms and interser-
vice coordination. By August 1944, U.S. military coordination was superior
to that of the Germans in their heyday in 1940 as the U.S. mastered the air-
ground battle. American air power ably supported the ground battle in
Normandy as fighter-bombers proved more accurate and deadly than heavy
artillery. Moreover, the deep interdiction mission that tactical strike aircraft
initially focused on exacerbated the already severe logistic difficulties the
Germans faced on the American sector of the front and contributed directly
to the ultimate German collapse (see Table 7.6).
Table 7.6 Allied Fighter-Bomber Sortie Claims in Normandy
Force
Sorties
Flown
Claims
Armor
Vehicles
Claims
per Sortie
2d (British) TAF
IX (U.S.) TAC
Total
9.896.
2,891
12,787
Sources: Hallion, Strike from the Sky, 227.
257
134
391
3,340
2,520
6,251
0.36
0.92
N/A
The greater territory overrun by the First Army allowed more U.S.
squadrons to operate from airstrips on the Continent, which reduced
response times and increased sortie ratios. Aircraft were also of high quali-
Y, the Republic P-47 Thunderbolt, in particular, proving a robust and flexi-
ble tactical strike aircraft that could absorb heavy punishment 130 The U.S.
Army Air Force (USAAF) also developed radar-guided vectoring onto tar-
