352
Normandy 1944
was inexperienced, and the abilities of General Crerar gravely concerned
General Montgomery, who considered him unfit for command. 72 Moreover,
in early August the First Army was incapable of major offensive action
because most of its services and its tactical air support remained in
Britain. 13 This lack of readiness, in particular the lack of air support, con-
strained Canadian operations in August. The arrival of the 4th Armoured
Division in late July did strengthen the Canadian First Army, though, and
allowed the 3d Division to withdraw for rest and refitting after 55 days in
the line.74
In late July, Panzer Group West denuded its defenses south of Caen to
build a new western flank facing the U.S. troops advancing from
Avranches.75 To prevent further enemy redeployments to the U.S. sector,
Montgomery ordered the Canadians to launch a series of holding attacks
south of Caen. Given the dramatically thinned German defenses, such lim-
ited attacks appeared more likely to succeed.
In early August the inexperienced 2d Division and green 4th Armoured
Division executed a succession of battalion assaults intended to hold
German reserves on the Caen front. On 1 August, the Calgary Highlanders
struck three times for Tilly-la-Campagne but were halted each time by
heavy enemy fire. In these operations, Canadian troops continued to inno-
vate to minimize casualties and to overcome enemy defenses. During the
night of 1-2 August, the Lincoln and Welland Regiment launched the first
silent Canadian night attack in northwest Europe, but this too stalled before
it had really started.77 This series of attacks concluded on 5 August with
three abortive battalion assaults on Verrières, May, and Tilly by the Black
Watch of Canada, the Regiment Maissonneuve, and the Argyll and
Sutherland Highlanders.
These abortive assaults on 5 August concluded the intermediate stage
of Canadian operations in Normandy. From 7 June on, the Canadians had
launched with mixed success a series of limited, break-in battles, which had
largely failed in the face of strong German defenses situated in depth in
good defensive terrain. Between 18 July and 5 August, the Canadian II
Corps launched twelve abortive battalion assaults against the Verrières
Ridge at a cost of more than 2,000 casualties. 78 Canadian troops had not
performed well in these operations due to inexperience, flawed doctrine,
and lack of specific preparation for this role.?9 British attack doctrine had
proven inflexible and cumbersome, and failed to stress the combined-arms
coordination that was essential for victory. Poor coordination had led to
repeated defeat in detail. Canadian training had lacked realism and failed to
instill flexibility. Tactically, not only had Canadian troops rarely employed
deception measures, but poor radio discipline and predictable artillery fire
programs repeatedly compromised surprise in the attack. Canadian forces
had also not managed to utilize fully available tactical air support.
When the Canadian First Army became operational in early August, it
Canada: Learning the Hard Way
353
too was confronted with a situation very different from that for which it had
trained. It had practiced exploiting a breakout against a badly weakened
German defense, but had encountered intact enemy defenses. Before it
could conduct its exploitation mission, the First Army had to execute a
breakthrough battle for which it had not been trained. Moreover, logistic
constraints aggravated Canadian operational difficulties. The Canadians
had limited transport capacity, which prolonged the buildup time required
for major operations, with the result that ammunition shortages restricted
artillery support for Crerar's two major August offensives. 80
On 8 August the Canadians launched a major new offensive to shatter
the German defenses southeast of Caen. The operation, named TOTALIZE,
and planned by Guy Simonds, was the first Canadian effort to devise a
comprehensive operational plan to overcome the German defense in depth,
which had previously stalled all Canadian offensives.8l The operation's
name implied that it would be a total effort on the part of the Il Corps.
Simonds sought to achieve surprise through the timing of the attack and the
methods employed. To compensate for the inability of Canadian artillery to
keep up with the advance and maintain fire support, Simonds substituted
the use of air power. He arranged a novel, but complex, nighttime bombing
attack, followed by a nighttime break-in. To get the infantry forward quick-
ly and with fewer losses, Simonds mounted them in improvised armored
personnel carriers converted from surplus U.S. M7 Priest 105mm self-pro-
pelled guns, officially designated Kangaroos, but more popularly known as
"unfrocked priests" or "holy rollers."82 To maintain surprise, Simonds for-
bade a preliminary artillery bombardment or stepped-up counterbattery fire
before TOTALIZE to reduce indications of an imminent assault. Only after
the attack began, did 312 guns fire on counterbattery targets and 408 guns
lay down a rolling barrage to a depth of 3.5 miles. Behind the barrage, the
two infantry divisions supported by two armored brigades organized into
combined-arms task forces were to break in to the enemy positions and
pierce the German main line of resistance (MLR). 83
Simonds also addressed the Canadian difficulty in translating a break-
in into a breakout. For the first tim ual inning for TOTALIZE took full
account of the depth of German defenses. 84 Once through the forward
German line, simonds arranged for a second strategie bombing attack, 1-
hours after the first, to smash the second German line of resistance and
lanking positions. Thereafter, two armored divisions, the Canadian 4th and
he fresh Polish 1st, would follow through and penetrate the most rearward
German defense line.
TOTALIZE was thus an innovative plan that grappled with the prose
lems that had bedeviled earlier Canadian operations.
Both the nighttime
attack by heavy bombers and the usueuen ›vised armored personnel car-
Tiers were new. Given the drastic thinning of the German defenses south of
Caen, Simonds had high expectations of success. TOTALILE began di
