A Campaign Overview
At first light, on 6 June 1944, Allied forces began landing at five beaches
along a 20-mile front on the coast of Normandy between the eastern
Cotentin Peninsula to the west and Le Havre Bay to the east. On the left
flank of the invasion Anglo-Canadian forces belonging to Gen. Bernard
Law Montgomery's 21st Army Group landed on three beaches, designated
Gold, Juno, and Sword, in front of the city of Caen. Montgomery's troops
quickly established themselves ashore in the face of moderate resistance
but were unable to capture their ambitious D-Day objective, the important
port town of Caen. On Montgomery's right, to the west, troops of General
Omar Bradley's U.S. First Army landed on Omaha Beach astride the bluffs
of the Calvados coast and at Utah Beach at the southeastern tip of the
Cotentin Peninsula, At Utah, U.S. troops soon established themselves
ashore in the face of light opposition, but at Omaha the outcome hung in
the balance for many hours in the face of determined German resistance
before troops of the Ist and 29th U.S. Infantry Divisions established a shal-
low and tenuous lodgement. On the flanks of the bridgehead the Allies
dropped three parachute divisions. The British 6th Airborne Division land-
ed east of the Orne River to gain a buffer zone that would protect the left
wing of the lodgement from flanking counterattacks. The U.S. 82a and
Olst Airborne Divisions dropped behind Utah Beach astride the Merderer
River to protect the right flank of the bridgehead. Though badly scattered,
Allied airborne forces added depth to the lodgement and managed to dis-
rupt and foil the weak German counterthrusts aimed at repelling the Allied
landings. By the end of D-Day, even though few realized it at the time, the
anes nau stared a permanem seoung me lane.
After D-Day, however, the British advance quickly stalled as powerful
enemy armored reserves massed at Caen in an effort to drive the Anglo-
Canadians back into the sea. In the process, these Allied forces suffered a
number of local reverses, the Canadians especially so. The most serious o1
these occurred on 7 June as the Canadian 3d Division pushed boldly inland
247
