142
Preparation: 1919-1944
trained together in conjunction rather than in concert. The army's tradition
of imperial policing and its deep-seated regimentalism worked against
improved coordination; the traditionalism enshrined in the regimental sys-
tem led each branch of service to guard jealously its sacred independence.
At the same time, the army's coordination difficulties were in part doctrinal
because doctrine failed to extend coordination below division level. The
armored division, for example, coordinated the firepower provided by the
motorized infantry brigade with the maneuverability of the armored
brigade. Only slowly, as the war progressed, did training manuals place
greater emphasis on combined-arms coordination. 195
Concern over infantry quality still remained. Political decisions about
manpower allocation in part accounted for the limited improvement in
infantry quality that had occurred. The infantry remained at the bottom of
recruitment priority, given the unprecedented manpower demands of indus-
try, the technical branches, and the other services. The doctrine of machines
over men that flourished with the cementing of the British-U.S. alliance
drew many men of ability out of the infantry and into the technical and
mechanized branches. At the same time the Battles of Britain and of the
Atlantic, the bomber offensive, and the amphibious armada drew more
high-quality personnel into the Royal Navy and the RAF.
Yet the army itself was also responsible for poor infantry quality:
starved from without, the infantry was also robbed from within. 19 In a
break with tradition, the wartime army diverted major resources to special
forces—volunteer elite units-
-as repeated defeats tarnished its reputation
and promoted the creation of elite forces that appeared to offer good
prospects of restoring wounded pride. The proliferation of special forces
also reflected Churchill's determination to strike back at nazi-occupied
Europe when regular forces were incapable of offensive action. The first
British special forces, the independent companies that harassed the German
advance in Norway while the Allies evacuated, evolved into the comman-
dos, army and Royal Marine light raiding units. After Dunkirk, Churchill
expanded and concentrated these raiding forces into the Directorate of
Combined Operations, which represented a major diversion of resources at
a time when Britain had few operational divisions. Thereafter, special
forces proliferated beyond all reasonable demands, resulting in more than
twenty distinct types whose functions often overlapped. 197
The most significant elite troops were the airborne forces. After the
daring German capture of the Belgian fort of Eben Emael and despite the
powerful opposition of Air Marshal "Bomber" Harris and chief of the Air
Staff, Air Marshal Portal, airborne infantry forces had expanded to two
divisions by 1943.198 But its own obsession with strategic bombing led the
RAF to neglect the support of airborne operations, with the result that its
glider and transport pilots were initially badly trained. This led to the poor
showing in Sicily, where the RAF deposited under 10 percent of the para-
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
143
troopers on their drop zones. Thus, prior to D-Day, airborne forces had yet
to demonstrate their full potential.
By D-Day, special forces amounted to one-quarter of British infantry
strength and were a clear drain on infantry quality. 199 Moreover, the
achievements of special forces did not justify such large-scale diversion of
resources. Commando raids on mainland Europe, though they sustained
morale during the dark days of 1940-1942, with a few notable exceptions,
had little strategic impact.200 The most important contribution they did
make was in gaining badly needed amphibious warfare experience, which
bore fruit with the successful invasions of Sicily, Italy, and Normandy.
Moreover, many special forces were not really elite units at all. The army's
notion that combined-arms units (like Jock Columns) and interservice
forces like the Long Range Desert Group) constituted elite troops reflected
the army's conservatism and reluctance to embrace modern combined-arms
warfare.
The drain of quality personnel into special forces exacerbated a grow-
ing manpower shortage. At the root of this lack of available manpower lay
the bloodletting of the Great War, not just in a demographic sense but espe-
cially psychologically. The shackling interwar never again mentality lin-
gered well into the war, and the ghosts of the Somme and Passchendaele
haunted even Churchill, who feared that Normandy might become another
Gallipoli. This psychological legacy saw the emergence of a limited-con-
flict mentality that proved impossible to dispel. Even Churchill succumbed;
he, like many, had come to believe that a future war would never see great
forces massed against one another. 201 He thus repeatedly advocated a
peripheral strategy that would first "close the ring" around Nazi Germany
and then attack through the "soft underbelly" of Italy and the Balkans. But
this approach eschewed the Clausewitzian imperative for a direct battle
confrontation, which had become embedded in U.S. military policy and
doctrine, and thus engendered serious British-U.S. disagreements over
strategy. 202 In addition, this limited conflict mentality fueled the world of
elite British miniarmies that siphoned the best soldiers out of the infantry.
Manpower concerns exerted a powerful influence on British planning
for, and operations in, northwest Europe. An infantry shortage existed by
the fall of 1943 that left few replacements available for OVERLORD. 203
Contrary to Carlo D'Este's claims, the preparation of OVERLORD casual-
ly estimates made Montgomery aware that his army group would be a wast-
ing asset. 204 Precisely when this would occur depended on the govern-
ment's success in finding extra manpower, the War Office's determination
to remuster personnel for the infantry, and on Montgomery's skill in avoid-
ing undue casualties.
Both government efforts to furnish more manpower and army efforts to
utilize its existing manpower more effectively failed to alleviate the man-
power shortage before D-Day. The army began remustering personnel as
