358
Normandy 1944
infantry hamstrung Canadian offensive actions during the late summer and
the fall of 1944. Lack of infantry not only hampered Canadian operations
but obscured the gradual development of military proficiency that the
Canadian First Army had gained through often costly trial and error during
The Canadian First Army thus failed to emulate the martial achieve-
ments of its World War I forebear. During the early war years the Canadian
Army had struggled to recover from its sustained interwar neglect; inexpe-
rience and neglect forced it into dependence on British doctrine, tactics,
organization, and equipment. Inexperience, especially in the higher com-
mand, meant that Canadian troops and commanders were to make many
mistakes. Troops initially did not display tactical and operational proficien-
cy as many of the flaws illuminated in training reappeared on the battle-
field. In addition, a growing manpower shortage impeded Canadian opera-
tions. Commanders were reluctant to take risks that might have brought
them greater glory in Normandy, but that might also have incurred heavy
casualties. Even so, inexperience brought disproportionate casualties
among Canadian units that ended up facing some of the best German troops
in the strongest defensive positions in Normandy. l17 The combination of
inexperience, inadequate training, unsound doctrine, unsatisfactory com-
manders, and command friction could only contribute to repeated failure.
The capabilities of Canadian formations at the onset of the Normandy
campaign were also far from uniform.
The 3d Infantry Division was the
most battleworthy Canadian formation, though its combined-arms prepara-
tion was inadequate. But the 2d Infantry Division and 4th Armoured
Division, which had trained for an exploitation role, were even worse pre-
pared for combined-arms operations. 118 Indeed, the 4th Armoured Division
remained nonoperational on D-Day, and it took intensive effort during June
and July to ready it for combat. 119 What was striking about the readying of
the 4th Division, though, was a new determination to absorb lessons
learned from the early battles in Normandy. 120 Before deploying to France,
the division formed its own countermortar organization, enhanced tank-
infantry cooperation, and honed aerial recognition skills.121 Nevertheless,
the division still performed poorly in its early operations. Inexperience and
indifferent integration led to a series of poorly supported frontal armored
attacks that were shattered by German antitank defenses during TOTALIZE
and TRACTABLE. 122
Combat readiness also varied among the arms, and clearly the weakest
link in the Canadian order of battle in Normandy was its armored forces.
The army's belated adoption of armor meant that the tank forces remained
underprepared even in June 1944. Equipment shortages, repeated reequip-
ment, limited combined-arms training, and shortages of replacement tanks
and crews all undermined the performance of Canadian armor in
359
Canada: Learning the Hard Way
Normandy. The Germans handled the 2d Armoured Brigade roughly in its
early Normandy operations. 123 Its morale suffered accordingly, and "Tiger
tank phobia" rapidly gripped the brigade.
From mid-June on, the Canadians experienced mounting difficulty
replacing tank losses. 124 This situation progressively worsened, and by 12
tank shortage affected Canadian combat effectiveness as continual high
inadequate equipment and combined-arms preparation, as well as growing
shortages of crews and vehicles, Canadian armor made little contribution to
Allied victory in Normandy.
The Canadian performance in Normandy rested heavily on leadership
provided by its senior commanders. Yet Canadian leadership was often
found wanting, and a combination of casualties, promotions, and transters
during the campaign removed most of the senior officers who had com-
manded on D-Day, 127 The performance of the senior commanders in
Normandy varied considerably. General Crerar proved a competent, if
unspectacular, army commander. His skill lay in the political and adminis-
trative spheres, and he wisely left most detailed operational planning to his
corps commander, General Simonds. Nonetheless, Crerar's operational
approach was sound and, in many ways, paralleled Montgomery s. Boun
men exhibited great concern to avoid unnecessary losses. 28 Thus casually
control as much as quest for victory provided the impetus for Canadian tac-
tical innovation in Normandy, and thus the purpose behind the novel meth-
ods used in TOTALIZE and TRACTABLE was to penetrate the strong
German defenses at minimal cost. 29 Crerar also mirrored Mon gomery in
his concern in maintaining troop morale. As a career gunner he was as wea
ded to firepower doctrine as his superior, yet Crerar was not simply an old-
fashioned gunner, 130 In Normandy, he emphasized the value of tacucal sur-
prise as an alternative to bombardment, an emphasis that bore fruit with the
success achieved during TOTALIZE. 3 This emphasis led to the develop
ment of a more sophisticated Canadian operadond approach durg the tall
of 1944 that combined flexible artillery tactics with tactical surprise. Ine
Canadian operational approach first employed during lOlALILe and
refined in subsequent operations became the basis of Anglo-Canadian oper.
ations in 1945. Crerar also showed great enthusiast for the use of aeridi
bombardment, which
in Normandy.
TRACIABLE. 1 hough no military genius, Clera Ported competently
proved pivotal in both TOTALIZE and
If the wartime Canadian Army possessed arabiary genus de was oug
