382
Normandy 1944
and though they could not prevent the fall of Cherbourg, the arriving II SS
Panzer Corps launched a major counteroffensive on 28 June to throw the
Allies back into the sea. The SS troops hurled themselves against the newly
established British bridgehead over the Odon River in an effort to break
through to the coast and split the British-U.S. lodgement. Despite strong
tank support, the Germans made little headway, and the operation petered
out on 2 July after heavy losses. The failure of this counterblow illustrated
that the Allied foothold had become permanent.
The attack failed primarily because the Germans lacked the logistical
base for major offensive action. Panzer Group West simply did not possess
sufficient ammunition and fuel for more than a couple of days of sustained
offensive action. 52 Moreover, the Germans attacked prematurely with
troops who had just dashed across Europe and who had not yet fully assem-
bled or reconnoitered the ground, let alone had time to become acclimated
to combat in Normandy. Thus only a portion of the corps' strength could be
brought to bear and artillery support was inadequate. The SS troops' unfa-
miliarity with combat conditions in the West also contributed to failure as
the corps launched a classic Eastern Front firepower "blitz" operation on
too wide a front and without sufficient artillery support. The intensity of
Allied defensive artillery and naval fire shook the SS troops and halted the
counterattack dead. 53
After this failure Hitler announced a new strategy: an unyielding
defense to pen the Allies into a narrow bridgehead and thereby deny them
the room and favorable terrain needed to conduct mobile operations. He
hoped to hold the Allies in a narrow area through a savage battle of attrition
that exploited the defensive advantages of the terrain and of German interi-
or lines. This decision locked the Germans into a battle of attrition within
range of the guns of the Allied fleet, a battle that they could not win. But
the other strategic alternative presented by the generals-—to retire inland
out of the range of those guns-
would have surrendered the most defensi-
ble terrain, doubled the length of the front, greatly weakened the German
defense, and brought about a precipitate German collapse in Normandy.
Despite the new strategy, so pronounced had Allied material superiori-
ty become and so unsatisfactory was the German supply situation that the
Germans could not stop the Allies from gaining ground despite defenses in
depth. On 8 July Montgomery launched a multicorps offensive, CHARN-
WOOD, to capture Caen. Assailed by three Anglo-Canadian divisions from
three sides and unable to supply his forces because of the destruction all but
one of the Caen bridges during the 7 July air raid, Rommel finally aban-
doned northern Caen and withdrew the attenuated Hitlerjugend division
behind the Orne River. This withdrawal gave the Germans a shorter, more
defensible, line in excellent defensive terrain and the Verrières Ridge, the
commanding high ground south of Caen, provided excellent obser-
vation.
Germany: The Defeat of the Westheer
383
In the week following CHARNWOOD, Panzer Group West deepened
and strengthened its defenses south of Caen to create a powerful dispersed
defensive belt in depth that consisted of no fewer than five zones. Thus dur-
ing Montgomery's GOODWOOD offensive (18-20 July) Anglo-Canadian
forces encountered the deepest and strongest German defensive system
established in Normandy (see Table 10.2),54
During GOODWOOD, the Germans orchestrated their greatest defen-
sive success of the campaign as they savaged British armor driving south
toward Falaise. A combination of clumsy British execution and skilled
German defense in depth defeated GOODWOOD. Allied carpet bombing
shattered the forward defenses and incapacitated many defenders, allow-
ing British forces to penetrate rapidly the enemy front, but poor British
coordination and methodical execution, combined with skilled German
defense, prevented the British from exploiting any success. The belt of
fortified village strongpoints, held in company strength and built into the
defensive zone in Eastern Front style, beyond the bombing zone slowed
and disrupted the poorly integrated and armor-heavy British advance. At
the same time, local German reserves utilized mobility and firepower in
hit-and-run counterattacks that disrupted and scattered the British drive.
The local reserves conducted a classic delaying withdrawal while maneu-
vering through the depth of the defensive zone to buy time while armored
reserves assembled for larger counterattacks.55 Concurrently, well-sited
and expertly camouflaged German antitank guns inflicted a heavy toll of
British armor.56 After local reserves had delayed and disrupted the British
advance and denied the enemy the Bourguébus Ridge, the Germans
launched well-coordinated counterblows down the Verrières Ridge. 57
off, ght down the slope, the poorly supported British armor was picked
The defeat of GOODWOOD was a major German defensive success.
The British may have gained ground, but German armor took few losses
while British armor suffered heavily 59 Indeed, Panzer Group West dealt a
drubbing that Montgomery's army group could not afford to take again. But
finally, in late July, after seven weeks of heavy combat, the German
defense of Normandy collapsed as the U.S. COBRA offensive, initiated on
25 July, broke through the German front. Historians have traditionally
interpreted the German collapse as the inevitable consequence of sustained
attrition. After constant battering by Allied firepower, conventional wisdom
maintains, the Germans were simply too weak to stop the U.S. break-
through (see Table 10.3). Historians have also argued that the Germans
neglected the St. Lô sector. But the Germans clearly had to conduct a vigor-
ous defense at Caen because a breakout into the excellent tank country of
the Falaise Plain would have unraveled the German defense, whereas
the Germans still had room to retire to a rearward river line on the U.S. sec-
tor.
