212
Preparation: 1919-1944
encircle Colonel-General Friedrich von Paulus's Sixth Army. Isolated on
poor defensive ground without prepared defenses, possessing depleted and
undersupplied forces, and forbidden to break out, the Sixth Army was
doomed unless it was relieved. Yet the Germans were unable to build a
defense along the Chir River from which to launch a relief effort, largely
because the Red Army had learned from its own mistakes the previous win-
ter, when dispersion of effort had denied decisive success, and now focused
on annihilating the Sixth Army. The Germans had to abandon the relief of
Stalingrad, and desperately fought to prevent envelopment of their entire
southern front between mid-December and February before the front stabi-
lized south of Kursk in March 1943.
That the Ostheer was much better trained, equipped, and prepared for
its second winter campaign prevented the Red Army from overrunning the
German southern front. 102 Improved winter preparation brought defensive
successes in the northern and central sectors too, where the Germans con-
ducted a forward linear defense based on a continuous front. Units had
greater winter mobility with sleds, reserves trained on skies, and armor
received extrawide winter tracks. 103 Nonetheless, the front remained thinly
manned, and vulnerable salients protruded at Rhzev, Demyansk, Velikie
Luki, and Schlüsselburg that the Soviets repeatedly assaulted over winter
1942-1943. Yet improved German defenses and defensive capabilities
denied decisive Soviet success. Although the Soviet forces restored a tenu-
ous land connection with besieged Leningrad at Schlüsselburg and encir-
cled two German divisions at Velikie Luki, they narrowly failed to sever
the Rhzev and Demyansk salients. Nevertheless, the Soviets drew the
Germans into lengthy attritional battles that expended German reserves,
and ultimately during the spring of 1943 the Germans abandoned the Rhzev
and Demyansk salients to build a new southern front. 104
The collapse of the Italians and Hungarians on the Don River south of
Voronezh in January 1943 threatened a new encirclement of the entire
southern wing, a crisis that forced Hitler to allow Field Marshal Erich von
Manstein temporary freedom to conduct mobile defensive warfare. 105
During January-February 1943, Manstein conducted fluid and economical
defensive operations as he withdrew from the Caucasus, slowed the Soviet
advance with delaying mobile defensive actions, parried Soviet efforts to
outflank the German line with mobile reserves, and built up a counterattack
force. Dwindling mobility, though, prevented Manstein from conducting a
classic mobile defense and forced his infantry to fight a linear defense
while mechanized reserves acted as mobile fire brigades to counter Soviet
penetrations. Although he used mobility and the terrain to maximum advan-
tage to blunt the Soviet offensive, German defenses lacked tactical depth,
and only a combination of maneuver and stubborn positional defense pro-
vided artificial depth. 106 These attritional tactics wore down Red Army
strength while preserving German fighting power, and as Soviet supply
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
213
lines lengthened Red Army pressure eased and Manstein finally was able to
drive five panzer divisions into the enemy's flank southeast of Kharkov on
22 February 1943 and rout several Soviet armies. This victory, the last
major German tactical success in the East, bought the time needed to
rebuild a continuous defensive front in the south, roughly on the line the
Germans had occupied the previous spring.
As the initiative began to shift toward the Soviets the Ostheer but-
tressed its defensive capabilities. Commanders and troops innovated to
minimize casualties and reduce the psychological strain of combat. Since
the aggressiveness and skill of the reserves was critical to maintaining the
front, formations gathered their best commanders and troops in mobile
reserves, powerfully reinforced in firepower, and retrained them for their
counterattack role. Increased ideological indoctrination inculcated a sense
of superiority in German troops about their weapons, cohesion, and training
to strengthen resolve as units conducted live-fire exercises in the field and
practiced hand-to-hand combat to condition the troops for brutal close com-
bat. 107
During 1942 doctrinal controversy raged over the defensive role of
armor. Prewar doctrine had stressed its counterattack role, and the panzer
arm opposed the dispersion of tanks for infantry support that had con-
tributed to enemy defeats in 1939-1941. German infantry often could not
Withstand Soviet armored attacks, and immediate counterattack required
armor to repel enemy penetrations. So experience demonstrated that
infantry required a force of armor for counterattacks, especially because
larger armored reserves often could not arrive before Soviet forces had con-
solidated their penetrations. In practice, the Ostheer progressively rein-
forced its infantry with assault guns and tank destroyers, even though dis-
persion sacrificed concentrated reserves and surrendered the initiative to
the enemy. 108
But German efforts to construct a ground force with staying power rep-
resented too little, too late. The German military's emphasis on the tactical
and operational levels of war engendered a concomitant neglect of logist -
Cal and intelligence functions. During 1941-1942 German tactical and
technical innovation failed to outweigh strategic, logistic, and intelligence
failures. At the same time, the unique political structure of Nazi Germthe
produced numerous problems detrimental to military organization. The
structure bred interservice rivalry and empire building that led to inefficient
manpower utilization, duplication in research, development, procurement,
and production; and diverted significant resources into unrealistic projects.
Moreover, Germany often directeduode cal innovation toward novel
odea of marginal utility, thus falling to realize the full potential of its
extensive technical creativity. 109
Because the Heer continually adapted and innovated throughout 1939-
1942, the army of 1942 was quite different in organization, tacues, equip
