174
Preparation: 1919-1944
reduce the training establishment met with limited success. Even in
November 1944, as one study has estimated, the training establishment
remained overstaffed by 40 percent.30 Such inefficient manpower utiliza-
tion meant that from late 1942 the CAO had increasing difficulty in main-
taining its strength, and by early 1943 there was a shortage of infantry
replacements even though no Canadian troops were engaged in combat.
Lack of manpower hampered Canadian operations when the CAO finally
entered combat in Sicily and Italy in the late summer of 1943, and combat
losses in turn inevitably exacerbated the Canadian infantry shortage. Lack
of manpower reinforced the government's political determination to avoid
heavy losses, and the avoidance of heavy losses remained a cornerstone of
Canadian operations for the remainder of the war.
During the spring of 1944, as the Canadian Army geared up for OVER-
LORD, it became evident that a significant infantry shortage existed and
that the CAO lacked the replacements needed to cover anticipated casual-
ties during the opening months of OVERLORD.31 On 16 March 1944, the
CAO reported to General Montgomery a healthy 7 percent surplus in
aggregate replacements over its projected requirements for the first three
months of OVERLORD-although the report admitted a serious deficiency
of 8,744 infantry replacements, some 37.5 percent of those authorized. 32
The official Canadian history of World War II has argued that this
replacement shortage was solely due to the adoption of flawed British casu-
alty forecast charts that underestimated both total casualties and the propor-
tion of casualties that would be suffered by the infantry. The official history
thus shifts responsibility for the Canadian infantry shortage from the
Mackenzie King government to the British War Office. Such an interpreta-
tion is erroneous. It is true that during the summer of 1942 the Canadian
Army discarded its own "wastage" projections and adopted lower British
casualty forecast rates because it lacked the experience to calculate its own
rates. The War Office based its casualty projections (the "Evett Rates") on
Commonwealth forces' experience in North Africa, where mechanized for-
mations predominated and limited artillery firepower and tactical air sup-
port kept infantry losses to 63 percent of total casualties 33 But in the more
rugged terrain of Tunisia, Sicily, and Italy, the infantry suffered about 75
percent of total casualties. Thus the War Office adopted new wastage rates
in February 1944 that increased the proportion of required infantry replace-
ments, but the CAO, while aware that its existing casualty forecast rates
were inadequate for the ETO, failed to revise upward its casualty estimates
before D-Day. 34
Unfortunately, the 16 March 1944 report to Montgomery deliberately
camouflaged a far more unsatisfactory replacement situation, for it includ-
ed as reinforcements large numbers of unavailable personnel. In reality, the
CAO possessed only about one-third of the infantry replacements called for
by its war establishment. Despite the intended deception the report did not
Canada, 1939-1944: The Politics of Neglect
175
deceive Montgomery, who characterized the Canadian infantry shortage as
"most serious."35 Canadian efforts to rectify its growing manpower short-
age prior to D-Day represented too little, too late. A strenuous publicity
campaign temporarily increased the number of NRMA conscripts persuad-
ed to volunteer for overseas service, but this still fell far short of providing
enough infantry. 36 It was not until March 1944 that the government remus-
tered 2,000 soldiers in other arms as infantry. Nevertheless, King's govern-
ment still opposed more extensive use of its conscription powers to release
further active-service personnel for overseas service. Canada's manpower
was drying up, and the NRMA was no longer producing men in sufficient
numbers.37
Increased efforts reduced the "official" infantry reinforcement defi-
ciency to 3,337 by 31 May 1944.38 Throughout May, the CAO struggled
just to bring formations up to strength and to assemble one month's project-
ed replacements. 39 But even based on its existing, inadequate projection
rates, the Canadian First Army remained short of infantry replacements on
the eve of D-Day. According to the upwardly revised War Office casualty
projections, which increased by 45 percent the required number of infantry
replacements, the Canadian infantry shortage was serious.40 Yet senior
Canadian military and political leaders still displayed unwarranted opti-
mism in their handling of manpower problems. On the eve of D-Day, the
First Canadian Army still lacked at least half its authorized infantry
replacements— far more than the "official" estimate.
The Canadian Army, of course, had a complete lack of operational
experience, since Canada had yet to deploy an army in the field. At Dieppe
Canadian forces had served under British command as they did in Sicily
and Italy. That Canada before 1941 had not seen its commitment to the
Allied cause extending beyond one corps meant thatCanadian First Army
came into existence only in April 1942. The highest level of Canadian com-
mand experience before D-Day was limited to the I Canadian Corps in
Italy. (In the fall of 1943 the corps had advanced up the Italian mainland
but did not launch its first major offensive until the Liri Valley campaign of
May 1944.)41 The army's operational inexperience raised doubts about its
potential.
The Canadian Army's inability to maintain sufficient troop strength in
Britain before D-Day exacerbated its lack of operational experience. The
dual pressures of public opinion at home and the military need for combat
experience forced the Canadian government to press the British for the
operational employment of the CAO in 1943. Yet the army's need for battle
experience and concentration of force in Britain for OVERLORD were
antithetical goals. The Dieppe fiasco gave impetus to the decision to dis-
patch the 1st Infantry Division and Ist Tank Brigade from Britain to the
Mediterranean in April 1943 to gain experience before participating in
OVERLORD. This limited and temporary diversion was sound policy,
