122
Preparation: 1919-1944
Axis defenses to the north and south. At the same time, the XII Corps
would launch a diversionary attack to the south to draw away Axis reserves
from the main attack. 104
Geography necessitated that the Montgomery make a frontal attack,
but the significant numerical superiority Eighth Army possessed made him
confident of success. Montgomery employed extensive deception to dis-
guise the intended attack and thus achieve surprise. 105 The deception plan,
Operation BERTRAM, successfully disguised the location and timing of
the attack and led the enemy to withhold crucial reserves for four days. 106
Montgomery also demanded aggressive reconnaissance and patrolling to
provide intelligence about German defenses. Yet, at the same time lacking
confidence in his subordinates, Montgomery exercised a close control over
the battle. 107 The XXX Corps attacked at night in moonlight on a narrow
front supported by heavy close air support and new mechanical mine-clear-
ing devices. Such massed firepower accelerated the attrition of Axis
strength, but Montgomery failed to break through enemy defenses eche-
loned in depth, and after four days he had to assume the defensive and
regroup for a renewed thrust. This shift to the defense proved crucial to vic-
tory as Rommel expended his strength in repeated counterattacks to regain
lost positions. 108
The British broke into the enemy defenses, but extensive German
minefields and limited British mine-clearing capability hampered the attack
and delayed the passage of armor waiting to exploit success. Moreover,
British armor remained reluctant to advance aggressively, and so the battle
degenerated into a slugging match. 109 After eight days of grinding down
Rommel's strength, Montgomery launched a hard blow, once again with a
nighttime infantry advance supported by massed artillery fire in the
south-Operation SUPERCHARGE-
-at the Italian-German boundary. This
attack gained surprise and broke through the Italians, allowing three
Commonwealth divisions to advance into the German rear, where torrential
rain bogged them down. At the end of his resources, Rommel had to effect
a general withdrawal. 110
While Montgomery's attention to administration guaranteed ample
ammunition, success depended as much on the improved effectiveness of
fire support as on greater volume. Increased use of radio communications,
better organization, and faster planning and execution of massed fire
brought improved effectiveness. Montgomery also revived a somewhat
crude counterbattery plan, but a shortage of medium guns and the absence
of heavy guns greatly curtailed the Eighth Army's counterbattery abilities
and ensured poor results. l11 In fact, Axis defensive fire significantly slowed
the British advance, and it was ammunition shortages rather than effective
neutralization that reduced enemy fire. Nevertheless, the battle witnessed
the first massed employment of medium artillery, and after El Alamein
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
123
artillery regained its premier position among British arms. 112 Centralized
artillery allowed the army to halt German mobile counterattacks and then to
neutralize and breach German antitank defenses.
That Montgomery attacked on narrow fronts to mass fighting power at
the point of main effort was another key ingredient in victory.
Concentration increased his strength, and fire superiority at the focal point
and maximized the damage inflicted on the enemy. When combined with
secrecy, deception efforts, and night assault that brought tactical surprise,
these advantages allowed Montgomery to grind down enemy forces whose
inferior strength and supply shortages compelled them to stand and fight. 113
The victory at El Alamein was a turning point for the wartime British
Army. Planned and executed in accordance with the strategy of attrition,
this battle ensured that the principles employed were never again chal-
lenged. Montgomery was victorious both because the army finally learned
how to overcome the blitzkrieg challenge and because "friction" and dis-
tance had eroded the enemy's ability to employ maneuver warfare.
Thus
after much hard fighting and heavy losses, the British relearned that fire-
power still dominated the battlefield. 114 As German mobility dwindled in
the face of growing, and ultimately overwhelming, allied numerical superi-
ority on the ground, at sea, and in the air, the Heer proved unable to main-
tain its small offensive mechanized cutting edge.
The Eighth Army drew important lessons from the El Alamein victory.
Success underscored the value of tactical deception; indeed, the margin of
victory was narrow enough that deception measures were vital for success
and thereafter they were integral to Montgomery's operational approach. 115
British coordination, though better, remained clumsy and advances would
lose momentum when the armor passed through the infantry. Since the mar-
gin of victory was narrow, Montgomery resisted all pressures to pursue the
retreating enemy aggressively, and insisted that undertrained British forces
not undertake ambitious operations that might bring local reverses and
damage anew his army's fragile morale. Caution thus became the hallmark
of Montgomery thereafter. 116
One must not, however, exaggerate Montgomery's impact. His arrival
coincided with the fruition of longer term improvements in Eighth Army
capabilities. The arrival of desperately needed fresh troops, for instance,
greatly aided victory. Organization also slowly improved through 1942 as
desert experience led the MEC to reduce its armored formations to a single
tank brigade, and to add an infantry brigade and more artillery to produce
better balanced and more cohesive divisions. Gradual improvement in both
mobility and firepower also aided success. In 1941 the Germans had out-
classed the British in every class of ordnance save artillery, but slowly new
weapons entered service that closed the quality gap. During fall of 1941 the
Bishop, Britain's first self-propelled 25-pounder gun, entered service and
