Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel signs the Instrument of Surrender in Berlin on 7 May 1945
The winning U.S. team reassembles after the end of the war: Seated from left to right are
generals: William S. Simpson, George S. Patton, Jr, Carl Spaatz, Dwight D. Eisenhower.
Omar Bradley, Courtney Hodges, and Leonard T. Gerow: Standing are Ralph F. Stearley,
Hoyt S. Vandenberg, Walter Bedell Smith, Otto P. Weyland, and Richard E. Nugent.
270
7
The United States:
The Leviathan Triumphant
The U.S. Army made the major, and possibly decisive, contribution to
Allied victory in Normandy. The Americans demonstrated that they had
significantly enhanced their capabilities since their first faltering combat in
Tunisia, and during the campaign the army mastered both maneuver war-
fare and the air-ground battle. In fact, the Americans broke through the
German front twice: on 16-17 June at St. Saveur-le-Vicomte to cut the
Cotentin Peninsula, isolate Cherbourg, and hasten the city's fall; and in late
July during Operation COBRA to burst out of Normandy and collapse the
German defense of France. Not only did the Americans possess the man-
power and material reserves to absorb the heavy losses of the bitter fighting
during June and July that ground down German resistance and sapped
Anglo-Canadian offensive strength, but U.S. forces also clearly enhanced
their combat capabilities during the campaign. Initial combat revealed that
significant deficiencies still plagued the U.S. Army, as a result of which it
experienced great difficulty progressing in the Norman bocage hedgerow
terrain. Yet the army overcame its initial difficulties and sluggish progress
and adapted and retrained in the field to fight more effectively. Such adap-
lation and innovation emerged largely from the bottom up and encom-
passed operational and tactical adaptation, as well as technical innovation.
ns fault improved interarms and interservice coordination, which paved
the way for a U.S. breakout from Normandy in late July 1944! The army's
determination to learn from experience and to enhance its combat pertorm-
ince was central both to the triumph of U.S. arms and to Allied victory in
Normandy.2
The Americans experienced contrasting fates on their two D-Day
aSSault beaches. At Utah, on the eastern flank of the Cotentin Peninsula,
they suffered light casualties and established a solid beachhead; at Omana
Beach, on the western Calvados coastns fau ime close to defeat. Success al
Utah Beach was due to the accuracy of the?- reliminary bombardment and
the paucity of the German defensent Omaha a combination of difficult
271
