24
Preparation: 1919-1944
appropriately structured given its strategic priorities, and reform continued,
despite scarce funding, at an attenuated rate. The army both revised its
manuals and initiated limited mechanization. 29 In the early 1930s, though,
regression set in as the nation plunged into severe economic depression,
and the army's combat effectiveness dwindled accordingly. Unprecedented
economic difficulties aggravated the psychological, material, and strategic
legacies of the Great War as the Depression focused national and political
attention on domestic socioeconomic issues and deepened popular hostility
toward the military. The Depression engendered further sweeping reduc-
tions in defense spending, polarized political and military thought, instilled
fear and uncertainty in the military, and exacerbated the conservatism
inherent in peacetime armies. The result was the stifling of military reform.
But such external factors as government parsimony and popular anti-
militarism fail to explain adequately the army's deficiencies at the start of
World War II. The army did share much of the responsibility for the disas-
ters of 1939-1942. At the root of the army's inadequate preparation for
continental warfare, and hence dismal early war performance, was its view
of World War I as aberrant. The army's assumption that it would never
again have to fight another major continental war ensured that it saw little
rationale or relevance in studying the lessons of the Great War. And in the
face of inevitable personnel turnover between the wars, the army lost what-
ever expertise and experience it had slowly and painfully gained on the
fields of Flanders.
The army was also neither structured, nor possessed mechanisms, to
derive, disseminate, and retain combat experience. It did not have a conti-
nental-style general staff with which to preserve institutional knowledge. It
was not until 1932 that the War Office examined the lessons of the Great
War. This was too late to revamp doctrine and transform training prior to
the outbreak of World War II30 Even when the army finally studied its
Great War experience, it misinterpreted the lessons of the war because it
evaluated its performance to validate traditional strategy. Thus the War
Office erroneously concluded that the naval blockade that had eroded
German civilian morale was the key to Entente victory, whereas, in reality,
it had been the combination of sustained military action on land and block-
ade that defeated Germany.31 This misperception validated traditional
British foreign policy and reinforced the "limited liability" proponents®
misguided claim that a peripheral strategy, relying on naval blockade and
aerial bombardment, could defeat a major continental power in a future
conflict.
The most significant lesson the army drew from the Great War was that
adherence to a strategy of attrition had brought victory, and it concluded
that the struggle demonstrated that modern industrialized nations could
only be defeated by protracted attrition. 32 It made little effort to contem-
plate other alternatives or to evaluate how potential enemies had interpreted
The Interwar Period
25
the lessons of the Great War and adapted in response to them. The army's
conclusion that victory in 1918, however costly, vindicated the adherence
to a strategy of attrition ensured that Britain remained wedded to this doc-
trine throughout the 1919-1945 period. The army made minor modifica-
tions to prevailing doctrine to absorb such new technology as armor and air
power but refused to reexamine, rethink, or revise strategic fundamentals.
The major reverses the army suffered during 1939-1942 illuminated the
vulnerability of a such an attritional strategy to the new German blitzkrieg
warfare that aimed to overwhelm quickly unprepared militaries before they
could mobilize their demographic, industrial, and financial strength. The
British Army was therefore unable to discern clear lessons and a path to
follow between the wars. Its failure to examine quickly and thoroughly its
previous experience and then to preserve such knowledge shackled even
the limited preparation that the army was capable of.
Most serious of all, however, the British people's association of the
slaughter in the trenches with the doctrine of the offensive meant that
offense was repugnant and unacceptable to the army between the wars. As a
result, what passed as interwar strategy was one of defense. The British
military had erroneously concluded that the strategic defensive inevitably
meant operational and tactical defense as well. This was a serious error, for
such a posture surrendered the strategic initiative to potential aggressors,
insidiously eroded morale and fighting spirit, and bred caution and hesitan-
cy.33 These were characteristics that the 1939-1945 army never entirely
eradicated. In the aftermath of World War I, few politicians, soldiers, or
civilians contemplated British involvement in another major war. The
improbability of major war in the 1920s buttressed both the intellectual
sway of the "never again" ethos and economic pressures for military
retrenchment. 34 Anticipating no mission that could lead to war, the interwar
army lacked the impetus for preparation, let alone reform or innovation.
The army's Victorian culture also contributed to its inadequate prepara-
tion between the wars: soldiering was an honorable part-time occupation
rather than a full-time profession that required extensive training and edu-
cation, and officership remained the preserve of elite society. Such a culture
was unreceptive to criticism, and thus the army leadership discouraged crit-
ical analysis of its performance and equated criticism with disloyalty. 35 The
War Office, for example, only disseminated a condensed and censored ver-
sion of its 1932 study of the army's Great War performance 36 Army culture
also disparaged preparation and intellectual study, especially of miltary
theory. Thus the army remained reluctant to evaluate honestly its capabili-
ties and instead extolled pragmatism and improvisation. Army culture so
militated against honesty and creativity that it slowed the pace of innova-
tion throughout the 1914-1945 period. 37 Although the interwar army
remained intellectually alive-vigorous debate continued in the army's pro-
fessional journals and at staff college courses-this activity was uncoordi-
