280
Normandy 1944
machine gun in particular, resulted in several field expedients. Workshops
mounted the M45 quad-gun turret on an M2 half-track to improvise a self-
propelled variant, the M16B.49 This proved a highly successful expedient,
which became a standard design. Field improvisation and innovation
allowed infantrymen to augment their own firepower during the cam-
paign. 50
U.S. forces also learned to deploy more indirect-fire support and to use
it more effectively. In Normandy, the First Army pioneered the use of
heavy antiaircraft guns in a field artillery role where they proved effective
at long-range harassing and interdiction fire. 51 The First Army also
employed tank destroyers as assault guns to provide extra indirect-fire sup-
port for the infantry, and pressed into service captured artillery pieces.2
Gunners also both made increasing use of deadly white phosphorus (WE),
or "Willie Peter" as the troops termed it, which combusted with oxygen and
burned anything it touched. Gunners also often quickly brought down
unplanned massed fire by using quick-fire procedures practiced in
Britain, 53
Continued improvisation by quahe ermasters offset the ammunition
shortages caused by the June storm. Logisticians employed emergency air-
lifts to overcome critical shortages in the immediate aftermath of the storm,
while ordnance personnel even used captured ammunition. 54 As a result,
the First Army was able to sustain unprecedented levels of fire support in
the final battle for St. Lô during mid-July (see Table 7.3).55
Table 7.3
Weekly U.S. Fire Support (Rounds per Gun)
Weapon
10
24
June
June
June
July
July
105mm Howitzer
155mm Howitzer
155mm Gun
55
4.5" Gun
8" Howitzer
8 Gun
240mm Howitzer
15
July
22
July
July
August
80
12
11 1 5=52
16
Source: FUSA, Report V, 185-186; VI, 70-71.
the Americans aiso innovated to allow se mor to operale more effec-
tively in the bocage. Units had used armored bulldozers to plough through
the hedges, but few 'dozers were available. 56 Other units blasted gaps in the
hedges with explosives but, while effective, this method was laborious and
Xorbitant in demolitions,57 By early July, improvised hedgecutter tanks
had emerged that anowed armor to plough through the thick heages, These
The United States: The Leviathan Triumphant
281
improvisations culminated in the Rhinoceros hedgecutter, whose employ-
ment in late July helped restore armored mobility. 58
The U.S. First Army also addressed the problem of poor tank-infantry
communication that disrupted coordination. Since infantry and tank radios
rarely operated on the same frequency, armored units improvised "deck
phones" by attaching infantry field radios inside the tank and on the outside
rear to improve communication. Infantry units also acquired armor radios
(and vice versa), and tank-infantry teams developed new universal signals
to overcome the confusion caused by different infantry and armored visual
signals.60
General Bradley also revised operational procedures that hampered
coordination. Combat had revealed that independent battalions "pooled" at
army level lacked cohesion and coordinated poorly.61 During the campaign,
the First Army gradually retreated from pooling and unofficially sanctioned
permanent attachment of pooled units to corps and divisions. 62 Although
operational necessity initially forced the frequent transfer of pooled units
between formations, during July growing association between divisions and
pooled units brought improved coordination. 63
The First Army also tackled the problems of artillery observation and
control in the bocage. To compensate for the frequent loss of forward
observers, the First Army made greater use of aerial artillery spotters,
Whose mere appearance often suppressed German artillery because of the
enemy's fear of accurate counterbattery fire directed by the spotter. 64
Spotter planes proved the most effective means of observation among the
hedgerows and were especially effective in locating enemy troop locations
and guns.65 U.S. forces increasingly used spotter aircraft to aid materially
their advance through the hedgerows.
Attack procedures also gradually became more sophisticated and better
attuned to German defensive techniques as U.S. troops learned through trial
and error to train their fire on the entire German defensive system. By the
COBRA offensive of 25 July, planners had developed complex fire plans
that targeted the full depth of enemy defenses.66
Despite deficiencies that had slowed their advance, the U.S. military
still achieved greater success than its British and Canadian allies during
June. The U.S. Army captured Cherbourg, bagged large numbers of prison-
ers, and inflicted heavy losses on the enemy. Although poorer quality
German troops and more pronounced German supply difficulties on the
western flank contributed to these successes, the Americans also clearly
fought harder and longer than their allies. Since the Germans had rarely
inflicted serious defeat on the Americans, U.S. troops sometimes lacked the
respect that the British had for the enemy. At the same time, their manpow-
er and material reserves and their doctrinal emphasis on continuous, direct,
and vigorous offensive action led U.S. troops to engage and destroy the
enemy in combat. 67 This more aggressive approach did mean that occasion-
