310
Normandy 1944
nized infantry needed to fight for information the way the the Germans did.
Instead, British forces relied heavily on aerial reconnaissance and Ultra
intercepts, which provided considerable intelligence. 34
Limited direct firepower necessitated the troops' coordinating closely
to maximize available fire, and since coordination was often absent troops
relied heavily on indirect-fire support 35 The Royal Artillery proved the
most effective arm of service in Normandy as the gunners provided rapid,
massed fire support. The largest component of the army by summer 1944
(see Table 8.2), gunners could bring down a divisional barrage in five min-
utes and a corps barrage in eight minutes, an impressive feat. Backed by
naval gun fire, British artillery fire nullified the striking power of even the
elite panzer divisions, halted every German counterattack that threatened
more than local success, and steadily sapped German strength. 36
Table 8.2 Composition of British Second Army, 30 June 1944
Troops
Percent
114,000
108,000
84,000
43,000
32,000
280,000
17
16
Artillery
Infantry
Engineer
Armor
Signals
Service
Source: PRO CAB 106/1121, 25.
British offensive employment of artillery, however, contributed direct-
ly to the difficulties troops faced in breaking through enemy defenses.
Artillery fire plans were so complex that they became unimaginative and
inflexible as gunners invariably laid down a creeping barrage along the
intended axis of advance, which allowed the Germans to gauge rapidly the
direction and axis of attacks and to mass their meager reserves astride and
along the flanks of the advance,37 This prescriptive use of artillery multi-
plied the difficulties the British faced translating a break-in into a breakout.
Moreover, the predictability of fire support allowed the Germans to adopt
effective countermeasures, such as adopting extreme dispersion by thinly
manning their forward positions in exchange for defense in depth to mini-
mize losses. Moreover, barrages were rarely deep enough to shatter the
entire German defense, which likewise contributed to the British inability
to break out. 38
The deficiencies of other arms and weapon systems also bred excessive
reliance on artillery fire. Instead of complementing the offensive power of
the other arms, the Royal Artillery acted as a substitute for their weakness-
Britain: Montgomery's Best Batsmen Fail
311
es. The infantry invariably went to ground and called down massive fire
when they met anything more than token resistance and thus failed to uti-
lize their own firepower and mobility to gain and hold ground. 39
Dependence on rigid fire plans also mandated set-piece battalion assaults in
which the infantry jettisoned battle drill techniques of fire and maneuver
taught in training, instead advancing rapidly behind a creeping barrage. 40
Armor, too, tended to withdraw and call down fire support when encounter-
ing any real opposition. 41 The "shells save lives" philosophy led the British
to shatter enemy defenses by sheer weight of shell, but created a depend-
ence on firepower-based attrition that made British operations inflexible
and exorbitant in ammunition expenditures that caused major logistic
headaches, 42 While artillery was clearly a major factor in Allied victory in
Normandy, dependence on fire support ensured that fire possibilities and
logistic considerations, rather than terrain or the tactical situation, came to
dominate planning. 43
The logistic requirements of firepower domination ensured that Anglo-
Canadian forces could not quickly or frequently attack, and often dictated
that only a single corps could attack at one time. Such requirements also
entailed that attacks would occur on narrow fronts to maximize the damage
inflicted and to penetrate enemy defenses. Firepower domination thus
unbalanced British operational art and retarded development of combined-
arms coordination. Even though firepower paved the way for victory,
infantry and armor still had to take and hold ground. The reliance on domi-
nation by firepower was symptomatic of a wider phenomenon, the
"machines over men" philosophy, a belief that technological advances
could allow ordnance to win wars and minimize the bloody infantry fire-
fights that had destroyed a generation in the Great War. But combat in
Normandy soon showed that machines could not compensate for the lack of
quality infantry, and that they could not hold the ground the infantry cap-
The id ficulties British infantry encountered were also the result of
low-caliber manpower. The unprecedented demands of the other services
and the technical branches, as well as the proliferation of special forces,
drew offs vality personnel from the infantry. Poor performance also
stemmed in part from training. Inut pamesh infantry remained less well
trained than the enemy because instruction failed to instill flexibility and
initiative or to inculcate understanding of enemy doctrine and tactics.
The army's inability to rectify defects partly hinged on leadership: Unit
leadership had the potential to transcend thesirmy s structural nigianty. Uni
performance in Normandy thus rested did oportionately on commanders.
At the senior level, Montgomery came out of the audit of war reasonably
(Sappe insistence on fighting a slow, deliberate, no-risk, ser-piece attr
tional battle that both optimized I druslapea Igths and German weaknesses
was sound. Even though he was overcautious at times and squandered
