312
Normandy 1944
opportunities that could have reduced losses in the long run, generally his
philosophy was correct. He also overcontrolled the battle and was reluctant
to share the reins of command because he had limited faith in his subordi-
nates. His deputy, Lt. Gen. Miles Dempsey, the commander of the Second
Army, was inexperienced in the use of air power, was less aware than
Montgomery of the limitations of British troops, and desired a more ambi-
tious British role. Montgomery allowed Dempsey little initiative and fre-
quently bypassed him entirely, but Dempsey tried to carve out a role for
himself in Normandy.44 He became much more frustrated than
Montgomery with the stagnation before Caen, and sought a breakout
through his ambitious GOODWOOD and BLUECOAT plans. His perspec-
tive was also more immediate than his superior's, and that caused him to
lose sight of Montgomery's master plan in mid-July and led him to seek
tame and glory for British arms through a breakout. 45
The other senior commanders emerged less well from the audit of war.
The wide variations in divisional performance in part reflected the spec-
trum of the commanders' abilities, and the flurry of dismissals during the
campaign exemplified that "deadwood" remained in the senior leader-
ship.46 But the real leadership problem began at brigade and regimental
level and got worse lower down the ranks. Junior officers generally proved
unable to transcend their methodical training to display the necessary skills
of initiative and leadership required for battlefield success.47
As a consequence of these deficiencies and the character of the cam-
paign, not only did British forces prove unable to break out from
Normandy, but mounting losses, dwindling morale, and lack of infantry
replacements sapped British striking power as the campaign progressed.
Examination of the four major British offensives in Normandy-
EPSOM,
CHARNWOOD, GOODWOOD, and BLUECOAT-illuminates both the
difficulties British forces faced and the deterioration of troop performance.
On 26 June, Montgomery launched Operation EPSOM, a major offen-
sive intended to force the Orne and Odon Rivers, seize the heights south-
west of Caen, and loosen the German hold on the city. To achieve this goal,
Montgomery committed his best-trained, yet inexperienced troops, under
the VIII Corps. With strong air, naval, and artillery support he hoped to
smash the strong German defenses and capture Caen. Yet bad luck bedev-
iled EPSOM: unseasonal bad weather postponed the operation for three
days and ultimately forced Montgomery to attack without the planned air
bombardment. Equally seriously, the neighboring XXX Corps failed to take
the commanding Rauray Ridge on the flank of the intended assault during
the night of 25-26 June, thus spoiling the entire attack.
Operationally, EPSOM was the best executed British assault in
Normandy as the VIII Corps with three fresh divisions 15th Scottish, 43d
Wessex, and 11th Armoured executed a textbook attack. 48 Infantry spear-
Britain: Montgomery's Best Batsmen Fail
313
headed the advance on a 4-mile front behind a formidable 700-gun barrage.
Such massed firepower allowed the infantry to penetrate the thin German
defenses lines, held by the attenuated but still formidable 12th SS Panzer
Division, and establish a bridgehead across the Odon River. Thereafter, the
11th Armoured Division "followed through" to seize the vital height of Hill
112 beyond. Though Montgomery had torn a hole in the enemy defenses by
28 June, excessive caution prevented British forces from making further
significant gains. Moreover, as German reserves assembled with the obvi-
ous intent of nipping off the tenuous bridgehead across the Odon, the cau-
tious General Dempsey relinquished Hill 112 and assumed good defensive
positions. Here, the VIII Corps turned back repeated German counterthrusts
through 2 July. 49
At best EPSOM proved a partial success. Montgomery had penetrated
the enemy front but, despite marked numerical and material superiority,
had not broken through, and neither gained the high ground above the
Odon nor rendered Caen indefensible. At the same time the VIII Corps had
suffered heavy losses. 50 While the tenacity and skill of the enemy con-
tributed in no small part to British difficulties, flawed British attack doc-
trine denied the troops decisive success. The rolling barrage gave away
both the location of the British main effort and the axis of the advance, and
thus allowed the Germans to redeploy their meager reserves quickly to
impede the advance. 51 At the same time, the narrow attack frontage left the
armored follow-through vulnerable to German flanking fire from the
Rauray Ridge and created terrible traffic congestion, especially at Cheux,
as units tried to advance down the narrow corridor simultaneously. The fail-
ure to take the ridge left the entire western flank of the advance badly
exposed to enfilading fire from higher ground that increased the casualty
toll.
Montgomery called off EPSOM to conserve manpower and, to protect
morale, exaggerated its success in drawing German armor. Although only a
partial success, in retrospect, EPSOM was the pinnacle of British achieve-
ment in Normandy. At the same time, the operation was a proving ground
for British commanders and troops, most of whom were participating in
their first action. 52 EPSOM clearly demonstrated the inexperience of
British troops and the weakness of their training as poor coordination and a
failure to comprehend German defensive tactics marred the operation.
Soldiers of the Scottish Division, in particular, suffered heavily when the
enemy surprised and ambushed them from a classic reverse-slope position.
Moreover, the depth of German defenses repeatedly took the British by sur-
prise. 53
The heavy losses sustained during EPSOM, as well as the need to
rebuild supplies and organize air support, meant that it was not until & July
that Montgomery resumed the offensive with an unusual multicorps attack
