224
Preparation: 1919-1944
As veteran Ostkämpfer, especially junior officers and NCOs, arrived in
large numbers in 1944, they undertook extensive, though still largely infor-
mal and uncoordinated, ideological indoctrination. 164 They seized every
National Socialist themes: to reinforce combat resolve, it promised new
wonder vengeance weapons, hammered home German racial and martial
superiority, and dwelt on Allied "terror bombing" of civilians. Lectures also
dwelt on the consequences of defeat and stressed the racial, and thus the
military, inferiority of the Allies. Such schooling sought to mold a stereo-
typical, professional National Socialist fighter; and it portrayed combat as
an embodiment of racial struggle, the Führer as divine, and National
Socialism as religion. 166
Indoctrination forged a Westheer that, like the Ostheer, though to a
lesser degree, possessed a grotesquely distorted mindset. German troops
understood that the second front would be the decisive battle of the war,
and most remained convinced of their racial superiority and that this superi-
ority would bring them victory. It must be emphasized that despite the evi-
dence to the contrary, most German soldiers still believed in final victory
and their faith in Hitler and the nazi leadership remained intact. Ideological
indoctrination thus clearly reinforced German fighting power, cohesion,
and tenacity.
When combined with reequipment and expansion, indoctrina-
tion boosted German morale in the West to its zenith by D-Day.
The Westheer also reequipped with the Reich's latest and most potent
weapons during spring 1944 as it received large numbers of Panther and
Tiger tanks, new low-silhouetted tank destroyers, the lethal 88mm antitank
gun, and powerful infantry antitank weapons.
The Westheer thus entered
the Normandy campaign with superior quality armor as well as an edge in
infantry firepower and antitank capability. These advantages help to
explain the German ability to conduct a tenacious defense despite being
greatly outnumbered and suffering enormous losses.
The Westheer also upgraded the coastal divisions that Field Marshal
Rommel had assigned to delay and disrupt the assault while mobile
reserves moved up to counterattack. In the fall of 1943, however, these for-
mations lacked the troops, firepower, and mobility needed to impede an
invasion. 167 Rommel thus sought to strengthen the coastal defenses sufti-
ciently to retard and break up an Allied landing while armored reserves
were redeployed to eliminate any lodgement. After Directive 51 coastal
divisions were expanded, reorganized, reequipped, retrained, and given bet-
ter quality personnel, greater firepower, and improved mobility. 168
To repulse an invasion, the Westheer required a powerful strategic
mechanized reserve. Only massed armored counterattacks could throw the
Allies back into the sea. But no such reserve existed in the fall of 1943, and
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
225
in forming one the Westheer encountered its most serious obstacle yet—the
army's dwindling mobility. By the spring of 1944, the Heer faced a serious
automobile shortage as losses outstripped production. Its truck pool shrank
at a rate of 2 percent per month; and the decline in artillery tractors was
even sharper. 169 The progressive demotorization of the Heer undermined its
ability to conduct mobile defense, hampering the creation of a strategic
reserve in the West. The Westheer was neither able to motorize fully its
reserves or create a sizable strategic transport reserve to supply troops in
combat if Allied interdiction attacks disrupted French rail communications.
On the eve of D-Day, the Westheer's mechanized divisions remained
woefully deficient in trucks and tractors (see Table 5.1). This limited
mobility created a heavy dependence on rail transportation for troop move-
ment and resupply operations, leaving the Westheer vulnerable to aerial
interdiction aimed at German communications and logistics. Initially, sen-
lor German commanders had remained unconcerned about such logistic
weakness in the West. They did anticipate that Allied air attacks on commu-
nications would accompany the invasion, but they believed that the excess
capacity and high connectivity of the French rail system would easily allow
successful supply. Only if air and sabotage attacks totally paralyzed the rail
net—a scenario considered improbable-would the Germans face serious
resupply difficulties. 170
Rebuilding offensive strength required major enhancement of forma-
ton mobility, absorbing most of the new automobiles sent to the West in
the spring of 1944.171 But the diversion of new automobile production to
the mobile reserves prevented the Quartermaster General West from assem-
bling a sizable strategic truck transport reserve to supply German forces in
combat. Only belatedly, as Allied air attacks progressively smashed the
Table 5.1
Percentage of Authorized Trucks and Tractors Operational, German
Strategic Reserve, 1 June 1944
Division
Trucks
Tractors
21st
93
185
2d
Lehr
12th SS
116th
11th
Ist SS
2d SS
9th
17th SS
Average
11
48
Sources: NARA T-78, 616, 623-624, 717-719, Gen. Insp. der Pztrpn., "Zustandberichten,"
June 1944.
