106
Preparation: 1919-1944
ing, and buttressing its battered reputation rather than openly assessing its
strengths and weaknesses. At the same time the speed and scale of defeat,
the army's lack of combat experience, the disdain for intellectual prepara-
tion, and the lukewarm commitment to retraining all slowed the pace of
reform early in the war. The BEF's ejection from the continent, though, was
a blessing in disguise that dispelled lethargy and complacency and pro-
pelled the army into action from which emerged a stronger and more effec-
tive "New Model Army."17 Even though this new army never became as
large, powerful, or proficient as the army of 1918, it was sufficient to
secure victory. The circumstances of 1940, however, were not conducive to
sober assessment followed by rational and planned reform, the continental
debacle energizing Britain to rebuild a ground force to resist an anticipated
German invasion. The army thus underwent meteoric, if hasty and unbal-
anced, expansion during summer 1940 as it churned out what it could most
easily and quickly produce-defense-oriented infantry. 18 The desperate
need of the hour led the army to sacrifice quality for quantity: to reequip
the army quickly the War Office kept obsolete weapons in production, pre-
maturely rushed new equipment into service, and shelved longer term proj-
ects. Such expedients met the immediate challenge but delayed entry into
service of powerful, offensive weapons, thus preventing the British Army
from closing the quality gap in armaments for much of the war. 19
Unparalleled defeat also inevitably accentuated Britain's strategic pre-
disposition toward defense because it suggested that blitzkrieg was a revo-
lutionary and unstoppable new form of mechanized warfare. But the army
mistakenly assumed that strategic defense negated offensive defense, and
was slow to learn that blitzkrieg did not fundamentally alter the nature of
war and that it could be stopped by mobile defense and firepower. It was
not until 1942-1943 that the army learned how to counter the blitzkrieg.
The new army that emerged in Britain after Dunkirk bore the stamp of Sir
Alan Brooke, the chief of the Imperial General Staff, and Sir Brian Paget,
the commander, Home Forces. They conducted the first serious pruning of
the officer corps, reorganized the army, improved training and small-unit
tactics, and toughened the minds and bodies of the soldiers despite major
equipment shortages and limited battle experience.20 The most serious
obstacle to effective reconstitution of the army, however, was doctrinal. As
the panzer myth spread after Dunkirk, it cemented both the army's adher-
ence to its particular brand of armored warfare and its determination to
seek victory in set-piece battles waged in accordance with the principles of
a strategy of attrition.21 The RAC remained wedded to the dogma that the
primary task of armor was to seek out and destroy enemy tanks. Not only
did the army not reconsider its employment of armor in light of its experi-
ences in France, but the panzer myth cemented prevailing, yet misguided,
armored warfare notions.
The army thus tripled its armored force during 1940-1941 and for the
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
107
first time concentrated most of its tanks in armored divisions. While reor-
ganization marginally increased the proportion of infantry and supporting
arms, which had proven inadequate in France, British armored formations
remained essentially massed tank forces, not balanced combined-arms
teams. The panzer myth hampered realization that integrated and mobile
combined-arms forces (i.e., firepower and mobility) was what the army
needed to halt the blitzkrieg.
Continued lack of battle experience after Dunkirk was another major
obstacle to improved combat effectiveness. While the army rebuilt the
Commonwealth bore the brunt of combat: between Dunkirk and the sum-
mer of 1942 only four British divisions fought the Germans.22 That these
British forces suffered repeated defeat provided few clear lessons, and the
widespread perception among senior officers that few lessons could be
learned from setbacks further slowed the pace of reform.
Italy's entry into the war in June 1940 drew the Middle East Command
(MEC) into combat and brought Britain's first, albeit ephemeral, victories.
The MEC was quite different from the army defeated in France. Dominated
by regulars, it had escaped the massive, uncoordinated expansion expert-
enced by the BEF and it contained the army's best division, the 7th
Armoured, the only offensively trained and organized formation. 23
Moreover, the MEC possessed a number of able officers. Its commander,
Gen. Sir Archibald Wavell, had gained a reputation as a versatile, unortho-
dox, and innovative commander between the wars.24 His deputy, Lt. Gen.
Richard O'Connor, the commander of the Western Desert Force (WDF)
that defended the Egyptian frontier, was equally talented 25 Between them,
Wavell and O'Connor inculcated in their command offensive spirit and dar-
ing. 26
On 9 December 1940, despite marked numerical inferiority and serious
equipment shortages, the WDF boldly launched Operation COMPASS,
Britain's first offensive of the war.27 Heavily outnumbered and outgunned,
Wavell relied on mobility and speed to mass strength against hesitant
Italian defenders. A combination of O'Connor's aggressive leadership, the
Tth Armoured's offensive spirit, and a poorly equipped, trained, officered,
and deployed Italian army, led the WDF to crush in just three days two
Italian corps that were dispersed in fortified camps along the frontier.
Thereafter, the fresh 6th Australian Division, aided by combined artillery-
aerial-naval bombardment, stormed Bardia and Tobruk during January.
Then, as the Australians pursued the Italians along the coast road from
Gazala to Benghazi, the 7th Armoured made a daring inland march via
Mechili and Misus to cut the Italian retreat. Between 5-7 February near
Beda Fomm, the two divisions annihilated the trapped Tenth Italian
Army, 28
Even though the WDF advanced 600 miles and destroyed a force five
times as large, its victory was not a result of the adoption of blitzkrieg war-
