166
Preparation: 1919-1944
less, once it was committed to combat the Canadian Army, like its Great
War predecessor, displayed flexibility and creativity and thus proved able
to adapt and to innovate faster than its British counterpart.
Underscoring this confusion was the lack of military, political, or pop-
ular consensus about the form of Canada's contribution to the Allied war
effort. While most Canadians supported a declaration of war, opinions
diverged over the extent of Canada's contribution. Government officials
and public commentators alike recognized that Canadians were not pre-
pared to make the same sacrifices as they had during 1914-1918.
Moreover, memories of the 1917 conscription controversy-when the nar-
row passage of the Military Service Bill forced Prime Minister Sir Robert
Borden to call a general election-tortured political opinion.! Prime
Minister W. L. Mackenzie King remained determined to avoid a similar
political crisis that he feared might bring down his government.
Thus political as much as military considerations dominated Canada s
wartime policies, as Prime Minister King pursued a policy of limited liabil-
ity in which he opposed the dispatch of an overseas expeditionary force and
sought to restrict Canada's contribution to the air and maritime wars. He
hoped that machines rather than men could provide Canada's contribution
and thus lessen human casualties-and thus head off another conscription
crisis. Popular opinion thwarted King, however, because most Canadians
expected that Canada's main contribution would once again be an expedi-
tionary force, though this time one led by Canadian commanders, which
would again demonstrate Canada's martial prowess. To maintain national
unity, King formed an all-volunteer overseas expeditionary force, the
Canadian Active Service Force (CASF). Its all-volunteer nature reflected
the fact that Canada's territorial interests were not directly threatened and
that no public consensus existed on what form Canadian involvement in the
In keeping with limited liability, the Canadian government initially
conceived of the CAS in very modest terms as a mobile force based
around a single infantry division. At a later date the government planned to
expand the CASF to two divisions. The modest size of the CASF reflected
the pervasiveness of the "never again" mentality of the 1930s, which con-
tended that future conflicts would be small wars. Indeed, most interwar
Canadian politicians, soldiers, and civilians alike simply could not contem-
plate Canada's involvement in another major war. Given the prevailing
political and social climate, Canada had to start virtually from scratch in
September 1939 in raising, training, equipping, and deploying an overseas
expeditionary force. Given the inadequacies of the militia at the start of the
war, even these apparently modest goals were in fact significant military
commitments.
Against the backdrop of limited liability and of military unprepared-
ness, Canada's early war mobilization was inevitably chaotic. In September
Canada, 1939-1944: The Politics of Neglect
167
1939 Canada mobilized the 1st Division of the CASF for overseas combat
service. There were few quality controls over early war enlistment, and
some men clearly volunteered to escape the unemployment of the Great
Depression rather than out of patriotism or belief in the threat posed by
Nazi Germany to Canadian interests.2 Interwar neglect meant that it was
not possible even to supply all volunteers with basic clothing and equip-
ment, let alone weapons. Confusion reigned about where, when, and how
the CASF would be dispatched overseas, thus it was not until November
193) that the 1st Division left for Britain. Moreover, since the British gov-
emment pledged to equip the CASF from British stocks there was little
impetus to resurrect Canada's arms industry. Nevertheless, given the condi-
tion of the Canadian military in September 1939, that Canada was able to
deploy a full division overseas in 1939 was in itself a major accomplish-
ment.
The specter of British defeat, which loomed large after Dunkirk, trans-
formed Canada's military policy and compelled its government to abandon
limited liability and reverse the priority accorded Canada's air and naval
forces since 1937. German victory in the West demanded an expanded
CASF to help fill the void in the Allied order of battle caused by the loss of
the French Army, the largest Allied ground force contingent. The Canadian
government thus ordered the expansion of the CASF to a corps of four divi-
sions. Yet extensive war mobilization had to wait until 21 June 1941 when
Canada enacted the National Resources Mobilization Act (NRMA), which
introduced limited conscription for home defense. The NRMA, by estab-
ishing a national service force for domestic defense, both gave Canada's
wartime ground forces a dual character and created political-military prob-
lems that plagued Canada throughout the war. Not only did the NRMA
hamper efficient Canadian manp dutilization, it was the source of con-
siderable friction between the volunteers and what the CASF considered
the less patriotic NRMA conscripts.
Dunkirk radically altered the character of the Canadian Army. From
the summer of 1940 on, Canada for the first time took armored warfare
seriously as the blitzkrieg apparently demonstrated the potential of armor to
win campaigns quickly and chea quipaiven the Canadian government's
concern about manpower, it was not surprising that from 1940 on the
Canadian Army enthusiastically embrd ed armored warfare and diverted
najor resources into armored forces. The Allied defeat in the West also led
Canada to rebuild its domestic arms industry as a desperate Britain asked
for help to reequip the British Army.3
Canadian difficulties in readying the CAsf inevitably delayed the
deployment of Canadian formations overseas. It was spring 1941 before the
original two-division CASF corps had concentrated in Britain. Canada's
diness, both in abandoning limited n-ability and in recognizing the poten-
id l of armored forces, meant that it was much later before additional for-
