134
Preparation: 1919-1944
Tunisia. Unit performance remained variable and coordination was again
poor. Most seriously, initial lack of antitank guns, due to shipping limita-
tions, once again brought the misuse of field artillery in an antitank role.
The debut of brigaded army artillery was also inauspicious as Anderson
decentralized his army artillery early in the campaign. 159 Moreover, during
the dash for Tunis and the winter battles, Anderson allowed Allied forma-
tions to fragment and become intermixed, which eroded morale and cohe-
Most lacking in the early stages of TORCH, though, was effective air
support. The Eastern Air Command (EAC) that provided tactical support to
the First Army had failed to absorb desert warfare lessons, and so its doc-
trine was obsolete and its organization cumbersome. It flew obsolete Bisley
tactical bombers in daylight when the Desert Air Force had long since
abandoned such day missions as suicidal. The EAC relearned this lesson
the hard way when German fighters annihilated an entire squadron during
December: 160 Initially, EAC also had very limited fighter-bomber capability
and misused its fighters to provide defensive umbrellas in contravention of
desert practices. Nor did it initially possess centralized control of fighters
or of radar, which curtailed its aerial reconnaissance capability. The air OP
too made little impact at first because few spotters were available, interser-
vice conflict raged on, and the First Army misused the aircraft as liaison
and courier planes. 161 Lacking preparation and infrastructure, especially
communications and transport, the EAC experienced major administrative,
organizational, and maintenance difficulties. 162
The First Army, though, enhanced its combat effectiveness more quick-
ly than British forces had hitherto in the western desert. Understanding of
the mechanics of modern war was gradually diffused through the army, and
recognition of the need to learn from combat experience spread. During
February 1943 Anderson reorganized the First Army, restored formation
integrity, and created operational reserves. At the same time, the new com-
mander of the 18th Army Group (formed to coordinate the actions of First
and Eighth Armies), General Alexander, instigated a coordinated air-ground
campaign —which involved alternate limited attacks by one army to draw
off enemy reserves while the other launched a major attack-to grind the
enemy into defeat. This strategy regained, and then retained, the initiative,
kept the enemy off balance, prevented the Germans from massing against
danger points, and inexorably wore down Axis strength. 163
Fire support also improved as Anderson slowly reconcentrated army
artillery and began to employ it en masse. The First Army also gradually
learned to harness the air OP, and at Bou Arada on 18 January 1943 the 6th
Armoured Division fired the first spotter-directed, radio-controlled divi-
sional barrage to halt German counterattacks, 164 This battle also saw the
Royal Artillery fire its first UNCLE target—the full, massed fire of brigad-
ed artillery. Late in the campaign the air OP demonstrated its potential as
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
135
more aircraft became available, as interservice wrangling abated, as the
First Army employed them more appropriately, and as the army finally
painted aerial recognition symbols on its vehicles. 165 Thus, during February
1943, at Hunts Gap spotter-directed massed fire single-handedly repulsed
German counterattacks, confirming another important lesson that the army
had been slow to learn—that heavy artillery could be effective against
armor. As a result, during late spring gunners finally began to use heavy
guns in defensive fire missions to halt German armored counterattacks. 166
The continued Axis air threat early in the campaign, however, demand-
ed careful camouflage, concealment, and dispersion of artillery, which
diluted its effectiveness, as did initial ammunition shortages. From April
1943 on, however, the acquisition of aerial supremacy and abundant ammu-
nition allowed Allied artillery to dominate the battle. The final Allied offen-
sive in Tunisia, Operation VULCAN, saw two divisions advance on a
3,000-yard front behind a massive preliminary bombardment that included
the First Army's first major counterbattery program. 167
The single most significant advance in the Allied prosecution of the
war during 1943 was the evolution of a integrated, interservice, and interal-
lied war effort. Originally, Britain and the United States had planned their
own separate roles in TORCH and had sought only minimal coordination.
But the speed of Axis reinforcement and the local defeats the enemy inflict-
ed throughout the winter dispelled complacency and precipitated greater
cooperation between air and ground forces and between the air forces
themselves, 68 The fusion of Air Marshals Tedder and Coningham with the
qually talented U.S. airmen "Tooey" Spaatz, James Doolittle, and "Pete"
Quesada fostered reform and saw tactical aviation reach new heights of
effectiveness.
Coningham's appointment to head Northwest Africa Tactical Air Force
HATAF) on 18 February 1943 finally solved the problems faced by BAC.
Horrified at what he found when he took command— the air support
dangements in northwest Africa being no more da vanced than mose mue
Western desert during summer 1941—Coningham abandoned the defensive
ase or lighters and concentrated them for offensive massions that proteid
round troops by forcing enemy planes onto the defensive. Likewise, ne
abandoned attacks on well-defended targets, like armor, for interdiction
he arms noti
strikes on more vulnerable "soft-skinned" motor transport, 19)
More importantly still, from February on, the Allies used air power en
masse for the first time along with a coherent, multistage plan to gain air
superiority and then to support the land battle. Air power became an inte
sral and coherent element of an interallied, Interservice theater strates
destroy Axis forces in Tunisia, rather than an independent sudies.
increased coordination during the spring allowed the Allies to apply their
growing strength in the air more effectively. Combined win aproved
communications and maintenance abilities, serviceabilty lates steadily
