102
Preparation: 1919-1944
While Germany overran Poland, the BEF expanded to ten divisions but
remained predominantly an infantry force that lacked supporting arms. By
spring of 1940, Britain had organized a war economy and production blos-
somed. But so great were equipment shortages during mobilization that the
BEF had only partly reequipped by May 1940 and still lacked communica-
tions, transport, and heavy weapons. Its troops remained undertrained and,
although the regulars had sufficient discipline and experience to progress in
unit training, the Territorial Army troops were still perfecting basics when
the Germans attacked. The necessary emphasis on basic training left the
BEF little time or resources for collective training, maneuvers, analysis of
the German victory in Poland, Or retraining. Thus the BEF simply lacked
the base of preparedness-_in leadership, equipment, and sound doctrine-
to become an effective force.
The BEF also lacked armored forces. Reorganization of the Ist
Armoured Division delayed its arrival-underequipped and poorly sup-
plied- until after the German onslaught had begun. On 10 May 1940 the
BEF had only two operational tank battalions, and its meager mechanized
forces lacked balance and cohesion. At the same time, the BEF lacked the
antitank weapons needed to stop the panzers that had rampaged through
Poland 3 Nonetheless, the BEF and the Heer faced many similar problems:
both lacked officers, ordnance, communications, munitions, and transport.
But marked differences existed in training, morale, spirit, and deployment.
While the Heer had trained its troops well, possessed high morale and an
aggressive offensive spirit, and, most significantly of all, had concentrated
its strength, the BEF dissipated its strength in linear defense.
The German invasion of Norway in April 1940 brought the first clash
between British and German ground forces and revealed how ill equipped
and unprepared British troops were to fight the Germans. The invasion
forced Britain and France to launch a hastily improvised campaign to retain
a hold on Norway. Lacking joint-operations experience, the Allies under-
took a campaign that required extensive interservice cooperation without an
appropriate command mechanism. That the Allies ineptly executed their
counterinvasion exacerbated the difficulties British troops faced as Britain
haphazardly shipped the 49th Territorial Division, mostly infantry with few
supporting arms, to central Norway. Oversupplied but undersupported, the
division fought a short, abortive campaign to maintain a toehold in Norway
before being withdrawn.4
British troops clearly came off worse in their first clash with the
Germans. They experienced what later became all too familiar: the demor-
alizing ease with which enemy infiltration and flanking tactics dislodged
British troops from their positions. Troop performance was variable but
generally poor. The few regulars committed conducted a skilled delaying
withdrawal, but the territorials lacked the leadership, training, and disci-
pline even to defend themselves effectively. In fact, the Norway operation
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
103
first demonstrated a weakness that plagued the British Army throughout the
war: its vulnerable morale, which plummeted with reverses and retreats
even though losses were light. The campaign also revealed that British doc-
trine and training had produced a sluggish, methodical army, as well as a
trait of logistic overinsurance. It shipped huge quantities of unnecessary
stores to Norway, while the ground forces lacked heavy weapons, commu-
nications, and transport.
The army had no time to draw lessons from Norway before the German
offensive in Western Europe (10 May 1940) rapidly penetrated the French
lines in the Ardennes and forced the BEF to retreat to the Channel coast and
be evacuated. The catastrophe was all the more shocking because British
and French commanders were confident that their troops could repeat the
successtul defense of 1914 by pursuing the same simple and conventional
strategy: adoption of defense to stop a renewed German offensive through
neutral Belgium. Once it was halted, the Allies planned to mobilize their
economies and wear Germany down into defeat through a strategy of attri-
tion they had used in World War I. Because they outnumbered the Germans,
this confidence seemed well placed. 6
But the defensive Allied deployment and the concept of armor as a spe-
cialized tactical weapon rather than a versatile, self-contained combat sys-
tem, led them to disperse their armor defensively for infantry support, for
reconnaissance, screening, and raiding in the light cavalry tradition, and as
a counterattack force in the heavy cavalry tradition to repulse German
armored penetrations in direct tank-to-tank combat.? Decentralization of
armor to less mobile forces robbed the Allied dispositions of sufficient
depth and strength to prevent a strategic penetration by massed German
mechanized forces, and left Allied forces too dispersed to launch an effec-
tive counterstroke. Thus when German armor broke through the weakly
held Ardennes and breached the Meuse, their own dispositions prevented
the Allies from assembling sufficient strength for their strategic counteral-
tack at Arras on 21 May to succeed.® Britain reinforced failure so that ulti-
mately sixteen divisions, virtually its entire field force, were sucked into a
lost battle. Desperate improvisation, stubborn defense, and good fortune
combined to allow the evacuation of the mainly weaponless remnants of
the BEF from Dunkirk. 10
The troops' performance in France was uneven, though they demon-
strated the stoic defense that became a hallmark of the wartime army. The
BEF, however, lacked the firepower and mobility to halt the blitzkrieg. The
Royal Artillery, though partly reequipped with the excellent 25-pounder
field gun, still deployed many obsolescent guns and lacked medium and
heavy artillery as well as mobility. Its training for static warfare, its obso-
lete ordnance, limited communications, defective organization, lack of
munitions, and dispersed deployment all crippled artillery effectiveness.
British artillery was neither numerous nor mobile enough, nor suitably
