196
Preparation: 1919-1944
1939-1940 the army extensively evaluated its experience in Poland and,
despite its stunning victory, was dissatisfied with troop performance.3
Equally important, the Heer did not simply seek to validate existing doc-
trine but to refine and improve it as it concluded that hasty and excessive
expansion had forged an army inferior to the 1914 Imperial Army. Study
revealed organizational defects, including the inadequacy of the light
mechanized division and the unwieldiness of the motorized division. 4
Reconnaissance, coordination, and camouflage skills had all proven inade-
quate, and troops had largely failed to adopt defense in depth on the few
occasions they had gone on the defense. Undertrained and hastily mobi-
lized reservists had also fought poorly, and even regular infantry had lacked
aggressiveness, fared badly in night fighting, and depended too heavily on
artillery support to overcome opposition. Even the elite panzer forces had
dispersed their armor, coordinated poorly, and displayed poor march disci-
pline.5
During the winter of 1939-1940 the Heer intensively retrained, reor-
ganized, and reequipped to correct the flaws illuminated in Poland, to raise
the standards of reservists and to inculcate offensive-mindedness and
speed. After-action reports from Poland confirmed the efficacy of mecha-
nized forces and won over many conservatives, including Erwin Rommel
and Gerd von Rundstedt, to the potential of armor. As doubt receded the
army fully adopted blitzkrieg warfare; the panzer arm expanded as the Heer
upgraded its light divisions to full panzer divisions and troops rigorously
exercised in the field to improve combined-arms coordination. Analysis
also showed the Luftwaffe's significant aid to victory in Poland: it had
quickly gained air superiority, then isolated the enemy front from reinforce-
ment and resupply with interdiction attacks on railways and bridges, and
materially assisted the German ground advance with bombing, strafing, and
dive-bomber attacks. Buoyed by this success, the Luftwaffe strengthened its
tactical orientation during the winter of 1939-1940 to provide more rapid
and intimate ground support.?
The Heer's realistic doctrine, broad professionalism, and quality train-
ing allowed it to surmount Germany's weak strategic position, which was
the biggest obstacle to Hitler's goal of world domination. Germany simply
lacked the manpower, industrial base, and raw materials to dominate the
world. Only by dividing its enemies and conquering them piecemeal could
Germany acquire the continental European hegemony that was a prerequi-
site in any bid for global domination.8 Blitzkrieg tactics and operational
concepts aimed to dislocate the enemy's command, communication, and
control system and thus sought to outmaneuver rather than outfight the
enemy. Such an approach allowed the Heer, which had only a marginal fire-
power advantage and which lacked the resources and industrial base for
protracted combat, to overwhelm powerful opponents quickly.
Yet significant deficiencies remained, most notably the Heer's limited
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
197
motorization, inadequate logistic base, and weak artillery capability. Yet the
markedly greater deficiencies of Germany's opponents obscured these
weaknesses throughout the early war years. At the same time, overexpan-
sion (as Hitler ordered another forty-nine weak infantry divisions raised in
the winter of 1939-1940) reduced the Heer's combat effectiveness.
Renewed expansion so soon after mobilization outstripped German produc-
live capacity, exacerbated equipment shortages, and seriously delayed acti-
vation of new divisions. Optical and signal equipment, motor vehicles,
weapons, and munitions all remained in short supply, and these deficiencies
seriously delayed the rapid acquisition of combat readiness by German for-
mations.9
In April 1940 Germany launched a hastily improvised invasion of
Denmark and Norway-Operation WESERÜBUNG-to forestall an antici-
pated Allied occupation of Norway. Hitherto, Scandinavia had barely fig-
ured in German strategic thinking, and the Heer lacked forces prepared for
Winter warfare in the Arctic. 10 Operationally, the German occupation of
Norway was a great success that secured for the Wehrmacht its first victory
over Anglo-French forces. Executed in the face of vastly superior British
sea power, WESERÜBUNG was boldly conceived, well planned, and skill-
fully executed. Though a minor campaign, this provided important lessons
for the protagonists. 11 WESERÜBUNG represented the first joint operation
that involved all three German armed services, and its success required
close interservice cooperation. Germany swiftly air- and sea-lifted six divi-
sions to Norway and successfully resupplied them. 12 Seaborne assaults on
eight Norwegian ports supported by paratroop drops, the first combat use
of airborne forces, began the campaign. Britain and France reacted by land-
ing forces in northern central Norway to contest the German invasion, yet
their counterinvasion failed-only at Narvik in the far north did Anglo-
French forces temporarily threaten the German lodgement before they
abandoned Norway. 13
The Norwegian campaign first demonstrated the supremacy of air
power over sea power, as air support proved decisive to German victory.
While unable to prevent the Allies landing in strength, the Luftwaffe kept
the Royal Navy at bay, obstructed Allied ground operations, and aided the
German ground advance to prevent Anglo-French forces from gaining a
firm foothold in Norway. The small-scale German tactical employment of
airborne forces to secure vital airfields and allow air-landing of reinforce-
ments also demonstrated the value of airborne forces operating in condi-
tons of air superiority against an unprepared enemy. The campaign
revealed the ability of aircraft to reinforce and resupply isolated forces: air-
lifts sustained the German lodgement at Narvik until the ground advance
from the south achieved a linkup. 14
Despite their lack of preparation for winter and Arctic warfare, German
troops adapted quickly to local conditions and innovated tactically to sur-
