00
80
Preparation: 1919-1944
and of operational maneuver; the army concluded that local setbacks had
resulted primarily from the misapplication and/or inflexible application of
existing doctrine. 53
Tunisia did, however, expose fundamental flaws in three areas of doc-
trine: the new armored, tank destroyer, and tactical air support procedures.
Armor doctrine that stressed en masse employment of armor echeloned in
depth on a narrow front to break through enemy lines and exploit the
enemy rear proved unrealistic. Unsuitable terrain and lack of mobile
reserves ensured that armor could rarely be employed in this manner in
Tunisia. Instead, commanders frequently dispersed armor in an infantry
support role to buttress an overextended front and provide effective means
of defense against German armored counterattacks. This U.S. II Corps only
concentrated its sole armored division late in the campaign, and reckless
dash characterized its operations. 54 In addition, mechanized infantry proved
slow to follow up and consolidate ground captured by armor.55
Operations in Tunisia also revealed that one of the army's most serious
organizational and doctrinal problems lay in antitank warfare. Tank
destroyers never lived up to expectations in TORCH, largely because they
lacked punch and armor protection and thus could not engage German
armor on equal terms. Combat in Tunisia also revealed serious flaws in
tank destroyer doctrine. The blitzkrieg had engendered an exaggerated fear
of the tank in the U.S. military, so tank destroyer doctrine developed
around the unrealistic assumption that large numbers of tank destroyers
would engage large numbers of unsupported panzers. 56 In reality, the army
only once employed tank destroyers en masse in Tunisia, where they suf-
fered prohibitive losses. 57 Indeed, the Germans-unlike the British—rarely
attacked with massed armor, but instead with combined-arms battle groups.
The U.S. Army in Tunisia typically employed tank destroyers as it did
armor —dispersed forward to buttress the infantry in a mobile indirect-fire
support role 58 The army learned to modify the traditional approach of
"seek, strike, and destroy" to meet the capabilities and limitations of tank
destroyers. Tunisia demonstrated that tank destroyers had to be used en
masse and coordinated with other antitank weapons to provide short-range
antitank defense from hull-down positions and to maneuver for advantage.
Combat also revealed the critical importance of cover, concealment, and
camouflage in the effective employment of tank destroyers.59
Tunisia also illuminated deficiencies at the operational level. U.S.
forces typically attacked on a broad front with all available forces, leaving
few reserves echeloned in depth to exploit a successful penetration.60 Such
an approach quickly exhausted offensive strength, but at the same time lack
of reserves hampered the rotation of formations out of line for necessary
rest and replenishment. Offensive practices, therefore, made it difficult for
the Americans to sustain combat power. The campaign also revealed that
offensive-oriented training had inculcated an unwise, often reckless,
The United States, 1939-1944: The Leviathan Awakens
81
aggressiveness in U.S. troops. The tempo of early offensive operations was
too fast: troops often sacrificed time-consuming preparation, reconnais-
sance, intelligence, and coordination for speed, resulting in unnecessary
setbacks and losses. Reconnaissance and patrolling proved particularly
poor, but Americans quickly recognized the frequent need to fight to
acquire battlefield intelligence.61
TORCH also showed that the army had devoted insufficient attention
and resources to the German defensive use of mines and booby traps,
which proved a far more formidable obstacle than anticipated. Prior to
TORCH the army had conceived mine clearing as a specialized engineer
task. Tunisia, though, demonstrated that all troops had to be proficient in
mine warfare if the pace of offensive action was to be maintained-and the
U.S. Army found no antidote for minefields except laborious and time-con-
suming clearance. Likewise, initial inexperience in laying and marking its
own minefields led to numerous casualties among its own troops.62
The ASC system for tactical aviation also proved a failure in Tunisia.
U.S. air-ground cooperation was so poor that the army and its air force
essentially fought separate wars. Only rarely did the missions of XII ASC
meet actual army needs, and when most needed, during the defeat at
Kasserine, air support was desultory. Tunisia illuminated that not only did
serious deficiencies in training exist but that the underlying air-ground sup-
port doctrine of FM 31-35 was faulty. No effective control and coordination
existed, and the doctrine dissipated air strength and neglected deep inter-
diction missions against German airfields. Tactical aviation also experi-
enced grave difficulties in acquiring targets, which resulted in numerous
friendly fire incidents. At the root of these failures lay the interwar contro-
versies over the proper uses of air power and the triumph of the strategic
bombing theorists.63 Inadequate air support resulted in frequent hostile air
attacks against U.S. ground troops. Yet these same troops provided poor
self-protection. Indifferent camouflage and concealment, inadequate dis-
persion and entrenching, and ill-disciplined antiaircraft fire all contributed
to heavier casualties and damage from air attacks.64
Nevertheless, the preponderance of doctrine proved fundamentally
sound in Tunisia and allowed the U.S. Army to concentrate on correcting
the more prevalent tactical, operational, and organizational defects that
combat had illuminated. The most significant tactical and operational les-
son of TORCH was the need for combined-arms coordination to guarantee
victory. Combined-arms training proved inadequate in Tunisia because the
AGF had failed to forge a combined-arms army during 1940-1942. Novel
weapons systems like armor and tank destroyers, with their concomitant
doctrinal controversies, inevitably bred parochialism and militated against
interarms cooperation. The magnitude of the army's training tasks during
1940-1942 also meant that the AGF was unable to identify quickly flaws in
its combined-arms preparation. The need to perfect basic training first and
