300
Normandy 1944
myriad tables of organization and equipment attested. Most German forma-
tions possessed some ad hoc unit or units improvised from their own
resources and designed to increase firepower, mobility, and combat
strength 38 All formations raised alarm units of troops combed from supply
and service units to prop up waning infantry strength. 39 German troops
often used captured enemy equipment to increase firepower, especially
armor. The Germans employed dozens of tanks captured from Allied forces
during the campaign, and after Montgomery's abortive GOODWOOD
operation (18-20 July) the 21st Panzer Division fielded an entire company
equipped with captured British Shermans. 40
To offset heavy losses, German forces reorganized both to maximize
their remaining combat strength and to minimize losses. Grievous losses
among unit leaders thrust many junior officers and NCOs into command.
To compensate for the resultant inexperience in such positions, formations
reduced the size of tactical units, since smaller units were easier to com-
mand and also suffered fewer losses. Many formations thus reduced and
reorganized companies into two platoons each of three sections plus a rein-
forced company assault section for counterattacks. Commanders also pared
down front-line strength and equipment to minimize losses and to establish
unit reserves to replace losses. 41 Since training inculcated independence
and initiative in the NCOs, when they ended up commanding platoons, or
even companies as officer losses climbed, German combat effectiveness
dropped off less markedly than in Allied units when officer casualties
mounted.
Indoctrination and propaganda contributed directly to the Westheer's
cohesion, fighting power, and tenacity. Propaganda persuaded many
German soldiers that the Allies would not take prisoners, while officers
often deliberately kept their troops ignorant of the true situation at the front
and dealt severely with signs of defeatism or antinazi sentiment. 42 At the
same time, rhetoric about powerful new "vengeance weapons" buttressed
German morale and resolve. Indeed, many German soldiers believed propa-
ganda claims that the V-1 rocket offensive launched on 14 June would force
the Allies into a negotiated settlement that would allow Germany to contin-
ue the struggle against the Soviet Union.43 "Eastern hardness" inculcated
through indoctrination helped troops surmount the terrible conditions in
which they fought.
In fact, the evidence demonstrates that the picture portrayed by Anglo-
American literature of a German soldiery increasingly disillusioned with
Hitler and nazism is distorted. Many German prisoners of war expressed
disillusionment on capture, and even more claimed to be antinazis after the
war. Contemporary prisoner interrogations, however, concluded that most
German troops remained ideologically committed to National Socialism,
that they rarely blamed Hitler for Axis defeats, and that they still had faith
in ultimate victory. 44 Nazi propaganda clearly reinforced the will of
Germany: The Defeat of the Westheer
381
German troops to continue an increasingly hopeless conflict, and indoctri-
nation was one element of military effectiveness in which Nazi Germany
maintained a marked edge over the Western Allies throughout the war.
However, the Westheer embarked on indoctrination too late to erase fully
the softening of the troops occasioned by comfortable occupation duty and
higher neglect—and so the Westheer retained a dual identity that manifest-
ed itself as friction between Ostkämpfer and garrison troops.45
Historians have also sanitized the Normandy campaign. While atroci-
ties never reached the depths of extermination that characterized the war in
the East, Normandy saw bitter, often brutal, combat. Although historians
have focused on a small number of well-documented atrocities committed
in Normandy by the SS, at the time the Allies repeatedly alleged numerous
war crimes committed by the regular German Army as well.46 Likewise,
Anglo-American historians have focused on egregious SS massacres of
French civilians, such as at Oradour, 47 but army units regularly participated
in antipartisan sweeps and routinely did not take prisoners.48 Indeed, the
Westheer viewed anti-maquis sweeps as excellent experience for new or
refitting divisions. At the front, exchanges of atrocities had begun on D-
Day between German troops and Allied airborne forces, but the most exten-
sive and sustained exchanges occurred between the 12th SS Panzer
Division Hitlerjugend and the 3d Canadian Division before Caen. A vicious
circle of atrocity and reprisal began on 7 June when the Kampfgruppe
Meyer executed Canadian soldiers captured during the battle group's
abortive drive to the coast, and in the weeks that followed SS troops com-
mitted dozens of atrocities. 49
One of the most significant deficiencies of the Heer was its poor, and
declining, intelligence-gathering capability. The army's offensive orienta-
tion early in the war and the traditional Prussian disdain of staff functions
brought about the neglect of intelligence. Early in the war air superiority
had allowed the Luftwaffe to provided considerable tactical intelligence to
advancing ground forces. But the demise of the Luftwaffe all but ended
photoreconnaissance intelligence by 1944, and left the Westheer blind. It
had to rely instead on tactical intelligence sources- signals intelligence
(SIGINT), prisoner interrogation, patrolling, and captured documents. Of
these, only in patrolling did the Germans exhibit any expertise. German
SIGINT was not sophisticated, nor were its operators well trained or
equipped. But the continued poor Allied signals discipline and security
meant that SIGINT remained the largest source of tactical intelligence for
German forces in northwest Europe. 50 Given these intelligence deficien-
cies, constant active patrols were necessary to identify enemy capabilities
and intentions. The Germans thus extensively used fighting patrols.5l
Nevertheless, intelligence gathering remained a serious weakness that con-
stricted German efforts to predict and counter Allied initiatives.
After corralling the Allied forces in a shallow lodgement during June,
