410
Conclusion
The process of rapid adaptation continued during the Normandy Campaign
as U.S. forces learned through trial and error to overcome the difficulties of
fighting in the Norman hedgerows and against enemy defenses in depth.
The Americans also mastered the air-ground battle during the campaign as
armored column cover forged the most intimate and effective air-ground
coordination yet seen in the war. By the end of the campaign not only were
the combat capabilities of the U.S. Army clearly superior to those of its
allies, they were also superior to those of its enemy.
Anglo-Canadian ground forces considerably enhanced their capabili-
ties during the war, but the pace of reform was generally slower and only
gained momentum during the middle of the war. Rigidly committed to a
strategy of attrition, lacking sound doctrine, and suffering the ravages of
interwar neglect, the British Army struggled early in the war both to draw
appropriate lessons from its combat experience and to improve its capabili-
ties. Such flaws had contributed to a series of reverses during 1940-1942
unparalleled in Britain's history. During 1942-1943 the British Army slow-
ly developed an operational approach, based upon firepower attrition, that
proved capable of defeating the Germans. Gradual honing of offensive art
finally led British forces to develop an all-round military proficiency dur-
ing the last year of the war. In 1944, however, real limitations still existed.
British offensive art remained unimaginative, mechanistic, and inflexible;
at the same time the limitations of its weaponry, the deficiencies in interarm
and interservice cooperation, and the need to minimize casualties all
ensured that it was difficult for the British military either to inflict sus-
tained damage or penetrate enemy defenses.
The Canadian military, on the other hand, had suffered severe neglect
between the wars and thus its fighting potential at the start of the war was
marginal at best. Such neglect initially forced the Canadian military into
dependence on Great Britain. The resulting anglicization of the Canadian
Army, however, turned it into an inferior clone of its British counterpart as
the Canadian military struggled to reform and reorganize without a solid
base of expertise and experience. At the same time, the Canadian govern-
ment's reluctance to risk its troops in combat, largely for domestic political
reasons, circumscribed the army's preparation. In consequence, lack of
combat exposure ensured that the Canadian Army's combat capabilities
remained limited in June 1944. It was only during the laiter stages of the
Normandy campaign that the Canadian military developed a basic profi-
ciency.
The combat capabilities of the German military in September 1939
were far superior to those of its opponents. Germany had begun rearma-
ment several years before its enemies, and the political climate in interwar
Germany provided a clear mandate for reform and expansion. The effec-
tiveness of the German Army, the Heer, early in the war was predicated on
sound, realistic doctrine and training grounded in its Great War experience,
Conclusion
411
the professionalism of its officer corps, the quality of its weaponry, a deter-
mination to examine and enhance combat performance at every turn, the
martial qualities of German society, and the ideological appeal of National
Socialism. These strengths allowed the Heer to harness the tank within an
aggressive strategic doctrine of deep penetration by mechanized forces to
paralyze and overwhelm underprepared militaries before enemies could
mobilize their demographic and industrial strength. The unpreparedness of
Germany's opponents, however, obscured serious deficiencies that existed
in German military capabilities and preparation. The Heer suffered from
excessive and rushed expansion, it was short of commissioned and non-
commissioned officers, had an inadequate service tail, possessed few mech-
anisms for interservice cooperation, and was inexpert at defense. Nazi
racism had also begun to inflate a sense of German superiority and distort
accurate assessment of enemy capabilities. But most seriously of all,
Germany simply lacked the strategic base for Hitler's quest for world dom-
ination.
Adolf Hitler, however, ultimately committed Germany to war against
much of the globe. Of necessity, the German Army had to structure and
organize itself to maximize its battlefield effectiveness and enhance its
qualitative edge. Such measures ensured that one to one, the Heer invari-
ably outfought its opponents until very late in the war. Yet, against such
overwhelming odds German battlefield superiority could not ultimately
surmount marked numerical and material inferiority. As the Allied nations
mobilized their economies and manpower, they also began to learn from
their combat experience and thus developed greater military proficiency.
Improved Allied combat effectiveness inexorably narrowed the German
qualitative edge. All the same, that it took the Allies almost six years to
overwhelm Nazi Germany testifies to the German military's ability to adapt
operationally, tactically, and technically throughout the war. German
wartime adaptation appears less pronounced in absolute terms in compari-
son to its opponents because the Heer started in September 1939 from a
broad base of general competence and expertise. Thus, in most cases, all
the Heer required was fine tuning of doctrine, tactics, and equipment rather
than more fundamental reform that the British and Canadian Armies
required. But, as the tide of the war turned, the pace of German adaptation
steadily increased. The net effect of constant adaptation was to postpone
inevitable defeat and to greatly increase the price of the Allied victory.
The reasons for the divergent pace of adaptation among these four
armies were many and complex. An intricate interplay of circumstances,
combat realities, military cultures, broader cultural characteristics,
geostrategic considerations, and personalities explain the relative pace and
character of adaptation exhibited by the U.S., British, Canadian, and
German militaries. Explanations clearly have multiple causes and are inher-
ently difficult to discern. Assessing the relative impact of individual influ-
