1
The Interwar Period
The United States
The American struggle for independence bred an innate distrust of military
institutions and a belief that martial values were alien to American democ-
racy. Thus, historically, armed forces have had an ambiguous position in
American society and a standing army only emerged in the early nineteenth
century after bitter political struggle.! Thereafter, cultural distrust of the
military combined with prevailing notions of governmental thrift ensured
that the United States maintained only a small, neglected peacetime army
prior to World War II. Historically, the United States, safe in its geographic
isolation, forwent large, expensive military forces and accepted the risks
that this entailed as it relied instead on mobilizing its great demographic
and industrial strength when confronted with imminent war.
The United States also had limited military experience. Between its
foundation and World War II, the nation fought nine wars, few of which
were long or costly, though peacetime neglect sometimes brought initial
reverses. Even World War I was not a total war for the nation; the late entry
into the conflict in April 1917 ensured that it was not until late 1918 that
U.S. ground forces took significant offensive action in the Meuse-Argonne
campaign. Rather, the army's most enduring experience was of policing the
frontier and Indian fighting.
Indeed, the only event to prepare the army at
all for total war was the Civil War (1861-1865). These contrasting experi-
ences of frontier skirmishing and bitter civil strife shaped a unique
American way of war in the twentieth century.?
During the 1920s, the country reverted to isolationism in the belief that
its geographic separation and economic self-sufficiency protected it from
external threat. Thus the nation demobilized in 1919 and thereafter main-
tained minimal ground forces for domestic defense and to preserve civil
order. Yet the interwar U.S. political environment made the maintenance of
effective military forces all but impossible as successive Republican presi-
17
