4
Canada, 1939-1944:
The Politics of Neglect
The Canadian armed forces in September 1939 possessed very limited mili-
tary capabilities and, as in the United States and Britain, the Canadian mili-
tary was neither materially nor mentally prepared for war in Europe.
Canada had no well-trained, equipped, organized forces capable of deploy-
ment overseas. Its militia had no real doctrine and little recollection of the
harsh realities of modern war that Canadian troops had learned on the
Western Front during 1914-1918. Protected by the Atlantic both from the
immediacy and direct danger of the war and possessing an exaggerated
faith in Britain's resilience, most Canadians believed that there would be
sufficient time to prepare for war if, or when, it materialized. At the same
time, the militia lacked the professionalism to develop military proficiency
quickly. It had little practical doctrine and was not structured to obtain,
absorb, or disseminate battlefield lessons so that it might learn from experi-
ence. In fact, few militia officers recognized the importance of studying,
evaluating, and learning from the warfare that engulfed Europe after
September 1939. Thus there was little in the interwar Canadian military's
experience to suggest that it could readily adapt to meet the challenges that
awaited it in World War I.
It took the audit of war to illuminate the army's deficiencies, and the
legacy of interwar neglect limited Canadian military effectiveness through-
out World War II. In contrast to the Great War, the tardy combat deploy-
ment of Canadian ground forces meant that they benefited less from com-
bat experience, not developing genuine military proficiency until late in the
war. To have expected military excellence in these circumstances from the
wartime Canadian Army was wishful thinking. Its interwar neglect and its
inexperience left it initially unable to prepare quickly or effectively for its
operational debut. It was also hampered in its efforts to innovate and adapt
to combat conditions because much time was lost in relearning basics and
developing professionalism to regain military proficiency. Much of
Canada's early war military preparation lacked rigor and realism. Neverthe-
165
