46
Preparation: 1919-1944
bered German forces would conduct a delaying withdrawal, utilizing ter-
rain advantages, speed, and concentration to inflict crippling losses on the
enemy. The Reichswehr recognized that to prevail against a more powerful
opponent via delaying defense required combat arms to coordinate closely
to ensure that the sum of their fighting power was greater than that of the
individual parts. Reichswehr doctrine and training thus inculcated apprecia-
tion of the need for arms to cooperate closely.
The man most responsible for molding the Reichswehr was its first
commander in chief, Hans von Seeckt. Seeckt believed that an offensive
defensive by fast-moving forces could offset numerical and material inferi-
ority. Thus during 1919-1926, he began to motorize the army and to incul-
cate mobility and the offense. In stressing maneuver war, Seeckt drew on
the extensive German mobile operations on the Eastern Front during World
War I. Forced by the Versailles Treaty to retain a large and, by Western
standards, anachronistic cavalry force, Seeckt modernized the German cav-
alry arm and transformed it into a mobile, offensive, semimotorized, com-
bined-arms force for deep-penetration operations. 122 The speed, mobility,
and offensive orientation that Seeckt and Versailles brought to the
Reichswehr was central to Germany's dramatic victories early in World
War II. As important in the long term was the Reichswehr's initiation of
limited mechanization during 1929-1931, which owed itself to von
Seeckt's successor, Wilhelm Groener. 123
Nevertheless, at the time of Hitler's accession to power in 1933 the
Reichswehr remained a lightly equipped, horse-drawn, ten division garrison
force. But the experimentation and innovation of the 1920s bore fruit in the
late 1930s and eased the burden of massive, ill-planned expansion and rear-
mament that Hitler embarked upon. For the efforts of the 1920s had created
a Führerheer, an army of leaders, which allowed expansion into a modern,
large, offensive-oriented field force in the late 1930s far more quickly than
was otherwise possible. Hitler's rise to power accelerated the pace of
reform; during 1933-1935 clandestine expansion and broad rearmament
began despite Versailles. Hitler covertly tripled the army and put into pro-
duction the weapons developed by the Reichswehr in the 1920s.124
In 1935 Hitler renounced the Versailles Treaty, reintroduced conscrip-
tion, and began simultaneous massive rearmament and military expansion.
In July 1935 the Reich Defense Law redesignated the German armed forces
as the Wehrmacht, and the German Army as the Heer. The fruits of
Reichswehr research, design, and technological innovation reached the
army in the late 1930s, with the result that the Heer's elite mechanized
spearhead possessed a technological edge during the early years of World
War II. Moreover, the Reichswehr's evasion of treaty restrictions allowed
the Wehrmacht to expand at an otherwise impossible pace. The Great War
weapons it had secreted away, and the interwar design, development, test-
The Interwar Period
ing, and training it had conducted allowed the Heer to train large annual
intakes in the mid-1930s until sufficient new production became available.
(But because expansion outstripped production, mobilization divisions
went to war in September 1939 equipped with World War I weapons.) At
and public sentiment supported rearmament.
Nevertheless, the Heer's cohesion and combat effectiveness initially
was eroded during expansion as formations reorganized, divided, absorbed
recruits, and redivided in turn, as the Heer underwent a twentyfold expan-
sion in six years. During 1935-1936 the army completed its second stage of
expansion to thirty-six divisions, but growth temporarily eased in 1937 as
the army struggled to complete a fivefold expansion in only three years.
Rapid and massive expansion brought rushed training in the late 1930s that
sank below traditionally high German standards. Even though Hitler
pushed the pace of expansion and rearmament, his strategic goal of global
dominance had little impact on the development of German tactical or
operational doctrine. 125 In fact it was Freiherr Werner von Fritsch, the army
commander in chief, Ludwig Beck, the chief of the General Staff (CGS),
and Erich von Manstein, the deputy CGS who were the generals chiefly
responsible for the development of the new Heer. 126 An important key to
the Heer's wartime success was its receptiveness to ideas outside the main
rearmament effort as senior commanders gave wide latitude and freedom to
innovators to develop novel weapons, tactics, and doctrine. This quality led
the army to develop a tank arm, the air force tactical aviation, and the navy
a submarine force-novel arms that subsequently proved to be Nazi
Germany's most effective military instruments.
Most significant of all, Germany usurped Britain's position as pioneer
in armored warfare between the wars. Germany had lagged behind Great
Britain in the development and employment of tanks in World War I and
Versailles had forbidden the Reichswehr from possessing armor. However,
this did not stop the German military from secretly building and testing
tanks; and it examined, absorbed, and refined British ideas on armored
warfare to develop its own armored doctrine between the wars. 127 The nazi
rise to power energized mechanization because many leading Nazis
favored motorization. In October 1934, a mobile troops command and
Germany's first independent mechanized formations emerged based around
the Reichswehr's motor transport troops (Kraftfahrtruppen) and its semi-
motorized cavalry arm. 128 In 1935 the establishment of Germany's first
three panzer divisions followed. This development was a natural evolution
of German strategic, operational, and tactical thought rather than revolu-
donary change. For the panzer division concept was a logical outcome us
the trends of mobility, offense-mindedness, and deep penetration i
