2no
50
Preparation: 1919-1944
Armies
Table 1.1 Expansion of the Heer, 1933-1939
Year
January 1933
January 1934
January
January
1936
January 1937
January 1938
January 19391
September 1939
Source: Tessin, Formationsgeschichte, 14.
Corps
Divisions
The German military's tradition of open, honest, and critical self-
examination, though, limited the detrimental effects of excessive expan-
sion. Even in the middle of massive growth and restructuring, the Heer
continued regular and extensive exercising. The July 1935 exercises saw
the first maneuvers by an entire mechanized division and demonstrated the
potential of armored warfare. 143 In September 1936 the largest German
maneuvers since 1913 took place, and in the following year an even larger
exercise was held 144 These maneuvers revealed many flaws in German
preparation and led to a reversion to basic training. The Czechoslovakia
crisis led to a scaling back of the 1938 maneuvers, though troops exercised
intensively in preparation for war with Czechoslovakia. 145 Moreover, the
Heer evaluated in detail its combat readiness and mission potential and it
gathered extensive intelligence. Hard work and sensible application charac-
terized German military preparation, and such professionalism minimized
the deleterious effects of forced expansion.
Such efforts notwithstanding, the Heer experienced considerable pre-
war growing pains. It had a severe and insurmountable officer shortage,
which reinforced the army's traditional reliance on its noncommissioned
officers (NCOs),146 Yet the shortage of NCOs in the late 1930s was even
more acute. The Heer thus went to war in September 1939 underofficered,
a situation that steadily worsened throughout the war. Rushed training and
its offensive orientation left troops inexpert at defense,
while constant
turnover in personnel delayed the acquisition of combat readiness and erod-
ed cohesion.
One strength of the German military in 1939 was that it had gained
recent operational experience from the German Condor Legion's participa-
tion in the Spanish Civil War (1936-1939), 147 The Wehrmacht learned
important lessons in Spain where the Luftwaffe conducted the first large-
scale strategic airlift in history, pioneered carpet bombing at Guernica, first
used the Junkers Ju-87 Stuka dive bomber in a tactical ground-support role,
and developed an embryonic command and control system for air-ground
The Interwar Period
51
attack. 148 The ground fighting also provided important lessons, including
the notable antitank capabilities of the German 88mm heavy antiaircraft
gun, as well as both the potential and limitations of Germany's first genera-
tion of panzers. Germany's peaceful annexations of Austria (1938), the
Sudetenland (1938), and the rump Czech State (1939) gave the Wehrmacht
further operational experience. These campaigns were instructive
rehearsals that identified numerous and glaring deficiencies in German
equipment, training, and organization, but the annexations witnessed pro-
Confusion and chaos had accompanied mobilization for the 1938
Austrian Anschluss. 149 After-action reports were highly critical of doctrine
and troop performance, training, and discipline. Undertrained reserve
forces mobilized in disorder, march discipline was poor, and the German
advance into Austria fell well behind schedule as formations straggled into
Vienna. Moreover, SS, police, and Luftwaffe units that had not jointly exer-
cised with the army caused major disorder. 150 Postcampaign analysis
revealed that the most serious deficiency was inadequate fuel provision for
the mechanizing Heer. 151 Due to the intensive German preparations for war
with Czechoslovakia and the absorption of lessons learned from the
Anschluss, the 1938 annexation of the Sudetenland went more smoothly.
The occupation of the Czech state in March 1939 witnessed further
improvement in German mobilization. 152 These operations all provided the
first practical German experience with armor and ironed out many kinks in
German organization, preparation, and mobilization.
Despite historical focus on the development of the panzer arm in the
1930s, most of the Heer remained infantry. An integral, if often underrated,
element of the German blitzkrieg success was the skill, quality, and aggres-
siveness of German infantry. Although often depicted as a conservative
opponent of armor, CGS Ludwig Beck, rather than opposing development
of armor, favored balance that led to parallel enhancement of the German
infantry in the 1930s. This contributed both to the German triumphs of
1939-1942 and to the protracted defense of 1943-1945. 153 Examination of
the lessons of the Great War demonstrated that the German infantry had
collapsed in 1918 under the strain of war. The Reichswehr thus revamped
the infantry and von Seeckt imbued the infantry with his doctrine of mobile
offense to build an aggressive infantry arm. Training emphasized individual
initiative, the highest caliber squad leaders, and maximum physical
fitness, 154 Interwar German infantry also routinely practiced small-unit tac-
tical drills involving assault groups and flexible ad hoc groupings that
forged a cohesive, disciplined, and flexible infantry arm prepared for fast-
paced, combined-arms offensive warfare. Recognizing the infantry as a bat-
tle-winning instrument in its own right, the Reichswehr also improved
infantry mobility and firepower: it introduced new infantry guns, antitank
weapons, and machine guns, as well as modern radios. 155 It also motorized
