360
Normandy 1944
Simonds. He emerged from Normandy with a reputation as a daring, inno-
vative officer and proved to be the most professional and gifted senior
Canadian commander. Under his leadership Canadian forces innovated
technically: they developed the first improvised Commonwealth armored
personnel carrier, the Kangaroo, and refined use of the Wasp flamethrower
vehicle. Simonds also displayed tactical and operational creativity.
Operationally, his abandonment of a preliminary artillery barrage brought
tactical surprise at TOTALIZE, but left the German defenses intact. His
strategic bombing attack on the second day of the operation was another
innovation, though one that tied the Canadian advance to a rigid plan that
ultimately undid the operation.
Simonds did "overcontrol" the battle and interfere with the freedom of
subordinates, as did all the senior Anglo-Canadian commanders, because he
had limited faith in his inexperienced subordinates, because of his lack of
success in instilling verve, speed, and flexibility among his subordinates
and their troops, and because he desired to minimize casualties. 132 At divi-
sion and brigade level Canadian commanders proved less effective. For
example, General Keller's command capabilities earned him the title of
"Killer" Keller; likewise, General Foulkes, commander of the 2d Division,
failed to impress Simonds.
Generally, once committed to combat in Normandy, the Canadians
adapted faster than British troops. Initially all three Canadian divisions had
performed poorly, but they adapted fairly quickly. The 3d Division first
demonstrated improved defensive skill during CHARNWOOD as it finally
began to integrate infantry and armor and to coordinate a combined-arms
defense, 133 But constant combat and heavy losses sapped the division's
effectiveness in July. The 2d Division likewise suffered heavily during its
July battles and did not display improved proficiency until TOTALIZE.
The 4th Armoured Division, which only saw major action during August,
had not had time to become proficient before the end of the campaign.
The most significant Canadian innovation in Normandy was the grad-
ual rejection of conventional British doctrine of firepower dominance.
Instead, the Canadians developed more sophisticated artillery programs
that relied less on predicted fire and creeping barrages and that employed
timed concentrations that made increasing use of smoke and air-burst high-
explosive shells 134 Greater operational flexibility allowed the Canadians to
achieve surprise during TOTALIZE, the only occasion when Anglo-
Canadian forces obtained it during the campaign.
Moreover, by August, Canadian forces had begun to bring more fire-
power to bear in the attack. The Wasp armored flamethrower, in particular,
proved a powerful offensive weapon and became an integral element of all
subsequent Canadian offensive operations. 135 Despite manpower con-
straints, the Canadians also innovated organizationally. Formations estab-
lished countermortar organizations during the campaign, and in August the
Canada: Learning the Hard Way
361
First Army formed both a rocket launcher battery equipped with captured
Nebelwerfer launchers and the Kangaroo-equipped 1st Carrier Squadron, 136
Initially, Canadian forces made poor use of the powerful tactical air
support available in Normandy. Canadian training for the air-ground battle
was inadequate prior to D-Day, and the tactical air support allocated to sup-
port Crerar's command only became operational on the Continent on 1
August. Thus there was no harnessing of the potential of tactical aviation
either offensively or defensively as part of a combined-arms air-ground
team or to ward off German counterattacks. It was only during August that
improved air-ground coordination slowly emerged. 137
The growing infantry shortage, though, both undermined Canadian
combat effectiveness and obscured the gradual improvement in Canadian
combat capabilities that occurred late in the campaign. The manpower cri-
sis clearly acted as a brake on Canadian innovation in Normandy.
Moreover, the army's continued failure to institutionalize the collection,
evaluation, and dissemination of combat lessons hampered Canadian inno-
vation. Before D-Day, the Canadian Army Overseas (CAO) had completed
postcampaign analyses of Dieppe and Sicily, but had not studied its early
operations in Italy. 138 This lack of postcombat evaluation seriously ham-
pered the First Army's ability to absorb lessons learned in the
Mediterranean. Only in the spring of 1944 did the CAO recognize the need
for more continuous and systematic utilization of combat lessons. 3) And
shortly before D-Day, Crerar did demand the completion of comprehensive
combat reports in northwest Europe. 140 However, few formations actually
prepared them, and even then only irregularly. 141
This lack of systematic, coordinated collection of after-action reports
hindered Canadian adaptation in Normandy. Of the senior Canadian com-
manders only Simonds exhibited real determination to learn from combat
and to conduct retraining in the field. 42 That Canadian forces were locked
in heavy combat throughout the campaign, however, prevented the with-
drawal of units for retraining in the rear. So there was little drive, even
from Simonds, to retrain during combat. 3 Consequently adaptation and
innovation occurred only unit by unit. 144
In conclusion, Canadian forces did not excel in the 1944 Normandy
campaign-indeed, as early as 12 June the Germans had concluded that the
battleworthiness of the Canadians was poor. 145 Inexperience, inadequate
and misguided training, poor coordination, sluggish attack doctrine, p for
understanding of enemy fighting methods, and inadequate preparation for
the air-ground battle resulted in setbacks and repeated partial success.
Nevertheless, Canadian troops adapted relatively quickly to combat condi-
tions in Normandy and demonstrated improved proficiency during the later
stages of the campaign. However, Canadian forces had yet to master fully
combined-arms coordination, offensive warfare, or the air-ground battle by
the end of the Normandy campaign.
