316
Normandy 1944
by the infantry, and gain maximum ground as quickly as possible. The
British also sorely felt their lack of armored personnel carriers, but
Dempsey countermanded the efforts of the commander of the VIII Corps,
Richard O'Connor, to employ ammunition carriers as improvised armored
personnel carriers.67
The aerial bombardment, the largest Allied carpet bombing in support
of ground forces yet witnessed in the war, was clearly the most successful
aspect of GOODWOOD.68 Drawing on the lessons of CHARNWOOD, this
bombardment was more effective. For the first time, night bombers
dropped delayed-action high-explosive bombs along the flanks of the
planned advance to disrupt German counterattacks, while day bombers
attacked at first light with fragmentation bombs to limit the cratering that
had badly delayed the CHARNWOOD ground advance. Nonetheless, this
action did not live up to expectations, because the shallowness of the bomb
area once again limited the material damage and left the German reserves
deployed in depth virtually unscathed. 69
The unsupported employment of massed armor against intact defenses
brought severe tank losses during GOODWOOD: more than one third of
the entire British tank strength in Normandy was disabled. 70 Dempsey had
allowed armor to spearhead the operation because he mistakenly believed
that plenty of replacements tanks were available. Not only were far fewer
available than he imagined, but he had overlooked a growing shortage of
replacement crews. GOODWOOD caused a tank shortage that lasted for
the rest of the campaign. 1 Nor did GOODWOOD minimize infantry losses
as Dempsey had intended; the diversionary attacks launched in support of it
caused too many casualties. 2 The operation also failed miserably to "write
down" enemy armor as Montgomery had intended. In fact the armored
advance barely hurt the enemy, and the offensive did not stop two panzer
divisions from being transferred to the U.S.
sector. 73 Even though GOOD-
WOOD did acquire badly needed room in the bridgehead and temporarily
tied some German reserves to the Caen area, these achievements were
bought at a price that British forces could not afford to repeat.
Yet GOODWOOD did make an important, if unintended, contribution
to the success of COBRA. The heavy defensive combat around Caen during
GOODWOOD forced the Germans to focus their resupply efforts in the
British sector, so that few supplies reached the U.S. sector in the crucial
days before COBRA. The result was a serious deterioration in the German
logistic position before COBRA that facilitated the U.S. breakout. 74
Forced to lick his wounds, it was not until 28 July that Montgomery
permitted Dempsey to launch an impromptu offensive, BLUECOAT,
against the weakly held German front amid the thick bocage around
Caumont. Montgomery intended the operation to maintain pressure on the
Germans and prevent the transfer of enemy armor against the Americans.
Britain: Montgomery's Best Batsmen Fail
317
But, again, BLUECOAT was Dempsey's brainchild, and he again hoped to
achieve a decisive breakout. Montgomery, in spite of lingering skepticism,
bowed to Dempsey because he needed a quick offensive to forestall the
transfer of German reserves to the U.S. front, regardless of the fact that the
buildup for the attack was insufficient to ensure victory. BLUECOAL waS
the only operation in Normandy in which Montgomery compromised on his
master plan and launched a premature offensive to assist the U.S. break-
through. 75
For BLUECOAT, Dempsey hastily recalled the 11th and Guards
Armoured Divisions from their post-GOODWOOD refitting. The offensive
saw simultaneous attacks by the VIII and XXX Corps, with three armored
and three infantry divisions.7 Dempsey deployed an unprecedented con-
centration of armor and infantry against a single German infantry division.
The need to prevent the transfer of enemy armor forced him to launch the
operation three days ahead of schedule, and the premature start ensured that
the fire support that normally accompanied British offensives was lacking.
Even though the German defense was weak and had almost no armor, the
front had been static since mid-June and the Germans had entrenched them-
selves in depth amid the thick bocage. But here Dempsey committed most
of the available British armor-in one of the sectors least suited for often-
sive armored operations. Also, because speed was so important Demspey
launched the attack before the VIII Corps had fully assembled.
Historians have generally viewed BLUECOAT as a great success, and,
indeed, Dempsey's forces breached the German lines and brought to battle
German armor that was being transferred to the U.S. sector. As a holding
attack (as conceived by Montgomery), BLUECOAT was a success. As a
major breakout bid, as sought by Dempsey, it was a dismal failure. For the
immense British numerical superiority (estimated at thirty to one by one
scholar) should have produced greater success.? But Dempsey had to rush
the attack, making it an untidy and unsubtle frontal assault. Moreover, fail-
ure to take flanking high ground at Amaye seriously hampered progress just
as it had in EPSOM.78 Caution and sluggishness also prevented British
forces from ripping open a weak, depleted, barely coherent German front
that was ripe for shattering. On 30 July, the British captured a bridgehead
over the Souleuvre River on the undefended boundary between the German
Seventh Army and Panzer Group West, and for the next week the two
German commands remained detached along this boundary, leaving a 2-
mile gap that was not exploited. By the time the British realized the weak-
ness of the enemy and advanced, German reserves had closed the gap. 79
The position of the Allies' own boundary line also hindered a rapid
British advance southwest toward the important communications hub of
Vire, which the British could have captured on 2 August with little opposi-
tion, but did not because the town was in the U.S. zone. 80 The failure to
