324
Normandy 1944
because it would tie down enemy reserves. 119 Casualty minimalization led
Montgomery to call off both EPSOM and GOODWOOD when losses
mounted, whereas the Americans slogged on toward St. Lô and bled the
enemy dry.
During lulls in the fighting, Montgomery maintained the initiative with
individual battalion assaults. Such attacks minimized aggregate casualties
but they concentrated losses in the attack battalions, writing them off.
Deliberate application of limited strength reduced prospects of success,
increased losses, and demoralized attack battalions. Even though
Montgomery retained the initiative throughout the campaign, his concern to
limit losses contributed to the British inability to break out. The operational
repercussions of casualty minimalization was that British forces failed to
take advantage of opportunities that presented themselves that might have
shortened the war and cut losses in the long run. 120
Montgomery, the master of public relations, persuaded the British peo-
ple, politicians, press, and soldiery, as well as the Allies, that British troops
were of high quality, even when he knew they were not. 121 He recognized
that confidence in command instilled and maintained troop morale-hence
his obsession with nurturing his image as an undefeated military genius
was more than just ego. 122 He believed that a setback might destroy his
image of invincibility and with it sap his troops' morale. He was acutely
aware of the pernicious effects of heavy losses and recognized that soldiers
of democratic, mass civilian armies were less resilient than those of totali-
tarian or ideologically motivated regimes and so he strove to avoid undue
casualties. 123
Indeed, unlike the Germans, the civilian British conscripts often never
recovered from a single tactical drubbing, as in the case of 3d/4th Battalion,
County of London Yeomanry Regiment on 13 June at Villers-Bocage. 124
Montgomery knew that his troops could perform well, but only if they were
nurtured and husbanded. Casualty minimalization recognized that Britain
had limited manpower reserves; that Allied demographic and industrial
strength would inevitably prevail; and that Britain's postwar international
standing required the preservation of its army. The shackling psychological
legacy of World War I also clearly promoted casualty minimization because
most senior officers had experienced the slaughter in the trenches of the
Western Front, many as infantry officers. The British infantry was not to be
used as cannon fodder, even though, inevitably, it was still to bear the bur-
den of both combat and casualties.
As it was, despite all of Montgomery's efforts to preserve combat
power and morale, both waned alarmingly as the campaign progressed-
until the German collapse in August 1944 boosted morale and gave the
British a breathing spell to replenish formations. By late July, despite his
efforts, morale had sunk as absence and desertion rates shot up. 125 Given
Britain: Montgomery's Best Batsmen Fail
325
superior German fieldcraft, the defensive advantages of the terrain, and
flawed British attack doctrine, the more aggressive British offensive action
in Normandy that Dempsey desired might have permanently crippled
British fighting power. To avoid this, Montgomery set out to create a sus-
tained, satisfactory performance from British ground forces that (relying on
Allied numerical superiority) would bring victory at tolerable cost and pre-
serve the army. 126 Thus he never desired nor sought the best and most
effective army attainable. Montgomery understood that a satisfactory per-
formance was all that was realistically possible and all that was necessary
for victory.
Contemporary and postwar criticisms leveled at Montgomery were
largely inevitable consequences of his operational approach. Highly con-
trolled set-piece battles prevented simultaneous attacks. Moreover,
although his focus on administration provided excellent logistic support
that sustained British fighting power as long as possible, he attacked less
frequently, for shorter periods, and more cautiously than the Americans and
thus let opportunities pass. But he did recognize the critical importance of
logistics for victory far more clearly than his adversaries, even Rommel.
Moreover, Montgomery understood the vital importance of air power to
Allied victory and he rated it so highly that he was reluctant to attack with-
out it. 127
Even though he was frequently criticized by contemporaries and by
historians since for his caution, British objecuves and the grows man-
power crisis made Montgomery's caution generally both appropriate and
sensible, 128 Indeed, the worst defeats Anglo-Canadian forces suffered
occurred when troops displayed dash and boldness. 129 It is thus apparent
that the slow, methodical, controlled battle was appropriate to the capabili-
ties of British forces.
Firepower attrition was the concomitant to concentration in
Montgomery's operational approach as massive firepower smashed the
infantry through to its objectives, 130 But this approach was a two-edged
sword. It was appropriate in light of British morale and manpower con-
cerns, as well as political-military objectives, but it had significant draw-
backs. The increasing scale of fire support ultimately became self-defeating
because the devastation it caused so hindered the advance that British
forces could not exploit the fires sabios effect. is Carpet bombing
reduced built-up areas like Caen and Falaise to rubble, impeded movement,
slowed the tempo of the advance, and gave the Germans time to move up
reserves, counterattack, and rebuild a continuous front.132 The planning
complexities of bombing also meant that the early bombardments preceded
the ground attack by several hours, alerting the enemy to a peng
attack. The lethal effect was limited and not in proportion to the resources
expended, but the moral effect was significant. It could temporarily stun
