186
Preparation: 1919-1944
quality training, or an adequate grasp of operational art. Significant varia-
tions existed in the quality of Canadian preparation. The 3d Division,
which had intensively trained for its assault role, was clearly the best pre-
pared Canadian formation. The 2d Division had worked hard to reconstitute
itself after Dieppe, but never fully recovered from that setback and thus
remained less battleworthy. The 4th Armoured Division's working up had
lagged so far behind schedule that the CAO still rated it as nonoperational
on the eve of D-Day. Canadian preparation was equally disparate as divi-
sions focused on narrow projected missions, rather than broad combat
preparation. The 3d Division's necessary emphasis on amphibious assault
training had left it little time for combined-arms exercising with its accom-
panying armor from the 2d Armoured Brigade. The War Office considered
neither of the continental armored contingents, the 1st Polish Division and
the Czech Brigade, fully operational on the eve of D-Day. Lacking replace-
ments, these formations were wasting assets whose combat power had to be
carefully preserved by avoiding heavy combat. 108
The Canadian wartime experience also illustrates the inherent obsta-
cles to the efficient utilization of national resources for a war effort lacking
overwhelming popular consensus and a direct threat to home territory. The
most limiting influences on Canadian military operations in northwest
Europe were Canada's growing manpower crisis and Canadian First
Army's inability to operate independently of British support. The manpow-
er problem on the eve of D-Day was ill recognized, let alone adequately
addressed, and this oversight seriously impeded Canadian combat effec-
tiveness in northwest Europe. Yet the personnel to avoid the manpower cri-
sis did exist; what was lacking was determined political and military will to
trim excess and rationalize manpower to mobilize the necessary people. As
a result, manpower concerns for Canada shaped operations in northwest
Europe as powerfully, if not more so, than for Britain. Minimizing casual-
ties dominated Canadian operations throughout the northwest Europe cam-
paign.
The Canadian Army's preparation for Operation OVERLORD demon-
strates that it could not easily or quickly remedy its prewar neglect of the
basic elements of the military profession. Such neglect necessitated
dependence on Britain, which gave the Canadian Army that landed in
Normandy a distinctly British cast. The Canadian military inherited the
strengths, and the considerable defects, of the British Army of World War
Il, experiencing all the problems that beset the British troops in Normandy.
Yet the Canadian Army faced its own unique difficulties, which derived
from its unparalleled interwar neglect as well as Canada's geostrategic
position and sociocultural background. Canada's need to deploy, train,
equip, and maintain an army overseas in Great Britain added immensely to
the difficulty of forging an effective wartime ground force and bred consid-
erable waste, duplication, and inefficiency. Moreover, as the war pro-
Canada, 1939-1944: The Politics of Neglect
187
gressed, the volunteer character of the CAO precipitated a growing man-
power crisis, especially among French-Canadian units. These additional
obstacles exacerbated the manifold problems caused by Canada's severe
interwar neglect of its military. Canada had gone to war in 1939 without a
modern army; by 1944 the nation had acquired one. Its achievements were
considerable, but the gap between Canada's and the enemy's abilities was
immense. Consequently, the Canadians were unable to compete tactically
or operationally with the Germans in Normandy in 1944, and they could
not replicate the Canadian triumphs of the Great War.
The Canadian Army on the eve of D-Day was thus a poor imitation of
the British Army. Its Commonwealth status and strong cultural, linguistic,
economic, and military ties with Britain meant that Canada naturally
looked to Britain for the expertise and experience with which to forge its
wartime army. Unfortunately, British doctrine and weapon procurement
remained in many ways flawed. Canada's neglect of its military between
the wars had denied it the expertise necessary to operate during World War
I as a truly independent military force, and such inexperience led the
Canadian Army to uncritically adopt a Commonwealth style of warfare.
Yet Canadian military preparation in Britain in 1943-1944 in no way
demonstrated that the Canadians had mastered the Commonwealth style of
wartare as well as their tutors. The CAO had not overcome serious man-
power procurement and training problems, and, although it had come a
long way from its state in late 1940, equipment and doctrine problems
ensured that it was still far from being proficient, especially in combined-
arms operations. Canadian commanders and troops remained largely
unproven, and Canadian First Army had been stripped of the fighting power
beyond the point it could operate effectively as a wholly Canadian force.
Finally, the rapid but haphazard wartime proliferation of support and serv-
Ice elements further curtailed Canadian ability to operate independently. In
recognition of these circumstances, SHAEF wisely assigned the First
Canadian Army the subsidiary role of landing only after the Allies had
established a successful bridgehead to operate across northeast France and
the Low Countries on the flank of the Allied advance. Such a role acknowl-
edged the limited capabilities of First Canadian Army, and only the audit of
war in Normandy would determine how well placed this limited faith
would prove.
Notes
1. On Canada's conscription problems, see J. L. Granatstein and J. Mackay
Hitsman, Broken Promises: A History of Conscription in Canada (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1977) and F. W. Perry, The Commonwealth Armies: May Preser
and Organisation in Two World Wars (Manchester: Manchester University Press,
1988), 127-136.
