148
Preparation: 1919-1944
extensively trained and that would take place with mastery of the seas and
skies. Allied intelligence had provided a good picture of enemy strength
and dispositions, and the War Office had met the gigantic logistic require-
ments for a successful invasion. It was thus likely that the Allies could
secure a bridgehead, the greatest danger coming from a rapid German
armored counterattack. Yet the War Office remained uncertain of what
would happen after Allied forces had gotten ashore, because they would
face the enemy in considerable strength and because their lack of opera-
tional-level doctrine left them unclear as to how precisely to effect the
breakout battle once ashore. Moreover, not only did the Allies face in
Normandy a large German field force operating on interior lines, but seri-
ous weaknesses still afflicted all the Allied armies. The British Army had
not yet fully shaken off its defensive mentality, its attack doctrine was
mechanistic and ponderous, its coordination remained poor, its armor was
inferior, its morale brittle, and its manpower limited. British fighting
power-the sum of the forces available times their combat effectiveness-
was finite. The lack of manpower, in particular, meant caution and careful
husbanding of available forces.
In these circumstances, Allied mastery in the air proved decisive in tip-
ping the balance in favor of Allied victory even before D-Day. Air
supremacy allowed the Allies to conduct deep interdiction strikes during
the spring of 1944 that effectively isolated Normandy. Such a mission was
more controversial than in Tunisia, where the length of Axis lines of com-
munication had made them vulnerable to deep interdiction. It was not obvi-
ous that effective disruption of France's modern communications network
was possible. Indeed, air forces had never undertaken interdiction on the
scale and scope necessary to isolate Normandy, and the need to preserve
the secrecy of the precise invasion site compelled the Allies to disperse
their attacks. Nevertheless, the mission went ahead and massive, repeated
air attacks systematically smashed German communications and effectively
isolated Normandy by the eve of D-Day. The interdiction campaign had a
major, perhaps even decisive, impact on the success of this second front,
even before the first shot was ever fired on the Normandy beaches.
The British Army entered World War Il markedly inferior to its oppo-
nent and without a ground force structured, organized, trained, or equipped
for modern continental warfare. It lacked appropriate doctrine, suffered
from poor morale and a defensive mentality, and was wholly unprepared
for interarms and interservice cooperation. Its tasks of mobilization, expan-
sion, and rearmament early in the war were gargantuan. The consequence
of this unpreparedness was a string of serious defeats early in the war,
which while providing impetus for reform, simultaneously hampered adap-
tation. Only slowly, painfully, and at heavy cost did the army relearn the
fundamentals of modern war in North Africa and the Mediterranean. Thus
it was only in 1943 that Great Britain had turned its attention to the deci-
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
149
sive land engagement in France; even then these efforts were mostly direct-
ed to the mighty amphibious armada required to get the army into battle.
While the British Army had transformed itself from a force possessing
only marginal defensive capability to one with limited offensive capability,
the degree of improvement varied tremendously. The British military had
made most progress in interservice coordination as repeated defeat forged
greater service cooperation, a process cemented by the intimate teamwork
required to return the army to the continent. The army, in turn, had ulti-
mately mastered a single successful operational approach that relied on
existing strengths-artillery, air power, and administration.
But the army
had not made all the necessary progress in reequipment, retraining, force
structure, organization, tactics, and operational art.229 Morale had improved
but it remained fragile, and the least progress had been made in combined-
arms coordination and doctrinal development.
The army's relative tardiness in discerning combat lessons slowed the
pace of adaptation and thus limited enhancement of combat effectiveness.
The failure to preserve lessons learned at such great cost during World War
1, as well as the lack of basic professionalism in army culture and of mech-
anisms to derive and disseminate combat lessons, all hampered wartime
adaptation. As the war progressed, the British learning process improved as
senior commanders began to appreciate the need to learn from combat
experience. As a result, in the mr idle of the war the army adopted a more
professional and scientific approach to lessons-learned analysis. The army
created the Directorate of Tactical Investigation to examine tactical devel-
Opments and pioneered operational research to examine operational, tacti-
cal, and technical questions scientifically. Nevertheless because army cul-
ture rewarded loyalty over honesty and because the army leadership was so
concerned about troop morale, the derivation and dissemination of accurate
combat lessons remained problematic. So, adaptation was haphazard and
sporadic rather than general and widespread; and though there was consid-
erable change in the wartime army, much of it appears in retrospect mis-
A combination of interwar neglect, inexperience, amateurism, and a
lack of honest self-criticism led to a British approach that one could charac-
terize as muddling through. Many sincere efforts at reform failed because
the army proved both unable and unwilling to assess accurately, and then
vigorously address, its underlying problems. Lack of holistic doctrine
fueled doctrinal inconsistency, even on occasions schizophrenia, and com-
partmentalized military thought and adaptation. By 1944 the army had
made limited progress toward a comprehensive, realistic combined-arms
doctrine, tinkering with various doctrines, but little substantive improve-
ment had materialized. Inadequate doctrine seriously hampered reform and
explains why the army experienced such difficulty refining and improving
its tactics, training, coordination, organization, and force structure. For
