210
Preparation: 1919-1944
troops and equipment from the West.87 Moreover, the Ostheer remained on
the strategic defensive on the northern and central sectors, where it expedi-
ently reduced sixty-nine attenuated infantry divisions from nine to seven
rifle battalions to cut manpower shortages, even though this destroyed the
formations' triangular structure and reduced their tactical flexibility. 88
German preparations for a renewed offensive thus transformed the
Ostheer in the same manner that the 1918 peace offensives had recast the
German Imperial Army. The Germans created a small force of elite attack
divisions and many more second-rate divisions to hold the rest of the front.
Incapable of major offensive action, Army Groups North and Center, never-
theless, gradually eliminated any Soviet force cut off in their rear during
the spring and constructed hedgehog defenses during the summer. Troop
shortages and limited mobility abridged defense in depth and compromised
traditional defensive principles of maneuver and depth. 89 Instead, troops
relied on static defenses, minefields, coordinated defensive artillery fire,
and fortified village strongpoints for defensive strength, and on firepower
and counterattacks by local reserves to hold or regain the front.90 Reserves
learned through experience that immediate, aggressive counterattacks at the
base of Soviet penetrations usually halted such breakthroughs.'l During
1942 the Ostheer gradually abandoned the delaying withdrawal and maneu-
ver within the defensive zone advocated by doctrine as fixed defenses, fire-
power, and immediate counterattack became the core of German defensive
Troops required greater firepower to hold the front because attacking
Soviet forces were still powerful when German forces counterattacked
immediately. To increase striking pown German commanders deployed
Kood assault guns and lank destroyers to buttress counterattack reserves.
nevertheless, througnout the summer of 1d12, Soviet probing attacks
repeatedly punctured Army Group Center's front and wore down its deten-
sive strength as winter approached. During late spring of 1942, the army
generated extra manpower to restore German strength in the East and reha-
bilitated the infantry arm. It expanded the use of Soviet prisoners of war as
auxiliaries, again combed out the rear-area echelons, extended ine use of
alarm units, and stepped up the recruitment of European volunteers for the
"CeS jade against Bolshevism," as Hitler bullied his Axis partners to
strengthen their forces on the Eastern Front. 2 These expedients temporarily
an viated immediate German manpower needs and numerically restored
the steer's strength, but its quality and offensive power was considerabl
lower than in the previous summer. Despite efforts to mobilize anti-Soviet
and anticommunist sentiment, nazi racism prevented Germany from fully
capping the well of anti-Soviet and anti-Russian sentiment that alone could
tave prad cu vermany with the manpower to defeat the soviels." Finally
ough enemy resistance also forced the Ges nans to grudgingly revise their
estimates of Soviet capabilities. 94
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
211
The Ostheer rebuilt its strength in southern Russia to launch a narrow-
front offensive-code named BLAU—to achieve a knockout blow as Hitler
once again gambled the army's long-term combat endurance against the
chance for a rapid blitzkrieg victory. Strategically, Hitler shifted from the
destruction of enemy armed forces to victory through economic means by
seizing the Caucasus oil fields.95 Yet BLAU ended any possibility that
Germany could fight the Soviets to an attritional stalemate in the East, the
offensive lacking a strategic goal capable of winning the war. Capture of
the Caucasus could neither cripple the Soviet war economy nor quickly
erode Soviet military capabilities.% The advance also greatly extended an
already overstretched and thinly held front, left the Red Army intact, and
exposed the German flank to counterattack.
German offensive preparations for BLAU were inadequate because the
Ostheer hastily refitted formations, often in the front line. Lack of troops,
in particular, forced the Germans to rely on poorly trained, equipped, and
officered Axis troops to hold the northern shield for BLAU.97 Initially the
offensive achieved good results as German forces advanced to Stalingrad
and struck deep into the Caucasus. Yet such success was largely due to a
shift in Soviet strategy from inflexibly holding fast to a delaying withdraw-
al that preserved their forces. During the fall of 1942, the Soviets sucked
the Germans into a protracted struggle for Stalingrad that sapped German
strength while the Soviets massed reserves. By early September, Hitler had
conceded that BLAU could not win the war and ordered a bolstering of
defensive strength by a return to pre-1917 rigid, linear defense.º8 Hitler
thus advocated an attritional defense that massed German strength in oppo-
sition to Soviet attacks. Although such defensive strategy temporarily
blunted Soviet attacks and held on to territory, it did so at a high price.
Hitler also finally sanctioned construction of a major fortification line, the
Eastern Wall.99 These reforms temporarily improved Axis defenses, but the
increasing emphasis on immediate counterattack, rather than husbanding
strength until friction had worn down Soviet strength, raised the cost of
To free the personnel to build and man the Eastern Wall the army reor-
sanized the replacement army, and decentralized training functions to occu-
pied territories so that instructors and recruits could perform garrison duties
while training. This measure freed several hundred thousand troops to build
and man defenses in the East with only a minor disruption in training. 100 At
the same time, increasing organizational diversity and divergent formation
quality led the army to introduce a new monthly reporting system in
December 1942 in which commanders subjectively evaluated their units'
combat worthiness. These candid assessments allowed the high command
to gauge unit capabilities accurately. 101
On 19 November 1942, Soviet forces counterattacked and overran the
poorly equipped Romanian forceinba Spoodt and southeast of stalingrad to
