118
Preparation: 1919-1944
to British difficulties. British offensive action depended on armor for its
striking power, yet its armor was inferior in quality. British forces learned
the hard way from the Germans that the best way to defeat armor was
through firepower, not poorly coordinated armored maneuver wartare.
Troops repeatedly failed to comprehend German defensive doctrine as,
time and again, panzers lured British armor into antitank gun screens with
devastating results. Doctrinal emphasis on outfighting the enemy, when
combined with inferior equipment, and ignorance of enemy doctrine,
ensured that it was invariably British armor that was written off.
The defeat at Mersa Matruh brought morale to its nadir. 80 Repeated
defeats sapped troop morale as the debacle in the Far East followed defeat
in the desert. 81 Fragile morale further hindered army efforts to learn and
adapt. Partial collapses of morale occurred at Dunkirk, on Crete (May
1941), and in Singapore (February 1942) evidenced by units retreating on
their own, desertion, panic, and collapse of discipline.82 Morale concerns
led the War Office to censor combat reports from the front for fear that hon-
est admission of British weaknesses might destroy fragile morale and
engender a total collapse that would lead to the loss of Egypt. Censorship,
seen as necessary to maintain current combat effectiveness, however,
retarded the speed of adaptation and slowed enhancement of future combat
effectiveness.
During 1941-1942 British forces suffered a succession of defeats in
North Africa. Poor generalship, organization, and training, as well as inade-
quate equipment all contributed to defeat, but underlying them was the
army's unquestioning reliance on a strategy of attrition and this strategy's
vulnerability to blitzkrieg warfare. British forces were twice routed after
successful advances, and, despite numerical and material superiority,
Britain nearly lost Egypt.83 British forces in the desert abandoned sound
and established military principles as repeated defeat encouraged expedien-
cy and unorthodoxy as the only apparent answer to German prowess.84
Rapid turnover in commanders and troops, as well as inadequate training,
clearly played a part in the deterioration in British combat effectiveness in
the desert during 1941. But, clearly, lack of coherent modern doctrine con-
sistently taught lay at the root of defeat.
Not only was the MEC slow in drawing appropriate combat lessons, it
proved even less adept at disseminating lessons learned. Heavy defensive
fighting on the retreat and doctrinal confusion hampered learning and adap-
tation. What the MEC required was a lull for rest, rehabilitation, and reedu-
cation. The army's reluctance to learn on the battlefield also clearly ham-
pered adaptation in the desert; peacetime training habits proved hard to
undo. The MEC tinkered with organization to correct such problems as
solve.
poor coordination that only revised doctrine and extensive retraining could
North Africa, though, was a proving ground in which disparate ele-
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
119
ments would survive to be forged into an army that slowly and painfully
relearned the basics of modern war. Gradually the Eighth Army discerned
desert warfare lessons and slowly improved its combat effecuveness, even
though it was not until the First Battle of El Alamein (30 June 1942) that
substantive improvement first materialized. Overstretched and exhausted,
Rommel's forces tried to hustle the British out of the El Alamein position.
There topography compelled the British to hold the narrow front between
the sea and the impassable Qattara Depression, and thus brought the first
real defensive concentration. The Desert Air Force too was able to provide
increased air support because the proximity of its bases to the front allowed
it to achieve sortie rates much higher than hitherto possible. Concentrated
defensive fire and stepped-up air support increased Axis losses and acceler-
ated the enemy's exhaustion. 85
While Auchinleck's defense against an attenuated and exhausted
enemy succeeded, his three counterattacks launched between 10-26 July
against the Ruweisat Ridge all failed. German armor repeatedly drove back
the attackers, and on 31 July the battle ended in mutual exhaustion. Once
again troop inexperience, rigidity of command, and poor coordination
caused the attack to fail. However, the Eighth Army did display improved
offensive art: Auchinleck resorted to nighttime infantry attacks buttressed
by massed artillery fire and air support under unified RAF command to
break into enemy positions. The struggle for the Ruweisat Ridge thus wit-
nessed the first renunciation of massed-armor attacks and the emergence in
embryonic form of the British attack doctrine employed during the last two
years of the war.86
The First Battle of El Alamein put a stop to the run of British disasters
and fought an overextended enemy to a standstill. Victory bought
Auchinleck time to strengthen the Alamein position and rebuild the Eighth
Army. The battle was a costly defensive victory, achieved in part by
improved defensive skill as British troops slowly began to discern the solu-
tions to countering blitzkrieg warfare. But the primary cause of British suc-
cess was that Rommel had overreached himself. The Eighth Army had
reached a watershed as it gradually identified errors and misconceptions in
prewar doctrine and tactics. The most significant improvement during
1941-1942 was a gradual reversion to traditional artillery practices: defeat
led the army back to the Great War tactics of static defense and infantry
assault backed by massed artillery fire. Yet, it was only slowly that the
MEC relearned that through firepower superiority artillery saved lives. 87
The real change in British fortunes in North Africa coincided with the
fortuitous arrival in August 1942 of Lt. Gen. Bernard Law Montgomery to
command the Eighth Army.88 Montgomery had impressed the War Office
with his orderly withdrawal of the 3d Division in France in 1940 and he
then energetically prepared Southern Command to repel a German inva-
sion. One of the most widely read senior British commanders, he imposed a
