170
Preparation: 1919-1944
Commonwealth operational doctrine of firepower dominance that became
ascendant from 1942 on. The Canadians had no combat experience under
their belt, so they could only follow British practice and hope they were
pursuing effective training. But battle drills were, however, mechanical and
not very realistic. 12
The failure of battle drill illustrated that the lack of a distinct Canadian
doctrine of war, let alone a comprehensive, holistic one, seriously ham-
pered the CAO's combat preparation. Doctrine is the intellectual substance
that binds together an army's organization, equipment, personnel, training,
tactics, and that provides the army's basic procedures that allow it to oper-
ate effectively. Doctrine is most important at the operational level, and
studies undertaken by officers at staff colleges are the foundation of opera-
tional doctrine in all armies. 13 But the interwar Canadian military did not
have a staff college; it depended for doctrinal development on a very small
number of officers who attended the British Royal Staff College at
Camberly and returned imbued with prevailing British doctrine. The pauci-
ty of trained staff officers left the Canadian staff poorly equipped intellec-
tually to prepare Canada's ground forces for modern war. 14 Thus what
passed for Canadian doctrine between 1919-1945 was contemporary
British doctrine, doctrine that failed to emphasize an integrated combined-
arms and interservice approach to war. Nor did modern British military
thought explicitly recognize the existence of an intermediate, operational
level of warfare that lay between tactics and strategy. Consequently,
wartime Anglo-Canadian forces operated without clearly defined opera-
tional doctrine. 15 Wartime Canadian staff officers were woefully underedu-
cated in operational art, a deficiency that directly contributed to the opera-
tional difficulties Canadian forces experienced during the war.
The military necessities of the war exacerbated the inadequacy of the
Canadian Army staff because the urgent need for more trained staff officers
led to curtailment of courses offered at British staff colleges. This simply
continued the inadequate grasp of operational art of Canadian Army staff
personnel. 16 The lack of seasoned officers forced Canada to elevate those
who had not gained a basic knowledge of operational art, and thus the
wartime army remained singularly unprepared to handle large independent
forces. Without any combat experience to illuminate the deficiencies of
operational art, the Canadian Army remained largely ignorant of the weak-
nesses of its staff, training, and preparation until well into the war. 17 The
onset of the war did not give Canada sufficient time to prepare an army
practically from scratch or to train a competent staff. So the army's depend-
ence on Britain to become operational led to an unquestioning adherence to
British doctrine and a peculiarly British style of war.
As already noted, the Canadian Army's most fundamental problem was
its dearth of battle experience. Only 2 percent of the troops slated for
OVERLORD had ever seen action— and for most of these this amounted to
Canada, 1939-1944: The Politics of Neglect
171
a single day's combat in the disastrous Dieppe raid of 19 August 1942.
Designed as a reconnaissance in force to test the feasibility of a major
amphibious assault on a defended enemy coastline, and prompted by
Canadian public pressure as well as concern from Canadian commanders
over the ebbing morale of their inactive troops, Dieppe saw the combat
debut of the 2d Canadian Division. But the plan, reflecting Allied inexperi-
ence at amphibious assault and interservice operations, was cumbersome
and unrealistic. Two-thirds of the Canadian troops landed became casual-
ties, and nearly half were taken prisoner. 18 The operation was beyond the
capabilities of the 2d Canadian Division—or probably of any Allied divi-
sion at that time. Given the Canadians' limited amphibious assault training
and the inadequate naval and air support, the well defended port was sim-
ply too tough a nut to crack. 19 Thus, the Canadian pool of battle-experi-
enced personnel, some 2,000 troops, was insufficient to instill cohesion.
The inexperience of the army was reflected in the reluctance of Prime
Minister Mackenzie King and Gen. A. G. L. McNaughton, the army com-
mander in chief, to commit Canadian troops to combat. King feared that
heavy casualties would force his government to send NRMA conscripts
overseas, which could induce a political crisis to threaten his government.
Therefore, he sought both to delay and to limit any combat commitment.
General McNaughton, on the other hand, though he recognized the army's
need to gain experience, vehemently opposed any breaking up of the army,
which would sacrifice its ability to operate independently of British com-
mand. 20
The fall of France dealt a severe blow to King's plan. Thereafter, he
fought an unavailing rearguard action against both the creation of a large
army and the commitment of Canadian forces to major combat. Despite his
intentions, however, manpower became a military and a political problem
for Canada during the war: its commitment to voluntary enlistment for
service overseas imposed significant restrictions on efficient manpower
use. Both the government and the military still optimistically believed that
Canada could maintain six divisions overseas for five years through volun-
tary enlistment. But by 1943, the supply of volunteers had largely dried up,
Plunging the army into manpower problems that forced the government to
cap the CAO in 1943 at five divisions, with 226,000 personnel. Thereafter
the army struggled to maintain even this establishment. 21
Canada's response to its manpower shortage was the least satisfactory
of those of the Western Allies to the problem of efficient manpower utiliza-
tion. This reaction reflected the legacy of limited liability, the unpopularity
of the war, and the government's perceived inability to take strong and
unpopular action. Canadian territory was never directly threatened, so the
government felt that it lacked the popular support to compel more extensive
military service-
-yet, in reality, Canada possessed more than sufficient
manpower to meet its mobilization needs. Canadian manpower regulation
