206
Normandy 1944
After the fall of St. Lô, the First Army prepared frantically for
COBRA. It depleted its reserves to bring formations up to strength in per-
sonnel and equipment (see Table 7.5), though cohesion and offensive drive
inevitably suffered from the absorption of large numbers of undertrained
replacements. General Bradley also rigorously removed officers who had
failed the test of war.92 As formations rotated out of the line for rest and
rehabilitation, they established divisional training centers where subunits
intensively retrained and exercised alongside independent tank battalions to
improve coordination.º3 Armored divisions also retrained during mid-July,
in preparation for their breakout role, to attain maximum speed during the
advance.
Table 7.5
U.S. Ordnance Shortages, 31 July 1944
Weapon
Rifle
BAR
MG
ATG
Artillery
TD
Tank
Keserves
12,115
5,420
490)
2,790
2,245
23
75
54
404
Sources: FUSA, Report I, 99; V, 203; VI, 101-111.
Losses
7,103
3,800
1,784
2,158
86
83
637
Net
+5,012
+1,620
-1,294
+1,101
+87
-63
+24
-234
Its previous slow progress meant that the First Army had conceived
COBRA as a limited breakthrough operation that would propel it beyond
the confines of the bocage into territory better suited for mobile warfare
along the line Coutances-Caumont. The planning and execution of
COBRA, therefore, starkly illuminated the lack of U.S. operational-level
doctrine. COBRA was a multidivision attack on a narrow front, and due to
the pessimism surrounding prospects of a breakout—few U.S. commanders
dared hope that COBRA would destroy the German defense of
Normandy —the operation lacked a definite strategic goal or a clear opera-
tional dimension. The subsequent breakout of August was thus an extempo-
rized affair.94
The carpet bombing that opened COBRA was the largest and most
effective air attack on ground forces yet seen in the war. A comprehensive
counterflak program adjusted by aerial spotters suppressed enemy antiair-
craft fire and allowed the bombing to achieve good concentration. 95 Allied
aircraft dropped over 5,000 tons of bombs, WP, and a new weapon, napalm
(jellied gasoline), on 6 square miles, although once again there was short
Ihe United States: The Leviathan Triumphant
287
bombing, which reflected the inherent hazard of this novel ground
weapon.%6 Faulty planning, sloppy execution, and bad luck dogged the
COBRA aerial bombardment, but the damage inflicted on the Germans was
heavier and more effective than even Eisenhower had dared hope.97 The
attendant artillery fire plan engaged the entire depth of the German defens-
es: the U.S. First Army had learned to target the entire enemy defense zone,
including the reserves dispersed in depth, and fired smoke both to mask the
ground advance and to confuse German flanking fire. Simultaneously,
heavy and accurate counterbattery fire effectively suppressed the German
artillery.98 To augment its firepower and compensate for shell shortages, the
First Army used tank destroyers and heavy antiaircraft guns for indirect-fire
support. Combined artillery-air attacks suppressed all long-range German
batteries and impeded German countermeasures.99
The carpet bombing crippled German communications and so stunned,
disorganized, and demoralized the Panzer Lehr Division that even its sea-
soned troops could not resist the concentrated attack by the VII Corps as
the Americans advanced 2 miles into the German defenses on 25 July. 100
But it was American speed and mobility that turned this break-in into a
breakout. Short on infantry and ammunition, the First Army achieved a
breakout because it outmaneuvered, rather than outfought, the enemy. The
U.S. troops exploited their penetration faster than the enemy could react as
supply shortages badly hindered German countermeasures. 101 On 26 July,
the VII Corps gained 8,000 yards as fuel and ammunition shortages badly
impeded enemy countermeasures. Under the pressure of this rapid exploita-
tion the stretched German front began to give way. As U.S. armor passed
through and out into the open, supporting flanking attacks pinned German
troops in place as dislocated communications slowed enemy appreciation
of, and reaction to, the scale of the crisis. 102
The U.S. forces achieved a major breakout on 27 July. As the Germans
tell back in an effort to retain a coherent front, the U.S. VII Corps fought its
way forward to the outskirts of Coutances. Simultaneously the XIX Corps
captured the high ground south of St. Lô and drew into battle the first
German reinforcements, the 2d and 116th Panzer Divisions, dispatched
from the Caen front. These developments precipitated the most intense
fighting seen during COBRA as the panzers repeatedly attacked westward
through the bocage southeast of St. Lô in a desperate attempts to restabilize
the front. 103
The following day, the 4th and 6th Armored Divisions of VIII Corps
captured Lessay and linked up with the spearhead of the VII Corps. At this
moment, General Hausser, commanding the German Seventh Army, erred
when he instructed his LXXXIV Corps to fight its way out toward the
southeast, rather than retiring unopposed due south. This decision ensured
that the retiring forces ran into the U.S. vanguard advancing southeast of
Coutances and were isolated in a pocket astride Roncey. 104
