172
Preparation: 1919-1944
remained lax and inefficient; even the NRMA conscription introduced for
home defense failed to meet Canada's wartime manpower needs.
The NRMA restricted liability for compulsory service to single men
between ages 18 and 42 and to married men between ages 18 and 31. Even
so the government failed to conscript rigorously within this limited man-
power pool— of those eligible for compulsory military service only 42 per-
cent actually served in the wartime armed forces. Not only did the govern-
ment fail to call up many men eligible to serve, but conscription boards
rejected as medically unfit a high proportion of those summoned. The
Canadian government also pursued a liberal deferment policy on economic,
moral, or compassionate grounds. During the war, one in three conscripts
received a temporary deferment of service of up to a year; and the govern-
ment granted no less than 89 percent of deferment requests.22 Because of
the decline in volunteers for overseas service, it became apparent early in
the war that at some point the Canadian government might have to send
conscript soldiers overseas in contravention of the NRMA. In April 1942
the government sought, and the electorate passed, a national referendum
that released the government from the NRMA prohibition against such
overseas service "in principle and if unavoidable." Quebec maintained its
traditional opposition with a 75-percent vote against the government's
move. The government was now theoretically free to dispatch conscripts
overseas if militarily necessary, but it kept in mind Quebec's hostility to
this. Fearing the political consequences of exercising this power, the
Canadian government refrained from sending conscripts overseas until
November 1944. Of course, the government's reluctance to exercise its
authority exacerbated the army's manpower problems; by 1943, even
before Canada committed its army to combat in any strength, the CAO was
affected by a shortage.
Greater political will could have allowed the government to avoid
Canada's wartime manpower problems. Expansion of conscription age to
45, the inclusion of married men over 31 years, less exacting medical
requirements, and a more exacting deferment policy could have produced
many more conscripts. The crux of the issue, however, was that neither the
Canadian government nor its citizens saw a military need for greater sacri-
fice. This reality is clearly illustrated in the government's reluctance to
address the serious problem of evasion of compulsory military service.23
The Canadian Army's failure to utilize its available manpower effi-
ciently merely exacerbated its shortage of personnel. The political decision
to create separate overseas and home defense forces obviously had made
effective employment difficult. Yet the army's inexperience and its depend-
ence on the British military, which led to the adoption of British organiza-
tional establishments, added to its difficulties. Abandonment of its organi-
zational independence meant that there was no independent Canadian effort
to trim excess from its establishment, in contrast to what occurred in the
Canada, 1939-1944: The Politics of Neglect
173
U.S. Army. Canada's demographic profile also hindered efficient manpow-
er utilization. The proportion of French Canadians who volunteered for
active service was far below that of English speakers, and throughout the
war French Canadians remained a small minority in the army. As a result,
the army raised few exclusively French-Canadian units and experienced
considerable difficulty maintaining them at full strength. 24
Canada's long militia tradition also fostered the retention of excess
strength in auxiliary defense forces of marginal military value. Throughout
the war, Canada's militia tradition was preserved in the form of the part-
time Canadian Army Reserve (CAR). Formed from NPAM personnel who
did not volunteer for the CASF, the CAR peaked in strength in 1943 with
105,000 personnel organized in twelve brigade groups. The equivalent of
the British Home Guard, the CAR was conceived as a trained reserve. In
reality, it possessed negligible military capability and further drained man-
power and resources from the CASF, while contributing to the excessive
duplication of overhead. Moreover, the "great majority" of men who
enrolled in the CAR did so simply to avoid conscription. 25 The Canadian
Army also kept a disproportionate strength inside Canada during the war.
Declaration of war on Japan in December 1941 once again turned attention
toward domestic defense. During the spring of 1942 the government
expanded its NRMA home defense forces to three divisions. The ease with
which the government raised these in contrast to the difficulty in sending
divisions overseas reflected the degree to which political, rather than mil-
itary, considerations governed military policy. Mackenzie King's efforts in
1942 to avoid a future conscription crisis centered on a deliberate govern-
ment publicity campaign to exaggerate the Japanese threat to Canada's
west coast backed by an extension of NRMA forces inside Canada. King
hoped these efforts would focus public attention on domestic defense and
thus forestall pressure to send conscripts abroad 26 In reality, however,
Japan posed no threat to Canada's Pacific coast. 27 The government's delib-
erate inflation of this threat for domestic political reasons had unfortunate
military consequences: it led to excessive retention of troops in Canada,
forced by the need to assuage public fears.
It was only in mid-1943, as the Japanese threat receded after U.S.
forces recaptured the Aleutian Islands, and as the manpower crunch bit
deeper, that the Canadian government trimmed its home defense forces and
disbanded the 7th and 8th NRMA Divisions. 28 But these efforts were half-
hearted, and a large number of nondivisional combat units remained in
Canada. The government was still unable to curb the growth of auxiliary
military forces, so that total army manpower in Canada peaked only in
1944 long after the Japanese threat had disappeared.?
The army training establishment was also inefficient and excessive.
The training system had expanded unchecked during the early war years,
but, as recruit intake declined during the middle of the war, efforts to
