HERA
356
Normandy 1944
successful innovations-nighttime bombing, Kangaroos, and no prelimi-
nary bombardment. However, the attack took place in daylight, using
smokescreens to provide the protection that darkness had given TOTAL-
12E. Simonds committed the 3d Infantry and 4th Armoured Divisions on
the narrowest of frontages. To maintain surprise, Simonds again avoided a
long preliminary barrage that would warn the Germans of an attack.
Moreover, Simonds returned to the defunct pre-1943 British offensive doc-
trine, concentrating his armor in combined-arms brigade groups to spear-
head each divisional assault. 101
However, Simonds augmented the armor with two Kangaroo-borne
infantry brigades and a new weapon—the Wasp, a carrier-mounted
flamethrower. Once again he had developed an imaginative plan and he
admonished his tank commanders to attack with daring and speed and to
press the attack at night. The TRACTABLE plan represented further inno-
vation to achieve victory by maintaining surprise and instilling speed into
the Canadian advance. Given the greatly thinned enemy defenses and the
heavy concentration of Canadian strength on a narrow front, TRACTABLE
appeared to have good prospects of shattering the German defenses, out-
flanking Falaise, and completing the encirclement of the German forces in
Normandy.
Shortly before H-Hour seventy-three medium bombers of 2d TAF
attacked German defenses astride the Laison Valley, the main axis of
advance. Soon after H-Hour, the heavies of RAF Bomber Command struck
German positions along the right flank of the intended advance to disrupt
German counterattacks. 102 In addition, supporting artillery provided a
flanking smokescreen and a frontal barrage that combined both smoke and
high-explosive shells. 103 German artillery fire, the smoke, and widespread
disorganization occasioned by the loss of direction during the advance
behind the smokescreen, combined to disorient and disperse the Canadian
columns. At the same time, the Laison River proved a major tank obstacle
that slowed and further disrupted the advance.
Terrible misfortune also dogged TRACTABLE. Late on 13 August, the
enemy captured a Canadian officer who carried the plan of attack, and the
Germans redeployed their meager reserves to meet the impending
onslaught. This misfortune cost the Canadians additional losses and
delayed the fall of Falaise for more than a day, 104 Then Bomber Command
bombed short on Canadian positions, causing casualties and considerable
disruption and confusion. 105 Despite the German redeployment, Canadian
attacks on 14 August overran the German 85th Infantry Division. 106 On 15
August, however, the Germans halted the Canadians just short of Falaise,
and it was not until 17 August that the Canadians captured the town.
TRACTABLE had failed to complete the encirclement of the enemy in
Normandy, 107
Canadian troops demonstrated during TRACTABLE that they had not
Canada: Learning the Hard Way
357
yet mastered the complex tactics of advancing under cover of smoke. Yet
they had coordinated more effectively than earlier and demonstrated
improved proficiency in the use of the Kangaroos. Moreover, the Wasp
flamethrower carrier proved highly effective during its operational
debut. 108 The capture of the attack plan and the accidental short bombing,
however, were the primary reasons for the failure of the operation.
As the German forces conducted a major strategic withdrawal to evade
encirclement, the Canadian First Army redoubled its efforts to close the
pocket. Without time to plan a new operation, Crerar simply ordered all
formations to attack southeast until they linked up with U.s. forces then
pushing northeast beyond Argentan. Thus on 17 August, Crerar's forma-
tions again struck southeast until they met up with U.S. troops at Chambois
two days later to seal the Falaise pocket. 109 But Crerar was unable to estab-
lish a solid barrier against the retreating German forces. Between 19-21
August, tens of thousands of German troops escaped from the pocket dur-
ing repeated, hard-fought breakout attempts.
The battle of the Falaise pocket witnessed the hardest fighting the
Canadians had yet encountered as the enemy fought to escape encur-
clement. By August a growing infantry shortage undermined Canadian
combat effectiveness. With only one division in action during June avail-
able replacements covered losses, but by mid-July infantry casualties were
80 percent above forecast. 110 By early August, when the infantry deficit
reached 1,900, Crerar acknowledged that the replacement situation had
become the most serious problem confronting the Canadians. Ill The heavy
losses suffered during TOTALIZE and TRACTABLE increased the short-
age: on 15 August Canadian formations were short 2,644 riflemen. 112
Manpower shortages thus sapped Canadian offensive drive at the moment
when it was put in the unique position of "bagging" the remnants of two
German armies in Normandy. Ordered to close the Falaise pocket from the
north, the Canadians were too weakened to stem the flood of desperate and
determined Germans bent on escaping. The fighting that engulfed the
Canadians at the mouth of the Falaise pocket was among the fiercest of the
campaign and left Canadian divisions severely depleted. 113 By 2 September
the infantry deficiency had reached 4,318, 19 percent of establishment. 114
Because of growing shortages of both infantry and armor the Canadians
could not, and did not, play a major role in the exploitation operations of
late August and early September. 115
The Canadian Army remained complacent about its manpower short-
age early in the campaign. After the modest remustering of March 1944, it
was not until 12 August that renewed remustering began and 4 September
before crash retraining began. 116 In the meantime, Crear had to place in the
line cooks, clerks, and others from noncombat units who possessed limited
infantry training. The failure of Canadian senior leadership to perceive the
scale of the manpower crisis and to enact promptly measures to find more
