Introduction
morale, culture, and social prestige. One also has to distinguish between
adaptation and change. Effective adaptation involves reforms that con-
tribute to final victory or to enhanced military effectiveness, whereas
change is modification that brings no discernible improvement in perform-
ance. However, adaptability and flexibility per se do not guarantee victory.
Superior quality militaries can lose wars, and have done so. In fact, the his-
tory of modern warfare indicates that overwhelming numerical superiority
typically prevails in the long run over a more militarily effective opponent.
Armed forces can rarely sustain sufficient battlefield superiority in the long
run, because of the very process of adaptation, to outweigh a significant
numerical or material inferiority. 10
The quest for military effectiveness and the importance of flexible
armed forces capable of rapid adaptation is of greater significance today
than ever before as we enter the new millenium. In the destabilizing post-
Cold War era the ability of military establishments to adapt rapidly to unan-
ticipated threats, despite downsizing and financial stringency, is not only at
an unprecedented premium, it may well even be the defining factor in
national security in the twenty-first century. The recent information revolu-
tion has engendered a new bout of rapid military innovation that appears
bound to continue into the next century. At the same time, the international
community has entered a new era where strategic and political threats are
more indeterminate. Military institutions must innovate with much less
funding, within greater uncertainty, and in the face of rapid technological
change.
The experience of past conflicts can provide valuable pointers to the
militaries of tomorrow. However, despite its significance, historians have
only recently begun to examine the issues of how and with what success
the combatants adapted and innovated during World War II. Moreover,
much of the scholarship that has sought to evaluate the performance and
military effectiveness of the protagonists is unsatisfactory. Not only have
few studies been comparative in nature, but various forces have distorted
existing scholarship in a number of significant ways.!l First, since 1945
scholars have extolled the military capabilities of the World War II German
army —the Heer. This process began with the eyewitness memoirs that del-
uged the English-speaking world early in the Cold War.
Allied memoirs acknowledged, typically with grudging admiration, the
battlefield superiority of German soldiers over Western Allied troops. This
trend toward inflating German military capabilities gained momentum as
Anglo-American histories of World War Il became refracted through a lens
imposed by the ideological imperatives of the Cold War. These imperatives
led Anglo-American historians to downplay the brutality of the war, to san-
itize the conflict, and to extoll German military prowess at a time when the
West desperately sought to rehabilitate a new democratic, rearmed West
Germany as a bulwark against communism. During the Cold War the
Introduction
5
Western Allies quickly forgot, even repudiated, wartime principles. The
Western Allies rehabilitated alleged war criminals who were valuable in the
war against communism, played down the enormous Soviet sacrifices that
had guaranteed Allied victory, and largely accepted without scholarly chal-
lenge the unrepentant and distorted apologia of nazi generals for their geno-
cidal struggle against bolshevism and European Jewry, 12
The Cold War need to counter and undermine communism thus subtly
distorted Anglo-American interpretations of World War II. These impera-
tives led historians to inflate German battlefield skill and to focus blame for
Germany's defeat on Hitler, thereby denigrating Soviet military effective-
ness and minimizing its decisive contribution to Allied victory. 13 Cold War
scholarship, therefore, extolled the martial achievements of the wartime
Heer: quantitative analysis concluded that on a man-to-man and unit-to-
unit basis the Germans consistently outfought their opponents. 14 In toto
scholarship created an image of a mighty German army skilled in opera-
tional art, tactics, and fieldcraft. 15 Some political commentators even went
so far as to argue that the World War II German army offered a paradigm of
military effectiveness. 16
Such evaluations are both narrowly focused and unbalanced because
they fail to present a comprehensive evaluation of the Heer as a fighting
force. What existing scholarship has often overlooked is that Germany had
to outfight its enemies because its leaders had committed the nation to war
against overwhelming, and ultimately insurmountable, odds. Thus the
German Army throughout the 1919-1945 period structured itself to maxi-
mize its immediate combat power. But such an orientation had its price,
which was the Heer's inadequate staying power: the German army maxi-
mized its immediate combat power only at the expense of its underlying
strategic and logistic base. 17
Moreover, comparing the Heer and its opponents at any fixed point in
time during the war is inherently misleading because Germany had begun
rearmament several years before its opponents. A more balanced assess-
ment would compare armies at the peak of their efficiency and accomplish-
ments. A comparison between the 1941 Heer and the 1945 U.S. Army, for
example, narrows considerably the performance gap. 18 For, as this book
illustrates, during the latter stages of the war the U.S. Army did not simply
overwhelm an increasingly outnumbered enemy but ultimately learned to
outfight it too. 19
The Cold War distorted Western understanding of the character of the
German military in other significant ways. The need to rehabilitate West
Germany as a bastion against communism also led historians to deempha-
size the impact and role of nazi ideology within the German military.
During the Cold War, Anglo-American historians readily accepted the
claims of former German generals that most of the German military
remained both apolitical and innocent of atrocities that were supposedly
