218
Preparation: 1919-1944
strength. German strategy thus reverted to attrition as the Ostheer sought to
encircle and annihilate Soviet forces in a replay of the great encirclement
victories of 1941. The Germans assembled a mighty concentration of
armor, including new Panther and Tiger tanks and Elephant tank destroyers,
but ZITADELLE failed because the operation was poorly conceived and
repeated postponement lost the element of surprise. 126 The Germans
attacked powerful Soviet forces entrenched in prepared positions in depth
and with numerous reserves at hand. The Red Army also demonstrated
growing appreciation of German doctrine and tactics and adopted effective
countermeasures, including it own version of defense in depth. 127 Even
though losses were heavy on both sides the Ostheer could not absorb losses
as readily as the Soviet forces, and the panzer divisions, laboriously rebuilt
by Guderian, were burned out anew.
The failure of ZITADELLE marked the permanent passing of the
strategic initiative in the East to the Soviet side; and from then on the Red
Army steadily pushed back the Germans. Faced with shrinking strength and
mobility, the Ostheer increasingly resorted to fortified positional defense.
But the Soviet steamroller shattered the Eastern Wall, hastily erected along
the Dnieper River, during the fall of 1943.
Attrition and the inability of motor vehicle production to keep pace
with losses prevented substantial expansion of the panzer arm. Thus there
were never sufficient armored reserves to counter every enemy break-
through. In fact, the last time the Germans did mount an effective mobile
defense to inflict heavy losses on an enemy at minimal cost to themselves
was during the defense of Sicily in July 1943. On Sicily two hastily raised
German mechanized divisions fought a skilled delaying withdrawal, to buy
time for a German buildup in Italy, before retiring intact to the mainland. 128
For mobile defense to work, however, the Germans had at least to contest
Allied air supremacy and retain logistic integrity. But the loss of air
supremacy increasingly threatened German theater logistics, and the
German ability to conduct mobile defense dwindled accordingly.
Total mobilization ensured that German firepower grew steadily during
1943-1944 as new weapons entered service and as production blossomed.
The superlative lightweight MG 42 machine gun, that could produce much
higher and sustained rates of fire than Allied machine guns, entered service
and quickly became the mainstay of squad firepower. Germany also intro-
duced new automatic weapons, including the world's first genuine assault
rifle, 129 Antitank capability increased too as antitank gun production blos-
somed and as a potent new 88mm gun entered service late in 1943. With a
low silhouette and high accuracy, this gun could penetrate the armor of any
Allied tank at long range, 130 During 1943 the Panzerfaust rocket-propelled
grenade launcher joined the Panzerschreck to give German infantrymen the
close-combat antitank capability they had previously lacked. At the same
time, production of assault guns increased dramatically and new well-
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
219
armed and armored tank destroyers entered service. As a result, German
infantrymen became much less vulnerable to armored attack than they had
been in the East during 1941-1942.
Central to the rapid and marked increase in German firepower was the
German willingness to exploit and replicate the technological achievements
of its opponents. The Germans adopted the sloped armor and large-caliber
overhanging gun of Soviet tanks in the Panther tank and armored tank
destroyers. They also copied the Soviet 120mm heavy mortar and Katyusha
rocket launcher, as well as the U.S. Bazooka. The need for increased pro-
duction to offset mounting losses inexorably eroded the German advantage
in weaponry, however. The services simplified and fixed existing weapons
to increase production, and as a result Germany was less able to keep
abreast of the technology race as production increasingly sacrificed quality
for mass production. 131 Thus, from 1943, the Allies steadily narrowed, but
never entirely eliminated, the qualitative edge that the Germans had
enjoyed early in the war.
During 1943 the Luftwaffe also reoriented itself toward the defensive
and sought to enhance its ground support capabilities. Early in the war it
had cooperated reasonably well with the army when faced with ineffectual
opposition, despite limited assets, the absence of specialized ground attack
aircraft, and a cumbersome system of air-ground coordination. But constant
combat in multiple theaters steadily wore down its strength thereafter. In
1943, though, the Luftwaffe enhanced its ground support capabilities with
the introduction of new specialized tactical aircraft-Focke-Wulf FW 190
fighter-bombers, Henschel HS 129B2 ground attack aircraft, and modified
Junkers Ju 87 Stuka "tank busters" -that became the mainstay of tactical
aViation, 132 Concentration of ground attack and tank-busting aircraft under
the VIII Air Corps during the spring of 1943 had allowed German tactical
aviation to achieve its greatest wartime successes as it smashed Soviet tank
spearheads at Kharkov during von Manstein's counteroffensive and at
Belgorod and Bryansk in July.
These successes led the Luftwaffe to amalgamate its dive bomber and
1943.133 More flexible and massed employment temporarily allowed tacti-
cal aviation to disrupt dangerous Soviet armored penetrations and thus be a
substitute for the army's lack of reserves, a change of emphasis in ground
attack operations that temporarily bolstered German defensive capabilities
in the East, 134 But ceaseless action as Soviet forces assumed the offensive
across the entire front in the wake of ZITADELLE steadily eroded the
Luftwaffe's ground attack units. Moreover, the Luftwaffe's shift in priority
to defend the Reich in 1943 meant that it could not maintain ground attack
strength: diverting fighters to defend Germany left ground attack units
exposed and increased their losses. As a result, by 1944 these units could
achieve only local tactical successes.
