254
Normandy 1944
dispersed two battalions of the brigade at Trotéval Farm. 21 The 2d Division
effort to restore the situation. But the SS troops also outflanked this battal-
ion and drove it back. The following day a renewed German counterat-
tack broke into the Essex Scottish positions, and only a combined-arms
counterattack stabilized the Canadian center. ATLANTIC, like
Montgomery's GOODWOOD offensive, came to an ignominious end as it
driving south toward Falaise.
took further limited attacks aimed at holding German reserves on the Caen
front, while U.S. forces prepared and launched another major offensive
south of St. Lô, Operation COBRA, on 25 July,23 Simonds's Canadian II
Corps launched the first of these holding attacks on 25 July, a renewed
assault, SPRING, on the Verrières Ridge. The two Canadian divisions rein-
forced by British armor and artillery attempted to storm the ridge on a 4-
mile front at night to nullify German observation from the ridge and so
reduce the defensive advantage enjoyed by the enemy. Thereafter, British
armor was to drive south to Cintheaux in a classic exploitation role.24
Against still powerful and well-entrenched veteran German troops in highly
defensible terrain, the weak probe rapidly ground to the halt after severe
losses- and after Dieppe the most costly single-day of combat for the
Canadians during World War II. Although it was achieved at heavy cost,
Montgomery had succeeded to a degree in holding much of the German
After a brief rest, the U.S. First Army vigorously prepared for its
largest operation to date, COBRA, that was begun on 25 July. COBRA was
originally intended as a limited breakthrough operation designed to
advance U.s. forces out of the bocage into more open ground south of St.
Lô, allowing both operational maneuver and resumption of mobile warfare.
prevall aganst intact did strong German defenses and to racilitate their
advance, the Americans now relied heavily on a massive attack by heavy
bombers to pave the way for the ground advance on a luen marrower
frontage than hitherto conducted.
lisorganized, and demoralized the German defenders of the elite Panzer
Lehr Division that even its seasoned troops could not resist the VII Corps
concenträted attack as the Americans advanced 2 miles into the German
defenses on 25 July.25 The U.S. forces rapidly exploited the initial penetra
tion and reinforced success faster than the Germans could redeploy
reserves. increasing logistic deficiencies for the first time crippled the
denials delease, Un do July, the U.S. Vil Corps gainea o,u00 yards as
A Campaign Overview
255
mounting fuel and ammunition shortages badly hampered enemy counter-
measures. Under the pressure of this rapid exploitation the stretched
German front began to collapse. As U.S. armor passed through out into the
open, supporting attacks on the flanks pinned German troops in place,
while dislocated communications slowed the Germans' appreciation of, and
reaction to, the scale of the crisis.27
On 27 July the U.S. First Army achieved a decisive breakthrough. As
the enemy abandoned Lessay and Périers to release troops to shore up the
disintegrating front, the VII Corps penetrated 12 miles into the German
defenses until halted by fierce resistance 2 miles short of Coutances. The
same day, General Corlett's neighboring XIX Corps thrust out of St. Lô to
seize the dominating heights south of the city and prevent the German II
Parachute Corps from disengaging to move west and patch the disintegrat-
ing German front. Corlett's flanking attack also sucked into battle the first
German armored reinforcements— the 2d and 116th Panzer Divisions-that
had been withdrawn from the British sector and that were tasked with stabi-
lizing the western flank. The arrival of fresh armored reserves precipitated
the heaviest fighting experienced during COBRA as the panzers counterat-
tacked westward through the thick remnant of bocage hedgerow southeast
of St. Lô in an abortive effort to seal off the U.S. breakthrough. 28
On 18 July, the U.S. VIII Corps loosed the 4th and 6th Armored
Divisions south from Lessay to reach Coutances and link up with VII Corps
pincer. At this juncture, Gen. Paul Hausser, the commander of the German
Seventh Army, made a serious tactical error. He ordered the LXXXIV
Corps to fight its way southeast to regain a continuous front and seal off the
U.S. penetration, instead of retiring unopposed due south to reestablish a
defensive position south of Coutances. The retiring German forces thus ran
into the U.S. spearheads advancing southeast of Coutances and were encir-
cled in the Roncey picket.29
With the German front torn open, the U.S. First Army expanded
COBRA on 29 July into a larger operation. What had begun as a limited
offensive became a strategic breakout. The VII and VIII Corps renewed
their drive to the south, and the next day the U.S. 6th Armored Division
crossed the Sienne River, while the 4th Armored took Avranches and seized
a bridgehead across the Sée River. On 31 July, the U.S. 4th Armored
Division secured a bridgehead over the Sélune River, gateway to Brittany,
at Pontaubault. Once the armor was out in the open, U.S. mobility came
into play. On 31 July the 2d Armored Division took the communications
hub of Villedieu-les-Puits, while on the eastern flank the XIX and V Corps
pushed southeast to tie down German reserves attempting to counterattack
the exposed U.S. left flank. Thus by the end of July, though few yet real-
ized it, the Americans had decisively shattered the German front in
Normandy and effectively won the battle for France.
After the Americans' success, Miles Dempsey's British Second Army
