300
Normandy 1944
Because of planning flaws, the defensive advantages of the terrain,
strong enemy defenses, and morale and manpower concerns, British forces
were stuck before Caen for six weeks, during which the infantry suffered
severe losses. Casualties among riflemen exceeded preinvasion estimates
by more than 25 percent. That the War Office had to add a new "double
intense" level to the Evett Rates, their casualty forecast charts, demonstrat-
ed how unprepared the British were for the campaign's bloodshed. 20
Moreover, as Montgomery had feared, heavy losses resulted in morale and
discipline problems with the infantry. The esprit de corps of the 6th
Battalion, the Duke of Wellington's Regiment, 49th Division, for example,
sank so low that Montgomery had to disband the battalion in late June.
Sinking morale was evident in mounting rates of absence without leave and
self-inflicted wounds that were evidently much higher than in the U.S.
forces.21
The most serious morale and discipline problems materialized among
the veteran desert divisions. After their triumphs in the Mediterranean,
these formations expected rest and rehabilitation. But the army's inexperi-
ence necessitated their reemployment in northwest Europe, which generat-
ed much "ill feeling" and "considerable unrest" in the divisions in Britain
during the spring of 1944.22 Once ashore in Normandy these formations
proved unable, or unwilling, to adapt to theater combat conditions, as the
debacle of the 7th Armoured Division at Villers-Bocage on 13 June demon-
strated. Its spearhead advanced without adequate reconnaissance, as if it
were still in the open desert, and was duly ambushed and all but annihilated
by the lone Tiger tank of Lt. Michael Wittman, the leading German tank
ace, in one of the most spectacular single-tank actions of the war.23
Likewise, the "stickiness" of the 51st Division led Montgomery to brand
the formation "not battleworthy" in mid-July.24
Limited firepower added to the difficulties that British forces faced.
British troops remained less well equipped than the enemy, in every catego-
ry except indirect-fire artillery. The British had no equivalent to either the
German dual-purpose Flak 88, the heavy antiaircraft gun with a formidable
antitank capability, or to the Nebelwerfer, the multibarreled, rocket-pro-
pelled German mortar, which caused many casualties in Normandy. The
infantry most keenly felt this lack of firepower as they returned to France
with the same squad weapons-—the .303 Lee-Enfield rifle and the Bren
gun-
-which they had carried at Dunkirk in 1940. The infantry also still
lacked antitank capability, the PIAT proving unwieldy, inaccurate, and lack-
ing in penetration. 25
Because armor rarely effectively supported the infantry, the lack of a
first-rate Allied battle tank only exacerbated the problems caused by limit-
ed infantry firepower. Armor was clearly the weakest link in the British
order of battle. Flaws in British tank design, procurement, and production
ensured that the majority of the tanks the Royal Armoured Corps (RAC)
Britain: Montgomery's Best Batsmen Fail
309
employed in Normandy were variants of the U.S. Sherman provided to
Britain after being rejected for overseas combat duty by the U.S. Army.26
which earned them the sardonic soubriquet "Ronson," after the British cig-
arette lighter that purportedly "lit every time."27 Even the upgunned (17-
pounder) Sherman Firefly proved a disappointment once combat revealed
that it had serious defects. Its 17-pounder (76.2mm) gun made the regular
Sherman turret too cramped, and retention of standard Sherman optics
meant crews could not take advantage of the gun's superior range.
Moreover, tardy conversion meant that crews had little time to familiarize
themselves with the tank before joining action. The Firefly also remained
in too short supply to have a significant effect on the campaign. 28 Finally,
its long overhanging gun was so distinctive that German armor quickly
learned to pick off Fireflies first, and so commanders were reluctant to risk
them in combat. Thus they rarely engaged, let alone destroyed, German
armor. 29
The absence of a quality battle tank capable of engaging enemy armor
on equal terms, the defensive advantages of the terrain, and enhanced
German antitank capability all brought heavy British tank losses. 30 Inferior-
quality tanks and heavy losses profoundly affected the performance of
British armored units in Normandy: hesitancy, caution, and timidity exhib-
ited by British armor reflected a serious crisis of confidence, most clearly
shown in the "Tiger tank phobia" that gripped crews in Normandy. The
phobia had two dimensions: first, tankers tended to identify all German
tanks as Tigers, even though few fought in Normandy, and, second, British
armor was unwilling to engage Tigers. 3l This was, after all, hardly surpris-
ing when experience has established sending five tanks to knock out a
Tiger and expecting only one to return. Such stark reality led to unorthodox
improvisations. Crews stacked sandbags or welded spare track sections
onto the hull to increase protection. Several regiments even reversed their
Shermans into battle to gain the advantage of the extra protection of the
engine "up front" and five forward gears with which to make a quick gel-
away 32 Fear of incineration also led British Sherman crews to abandon
lanks immediately when they were hit, which allowed dozens of servicea-
ole tanks to fall into enemy hands, where they were quickly employed
against their former owners. Indeed, in late July 1944 the 21st Panzer
Division fielded an entire company uel ardured Shermans. 33 All told,
despite the courage of the crews, British armor made little contribution to
Allied victory in Normandy.
Inadequate equipment also left British forces unable to undertake
spective battlefield reconnaissance. Even after the RAC absorbed the
Reconnaissance Corps in early 151 san an enor lo strengen reconnais
sance capabilities, reconnaissance res, nents remained badly equipped and
organized to gain battlefield intelligence andd icked the armor and mecha-
