390
Normandy 1944
around time, the Quartermaster General West on 17 July abandoned deliv-
eries to the Seventh Army's largest and most forward ammunition dump
Michel at St. Sever, 10 miles behind the front and instead delivered stocks
to Martha, 10 miles farther away near Domfront. This quadrupled the dis-
tance that units on the St. Lô front had to travel to collect ammunition and
thus further strained the German fuel situation. At the same time, sustained
combat that led to the fall of St. Lô on 19 July depleted front-line ammuni-
tion stocks.86 On the eve of COBRA, German forces lacked the munitions
to halt a major, concerted U.S. offensive.
For the first time in the campaign, during COBRA supply shortages
crippled the German defense and prevented them from cordoning off the
COBRA break-in on 25-26 July as they had all previous Allied offensives.
Supply shortages explain why the elite, and still powerful, 2d SS Panzer
Division Das Reich, failed to make its presence felt on the COBRA battle-
field. By 26 July, LXXXIV Corps had expended all ammunition for the
88mm flak guns that formed the backbone of its antitank defense, while
gasoline shortages "significantly prohibited" German countermeasures and
forced Das Reich to abandon two companies of Panther tanks, an eloquent
testimony to the scale of the fuel crisis.87
To restore the situation Field Marshal von Kluge rushed the XLVII
Panzer Corps (2d and 116th Panzer Divisions) from the British front to take
the U.S. breakthrough in the flank and nip off the penetration as German
troops had often done on the Eastern Front. But not only did the Germans
underestimate the speed, strength, and proficiency of the Americans, but a
flanking push south from St. Lô by the U.S. XIX Corps disrupted the
planned German counterattack against the exposed U.S. forces' left flank.
This push siphoned off part of XLVII Panzer Corps strength and forced the
corps to counterattack hastily amid the thick bocage that extended south-
east of St. Lô. But the bocage and increasing supply shortages frustrated
the German counterattack: the panzer forces experienced the same offen-
sive difficulties in the hedgerows that had earlier bedeviled U.S. opera-
tions.89 The panzers became separated from their supporting panzer-
grenadiers and were unable to hold the ground taken. All that the XLVI
Panzer Corps could achieve was to build a defensive front facing west and
await promised reintorcements.
As the shattered Germans recoiled, Allied fighter-bombers hastened
the diminishing mobility of the enemy.9 Once the Americans had broken
out, growing logistic difficulties and dwindling mobility unraveled the
German defense. During early August, U.S. forces overran the forward
German supply depots, destroying any lingering chance that the Germans
might shore up the front. In retrospect, the fortuitous destruction of the rail
bridge and marshaling yards at Tours ten days prior to COBRA contributed
directly, if unintentionally, to the success of the operation.
Hitler's insistence on 2 August that Army Group B launch Operation
Germany: The Defeat of the Westheer
391
LUTTICH, a counteroffensive to recapture Avranches and seal off the
American breakout, ensured total German defeat in Normandy. The
Germans hastily scraped together a respectable armored strike force with
elements of six, much depleted, mechanized divisions, and built up supplies
for a few days of sustained offensive action, though only at the cost of
denuding the rest of the front.91 Von Kluge chose Hans von Funck's experi-
enced XLVII Panzer Corps to spearhead the offensive. On the night of 6-7
August von Funck attacked without a preliminary barrage down the narrow
corridor between the Sée and Sélune rivers toward Mortain and Avranches
and obtained tactical surprise. Nonetheless, his troops were too few and too
tired, and von Funck had attacked prematurely before his forces had fully
assembled, rested, or reconnoitered. 92
Forewarned at the last minute by Ultra, the U.S. 30th Division con-
ducted a resolute defense, especially at Hill 317 where an isolated battalion
defied all German efforts to punch through Mortain. 93 Thereafter, the rapid
arrival of U.S. reserves quickly stalled the offensive as Allied fighter-
bombers disrupted the German drive through the bocage once the skies
cleared on 7 August. 94 Indeed, the imbalance of forces was simply too great
to allow a restabilization of the front and, logistically, LÜTTICH was
doomed. Von Funck had neither the firepower, the infantry, nor the supplies
to recapture and hold Avranches.95
With U.S. forces advancing deep into the enemy rear, the only feasible
German strategy was to fall back on the Seine. Given the dire supply posi-
tion and the deteriorating mobility of German forces, heavy losses were
inevitable. Despite earlier isolated incidents, widespread demoralization
and disintegration only surfaced after LÜTTICH failed.% The counterat-
tack thrust the Germans further into the noose of a pocket forming in the
Argentan-Falaise area, which the Allies finally closed on 19 August.
Precisely how many German troops became encircled in the Falaise pocket
and how many broke out remain a matter of controversy."? Yet, most esti-
mates have both inflated the number of German troops encircled and under-
stated the number that broke out.?8 The mouth of the pocket saw some of
the bitterest fighting of the campaign, and it was here that the Germans lost
most heavily. 9º Nevertheless, the quality of training, experience of breakout
operations in the East, and their flair for improvisation allowed the
Germans to extricate a surprising number of troops and amount of equip-
ment from the Falaise pocket despite the disintegration of command and
control, 100 Junior officers and NCOs assembled stragglers into combat
groups and led them in repeated breakout attempts. Moreover, experience
in relief operations in the East propped up German resolve and morale:
many of the encircled troops remained confident that relief efforts, spear-
headed by the II SS Panzer Corps, would rescue them. Only when the relief
effort stalled on 20 August did resolve waver and then collapse, though
resistance inside the pocket continued until 22 August.
