Conclusion
An examination of the performance of the U.S., British, Canadian, and
German militaries both prior to and during the 1944 Normandy Campaign
demonstrates that the U.S. military generally learned more quickly from its
combat experience and thus adapted faster than either its British and
Canadian counterparts or its German adversary. At the start of World War II
in September 1939, the combat capabilities of the western Allied armed
forces remained limited. The British military was marginally better and the
Canadian military marginally worse prepared than the U.S. armed forces.
Yet none had the ability to project effective military power overseas or to
prevail against a Nazi war machine that had embarked upon rearmament
years before its opponents.
By the end of the Normandy Campaign, the U.S. military had clearly
developed superior combat capabilities compared to its Anglo-Canadian
allies. The reasons for this were complex. That the United States did not
enter the war until December 1941 gave its armed forces significant advan-
tages. Not only did it allow a more ordered mobilization and expansion, but
also permitted study and understanding of, at least in part, the reasons for
the dramatic German blitzkrieg victories of 1939-1941 and more effective
preparation to meet the impending challenge. Nonetheless, no amount of
peacetime preparation could adequately prepare U.S. troops for combat,
and, inevitably, the green soldiers initially performed poorly in their first
combat in North Africa over the winter of 1942-1943 during Operation
TORCH. But the fundamental soundness of U.S. doctrine, tactics, and
equipment combined with the army's determination both to learn from its
experience and to retrain in the field during ongoing combat operations
ensured that the army would learn relatively quickly from combat in
Tunisia, Sicily, and Italy. The U.S. Army learned from past mistakes, dis-
missed incompetent commanders, enhanced interarm and interservice
cooperation, refined tactics and techniques, and improvised better weapons.
In consequence, this military steadily enhanced its combat effectiveness.
409
