418
Conclusion
losses, to obtain the objective. The benefits of this approach in Normandy
was that it bled the enemy dry and created conditions conducive to a suc-
cessful breakout. Such an approach, while flawed, was well attuned to the
nation's demographic and material strength and allowed Americans to be
profligate with resources in a way that was impossible for either allies or
the enemy.
For both the British and Canadians and the Germans manpower was
always more limited. Because of manpower concerns, rooted in their Great
War experience, casualty conservation--the minimization of losses- domi-
nated Commonwealth operations in northwest Europe. This imperative
helped reinforce the cumbersome, unsubtle, attritional British approach to
operations in which firepower endeavored to smash the enemy and troops
occupied the devastated ground. Slow, ponderous, mechanistic, and con-
trolled, such an approach left little to chance and kept losses down. It
brought success-with such overwhelming firepower it was virtually
impossible not to gain ground. But such an approach meant that Anglo-
Canadian forces could neither gain much ground quickly nor maintain
offensive operations for long. It also meant that the army could not keep up
continuous pressure, because it required extended breaks between opera-
tions for the logistic buildup needed to guarantee victory. The British
approach reflected the army's history, especially the legacy of the Great
War slaughter in the trenches, sustained neglect of the interwar years, dam-
aging defeats in the early years of World War II, painful recovery, growing
war weariness, and meager manpower reserves. The British approach con-
trolled the battle and made defeat highly unlikely, but at the price of leav-
ing the enemy damaged but intact. However, British operational art was in
tune with overall British political-strategic objectives that sought to defeat
nazism at tolerable cost and retain the empire, for which Britain required an
intact army.
Both approaches by the Western Allies had their merits and drawbacks.
Neither operational approach was particularly effective in surmounting
German defenses in depth, but there was a narrow advantage in the U.S.
approach. The slow, ponderous battle of attrition fought by the British
meant that they were unable to exploit an unanticipated opportunity quick-
ly. The battle's mechanistic nature brought about fatal delays that allowed
the enemy to recover. Firepower dominance was thus a recipe that could
defeat the enemy, but that denied decisive success. This attack doctrine,
therefore, ensured that Anglo-Canadian forces were incapable of effecting a
breakout from Normandy.
The U.S. forces' approach, on the other hand, provided better opportu-
nities for maneuver, but often lacked sufficient strength or concentration
for decisive penetration, and hastened troop fatigue due to constant combat
and the shortage of reserves. Broad-front attacks also dispersed strength
and slowed the advance. The approach reflected an exaggerated optimism
Conclusion
419
and a stubborn faith in the efficacy of continued offensive action. Thus the
Americans butted against strong enemy defenses in adverse terrain, for
example in the bocage during June and July 1944 and again later over the
winter of 1944-1945 in the Huertgen Forest, and bled themselves dry. But,
at least this approach to operations sapped German strength faster and left
the enemy susceptible to penetration when the Americans finally concen-
trated their strength during Operation COBRA in late July and shattered the
German defense of Normandy.
The least understood facet of the U.S. Army's performance in the
European Theater, however, was its growing operational flexibility that
complemented its tactical and technical ingenuity. The greater flexibility of
the army allowed it to recognize flaws in its operational art more quickly
and subsequently to refine its capabilities. One of the key changes in U.S.
attack methods during summer 1944 was a gradual shift toward narrower
attack frontages and greater concentration. This shift began with the break-
out across the Cotentin Peninsula in mid-June 1944 to isolate Cherbourg
and hasten its fall. This development continued with the COBRA breakout
in late July south of St. Lô and became increasingly prevalent in the last
nine months of the war.? Concentrated offensives provided greater opportu-
nities for both tactical and operational maneuver that took advantage of the
dwindling mobility of the enemy. When coupled with speed and boldness, a
narrow-front assault completely undid the German defense south of St. Lô
in late July. U.S. forces gradually learned through trial and error to bring
greater and better coordinated firepower to bear on the full depth of enemy
defenses, and in this regard these attack methods were clearly ahead of
those of the British by August 1944.
The performance of the protagonists in the 1944 Normandy Campaign
exemplifies the ingredients necessary for military effectiveness. These
ingredients include, first and foremost, the development of a sound, unam-
biguous, and realistic doctrine that emphasizes flexibility, adaptability and
critical self-appraisal, and, second, the need for rigorous and honest peace-
time preparation for war. The experiences of the U.S., British, Canadian,
and German militaries during World War II clearly demonstrate how diffi-
cult it is for military institutions to perfect organization, force structure,
equipment, doctrine, and tactics during wartime, especially in the face of
parallel enemy adaptation in light of their own combat experience.
Notes
1. Timothy Lupfer, Dynamics of Doctrine: The Changes in German Tactical
Doctrine during the First World War (Fort Leavenworth: U.S. Army Command and
General Staff College, 1981).
2. Michael Doubler, Closing with the Enemy: How G.I.s Fought the War in
Europe (Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1994), passim.
