Foreword
xii
ority were nullified, U.S. divisions by 1944-1945 were in fact more effec-
tive than their German opponents.
The end result of this revisionism too often resembles the kind of
ongoing dispute better associated with the relative capabilities of sports
teams-more of a pastime than an intellectual or professional exercise. It is
in that context that Clash of Arms makes a seminal contribution. Making
extensive use of both archival and published sources, Hart establishes a
comparative two-stage model that includes the Western Front's three major
combatants: the German, the American, and the Anglo-Canadian armies. In
general terms he establishes the importance of such factors as geography
and domestic politics. Germany, a continental power, was fighting on its
own ground, and in contexts of preparation that dated back to the Weimar
Republic. The Allies on the other hand were geostrategic islands, who had
to devote as much attention to getting to Europe as to staying there once
they landed. Neither the U.S., British, nor Canadian governments, more-
over, was willing to devote resources to military preparation between the
world wars in ways acceptable to even a democratic German government,
much less Adolf Hitler's Reich.
At institutional levels, Hart stresses the importance of adaptability. By
1944, none of the major combatants in Western Europe was an easy enemy
to defeat. The outcome of battles and campaigns depended to a correspon-
ding degree on learning the operational lessons one's adversary taught. And
that in turn depended heavily on prewar approaches to doctrine. Were those
fundamentally flawed, appropriate adaptation to circumstances became
questionable. The German way of war was essentially artistic, emphasizing
individualistic virtuoso performances at all levels. Cooperation, particularly
among the services, was correspondingly discounted. More seriously, the
"artistic" paradigm was significantly vulnerable to a Nazi ideology that
encouraged replacing rational calculation with wishful thinking in such
crucial matters as the military capabilities of "racially inferior" oppo-
nents-
-Americans in particular.
On the other side of the line, the Americans followed a managerial/sci-
entific paradigm. They took advantage of late entry into the war to study
German methods and develop responses to them. If their operational
"machine" did not work, they repaired it or redesigned it, paying little
regard to feelings or traditions. This gave them a flexibility, and eventually
a fighting power, significantly greater than their Anglo-Canadian allies,
who followed what might be called an artisanal model of warmaking.
Incorporating respect for tradition and low-risk, trial-and-error methods of
adaptation, the "British way" reflected both prewar doctrinal shortcomings
and wartime lack of resources compared to both the Germans and the
Americans. In the end, both the Americans and the Anglo-Canadians
proved able to outfight their German adversaries-but as much because of
German shortcomings as their own positive qualities. Hart's conclusion, that
Foreword
x111
modern war offers no shortcuts and seldom rewards improvisation, merits
application well beyond the parameters of this single monograph. Clash of
Arms is a must read for anyone concerned with the creation and mainte-
nance of combat effectiveness, whether in the twentieth or the twenty-first
centuries.
