180
Preparation: 1919-1944
training undertaken varied enormously. The assault formations inevitably
neglected combined-arms training as they honed amphibious assault tech-
niques. These units believed that they would be rapidly withdrawn from the
bridgehead once they had accomplished their mission and, therefore, had
no rationale for combined-arms preparation.66
The quality of Canadian combined-arms training left much to be
desired because it was conceptually flawed. Lacking the independence and
experience to formulate its own doctrine, Canadian combined-arms training
scrupulously followed prevailing British doctrine. 67 The result was the
Canadians being inculcated with the prevailing British philosophy of "joint
operations," the loose combination of arms, rather than the intimate inte-
gration that modern warfare demanded. Canadian troops also spent too
much training time on the abstract and theoretical; infantry and armor spent
little time actually exercising together. Even when they did, the impact of
British doctrine was starkly evident: Canadian infantry and armor exercised
alongside one another rather than together. 68
During the last year of preparation for Normandy, Canadian combined-
arms training intensified. Unfortunately it suffered from increasing doctri-
nal confusion. Illustrative of this confusion was the distinction drawn by
the Il Canadian Corps in November 1943 between tank-infantry and
infantry-tank cooperation!69 Such confusion was a result of the significant
changes in British attack doctrine brought about by crippling tank losses in
North Africa, and the War Office's finally abandoning the offensive spear-
head role for armor.70 There was a reversion to the prewar doctrine in
which infantry once again led the attack, with armor providing indirect-fire
support from hull-down positions on the flanks and rear. 1 This reversal of
doctrine six months before D-Day sowed confusion among Canadian
forces, which apparently failed to grasp the import of these doctrinal
changes during the hectic last few months of preinvasion activity.
Reequipment likewise hampered training. 72 Doctrine change combined
with reequipment effectively invalidated much of the Canadians' previous
combined-arms preparation. While doctrinal reform reduced Anglo-
Canadian tank losses in Normandy, it also destroyed any prospect of effec-
tive infantry-armor cooperation. Self-preservation led these armored forma-
tions to abandon any pretense of coordination in favor of indirect-fire
support designed to blast the infantry onto their objectives. 73
Armored forces were the weakest link in the Canadian order of battle
on the eve of D-Day. Canada had not fielded any operational armored
forces in World War I, and in the face of financial stringency no rationale
had existed for a militia designed for domestic defense to develop an inde-
pendent tank force between the wars.74 In the late 1930s the army had
introduced limited mechanization, but equipment and financial constraints,
and the assumption that Britain would furnish any required armor, guaran-
teed that Canada did not develop a tank force prior to World War II. Only
Canada, 1939-1944: The Politics of Neglect
181
after the resounding German victory in the West in 1940 did Canada take
armored warfare seriously, and the Canadian Royal Armoured Corps
(CRAC) came into existence on 13 August 1940. Established from scratch
with 250 World War I-vintage Renault FT-17s legally purchased from a
neutral United States as "scrap iron," the CRAC raised its first armored
brigade in October 1940.75 Expanded during the spring of 1941 to become
the 5th Armoured Division, the CRAC soon added the 1st Army Tank
Brigade for infantry support in accordance with prevailing British armored
warfare conceptions. These two formations arrived in Britain in 1942, and
after expansion of the CASF to army status in January 1942, the CRAC
raised the 4th Armoured Division and the 2d Tank (later Armoured)
Brigade, both of which arrived in Britain in 1943.
After the fall of France, both the Canadian government and its army
high command became enthusiastic converts to armored warfare. For both
military and political leaders, armor appeared a way to guarantee the mili-
tary independence that befitted Canada's elevated international standing:
the army because of its apparent military effectiveness and the government
because of armor's potential to save lives. The CRAC consequently under-
went unprecedented expansion, and on the eve of D-Day the CAO was the
most armored army among the Western Allies. 76 Meteoric expansion, how-
ever, failed to disguise serious weaknesses that still afflicted Canadian
armored forces in 1944. Equipment deficiencies seriously hindered activa-
lion; a motley array of obsolete foreign tanks constituted the CRAC's
inventory during its early existence. It was reequipped in 1942 with the
new Canadian Ram tank and in 1943 with British armor, before standardiz-
ing with the U.S. Sherman tank in 1944.77 Reequipment was protracted and
seriously hindered the tactical and operational readiness of Canadian
armored forces for OVERLORD. The 2d Armoured Brigade, for example,
designated to spearhead the Canadian amphibious assault on D-Day, had
only ten Shermans in January 1944, and trained instead with obsolete
British Valentines and Canadian Rams. The brigade reached full strength
only in late May 1944, and even then remained short of its quota of
upgunned Sherman Fireflies. 78 As an assault formation, the 2d Armoured
Brigade received priority over the 4th Armoured Division, whose reequip-
ment and preparation so lagged behind that the division was still rated non-
operational on D-Day. In addition, the Canadians lacked a significant
eserve of tanks and tank crews to replace projected battlefield losses.
Finally, Canadian armor had failed to exercise extensively and had rarely
participated in joint maneuvers. 79
The CRAC had adopted British armored warfare doctrine and thus
embraced the British two-tier structure of infantry support and cruiser tanks
as well as the disastrous British emphasis on direct tank-to-tank combat. So
the CRAC entered the 1944 Normandy campaign with the same deficien-
cies that plagued the RAC. British doctrine trained Canadian armor to seek
