114
Preparation: 1919-1944
capabilities. 2 Increasing interdiction of Axis supplies by the RAF, Royal
Navy, and the Special Air Service and LRDG on land also allowed
Auchinleck to build superiority on the ground and in the air. 63
Auchinleck used elaborate deception measures to gain total surprise for
CRUSADER, aided by bad weather and local air superiority.64 He also
launched a bolder and more sophisticated attack, but one that still con-
formed to prevailing doctrine. A frontal assault sought to pin the enemy in
place, while massed armor outflanked the German position and searched
out the enemy armor. But when the panzers refused to do battle, Auchinleck
gradually dispersed his armor. The battle degenerated into series of uncoor-
dinated actions in which ill-supported British armor once again shattered
itself against German gun lines or in tank-to-tank engagements in which the
better trained and more experienced panzers invariably prevailed.6s This
battle witnessed some of the severest and most confused fighting seen in
the desert. Despite the tank losses, Auchinleck boldly (and at great risk)
pressed the offensive, and the arrival of fresh reserves allowed superior
numbers to wear down Axis strength and forced Rommel to abandon his
siege of Tobruk and to retreat to Mersa Brega.
Though a victory, CRUSADER was a messy, protracted, and costly
success. In fact the battle revealed numerous defects in its execution.
Armor had still attacked with negligible support and had consequently suf-
fered crippling losses. British forces had often failed to concentrate or coor-
dinate, which forced them to fight at a disadvantage. Commanders failed to
mass artillery support either in attack or defense, which greatly weakened
available fighting power. The result was repeated defeat in detail and the
overrunning of several Commonwealth brigades. Equipment defects, espe-
cially the poor penetration of the 2-pounder gun, the mechanical weakness
of the new Crusader tank, and the vulnerability and short range of the new
American Stuart tank all exacerbated British losses.66
Command and control too remained problematic. Desert combat neces-
sitated the extensive use of radios, but few were available and these were
unreliable and of short range. Undependable communications in the heat of
battle occasionally left commanders and formations out of touch, which
delayed the issuing and execution of orders. Moreover, inexperience at
enciphering and lack of cipher personnel brought poor radio security and
discipline, which resulted in frequent use of "veiled" conversations that
were far more revealing than the speakers hoped.67
The Western Desert Air Force (WDAF) also began to make its pres-
ence felt for the first time during CRUSADER as Coningham tested the
new joint communications system for direct air support. Its reorganization
and the flow of new aircraft allowed the WDAF to average a record 190
sorties daily, and despite inevitable teething problems the new system gen-
erally worked well. The pre-CRUSADER attritional battles won a large
measure of local air superiority, but the WDAF lacked the strength to main-
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
115
tain air superiority as the newly activated British Eighth Army pursued
westward. Air Vice Marshal Coningham established an effective central-
ized RAF command of all air operations during CRUSADER and attached
his headquarters to that of Eighth Army,68 New aircraft, including
Hurricane fighter-bombers and Liberator heavy bombers, increased avail-
able strike power and curtailed the battlefield impact of Axis aviation.
Technological advances, in particular the invention of the fighter-bomber,
which saw its debut during CRUSADER, also made close support more
viable as the RAF discovered that fighters armed with bombs, cannon, and
rockets, could provide effective tactical support.
The air-ground communications system, though, remained in its infan-
cy, and thus Coningham received few calls for air support during CRU-
SADER and even fewer could be executed. Although Coningham and
Tedder had formulated a basic framework, many problems remained.
Inexperience, lack of recognition procedures, problems of desert target
identification, and limited aerial reconnaissance capability made it difficult
to apply air power effectively and brought many friendly-fire incidents.
Response time to a call for air support in 1941—generally three hours-
was slow, and the use of medium bombers for direct support missions
proved disappointing. A framework had been built for future success, but
during 1941 tactical air power remained an unpredictable and largely inef-
fectual weapon in support of ground forces.69
CRUSADER was imperfectly executed with heavy losses, but it was a
victory, nonetheless, which suggested that an attritional strategy could still
bring victory in the era of blitzkrieg. 70 The operation also saw limited
improvement in British defensive skill. German after-action reports noted
improved Commonwealth defensive artillery fire that, for the first time,
turned back a tentative German armored thrust on 25 November. Moreover,
during CRUSADER British troops had not retreated before bold German
armored thrusts as they had in BATTLEAXE."]
Instructions and exhortations from above had little impact on troops in
combat, however, because British forces were slow to learn lessons and
reluctant to retrain in the field. The army was slow to learn because it eval-
uated its performance and the problems that beset it intuitively rather than
analytically. 72 What the MEC required, but did not get, was a quiet period
to consider lessons, identify weaknesses, formulate doctrine, and then,
most importantly, retrain. But the urgent political need for victory pushed
each new commander into premature offensives before he had established
"the form," as Montgomery called it. The quest for victory thus ironically
promoted further defeat, and as a result the MEC learned slowly through
costly trial and error.
The parallels between the events of spring 1942 and those of the pre-
ceding spring demonstrate the British slowness in learning from experi-
ence. Pressed by Churchill, Auchinleck had dissipated his strength and
