72
Preparation: 1919-1944
employment of such troops in Crete. In February 1942, the army estab-
lished its first four parachute regiments and an independent Airborne
Command. Finally, in August 1942 the army raised the 82d and 10lst
Airborne Divisions, the progenitors of an airborne force that by 1945 had
grown to five divisions. 16
The prevailing interwar notion that the bomber would always get
through and the reality that no effective means of active antiaircraft defense
existed meant that the army also had little antiaircraft artillery in 1939. The
effective German tactical air strikes in Western Europe and in North Africa
in 1940-1942, however, forced the U.S. Army to move major resources to
antiaircraft defense. Driven by the threat of Axis air power, the antiaircraft
artillery arm expanded eighteenfold between 1941 and 1943.17
In addition to raising new types of units in the years 1940-1941, the
army also reorganized existing formations. Experiments by the 2d Infantry
Division during 1937-1939 had resulted in a dramatic change in infantry
organization. During 1940-1941 infantry divisions underwent "triangular-
ization" —they converted from their large and unwieldy four-brigade
"square" structure to a smaller, more flexible, and more mobile triangular
pattern that brought U.S. organization in line with European norms. 18 The
old organization had reflected the army's commitment to a doctrine of anni-
hilation; but the new, sleeker, and more mobile organization reflected both
the principle of economy in U.S. military thought and the increasing popu-
larity of a doctrine that stressed speed and mobility. The reorganization
abolished intermediate brigade headquarters and established simpler and
more streamlined formations with greater mobility and striking power.
Rearmament also accompanied expansion and reorganization. Drawing
on its World War I experience, interwar governments had prepared detailed
plans for wartime industrial mobilization. Thus the United States was able
to mobilize quickly and efficiently its enormous industrial potential after
1941. But the army not only had to produce large numbers of existing
weapons, it also had to develop more modern weapons-several of which
did enter service during 1940-1941, including the M3 Grant tank and the
first half-track tank destroyers, which increased both firepower and mobili-
ty.
Doctrinal development also continued during the same period and cul-
minated in the publication of Field Service Regulations (FM 100-5), which
codified an offensive strategy to annihilate the enemy based upon the main-
tenance of the initiative. 19 In its offensive orientation FM 100-5 resembled
German doctrine, but in other respects it differed markedly. The limited
U.S. combat experience, a military tradition of applying overwhelming
material superiority, and an essentially civilian army engendered a more
managerial conception of war than did the German approach. U.S. doctrine
thus stressed scientific management more and individual action less.
Moreover, since historically the United States had never had to rely heavily
The United States, 1939-1944: The Leviathan Awakens
73
on raw fighting power, doctrine had stressed organization, planning, and
logistics far more than German doctrine, but neglected the operational level
of war that lay between tactics and strategy. The absence of an operational
dimension to this doctrine hampered U.S. combat performance througnout
At the outbreak of war on 7 December 1941 the army had grown to
1,636,086 troops and thirty-four divisions, half of which McNair rated as
combat ready. The peacetime measures taken in 1940-1941 had done much
to promote the rapid expansion and quick achievement of wartime combat
readiness. Yet while adequate to defend the country from external threat,
the U.S. Army of December 1941 remained unprepared for major offensive
action. Most formations were still in training, and massive expansion com-
bined with inexperience increased the time required to mobilize a combat-
ready division to well beyond a year.
To become fully operational and develop offensive capability the
peacetime army had to restructure for war. In late 1941 the army reorgan-
Ized itself as a dual structure: the Army Ground Forces (AGF), which
included training units, and the Army Service Forces (ASF), which
absorbed the replacement system. After its experiences in World War I, the
army had abandoned territorial affiliation for its field formations and struc-
tured, organized, and equipped its divisions according to a small number of
uniform tables of organization and equipment (TO&Es). Thus, marked
homogeneity and uniformity characterized the army's wartime organiza-
tion. This uniformity reflected General McNair's powerful influence on the
wartime army's structure. His basic philosophy was to concentrate maxi-
mum offensive fighting power. He tirelessly advocated streamlined combat
units with minimal "tail" and vigorously promoted the principle of "pool-
ing," the removal and centralization of all nonessential divisional elements,
to achieve this end. McNair believed that such rationalization would bring
unity in command, economy of force, and operational flexibility.
U.S. mobilization policy also significantly affected the size, character,
and combat effectiveness of the wartime army. In 1942, the United States
limited its army to ninety divisions in recognition of the need to channel
unprecedented resources into air and naval forces as well as the support
services to project military power overseas.21 This limitation in size had
significant operational repercussions because it made it difficult for the
army to sustain its combat power through the rapid rotation of units out of
line for rest, rehabilitation, and replenishment. Instead, the ninety-division
ceiling placed the onus of sustaining combat effectiveness on the army's
manpower replacement system. To maintain divisions near full combat
strength and sustain their combat effectiveness required a constant stream
of replacements. Thus the army's replacement system developed to produce
large numbers of replacements that could be assigned where needed. This
system emphasized flexibility and quantity over quality and prevented a
