326
Normandy 1944
even veteran defenders, as it did to the Panzer Lehr Division during
COBRA, so that attacking troops, if following close behind the bombard-
ment, could penetrate the German front at tolerable cost. 133
Montgomery's operational approach, while crude, was effective: it
invariably got infantry onto their objectives with bearable losses. But nei-
ther Montgomery nor his subordinates speedily got to grips with the great
depth of German defenses in Normandy. British awareness of German
defensive doctrine remained poor, and the Germans' light manning of their
forward line made British shell expenditures out of all proportion to the
results achieved. Massed fire smashed the lightly defended enemy lines and
carried the advancing infantry thorough to the German main line of resist-
ance, but then lifted. British commanders also failed to appreciate the
enemy's adoption of dispersed defense in depth, or to develop fire plans
that attacked the full depth of enemy defenses—nor did they solve the
problem of deploying a mass of guns forward in the early phases of battle.
Firepower dominance was self-reinforcing and created a dependence that
increasingly alarmed Montgomery. 134
The imperatives driving British operations thus forged highly managed
battles. Indeed, Montgomery dominated planning and left his army com-
manders, Crerar and Dempsey, little room for initiative, and they in turn
kept an equally firm grip on their corps commanders. 135 This rigid control
denied subordinates the opportunity to display initiative or flexibility.
Although the flaws that afflicted British forces in Normandy had all
been demonstrated and identified before the campaign, circumstances in
part explain the army's inability to rectify them. The wartime army could
not quickly or easily overcome its interwar neglect, especially as battle
experience was simultaneously refining and redefining enemy doctrine,
training, and tactics. However, the army's unwillingness to evaluate its per-
formance critically and honestly obstructed its efforts to adapt throughout
the war. British forces in northwest Europe learned principally from recent
operations through after-action reports, the most important of which being
the diverse immediate reports series. Quickly produced after the event, they
ranged from the tactical and operational to the technical. 136
Generally, however, after-action reports contained little critical evalua-
tion and were reluctant to acknowledge or to identify deficiencies, let alone
demonstrated a desire to correct them. This reluctance to learn stood in
marked contrast to the honest, critical self-evaluation that was the hallmark
of the wartime German and U.S. Armies. But British commanders and
troops often equated success in battle with excellence in performance, and
the army found it difficult to escape its emphasis on loyalty above honesty.
Troops and commanders remained reluctant to criticize individuals or
organizations, and when they did offer criticism it was muted, diluted, and
euphemistic.137
Britain: Montgomery's Best Batsmen Fail
327
This unwillingness to acknowledge deficiencies lay at the core of the
unspectacular British performance in Normandy. Silence dominated the
reports coming back from Normandy and rendered more difficult the
adjustments that combat realities demanded. While the Americans
enhanced their capabilities during the campaign and, in particular, sur-
mounted the debilitating effect of the bocage on offensive operations,
British adaptation occurred more slowly and was less focused, thus ulti-
mately proving less effective. 138
At the same time, the imperatives that drove British operations, casual-
y and ammunition conservation and morale preservation, negatively influ-
enced the lessons-learned process, 139 Montgomery influenced the process
in northwest Europe in two major areas. Alarmed at the extravagant ammu-
nion expenditure early in the campaign, he censored reports that sanc-
toned massive artillery support. 140 He also censored reports critical of
British performance because he viewed frank admission and discussion of
weaknesses incompatible with morale maintenance. He quashed, for exam-
pie, reports that identified the marked inferiority of Allied tanks. 41 As he
censored lessons-learned material to protect his army group from a possible
deterioration of its combat effectiveness, Montgomery impeded his com-
mand from enhancing its capabilities.
The history of countermortar groups illuminates the army's slowness in
leaning from experience. Since most British casualties in North Africa had
resulted from German mortar fire, formations organized countermortar
groups designed to observe enemy mortar fire, locale those monas, and
call down fire to eliminate them. This system proved effective in the
Mediterranean and saved many lives. Yet units withdrawn from the
Mediterranean for OVERLORD disbanded their countermortar groups lo
preserve manpower. British formations landed in Normandy without a
countermortar organization, with theueuenperal verman mortars inflicted
U percent of total casualties during June and July. even though division
gradually improvised countermortar groups during the campaign, it was to
unt August that Montgomery officiallyly uthorized their rerormation. 142
A complex array of factors explains the relative slowness of British
forces to adapt in Normandy. British military culture was innately conser
Pulper the war, it relied more on extemporaneous pragmatism than on
valve and displayed hostility toward theory and intellectual preparation. 14
ormally expressed doctrine. 144 Doctrinal development was thus duanste
a schizophrenic: the doctrine of individual semor commanders often
merged from official War Office doctrine. *> Lack of appropriate and
holistic doctrine hampered the army's efforts to enhance its combat effec-
uveness at all levels. Moreover, against a backdrop of soft interwar Prepa
ation, the army lacked mechanisms to evaluate and disseminate combat
lessons, preventing it from deriving appropriate lessons from its early
