132
Preparation: 1919-1944
troops first practiced large-scale amphibious assault and exploitation drills;
and only during SPARTAN (March 1943) did six OVERLORD divisions
practice offensive operations. These exercises revealed serious flaws in
British military capabilities, especially among armored forces. 149
In 1942 Britain finally began to prepare for the second front. To return
to the continent required an extensive amphibious capability. Yet despite a
rich heritage of amphibious operations, financial constraints prevented
either the army or navy from developing specialized amphibious forces
between the wars. Moreover, the lessons of the Great War, especially the
failure of the 1915 Gallipoli campaign, suggested that amphibious opera-
tions against a defended locality were prohibitively costly. 150 Thus, in
1939, Britain had neither trained forces nor landing craft to conduct
amphibious warfare. 151 The resultant ineptness in joint operations con-
tributed directly to failure in Norway and led to the creation of the
Directorate of Combined Operations in 1940. The military gained valuable,
if often costly, amphibious warfare experience from the 1940-1942 com-
mando raids that culminated in the Dieppe debacle. This reverse galvanized
the army to identify the causes of defeat and to enhance its amphibious
assault capability. Study emphasized the recklessness of attacking a well-
defended port, the need for special amphibious assault armor and engi-
neers, and constant air and naval fire support. 152 After Dieppe, Britain
diverted major resources to amphibious warfare, and Percy Hobart directed
his unique talents to create specialized assault armor-the "Funnies." 153
Nonetheless, the military remained inexperienced at amphibious assault on
the eve of TORCH. The earmarked troops had little amphibious training,
and the invasion flotilla lacked both specialized tank landing craft and
operational experience.
Both circumstance and policy thus limited the new army's improve-
ment in combat effectiveness. Reequipping Home Forces proved difficult
as Churchill sent the latest and best weapons to North Africa first to stave
off defeat and then to reinforce success. Home Forces thus was under-
equipped on the eve of TORCH. The anticipated improvement in training
quality also proved illusory as firepower dominance became de facto oper-
ational doctrine in the field and as battle drill quickly turned into an inflexi-
ble, regularized drill devoid of battlefield reality.
Between 1940-1942 Home Forces did manage to transform itself from
an organization with only marginal defensive capacity into one with limited
offensive capability. Given the extent of interwar neglect, exacerbated by
the stunning early defeats, the task that confronted Home Forces was enor-
mous. Although it made considerable progress, the problems it faced could
not be quickly or easily remedied. Thus, on the eve of TORCH, the combat
capabilities of Home Forces remained limited. Most troops remained
focused on basic and small-unit training, and combined-arms coordination
was poor. More serious was that the army remained mired in controversy
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
133
over fundamental, unresolved issues regarding doctrine, tactics, force struc-
ture, and organization.
That Home Forces was reluctant to learn from the desert experiences
slowed the pace of reform. This unwillingness stemmed in part from the
widespread belief among senior officers that the desert war was unique and,
therefore, that it held few lessons relevant to the European theater. 154 Home
Forces thus left the dissemination of desert combat experience to veteran
officers, which ensured that any improvement was haphazard, partial, and
incomplete. The Home Forces' failure to absorb combat lessons forced the
First Army to learn modern warfare the hard way—in combat in tunisia.
Indeed, it was not until Montgomery's success in Sicily that Home Forces
began to appreciate the general applicability of lessons learned in the
Mediterranean to combat in northwest Europe. The prevalent view of desert
warfare as anomalous ensured that on the eve of TORCH the First Army
remained less proficient than the Eighth Army. Only in terms of its ability
to provide massed fire via the Parham system and aerial spotters, did it pos-
sess capability potentially superior to the Eighth Army's.
In November 1942 General Anderson's First Army executed TORCH,
the invasion of French North Africa. Inexperience and underpreparation,
combined with the lack of strategic direction behind the campaign, ensured
that Anderson faced major obstacles. Planned with only three months'
notice after the cancellation of BOLERO, the projected 1942 invasion of
France, TORCH was the largest amphibious assault of the war to date. 155
Lack of experience in amphibious operations generated considerable confu-
sion and disorder during the landing, and it was fortunate that the Vichy
French offered only desultory opposition. 156 TORCH also saw the first,
largely unsuccessful, British airborne assault of the war as the First Army
dropped parachutists deep in the Axis rear where they suffered heavy loss-
es. 157
The biggest flaw in TORCH, however, was that the Allies lacked a
clear, coherent, and integrated theater strategy to prosecute the war in
North Africa, a reality that reflected poor Anglo-American understanding
of the operational level of war. Indeed, the TORCH planning banked upon
the rapid capture of Tunis by coup de main to wrap up the campaign quick-
ly. Thus the Allies neither planned nor prepared for a protracted campaign.
When the Axis forces reacted much more rapidly than the Allies had
deemed possible, they defeated the feeble Allied attempt to quickly take
Tunis and inflicted a series of local reverses. Lack of cooperation, both in
the air and on the ground, between green British and U.S. forces fighting
for the first time side by side exacerbated these setbacks. 158
Poor strategic planning, the hasty implementation of TORCH, and the
failure of Home Forces to absorb desert lessons all impinged upon First
Army's performance and delayed Allied victory in Tunisia. Many problems
that had previously bedeviled British operations resurfaced early on in
