206
Preparation: 1919-1944
troop, equipment, supply shortages; and by Hitler's orders to stand fast pre-
vented elastic defense in depth. Instead, the Germans adopted expedient
defensive techniques dictated by circumstances as, on 6 December, the
Soviets counterattacked. The Red Army launched heavy but unsophisticat-
ed, ill-coordinated, and dispersed frontal assaults all along the central front
in an effort to drive the Germans back from Moscow. The depleted panzer
divisions that had spearheaded the German advance were thus embroiled in
heavy defensive fighting. Slow to predict the Soviet counteroffensive or to
discern its magnitude, the Germans also underestimated their own weak-
nesses.61 Inexpert at defense, lacking reserves, and dismissive of Soviet
capabilities, the Ostheer conducted half measures—piecemeal local with-
drawals and small-scale unit rotations-that failed to stem the Soviet drive.
Forced back in uncoordinated withdrawals, gaps opened in the German
lines through which Soviet forces poured into the German rear.62 The
German front began to disintegrate as the overstretched supply organization
unraveled under the combined effects of winter weather and Soviet disloca-
tion of the German rear. Unused to reverses, German generals and troops
panicked when confronted with their first major defeat of the war.
The Soviet counteroffensive prompted significant changes in German
strategy and brought about modified defensive tactics employed on all
fronts for the rest of the war. The Germans faced two strategic options —a
major withdrawal to a shorter, defensible winter line (which the generals
wanted) or to stand fast and weather the Soviet onslaught, which Hitler
chose on 16 December. Hitler was right. A strategic withdrawal in midwin-
ter with limited mobility would have cost the Germans their heavy weapons
and might well have turned into a rout like Napoleon's 1812 retreat. Hitler
ordered the Ostheer to hold and unflinchingly defend "hedgehog" posi-
tions. These were centered on dispersed fortified village strongpoints in
which beleaguered German forces desperately massed during December
1941 to escape both the winter weather and annihilation. 63 By late
December most of the front comprised hedgehog defenses that the Germans
fortified as best they could, but doctrine, equipment, and training proved
inadequate for winter defensive warfare. Nonetheless, the Germans' hold-
ing fast, coupled with winter weather, ultimately halted the Soviet offen-
sive.
That such expediency stopped the Soviet onslaught was as much due to
Soviet disorganization and lack of tactical sophistication as to the inherent
defensive qualities of hedgehog defenses or the steadfastness of German
troops. While holding fast prevented the Ostheer from disintegration, it
cost the Germans heavily. Badly prepared for winter warfare, the Ostheer
suffered 228,000 casualties from frostbite alone, and the Soviets isolated
and overran some units.64 Soviet armor posed a great danger because the T-
34 tank had good cross-country mobility in winter, while such weather ren-
dered many German weapons unreliable and ineffective. 65
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
207
The Ostheer quickly improved its defensive and winter warfare capa-
bilities as well as the strength of its hedgehog defenses through trial and
error and rapid dissemination of after-action reports.66 Troops quickly rec-
ognized that village strongpoints had serious limitations: massed defenders
were vulnerable to artillery fire, and their defenses lacked depth and con-
ceded control of the ground between positions to the enemy..? Thus the
troops gradually extended hedgehog defenses beyond village perimeters to
improve security, enhance observation, and reduce the gaps in the front
through which Soviet forces regularly infiltrated.68 Experience showed that
vigorous, immediate counterattack employing massed firepower was neces-
sary to repel Soviet incursions.
These defensive experiences led the Heer during 1942 to develop for
the first time mechanisms and procedures for coordinated massed defensive
fire plans. Although the strongpoint defense system did not conform exact-
ly to doctrine, its emphasis on depth, firepower, and counterattack demon-
strated that it was firmly rooted in traditional German defensive doctrine.
By maintaining active and aggressive defense, German hedgehogs, despite
their expedient nature, often survived against great odds.69
Soviet deficiencies also contributed to the success of hedgehog
defense. Initial Soviet operations after 6 December 1941 were fundamen-
tally defensive in nature and aimed to gain room for maneuver in front of
Moscow rather than to destroy the enemy. Moreover, hedgehog defense
inadvertently exploited flaws in Soviet organization, leadership, and doc-
trine: the Soviet forces lacked the expertise, firepower, and mobility to
encircle and annihilate major German formations.70 Poor leadership, faulty
doctrine, and unsubtle, broad frontal attacks by green, depleted, poorly
trained and equipped troops, as well as poor coordination, ammunition
Shortages, inadequate communications, and limited armored and artillery
support, all hampered Red Army operations.1 Soviet forces rarely exploit-
ed penetrations quickly or with determination and usually recoiled when
ounterattacked. Early success led Stalin to launch a counteroffensive
along the entire front between 5 January and late February 1942 that aimed
to destroy the Ostheer. This all-out offensive was well beyond the weak-
ened Red Army's capabilities as Stalin in turn underestimated German
defensive power and the powerful obstacle the weather presented to offen-
sive action. Lack of strength and dispersion of effort across the front meant
that soviet strategy thus spared German forces from annihilation. Without
nassed artillery, adequate ammunition, or effective coordination, the Red
Army failed to defeat the Germans, and it was the Soviet spearheads that
were cut off and eradicated during the spring. 73
Soviet successes forced the Luftwaffe to employ airlifts to resupply
German forces isolated by the Red Army offensive at Kholm, Demyansk,
and Velikie Luk. But the Luftwaffe viewed air supply as an emergency task
only and thus lacked significant lift capacity. During the winter, it organ
