304
Normandy 1944
and a few well-trained and well-led divisions (the 11th Armoured in partic-
ular) fought well, the aggregate was unimpressive because the diversion of
quality personnel into elite units underlay the mediocre performance of
many regular formations. Performance in Normandy paralleled previous
campaigns: the troops performed reasonably well in defense, but they expe-
rienced difficulty on the attack. Moreover, the army found it difficult to
sustain its combat power as the campaign progressed because operational
rigidity and poor coordination denied decisive success. British forces
would break into German positions during major operations, but were gen-
erally unable to break through German defenses. Moreover, as the cam-
paign progressed and casualties mounted, both the conception and execu-
tion of British attacks deteriorated. The evidence thus indicates that British
troops were incapable of executing a successful breakout from Normandy.
British problems were most starkly revealed at the moment of the
Americans' triumph in late July. After the COBRA breakout, Miles
Dempsey, commander of the British Second Army, launched his own
breakout bid, BLUECOAT, a drive on Mont Pinçon and the town of Vire,
which failed ignominiously. Because of this failure and waning British
strength, Montgomery was unable to shut the door of the Falaise pocket in
mid-August, or to trap the Germans against the Seine-failures that
allowed the Westheer to escape from Normandy, reform during the fall, and
launch the Ardennes counteroffensive of December 1944.7
The army's culture and traditions, the baneful legacies of the Great
War, and the resultant interwar neglect continued to impede British per-
formance in Normandy. The amateurism and class consciousness that per-
vaded the army hampered British efforts to solve the problems the troops
faced. The army's social stratification and the gulf between the officer
corps dominated by the middle and upper classes and the rank and file
retarded development of initiative and independence among noncommis-
sioned officers (NCOs). Class consciousness affected British performance
in Normandy more than might otherwise have been the case because of the
campaign's heavy officer losses. The traditional rigid subordination of
British NCOs worked against their taking control of units whose officers
became casualties.8 British attacks often stalled when officers were inca-
pacitated, and many units lost their fighting edge as officer casualties
mounted. Class concerns also made army leadership less than receptive to
ideas from the troops, and so the army continued to adapt largely from the
top down."
The traditionalism enshrined in the British regimental system also con-
tinued to retard development of the interarms and interservice coordination
that modern war demanded. Emphasis on former glories led each branch of
service to guard jealously its sacred independence.
The wartime army,
therefore, never developed a holistic combined-arms doctrine; its approach
remained that of "joint ops," the loose cooperation of independent arms
FIRST AMERICAN ARMY
ount da Hoc
The Anglo-Canadian Bridgehead,
D-Day to 24 July 1944
D-Day lodgement
Captured, 7-10 June
Captured, 11-17 June
Captured, 18-30 June
Captured, 1-24 July
- Boundary British & American sectors
Miles
Kilometers
SECOND BRITISH ARMY
Port en
Bessin
GOLD
Arromanches
XX
ORPS
JUNO
Courseulles
SWORD
IT CDN
*Dourtes
I CORPS!
Mewille
22nt1
276th
* 7th Ar
(13 June) •
Villers-
D0c220
I SS PZ
Vimont
10th SS Pz
272d
277th
• May
Bourguebus 12th SS Pz
1st SS Pz
117 ome
PANZER GROUP
I SS PZ
CORPS
WEST
116th Pz
305
