394
Normandy 1944
grievous losses. 114 So overwhelming was Allied aerial mastery that rarely
did German aircraft reach the battle zone, and even more infrequently
could attacks be pressed home. Moreover, the German lack of ground
attack aircraft forced fighter planes to carry the burden of close support as
improvised fighter-bombers, which placed them at even greater tactical dis-
advantage. As a result, German battlefield air support was all but neutral-
ized. The Luftwaffe's only impact was regular night bombing runs and the
dropping of magnetic mines in the Seine Bay, which proved a nuisance and
forced the Allies to maintain continuous mine sweeping. Apart from that,
nocturnal raids inflicted minimal damage, only rarely—on the eve of
GOODWOOD and TOTALIZE-did German air attacks disrupt Allied
offensive action. The Luftwaffe also occasionally resupplied ground forces,
but lack of lift capacity meant it could only minimally contribute to the
resupply effort.115 After the breakout, Luftflotte III made a determined
effort to destroy the Pontaubault bridge, gateway to Brittany, and thus stem
the U.S. advance, but failed. 116
The Luftwaffe also diverted large numbers of flak guns to Normandy in
an effort to protect ground forces and lines of communication from air
attacks. Heavy flak concentrations partly ameliorated the damage caused
by Allied bombing and strafing and inflicted a steady toll on Allied planes,
but such passive defenses alone could not protect German forces, rear
installations, and communications.117 Heavy flak made an important,
though often exaggerated, contribution to the ground defense. As the war
turned against the Germans, heavy flak saw increasing service in an anti-
tank role. Historians have often viewed the III Flak Corps as a lethal tank-
busting force on the Caen front in Normandy: Luftwaffe heavy flak did
occasionally inflict crippling losses on Allied armor, but this was the excep-
tion rather than the rule, l18 In reality, the III Flak Corps had barely begun
its training for joint air-ground operations and the Luftwaffe High
Command (OKL) remained loath to dissipate vital flak assets in support of
the army. Its assistance to the army was grudging, halfhearted, and spas-
modic, and it simply lacked the resources to combine both missions effec-
tively. 119
The Kriegsmarine's efforts to obstruct OVERLORD were as ineffectu-
al because Allied air and naval superiority thwarted all German surface
action. Only fast E-boats achieved even minor tactical successes. 120 At the
same time, Allied bombers systematically destroyed the port, dock, and
repair facilities required to keep German warships operational. 121 The
German U-boat challenge proved equally ineffectual in the shallow, con-
stricted waters of the English Channel, 122 In frustration, the Kriegsmarine
turned to its
"small combat units" as frogmen, human torpedoes, and
midget submarines repeatedly sortied against the eastern flank of the Allied
bridgehead, but with little success and prohibitive losses, 123 Nor could
naval coastal artillery have more than a minimal impact on the naval or
Germany: The Defeat of the Westheer
395
ground battles. 124 The Kriegsmarine thus failed to interfere with either the
invasion or the steady buildup of Allied strength ashore. 125
The interservice coordination that had accompanied Germany's early
in has company
war victories was absent in Normandy. As Germany's fortunes receded,
interservice strains multiplied and the early war veneer of close cooperation
cracked. Indeed, so impotent had the German navy and air force become
that the Heer fought the campaign virtually alone against an enemy that
demonstrated an unprecedented degree of interservice coordination. The
inability to orchestrate an effective, integrated interservice defense was a
major cause of the Germans' defeat.
In conclusion, the Westheer fought tenaciously against overwhelming
odds for seven weeks before its defense of Normandy collapsed.
Thereafter, despite enormous losses, it extricated one-third of the troops
and one-tenth of the materiel that it had committed in Normandy. In the
adverse circumstances that it faced, saving even this much was an achieve-
ment. The Normandy campaign demonstrated the Heer's resilience, combat
prowess, powers of recuperation, and ability to adapt. Yet, improved organ-
ization, better manpower utilization, more potent weapons in unprecedent-
ed numbers, and honed defensive techniques failed to avert disastrous
German defeats in France, the Soviet Union, and Italy during the summer
of 1944. These multiple, simultaneous defeats shattered the Heer, and
Germany's imminent defeat became irrevocable.
The defeat of the Westheer illuminates the reality that it was the pro-
gressive decline of the strategic base of the German war effort, and the
mounting Allied ability to conduct an integrated interservice and interarms
onslaught, that was decisive in the defeat of Nazi Germany. The increasing
application of Allied air power against German communications and pro-
ductive capacity, coupled with mounting attrition, progressively robbed the
Heer of the mobility, the ordnance, and the veteran cadres that had voidn
instrumental both to German victory during 193-1941 and in the avoid-
ance of irreversible defeat prior to summer 1944. Robbed of its mobility,
the Heer suffered comprehensive and decisive defeat during summer 1944.
Nonetheless, continual German adaptation and innovation were able to
postpone the inevitable. German forces continued to adapt to changing
combat conditions in Normandy as they had throughout the war, and inno-
vation remained broad based, decentralized, and fairly rapid. Refinement of
detensive doctrine with the adoption of extreme dispersion was the most
significant German innovation of the campaign. The gradual adoption of
dispersed defense in depth curtailed losses and exacerbated Allied offensive
difficulties and thus prolonged the German defense. At the same time, con
tinued organizational reform and deployment of new weapons increased
German firepower and buttressed defensive strength. But finally, during
late July, the Americans outfought and outmaneuvered the enemy lo break
out from Normandy. Despite the adoption of numerous expedients the Heer
