124
Preparation: 1919-1944
troops gained limited mobile antitank capability with the truck-mounted 2-
pounder portee. However, Commonwealth troops initially achieved more
mobile firepower only at the expense of decreased protection. 117
It was not until 1942 that the arrival of a new generation of U.S. and
British ordnance significantly narrowed the firepower gap. The appearance
of effective antitank weapons in the desert—the U.S. M3 Grant tank armed
with a sponson-mounted 75mm gun and the British 6-pounder (57mm)
gun-finally allowed field artillery to relinquish its antitank role and be
centralized at the division level during the summer of 1942 for convention-
al indirect fire support. The 6-pounder, a light, mobile, low-silhouette, and
sturdy antitank gun first provided a genuine antitank capability and helped
stop Rommel's panzers in their last desert offensive in 1942. Greater anti-
tank firepower increased German tank losses and speeded the erosion of
Axis striking power in North Africa. In addition, the arrival of new 4.5- and
5.5-inch medium howitzers finally gave gunners longer range and greater
hitting power that enhanced defensive and counterbattery fire capabili-
ties. 118
After El Alamein, other new weapons systems entered service that fur-
ther narrowed the firepower gap. These included the Deacon, a self-pro-
pelled 6-pounder gun that was quickly replaced by the American 75mm-
gunned M10 tank destroyer, and the Priest self-propelled 25-pounder gun.
Increased firepower reduced the widespread misuse of weapons systems,
and as a result the firepower balance shifted in favor of the Allies during
1942-1943. Growing numerical and material superiority, combined with a
strategy of set-piece attritional battles, allowed Montgomery to grind down
Rommel in North Africa as attrition and precarious lines of communica-
tions increasingly strangled Axis forces and hampered mobile defense.
The most significant improvement in British combat capabilities dur-
ing 1942, though, was the more effective application of air power in sup-
port of ground operations. With the genesis of viable air-ground communi-
cations and of the fighter-bomber during 1942, the RAF developed a
ground-support doctrine that emphasized balanced pursuit of the two major
missions of tactical air power: close support and direct support. 119 During
1942, the efficacy of tactical aviation steadily improved as technological
innovation gave the RAF its first antitank capability with the introduction
of a specialized "tank buster," the Hurricane IIID equipped with a 40mm
cannon. Growing experience and greater use of both forward airfields and
tentacle radio links had cut response time to 35 minutes by the First Battle
of El Alamein. Effectiveness further improved as interservice dissension
abated with final army acceptance of centralized RAF command of tactical
aviation late in 1942,120
British ground combat capabilities clearly grew during 1942 as the
pace of learning and reform accelerated with mounting experience. But
innovation was patchy because the collection and dissemination of combat
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
125
lessons remained haphazard. Montgomery greatly influenced the lessons-
learned process, and under his tutelage the pace of adaptation in the desert
accelerated. Unlike his predecessors, Montgomery was determined that the
troops understood the lessons of his campaigns. 121 He vigorously and
quickly disseminated lessons learned through memoranda, pamphlets, and
correspondence. 122 His emphasis on his own immediate postbattle analysis
facilitated adaptation and retraining. 123 He first sought to educate his senior
commanders, so that they in turn could disseminate his operational
approach to the troops.124 He would then establish firm doctrine on which
to base training and would stress retraining in the field. He, more so than
other senior commander, understood the vital importance of retraining for
victory, 125 Under his direction, the Eighth Army's defensive capabilities
clearly improved during fall 1942.
However, Montgomery's character flaws— his egoism, arrogance, tact-
lessness, and condescension-subsequently hampered his efforts to dissem-
inate desert campaign lessons to the Home Forces, just as these traits aggra-
vated interservice and inter-Allied friction.
He so monopolized
lessons-learned analysis in the Eighth Army that he restricted the spectrum
of adaptation: the troops had to learn the gospel according to "Monty."
Montgomery's ascendancy entrenched the army's class-oriented, top-down
approach to learning. Like his peers, Montgomery extracted from combat
experience only what supported his preconceived notions. Nevertheless,
that he possessed a firm grasp of the mechanics of modern war and some
understanding of operational art allowed the pace of adaptation to acceler-
ate under his auspices.
By late 1942 the Eighth Army had painfully begun to feel its way
toward military proficiency. Under Montgomery's leadership and through
the vicissitudes of the desert campaigns, the Eighth Army finally acquired
defensive proficiency as well as limited offensive striking power. Most sig-
nificantly, the Eighth Army reverted to conventional artillery practices,
muddled its way through to devise a successful operational approach, the
set-piece battle of attrition, and slowly learned to apply air power to aid the
ground battle. New weapons narrowed the enemy's firepower edge and
attrition wore down German capabilities as growing Allied aerial and mar-
itime mastery slowly choked off Axis resupply to North Africa.
Nonetheless, the Eighth Army found it difficult to adapt its newly suc-
cessful defensive tactics to the attack when it took the offensive in North
Africa during fall 1942. After El Alamein, the British learned to employ
massive artillery bombardment to shatter the enemy as firepower domi-
nance became de facto operational doctrine. Yet even after it had developed
weapons and tactics that could defeat the blitzkrieg,
the army had to learn
to employ them offensively to allow more flexible, massed fire, and to
combine firepower with dexterity, which required improved command,
control, and communications (C3). Greater speed and flexibility proved
