70
Preparation: 1919-1944
The first substantive expansion of the U.S. Army, therefore, only mate-
rialized in late summer of 1940, during which the army expanded to
375,000 and activated a general headquarters (GHQ) to oversee mobiliza-
tion. On 16 September 1940 a second stage of expansion began with the
passage of the Selective Service Bill, the first ever U.S. peacetime con-
scription, and the absorption of the National Guard into the regular army.
This process, completed by November 1941, quintupled the size of the
army. Massive and rapid expansion during 1940-1941, however, presented
the army with enormous mobilization difficulties. The most serious man-
power problem was the need to improve officer quality even while in the
middle of meteoric expansion. Lack of funding between the wars had pre-
vented evaluation of command fitness, and rapid expansion in 1940-1941
mandated quantity rather than quality. Inevitably, many unsatisfactory offi-
cers not only had to be retained but elevated. That the United States had a
large pool of trained reserve officers gave it an advantage over its allies and
enemies alike? The pool reduced the strain of rapid expansion and allowed
the army to grapple earlier and more vigorously with the necessary but
painful task of weeding out those too old, too poorly trained, or too incom-
petent to command. In fact, the wartime army demonstrated determination
to remove officers ill fitted for command. While continual officer shortages
during mobilization hampered initial efforts to dismiss inept officers, from
1943, as an officer surplus materialized, the army intensified its efforts to
remove unsuitable officers.8
The introduction of Selective Service ended army recruitment difficul-
ties, but it created insurmountable training problems. Rapid expansion
brought with it staggering instructional tasks as a small and inexperienced
teaching staff grappled with training large numbers of civilian recruits in an
as yet unproven doctrine for an uncertain mission against an unknown
enemy. It was, therefore, hardly surprising that much early war training
proved inadequate. The chaos of early war mobilization also brought huge
personnel turnover, which ruined logical progression in instruction and
delayed the building of divisions. Basic training, advanced officer instruc-
tion, and unit tactical drills all went on simultaneously, eroding quality and
lengthening the time required to produce combat-ready divisions to well
over a year.'
The strength of U.S. military training, however, was its offensive ori-
entation. Because traditional doctrine emphasized halting the enemy far
from U.S. shores and launching an early counteroffensive, by late 1939 the
military had produced War Plan RAINBOW 5, a strategic blueprint for
offensive transatlantic operations against Germany and Italy. The creation
of RAINBOW 5 allowed U.S. troops to begin offensive-oriented training in
1940, much earlier than their Anglo-Canadian counterparts. It also meant
that from 1939 U.S. armed forces regularly practiced amphibious opera-
tions and developed a sound understanding of amphibious warfare tech-
The United States, 1939-1944: The Leviathan Awakens
71
niques, even if they lacked specialized forces and landing craft to conduct
opposed landings. 10
Another major army strength was its thorough evaluation and refine-
ment of training during the 1940-1941 period. The outbreak of the
European war overrode financial restraints and prompted the army to con-
duct an ordered and structured program of large-scale peacetime maneu-
vers. The first of these, conducted in August 1940, revealed manifold short-
comings that ranged from poor training and signals communications to
inadequate artillery support. Army observers concluded that most troops
required further basic training." More than 350,000 troops Joined the
September 1941 Louisiana maneuvers, the largest peacetime maneuvers in
U.S. history. Lt. Gen. Lesley J. McNair, the Army Ground Forces (AGF)
commander, insisted on closely replicating combat conditions and demand-
ed frank honesty in appraising troop performance. 2 The exercise identified
serious flaws in preparation, including poor reconnaissance, small-unit tac-
tics, combat intelligence, and communications. 13 The Carolina maneuvers
that followed in November 1941 confirmed the findings of previous exer-
cises and led General McNair to conclude that the army had only limited
combat capabilities and required extensive retraining before it would be
combat ready. 14 Thus in the spring of 1942 the U.S. Army went back to
basic training to rectify the deficiencies. The army's willingness to evaluate
critically its performance on maneuvers allowed significant enhancement
of training quality before the commitment of U.S. ground forces to combat
(in North Africa) late in 1942.
As it experienced unprecedented expansion in 1940-1941, the army
also underwent simultaneous reorganization as it raised new types of for-
mations, restructured existing units, and modernized its equipment all in
the light of German successes. In this period the army formed its first
armored divisions. As with the British, however, the Americans initially
organized their armored formations poorly: the units were too large,
than intimate combination of arms, was the key to the German blitzkrieg
success.
Among new ground forces raised during 1940-1941 were paratrooper
and glider infantry units. The army had only minimally experimented with
airborne troops prior to 1939; so it required the bold German employment
of airborne forces in northwest Europe in May 1940 to make the army
