378
Normandy 1944
conditions allowed, the Germans erected additional defenses behind the
MLR and withdrew troops into these rearward positions. These defensive
tactical adaptations emerged in the classic bottom-up, top-down decentral-
ized pattern of German innovation as adaptation emerged ad hoc unit by
unit during June. After collection and analysis of after-action reports, the
German command published guidelines in early July for dispersed deep
defense advocating that only one-third of available troops should hold the
MLR and that the remainder should man additional positions to the rear. 20
Extended defense in depth curtailed German losses (see Table 10.1) and
contributed directly to the defeat of Montgomery's GOODWOOD offen-
sive (18-20 July).21 Extreme dispersion reduced German losses from
artillery and aerial bombardment and at the same time made it even harder
for Allied forces to penetrate German defenses.
The Germans also adapted to offset Allied numerical and material
superiority as well as growing fighting power and combat proficiency. So
powerful did Allied artillery become in Normandy that German troops soon
learned that only instant counterattack, before Allied troops could consoli-
date and register fire, could retake objectives. 22 In Normandy, platoon-
strength local counterattacks often materialized within fifteen minutes of
the loss of an objective, and in company and battalion strength within the
hour.23
German troops also adapted to minimize the impact of Allied com-
mand of the air, which caused them unprecedented difficulties. Troops
learned through trial and error the need for strict radio discipline and to
locate radio equipment away from command headquarters to minimize
attacks on command and control facilities. Initial failure to adopt counter-
measures had led to the neutralization of the headquarters of Panzer Group
West by air attack on 10 June 24 Thereafter, the Germans adopted elaborate
security measures to safeguard command and control facilities. 25
By 1944, coordinated defensive artillery fire had become the backbone
of the German defense on the thinly held Eastern Front, where troop densi-
ties were often half those attained in Normandy. Although the Germans
established a heavy concentration of artillery in Normandy, Allied air
power and German supply shortages rendered this artillery ineffectual and
it was rarely able to help the German defense. 26 Air attacks dictated that
guns had to be relocated often and adopt elaborate camouflage and conceal-
ment. 27 This threat forced the Germans to abandon massed fire and resort to
"shoot-and-scoot" tactics, random "sprinkling fire" or "roving fire" involv-
ing individual guns.28 At the same time ammunition shortages prevented
the heavy barrages needed to repel Allied attacks. Massed fire was thus
rare, and gunners increasingly abandoned counterbattery fire entirely.29
Moreover, poor ground observation, lack of air observation or recent aerial
photoreconnaissance, and inadequate communications all hampered
Germany: The Defeat of the Westheer
379
German artillery operations. German gunners were rarely able to provide
effective fire support. 30
In the absence of strong artillery support German troops relied heavily
on mortars, which they used to great effect, for fire support in Normandy. 31
The Germans had more and larger caliber mortars than the Allies, and
because mortars were more mobile and more easily concealed they were
less vulnerable to air attack than artillery. The Germans also made increas-
ing use of the Nebelwerfer, the mobile, multibarreled rocket launcher.
Opposite the British sector, the Germans soon established the heaviest con-
centration of Nebelwerfer batteries yet seen in the war.32 These weapons
could bring down such rapid massed fire that Allied troops came to dread
their "stonks" —and the characteristic, and demoralizing, wail of the pro-
jectiles in flight-which often single-handedly stopped Anglo-Canadian
assaults.33 Yet the weapon's short range, ravenous ammunition consump-
tion, and telltale dust cloud on firing (which made them vulnerable to
detection and neutralization) were significant tactical limitations. With
Allied domination of the skies, the launcher batteries suffered heavy
losses. 34
Since Allied offensive striking power had increased so much, German
infantry often could not hold the line without strong fire support. To com-
pensate for inadequate artillery support, the Germans increasingly deployed
forward armor, assault guns, and tank destroyers to support the infantry,
even in the forward outpost line. Although this forward concentration
shored up the German defense, it increased equipment losses. 35 Allied air
attacks also inflicted a steady toll on German soft-skinned vehicles-some
seventy-five trucks a day on average in June. The Germans adopted numer-
ous passive countermeasures-
-creating "flak avenues," maintained wide
distances between vehicles in convoys, and relegated supply runs to night-
time-yet such measures could only marginally reduce loss rates. The
heavy German motor vehicle losses from a combination of air attacks and
increased accident rates that accompanied nocturnal supply operations
reduced German mobility and proved to be the most debilitating problem.
The Germans resorted to all kinds of improvisations and expedients to off-
set dwindling mobility, pressing captured vehicles into service, rounding up
horses and carts, making extensive use of bicycles, and even stealing vehi-
cles. 36
German troops skillfully employed tactical deception to inflate their
own strength and to confuse the enemy. Aware of the Allied propensity to
bombard forward slopes, troops often constructed dummy forward-slope
positions to attract Allied fire while remaining protected in reverse-slope
positions.37 The Germans were also experts in camouflaging heavy
weapons and in ambushing the enemy.
Organizational improvisation was commonplace in the Heer, as its
