74
Preparation: 1919-1944
repetition of the chaos that accompanied the replacement provisions during
World War I, but at the price of impeding efforts to sustain cohesion,
morale, and combat effectiveness.22 The replacement system was a vicious
circle that resulted in unnecessarily heavy casualties: heavy losses brought
large numbers of undertrained replacements, which in turn brought higher
casualties that brought even more replacements.23
Initial army manpower allocation priorities exacerbated the pernicious
impact of the replacement system on combat effectiveness. The USAAC,
now redesignated the Army Air Force (USAAF), the ASF, and the airborne
and special forces received draft selection priority and thus siphoned off the
most skilled and talented personnel. The AGF thus received relatively less
educated, less skilled, and less physically fit personnel. Within the AGF,
disproportionate numbers of the highest rated personnel also went to the
technical and mechanized branches, leaving the infantry with lower quality
recruits. This mobilization policy eroded infantry quality.24
Before it could take the offensive the army required further expansion
and reorganization. The development of a powerful, independent tank arm
was a vital prerequisite for offensive action. The army formed an independ-
ent Armored Force in July 1940 and by December 1941 it had raised five
armored divisions that participated in the 1941 maneuvers as a unified tank
corps,25 During 1940-1942 the Armored Force developed a doctrine to
govern the organization, training, and mission of armor. This doctrine
rejected the British approach of armor specialization and direct tank-to-
tank combat within a strategy of attrition. Since armor had the potential to
be both highly mobile and strong in firepower it appealed equally to
American advocates of attrition and mobility and thus generated less con-
troversy than it did in the British military. The German blitzkrieg victories,
though, led to the gradual triumph of an armored doctrine that utilized the
tank in a mobile exploitation role rather than in a breakthrough role.
If the mission of armor was exploitation, what weapon should be used
to stop enemy armor? It was only after the collapse of France that the army
seriously considered the question of stopping the tank. Yet the army's
offensive orientation robbed it of any significant antitank capability, and
during 1942 it desperately needed both an effective antitank weapon and a
suitable doctrine to halt the German blitzkrieg.26 It developed a new offen-
sive antitank weapon-the tank destroyer, a self-propelled antitank gun
that, theoretically, married mobility, speed, and firepower. The Tank
Destroyer Center activated at Fort Meade, Maryland, developed doctrine
during 1942 that called for large tank destroyer groups to seek out and
destroy enemy armor.?? Although the tank destroyer's speed, mobility, and
firepower reflected a compromise between competing doctrines of mobility
and annihilation, intense controversy raged over the relative merits of tank
destroyers versus towed antitank guns. General McNair's powerful support
of the tank destroyer, however, ensured the centralization of divisional anti-
tank battalions into pooled tank destroyer groups in 1942.28
The United States, 1939-1944: The Leviathan Awakens
75
The emphasis on tank destroyers and the army's disdain for purely
defensive weapons meant that the army devoted few resources to antitank
gun development.29 Thus U.S. infantry lacked antitank capability early in
the war and had to rely on the obsolete 37mm M2 gun. Moreover, the
army's wartime record of antitank gun procurement was unimpressive. The
improved 57mm M1 introduced in 1942, essentially a copy of the British 6-
pounder gun, remained the primary antitank gun of U.S. infantry through-
out the war. Towed-gun battalions, meanwhile, deployed a 75mm antitank
gun, modified from an outdated foreign field gun, that lacked penetration.
Poor antitank capability left the infantry vulnerable to the quick local com-
bined-arms counterattacks that were integral to German defensive tactics. 30
Deprived of resources for antitank guns, the army nonetheless displayed
considerable ingenuity in developing a novel and cheap infantry antitank
weapon-the "bazooka" hollow-charge rocket launcher. The bazooka first
used in action late in 1942 in Tunisia, where it proved a valuable and cost-
effective antitank weapon, and thereafter it saw wide use. 31
Offensive action by the army also required amphibious capability. The
heavy commitment of the U.S. Marine Corps to the Pacific led the army to
rain four infantry divisions for amphibious assault during 1941-1942 and
to organize specialized amphibious engineer brigades. 32 But to undertake
offensive action the AGF required extensive logistic support. During early
mobilization the buildup of combat arms took precedence over support
services. While U.S. forces engaged in bitter defensive fighting in 1942 in
the Pacific, inadequate logistic support initially hampered operations. By
late 1942, however, the expansion of the ASF had caught up with that of the
AGE, and from 1943 the army experienced lavish logistic support.
Another prerequisite for an offensive army was the provision of effec-
tive tactical air support. Yet air force resistance and lack of suitable aircraft
meant that no workable air-ground system emerged prior to the commit-
ment of U.S. troops to combat in the European Theater of Operations
(ETO). The 1940-1941 maneuvers demonstrated that command and control
difficulties presented many obstacles to effective air-ground coordination. 33
These trials led to the issuance of Field Manual 31-35 in April 1942 that
established Air Support Commands (ASCs) based on the British system
developed in the western desert during 1941.34 Unfortunately FM 31-35
failed to create a workable ground-air support system. It was cumbersome
and flawed in conception and execution. The ASC structure was decentral-
ized and thus had air assets dispersed to army corps commanders, who pro-
vided close air support at the expense of battlefield interdiction. Most seri-
ously, doctrine prevented concentrated employment of air power in support
of the ground battle. 35
A critical shortage of shipping space and General McNair's commit-
ment to economy brought a major streamlining of the army during 1942-
1943. This rationalization trimmed the manpower and increased the fire-
power of the army shipped overseas. Smaller, more compact units were
