388
Normandy 194t
When the Germans failed to defeat the Allies on the beaches, they
could only fight a protracted defense in the West if adequate supplies of
fuel and munitions were forthcoming from the Reich. 70 Given fuel and
transport shortages, planned German troop redeployments to Normandy
grossly exceeded the available trucking capacity and the German ability to
supply these formations once they were committed to combat.71 The
Germans thus established priorities in getting troops to Normandy to cor-
don off the Allies in as small a bridgehead as possible. Once the troops had
arrived, the Germans tried as best they could to supply the forces commit-
ted.
Allied air attacks hampered German supply operations so much that
the Quartermaster General West could deliver only a fraction of the sup-
plies consumed at the front. For the Germans there never were sufficient
supplies to sustain offensive action.73 Their gasoline situation rapidly
became critical because they depleted their entire strategic fuel (gasoline)
come tragic du
reserve by 13 June, and the German forces could hardly deal with the
destruction of the main German fuel depot at Gennevilles (outside Paris) on
22 June. 74 Thereafter only stringent rationing, diversion of fuel from other
field commands, and daily deliveries from Germany kept German forces in
Within the first week of the invasion, the Germans had realized that
only a dramatic improvement in their supply situation could allow a pro-
tracted defense of Normandy. German quartermaster units had to improvise
to speed the flow of supplies even as they sought to restore limited rail
communications to Normandy. In the first week of the invasion, the
Germans could not run a single supply train into Normandy across the
Seine and Loire. Thereafter, they abandoned their uncoordinated and scat-
tered rail repair operations and focused on opening-and keeping open—
two major rail arteries into Normandy, the Paris-Versailles-Dreux-Vieux-
Surdon line from the east and the Tours-Le Mans-Alençon-Sees-Vieux-
Surdon line from the south, lines that served the major German supply
depots in the Le Mans-Alençon area. Frantic work reopened these two lines
during the second week of the invasion. 76
In late June the German logistical situation in Normandy improved as
rail movement into Normandy recommenced, large-scale transport got
under way, and combat units collected supplies from rear depots.?7 In late
June, the Germans began ferrying operations across the Seine that, during
July, delivered a major proportion of the supplies to reach Normandy. 78
With the reopening of rail communications, the flow of supplies to central
Normandy increased steadily in July. But the major German problem
remained the shipment of these supplies from railheads and loading docks
to the front as Allied air attacks inflicted a heavy toll on German motor
transport.?9 Only by acquiring supplies on their own could combat units
Germany: The Defeat of the Westheer
389
compensate for the quartermaster service's dwindling ability to get stocks
from the rear to the front. 80
During July the logistic situation of the Germans on their eastern flank,
where Panzer Group West opposed the British and Canadians, slowly
improved as rail movement was restored to Dreux and Verneuil and as fer-
rying operations across the Seine increased the flow of supplies into eastern
Normandy. Allied air forces were unable to neutralize the Seine ferrying
operations because the boats were much harder to hit than bridges or rail
lines, and they operated mainly at night. But on the Germans' western
flank, where the Seventh Army opposed the Americans at St. Lô, there was
no parallel improvement in logistics during July; to the contrary, the
decline continued: ferrying was far less significant, supply distances
greater, and communications lines less developed. But it was the German
forces' inability to sustain rail deliveries across the Loire River that directly
contributed to the collapse of the St. Lô front in late July.
The catalyst for an ultimately fatal decline in the Seventh Army's sup-
ply situation on the U.S. sector was the renewed destruction of the railway
bridge and marshaling yards at Tours on 15 July. After they had reopened in
mid-June, the Tours bridges had become the supply lifeline for the Seventh
Army. 81 At the same time that bombing reclosed the Tours supply artery,
growing truck losses reduced the supply service's ability to resupply the
Seventh Army by road. The few lateral roads in western Normandy and the
greater distances involved made resupplying the Seventh Army more diffi-
cult than supplying Panzer Group West on the eastern flank, and thus a
smaller proportion of supplies dispatched to the Seventh Army made it to
the front. During July, the Seventh Army became increasingly dependent on
daily rail and ferry deliveries of fuel to keep it mobile and upon its own
truck columns to transship supplies from railheads and ports. 82
The destruction of the Tours artery undermined the Seventh Army's
logistic position because the Quartermaster General West could not com-
pensate for the interruption to rail delivery of fuel by increased road deliv-
ery. German fuel stocks on the St. Lô front thus dwindled at the very
moment that U.S. forces launched COBRA on 25 July. 83 After frenetic
work, the Germans had reopened the Tours rail bridge on 23 July, too late
to resupply the Seventh Army before the U.S. attack. In the meantime,
replenishing Panzer Group West after its GOODWOOD expenditures
meant that the Quartermaster General West was only able to dispatch gaso-
line by road to the Seventh Army on one day between 18 and 25 July. 84 As
a result, on the eve of COBRA German fuel stocks on the St. Lô sector had
sunk perilously low: At average consumption rates, the LXXXIV Corps had
less than two days' supply left. 85
The closure of the Tours rail route also had an important, if indirect,
impact on the Seventh Army's ammunition supphes. To decrease tum-
