202
Preparation: 1919-1944
pled with the spectacular conquests of 1939-1941, exacerbated the German
miltary's traditional disdain of Soviet/Russian military capabilities.
Whereas the Reichswehr had soberly assessed the military capabilities of
potential opponents, the Wehrmacht increasingly embraced ideological and
racial rhetoric, 35 The rapid destruction of Poland merely reinforced tradi-
tional German contempt for Slavic martial qualities. Thus the BAR-
BAROSSA plan lacked the sober assessment that characterized Reichswehr
planning. Moreover, the effects of Stalin's military purges-demonstrated
by Finland's humiliation of Soviet arms in the 1939-1940 Winter War—
suggested easy German successes. (At the same time, however, the
Germans ignored contrary evidence provided by Soviet victory over Japan
at Khalkin Gol in the Far East during the summer of 1939.)36 Germany's
brilliant blitzkrieg conquests thus bred arrogance, appeared to validate nazi
racism, and denigrated Soviet military capabilities.37 Indeed, the
Wehrmacht had become so intoxicated with success that it was not unduly
alarmed by its lack of information about the force structure, military poten-
tial, and staying power of the Soviet Union. Such inadequate intelligence
led the Germans seriously to underestimate Soviet military strength and
resilience, and also meant they failed to detect the Soviet buildup of
reserves deep within the Soviet Union. 38
The conquest of Yugoslavia and Greece in April 1941, which interrupt-
ed BARBAROSSA preparations, marked the epitome of blitzkrieg.
Germany launched a hastily prepared invasion with troops drawn from all
over the Nazi empire. Yugoslavia's twenty-eight-division army lacked
modern equipment and suffered from internal ethnic tensions, and its near
encirclement by Axis countries gave the Germans an immense strategic
advantage. The Greek Army was much smaller but equally backward. The
rapidity with which Germany conquered the Balkans demonstrated that the
Heer had considerably enhanced its combat effectiveness since Poland and
France. Indeed, close ground-air coordination characterized German opera-
tions in the Balkans: intimate liaison allowed powerful air support to com-
pensate for the obstacles to artillery support in the Greek mountains. 39 That
Germany overwhelmed resistance in the field in three weeks without spe-
cial preparation reflected the high standard of coordination and training that
the Heer had reached by spring 1941. Concluding the Balkan campaign
was the German airborne conquest of Crete, the first truly strategic employ-
ment of airborne forces. But here Germany gained a Pyrrhic victory.
German casualties were heavy, and Hitler misinterpreted the lessons of
Crete and never again employed airborne forces en masse instead of limit-
ing their future use to less ambitious tactical missions. As a result, after
Crete, the Luftwaffe gradually transformed its paratroop arm into another
elite ground infantry force. 40
Despite its increase to 208 divisions, in June 1941 the Heer was only
marginally more powerful than it had been in May 1940. Even though par-
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
203
tial reequipment had been carried out, there was little increase in armor, air-
craft, or artillery strength. The biggest improvement was increased stan-
dardization and a better quality of leadership. But the army remained too
large; serious officer shortages persisted, especially in the general staff;
units remained understrength and underequipped; many divisions still used
captured weapons and motor vehicles; and antitank ammunition were still
especially tight due to raw material shortages. At the same time, overexpan-
sion had prevented the replacement army from raising its training capacity,
so divisions now shared training units and the Heer lacked a large pool of
replacements.41
The German failure to increase production and reequip was a conse-
quence of political decisions by Hitler. In retrospect, the year between the
fall of France and BARBAROSSA was a lost period. The Heer underwent
greater psychological changes as it prepared for BARBAROSSA. For the
first time, the officer corps systematically inculcated a National Socialist
voriaview to condition troops for the genocidal struggle ahead. 42 BAR-
BAROSSA was to be the largest military operation in history as Germany
committed 153 of its 208 divisions and 3.3 million troops for a short, brutal
summer blitzkrieg campaign to overwhelm the Soviet Union. But given
that country's size, population, industrial potential, and the savage war the
eastern army (or Ostheer) was to wage, Germany lacked the resources to
deteat the Soviet Union in a single summer campaign. Dismissing Soviet
military capabilities, Germany abandoned use of the political subversion
that had aided the German victory against Russia during World War I and to
Which Stalin's unpopular regime remained vulnerable. Blinded by racism
and overconfidence, Hitler and his generals failed to realize that waging
genocide would inevitably intensify Soviet resistance and rally the Soviet
peoples behind Stalin's regime.43
Germany thus greatly underestimated the size and resilience of the Red
Army 44 In fact, in anticipation of a quick ground victory, Hitler actually
scaled back arms and ammunition production for the army during summer
of 1941.45 The war games had recognized the massive frontage and depth
of penetration required if BARBAROSSA were to succeed, and the army
had addressed, however inadequat Dau? problems this presented. It
expanded signals units to allow long-distance communication, doubled its
strategic motor transport reserve, acquired thousands of Polish horse-drawn
carts to improve infantry mobility, ini patos railway troops to convert the
soviet rail net to German track gauge, and, as an interm measure, built 170
I natoges to the soviet gauge.46 Such measures considerably expanded
German logistic resources, but were inadequate for the immense task out-
-paul the Soviet Union did not quickly conapse, te ostheer would sun
ply lack the logistics base-
-transport, fuel, and munitions—for victory in a
single summer campaign. As well, bridging and radio equipment and prime
movers all remained in short supply. To compensate for these deficiencies
