200
Preparation: 1919-1944
enhanced combined-arms capabilities. The OKH also revised training man-
uals to emphasize greater coordination 24 The result was better organized,
balanced, and coordinated mechanized forces.
During 1940 the Heer underwent few major doctrinal, organizational,
or equipment changes; its great victories provided little impetus for exten-
sive or radical transformation. Nevertheless, modest reform and reorganiza-
tion continued, including the expansion of assault gun formations to
increase provision of armor for the infantry.25 The Heer also raised junior
leadership standards and retrained reservists and recruits to the highest
standards. Consequently, by summer 1941 the Heer had become exception-
ally well trained. At the same time, while the army's overall equipment sit-
uation remained unsatisfactory, partial reequipment occurred as uniformity
increased and several excellent new weapons entered service. 26
In February 1941, Hitler reluctantly committed a small motorized force
led by an energetic and competent young commander, Erwin Rommel, to
shore up his Italian ally since its position in North Africa had disintegrated
after a crippling winter 1940-1941 defeat by the British in Libya. Hitler's
strategic goals did not encompass North Africa, and Germany lacked forces
even remotely prepared for Mediterranean service.27 Once it was commit-
ted events forced Hitler to reinforce German strength in Libya, from which
emerged the famous Africa Corps. Unique desert conditions brought new
challenges for German troops and denied them many of the advantages
they were accustomed to. Rommel's forces operated along extended and
tenuous lines of communication, often without air superiority, and with
troops untrained and ill equipped for desert warfare. Because Libya con-
tained only one all-weather road, the Via Balbia, and cross-desert tracks
were difficult to traverse, poor communications restricted most combat to
the narrow coastal plain. At the same time, desert haze, dust clouds, and
sandstorms kicked up by hot winds obstructed observation and hampered
concealment. 28
The Africa Corps adapted rapidly to desert conditions during combat
and largely without formal retraining. Starved by higher neglect and
overextended lines of communication, the troops speedily adapted to the
exigencies of terrain and climate to become proficient desert fighters within
a few months. Standard German tactics often proved inappropriate in the
desert, where armor enjoyed even greater prominence and where fluid
maneuver warfare was the norm.
Lack of air cover and the difficulties of
camouflage forced German troops to learn the need for dispersion.
Moreover, though given a defensive mission, doctrine said relatively little
about desert defense where reverse slopes were uncommon. Tactically, the
Africa Corps quickly learned from experience to eliminate British armor
first by offensive defense. Mechanized combined-arms battle groups built
around armored wedges (Panzerkeile) echeloned in depth learned to retire
when they encountered British armor, and lure them onto novel antitank
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
201
screens reinforced by heavy antiaircraft guns that outranged British armor
and routinely shattered British tank regiments before the summer of 1942.29
The Africa Corps experimented and retrained during the lull between
the battles of the summer and of fall 1941, and by spring 1942 had become
a proficient desert force.30 The superior fieldcraft displayed by the Africa
Corps reflected the sophistication of German holistic combined-arms doc-
trine. German troops reconnoitered aggressively and routinely employed
tacuical deception to disguise their attacks. In fact, the open terrain so ham-
pered concealment that deception became much more important than in
Europe. Lack of firepower and ammunition shortages also meant that it was
in the desert the Germans would first employ concentrated artillery support.
Almost always understrength, the Africa Corps relied heavily on artillery
fire for its offensive and defensive power-even though soft sand reduced
shells' effectiveness.31 Moreover, good aerial reconnaissance and excellent
wireless interception provided valuable intelligence that gave the Germans
an edge in the desert during 1941-1942.
The Africa Corps assessed British capabilities much more accurately
than vice versa. Rommel drew on assessments of British performance in
Scandinavia and France as inept, methodical, slow, and inflexible. He con-
cluded that the boldness that led to Wavell's stunning victory over the
Italians was atypical and that, therefore, the British remained vulnerable to
fast-paced maneuver war. 32 German involvement in North Africa brought
extensive exposure to British combat techniques, and, at the same time,
German professionalism, flexibility, and ingenuity all directly contributed
to the stunning early Axis victories in the desert.
Hitler's ambitious plans to annihilate the Soviet Union (Operation
BARBAROSSA) in a racial struggle that would acquire the Lebensraum
needed to guarantee a thousand-year Reich ended the consolidation process
begun in 1940. Hitler demanded an even larger army to effect his grandiose
strategic designs. During winter of 1940-1941 the Heer thus added another
sixty-seven divisions to its order of battle. This rapid renewed expansion
once again temporarily reduced the Heer's combat efficiency and left the
army understrength and without reserves. 33 The envisaged scale and nature
of BARBAROSSA wrought important changes to the army's character and
organization. Hitler conceived the campaign as an ideological and racial
Nar of extermination against the Soviet Union, Bolsheviks, Slavs, and
Jews the culmination of his genocidal master plan.34 The scope of the
undertaking envisioned thus stretched German resources to the limit as the
Wehrmacht prepared during the spring of 1941 for the impending cam-
The most significant change in the character of the Wehrmacht was its
increasing nazification. Politicization was a double-edged sword that both
enhanced and eroded German combat effectiveness, however. Nazi racism
inflated German perceptions of their military superiority, which when cou-
