trocuction
committed by a minority of Nazi fanatics. Until the emergence of the new
military history in the 1970s and 1980s, scholarship presented a sanitized
view of the German armed forces as a thoroughly professional and largely
apolitical military force.20 The West's need to present a united front against
communism also muted critical Anglo-American appraisal of Allied
wartime combat effectiveness. The authors of the numerous Allied official
histories, for example, were generally selected because of their sympathy
toward their own respective military institutions and their aims, values, and
reputations. Thus the official histories often lacked critical analysis of
Allied performance. 21
The end of the Cold War in the late 1980s has finally allowed histori-
ans to reexamine World War II divorced from the Cold War's ideological
imperatives. Historical understanding of the war began to change in three
significant ways. First, fueled by the opening of Soviet archives, historians
have begun to reevaluate-and reemphasize-the enormous Soviet contri-
bution to Allied victory. Recent scholarship has emphasized the Red
Army's adaptability and growing combat effectiveness and has demonstrat-
ed that the war on the Eastern Front was far less one-sided than the German
generals had us believe.22 Second, historians also began to present more
balanced assessments of the character, capabilities, and effectiveness of the
Heer. Recent scholarship has stressed the continuity of poor German strate-
gic planning and decisionmaking throughout the 1914-1945 period and the
weakness of German battlefield intelligence.23 New studies have also reem-
phasized the role of ideology, and specifically the pervasiveness of nazism,
within the German military.24 Recent research on the Eastern Front, for
instance, has illustrated the process of intense nazification that occurred to
condition the Heer for an ideological and racial war of extermination.
These studies have demonstrated that most of the German army in the east,
the Ostheer, either directly participated in, or were complicit in, nazi atroci-
ties. 25
Third, historians have begun to reappraise the performance and combat
effectiveness of the Western Allies. Recent works have thus been much
more critical of Allied performance than the official histories.26 These stud-
ies have emphasized the Allies muddling through to victory via over-
whelming resources and massive firepower.27 Yet this scholarship has
largely failed to differentiate among the relative combat capabilities of the
U.S., British, and Canadian militaries. Only in the past five years has pio-
neering research suggested that the U.S. Army adapted more quickly and
better, and therefore ultimately performed more effectively than its Anglo-
Canadian counterparts. 28
Another major weakness of the existing literature on World War II is
that few works have attempted to integrate analysis of the effectiveness of
military organizations into operational narratives. How, for example, did
doctrine, tactics, organization, and manpower policies actually affect the
Introduction
course of combat on the Normandy battlefield? The character, conduct, and
outcome of any campaign can only be understood with reference to the
organization, military thought, culture, doctrine, equipment, training, and
leadership of the protagonists as forged by historical experience and refined
by the ordeal of war.
The second part of this study thus evaluates the performance of the
U.S., British, Canadian, and German militaries in the 1944 Normandy
Campaign. This was the major campaign of the war in the European theater
and it tested the efficacy of each combatant's preparation as well as their
ability to adapt in the field. These chapters explore how prevailing doctrine,
tactics, equipment, organization, and manpower policies-the sum of each
armed forces preparation-shaped the outcome of the struggle, while
simultaneously examining the actual process of adaptation by the combat-
ants on the Normandy battlefield.
The 1944 Normandy Campaign is a particularly appropriate case study
through which to examine the theme of wartime military adaptation.
During its time span two non-European powers, the United States and the
Soviet Union, eclipsed the European great powers and emerged as the two
superpowers of the postwar era. The Normandy campaign, therefore, wit-
nessed not only the defeat of Nazi Germany but also the decline of Europe.
Great Britain, while ostensibly a victor, effectively emerged from the war a
loser, a fate starkly illuminated by the 1956 Suez debacle. The second front
thus represented Britain's last opportunity during the war to preserve at
least a semblance of its former greatness through feats of arms on the bat-
tlefield. The Normandy Campaign, therefore, offers an excellent case study
of institutional barriers to flexibility and the historical importance of adapt-
ability for the effective preservation of national security.
Moreover, existing literature on the Normandy Campaign reflects the
prevailing deficiencies in the scholarship on World War II. Two special lim-
itations plague the voluminous literature on the campaign. The first is the
lack of scholarly comparative analysis of Allied performance in Normanay.
Indeed, a "British school' has powerfully informed Anglo-American schol-
arship on the campaign. This school has elevated British accomplishments,
exaggerated the success of Field Marshal Montgomery's theater strategy,
and criticized the American effort for amateurism and for failing to heed
the advice of the more experienced British. 29
The second limitation is the unsatisfactory character of literature on the
German defense of the west. Anglo-American works are often either poorly
grounded in primary research, or else the credibility of the sources is sus-
pect. 30 Other scholarship is problematic because its avowed purpose is an
explanation of German defeat-and no military looks good in defeat.
Historians have thus focused on supposed German combat weaknesses
without concomitant attention to the grave logistic deficiencies that were,
as this book illustrates, central to German defeat. 31 German literature, on
