Cherbour
St Preme Felie
St
Croix
Carteret
Quine ville
Crisbecq
4th)
Azeville
Eglise
Portbail
The United States
Bridgehead,
D-Day to 24 July 1944
Miles
Kilometers
15
FIRST AMERICAN ARMY
UTAH
Grandcamp Pt du Hoc
[29thl
igny
30th
83d
• Pz Lehr
Marigny
CORPS
SEVENTH ARMY
Coutances •
- La Haye
du Puits
9th
2a SS Pz/
Lessay
243d 01 Peners 17th SS
D-Day lodgement
Captured, 7-10 June
Captured, 11-17 June
Captured, 18-30 June
Captured, 1-24 July
tion that generated the joint-service coordination necessary for a successful
amphibious assault against strong opposition. Massive fire support, mastery
of the seas and skies, numerical superiority, and the achievement of sur-
prise all materially aided success. Powerful air and naval fire support
directed by aerial observers and naval fire control parties ashore suppressed
enemy defenses, and accurate destroyer fire from close inshore provided
crucial support to the beleaguered troops at Omaha.? The innovative use of
tank and artillery fire from landing craft, for which new procedures and
extensive rehearsal was necessary, also helped to suppress enemy fire dur-
ing the approach after the preliminary bombardment had lifted. 8 Finally,
g00d combined-arms coordination learned through intensive preparation
and rehearsal greatly assisted success, while the expanded engineer special
brigades rapidly cleared and organized beaches for large-scale unloading
operations.
But after D-Day signs of flaws in U.S. preparation surfaced. Gen.
"Lightning" Joe Collin's VII Corps made slow progress north from Utah
Beach toward Cherbourg as a combination of tenacious enemy resistance
and the breadth of the offensive temporarily checked the 4th Division's
advance on Montebourg. 10 Nor could Collins's troops make much headway
West or south due to poor coordination and drive in the green 90th Division
and as German reserves in the Cotentin redeployed to block the U.S.
advance. 11
The advance of Mai. Gen. Leonard T. Gerow's V Corps on St. Lô from
Omaha Beach was likewise slow. After D-Day, the lst and 29th Divisions
battered the German 352d Division, and when Isigny fell on 9 June few
enemy troops barred the way to St. Lô.12 Yet, the American advance
remained methodical, cautious, and slow, largely due to prudent recogni-
tion of German tactical skill. Recklessness, for example, led to the defeat of
3 XIX US
CORPS
M35thl 29th Sthl
3d Para
PARA
ILVI
behind Utah Beach and astride the Merderet River to protect landing troops
until they had established themselves ashore. The drops were widely scat-
tered, reflecting the inherent hazard of airborne operations. Dispersion,
however, also proved beneficial because it obscured the focal points and
objectives of the drop, and thus hindered German countermeasures and
the beach, and a stronger German defense brought the landing close to fail-
ure. 4 Ultimately, sheer numbers, toughness, and heroism, backed by mur-
derous short-range naval gunfire, overwhelmed the defenders.$
The Americans also used airborne forces extensively to support their
amphibious assault. Having learned from experience in the Mediterranean,
terrain, the failure of the preliminary bombardment, the loss of most assault
The United States: The Leviathan Triumphant
273
