84
Preparation: 1919-1944
ammunition and dissipating the effectiveness of the bombardment. The
artillery proved effective in Tunisia, but the U.S. Army realized it could be
even more efficient. 87
The army's embryonic replacement system was also found wanting
during the Tunisian campaign. Replacement provision was poorly coordi-
nated, and even though it met total replacement needs, infantry shortages
developed during winter 1942-1943 due to the War Department's underes-
timation of both casualty rates and the proportion of casualties suffered by
the infantry.88 In addition, many replacements found themselves siphoned
off into unofficial provisional units that proliferated in the face of many
unexpected needs. Just as serious was the replacements' quality, which was
often unsatisfactory. Many replacements arrived undertrained, and there-
after their morale and discipline dwindled as they languished at rear depots.
Replacement provision also proved disorganized and wasteful, with the
misassignment of specialists as infantry-and vice versa. As a result of
these flaws, a combat unit would experience great difficulties in successful-
ly integrating replacements before they became casualties. 89
The experience in Tunisia did, however, reveal important strengths.
The campaign demonstrated the resilience and recuperative strength of U.S.
ground forces. More important, it illuminated a flexibility, originality, and
adaptability that the enemy grudgingly recognized. Indeed, as Rommel
wrote of them, "the American generals showed themselves to be very
advanced in the tactical handling of their forces. ... The Americans, it is
fair to say, profited far more than the British from their experience in
Africa."90
In fact, the U.S. Army showed the determination to examine its per-
formance in detail both during and immediately after the campaign. This
drive to learn lessons allowed the army to correct many of the weaknesses
displayed in Tunisia in the year preceding Normandy landings.
The army
that returned to northwest Europe on 6 June 1944 was far superior to the
one that had landed in North Africa eighteen months earlier.
In particular, the defeat at Kasserine Pass brought a major shakeup in
air-ground cooperation. The setback starkly illuminated the inadequacy of
existing doctrine and led to the scrapping of FM 31-35 and the appointment
of British Air Marshal Coningham as
commander of the Allied
Northwestern African Tactical Air Force (NATAF). This integration led the
Americans to adopt the RAF's combat-proven direct-control system.
Coningham assigned NATAF the primary mission of destroying enemy air
power in the final months of the Tunisian campaign. It took defeat at
Kasserine and exposure to the RAF's western desert air support system to
force the USAA to address realistically the problem of supporting ground
forces by direct air attack. A revised air-ground doctrine, FM 100-20,
grounded in TORCH's combat experience, emerged in July 1943 and gov-
erned U.S. close air support operations for the rest of the war. The new doc-
The United States, 1939-1944: The Leviathan Awakens
85
trine abandoned distribution and subordination in favor of centralization
and coequality in status between air and ground forces to restore
flexibility.91
By the end of the Tunisian campaign, the performance of many U.S.
ground units showed discernible improvement. In particular, the infantry
learned to reduce losses by closely following creeping barrages, while
improved night fighting skills allowed troops to obtain jumping-off posi-
tions with fewer casualties and to achieve surprise more often.92 Troops
also made unexpected use of smoke for both offense and defense. 93
The subsequent conquest of Sicily (Operation HUSKY) during July-
August 1943 confirmed the lessons derived from Tunisia. The perceived
failure of U.S. arms in North Africa led Gen. Sir Harold Alexander, com-
mander-in-chief of the British 15th Army Group, to assign General Patton's
U.S. Seventh Army a secondary role of flank protection for General
Montgomery's British Eighth Army in HUSKY.94 Montgomery's slow
progress in the face of stubborn German resistance, however, forced
Alexander to give Patton greater operational freedom as the campaign
developed. As a result, the Americans beat the British to Messina, demon-
strating the growing firepower, mobility, and proficiency of U.S. troops.95
HUSKY confirmed again that the army had not yet mastered airborne
warfare; U.S. paratroopers made a poor showing in Sicily. Alexander had
given Allied airborne forces a major role in HUSKY to drop inland and bar
the advance of German reserves while assault troops secured a viable
lodgement. But inexperienced transport pilots badly scattered the drop of
the U.S. 505th Parachute Regiment on the first day of a HUSKY, and a later
drop by the 504th Regiment went disastrously awry. Routed over the inva-
sion fleet, friendly antiaircraft fire savaged and scattered the transports: a
day later less than one-quarter of the regiment had been able to assemble.96
Sicily demonstrated that the Allies still had a lot to learn about the effective
employment of airborne forces, the campaign confirming what Tunisia had
suggested— that airborne forces had to be employed en masse with well-
trained transport and glider crews for less ambitious tactical objectives.
The proficiency of U.S. artillery also improved in Sicily and Italy dur-
ing 1943-1944 as corps- and army-level operational commands for massed
fire finally emerged.97 Centralized control prevented dispersion of effort
and allowed the army to apply rapid and effective massed fire. In addition,
in 1943 the army abandoned its fixed field artillery brigade and regimental
organizations in favor of a more flexible organization. At the same time, the
accuracy of the Americans' gunnery showed improvement as forward
observers became adept at adjusting fire.?8
After the experience in North Africa and Sicily the army had begun to
recognize the potential of heavy antiaircraft guns in a ground role, but it
was only in May of 1944 that the combined training of heavy antiaircraft
gun units with other ground forces was regularized. 9 Heavy antiaircraft
