340
Normandy 1944
146. The marginalia by G (Ops) Branch at Army Group on GSOIL), 49th
Infantry Division, Imd. Rpt. IN 102, "Attack by the Leicesters on 29 Sept. 1944" of
5 October 1944 is highly illuminating: "This does not seem worth publication if so
many mistakes were made!"
147. PRO WO 171/258, "Operational Policy," WD I Corps, 22 July 1944,
Apdx. T.
9
Canada:
Learning the Hard Way
The British Soldier appears slower to adapt himself to a new situation
than does the Canadian.'
The lack of combat experience and a growing manpower shortage both
hampered and stimulated the Canadian Army's ability to adapt during the
Normandy campaign. All told, however, the Canadian Army in Normandy
failed to replicate the martial achievements of its Great War predecessor.
The war in Normandy was a learning process that validated some aspects of
Canadian preparation but condemned others. Inexperience bred misjudg-
ment and overconfidence that cost the Canadians heavily when facing some
of Germany's best troops early in the campaign. Canadian forces proved
Sluggish in attack and never achieved the speed, flexibility, or versatility
that characterized U.S. operations in Normandy.
The worsening manpower crisis undermined Canadian combat effec-
tiveness late in the campaign and engendered a philosophy of casualty min-
imization that dominated operational planning. This constraint often led the
Canadian First Army to commit strength that was inadequate for its opera-
tional goals. However, manpower conservation also promoted innovation
because troops and commanders alike sought new tactics and equipment
that would reduce losses. But despite efforts to minimize casualties, unex-
pectedly heavy losses-the result of a combination of Canadian offensive
inexperience and German defensive skill depleted units and sapped their
drive at the very moment in late August 1944 when Canadian forces finally
embarked on the exploitation mission for which they had long trained. The
Canadians thus proved unable to pursue aggressively the retreating
Germans in August-September 1944. The loss of offensive thrust that the
manpower crisis brought about did, however, mask the growing skill that
Canadian forces were developing late in the campaign as they adapted ever
quicker to battlefield conditions. All ranks showed ingenuity as they sought
341
