322
Normandy 1944
defenses, although the bombardment stunned many of the defenders for
long enough to allow the assault troops to get ashore. 106 The carpet bomb-
ing attacks conducted by RAF Bomber Command in support of
Montgomery's CHARNWOOD, GOODWOOD, and BLUECOAT offen-
sives achieved mixed results. The 7 July Caen raid was least effective
because inexperience resulted in Bomber Command's demolishing much of
the city while inflicting negligible damage on the German defenses. 107 The
GOODWOOD bombing proved better as air and ground forces drew appro-
priate lessons from CHARNWOOD. The inability to mass artillery in the
narrow Orne River bridgehead made the success of GOODWOOD too
dependent on the efficacy of the bombing. Scheduled only two hours in
advance of the ground attack, the bombing stunned and demoralized the
forward enemy defenders, but Allied ground troops failed to follow up
quickly enough because cratering and the constricted startline hindered the
ground advance. 108 During BLUECOAT a smaller bomber force, the pauci-
ty of German defenders, and the defensive advantages of the bocage limited
the damage inflicted and the resultant cratering again slowed the ground
advance. 109
Nonetheless, the gradual emergence during 1942-1944 of an integrat-
ed, interservice war effort witnessed the most significant improvement in
British military capabilities during the war. Clearly, also, the logistic prepa-
rations for the campaign were a massive achievement that owed much to
the lessons of Norway, Dunkirk, Dieppe, North Africa, Sicily, and Italy. In
fact, for the first time in the history of warfare, the Allies in Normandy
overturned the traditional supremacy of land communications over mar-
itime communications as aerial interdiction slowed German logistics and as
technological innovations-the landing ship tank, embryonic roll-on roll-
off ferries, the artificial Mulberry harbors, and the Pluto fuel pipeline-
speeded the Allied buildup. 110
Nevertheless, innovation remained limited, and significant operational
and tactical problems that fundamentally stemmed from flawed doctrine
continued to plague British operations in Normandy. The army's failure to
absorb the lessons of the Great War, the defeats of 1939-1942, and the des-
perate quest for victory had forged a distinct British operational approach:
minutely planned, precise fire plans created tightly controlled set-piece
attritional battles in which echeloned British forces attacked the enemy at
his strongest to maximize the damage inflicted.
While British attack doctrine played to inherent strengths-logistics,
administration, and fire support-
-this approach had significant flaws.
Attrition mandated narrow attack frontages to maximize firepower, facili-
tate massed fire support, and maximize enemy losses, but limited maneu-
ver. lll Echeloning often prematurely disclosed British intentions, and
attack frontages were so narrow that German flanking fire often fatally dis-
rupted echeloned forces following through the hole punched in the German
Britain: Montgomery's Best Batsmen Fail
323
line, as happened at EPSOM and GOODWOOD. Even though narrow
attack frontages allowed echeloned troops to penetrate forward enemy
defenses, the narrowness of the penetration restricted maneuver and supply,
enabled enemy local reserves to concentrate their counterblows, and left the
advance vulnerable to the spoiling counterattacks at which the Germans
excelled. 113
But the most significant drawback of British attack doctrine was that
only a fraction of available forces actually engaged the enemy at any one
time: concentration meant that usually only one corps fought at any given
moment and echeloned deployment meant that only spearheads engaged
the enemy. The failure to bring its full fighting power to bear denied British
forces decisive success and led contemporaries, both British and U.S., to
misinterpret this dissipation of strength as a lack of determination. 114
Although Normandy was rather disappointing operationally, the imper-
ative driving British operations was to win the war at tolerable cost. The
psychological legacies of the Great Wars slaughter in the trenches and the
growing manpower concerns cemented casualty minimalization as a cor-
nerstone of British operations. 115 Steady progress with bearable losses was
thus more important than excellence in performance or decisive success. 116
Given this goal, Montgomery was the right man to lead British forces. Few
wartime personalities have generated as much controversy as he did, and
the animus or adulation generated has often distorted evaluation of his per-
formance. l17 But despite his character flaws, Montgomery was the com-
mander most capable of shepherding Anglo-Canadian forces through to
victory in northwest Europe. His caution was sensible: he understood, more
so than any other British commander, that the army remained a fragile
instrument, whose morale had only recently been restored and that lacked
manpower reserves. He was thus determined to avoid a serious setback that
might demoralize his troops.
Britain's manpower shortage and war weariness, manifested in casual-
ty minimalization, dominated British operations in Normandy. The easiest
way to curtail losses was to limit the forces committed and mass strength
on a narrow front. After his failure to take Caen quickly, Montgomery with-
held his forces from bloody, piecemeal frontal attacks on the city and at
EPSOM tried to outflank Caen. In CHARNWOOD he pressed hard from
three sides to squeeze the Germans out of Caen, but thereafter wisely
retrained from frontally assaulting an enemy well dug in behind the Orne
River. 118 Manpower concerns clearly limited British offensive action;
although he desired more room for maneuver, airfields, and supply depots,
Montgomery was unwilling to suffer heavy losses to reach Falaise.
Manpower concerns also led Montgomery to adopt Dempsey's GOOD-
WOOD plan, regardless of skepticism about its prospects for success and to
80 against a deep conviction to never employ an all-armored corps, because
Dempsey promised low infantry losses through reliance on armor and
