pg_0408.pdf:
V07795 (407) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
376
[Appendix III.
(25) A.F. W 3000 (Descriptive report of enemy prisoner of war).
0. i/c 2nd Ech. will arrange for the issue of books of A.F. W 3000
to Os.C. prisoners of war units and Os.C. medical units charged with
the duty of registering captured prisoners of war. A.F. W 3000
consists of three parts, each bearing a serial number and giving
detailed information of the name, regimental particulars, age,
description, &c., of a prisoner of war. As soon as possible after
receipt of a prisoner of war, Part III will be completed by the
prisoner of war or at his dictation, and Parts I and II by the O.C.
unit. Part III will be sent by the O.C. unit to the Prisoners of War
Information Bureau, Part II will be sent to the O. i/c 2nd Ech.,
batches of Part Il to the Prisoners of War Information Bureau.
Whenever a prisoner is transferred Part I will be handed to the
escort for delivery to the new place of internment and the date of the
receipt of the prisoner of war stamped on the reverse of the form by
the receiving unit.
The counterfoils in A.F. W 3000 will be com-
pleted by the O.C. unit and retained by him until the unit is dis-
banded or permanently ceases to hold prisoners of war.
(26) A.F. W 3000M (Descriptive report of incapacitated enemy
prisoner of war).
This form is identical with Part III of A.F. W 3000 except that it
does not bear a printed serial number.
When a prisoner is incapable
of personally completing or dictating the information required at
Part III of A.F. W 3000, all the information obtainable will be
inserted on all three parts; Parts I and II will be retained and Part
III (endorsed with the medical officer's report) will be despatched
to the Prisoners of War Information Bureau. Subsequently when
the prisoner is capable of completing the form or giving the neces-
sary intormation A.F. W 3000м will be completed and sent to the
Prisoners of War Information Bureau, the serial number originally
allotted to the prisoner on A.F. W 3000 being inserted thereon.
The counterfoil and Parts I and II of A.F. W 3000 will then be
Colveted and the action laid down above for this form will be
(27) A.F. W 3002 (Report of casualties to enemy prisoners of war).
This form will be used by Os.C. prisoners of war units and Os.C.
medical units for the purpose of recording and reporting the occur-
V07795 (407) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

