pg_0395.pdf:
V07795 (394) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Appendix III.]
363
2. Copies of these forms with the various headings fully completed
will be forwarded to 0. i/c 2nd Ech. for all officers or nurses and other
ranks proceeding to join the army in the field.
In the case of personnel proceeding with their units, the forms
will be brought by the unit together with the nominal roll referred
to in Table I and sent to the O. i/c 2nd Ech., with the orderly-
room serjeant or other clerk (if any) detailed in W.E. to proceed
to join that officer; in cases where no clerk is detailed in W.E.
to join the and Ech., the forms will be sent by post together with the
nominal roll referred to in Table 1.
In the case of personnel proceeding with drafts or individually,
the forms will be despatched by post to the . 1c 2nd Ech., by
the record othce at home by which the draft or individual is adminis-
tered, in other cases by the Os.C. their late units.
3. On receipt by the O. i/c 2nd Ech., the forms will be carefully
checked against the nominal roll, each form will be examined to
ensure that the various headings are correctly filled in and any
queries arising thereon will at once be taken up with the unit or
record office concerned.
The O. i/c 2nd Ech. will cause to be published in Part II orders
and entered on A.F. B 199A, A.F. D 420, and A.F. B 103 all par-
ticulars obtained from reports in A.F. W. 3010, A.F. W 3011 and
A. F. W 3012, A.F. W 3034, A.F. A 36, or from other official sources
regarding each officer, nurse, soldier, follower or civilian serving
with the forces in the field.
When an individual is struck off the
Strength of the expeditionary force and proceeds to his or her home
the are ice, in be cose ardeo dithe the of and tie concerned,
and in the case of a follower or civilian as may be specially directed.
Should the individual subsequently rejoin the expeditionary force
his A.F. B 199A (or in the case of a nurse her A.F. D 420) or original
A.F. B 103 will accompany him or her and the record of service be
continued thereon; the same procedure being followed in the event
of the individual again returning to the home force and rejoining the
expeditionary force. In the event of the individual being trans-
ferred from one expeditionary force to another direct, the form will
be forwarded to the O. i/c 2nd Ech. of the expeditionary force to
which he or she is transferred. At the termination of hostilities or
in the case of death, the form will be disposed of as follows : that
of an officer will be checked with the original in the War Office and
re-issued to his unit commander, that of a nurse will be forwarded
13— (1463)
V07795 (394) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

