pg_0398.pdf:
V07795 (397) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
366
[Appendix III.
(6) A.F. W 3008. Field return-Officers.
A.F. W 3009. Field return- Other ranks.
1. Commanders of all units or detachments will furnish weekly,
on Sunday, to the O. i/c 2nd Ech., a field return for officers (A.F.
W 3008) and a field return for other ranks (A.F. W 3009) for all
persons borne on strength as detailed in the forms on the previous
sature Wi 3009 is issued in four varieties (numbered 3009 to 3009c)
for the different arms of the service, but both A.F. W 3008 and A.F.
W 3009 (and the casualty returns referred to in (7)) form the basis
on which is founded the work of the O. i/c 2nd Ech., and on the
correct compilation and punctual rendering of these returns depends
the whole of the calculations of the reinforcements for the army
and the detail records of the individuals comprising it.
2. The field returns contain the information required for statistical
and reinforcement purposes, and should accurately account joI
the actual number of officers and other ranks serving with the units
and those counting against the posted strength of the unit though
perhaps not actually with the unit at the time.
3. The effective, or posted, strength of a unit is the actual number
of officers and other ranks posted to and actually serving with the
unit, and will include all those on leave, detached on command,
&c., for whom no authority exists for striking off the effective
strength.
Reinforcements en route from base depots to units will remain on
strength o: the base depot until actually taken on strength of units
as reported in the daily casualty return.
4. On receipt by the O. 1/c 2nd Ech., the field returns are examined
and passed to the reintorcement section.
The demands for reinforcements are, on receipt in the reinforce-
ment section, checked against the numbers already under orders to
proceed, the balance, if available, is ordered up and a demand 1s
made on the home authorities to complete the reinforcements to
be held in the country and for such specialists as cannot be found
from local sources. Any special requests for the return of individuals
are complied with or noted for compliance when the individual
becomes available.
The field returns will then be carefully examined and checked
by the record section with the casualty returns to ascertain that the
casualties reported correctly account for the increase or decrease
during the week.
V07795 (397) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

