pg_0400.pdf:
V07795 (399) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
368
[Appendix III.
3. With a view to keeping " posted strength" distinct. from
" attached " and enabling parent units to be cognizant of casualties
to personnel detached to other corps, the following will be the pro-
cedure in reporting casualties to personnel attached from another
corps.
The O.C. the unit to which an officer, nurse or soldier is attached
will notify to the O. i/c 2nd Ech. and O.C. parent unit, i.e., unit from
which detached, on A.F. W 3012, details of any casualties affecting
personnel attached.
The O.C. the parent unit will be responsible for
demanding reintorcements from the base, when required to replace
casualties to detached personnel, as by this means it may frequently
be possible for a parent unit to replace a casualty some time before
the arrival of the reinforcement from the base.
4. The casualties are transcribed by the record section of the
D.A.G.'s office at the base on to A.F. O 1810A and Part II orders, and
the B 199A, D 420 and B 103 and card index of the personnel affected
are written up. Any queries arising will be referred to the O.C. the
unit concerned, the form will again be checked against any omissions
signed and dated by the responsible officer and filed.
5. A daily casualty list on A.F. W 3013 for officers and nurses,
and on A.F. W 3014 for other ranks and enrolled civilian personnel,
numbered consecutively and arranged regimentally, will be rendered
by the officer i/c 2nd echelon as follows :
For officers and nurses. -1 copy to Casualty Section, War Office.
For other ranks and enrolled civilian personnel.-1 copy to
officer i/c home records concerned, and l copy to Casualty
Section, War Office, for information.
The casualty lists in respect of civilian personnel enrolled locally
will indicate whether the next-of-kin has been duly informed.
A copy of each casualty list will be retained by officer i/c 2nd
echelon for reference.
Casualty lists will be compiled from A.Fs. W 3006, W 3010,
W 3011, W 3012, W 3034, W 3034A, A. 36 and any other reports,
telegraphic or otherwise, received by the other 1/c ind echelon.
Casualties will be classified in the lists as indicated at i. to v. below,
together with any amendments to casualty lists already rendered.
i. Deaths. (Killed in action, died of wounds, or from any
other cause.)
ii. Wounded. (Nature of wounds to be stated if possible. If
remaining at duty it should also be specified.)
iii. Missing. (If believed killed, wounded or prisoner it should
be so stated.)
V07795 (399) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

