pg_0409.pdf:
V07795 (408) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
Appendix III.]
377
rence of any of the following events affecting the prisoners of war :
admission,
release, transter,
escape, recapture, repatriation or
decease. It will be completed in triplicate, one copy will be retained
by O.C. unit and two sent to O. i/c 2nd Ech., who will record the
casualties notified thereon and transmit one copy to the Prisoners of
War Information Bureau.
28) A.F. W 3034A (Progress report of dangerous and serious
cases).
Forwarded weekly by general hospitals in duplicate to 0. i/c 2nd
Ech. One copy for retention and one for despatch to the Prisoners
of War Information Bureau.
(29) A.F. W 3486 (Return of all prisoners of war in the theatre of
war).
This form is rendered monthly by the O. i/c 2nd Ech. to the
War Office and shows in a consolidated form all prisoners of war
in the theatre of war under the following heads :—
i. In prisoners of war companies.
ii. In prisoners of war depot companies.
iti. In hospital,
with any variations and amplifications that may be demanded from
time to time by the military authorities.
(30) A.F. B 103B (Nominal roll of the enemy's dead found on the
battlefield).
This form is rendered in duplicate by the searching and burying
parties (Appendix VI) to the O. i/c 2nd Ech. Where names are
not traceable the fullest particulars possible to enable identifi-
cation to be made are to be rendered. The O. i/c 2nd Ech. on
receipt of these rolls will cause a serial number to be allotted to
each of the enemy dead found on the battlefield, and this having
been done will forward one copy to the Prisoners of War Information
Bureau, retaining the duplicate for reference.
The serial numbers allotted to enemy dead will in no circumstances
be duplicates of numbers printed on A.F. W 3000, used for the regis-
tration of prisoners of war captured alive.
V07795 (408) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

