pg_0396.pdf:
V07795 (395) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
364
[Appendix III.
to the War Office, and that of a soldier will be filed with his duplicate
attestation and that of a follower or civilian as may be directed.
4. Should a check of personnel be required at any time the 0. 1/c
2nd Ech. will prepare nominal rolls of other ranks and send to units
for checking.
In the event of no report being received by a record section at the
base for individual soldiers during a given period (say 2 or 3 months),
the record section should refer to the man's unit, and if no informa-
tion is forthcoming from that source, should institute further
enquiries with a view to tracing his whereabouts (in the last resource
by ascertaining when he last drew pay).
5. A.F. W 3241 for officers and A.B. 64 for other ranks are carried
by the individual and contain his personal description, history
and pay accounts. The responsibility for the correct entry and
verification of all details on these subjects rests with the individual's
immediate commander and is one that cannot be insisted upon
too strongly.
(3) Nominal roll of units and drafts.
The A.Fs. B 199A, D 420 and B 103 held by the 0. 1/c 2nd Ech.,
will be checked periodically, any found to be surplus being disposed
of, as in note (2), 3, above, any found lacking being replaced by a
temporary sheet until the original is obtained.
In the latter case steps should be taken at once to trace the
original forms. A careful record should be kept of all temporary
sheets.
When the original comes to hand, the entries on the tem-
porary sheet should be transterred to the original and the temporary
sheet estroy complete vita oy in insation ice the sinie to
obtain, should be substituted as a temporary sheet, a note of the
circumstances in which the original was lost being made in red ink
at the head of the form.
(4) A.F. W 3006. Daily strength state.
1. This state will show in abbreviated form :
i. Losses since last state rendered.
ii. Reinforcements received since last state rendered.
iii. Total strength present with unit (excluding attached).
V07795 (395) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

