Holland-Tilburg
On the liberation of part of Holland a reconnaissance was made of the
workshops and running sheds at Tilburg,
and arrangements were made for
these to be taken over.
Personnel were made available for this task by handing
over the running repairs section at Caen to the Americans for operation by
French personnel.
A month later, on 16th December, Coen workshops were
handed over to the French authorities and the British Workshops detachment
was withdrawn from Mezidon.
The remainder of the Workshops Company
from Caen then moved to Tilburg.
Meanwhile at Malines the programme
of locomotive repairs was continued and the building of the transformer house
was completed at the end of November.
By the end of January power was
obtained from the grid system.
Between the start of the campaign and the end of hostilities some 2,820
locomotives (including 1,617 running repairs) were repaired by British units
together with 4,327 wagons and 982 coaches.
Ambulance Train Maintenance Sections
Soon after the first Ambulance Train Maintenance Section arrived at Bayeux
on Ist September, 1944, two ambulance trains began to operate as far as the
railhead at Mezidon.
After the liberation of Belgium, trains were brought
north of the Seine and were assisted by a Belgian train, made up of mixed
Belgian and recaptured British stock which had formed part of the ambulance
trains abandoned in France in 1940.
Ambulance trains were run from Brussels
to Amiens and from Brussels to Hasselt and the Eindhoven area, depending
on the railhead.
When the Seine bridge was opened, the service was extended
to Bayeux in order to clear casualties to the Base Hospital.
After the Rhine crossing, a train was sent via the Wesel bridge to Burgstein-
furt for stabling.
By this time the maintenance of leave trains was becoming
a problem, and ambulance train maintenance sections at Ostend and Brussels
dealt with all six sets of stock which were being used for this traffic.
After the
end of hostilities, although the flow of battle casualties ceased, the ambulance
trains were still much used owing to the cessation of air lift from the front.
It was found possible, however, to dispense with seven out of the eleven sets in
the remaining four being stabled, two at Osnabruck to service Corps
districts and the other two at Nijmegen for Canadian Army use.
Of the seven
trains withdrawn, three were returned to the United Kingdom and the other
four retained for postal traffic and special trains.
Wagon Erection
It had been realized that the enemy would attempt to withdraw as much
wagon stock as possible from the area of operations, and a supply of American
wagons had therefore been arranged for erection in the theatre.
The site
eventually chosen for this work was at Bruges, at one of the biggest wagon-
producing factories in Belgium, served by canal as well as by rail.
first wagon was turned out by the Canadian Workshops Company on 8th
wagons a month. Later, in order to meet the increased inflow of parts from
The initial target for this wagon erection plant was a thousand
civilian firme for the erection of 20-ton wagons and with the S.N.C.B for the
the United States, the target was doubled and contracts were placed with
152
erection of bogie stock.
Repairs to captured rolling stock were carried out
by the Railway Workshops Company at Caen, and later by mobile teams of
six men with a 3-ton lorry.
The latter system was first tried out in Holland
at the beginning of 1945 and was used during the advance across the Rhine.
These teams were able to examine and carry out light repairs on some 400
wagons between the last week of March and the end of hostilities.
SECTION 5. RAILWAY CONSTRUCTION
1943-1944.—Planning and Training
The initial Railway Construction branch of the Tn. Directorate at H.Q.
21 Army Group consisted of a D.D.Tn., an A.D.Tn., a D.A.D.Tn. (Permanent
Way) and two staff captains.
A D.A.D.Tn. (Bridging) joined later and followed
the Directorate overseas at the end of August. In the organization and training
of units, advantage was taken of the lessons learned in other theatres, especially
North Africa and Italy, on the rapid repair of demolished structures, and
several officers who had gained experience in the campaign in Italy were posted
to the Directorate and to units earmarked for the theatre.
British Transportation and American Army Engineers were allocated
distinct responsibilities, but during planning the closest contact was maintained
between them.
The object of the British plan was to open up lines of com-
munication for the maintenance of 21 Army Group, while the American Army
Engineers were to open up lines for the maintenance of the American forces.
The overall allocation of prospective lines of communication was made by
S.H.A.E.F., who made long-term appreciations and plans.
Detailed planning
of railway construction operations to satisfy the needs of 21 Army Group
was entirely the responsibility of the Transportation Directorate, 21 Army Group.
Planned priorities for the opening of lines for the British and American
forces were as follows:—
British
Courseulles-Caen
Lison-Caen
Caen-Le Mans
Le Mans-Rennes
Surdon-Laigle
Le Mans-Chartres.
American
Cherbourg-Lison
Lison-Avranches
Avranches-Rennes
Rennes-Redon-Auray
Auray-Lorient
Redon-St. Nazaire-Nantes.
British units available for the tasks enumerated above were ten Railway
Construction Companies, three Railway Survey Companies and two Railway
Bridging Companies, organized in four Railway Construction and Maintenance
153
WO 27
7/2
2:
WO277
28
