which each Service had been pursuing independently and not entirely success.
fully up to the spring of 1943, Transportation, B.A.S. initiated a proposal
to form a committee in Washington on the lines of the Overseas Port and
Transit Committee in London, and in July of that year the Joint Port Facilities
Committee (J.P.F.C.) was established under the authority of J.S.M. Its
membership included representatives of B.A.S., the British Admiralty Dele.
gation, the British Merchant Shipping Mission, the R.A.F. Delegation, and
later of the Dominion and India Supply Missions, under the chairmanship of
the D.Q.M.G., B.A.S.
It was originally intended that the committee should
receive and co-ordinate all British demands for harbour crait and port equip.
ment required from United States and Canadian production, after these had
been screened in London, and should present these American requirements,
schedule
assignments according
priorities.
The formation of a Combined Committee was consistently opposed
by the Americans, however, and although the J.P.F.C.
performed a very
necessary function its usefulness was considerably handicapped by the absence
of such a committee.
In November, 1943 Tn. 1 proposed the establishment of a committee in
Washington, on the lines of the Railway Equipment Sub-Committee in London,
with the object of co-ordinating the procurement of railway equipment and
stores in North America.
After some discussion it was agreed that a Railway
Facilities Committee should be formed to act as a sub-committee to the
Principal
Commonwealth Supply Committee in Washington.
With the
subsequent formation, under the Combined Production and Resources Board,
of the Combined Transportation Equipment Committee, of which D.D.Tn.
was a member,
the Railway Facilities Committee became redundant and no
further meetings were held.
In the summer of 1943 contact was made with the American Corps of
Engineers and Transportation Corps on the question of transportation intelli-
gence, but owing to the shortage of staff in Transportation,
that could be done was to arrange for the supply of certain British reports to
these Corps and to procure some American reports for direct despatch to
G.H.Q., Middle East Forces.
At this time the Military Intelligence branch
of the B.A.S. was responsible for the exchange of such material, but in practice
this arrangement was not working to the complete satisfaction of the technical
Corps of either side.
Alter consultation with the Military Intelligence branch,
therefore, it was agreed that Transportation should arrange for such additional
exchange of published material as was thought to be necessary, and should
continue its proper function of discussing and evaluating American and British
With the increasing amount of intelligence work being undertaken by
Transportation, it was decided that the establishment of a transportation
intelligence library and the appointment of an additional officer were essential.
In December, 1943 this officer arrived, and from then on many close contact
were made with both American and British intelligence agencies, and the work
of transportation intelligence in the B.A.S. developed into the following
functions:—
(a) To bring about the fullest possible interchange of American and British
intelligence
material, whether channelled through B.A.S.
or direct
between British and American theatres.
97797/14
WO 277/21
27
Wo 27 7/26
28
(b) To discuss particular intelligence problems in order that American
and British views could be pooled.
The British agencies chiefly concerned were the Naval, Military, and Air
intelligence branches, the Joint Intelligence Committee, and the Inter-Services
Topographical Department Liaison Officer.
The chief American organizations
were the Strategic Intelligence Division of the Corps of Engineers, the Army
Map Service, the Intelligence and Security
Division of the Transportation
Corps, the Military Intelligence Service (G-2), the Office of Strategic Services
Research and Analysis Branch, and the Joint Intelligence Publishing Board.
Another responsibility of Tn. 1 was to keep a look-out for all new American
or Canadian developments in equipment or in its application which might be
of value in military transportation, whether those developments were being
undertaken by Service or commercial organizations; to report such develop-
ments to the War Office and to interested commands; and to advise on the
possibility and correct channels of procurement.
The methods by which
information was obtained on such developments were partly by discussion with
American Army and Navy officers, partly by official or personal contact with
firms, and partly in casual conversation
or by perusal of advertisements in
journals of transportation interest.
The arrival of a Transportation Operations officer in May, 1943 made it
possible to established a closer liaison with the training divisions of the
Transportation and Engineer Corps.
Information was exchanged on War
Establishments and Equipment Tables and
on training methods and pro-
At the same time the opportunity was taken of explaining the
organization and functions of Transportation in the British Army.
attachment of American officers to British training centres and vice versa was
arranged during 1944.
This interchange was of advantage to both sides, but
came too late to be of maximum value.
SECTION 3.—STORES
The history of the British Transportation Stores Branch in Washington
falls into several distinct phases, and as the problems and difficulties encoun-
tered in each are different, each phase is dealt with separately.
From July, 1941 to November, 1942, as explained in the first section of this
chapter, Transportation Stores interests were represented by
Section of the British Military Mission (later renamed the British Army Staff)
with procurement through the Engineer Corps of the United States War
In August, 1941 a transportation technical supply officer was
posted to what later became the Chief Engineer's Branch of the B.A.S. This
officer was charged with the responsibility for a programme of procurement of
railway and docks equipment, the greater part of which consisted of railway
engines and rolling stock, track, workshops equipment, and cargo handling
A second officer was temporarily attached from the War Office to
negotiate the purchase of portal wharf cranes of various capacities, most of
which were urgently required for the Middle East and Persian Gulf ports. In
February, 1942, when the staff was increased, the new staff captain took over
responsibility for crane procurement from the attached officer.
Until the United States came into the war it was not unduly difficult to get
