WO277/2k
27
WO 277/26
28
to fit out units accordingly on mobilization and to maintain them in the field.
In the case of new types of unit, these tables were drawn up on the advice of
the technical branch concerned, which knew exactly what it wanted the unit
to do.
The tables were constantly under review and frequently amended in the
light of experience gained on active service and on exercises.
Another very important part of the duties of Tn. 2 was in connection with
supplies to civil transport agencies.
It became apparent early in 1941 that
War Office help would be necessary to certain such agencies abroad if their
efficiency was to be maintained; without such help it was becoming more and
more difficult for them to obtain delivery of their essential requirements of
stores and spare parts. Arrangements were therefore set on foot by Tn. 2
whereby railway, port and inland navigational undertakings of strategical
importance were nominated as such by the local military commanders and
were thereupon placed on a War Office list of "sponsored undertakings."
Copies of orders placed by sponsored undertakings were submitted to the local
Tn. Headquarters and forwarded by the latter with comments to Tn. 2, War
Office.
In. 2 then made arrangements with the Ministry of Supply for the
allocation of materials and production capacity and in due course for suitable
shipping priority.
A separate sub-section of the branch dealt with the compilation of the
"Vocabulary of Transportation Stores (War)" which grew from a very slender
pamphlet at the outbreak of war into a massive volume.
kept records of all receipts, issues and stocks at the In. stores depots at home,
whose stores were, for reasons of policy and economy, held under centralized
War Office control throughout the war.
Finally, there was a financial sub.
section whose duties were to maintain records of expenditure against lump
sum Treasury sanctions; to obtain approval from War Office finance branches
to the placing of requisitions on the Ministry of Supply; to certify and pass for
payment invoices from contractors, and to deal with shortages and discrepancies,
This sub-section also accounted for all stores delivered direct from contractors
to users which did not pass through the home stores depots, for plant hired
from private firms, and for Tn. stores supplied to the American forces under
Reciprocal Aid, which reached a value of just under five million pounds.
No. 1. Transportation Stores Depot, Longmoor
Before the outbreak of war, there were in existence one H.Q. Tn. Stores
Group and one Tn. Stores Company,
both Supplementary Reserve units,
composed of men who were qualified railwaymen, but who had only the very
limited experience of the technicalities of army storekeeping gained during ther
annual fortnight's training at Longmoor Camp.
The only In. stores held in readiness for war were the approved scales c
mobilization equipment for authorized Regular and Supplementary Resent
units, plus a small stock of permanent way and bridging materials.
stores were rapidly shipped to France, and further materials ordered for the
B.E.F. were despatched direct from contractors' works to ports of shipmen.
war not until the spring of 1940 that it became necessary to set up a small Te
Stores Depot at Longmoor for the holding of stores awaiting shipment.
Following the fall of France, increased storage space was urgently neede
o hold not only stores coming off production and no longer required overseas,
but also stores and equipment salvaged from the Continent.
The Longmoor
12
Depot was enlarged to some two miles of sidings serving open storage and five
Nissen huts, and was manned by one Tn. stores company returned from the
B.E.F. It was not until late 1942, when this stores company was about to
embark for North Africa, that No. 1. Tn. Stores Depot (Home) was set up as
a static unit, with an authorized War Establishment of 5 officers, 116 other
ranks, and 38 A.T.S. auxiliaries.
From this time until 1945 the depot was gradually enlarged by the setting-up
of sub-depots at various points on the Longmoor Military Railway, and ulti-
mately consisted of 37 miles of railway sidings serving open stacking ground
and 270,000 square feet of covered storage, with an establishment of 16 officers,
567 other ranks and 43 A.T.S. auxiliaries, and a holding of over 200,000 tons
No. 2. Transportation Stores Depot, Kings Newton
A second depot was created in August, 1940, at Kings Newton, near Derby,
this site being selected firstly as a good geographical and railway centre for the
North of England, and secondly because it was served by the Melbourne
Military Railway, a section of the L.M.S. Railway taken over for training pur-
poses by No. 2 Railway Training Centre R.E., Derby; the depot was thus
within easy reach of ample technical and labour resources.
The original objects of the Kings Newton Depot were similar to those of
Longmoor at the same period, namely to hold stores on delivery from con-
tractors for which there was now no requirement abroad, and to receive and
recondition material salvaged from the Continent.
was initially manned by a field force Tn. stores company, and continued to
be so until early in 1944 when it was provided with a static War Establishment
under the title of No. 2 Tn. Stores Depot (Home).
This establishment was twice enlarged to cope with increasing work, and
at the end of the war amounted to 15 officers, 456 other ranks and 51 A.T.S.
auxiliaries. Stores held at the depot reached a maximum of 122,500 tons.
No. 3. Transportation Stores Depot, Marchwood
A third depot was set up at Marchwood, near Southampton, in February,
1944, to take charge of the stores which were being collected by No. 1 Port
and I.W.T. Repair Depot, R.E., in preparation for D-Day.
included some 10,000 tons of special
equipment for the Mulberry Harbour
at Arromanches, and large quantities of materials for use in the repair of
damaged quays, lock gates, etc.
It was also used for some months as a base depot of the Tn. stores organi-
depots were forwarded to Marchwood and held there in readiness for imme-
diate cross-Channel shipment, issues being made against direct 21 Army Group
The depot developed to eighteen acres of open and one acre of covered
storage with 43 roads and nearly 8 miles of railway sidings. It also included a
jetty capable of berthing steamers up to 17 feet draught and equipped with
four 6-ton diesel-electric portal cranes. 55 coasters sailed from this jetty between
May, 1944, and August, 1945.
