opening of the railway to Khorramshahr, when this derrick was moved to
Failiyah creek at Khorramshahr.
No Docks officer was available for full-time
supervision at Ahwaz but, owing to the high proportion of military traffic
being handled, an officer from Movements was provided in February, 1942.
Port operation was, in fact, undertaken by Movements at this port six months
before Transportation was officially relieved of this responsibility.
No major
development was undertaken, but in the base construction programme in the
summer of 1942 new barge wharves were built down-stream from the existing
wharves. These new wharves were eventually made available for Russian traffic,
but their distance from the station yard made rail clearance difficult.
As already stated, Tanuma was ruled out in favour of Khorramshahr when
the site for a new deep-water port was under consideration at the beginning of
1942. At the end of May, 1942, however, it was decided to develop Tanuma with
the highest priority as a rail-served lighter port in order to improve the lines of
communication from Iraq bases to central and northern Persia.
struction of the lighter basin and of the rail connections was completed in
December, 1942, but the port could not be brought into use until two months
In July, 1943, Tanuma basin was handed over
to the Americans in Persia.
Owing to shortage of staff, Transportation were never able to provide any
supervision for the port of Bushire.
Its operation was controlled throughout
by Movements and the Ministry of War Transport, assisted by I.W.T. staff
from Iraq.
SECTION 8.-INLAND WATER TRANSPORT-IRAQ AND PERSIA
Organization and Development, April-June, 1941
Immediately following the entry of British troops into Basra during the
Iraqi revolt in 1941, arrangements were made between the military authorities
and Messrs. Gray Mackenzie and Co. Ltd. (Agents for the Euphrates and
Tigris Steam Navigation Company Ltd.) for certain river craft to be kept
available for military purposes.
These craft continued to be manned, operated
and maintained by the Company.
The majority of the craft in Iraq had been
brought into the country by I.W.T. Mesopotamia during the 1914-1918 war,
and were consequently in constant need of repair.
The only local craft in
anything like reasonable condition were those belonging to the Anglo-Iranian
Oil Company, but these could not be acquired at that time as Persia was still
A waterborne advance up the Tigris to Amara and Kut, known as Operation
"Regatta," was undertaken during June, 1941, and was completed withou
Considerable difficulty was experienced, however, in getting the Arab
craws to take part, but they were eventually persuaded by an offer of double
To guard against defection, the local military authorities signalled to
India for reserve crews, but the demand was loosely worded and wrongly
channelled, with the result that the "First I.W.T. Contingent," composed o
unemployables from the Calcutta labour market, was despatched under the
Mackenzie and Co. Ltd., Basra."
auspices of the Ministry of War Transport "for service with Messrs, Gray
This contingent consistently refused to
work under military orders, and in May, 1942, all but a few who volunteered
for enlistment were repatriated without having done any work whatever.
In June, 1941, Inland Water Transport was represented on the Transpor-
tation Directorate in Iraq by one staff captain from a docks unit who had
no previous I.W.T. experience.
In view of the growing importance of this
theatre and the lack of suitable I.W.T. personnel locally, the Force Commander
requested India to send experts to investigate the possibility of establishing
a military I.W.T. service between Basra and Baghdad, and a Committee of
four, headed by Mr. J. W: E. Berry of the India General Navigation and
Railways Company Ltd., arrived at the beginning of July.
The Berry Committee
The Berry Committee (July-September, 1941) immediately set to work to
investigate local resources and conditions.
The investigation was considerably
prolonged because a mass of detailed information had to be collected and
This information was not readily available owing to the lack of
responsible officials with recent practical experience of the River Tigris and to
the untrustworthiness of local survey certificates.
the appointment of D.A.D.Tn. (I.W.T.) on the Directorate establishment was
filled, and this officer was immediately attached to the Committee to advise
and assist them on the military aspects of the proposed organization. When
Persia was occupied at the end of August, an inland water transport service
up the Karun River from Khorramshahr to Ahwaz was added to the Com-
mittee's terms of reference, as well as an investigation into the craft resources
and repair facilities of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company.
Early in September,
Q.M.G., India, decided that the development of an I.W.T. service was a prac-
ticable and essential link in the Persia and Iraq L. of C., and directed that
personnel, craft and equipment on the scale suggested by the Committee should
be provided by India on the highest priority and that the Committee should
return to India forthwith in order to finalize plans and advise on detail.
The Committee returned to India in mid-September, after completing an
exhaustive study of the problem, and took with them outline proposals, agreed
with Force H.Q. at Baghdad, for the establishment of an I.W.T. service.
Although there were some practical difficulties in finalizing these plans at
G.H.Q., India, and subsequently in allocating resources, the work of the Com-
mittee undoubtedly saved months of delay in co-ordinating civil and military
effort in regard to recruiting, fitting out of craft, and provision of stores.
Formation of I.W.T. Organization-October-December, 1941
Meanwhile a sub-directorate of I.W.T. had been set up in Iraq on
Ist October, 1941, consisting of an A.D.Tn. (I.W.T.), a D.A.D.Tn. (River
Conservancy) and an infantry subaltern (attached) to supervise the loading
and despatch of river craft. As there was not yet either War Establishment
or War Equipment Table for this sub-directorate, it was impossible to get
clerical assistance or office equipment from the Command, which was extremely
short of both, but a start was made with the help of a few officers and men
from a rest camp.
A few I.W.T. officers were posted from India, and others
WO 277/2
WO277/
2
8
