had, however, to remain virtually untouched.
Until 1943 the civilian steamer
companies refused to permit Transportation personnel to double-bank their
crews and it was not until river craft originally sent to Iraq were returned from
that theatre that it was possible to obtain independent training facilities.
Owing to the great difficulty of producing craft of the types normally employed
on the Brahmaputra and Irrawaddy rivers, it was necessary to accept smaller
craft powered by internal combustion or diesel engines.
As the orthodox
craft vere almost all steam driven, the adoption of these new types necessitated
special training for crews.
Workshop Trades
Workshop trades needed training from the bottom, since workshop capacity
in India had from the beginning of the war been overtaxed, and had absorbed
large numbers of men otherwise suitable for military workshop units.
to provide better facilities than those found by farming out men in civilian
workshops, a
workshop in Bombay
was requisitioned and an immediate
improvement in the standard of workshop trades resulted.
Included in the
training establishment at Bombay was also a special section devoted entirely
to the training of internal combustion engine and diesel engine drivers.
I.W.T. Officers
The provision of I.W.T. officers was the greatest difficulty of all.
Reliance
had to be placed almost entirely on officers from the steamer companies and
from the Irrawaddy Flotilla, who had the qualifications and experience necessary
to provide a nucleus for the operation of I.W.T. in the Eastern theatre.
List of Units Raised
The following Indian Transportation units were raised in India or in Burma
during the war:—
9 Indian Railway Construction and Maintenance Group Headquarters.
4 Indian Railway Survey Companies.
22 Indian
Railway Construction Companies.
20 Indian Railway Maintenance Companies.
4 Indian Railway Bridging Companies.
10 Indian Railway Operating Group Headquarters.
34 Indian Railway Operating Companies.
5 Indian Railway Yard Operating Companies.
2 Indian Railway Workshops Group Headquarters.
9 Indian Railway Workshops Companies.
2 Indian Railway Control Groups.
3 Indian Transportation Stores Group Headquarters.
8 Indian Transportation Stores Companies.
1 Indian Railway Telegraph Maintenance Section.
4 Indian Riveting Companies.
6 Indian Docks Group Headquarters.
6 Indian Docks Sections.
21 Indian Docks Operating Companies.
5 Indian Docks Maintenance Companies.
7 Indian Port Operating Companies.
1 Indian Port Operating Section.
184
WO277
3 Indian Port Construction Companies.
1 Indian Stevedore Unit.
i Indian Port Service Group.
5 Indian Mechanical Handling Sections.
4 Indian Inland Water Transport Group Headquarters.
15 Indian Inland Water Transport Operating Companies.
4 Indian Inland Water Transport (Country Craft) Operating Companies.
2 Indian Boat Companies.
3 Indian "Z" Craft Operating Companies.
1 Indian River Service Section.
3 Indian Inland Water Transport Workshops Companies.
2 Indian Inland Water Transport Floating Workshops Companies.
2 Indian River Salvage Companies.
1 Indian Craft Erection Company.
In addition, two British Port Operating Companies were raised and trained
in India from low medical category British other ranks.
SECTION 3.-RAILWAY OPERATING AND WORKSHOPS
In 1941, a number of railway operating companies were raised in India
for service overseas and sent to the Middle East and Iraq.
These units were
so urgently required that they had to be sent abroad without adequate training
in their technical role, and with only the essential minimum of military training.
Fortunately, however, these early units contained a fair proportion of skilled
railwaymen from the Indian Railways.
With the entry of Japan into the war at the end of 1941, and the early loss
of Burma, Malaya and the East Indies, it was evident that railway operating
units would be required in the eventual re-conquest of these countries as well as
for the Middle East and Iraq.
In the meantime, with the daily increasing
threat to communications, particularly on the eastern side of India, by Japanese
offensive action, it was necessary to place such Tn. units as became available
at strategic points along the L. of C. to bolster up civilian morale and to act as
a reserve against complete disruption of services by enemy action.
On the Assam L. of C. the volume of military traffic increased to such an
extent that the Bengal and Assam Railway was unable to handle it without
assistance, and the bulk of the railway operating troops in India were sent to
assist the civil railway authorities on these lines.
The metre gauge section,
from Khatihar to Ledo, was handed over in 1944 to the American Military
Railway Service for operation, but many Indian railway operating units remained
on this line and worked in co-operation with the Americans.
In May, 1942, Manipur Road station area in Assam received a "RED"
air raid warning, and the majority of the civilian railway staff deserted in
consequence.
This possibility had already been realized, and as it was quite
impossible to raise sufficient military railway units to replace a wholesale
desertion by civilian staff some other method had to be found of ensuring that
essential services were kept running in spite of enemy air action.
achieved by the formation of what were known as "Defence of India Units,"
formed from civilian railway officials and employees.
Volunteers enlisted on a
regular engagement, but with liability to serve only on their own railvay or in
their own port or circle.
They were under Military Law, but ordinarily their
185
