Increasing the Capacity of Assam L. of C.
By the spring of 1943 it had become apparent that the requirements of
military supplies to support operations by British and Indian troops in North
and to support the American plans for developing aid to China and
re-opening land communications, would far outstrip the existing capacity of
the Assam L. of C.
The matter was considered at the Quebec Conference in
the late summer of 1943, and a target was laid down for the expansion of the
L. of C. capacity.
The principal developments put in hand to meet this target
were:-
(a) Doubling the broad gauge track from Calcutta to Parbatipur throughout.
(b) Doubling the metre gauge track from Parbatipur to Ledo.
(c) Constructing a double track bridge over the Brahmaputra at Pandu.
d) Constructing and extending marshalling and transhipment facilities at
various points.
(e) Developing of river ghats on the Brahmaputra.
By November, 1943, it was clear that progress was falling behind schedule.
In January, 1944 the programme was reconsidered and it was decided to abandon
the proposal to bridge the Brahmaputra at Pandu, as alternative and quicker
means of carrying the traffic were devised by increasing the equipment and
facilities of the Pandu-Amingaon Ferry.
Later, as a result of improved efficiency
following the arrival of the American Railway Grand Division, much of the
doubling was cancelled and replaced by the lengthening of loops to take trains
of 125 wagons.
Consequently only 170 miles of track were doubled instead
of 534 miles in the original programme.
By the end of 1943, work was proceeding on the construction of five new
crossing stations and six new loops on the broad gauge section; doubling of
the single line lengths, and the development of the transhipment yard at
Parbatipur, were also in progress.
On the metre gauge sections west of the
Brahmaputra,
work was in hand on the construction of seven new crossing
stations and eighteen new loops, and the yard and station at Lalmanirhat were
being remodelled.
Pandu Yard was being extended, and between Pandu and
Manipur Road nine new crossing stations and twelve new loops were under
construction, while survey for the Lumding to Manipur Road doubling had
been completed.
East of Manipur Road, sixteen new loops were in hand, the
narrow gauge line from Jorhat to Mariani was being converted to metre gauge,
and survey was proceeding for a chord line from Namrup to Margherita, to
avoid Tinsukia and the two vulnerable bridges over the Dihang river.
This
chord line was never completed as sufficient plant and labour could not be made
available.
On the hill section from Akhaura to Lumding, ten new crossing
stations and fifteen new loops were being laid.
in thand fifteen ne loops thirteen new crossing stations and ten ho to
were under construction, as was a relief yard at Chandranathpur.
Prohmaputra, rail service to the river ghats was being improved at Dhubri
Jaganathgani Tistamukh, Siraigani and Gerlando, and a new river por
was constructed by Tn. troops at Neamati, near Jorhat.
Chittagong port were also being improved.
Rail facilities at
construction at Kankinara, Kanchrapara,
Work was in progress on depot
and on railheads at Bongaigaon and Dohazari.
Manipur Road and Chittagong,
Bases at Panagar continued.
Construction of the Reserve
struction in Assam and Bengal.
A number of airfield sidings were under con-
188
Withdrawal, 1945
Work continued at full pressure during the first half of 1944, but by August
the war situation huld not vel con that it was decided not to proceed with any
new works that could not be completed by the end of the year.
In October,
plans were made for the gradual release of railway construction units for
employment in Burma and Malaya.
The doubled section between Lumding
and Manipur Road was opened on Ist January, 1945, and in March the with-
drawal of railway construction units for service under A.L.F.S.E.A. (Allied
Land Forces, South-East Asia) began.
In July, 1945, owing to the withdrawal
of units and to the great shortage of officers, it was laid down that no new
projects should be started and that all works of the Assam L. of C. that were
not essential for safety reasons were to be stopped.
The Japanese surrender
in August caused a complete cessation of construction work and in the following
months all units were withdrawn.
SECTION 5.—PORT OPERATING AND INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
Organization, 1941
In India and in the Far East theatre of operations the port operating and
inland water transport aspects of Transportation were so closely related that
it is almost impossible to describe them separately.
In the ports, especially in
the east, port operation depended largely on port lighterage services, and I.W.T.
units were therefore integrated with docks groups for this purpose.
On the
long river lines of communication in Assam and later in Burma, docks operating
units had to be included in I.W.T. groups to operate the inland ports and
wharves.
A group H.Q. (either docks or I.W.T.) might control any number of
units of either type, according to the needs of the particular operation.
this chapter, therefore, port operating and inland water transport are dealt
with in the same section.
Recruiting for Indian docks and I.W.T. units was started in the summer
of 1941, and the first draft of officers from the United Kingdom arrived to join
these units in October.
These first units were raised for service in the Middle
East and in Iraq, and most of them had left India when the war with Japan
started.
Consisting of a docks group H.Q., a docks maintenance company
and four docks operating companies (all for Basra), and Z7 craft and I.W.T.
workshop companies (for Middle East), they were formed before the introduc-
tion of the Technical Training Battalions (see Section 2 of this chapter and
at a time when the depot was full of recruits for units which had not yet
been formed.
Consequently most of the work of technical training, trade-
testing, military training and administration had to be carried by the units
themselves in spite of a shortage of officers.
Many of the officers had joined
direct from civil employment and had, therefore, little military experience.
Some of these original units were recruited from civil employees of the Port
of Calcutta, and the remainder had a good proportion of men with previous
civilian experience at their various trades.
Individual technical training was
therefore simplified at this time.
After the formation of these original units
the proportion of men with previous experience dropped rapidly, and it proved
189
WO 277/
WO27
