SECTION 8.-INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
Landing Operations
and tugs, ramped powered barges (P.B.R.s) and tugs.
I.W.T. craft used in the initial landing operations consisted of Rhino ferries
All craft operated under
difficulties owing to the bad weather and a few Rhino tugs were lost on the
crossing,
though
all other craft arrived.
Throughout D-Day and up to the
afternoon of 7th June heavy seas and strong on-shore winds prevailed and a
Repairs and salvage work were put in hand, however, and until rough weather
large proportion of the Rhino ferries were stranded on the beach by 8th June.
stopped work on 20th June, an average of 20 ferries were at work.
In the first
14 days, Rhino ferries discharged 10,882 vehicles, mainly from M.T. (motor
transport) Ships.
the powered barges (P.B.R.s) were stationed at portren- Be sinhwhere they
had a good sheltered berth, and at Courseulles and Mulberry "B," where they had
not.
At these last two places, they were nearly all driven ashore and damaged
during the gale from 19th to 22nd June.
After the gale repairs were put in hand,
and, by the end of June, 30 out of 92 were back at work.
At Mulberry "B" the
beach to which these barges were working was congested with damaged craft,
while at Courseulles the limited berthing-space at the dock also led to congestion.
The tugs did good work on the cross-Channel passage in going to the rescue
of P.B.R.s in difficulties.
They proved to be excellent for harbour work, for
which they were designed, but in the anchorages they lacked weight and power
in rough weather and were of too great a draft for work close inshore.
An
outstanding difficulty, particularly in the first few days, was the lack of small
craft for I.W.T. use.
It was necessary to apply to the Navy or R.A.S.C. for
these craft, and as both these organizations were themselves short they were not
in a position to make any arrangements except on an hour-to-hour basis.
This
led to delays and lack of control.
An I.W.T. Light Aid Workshop Company was planned to work with the
Rhino ferries.
The damage to these ferries, however, proved to be too much for
one unit to deal with and a second company was sent, while a third company
was employed on repairs to P.B.R.s.
A Heavy Workshop Company had to be
called forward earlier than was originally planned and arrived early in July,
but owing to various difficulties it could not be installed at Courseulles until
August.
July, 1944
During July the Rhino ferries were used mainly as large lighters for unloading
stores ships, and proved very successful; owing to their large capacity it was only
necessary to move them twice a day, and this greatly simplified control.
majority of the P.B.R.s damaged or sunk during June were salvaged and put
back into use and, by the end of the month, were easily able to handle all the
tonnage offered, the limiting factor being clearance facilities.
The use of Rhino
ferries by I.W.T. was discontinued early in September as these craft were not
suitable for use in rough water.
71 vehicle landing barges (L.B.V.s) were taken
over from the Navy and manned 11 vehicle landing Rhinos, while 24 additional
L.B.V.s were handed over to the French Navy for use under the control of
Transportation.
166
French Canals
With the advance through France and Belgium in September, preparations
were made to move units and craft along the coast for use in the newly acquired
ports and on the French and Belgian canal systems.
A reconnaissance of the
main French waterways was made from the coast to the Valenciennes-Cambrai
area, and it was found that the canals were not badly damaged, the principal
obstructions consisting of demolished bridges.
The French authorities were
proceeding very energetically with the repair and re-instatement of the system,
which was opened for navigtion by the middle of October.
Belgian Canals
During the month of September the principal waterways of Belgium and the
port of Antwerp were investigated and, apart from the Albert Canal, the general
condition of the Belgian canals was found to be good.
A large number of
bridges had been dropped, but as none of these was large their removal
was not a very difficult matter.
The Belgian authorities rapidly cleared their
own waterways, and the system was fully open to traffic by November.
The
Albert Canal was, however, badly damaged, particularly the section east of
Hasselt which required several months' work for reconditioning.
A large
number of craft had been sunk in the Albert Canal and in the Antwerp area.
Operation of the Belgian waterways by Belgian craft, manned by Belgian
crews but under I.W.T. control, started during October, 1944.
The principal
traffic at first was from Ghent to the Antwerp area, and there was also some
traffic from Ostend to Ghent and other localities.
With the opening of Antwerp
port in November increasing emphasis was placed on waterway operating, as
two-thirds of the daily clearance from the port of Antwerp was planned to be
by I.W.T.
Planning for the operations leading to the capture of Antwerp took no
account of I. W.T. operating, as it was estimated that demolitions would prevent
early clearance of the canals for navigation and that most of the craft would
be sunk.
Both these estimates proved unduly pessimistic and, with the enter-
prise shown by the Belgians in clearing demolitions and putting craft into
operation, I.W.T. operating on military account rapidly became the main method
of port clearance.
The main function of the I.W.T. branch of the Tn. Directorate was to get
the Belgian Waterway machine moving.
The Belgian Government was per-
suaded to revive an organization known as Office Regulateur de Navigation
Intérieure (O.R.N.I.). Most of the craft were privately owned, but the owners
grouped themselves with agents at main waterway centres such as Antwerp,
Brussels, Ghent, Charleroi, Liége and Namur.
O.R.N.I. kept a census of
available craft and a tally of all craft movement, and arranged and ordered
movement of craft to the traffic originating points, thereby largely providing
a movement control.
O.R.N.I. was however slow in starting, owing mainly to lack of transport
and communications.
The I.W.T.
Branch of the Directorate had therefore
to deploy three I.W.T. Groups at Antwerp, Brussels and Ghent.
Their work
was to get the best possible census of craft, to contact the agents and get the
craft chartered and moving to the loading points, to establish controls by which
the movement of all craft could be checked, to open up waterway operating for
the movement of stores for all services, often at very short notice, and to arrange
167
we
27 81
WO 277,
W0277)
