railways, docks and inland water transport,
was therefore set up at Batavia
on 14th December, 1945, and functioned until 28th November, 1946.
SECTION 2.—RAILWAYS
Malaya, 1941-1942
The railway situation in Malaya at the time of the outbreak of war with
On the island of Singapore there was a number of
small military railways serving the heavy coastal gun batteries and the Alexandra
Supply and Ordnance Depots.
The personnel for the operation and main-
tenance of these military railways were borne on the strength of two Fortres
Companies, R.E.
The F.M.S.R. (Federated Malay State Railways) were metre
gauge, and their Head Offices were at Kuala Lumpur.
The main line ran from
saugapore up the west side of the central range to the Siamese border at Padang
Basar, while the east coast branch left the main line at Gemas Junction and
ran to the east coast port of Tumpat.
A few miles short of Tumpat, a branch
line led to the Siamese border at Sungei Golok.
The Siamese Railways con-
tinued the lines from Basar and Sungei Golok to meet at Haadyai Junction,
whence their main line ran north to Bangkok and a branch ran north-east to
Singora (see Map No. 7).
The F.M.S.R. were in a comparatively weak position owing to the economic
slump of 1931 to 1936 and to road competition; revenue had declined severely
and drastic economies had to be enforced.
Staff, especially European staff,
was cut and, in conformity with Government policy, lower European grades
were replaced by Asians.
Renewals to plant, locomotives and rolling stock
had been curtailed and the number of goods wagons in service was barely
sufficient for normal traffic.
Between March and July, 1941, a Volunteer
Railway Operating and Maintenance Company was formed from the personnel
of the F.M.S.R. and this had the effect of further reducing the European
Japanese landings in Malaya and Siam began on 8th December, 1941.
The plan for an advance into Siam was not put into operation, but a sortie
was made from north-west Malaya with an armoured train to demolish the
first sizeable bridge on the line to Haadyai Junction.
During the next three
days all rolling stock, except that being used for operations, and all civil and
military personnel were moved back.
Two Sections of the Railway Operating
and Maintenance Company were on the west coast line, while the third Section
was sent to Kelantan on the east coast branch.
The withdrawal on the west
coast began on 12th December, and by 19th December had reached the Tooh
Air attacks on the railway were frequent, and towards the end of this
the hands of the Volunteer Force unit.
pherd most of the civilian railway staff had disappeared, leaving operation ia
On the east coast branch. the withdrawnt of stock from Tumbat began on
sth December A + this time there were Onlu civilian railway emplovees on this
line, which for most of the wav was the only means of transnort through jungle
Maintenance Company arrived.
country, but on the 12th December the Cation do a Pailway Operating and
acilities, and the effect on native staff of frequent air attacks, the withdrawal
Despite poor communications, poor station
down the line for 200 miles fam Turnat to Games Tention Too connect ty
Apart from two engines, no undamaged stock was left anywhere
by the Volunteer Force unit.
Bridges were destroyed by Engineer units and station facilities
About seven miles of track were salvaged for
use elsewhere, and a number of vehicles and nearly all dumps of supplies,
stores, salvaged material and ammunition were back-loaded.
of the native staff deserted when air attacks took place a number remained
their posts to the end.
From about 20th December, 1941 to mid-January, 1942, the withdrawal
continued. and the main Transportation task was to back-load as mush material
and rolling stock as possible, while maintaining the supply of stores, am mainl
and reinforcements as needed for fighting. The disposal of the evacuated
locomotives and stock became a difficult problem as the available railway
accommodation was reduced, and considerable congestion resulted. By the
end of December there was a serious shortage of staff, and practically the only
railwaymen working were the men of the Railway Operating and Maintenance
All available civilian staff was redistributed, and two Composite
Railway Companies were formed, one from British personnel drawn from
military units and the Royal Navy and the other from Australian units. By
the end of January, 1942, the withdrawal to Singapore Island had been com-
pleted, and from then until the surrender the only railway activities were
concerned with the denial of facilities to the Japanese.
Burma, 1941-1942
Before the arrival of military Transportation personnel in Burma in Febru-
ary, 1942, the Burma Railways were coping with military requirements except
in the areas of operations, where desertions of staff were taking place. This
lack of staff in the forward areas during the operations leading to the fall of
Moulmein was met by the provision of military train crews from the Divisional
These men were not trained in railway work, and friction arose with the
Railway Administration about the risk of accidents.
and rolling stock in the evacuated areas were withdrawn to prevent them falling
By the end of January, 1942, it was clear that, although there was no shortage
of locomotives, stock, materials or stores, the civilian staff could not be relied
upon to remain at their posts in the face of danger. A Railway Construction
and Maintenance Group H.Q. arrived from India early in February and a
Railway Construction Company was standing by, but never arrived in Burma
owing to lack of shipping space.
No additional units or staff could be spared
from India at that time, and it was therefore planned to militarize a proportion
of the railway staff.
This proposal was at first welcomed but later opposed by
the Railway Administration, and could not be implemented.
The railways continued to function more of less normally while the Army
withdrew successively across the Salween and Bilin tivers, and in the forward
areas operation, with the assistance provided by the Divisional R.E., proved
sufficient for military requirements.
As Rangoon itself became threatened,
however, the staff situation deteriorated rapidly.
On 22nd and 23rd February
two air attacks were made on the railway at Toungoo and Swa. All telephone
communications were cut. the staff were badly shaken, and many deserted.
By the evening of 24th February the Ie carated on had stopped working
altogether swine to shortage of staerating and mperative to run at least one train
117
WO 277/21
27
wO 277/26
28
