quate.
The Khorramshahr line alone required about 120,000 cubic metres
of ballast with an average haul of 150 kilometres:
Output improved con-
siderably at the quarry when supervision was provided by a British railway
construction company, but wagon shortage later proved a handicap.
As a
result not all new works were ballasted by the time they were handed over
to the Americans.
Throughout the period of occupation Transportahions arried out a con-
siderable amount of building work such as running sulain ofices, stores and
camps for military and civilian personnel, which would normally have been
the responsibility of the Works Service.
SECTION 7.-PORT OPERATING AND DEVELOPMENT-
IRAQ AND PERSIA
At the outset, responsibility for the development and operation of the ports
in Persia and Iraq rested with the respective Directors of Transportation.
far as development was concerned this function was mainly advisory, as all
construction work, apart from crane erection at some of the ports which was
carried out by docks maintenance companies, was performed by the Engineer
Services of the British and American Armies.
Port operation in Iraq from
the end of 1941 was carried out largely by docks troops, but in Persia it was
effected by means of small detachments of officers and men supervising civilian
labour.
1942, responsibility for port operation passed to the
Movements Directorate, and at the ports only railway operating and con-
struction remained under the Directors of Transportation.
transport services were provided by I.W.T., Iraq, for the whole period.
to the long distance and poor communications between Transportation Head-
quarters at Teheran and the ports, an A.D.Tn. was appointed with an office
in Ahwaz to co-ordinate all transportation activities in the port areas of Persia.
In February, 1943, responsibility for port operation reverted to the Transporta-
In Persia the Americans took over the ports as well as the
railway, but assistance was given from Iraq,
detachments being sent to some of the Persian ports to work in co-operation
with the Americans.
In Iraq, the commanding officer of the Docks Group
was also appointed A.D.Tn., Docks, and the additional appointments of Docks
Superintendent, Basra, Port Director, Um Qast, and Docks Superintendent,
Um Qasr, were made.
Quay discharge at Ahwaz became a responsibility of
I.W.T., Iraq, as it had been throughout at Kut.
Basra
Basra, on the Shatt-el-Arab, was a well developed port. In order to handle
the extra tonnage required by the military occupation, however, it was necessary
to construct two new personnel berths (also used as hospital berths) which
were both completed in 1941, four new cargo berths which were built during
1942, and a new lighterage wharf which was completed in June, 1942; additional
docks cranes were brought from India: the rail layout serving the docks vas
remodelled: two new yards were constructed, and a new line laid across the
desert to the Shuaiba depots, thus avoiding Margil (Basra) station and faciliains
Until December, 1941, port operation at Basra was carried out by
88
the civilian administration, the Army being represented by two Indian docks
sections composed mainly of checkers and office personnel. In December,
1941, an Indian docks group H.Q. with two docks operating companies arrived
and took over three berths.
Operation was retarded at first by lack of gear
and clearance facilities, but by February, 1942, the effect of the railvay
remodelling began to be felt and the tonnage handled began to increase.
the end of 1942 a special unit, known as a Docks Supervisory Unit, arrived
to control the native labour employed.
This unit caused a great improvement
April, kins, the tonage handled started to drop working to ca chang vat
situation, and the export began of ammunition and other warlike stores from
Iraq depots to the Middle East. In November, 1943, the tonnage handled
had fallen to such an extent that the Docks Supervisory Unit was no longer
considered necessary and was disbanded.
In the middle of 1943, cargo for the I.W.T.—rail—road route for "Aid
to Russia" via Khanaqin caused difficulties.
This had to be "truckable" cargo,
i.e. suitable to be carried over the road part of the route, and as ships arrived
loaded with all sorts and types of material for Russia, cargo for the Khanagin
route had to be sorted in the ships' holds, a procedure which considerably
slowed up working.
This difficulty continued in varying degree until the
Khanaqin route was finally closed in July, 1944. In October and November,
1944, a start was made in handing back operation of the port to the civilian
organization and in February, 1945, the docks operating troops were withdrawn
As Basra was the only port in Iraq or Persia that was capable of handling
large numbers of ships, it was decided to construct an additional port, partly
to supplement Basra and partly to act as a stand-by in case Basra should be
damaged by enemy air attack.
The site chosen for this new port was at Um
Qast, near the border between Iraq and Kuweit.
The actual construction of
the jetties was to be carried out by the Americans, while British Engineer
Services were to construct the earthwork bunds on shore.
bunds started in December, 1941, and the Americans arrived and started to
drive test piles in February, 1942. Piling for the jetties was due to start in
April, but before work could start the Americans were withdrawn to Khor-
ramshahr, owing to the decision that this latter port should be developed first.
The work at Um Qasr was let to civil contract, and piling started in July, 1942.
In August the approach had been completed and piling started for the first
The second berth was completed in April, 1943, by which time the rail
layout had been completed
and the port was connected by rail to Shuaiba.
But at this stage Basra was handling all traffic required for Iraq, and Khor-
ramshahr was coming into use on a larger scale.
No enemy air action had
taken place against Basra.
It was therefore decided that Um Qast should
be placed on a care and maintenance basis, and that construction of the
remaining four berths should be suspended.
therefore stopped, and it was never used for military traffic.
The port of Bandar Shahpur on the Persian Gulf, sometimes referred to
as Bandar Gulf to avoid confusion with the port of Bandar Shah on the Caspian
WO 277/2
WO 277/2
