a day on each line from Rangoon to Pegu and Prome, and after the Chief
Railyay Commissioner had stated that this was no longer possible the railways
south of Toungoo and Prome were taken over by the Army.
Railway officials
remaining in South Burma were commissioned, and a Railways Directorate
was set up on 25th February.
Some of the missing staff were rounded up,
and attempts were made to enlist them into units to raise morale, but this was
During the 11 days from 25th February to the fall of Rangoon on 7th March.
order was restored by sorting out wagons in the yards and sidings; all wagons
loaded with military stores were despatched north, mainly to Prome. On
most days three or four trains were run, and in addition to refugees, sick and
wounded, some four thousand tired troops for whom no transport was available
were evacuated to Prome.
On the line to Mandalay communication was inter-
mittent on account of air attack and the nearness of enemy ground troops' to
Traffic was mainly from Rangoon to Mandalay.
a small detachment of railway operating personnel arrived from India.
of this detachment was sent to Prome, and the remainder was put at the disposal
of the Chief Railway Commissioner at Mandalay.
The last fully loaded train of military stores left Rangoon on the afternoon
Two trains were kept for the evacuation of the remaining
civilians, railway staff and covering troops, while a third short train was
arranged to follow and pick up station staffs from the stations on the route.
These three trains left on the evening of 7th March, but were ambushed after
travelling about thirty miles.
After beating off Japanese attacks the trains
were withdrawn to a safe distance the next morning, and personnel joined the
withdrawing forces by road.
The Director of Railways had left Rangoon some days before the evacuation
and had set up his H.Q. at Letpadam. During the withdrawal from Rangoon
to Prome an adequate train service was maintained and, although enemy air
action caused desertion among the civilian staff, loyal employees evacuated from
stations further south more than made up the deficiency.
line from Toungoo to Mandalay, desertion of staff following air attacks
had brought about a complete standstill, and yards and stations were full of
loaded wagons evacuated from Rangoon. On 14th March the railways in
North Burma were placed under military control, and the work of clearing and
sorting was undertaken in the same way as for Rangoon.
Following further
raids on Toungoo, Railway Headquarters were moved back to Yamethin on
18th March, and all traffic working forward of Toungoo was left to the military
On 19th March the Chinese forces, who were operating
south of Toungoo, took up parts of the line near Pyu and also burned Toungoo
to make a defensive position.
In mid-March it was hoped to stabilize a defensive position on the line
Toungoo-Prome, and to this end the Chinese took the left flank while the
British took the right. Military Transportation requirements during the second
half of March were the sorting and despatch of wagons on the line south of
Mandalay to new depots in the area Mandalay-Meiktila-Myinmu, the move-
ment of Chinese troops from Lashio to the Toungoo area, and the evacuation
of sick and wounded.
Efficient working of the railway with the Chinese troops
became almost impossible, owing mainly to the language difficulty and to the
Chinese lack of confidence in the civilian railway staff.
Later in March the
enemy cut off the Chinese forces and the local commander ordered the evacuation
W97787 14
10 277/21
27
WO 27 7/26
The result of this order was that all the station staff left, and
position could not be moved.
Chinese troods from Lashio who were urgently required to heln stabilize the
In addition, the Kyaukpadaung branch was put
The withdrawal to the line Lashio-Mandalay-Monywa occupied the month
When this withdrawal started, it was cuite clear that the depots
set up in the previous phase were not far enough back, and stocks had to be
moved to new depots in the areas Katha, Indaw, Mvitlvina and Kalewa
on 3rd April, Mandalay station was bombed and destroyed by the subselee.
explosion of a wagon loaded with bombs. This was followed, as in nuary
every town in Burma, by the exodus of the population and by arson and loany
Without Railway troops to repair the damage, maintenance of regular trans-
portation services was impossible. The growing stream of refugees during
April caused a traffic problem of considerable dimensions.
The plan for the withdrawal north of Mandalay was for the Chinese and
part of the British forces to withdraw on Lashio and Myikyina while the
remainder of the British withdrew along the Chindwin Valley. Dispositions
of locomotives and rolling stock were made accordingly, but the rapid advance
of the Japanese on the left flank caused a change of plans and the whole of the
British force withdrew on Kalewa.
Wounded and hospital staff were moved
by rail to Myitkyina and flown out from there to India. The railways despatched
nine trains northwards from Ywataung on the final day of the evacuation and,
after the British forces had left on 1st and 2nd May, the railway staff continued
to work the line to Myitkyina.
All hospital trains and a large number of
refugees were moved to Myitkyina before a series of accidents, caused by
Chinese troops forcing trains to move into occupied sections and so causing
head-on collisions, brought the railways to a standstill on 4th May, 1942.
Burma, 1944-1946
On the re-entry into Burma in 1944, the first line to be brought into action
was that from Myitkyina to Katha, which was operated by the Americans
from the end of 1944.
Indian Tn. troops for the rehabilitation and operation
of lines in Northern Burma started to concentrate at Manipur Road in Assam
in December, but owing to the thoroughness of the Japanese denial policy
little could be done until March, 1945, when the Mandalay area was reached.
The capture of Meiktila on 3rd March and the rapid advance to the south
called for the maximum development of the railway from Myingyan to Thari
and on towards Rangoon.
Very few locomotives or wagons were found in
running order, several stations had been severely damaged by bombing, and a
number of bridges had been destroyed, but fortunately no systematic track
demolition had been carried out.
Bridging material and locomotives were
brought in from India by way of Manipur Road and Kalewa.
2-8-0 locomotives
in sections and assembled at
Myingyan, and six o 6O tender engines were brought in complete.
Track and bridge repairs, including the erection of to 100-foot spans
and numerone smaller spans were comnleted as far south as Tatkon by the
This station remained the railhead for the L. of C. from the
north, as five maior bridges between there and Toungoo had been destroyed
by bombing and could not be repaired until several months later.
The factor which limited capacity d stabilize thefew months was motive
