Chamber of Commerce should instead be reimbur
any expenditure on
military account as supported by vouchers, or else be paid a subsidy.
These
recommendations were not put into effect, and after much argument and dis-
cussion the original rates were restored.
The matter had not finally been
settled before the introduction of the Mutual Aid agreement.
and instructions were given for the job number to be quoted on all indents for
All railway construction projects when sanctioned were given job numbers,
materials to be incorporated in the project.
Similarly, Tn. stores depots were
instructed to quote the job numbers on issue vouchers and to forward a copy of
the issue voucher to the Tn. Finance Office.
Index cards were maintained for all
jobs, showing the quantity of material estimated in the plans and also the amount
of French material, where any had to be used.
It was thus possible to reconcile
st fes issues with the amounts shown as required on the are ermi so to ensure
that all issue vouchers for the job had come to hand.
At the termination of the
North African Campaign, 125 projects had been completed.
All these had
been costed and classified into categories, according to their disposal values.
In the process of costing, a distinction was drawn between recoverable stores
and irrecoverable material such as ballast, in order that data should be available
either for disposing of the works in situ or for recovery. When materials were
picked up and returned to store, they were vouchered under their original job
numbers and records were amended accordingly.
Although certain powers of local purchase and of letting contracts were
delegated to group commanders, these were regarded generally as applicable
in emergency only, and Groups were expected to indent on Transportation
Stores for normal requirements.
Local purchases and contracts for the supply
of such commodities as timber and ballast were generally arranged through
the Transportation Stores Organization, copies of contracts and local purchase
orders being supplied to the Finance Section to facilitate the passing of the
bills for payment.
Other questions dealt with by the Finance section were claims for loss or
damage to goods in transit and the agreement for the operation of the Bone-
La Calle line as a military railway.
Statistics were compiled of the actual user of ports and railways on the
lines of communication compared with their estimated capacities.
It was
agreed that the preparation of statistics of movement in this theatre could best
be undertaken by Transportation as the file copies of railway warrants together
with outward extracts were already being received and scrutinized for other
purposes.
Details of numbers of
and ton mileages were also recorded personnel, tonnage of supplies, passenger
The Italian Campaign
Under the Italian armistice terms the checking of passenger and freight
bills and their payment did not arise.
It was considered, however, that as
the Italian State Railways might later endeavour to offset cost of rail services to
the Allies against any possible reparations which their government might be
called upon to pay, it would be advisable to have some means of checking such
claims if they were preferred.
Recourse was therefore made to the military
freight and personnel warrants, copies of which were sent to the Transportation
Finance Branch for statistical purposes, and the collation of ton and passenge
kilometre foures afforded a ready means of assessment by the adoption of
138
forming the Allied forces.
average rates per ton and passenger kilometre separately for the various nations
This method was also used as the basis of assessment
of traffic charges to be collected from non-military bodies such as Expeditionary
Force Institutes.
In the early stages some effort was made by the Allied Commission to
control State Railway expenditure, which was financed by the Italian govern-
ment out of its own resources.
Where these resources proved to be insufficient,
advances of military lire were made by the Allied Military Government.
The
railway budget, like those of all public services, was examined by the Finance
Sub-Commission of the Allied Commission, generally by comparison with
those of earlier years.
Although during the period of Armistice it was intended
that only military works or civilian works of great urgency should be under-
taken, there was bound to be a tendency to include in departmental budgets
as many capital improvements as could be squeezed in unnoticed, so that when
the final settlement occurred they would at least have their public services
adequately equipped, whether or not the financial position of the country
allowed of payment of the cost of occupation or of reparations.
It was the policy of the Transportation Service to pass bills for locally
purchased materials used in rehabilitation and reconstruction of the Italian
State Railways to that organization for payment.
This procedure was found to
work satisfactorily, the materials being thereby made a direct charge on the
Railway budget.
This system was later extended to the recovery of cash from
the railways for bills paid by the Command Paymaster on contracts entered into
by other major user services, where the materials were used in railway rehabili-
tation projects.
This policy was intended to assist the Italian Government in
a proper appreciation of monies expended on railway construction account
against budget allotments.
The Military Railway Service was a joint British and American service and
works were carried out by units of the two Armies with materials which, although
issued from the British Tn. stores depots, might be of either British, American
or Lease-Lend origin.
Similarly, ownership of mechanical plant and equip-
ment varied according to the unit carrying out the work.
The question of
ownership of stores incorporated in works was complicated by the fact that the
Americans had no transportation stores depots of their own, and therefore
made use of British depots into which materials were dumped.
In these cir-
cumstances it was not possible to specify materials in any one job as British
or American, and therefore they were regarded as "common user."
All construction projects were given job numbers for ease of identification,
and construction units were required to quote these numbers on all indents for
materials to be incorporated in the work.
Issue vouchers from transportation
stores depots were numbered accordingly.
A system of Field and Completion
Reports was introduced in which materials,
both of imported and of local
origin, were described in detail together with manhours and mechanical equip-
ment hours, the latter being broken down to show the type of equipment used.
At the request of the Financial Adviser arrangements were made for the
costing of imported materials and services used in the works, for inclusion in
the Allied Commission account against the Italian Government.
American
and British manhours and mechanical equipment costs on a hire basis were
assessed separately, but in the case of materials issued on a common user basis
it was not possible to make a separation at the time; it was therefore agreed that
a percentage division should be made later, based on the country of origin of
139
WO 277/2
2:
WO27
28
