to Barletta and opened the east coast route as far as San Severo by the middle
This work, which included repairs to ten steel and two masonry
viaducts, was carried out without any transportation stores at all and without
any mechanical equipment other than what could be borrowed from field units.
Bailey bridging was used to replace masonry bridges, and girders of demolished
steel bridges were raised and re-used.
Meanwhile, Following operation "Elstree," the remaining units from Sicily
had moved to Taranto.
By mid-October Group Headquarters, two Railway
Construction Companies and ancillary troops had arrived and were employed
on base development in the Bari and Brindisi areas.
One of these Construc-
tion Companies was soon sent forward to assist the original Company in
opening the east coast line (Line 86) north of San Severo.
The first railway construction unit in operation " Avalanche" did not arrive
until 5th October, one month after the operation had begun.
operation had assumed the capture of Naples by D + 12, and it had been
anticipated that the first tasks would be the development of the port itself and
the railways serving it; in fact, the first requirement was a rail L. of C. from the
beach maintenance areas to the Naples front.
As no railway construction
troops had been included in the assault of follow-up convoys, advance parties
had to organize the civilian staff to begin repair work pending the arrival of
On arrival, the British Construction Company took over work on the
Salerno-Naples line, while an American Railway Operating Battalion which
arrived at the same time started work on the railway system in the port of Naples.
On 8th October, 1943, reconstruction priorities were issued as follows
by A.F.H.Q.:—
—Taranto-Brindisi-Bari-Foggia-northward.
Salerno-Naples-Rome.
Naples-Foggia.
Second priority-Taranto-Metaponto-Potenza-Naples.
-Naples-Pescara by inland route.
Fourth priority-Reggio-Orotone-Metaponto.
The second priority line was not badly damaged and was opened by the Italian
State Railways without military assistance on 5th November.
The third priority
was abandoned and the fourth had already been opened by the Construction
working up from Reggio.
The problem therefore resolved itself
into a decision as to which of the alternative routes between Naples and Rome
and between Naples and Foggia should be repaired.
Work on the east coast
route north of Foggia was already in hand.
Reconnaissance was in hand on
the priority lines, and
as labour and units became available repairs were being
extended out of Naples towards Caserta, where the lines to Rome and Foggia
This line also provided access to maintenance areas which were
rapidly being developed.
By early November, Advanced A.F.H.Q. had been
established at Naples, and the control of all railway construction in Italy had
been taken over by the Allied M.R.S. which allotted the following reconstruction
tasks to British Railway troops:-
The direct Caserta-Foggia line (Line 91) to be repaired.
(b) Repairs to
Repairs to the
east coast line (Line 86) north of Foggia to continue.
Foggia to Potenza.
section Candela-Rapallo to be put in hand to connec
Two British railway construction companies and a railway bridging section
were engaged on line 91 and on depot construction in the Naples area.
Early
in December, the newly arrived South African Group, assisted by one British
Company, took charge of the reconstruction of line 86 from Termoli north-
wards.
The remaining two British Construction Companies were employed
on base development in the areas of Bari and Brindisi.
Work proceeded on
these lines until the end of the year, by which time railheads had reached Vasto
on line 86 and Sparanise on line 90. The Naples-Foggia (line 91) and Potenza-
Foggia (line 302) lines were also completed.
There followed a comparatively
static period, until the offensive of May, 1944. During this period, railheads
were pushed behind the armies as far forward as the tactical situation allowed.
reaching St. Vito (line 86) and Mignano (line 90). At the same time there was
much activity on base development in the Heel and Naples areas, on repairs
to branch lines and on the replacement of temporary bridges by permanent
In March, 1944, it was decided to repair the Naples-Rome coast line (line
89) in addition to the inland route (line 90).
for the attack on Rome whereby the Eighth Army were to attack up the Liri
valley and the Fifth Army along the coast.
It was therefore decided to provide
a rail for each Army, from the main base at Naples.
At the time of the
decision one British Group had units available for work, and these were there-
fore allotted the sections Naples-Villa Literno, Aversa-Villa Literno and Villa
Literno to the north via line 89 to the Mount Massico tunnel, where the American
construction units were to take over.
The British units were then to take over
the repair of line 90 from Mignano to the north.
The plan worked well;
line 89 was opened to the Gargliano River just as the offensive began, and
the construction companies were all ready to follow up the advance.
The offensive resulted in the greatest period of activity which had yet been
experienced in railway construction in the theatre.
towards Rome, units took over sections of the line and put repairs in hand
When the Group had taken over as much of the line 90 as it
could handle (from Mignano to Ferentino), the second Group was moved
from the Heel area with all the remaining units available and took over the
remainder of the line to Rome.
The advance went on far beyond Rome, and
in view of the paramount necessity to press on the rail L. of C. behind the
reconstruction on the East Coast was abandoned beyond Ortona
and the South African Group was moved across to Rome to carry out repairs
to the north of the main Rome-Florence line (line 65) and to repair the rail link
between Rome and the port of Civitavecchia (line 50). Demolitions were
complete in the areas of the main fighting, particularly near Cassino (line 90)
and near Minturno (line 89), but in the area through which the advance had
been rapid there were no enemy demolitions but much bomb damage.
head was opened at Roccasecca on line 90 on 17th June and at Civita Castellana,
120 miles north of Roccasecca, on 7th July.
from Naples via line 90 on 2nd July and the coast route from Naples (line 89)
was opened on 26th July, using a deviation from Campoleone to Rome via
After Rome had been linked with the south, the whole Railway Construc-
tion force was used on extending rail communications out of Rome to the north.
The Americans followed the Fifth Army up the coast, repairing line 50 towards
Grosseto and Leghorn from Civitavecchia. The two British Groups worked
119
WO 277/2
WO27 7/2
