same time the main rail L. of C. from the Rear Maintenance Area to Eindhoven
was further developed as the Channel ports were opened up.
The damage
at Antwerp was comparatively light, although the marshalling yards had been
badly damaged by mortar and shell fire and by the removal of track and turnouts
by the enemy.
for the development of Antwerp as a base.
Extensive railway construction was not found to be necessary
Practically all railway bridges in
Holland had been destroyed, and as the majority bridged canals, replacement
spans of at least 100 feet were required in most cases.
construction units reached their maximum at this stage.
The demands on railvay
By the end of the
year the L. of C.
was open to the river Maas at Ravenstein and Mill, and
railheads were available within ten miles of the forward positions.
Opening of Ports
A port construction and repair company arrived at Antwerp on 12th Sep.
tember and, although the port itself was not badly damaged, major repairs
necessary to one lock were not completed until December.
Quaysides were
cleared of concrete obstructions and scrap steel with the assistance of mechani-
cal equipment sections and civilian labour.
The port of Ghent was opened in December after the main sea locks at
Terneuzen, on the Terneuzen-Ghent Canal, which had been badly damaged
by the enemy and which the Dutch estimated would take six months to repair.
had been repaired by a port construction and repair company in two months.
The port of Brussels was developed exclusively for the discharge of barge traffic.
When Antwerp was opened, more and more resources were deployed on the
canals at the expense of the Channel ports.
A Port and I.W.T. Mechanical
branch
was formed to control all mechanical units and to ensure that the
mechanical engineering services required for the operation and maintenance
of port and waterways equipment were put to the best use.
The main problem
was to re-establish the Belgian waterway organization, as it was evident that
the waterways would become one of the major means of port clearance, particu-
larly in the case of Antwerp.
The whole of the system of canals in Belgium
was in satisfactory order by the end of October except for the Albert Canal,
which was finally put into use for 600-ton craft by the middle of December.
Clearance of the Dutch canals was undertaken by Transportation troops, but
the French canals, which were comparatively undamaged and only obstructed
by demolished bridges, were cleared by the French themselves.
Early 1945
During the first four months of 1945, the policy was to make the maximum
use of civilian resources in order to free troops for the advance into Germany.
More and more of the daily routine of port operation was therefore handed over
to civilians under military control. Caen, Boulogne and Dieppe were handed
over to the French, and although port construction and rehabilitation continued
at Calais, Ostend, Antwerp and Caen, it was found possible by dilution with
civilian hour to release 60 per cent of the nort construction units for work
under the Chief Engineer on the construction of road bridges over the Rhine.
On the same principle traffic Working on the Relian canals was handed over
in March to civilians under the direction of Q(Movements).
This released
units for work on the Rhine and in Holland.
The primary obiect of the Railwas branch throughout the winter was t
assist the Relaians and Dutch to extract the best use out of their mailway systems.
146
Urgent needs for locomotive and wagon repairs and for the provision of bridging
and signal materials were met as far as possible, and stores were handed over
to the civilian railway authorities.
The Dutch Railways needed rather more
assistance than those in Belgium, as the main centre of the Dutch Railways
was at Utrecht which was still under enemy occupation.
Only a few Dutch
officials capable of reviving their railway organization were in the liberated
parts of Holland.
The build-up for the Rhine crossings called for a considerable
amount of construction work and the movement of a large volume of traffic.
The Rhine Crossing
For the operations across the Rhine there was no really effective railway
L. of C. in the British area.
The main railway route over the Wesel Bridge
to Munster, Osnabruck and Hanover was in the American area, and there
was no site between Wesel and Nijmegen that had ever been bridged before.
On the west side of the Rhine the only lines available were single track.
When
work was begun on the line from Emmerich to Rheine, with the intention of
inaugurating a L. of C. working from railtails east of the Rhine, it was found
that the line had been heavily damaged by bombing and practically all the
larger and medium road bridges had been destroyed.
The construction of a
railway bridge over the Rhine was therefore put in hand at Spyck, and it was
planned to run the L. of C. forward over new bridges across the Ems canal and
the Ems river to Bremen.
This rail L. of C. was operating satisfactorily by
In order to provide early information on which a correct appreciation of the
situation east of the Rhine could be based, an advance railway H.Q. was or-
ganized and attached to the forward Railway Construction and Maintenance
Group.
This advance headquarters consisted of 15 officers with interpreters,
20 other ranks and some 20 vehicles and, despite the fact that it was only able
to assemble a week in advance of the operation, proved very successful.
May, 1945
In order to control and operate the railways on the L. of C., an area railway
H.Q. was left at Brussels for Belgium and France, and a second area H.Q.
was formed and moved forward into Germany, after the Rhine crossing, for
the L. of C. in Holland and Germany.
It was hoped to take over control of
the German divisional organization, but owing to evacuation, bombing and
the shortage of British officers and N.C.Os., it was not possible to do this to
any great extent until after the surrender.
However, by 8th May it had become
possible to operate with German coal, locomotives and wagons and a high
proportion of German personnel, all the railways in Germany that could
physically be opened up.
British materials were imported for the line between
Emmerich and Rheine only.
SECTION 3.—RAILWAY OPERATING
June to December, 1944
One Railway Operating Group H.Q. and one Company landed in Normandy
in June, 1944.
Owing to the tactical situation, however, little rail movement
was possible for the first few weeks.
On 4th July, the first train was run from
147
WO 277
W027
28
