from the teredo borer.
The difficulty of finding crews was acc
oy the
fact that most of the pre-war fleet was powered by steam, Whe
all the
military craft except "W" tugs were petrol or diesel driven.
An organization
for recruiting civilian crews in Chittagong was set up by C.A.S.(B), but shortage
of shipping made it extremely difficult to get these recruits into Burma.
The process of handing over to the Civil Affairs organization proceeded
steadily from August, 1945, and with effect from 15th January, 1946, the Irra-
waddy Flotilla Company took over responsibility for all river services in Burma
except in the Arakan and Moulmein areas. Some Tn. units were withdrawn
by the end of 1945, but owing to the difficulty of obtaining civilian tradesmen it
was necessary to retain a number of I.W.T. units to operate essential services
and to work on craft erection and salvage operations.
All units assisting the
Irrawaddy Flotilla Company were finally withdrawn in July, 1946.
Tenasserim, 1945-1946
The occupation of Moulmein and the Tenasserim coast in August, 1945,
necessitated sending an I.W.T. operating company and workshops detachment
to Moulmein to take over the Martaban-Moulmein ferry and the harbour and
creek services in the Moulmein area.
These services were mainly run with
Japanese craft and crews.
The craft were in a bad state of repair and consider-
able effort was needed to keep them in service.
Steel craft could not be used
in Moulmein, Tavoy or Mergui, owing to magnetic mines and, as it was some
time before these could all be swept, some fifteen wooden schooners were char-
tered to assist with the maintenance of the forces in the area. During the fair-
weather period, maintenance of Tavoy and Mergui was carried out by "Z"
craft operating from Rangoon and discharging on to the beaches.
Navy also operated five tank landing craft on this run until February, 1946;
the Naval crews were then withdrawn and the craft were taken over and manned
by Tn. troops.
By the time the bad weather set in in May, all mines had been
cleared and it was possible to start a coaster service from Rangoon to Moulmein,
cargo being transhipped into wooden lighters at Tavoy and Mergui.
All units
were withdrawn from this area in July, 1946, when responsibility passed to the
civil authorities.
Malaya and Netherlands East Indies, 1945-1946
In Malaya, after the Japanese surrender, I.W.T. assistance was given at Port
Swettenham and Port Dickson.
Docks operating troops were employed at
the Netherlands East Indies ports of Batavia, Sourabaya, Semarang, Makassar,
Medan, Padang and Palembang at various times between October, 1945, and
November, 1946.
There was nothing unusual in the work at any of these ports,
although there had to be a considerable amount of improvisation at first owing
to shortage of gear.
Indonesian and Chinese labour, together with Japanese
surrendered personnel, were used as much as possible.
The bulk of the work
naturally centred around Batavia, which was worked entirely by British forces
at the beginning of the occupation.
Gradually, however, the Dutch authorities
assumed responsibility except for the port of Tandiong Priok, which remained
throughout under British jurisdiction.
It was decided that dredging should
not be accepted as a military commitment except on the Tandjong Priok to
216
for themselves any dredging considered necessary.
Did Batavia Canal, but the Dutch were encouraged and assisted to undertake
SECTION 4.-STORES
WO 277/21
27
W027 7/26
28
A Transportation Stores Directorate was formed in Burma in 1942 with the
co-operation of the Department of Supplies and Economic Warfare, as a military
cell within that Department.
The A.D.Tn. and clerical staff were found by the
Department, and a D.A.D.Tn. by the Army. The arrangement was such that
civilian organizations could be utilized and associated as closely as possible with
the military effort, and was capable of expansion as military work increased.
The fall of Rangoon, however, and the subsequent withdrawal and curtailment
of the L. of C. made the import of stores no longer necessary or practicable.
The Stores Directorate was, therefore, never called upon to function as intended
and was closed down on the evacuation of Mandalay.
Burma, 1944-1945
Until the end of 1944, Tn. stores requirements for South East Asia were
mainly port and I.W.T. stores which were issued from Calcutta and from a
small depot in Chittagong.
In November, 1944, a new Tn. stores depot was
opened at Manipur Road in Assam to receive prefabricated craft and other
I.W.T. stores for onward movement to the Chindwin via the Imphal Road.
By January, 1945, this depot was working at full pressure in spite of a shortage
In the following month a Tn. Stores transit depot was established
at Kalewa to serve the craft erection site and for the transit of stores arriving
by road from the Manipur Road depot and consigned to Central Burma.
temporary depot was opened at Alon until the situation would permit of a main
depot being established at Myingyan.
The Myingyan depot was opened in
March, and operated until September when stocks were transferred to Thazi.
On the capture of Akyab in January, 1945, a Tn. stores detachment was sent
from Chittagong with a stock of items for craft maintenance. No depot was
established at Akyab in view of the projected operations against Ramree Island,
the main depot being planned for Kyaukpyu on Ramree.
The Kyaukpyu
depot was opened in February, and in view of the further transfer of craft and
personnel to Akyab and Ramree, the reduction of Chittagong traffic, and the
cessation of coastal traffic, most of the stocks from the Chittagong depot were
moved to Kyaukpyu. With the capture of Rangoon in May, much of the craft
and stocks from Kyaukpyu was moved to Rangoon, but the stores detachment
remained to serve the I.W.T. fleet which was responsible for the maintenance of
Considerable dificulty was experienced from March, 1945, in sending
broad gauge railway to Parbatipur, by metre gauge railway to Manipur Road.
stores to Central Burma.
Stores were issued from depots in India, moved by
by road for 300 miles to Kalewa and finally 250 miles by river to Mvingyan.
inevitably got confused.
This involved four separate transhinments, with the result that consignments
arrival of stores was about ten weeks.
The total time from the submission of indents to the
Owing to the rapidly changing situation,
