(c) Survey, design and construction of additional facilities in the Base
Areas in accordance with Key Plans.
(d) Repair of damage due to sabotage or enemy action.
(e) Co-operation with civilian staffs and the provision of technical super-
vision and assistance for the maintenance of their systems.
Railway construction stores were to be called forward over the first six months.
including 24} miles of track with eight turnouts to the mile and 4,000 feet of
Bridge quantities were computed on an estimate of 25 per cent.
demolitions, but track quantities had not been calculated on any specific plan
as all calculations, based either on the average consumption of a construction
company or on the estimated quantities for Base development, led to the con-
clusion that requirements would be far in excess of available shipping space.
On the establishment of D.Tn's office in Algiers on 13th November, 1942,
contact was made immediately with officials of the Chemins de Fer Algériens
(C.F.A.) and attempts were made to ascertain what stocks of material were
It was soon found that there were considerable stocks
of light rail, with smaller quantities of sleepers and fastenings.
bridging material existed scattered about the country, these obviously being
military stores dispersed to elude the German Armistice Commission. The
C.F.A. system had suffered no damage of any sort and the whole of the main
line was in excellent condition.
Pending the arrival of construction units, the Directorate staff and unit
advance parties started reconnaissance
for rail served depots, first in the
Algiers area, and later at Bone, Philippeville and Constantine.
By the time
main bodies disembarked reconnaissance and planning had advanced sufficiently
to provide adequate work for all units, and enough track material had been
collected to remove any immediate anxiety on that account.
The first depot to be constructed in the Algiers area was the Tn. Stores
Depot, since until reasonable facilities could be provided for the handling and
sorting of transportation stores little progress could be made.
in this area included the R.E. Stores Depot at Reghaia, a marshalling yard at
Hussein Dey and an
extension to the Base Ammunition Depot Railhead at
A Tn. Stores Depot was also constructed at Guelma in the Bone
Philippeville was not suitable for rail development owing to the moun-
tainous nature of the surrounding country and was moreover the smallest port
A composite Transit Depot was, however, started
in the St. Charles district in connection with the line of communication Philippe-
ville-Constantine-Tebessa for the Second (American) Corps operating in
The Depot was designed to accommodate British Engineer
stores and all kinds of American stores, but owing to the advance of the Eighth
Army in the south and the transfer of the 2nd Corps to the north flank, the
project was not completed.
The need for rail development in the Constantine area had not been foreseen
in the early planning stages, but with the establishment of an Advanced Base
at that place coupled with heavy demands for maintenance of the Air Corps
at neighbouring aerodromes it was soon necessary to undertake new construc-
In fact, from the end of January, 1943, until April, Constantine was
the area of greatest intensity of railway construction in the theatre.
For the purpose of maintaining the First Army and the Tactical Air Force
during the winter of 1942/43 and to assist in building up stocks for the advance,
various improvements to railheads were undertaken in the Forward Area,
An Advance Office of the Railway Construction and Maintenance Group
Headquarters was opened at Souk Ahras to supervise these works and to estab-
lish liaison with Sth Corps (of First Army).
Although railway construction plans had been largely influenced by the
expectation of having to repair extensive bomb damage, this proved to be a
much smaller commitment than had been contemplated of could reasonably
have been foreseen. Bomb damage to railways at Algiers was negligible;
damage at Bone, in spite of its being the most bombed port, consisted merely
of a few craters and damaged rails at the station.
Souk Ahras station was
damaged during one raid, and at Tabarka a steel lattice girder bridge was slightly
damaged by blast and splinters and had to be repaired by transportation troops.
The only other deliberate bombing of railway track was at Djedjelli where a
track used by the Navy was hit and had to be relaid. On 16th April, 1943,
Transportation was faced with the unusual task of dealing with the results of
an earthquake, three bridges on the main line east of Algiers having been
damaged by a minor disturbance in the Setiff region. The damage, however,
proved to be much less than at first reported and was soon rectified.
Towards the end of 1942, the enemy began a series of bridge demolitions
on the metre gauge lines south and east of Tebessa, probably in preparation
These demolitions were
carried out by means of small aircraft which alighted near the bridges; the
raiding party then dispersed the native guards, placed prepared charges and
A Railway
Bridging Section was attached to the American Railway Operating Battalion
in that area, and worked on the repair of these bridges and of others damaged
Enemy parachutists made several attempts to attack bridges
on the main line east of Algiers, but owing to the vigilance of local guards and
police all attacks were abortive.
During the operations which led to the enemy retreat from southern Tunisia,
the metre gauge lines in that area were entirely in the American sphere of com-
mand.
A British Railway Bridging Section and a British Mechanical Equip-
ment Section were, however, attached, and together with the Americans were
continuously employed on track and bridge repairs and on the construction of
The first plans for the re-opening of the railways to the east were made in
December, 1942, and this commitment was always in mind when the location
of railway construction units was under consideration.
every effort was made to locate units so that they were fully employed on works.
As American railway troops became available to take over the metre gauge
lines in the south, the plan was altered to suit the changed circumstances.
During the period before the advance, the only unit not fully engaged on
works was a Railway Bridging Section.
This unit was therefore employed on
reconnoitring bridges on the redundant Nebeur line, selecting those suitable
for re-use, dismantling and storing some of them at Muthul and preparing
schemes for the rapid delaunching of the rest if required. Six of these spans
were subsequently used for repairs on the main lines of communication.
quantity of permanent way material was also taken up on the Nebeur line
and stored at Mastouta.
Railway construction troops were disposed, one Railway Construction
115
WO 277/2
WO27 7/2
