in keeping it open. Many of the deviations were in a very unsafe condition.
After the surrender and the occupation of Moulmein and Tenasserim it was
decided to continue operation of the line, using a Japanese railway regiment.
A small Tn. Headquarters, under an A.D.Tn. and staff captain, was set up in
Moulmein to control the operation of the line.
Traffic was concerned with the
concentration of Japanese surrendered personnel and the collection of bodies
by the Graves Commission.
There was also a small amount of civil traffic and
wood fuel for the Burma Railways.
The question of the disposal of Japanese locomotives. and rolling stock
in use on the line and the repatriation of Burmese and Malayan locomotives and
stock
was the subject of somewhat protracted discussion.
It was finally
decided that all Japanese stock, together with some sixty four-wheeled wagons
belonging to the Burma Railways, should be sold to the Siam Railways to assis
them with the movement of rice for export.
The line was considered to have
no military value, and as the Burma Government was not interested in it as a
through line orders were given in May, 1946 for the track on the Burma side
of the frontier to be taken up.
Only about eight kilometres were recovered by
the Japanese railway regiment before the monsoon caused work to be suspended.
Katha-Myitkyina Line
During operations in 1944, nearly all the bridges on the Katha to Myitkyina
line were destroyed.
There was no deliberate demolition of track, but a num-
ber of sidings and loops were removed by the Japanese and some of the track was
damaged by bombing.
The American Army, assisted by British Divisional
Engineers, reconstructed the line during the dry season of 1944-5 and operated
a limited service, partly by steam locomotive and partly by rail jeep, until
September, 1945, when the Americans left.
The line was then fit for the steam
locomotives on the northern section, from Myitkyina to Namti, only. South
of Namti most of the bridges were only fit for jeep trains, and the track was
generally in poor condition owing to lack of maintenance.
To make the line
fit for steam locomotives throughout required the repair of forty-three bridges,
totalling 3,500 feet in length. As this part of the country was not self-sup-
porting in food and as there were no all-weather roads, the reconstruction of
the line was accepted as a military commitment to prevent disease and unrest.
Units were made available by December, 1945, and there were sufficient stores
in the country, but it proved very difficult to move either troops or stores to
the site.
Owing to the state of the railway northward from Mandalay and
the bad condition of the roads, the only route from Central and Southern Burma
was by river to Katha.
The old I.W.T. ghat at Katha was blocked by sunken
craft, and a new unloading site had to be improvised.
The line was made fit
for steam traffic by the end of May, 1946, and this greatly eased the distribution
of materials, but as there were still a number of deviations it could not be
opened for civil traffic until 1st July, 1946.
Railways a month later.
It was handed over to the Burma
Malaya, 1945-1946
Following the re-occupation of Malaya it was found that the whole of the
main line from Singapore to Penang as fit for trafic at a speed of 30 m.p.h,
occupation.
the restriction being due to lack of track maintenance during the Japanese
This line, and
also the Port Dickson and Port Swettenham
208
WO 277/21
27
ranches, were opened in September, 1945. The branch line from Prai to
adang Basar was also opened, thus enabling communication to be estab-
ished with Siam and the Malayan Railway in Kelentan. Most of the east coast.
branch and many minor branch lines had been taken un by the Japanese. The
Railway workshops at Sentul had been almost destroved by an Allied hamkina
raid in March, 1945, and temporary restoration was put in hand!
Railways Supervisory unit, which was formed to assist the F MS p continued
to give assistance until 1st December, 1946, when it was disbanded
Netherlands East Indies, 1945-1946
Railway troops, including an Indian Railway Operating Company, landed
at Batavia in Java in December, 1945, in order to work the rail L. of C. from the
port, which until then had been opprated in an unsatisfactory manner by the
The first task of these troops was to obtain sufficient locomotives
and rolling stock. The Indonesian held locomotive shed at Tanahabang was
therefore seized temporarily with the help of infantry troops, and 11 engines
were removed to Tandjong Priok. More than 900 wagons were collected and
removed to areas under Allied control. Following this step the Indonesian
Railway officials agreed to co-operate, though pressure had to be exerted in
the first few months. Transportation policy was to encourage the Indonesians
to achieve as efficient a service as possible in Batavia, and relations eventually
became very cordial.
The Indian Railway Operating Company which had arrived in December,
1945 was joined early in the new year by a second operating company and by a
Railway Maintenance Company. The latter unit was employed on maintenance
and repair of the permanent way which had been badly neglected during the
period of Japanese operation.
During the early months of 1946, railway
operating detachments were also sent to Semarang in Java and to Medan and
Close contact was maintained with the nucleus staff of
the old State Railways, and plans were prepared for them to take over from
Transportation by the end of March, 1946.
pre-war staff was now working for the Indonesians, however, this could not be
By the end of March all railway troops were withdrawn,
except for an operating detachment which was retained to act as a buffer between
the Indonesians and the State Railway authorities, as the former refused to
allow Dutch train crews to operate over the lines under their control.
bility for railway operation in Batavia was eventually transferred to the State
Railways in November, 1946.
SECTION 3.—PORTS AND INLAND WATERWAYS
Malaya, 1941-1942
The Malayan ports were run in peace-time either by the Singapore Harbour
States Railways.
Board under the Straits Settlements Government, or by the Federated Malay
rai to trenuouslv opnosed "military interference," and no previous working
Before the outbreak of war with Japan, these authorities had
arrangements had therefore been madied bambir nical military assistance
if the civil labour should cease to function.
been provided at all the princin am Prai to practices had been held for the staffs.
Adequate air raid precautions had
209
28
