April, 1944-Northern Holland and Germany
On 18th April, D.D.Tn. (Holland and Forward) became D.D.Tn. (Forward)
with H.Q. in Germany and was responsible for Germany both east and west
of the Rhine and for Holland north of the Waal.
D.D.Tn. (France and Bel-
gium) became D.D.Tn. (Reat) and was responsible for France and Belgium
and for Holland south of the Waal.
As many units as possible were relieved
and moved forward to Germany; only one Railway Operating Group H.Q.
and two Companies were left in the Rear area.
Further extensions to the L. of C. occurred in April. These included the
opening of the Gennap bridge over the Maas and the opening of the line from
Nijmegen to Goch via Cleve.
From 17th April, two or three trains a day
were run from railtails east of the Rhine at Bocholt (17th April), Hamminkel,
Dingden, Isselburg and Empel Rees (all 25th April) to railheads in the Rheine
area, using captured locomotives and rolling stock.
By arrangement with S.H.A.E.F. and the American Military Railvay
Service, three trains a day were also worked from Holland via Geldern and
the American bridge over the Rhine at Wesel.
In addition, two trains a day
were run by German personnel under British supervision between Celle and
Bienenbuttel.
Use was made of German personnel for such duties as manning
level crossings on British-opened lines.
Rhine Bridge, Spyck-May, 1945
On 10th May, the rail bridge over the Rhine at Spyck was opened to traffic
and through working began over the Rhine to railheads in the Bassum-Sullingen
and Rheine-Almelo areas.
This traffic developed by 24th May to the planned
maximum of fifteen trains each way a day over the single line from Emmerich
to Rheine.
By 27th May all construction work necessary for opening the lines
between Osnabruck and Lohne and Bienenbuttel and Hamburg was finished.
Operation, using German personnel, had already been instituted over the
section Celle to Bienenbuttel, and the granting by the American M.R.S. of
eight paths each way a day for British traffic over their section from Lohne
to Lehrte completed the rail link west of the Rhine to Hamburg and thence to
Denmark.
This L. of C. was immediately used up to the limit of eight trains
each way a day.
The opening of the Rheine-Munster line on 18th May gave
a connection to the American L. of C. and enabled coal traffic to be worked
to the British L. of C. from the Ruhr.
SECTION 4.—RAILWAY WORKSHOPS
Caen Shops
The advanced party of a Railway Workshops Company arrived in Caen
on 23rd July, 1944, followed four days later by the rest of the unit.
first three weeks, the Company was employed in clearing debris from the
For the
railway workshops
and examining the machines
found in the shops.
generating set found in a nearby gasworks was repaired and connected up
to the shops to provide power: water supply was also laid on.
Clearance
150
taneously.
The repair of locomotives and rolling stock was begun on 14th
Department on the following day.
August and the first four locomotives repaired were handed over to the Operating
repairs to locomotives and wagons was carried out.
From mid-August a regular programme of
area was taken over and put into working order.
A foundry in the port
mobile workshops arrived and began work in Caen shops.
On 20th August, two railway
A detachment of
one of these mobile workshops took over and put into working order the
pumping station at Falaise.
A Railway Workshops Group H.Q. arrived on
25th August to supervise the work of units already in the theatre, and a detach-
ment of the original company was sent to take over the carriage and wagon
shops at Mezidon.
The workshops
at Caen were fully employed during
September and pressure of work made it necessary to introduce double shift
working.
War Department locomotives began to arrive over the Cherbourg
rail ferry during August, the work at the Cherbourg terminal being carried out
by a detachment of the Railway Workshops Company.
The train ferry at
Dieppe started to operate on 20th September, and a detachment of a second
railway workshops company, which had just arrived, covered this work.
More units arrived in the theatre during the month, and by the end of September
there were under the Group H.Q., two railway workshops companies, six
railway mobile workshops and two ambulance train maintenance sections.
Belgium-Malines
Following the advance into Belgium, a reconnaissance was made of the rail-
way workshops at Malines which had been vacated by the enemy at the beginning
of September.
The objects were firstly to get repair facilities for locomotives
as soon as possible by any means, and secondly to reinstate the workshops as
a heavy repair shop.
The work entailed was formidable, as the wrecked build-
ings were of reinforced concrete and would obviously take months to clear.
The preliminary work of reconstruction started at the beginning of October
and the first locomotive entered the shops for repair on 16th October, although
repairs to the roof of the erecting shop were not completed until five weeks
later.
Installation of machinery was carried out during November.
During
this period power was supplied by a captured German diesel engine, and a
railway mobile workshop assisted with machine work in the early stages.
New erecting and machine shops, complete with overhead traversing cranes,
were built and brought into use by the end of March, 1945.
Development of Shops-October, 1944
A running repairs section was put into operation in the workshops at
Caen during October, and so much work was called for that it was necessary
to work three eight-hour shifts a day.
Shift work was also introduced at the
carriage and wagon repair shop, and the whole of the workshops at Caen was
thereby brought on to continuous production.
Two railway mobile workshops
arrived during October, one of which was sent to Lille for the repair of S.N.C.F.
locomotives, while the other went to Malines.
Towards the end of November,
a Canadian railway workshops company arrived and started work on the
erectional American wagons at Bruges.
Two more ambulance train mainten-
ance sections also arrived during November.
151
WO 27+
W027
2 S
