The plan for "Husky" had allowed for maintenance from the Middle
East up to D + 86, after which A.F.H.Q.
would
assume responsibility;
but,
owing to the unexpectedly early termination of the campaign, this plan
was revised.
It was decided that Middle East provision for the first 86 days
in Sicily ought to be sufficient to support initial operations against the mainland
of Italy, and the maintenance programme from A.F.H.Q. was cancelled.
From
the Transportation point of view this was an unfortunate decision, for Middle
East had provided only for needs in Sicily and consequently there was a serious
shortage of transportation stores,
especially railway bridging,
to support
operations against Italy.
The Campaign in Italy
The planning of Transportation Stores for the invasion of Italy was per-
formed under difficult conditions owing to the indeterminate operational plans.
It was not until August, 1943 that the decision was reached to launch one
operation, mounted from North Africa, against Salerno, and another, mounted
from Sicily, against Calabria.
Subsequently a third operation was launched
against Taranto—-without any plan at all so far as Transportation Stores was
concerned.
In preparation for whatever the future might hold, reserves of stores had
been accumulated in North Africa; additional demands were placed on the
War Office and arrangements were made for stores to be supplied from Middle
East stocks, if the situation should so demand, subject to War Office concurrence.
It was originally planned to receive all stores in North Africa and thence despatch
balanced consignments to Italy until the new depots in the latter country
were firmly established; but this would have been so uneconomical in labour
and shipping that the plan was abandoned, and Italian depots had to accept
some overseas shipments from the outset.
A special task unit drawn from the Stores Company in North Africa was
attached to Fifth Army for the Salerno landing.
Owing to shortage of officers
it was not possible to include a Stores element in the staff of D.D.Tn., so stores
matters were handled by the Tn. 4 (Railway Construction) branch. At first
Tn. stores were accommodated in a beach dump, but following the capture of
Naples the State Railways' Depot north of that city was taken and adapted to
Transportation purposes.
This depot was already equipped with good covered
accommodation, had road and rail access and offered plenty of room for
expansion.
Large quantities of railway stores, including some bridging, were
seized and diverted for military use.
Later a second depot was opened near
Pompeii south of Naples.
The Stores Company from Sicily was included in the Order of Battle for
operation "Baytown" and, on arrival in the Heel area, detailed port detachments
for the four main ports and opened transportation stores depots near Brindisi
and Bari.
At both of these places new construction was necessary and, while
this was in hand, depot working was performed under the difficult conditions
usual in such
circumstances.
Until the arrival of shipments from North
Africa there was an acute shortage of stores, for the reasons already mentioned.
their work was not co-ordinated, but with the establishment of Transportation
Initially the stores detachments in East and West Italy were separate and
Headquarters at Naples, followed by opening of the main East-West railway
on 1st January, 1944, a central stores organization was set up.
It was decided
134
, to retain the existing two main depots on each coast.
These depots and all
other stores activities were to be directed from H.Q. by the Tn. 2 branch which
had representatives in No. 2 District at Bari.
In general this arrangement
continued throughout the campaign although, as operations developed, the
depot at Brindisi was closed and further depots were opened at Rome, Ancona
and Leghorn, together with a number of forward dumps. An additional
depot was also opened a few miles north of Naples.
An unusual circumstance
caused serious difficulty at the depot south of Naples in March, 1944, when
Mount Vesuvius erupted and covered the depot and surrounding country
with a deep layer of volcanic ashes.
At the end of October, 1943, the responsibilities of D.G.M.R. were
extended to include Italy, and a combined Railway Stores branch was formed
on lines similar to those already operating in North Africa.
As the opening date for the Second Front approached it became clear that
the Italian theatre was no longer to have the same high priority, and much delay
was experienced in the receipt of stores from the United Kingdom.
Fortunately,
considerable assistance was forthcoming from the Middle East and this, together
with the maximum use of local resources, prevented what might otherwise have
been a Tn. stores crisis.
Even so, strict economy had to be exercised at all
times and many items were controlled and issued only on the authority of
Transportation Headquarters. This control caused much additional work at
depots and in units, but, in prevailing circumstances, it was essential if a break-
down were to be avoided.
Initially there was no central civil railway stores organization with which
Transportation could co-operate.
When liaison was established with the
H.Q. of the Italian State Railways in Rome, it was found that many senior
officials had previously moved northwards and for this and various other reasons
the Stores Department of the I.S.R. lacked an effective central control.
Before and following the Allied landings, stores had been dispersed to many
hundreds of small stations (and even to monasteries) and under the prevailing
conditions were difficult to recover.
Substantial quantities were still left,
however, in some of the State Railways' depots, particularly at Naples and
Rome.
Military control was exercised over all I.S.R. stores throughout the
campaign.
Responsibility for supplying stores, as the military relinquished
control of parts of the I.S.R. system, was placed on the Allied Commission.
The short-term policy was that the Italian State Railways should supply require-
ments as far as possible by cannibalization, reclamation and development of
local resources,
rather than by ordering from United Kingdom or United
States, and that supplies from military sources would be made only to operate
military and essential civil traffic.
Issues of military or controlled I.S.R.
stores were in general made through British channels in East Italy and American
channels in West Italy.
In January, 1945, a Stores Sub-Committee, consisting
of British and American stores officers, and representatives of Allied Commission
and Italian State Railways, was set up under the Allied Railway Board to
co-ordinate railway stores requirements.
As transportation activities developed in Italy so the load on the Stores
organization steadily increased, especially in connection with the repair of
railway demolitions, and a number of increases in establishment were made.
Between December, 1943, and March, 1945, the Tn. 2 branch at Headquarters
expanded from 4 officers to its final strength of 11 officers, with proportionate
increases in other ranks.
By the end of the campaign the number of In.
135
WO27
7/2
WO27;
28
