transportation developments in all parts of the world, and to be ready to
produce at the shortest notice briefs on any such subject as required by the head
of the branch or at a higher leyel.
They were also responsible for liaison
with the Director of Public Relations on publicity
questions affecting Tn.,
and supplied material for press, radio and film publicity.
in 1941 of the Overseas Port and Transit Committee, an important Inter-
departmental Committee presided over by the Q.M.G.,
Tn. 1(a) provided its
Secretary and took an active part in its work and that of its sub-committees.
Tn. 1(b), while the least spectacular of the three sub-branches, was in some
respects the corner stone of the Directorate. It was responsible, as has already
been said, for organization, administration, technical training and personnel
Under the heading of organization was included responsibility
for the preparation and amendment of War Establishments for every type of
Transportation unit and for the In. section of Force and other Headquarters
in all parts of the world.
The number of different types of Tn. unit increased
from nine at the outbreak of war to over sixty at the end, with many more
types adopted and discarded in the meantime; and apart from the creation of
new types of unit for specialized duties there was a constant demand, as the
result of experience, for major or minor amendments to existing establishments,
every one of which had to be set out in proper form (with some 25 copies) and
argued before the War Establishment Committee of the War Office.
Parallel with this duty went the task of working out in consultation with
other branches of the Directorate, and agreeing with the General Staff, detailed
orders of battle or schedules of Tn. units to be provided for each theatre of
operations and for home and overseas bases.
the war progressed and the shortage of manpower became more and more
acute, a system of rationing was applied at all levels.
Under this system the
Army as a whole was allotted so many men; this quota was divided by the
General Staff between the various theatres, bases, garrisons, etc., after which
the quota of each theatre, etc., was divided among the different arms and
It was within the figure allotted to Transportation in each theatre
that the total establishment of that theatre's Tn. units had to fall.
this system was more elastic than it sounds and on the whole it worked very
well, but it inevitably resulted in occasional cuts below what those responsible
for Transportation regarded as minimum requirements, and so called for a
These two main organizational duties of Tn. 1(b) led naturally up to its
duty in connection with technical training.
The total number of Tn. units
of each type, and the detailed make-up of each type of unit in terms of officers,
warrant officers, tradesmen, etc., having been established in this way, it became
possible to calculate the number of officers and the numbers of each trade
which would be required to form new units within a specified time, and the
further numbers required to make good wastage.
The scale on which wastage
sas to be calculated under various conditions was laid down by the General
This calculation, for so long as it held good, formed the basis of the
with al raining programme of the In. Training Centre and, in collaboration
with A.G. 7, of the programme for the commissioning and training of d
If it was found that facilities did not exist and could not be provided
W92947/17
WO277/21
27
W027 7/26
28
at the Training Centre to train some particular type of tradesman within the
time or in the numbers called for, it was the duty of Tn. 1(b) to ensure that
suitable training was provided elsewhere, either through the Directorate of
Military Training or by arrangement with some other Tn. unit or establish-
ment at home, such as the Military Ports and the Stores Depots.
From the administrative point of view the whole Directorate, and to a large
extent Tn. group and company commanders all over the United Kingdom,
relied on Tn. 1(b) for advice and help on matters of unit administration and
procedure where difficulties could often be smoothed out by personal contact
with the right branch of the War Office.
Tn. 1(b) made it its duty to watch
Army Council Instructions and War Office letters which had a bearing on unit
administration or on the rights and duties of officers and other ranks, and to
bring them to the notice of other branches of the Directorate which had units
under their control.
Finally Tn. 1(b) was the channel of communication between the Directorate
and the Adjutant General's Department (A.G. 7) on all matters relating to the
posting and promotion of officers and the selection of personnel for drafts.
While responsibility for executive action on all such matters rested with A.G. 7,
it was at an early stage recognized as essential that the latter should normally
invite and accept the recommendations of the Tn. Directorate in the selection
of Tn. officers for all purposes.
Tn. units were of so many different types,
each requiring a balanced complement of officers with different technical
qualifications, that the normal system of filling vacancies by promotion on a
general seniority roster was quite impracticable in their case.
ment, whether regimental or extra-regimental, had to be carefully considered
in the light of its specific technical requirements, and an officer fulfilling these
requirements as nearly as possible had to be found.
For this purpose Tn. 1(b)
kept a record of the training and experience, both before and during the war,
of every Tn. officer, and were usually able to produce from this record one or
more suitable names for consideration to fill any type of vacancy.
was not evolved satisfactorily without some questioning by the A.G. side that
the Tn. Directorate was tending to trespass in personnel matters; but such
grounds as there may have been for these complaints were removed by mutual
goodwill and forbearance, and on the whole the system worked extremely
Coming now to the third sub-branch of Tn. 1, the duties of Tn. 1(c) fell
into three categories, which may be described shortly as intelligence, operations
and general research.
On the intelligence side, the primary need was to assess the speed with
which an enemy force could be concentrated in a certain area and the size of
force which could be maintained there, in so far as the known transportation
facilities constituted limiting factors.
Then there arose the question as to
how far the speed of concentration and the size of such a force could be restricted
by any action on our part.
As the allied bombing strengths increased, the
indication of specific transportation targets and the assessment of their relative
values became of paramount importance in this connection.
On the operational side, appreciations were called for on the Transportation
aspects of strategical planning.
This involved the assessment of the capacities
of ports, railways, waterways and (in conjunction with the Engineer-in-Chief's
