W97707/17
WO 277/21
27
WO 27 7/26
28
(Ground) in December, 1943. From this date until June, 1944 these assign.
ments were issued on the joint recommendation of the Transportation and
Engineer Assignment Sub-Committees.
From June, 1944 onwards, S.H.A.E.F.
held the real control of allocations from the joint stockpile, and through close
co-operation between Transportation and the Engineer Corps it was found
unnecessary to use the two sub-committees; British quotas were demanded
and assigned through the Engineer sub-committee to Munitions Assignment
Committee (Ground).
At the end of November, 1944 negotiations took place in Washington for
the 1945 requirements of transportation equipment.
These negotiations
coincided with the visit to America of the Director of transportation from the
War Office and the Tn. representatives from South-East Asia Command and
The negotiations were complicated by the changed situation on
the German front, where earlier optimism had given way to realization that
the war with Germany must continue well into 1945 and with Japan possibly
for one or two years longer: but with the support of the visiting officers the
schedule of 1945 requirements, revised to meet the new conditions, was accepted
complete for provision by the U.S. War Department.
A new feature in requirement and assignment procedure, which was brought
into effect by the War Department as from the beginning of 1945, was a system
known as Supply control.
The main points of this system were as follows:—
(a) Following initial agreement on eligibility for military Lease-Lend, such
requirements as the War Department agreed to provide had to be
phased for monthly production with due regard to productive capacity
and desired delivery dates.
(b) Subsequent to each monthly assignment, progress towards filling the
requirements as a whole was to be reviewed, and if production was
failing to meet the required delivery dates any undelivered balance
would be rephased and possibly would require re-negotiation and
justification.
Fears that this system, if applied rigidly to transportation stores, might lead
to complications
were found to be unjustified, and the
assignment machinery continued to operate as before.
A difficult period was met in April, 1945 in regard to allocations for Burma.
In the opinion of the War Department the unexpectedly rapid advance removed
the necessity for some of the equipment, particularly that required for the river
supply line northwards from Rangoon.
During the early part of 1945, Lease-Lend eligibility of stores required
for Civil Affairs in South-East Asia Command came under review.
British case for provision through military procurement channels was based
(a) the necessity for ensuring that the military forces engaged secured the
support and goodwill of the native population in the operational areas:
b) in the case of transportation equipment, the impossibility of separating
purely military elements from those required for civil maintenance:
(c) the risk of vitiation of military effort through the diversion of military
forces to a security role if, through failure to provide for civil needs,
riots or unrest occurred.
Another question in this discussion was whether captured material should
be available for use.
Negotiations on this matter were protracted and although
every effort was made to obtain Civil Affairs requirements on Lease-Lend
terms either civil or military, Transportation were eventually forced to agree
to procurement, on a cash basis, through the United States Foreign Economic
Administration.
The major items concerned were river tugs, barges, loco-
motives and rolling stock.
Subsequent operational developments eliminated
the need for all except the barges.
By the end of the first quarter of 1945 the
U.S. War Department was becoming concerned lest, at the end of hostilities
in Europe, they would be left with surplus stocks for which there might be only
a very limited local market, thus subjecting the Department to Congressional
censure or criticism.
Although the type of equipment to be provided for
S.E.A.C. differed from European requirements in the case of most items and
often needed a much longer time for production, the War Department con-
tinued to insist on Combined Chiefs of Staff operational authority before
authorizing production.
Fortunately the quantity of equipment required
this juncture was comparatively small, and developments in Burma averted any
urgent call for the delivery of full quotas as originally planned.
Thus a situa-
tion which might have become critical was fortunately avoided.
