for distribution of stores to units, was far outside the area served by normal
port clearance at Bone, and it became necessary to bid for bulk movement of
stores from Bone to Guelma.
This complication arose again when stores were
moved in the reverse direction for shipment to Italy.
It was found, as expected,
that not much stock would be forthcoming from local resources; but arrange.
ments were made as soon as possible to acquire all available permanent way
stores and to place orders for stone ballast,
100,000 tons of which had been
purchased by the end of the campaign.
The C.F.A. were requested to produce
a list of the stores which they regarded as immediately vital for the operation of
their system, and in a remarkably short time they submitted a volume.
Even
before this could be translated into English—a process which took three weeks
it was obvious that the demands were fantastic and that there was not the
remotest prospect of supplying them.
Accordingly a list was prepared showing
both the raw materials and the nearest British equivalent of manufactured items
which appeared to be critically short, and a comprehensive demand was sent to
the War Office.
Although little of this demand was met before the end of
hostilities, the stores were eventually of great assistance in handling the traffic
needed to mount the assaults on Sicily and Italy, and also for supplying certain
critical shortages (such as whitemetal and boiler tubes) in Italy.
The two Stores Depots were established according to plan, but working
conditions were at first difficult on account of bad weather and the fact that the
construction of roads, rail access and shedding proceeded concurrently with
sorting and stocking.
The centre of gravity of Transportation activities soon
moved eastward with the result that demands on the Guelma depot exceeded
those on Oued Omar and it became necessary to move stores in bulk from
Algiers to Guelma.
Other Services were in similar plight and the competition
for rail and coastwise movement was keen.
Towards the end of the year there
was a critical shortage of permanent way material for rail development in the
Bone area, but the situation was apparently saved when a coasting vessel was
allotted to move a cargo of Tn. stores from Algiers to Bone.
The ship was,
however, sunk on the voyage and all the stores were lost.
Fortunately a crisis
was averted by additional rail movements pending further deliveries by sea.
In February, 1943, all British railway stores were placed at the disposal of
the American D.G.M.R., but it was soon obvious that it would not be practi-
cable to integrate British and American stores branches to the same extent as
the technical railway branches.
Among the obstacles were the facts that Tn. 2
was the stores branch for ports and I.W.T.—and, in the case of some items, for
the whole army—as well as for railways, and British stores procedure differed
greatly
from
American.
Moreover,
Transportation were already planning
ahead for operations outside Africa, and it was only prudent to assume that, so
far as Transportation was concerned, these would be conducted under British
direction.
A loosely knit Allied Railway Stores branch was, however, installed
and continued to function until the end of transportation stores activities in
North Africa.
It was agreed that the British and Americans would each be
responsible for maintaining the basic equipment of their own units, that the
Americans would supply locomotives and wagons through
United States
channels, and that the British would supply track and bridging through British
The two main advantages derived from the combined organization
were, first, that it tended to prevent both British and Americans providing
equipment notably locomotives) that was not forthenming from Rritish sources
stores for the same project and, second, that it placed at Allied disposal much
132
An unforeseen drain on the resources of the Stores Company was the
provision
of Tn.
stores port detachments.
Experience soon showed that
unless Transportation was, like other Services, represented at the ports, stores
were apt to go astray or to lie for long periods in the docks.
Moreover, in the
absence of representation, information about impending deliveries was insufi-
cient to enable commanding officers to plan the work of their depots.
Throughout the campaign stores normally provided by other services were
demanded in bulk by monthly or quarterly forecasts and were consigned direct
to Tn. stores depots.
This system was very convenient for unit commanders
who were thus able to collect, with few exceptions, all their technical stores
and equipment from one depot.
In the early stages provision of cargo handling gear became difficult owing
to the fact that much gear which should have been landed in Africa remained
in the ships, and it was necessary for stores depots and port maintenance units
to manufacture gear.
At the same time the need for applying a definite scale
of port equipment became apparent and a unit measure designated
"The
8-ship Port Set" was evolved.
This set was used as a basis for provision until
the end of the campaign and subsequently.
Provision of mechanical equipment, especially mobile cranes, was a con-
tinual source of anxiety.
All services had underestimated their requirements
in the planning stage and inevitably the requisite quantities were not quickly
available from the United Kingdom.
The situation was aggravated by an
acute shortage of spare parts; this led to the cannibalization of some cranes
that otherwise would have been repairable.
The whole Army looked to Trans-
portation for its mobile cranes, and it was therefore particularly unfortunate
that they were in such short supply.
As expected before leaving the United Kingdom, the Stores establishment
proved to be inadequate for the tasks it was required to perform, and, though
some minor additions were made to Tn. 2 in the course of the campaign, all
ranks had been overworked and were feeling the strain by the time hostilities
ceased.
However, the Stores branch could claim to have fulfilled its commit-
ments for, excepting the two items mentioned above, there had been no serious
deficiencies and remaining stocks were not unduly large.
Probably the out-
standing lesson was the need for forward planning, often with little help from
the technical branches.
With the best will in the world technical branches
could not under the conditions of the North African campaign foresee the
future more than a few weeks ahead, and that was not nearly enough to help
the Stores branch.
The most valuable technical experience gained by the Tn. Stores Company
was in the regulation of detail issues to units and the replenishment of small
stores, two vital responsibilities which it had been unable to exercise in the
bulk-holding depots of the United Kingdom.
The Campaign in Sicily
The Order of Battle for operation "Husky" included one Transportation
Stores Company and two Stores officers on the establishment of D.D.Tn's
Headquarters.
Following the assault the Stores Company opened a temporary Depot at
Giannelena (near Syracuse) where stores were received and issued; it also
detailed port detachments for work at Catania and Syracuse.
WO 27
WO27
2.
