ail jeeps were used extensively. first by the Americans on the Kath..
Wvitkvina line, and later by Transportation in Central Burma and to a lesser
were concentrated on the repair of captured locomotives and rolling stock, and
extent in Southern Burma.
"In Central Burma all available workshops resources
by the end of June the position had become fairly satisfactory.
The locomotive
running sheds at Thazi were occupied by a railway workshops compan:
eleven captured locomotives were repaired and some 400 wagons were put into
The chief difficulty then became fuel. A few hundred tons were
found at various points, but most of the running had to be done with wood fuel
until coal could be brought up by river to Myingyan.
Following the recapture of Rangoon on 2nd May, 1945, the direction of
flow of supplies began to change from southwards via Kalewa to northwards
via Rangoon, and an early decision had to be made regarding the relative
merits of the two possible lines of communication to the north, the one by
rail to Prome and thence by inland water transport to Myingyan, and the
other by the main railway line to Mandalay.
The weakness of the Prome
route was the lack of transhipment facilities and a shortage of I.W.T. craft
on the Irrawaddy; on the other hand many more bridges had been destroyed
on the Mandalay line than on the Prome line.
The decision was made to give
top priority to rail reconstruction on the Prome line and to the provision of
craft for the Irrawaddy, and at the same time to put repairs in hand on the
main Mandalay line with any units not otherwise employed.
Damage in Rangoon was extensive, particularly in the port area and in the
railway stations and yards.
Malagon shed and yard were completely devas-
tated; so also were the locomotive shops at Insein, from which the Japanese
had removed most of the machinery.
Some of it which they had used in a
small temporary workshop in the jungle was recovered and, together with new
machinery and generators, was re-installed by the Indian Railway Workshops
Group when they reconstructed the workshops.
Two locomotives only were
found in working order in the Rangoon area, but nine others required only
Sufficient wagons were found for immediate requirements
and a considerable programme of repairs to other locomotives and rolling stock
On both the Prome and Mandalay lines damage was mainly confined to
bridges and stations. In spite of the fact that practically no maintenance had
been carried out during the Japanese occupation, the railway track was in quite
good condition in most places, whereas parts of the main roads to Prome and
Mandalay had broken up badly. It was desirable, therefore, to direct as much
traffic as possible to rail and river.
On the Prome line there was no serious
damage for the first 66 miles from Rangoon, and railhead was opened at Palon
by the first week in June and extended to Thonze on 2nd July.
from Paungde to Prome was also opened to traffic about mid-June, as a loco-
motive and several wagons were found on this part of the line.
repairs to six bridges, including two major reconstructions, was delayed by lack
No complete pile-driving equipment was available and one had to
be improvised. Bridging did not start to amit was agoon until the middle of
July, and even then shipments were not complete.
Some 200 components
had to be made in the railway workshops at instin and I. W.T. dockyard ar
Dalla in order to complete these bridges.
to Prome on 27th August.
The line was opened from Rangoon
Bridge reconstruction on the Mandalay main line proved a longer task.
WO 277/21
27
WO 27 1/26
have taken several months to replace.
ridge 13, seven miles from Rangoon, had been demolished in 1942 and would
avoiding line at Dawbong could be rebuilt.
ite of the demolished bridge for use until another damaged bridge on an
A Bailey road bridge was built on the
and Pyu on 18th July.
pleted from here to Pyu by mid-July, and a service began operating to Pegu
Repairs to five bridges were com-
from Japanese who attempted to break out from the Pegu Yomas across the
There was some interference with traffic for a few days
Sittang
running to Pyu.
The Dawbong bridge was opened on 4th September, giving through
All available units were then concentrated on the seven major
bridge reconstruction jobs between Pyu and Sinthe. Railhead was advanced
to Toungoo at the end of October and remained there until the rest of the
bridges had been repaired. On 8th December the first through train was tun
from Rangoon to Paleik. It was not possible to run through to Mandalay as
the Myitnge bridge was limited to single wagons hauled by a petrol locomotive.
A deviation with a piled bridge was finally opened for unrestricted loading at
Myitnge on 20th January, 1946.
The Railway
department of the Burma Civil Affairs administration
(C.A.S.(B) Railways) was made responsible from the start of operations for
the development of all lines not required for military purposes, and they pro-
gressively took over operation and maintenance of the whole system in South
On 1st January, 1946, C.A.S.(B) Railways ceased to exist,
and the Burma Railways started to function again on a commercial basis. The
only sections which remained under military control after this date were the
lines from Myitkyina to Katha, from Donwun to Martaban, and from Moulmein
Transportation continued to assist the Burma Railways by
lending operating and workshops companies, as well as by doing reconstruction
work, until the end of July, 1946.
Following the Japanese surrender a force was sent to Moulmein and the
Tenasserim coast and, as the waters round the coast were infested with magnetic
mines, it was essential to develop road and rail facilities. A Japanese deviation
from Shwele on the main line to a point near Pegu on the Martaban branch was
used to carry traffic as far as Waw.
The demolished bridges between Waw
and the Sittang River were replaced by Bailey bridges which were used to carry
The Sittang was crossed by an R.C.L. (ramped
cargo lighter) ferry, and traffic was then carried by road from the ferry to Don-
wun and by rail from Donwun to Martaban.
had been completely destroyed, but an improvised ferry was brought into use,
using Japanese craft.
These arrangements proved adequate for the supply of
the force, but an increased service was later required to enable stone to be
obtained from the quarries at Mokpalin.
A rail ferry was therefore constructed
across the Sittang, using P.C. (Port Construction) pontoons.
of this ferry started in October, 1945, and was completed in February, 1946,
after several setbacks.
After the terminals had twice been badly damaged
by the tidal bore on the river, the ferry was abandoned in April, 1946.
Burma-Siam Railway
The Burma-Siam Railway, bilongy the Japanese during 1942 and 1943,
connected Thanbyuzayat on the Burross the ways line from Moulmein to Ye
with the Siam Railways at Banpong.
from Allied hambing and the mon to a lesser, but the Japanese had succeeded
The line had suffered severe damage
207
