CHAPTER V
THE MIDDLE EAST AND LIBYA
SECTION 1.-GENERAL
From the transportation aspect, events in the Middle East theatre of operations
can be considered broadly in five phases.
The first phase, from the outbreak
of war to the summer of 1940, was a period of improvisation.
phase, which was a period of planning and suspense, opened with the fall of
France and the entry of Italy into the war and lasted until the summer of 1941.
In this period occurred the first advance to Agheila followed by the retreat to
the Egyptian frontier, and also the sending of a force to Greece and its subse-
quent evacuation from Greece and Crete.
In the Levant, this was a period of
suspense, with Syria under the control of Vichy and with Axis penetration into
The third phase, from the summer of 1941 to the
summer of 1942, was a period of construction.
At the beginning of this period
the state of suspense in the Levant was terminated by the British occupation of
Syria, Iraq and Persia.
In the Western Desert occurred the second advance and
the subsequent retreat, first to Gazala and then to Alamein.
from the summer of 1942 to the summer of 1943, was a period of movement.
It opened with the enemy at Alamein, threatening the Nile Delta, and it ended
with the advance to Tripoli and later to Tunis.
At the beginning of this period,
efforts were concentrated on extending the base in the Levant and developing
"backdoor" routes to Egypt.
But in October, 1942, the Battle of Alamein
changed the whole tenor of the campaign and the victorious advance across
the North African desert began.
The whole transportation effort was concen-
trated in support of this advance, first on re-opening the Western Desert Railway
and then on the rapid opening and development of the ports-Tobruk, Benghazi,
Tripoli, and many other minor ones.
The fifth and last phase, from the summer
of 1943 to the end of the war, saw the reduction of the base in the Levant and the
mounting of offensive operations against Sicily, Italy, and the Aegean Islands.
At the outbreak of war there was in the Middle East no Headquarters
responsible for the adminstrative co-ordination of the various commands, and
any co-ordination necessary was carried out by Headquarters, British Troops
in Egypt (B.T.E.) which had a small Movements staff.
So far as transportation
was concerned, the first step was to obtain a few officers locally, and one of
these was posted as A.D.Tn. with Headquarters, B.T.E.
In February, 1940,
when G.H.Q., Middle East, at Cairo, was beginning to assume a measure of
administrative responsibility, this officer became Director of Transportation with
At that time there were no active operations in the theatre;
the tasks of Headquarters staff were confined to small-scale base planning and, in
conjunction with the French staff in Syria, to the formulation of plans for active
assistance to be given to Turkey if Germany attacked that country:
With the fall of France and the entry of Italy into the war, this situation-
was drastically changed.
It became obvious that, failing an invasion of the
British Isles, the Middle East would become the most important theatre of
operations for some time to come. The defence of Egypt and the Sudan and
of ODI TO RUN AND Paul Holl the south
Mediteraran and Middle Cast eenpaw le theretore or paramount impor-
In August, 1940, a Director General of Transportation with the rank of
was approved for a Water sportation Headquarters staff, with a Directorate
of Docks and Inland ion see train the Ba a Directorate of Railways, on similar
lines to the organization set up in the BE.. in France. This organization was
not, however, fully working before the end of 1940.
Railway construction in the development of depots in Egypt and the Sudan
was, at this time, undertaken by the Egyptian State Railways (E.S.R.) and the
Sudan Railways respectively.
The latter also undertook a certain amount of
new construction required for the maintenance of forces engaged in the defence
of the south-east frontier and agreed to provide railheads for offensive opera-
tions against Eritrea.
The available transportation troops were fully employed
providing detachments to work harbour craft in the recently captured Western
Desert ports, "double-banking" E.S.R. personnel on the Western Desert
Railway, and constructing base depots in Palestine. Projects under investi-
gation included the extension of the Western Desert Railway, the extension of
the Palestine standard gauge system to link up with the Syrian railways, and
the construction of a railway bridge over the Suez Canal.
In Egypt itself, the rapidly increasing import tonnages, together with the
possibility that use of the Mediterranean ports might be denied by blocking
of the Canal or by enemy air attack, rendered necessary an ambitious programme
While long-term projects for increasing the capacity of
the Suez area were under consideration, a series of lighter wharves was con-
structed in the Canal to provide some immediate relief.
of a semi-permanent nature in the base port area, were undertaken by the Director
Port operating, except in the captured ports, was in the hands of
the civil agency, though to some extent directed, supervised and assisted by
the Docks Directorate and such docks operating units as were available or
As the number of docks operating units in the command
increased, so also did the calls on their services arising both from operational
commitments, such as the provision of detachments for the ports in Greece,
Crete, Syria and the Western Desert, and from the completion of new military
With the fall of Greece and the general deterioration of the situation in the
Mediterranean, attention was focused on port development south of the Suez
Canal and on the development of the Nile Valley routes.
It was decided to
proceed with the provision of deep water berths at Suez, which involved further
railway construction.
At the same time a project was prepared for developing
Safaga, a small phosphate port on the Red Sea, and for constructing a new
railway from this port to connect with the main E.S.R. line at ena.
use of Port Sudan was also planned in conjunction with the proposed rail-river
Nile Valley route.
The successful campaign in Syria further extended the scope of transportation
commitments with the opening of the ports of Beirut and Tripoli.
railway side, a reconnaissance was put in hand for a standard gauge connection
between the Palestine Railways at Haifa and the Syrian Turkish systim ay
Tripoli; this was an alternative to the route via the Jordan Valley, a preliminary
survey for which had been carried out in the latter half of 1940.
was quit
W0277/21
27
W027 1/26
28
