civil code continued to apply until Phase II of the emergency scheme was
brought into operation.
During Phase II, which operated only in the spring of
lou can Chittagong Akhaura and Akhaura-Lumding durine tu
period of Japanese pressure on Imphal and Kohima, these units were under
military direction and control in all respects.
in Assam, particularly in the Manipur Road area.
In the early months of 1942 very serious congestion of traffic was occurring
This was due mainly to
the fact that more stores were being sent forward than could be dealt with by
the ferry across the Brahmaputra at Pandu or could be cleared from the Manipul
Road railhead.
All available railway operating unise, to to Asing a Railway
Group H.Q. and four Companies, were sent to Assam to assist,
the operation of Manipur Road station itself being taken over by the military
in June.
By July, 1942, there were two Indian Railway Operating Groups on
the Assam L. of C., one at Lumding with companies at Pandu, Manipur Road
and Mariani, and the other at Akhaura with companies at Laksam and Mymen-
By the end of the year the Group from Lumding had moved to Gauhati
and had a fourth company at Dibrugarh, while the company in the other Group
which was formerly at Mymensingh had been moved to Badapur.
An Indian
pirating company was at Calcutta, and a British comtian it colmanithat.
A Railway Workshop Group had been set up at Gauhati, with companies in
the workshops at Dibrugarh and Perambur.
During 1943, flood breaches occurred in the monsoon period on the East
Indian Railway west of Calcutta, causing temporary difficulty in moving up
supplies to Assam.
The raising of new units continued, and by this time
training facilities had improved and proper collective training could be carried
By the end of the year the number of units deployed on the Assam L. of C.
and elsewhere in India had increased considerably.
In Upper Assam there
were two Groups, one at Lumding, with five companies between Pandu and
Mariani, and the other at Tinsukia with two companies from Mariani, and the
other at Tinsukia with two companies from Mariani to Dibrugarh and Ledo.
One Group was at Chittagong with four companies on the Hill Section and in
East Bengal.
One Group was at Calcutta with two companies, while a fifth
Group was in Madras with three companies.
The Railway Workshops Group
continued to be at Gauhati, and was joined by an additional company at the
Perambur shops.
Two Yard Operating Sections had been formed and were
running the yards at the two railheads of Manipur Road and Ledo.
In October, 1943, in order to ensure that the L. of C. could carry the trafic
required by the programme laid down at the Quebec Conference, the American
Army offered to operate the metre gauge section from Khatihar to Ledo.
offer was accepted, and the American Military Railway Service took over on
1st March, 1944.
Two Indian Railway Operating Groups, however, remained
and continued to work alongside the Americans.
The latter, while continuing
to work in general in accordance with Americans, le book, relaxed a number of
safety precautions in order to speed up working, making up for this relaxation
by providing more adequate skilled supervision.
In January, 1944, the rail
L. of C. from Akhaura to Chittagong was taken over by 14th Army.
began.
In March, 194S, the withdrawang was taken Assam for service in Burma
The end of the war in al of units from importance of the Assam
railways to fall very quickly.
The section from Khatihar to Pandu was handed
back to civil operation on let Oether and the remaining sections on 16th
October, 1945.
186
SECTION 4.-RAILWAY CONSTRUCTION
Development of Assam L. of C.
With the approach of the develo to the often rolf in of ludia in the
beginning of 192, ese areas becamlo pment of the wholly inadequate railway
facilities serving these areas became essential.
the Assam L. of C, running from Calcutta, across the river Brahmaputra from
This applied in particular to
Amingaon to Pandu, and thence to the northeast corner of Assam.
was broad gauge from Calcutta to Parbatipur, where stores had to be tran-
shipped to metre gauge for the remaining sections.
The metre gauge section
was single line throughout, and was broken at Amingaon by the river Braham-
putra, where there was a rail ferry capable of handling only 125 wagons a day.
A subsidiary route left the broad gauge at Santahar and crossed the Brahma
putra by ferry at Tistamukh, running through a hill section to join the main
route at Lumding.
The Tistamukh wagon ferry also served the route to Chitta-
gong, which branched from the hill section at Akhaura.
The three main destinations for stores and supplies were the Advance Base
at Manipur Road for the Imphal road into Burma, the Dibru-Sadiya Railway
for the airfields used by the American Air Ferry Service to China and for
the Ledo
Road, and Chittagong for operations in Arakan.
Chittagong
could be supplied also by sea from Calcutta and the rail route could therefore
be supplemented by I.W.T.
It was obvious that the greater part of the rail
development required would be on the lines serving Assam.
The development
of the Assam L. of C. was first proposed in April, 1942, by which date it was
clear that a greatly increased capacity would be required.
The original proposal
was to double the line throughout but, unfortunately, this was not approved
at the time.
The first railway construction troops were sent to the Assam L. of C. in
March, 1942, and work was started on development of the Manipur Road and
Ledo railheads.
By October there were two Railway Construction and Mainten-
ance Groups, each with two Companies, one in the Ledo area and the other
at Manipur Road.
A third Group was at Akhaura on the Chittagong L. of C.,
with one British Railway Construction Company in the Chittagong area
assisting the civil railwaymen on maintenance and the repair of bomb damage.
A fourth Group, with two Companies, was at Whitefield Ordnance Depot
near Bangalore.
One Company was at Sorbhog assisting the Bengal and Assam
Railway in the repair of flood damage to the metre gauge line on the west side
of the
Brahmaputra
A British Company was engaged on the construction
of the rail facilities of the new Reserve Base at Benares.
Panagar and Avadi Base Areas
In the spring of 1943, as part of the development of India as a base for
operations against the Japanese, it was decided to construct two new base
areas in India,
one west of Calcutta and the other near Madras.
The site
for the first was selected at Panagar in Bengal, and for the second at Avadi.
The survey for these two bases was carried out by railway survey companies,
but the construction was done in each case by the civil railways concerned.
Transit depots to serve these bases were constructed at Calcutta and at Waltair,
near Vizagapatam, the first by the civil railway and the second by a British
railway construction company.
A small transit depot for inwards traffic
through the port of Cochin was also laid out at Podanur, the work being carried
out by the civil railway.
187
WO 27
W027
