Victoria Dock, Bombay
In April, 1944, a ship in Victoria Dock at Bombay caught fire.
included nearly 1,200 tons of ammunition, aict this exploded, causing very
considerable damage to the port.
Ships in Victoria Dock and in the neigh-
couring Prince's Dock were sunk or badly damaged, cranes were overturned.
buildings were levelled to the ground and parts of the quay walls were destroyed
or badly damaged.
Responsibility for co-ordinating the work of reconstruc-
tion was given to the Tn. Directorate, and a D.D.Tn. was appointed to take
charge of the work.
Under the D.D.Tn. were a Port Construction Engineer
who dealt with the reconstruction of the Dock itself; a C.R.E., Clearance, who
dealt with the clearance and removal of the considerable quantities of debris:
and a Commander Royal Engineers (C.R.E.) Reconstruction, who dealt with
the rebuilding of demolished warehouses and the re-laying of hydraulic, electric
and water facilities.
The C.R.E. Naval Works (in so far as the port was con-
cerned) and the Engineering Department of the Port Trust also came under the
general control of D.D.Tn.
for work on the reconstruction.
To assist and
advise on the daily problems which arose, a Port Reconstruction Co-ordinating
Committee was formed consisting of representatives of the Royal Navy, Sea
Transport, Ministry of War Transport, Port Trust and Bombay Area Com-
mander.
'In spite of the very considerable damage, the Victoria Dock was
repaired and opened by October of the same year.
The work was carried out
Transportation and other Engineer units,
assisted by Pioneers, Indian
Infantry, some 550 British troops of low medical category, and by Indian and
Italian lorry drivers.
The Engineering Department of the Port Trust and, in
the early days, the Royal Indian Navy and the Director General of Ship Repairs,
also assisted.
SECTION 7.—STORES
Engineer Stores Depots
Until April, 1942, Transportation stores in India were treated as Engineer
stores, and were held in engineer stores depots.
During this period the stores
consisted almost exclusively of permanent way, rolling stock and locomotives,
obtained from the Indian Railways and destined for Iraq, Persia, the Middle
and Far East.
India was financially on a peace-time footing, and authority
for the procurement of stores could not be obtained until a firm demand had
been received from the theatre of operations concerned.
It was therefore
impossible to build up any reserve stocks of stores or material.
Formation of Tn. Depots, April, 1942
In April, 1942, the port of Calcutta was closed and military stocks in the
Calcutta area were withdrawn.
The opportunity was taken, when the Engineer
Stores Depot was cleared, to separate the Engineer and In. Stores that had been
The first In. transit stores depot was opened at Bhavnagar, the
port selected for the shipment of Tn. stores overseas.
In May, 1942, work
was started on the construction of a central In. stores depot at the Benares
Reserve Base, and this became, until the end of 1943, the main holding depot
for Tn. stores in India.
In August, 1942, separation of Tn. items from the
stocks in the Engineer Stores Depot at Karachi took place.
By January, 1943,
194
one Tn. Stores
Manipur Road and Chittagong: while a third was at Calcutta.
Planning
Planning and ordering of stores for possible use in a campaign against the
Japanese began actively in April, 1942.
This planning covered preliminary
requirements of locomotives, rolling stock, permanent way and bridging.
the formation of the Overseas Planning Section of the Tn. Directorate in
October,
1942, more detailed stores planning was possible, and all likely
requirements were planned and orders placed accordingly.
Procurement
To the greatest possible extent orders were placed on Indian sources of
supply, but the majority of main items had to be ordered from outside India.
The great difficulty was the procurement of steel in competition with other
users.
Until mid-1943, all Indian requirements for rails had been met from
India, but the position became far from secure because planned programmes
failed for a variety of reasons.
In order to cover this position and to ensure
that stocks of rails would be available when required, it was found necessary
to place a demand on the United States for 665 miles.
Orders for all bridging
requirements, with the exception of nuts and bolts, were placed with Indian
manufacturers.
This bridging equipment included Callendar-Hamilton spans
and light trestling, together with short spans of built-up girders or rolled steel
joists.
Although the Tn. Directorate placed orders for Tn. stores for oversea
commitments only, such items as arrived in India before they were actually
required overseas, and which could be used in India with advantage, were
put into service as required.
For example, locomotives imported for eventual
use in Burma were used on the Assam rail L. of C.
Planning for Burma
While the preparation of an administrative plan for the re-occupation of
Burma ensured that some at least of the stores required for that purpose would
become available over the next two years, until the end of the war plans were
being made for operations only two or three months ahead.
The provision
of specialized Tn. equipment at such short notice was very difficult, and often
the operations themselves were hampered by insufficient or unsuitable equip-
ment.
For Tn. stores a broad planning directive well in advance is required,
and stores must be ordered on a pool basis rather than linked with operations
or phases in an operation.
This, however, was contrary to American Lease-
Lend policy, whereby assignment of equipment from the United States was
only sanctioned against approved operations, and the stockpiling of equipment
for issue on an "as required" basis was not permitted.
India Base
Planning for the development of Transportation for the India Base was
hampered by security dificulties in notifying forward requirements to the
civil agencies.
To overcome this problem a Joint Transportation Committee
was set up in 1943, under the chairmanship of the Principal Administrative
195
westert
wO27t
WO2777
2
