of coast line, had to rely almost entirely on wa
This entailed the employment of a large numbe
"puffers," to serve the 18 waterheads where troops were lo
of these craft together with their civilian crews were hired ai
the campaign, and as no military personnel were available
fleet, an I.W.T. organization was started and maintained by a very
of the Royal Navy.
This system was a failure, largely owing to the totally
inadequate numbers of staff available.
On the arrival of IV Corps on 11th
May, out of six small steamers and some hundred and twenty puffers on the
books, the I.W.T. organization could only give the location of thirty-eight.
The rest were missing, although most were known to be loaded with military
stores, and this state of affairs constituted a serious danger to the safety of the
In order to remedy this situation, A.D.Tn. on his arrival requested authority
to take over the I.W.T. organization and run it with the railway construction
and operating company which had been included in the Force to repair and
operate the Narvik railway and which was then due to arrive in the theatre.
Alternatively he suggested that Movement Control should take charge of the
organization, and offered to place a detachment of the railway construction and
operating company at their disposal for the purpose.
approved, and on the arrival of the company two officers and a hundred men
were attached to Movement Control.
Within a week, 80 craft, each with a
soldier on board, were under control and performing useful work.
the final evacuation took place, the I.W.T. organization had expanded to 13
officers and 260 men and controlled a fleet of 140 craft.
to say that the Force could not have been evacuated in an orderly manner without
Throughout the operation air raids were frequent, but as these were directed
mainly against shipping few casualties were sustained among Transportation
Two small steamers and six fishing craft working for Transportation
were sunk and also five merchant ships.
At the end of May orders were received
for the Force to be evacuated to the United Kingdom.
22.00 hours on 3rd June, 1940, and was completed at 01.00 hours on 8th June.
During this period the whole force of 25,000 men was embarked with some 700
vehicles and 2,000 tons of valuable stores.
All other vehicles and stores had
to be abandoned.
No Transportation troops participated in operations elsewhere in Norway
during this campaign.
SECTION 3.-ICELAND
Following the Allied occupation of Iceland in July, 1940, a docks operating
company was sent to the island and set up its headquarters at Reykjavik with
detachments at the subsidiary port of Akureyri, at Seydisfjordur and at Hafnarf-
jordur, the last named being a Naval port.
The Company Commander acted as
senior Transportation representative on the island until September,
when the appointment was made of an A.D.Tn. at Headquarters British Troops
The problem in Iceland was one of handling military stores at a number of
small and inadequate ports.
Stores were received at Reykjavik from both
WO 277/21.
America, and were there either landed or transhipped to smaller
mers for carriage to the various garrisons on the island.
In July,
1941 the first American troops arrived on the island, and from August, 1941 to
August, 1942 the American Army took over an increasing share of the garrison
and also took over part of the docks working. In August, 1942 the first part of
the British Docks Company was returned to the United Kingdom, and in the
following month the remainder of the unit also returned, having handed over
all its former commitments to the Americans.
SECTION 4.—EAST AFRICA
The East Africa Command covered a vast region of eastern and central
Africa, stretching from latitude 12 degrees North to 30 degrees South and
straddling the territories that lie between the Indian Ocean and the Great Lakes
Basin; Ethiopia, British and Italian Somaliland, Tanganyika, Kenya, Uganda,
Nyasaland and Northern Rhodesia.
In addition, it covered a wide area of
ocean, including the islands of Zanzibar, Madagascar, Mauritius, Reunion and
The main lines of communication through the Command consisted of the
following seven routes:—
(a) Northern Areas.
The main L. of C. to the north, exclusive of shipping,
was from Nairobi to Nanyuki by the Kenya and Uganda Railways
and thence by road convoy to Mogadishu and Dire Dawa.
(b) The Congo L. of C.
This route, which was first opened in May, 1942,
ran from Nairobi to Kisumu by train, from Kisumu to Mwanza by Kenya
and Uganda Railway Steamers, thence to Kigoma by the Tanganyika
Railways, by steamer to Albertville in the Belgian Congo, to Kabalo
on the C.F.L. Railway system, by road to Kamina, by rail to Ndola via
Elizabethville on the system owned by the Belgian B.C.K., and lastly by
the Rhodesian Railways to Lusaka, Southern Rhodesia and South
(c) The Great North Road L. of C.
This linked Nairobi with Lusaka, via
Arusha, Dodoma, Iringa, Mbeya, Mpika and Broken Hill: and thence to
Livingstone and South Africa.
After the opening of the Congo L. of C.,
portions of this route fell into partial disuse.
(d) The Great East Road L. of C.
This was entirely by road from Lusaka
(f) The West Nile L.. of C.
From Tororo to Arua.
(g) South Uganda. From Kampala to Kabalo.
The railway systems which were utilized were:-
(a) The Franco-Ethiopian Railway (Ethiopia).
(b) The Kenya and Uganda Railways (Kenya).
(c) The Tanganyika Railways (Tanganyika).
(d) Compagnie des Chemins de Fer du Congo Supérieur aux Grands Lacs
Africains (C.F.L.) (Belgian Congo).
(e) Compagnie du Chemin de Fer du Bas Congo au Katanga (B.C.K.).
(f) Rhodesian Railways (Northern Rhodesia).
(8) Sudan Government Railways and Steamers.
(h) Egyptian State Railways.
W027,
28
