It was soon evident that implementation of the full system of port docu.
mentation as set out in the manuals was causing serious delay to ship discharge.
After careful investigation it was decided that this delay was not fully offset
by the advantages
derived from full documentation,
which was therefore
restricted in future to one or two ships selected at random from each convoy
cargoes particularly liable to pilferage (notably N.A.A.F.I. stores).
A system of Convoy Notes between Docks and Depots was, however, intro-
duced with the object of eliminating losses en route, because several cases of
loss had already come to light, including complete lorry loads of military stores
diverted to the local black markets.
At the end of November, 1942, there were five docks operating companies
at Algiers, two at Bougie, three at Bone and half a company at Philippeville.
One Group H.Q. was responsible for Algiers and Bougie and the other for Bone
and Philippeville.
Between November, 1942, and May, 1943, as the mainten-
ance tonnage required in Eastern Algeria increased, docks units were gradually
moved eastward, their loss from the western ports being offset by the increasing
number of civilian stevedores who became available, until in May, 1943, over
80 per cent. of the tonnage passing through Algiers was handled by civilians.
By the end of June, 1943, two and a quarter million tons of cargo and 65,588
vehicles had been discharged through the British operated ports.
A further
quarter of a million tons had been loaded for coastwise movement between
North African ports.
Initially all dock working was performed by troops, but
the number of civilian dockers increased steadily, making a valuable contri-
bution towards the discharge of the gradually mounting rate of imports and
releasing military docks units for future operations.
Except at Bone,
enemy air attacks did not seriously interfere with ship
working and the work proceeded very much as planned.
The limiting factor
was always port clearance or ability of depots to receive stores rather than
ship discharge.
At the outset docks units were very short of mobile cranes and
other mechanical appliances.
As Algiers was the only port equipped with
serviceable quay cranes this shortage of mobile plant was a serious handicap
when dealing with loads that could not be easily manhandled.
Docks units
had much hard work and little leisure, especially in the early stages, and in
general handled tonnages at least equal to estimates.
On the whole, dock
operating activities had closely followed the lines foreseen during the planning
stages before leaving the United Kingdom.
The Campaign of Sicily
Docks units in the Order of Battle for operation "Husky" were:—
Two Docks Group Headquarters.
Nine Docks Operating Companies.
One Stevedore Battalion.
Two Port Maintenance Companies.
One and a half Inland Water Transport (Port Operating)
Companies.
One "Z" Craft Operating Company (Indian).
The operation began on 10th July, 1943, British forces landing on the
south-east coast of the island while the Americans landed on the south coast.
124
vehicle and store ships.
The initial landings in the British sector involved the discharge of thirty-six
The landing proceeded according to plan in spite of
enemy air opposition, and the ports of Syracuse and Augusta were soon captured
in workable condition without any serious damage to quays.
The follow-up
flight of personnel ships was discharged at Syracuse on 13th July, and the first
stores ships were berthed in that port on the following day.
So far as Augusta
was concerned, the first stores ships entered the port on 17th July, although
landing ships and craft had arrived on the 14th.
As the ports of Syracuse
and Augusta were organized, so work over the beaches was reduced until, by
the end of July, only one beach was in operation.
Catania was not captured until early in August-rather later than had
been expected.
The development of operations, however, was such that it was
not necessary to use Catania to any large extent for discharge.
Instead, the
port was organized to deal with the loading of craft for the assaults that were
already being planned against the toe of Italy.
By the middle of August, the whole of the island had been occupied. As
in North Africa, sporadic enemy air attacks were directed against the ports
and a small number of casualties was suffered by docks personnel.
During the initial stages ship working proceeded under difficult conditions.
All concerned had to work long hours, at times under enemy air opposition.
Several ships were sunk or damaged but casualties were not unduly heavy.
Once the ports were working, the only serious difficulty was the acute shortage
of civilian labour, which meant that military docks personnel were again required
to work abnormally long hours.
Clearance facilities were much more satis-
factory than they had been during the North African campaign.
This was
due to the rapid build-up of road transport which was greatly facilitated by the
use of large numbers of L.S.T.s.
Work in the ports was directed and co-ordinated by Port Control Commit-
tees.
The members of these committees were the Naval Officer in Charge,
Sea Transport Officer, Port Commandant and a representative of Area Head-
quarters.
Much difficulty arose from the fact that some units were organized
on the Middle East "Movements and Transportation" basis, whereas others
followed the usual Transportation Service organization.
As Eighth Army
from the Middle East was responsible for the operations it was decided to use
the "Movements and Transportation" organization pending further orders.
As in North Africa, I.W.T. (Port) Operating Units were included in the
order of battle, but the only craft provided from outside Sicily were those of
one "Z" Craft Operating Company from the Middle East.
Some ramped
cargo lighters (R.C.L.s) had been ordered for the I.W.T. (Port) Operating
Companies but failed to arrive, so these units had once again to rely on the
capture of civilian tugs and barges.
Owing to the small amount of demolition
carried out by the enemy, a number of tugs and barges fell into our hands
at both Syracuse and Augusta.
Considerable use was made of Royal Navy
landing craft for lighterage, but most of these craft were soon withdrawn to
prepare for further operations.
The port maintenance companies in Sicily had considerably more and a
greater variety of work to do than they had in North Africa.
There was a
far greater quantity of mobile plant to maintain, and the maintenance of "7"
craft also became their responsibility.
At both Syracuse and Augusta the
Port Maintenance Company established itself in the sea-plane base, where good
workshop facilities existed.
125
WO27
28
