at about the same time Brigadier Sir Godfrey Rhodes arrived in Persia to act
as Director of Transportation in that country.
The development programmes which were in hand at this stage aimed,
in Iraq, at a capacity of 9,000 tons a day through Basra and subsidiary Gulf
ports, of which 7,400 tons were to be moved into base depots, while 5,700 tons
a day were to be moved out of base depots to railheads.
At the same time,
the Trans-Persian Railway was to be developed by extending the port of Bandar
by the importation of locomotives and rolling stock, by improving
the water supply, and by the use of water transport between Khorramshahr
and Ahwaz, to carry 2,000 tons a day through to the Caspian.
to reach these target figures by the late spring of 1942.
In February, 1942 the forces in Iraq and Persia were transferred from the
control of C. in C. India to that of C. in C. Middle East, and the two Directors
of Transportation came under the local control of D.Q.M.G. Tenth Army
and under the general supervision of D.Q.M.G. (Mov. and Tn.) at G.H.Q.
This change led to temporary difficulties, particularly in Irag,
as demands for stores had to be re-submitted and fresh authority obtained
for issues, but these difficulties were soon overcome and the programme went
The base depots at Shualba were completed and
stocked and a further series of base depots was built in the area Hindiyah-
The I.W.T. organization was
additional berths were opened at Basra docks, and with the arrival of British
and Indian technical troops the tonnage handled steadily increased.
Meanwhile good progress was made in Persia towards the initial target
of 2,000 tons a day, but the growing needs of Russia led to constant pressure
to expand still further the capacity of this, the one safe line of supply to the
The target was successively raised in March, 1942 to 4,250 tons
a day from the Gulf to Andimeshk, and 3,350 tons thence northwards, and in
August of the same year to 6,500 tons a day to Andimeshk and 5,200 tons
from that point northwards.
Each of these increases naturally involved heavy
additional demands for locomotives, rolling stock, port equipment, craft, etc.,
which by this time were coming very largely from American sources.
In August, 1942 the Persia and Iraq Command (P.A.I.C.) was established
as a separate Command, and a combined Movements and Transportation
Headquarters under Brigadier Sir Godfrey Rhodes as D.Q.M.G. (Mov. and Tn.)
was set up at G.H.Q. Baghdad to control Movements (Iraq and Persia), Trans-
portation (Iraq) and Transportation (Persia).
In October, 1942 it was agreed between London and Washington that the
United States Army should gradually take over responsibility for the operation
of the Gulf ports and of the Persian railway from the Gulf to Teheran. The
handover was successfully completed by the end of March, 1943, when the
Transportation Directorate in Persia was closed down.
By this time, with the removal of the German threat to the Middle East
and the Caucasus and with the completion of depot construction and stocking,
the volume of traffic over the Iraq L. of C. began to fall, and a start was made
with handing back full operation and control of the railway to the civil
At the end of 1943 the evacuation of the depots at Hindiyan
and Mussayeb began, their stocks being shipped to Middle East and India.
During 1944 the evacuation of depot stocks and the repatriation of imported
river steamers, locomotives and rolling stock and of technical troops continued,
and inland water transport was handed back to civilian control.
of this year the Irans-Persian L. of C., built up by the Americans to the full
plantica capacity, was adie to handie all alu to Kusod dame winout assis.
tance ош trag; and by rebruary, isto te muportance un uns teate had
and Persia reverted to Middle East Command.
so shrunk that the P.A.l. Command was abolished and the forces in Iraq
SECTION 2.-RAILWAY OPERATING AND WORKSHOPS, IRAQ
The policy decided upon for the running of the Iraq rail L. of C. was to
make use of the existing (Irag State Railway) organization as far as possible
and to give military assistance where necessary. It was found, however, that
this military assistance had to be given on a greater scale than had been
originally anticipated. As a result of the treatment they had received during
the troubles in the second quarter of 1941, a number of the civil employees
resigned or deserted and, although efforts were made to recruit both locally
and in India, the railway remained short of traffic staff and yard staff. Military
officers and men were therefore lent to enable the railway to carry on.
of personnel continued throughout 1942 and this, combined with the fact that
only five railway operating companies could be provided instead of the twelve
asked for, made it necessary in August, 1942 to split the Iraq State Railway
Traffic Department into two separate branches, Commercial and Operating.
The Army provided many of the key men for the Operating branch.
During 1941, railway operating activities were mainly devoted to traffic in
the Basra-Shuaiba base area where depot stocks were being built up, and to
moving traffic to the troops in the Baghdad-Kirkuk-Mosul area.
1942, the depots at Hindiyah and Mussayeb were brought into use, and railway
operating troops were moved up to operate the resulting traffic.
November, 1941 and March, 1942, fifteen new crossing stations were opened
on the Basra-Baghdad line, and these were manned by military operating
More crossing stations were completed in the following months,
but could not be brought into use owing to lack of staff. In spite of difficulties
traffic was gradually increased until in October, 1942 an average of eight trains
a day was being run on the Basra-Baghdad line, eight on the Kirkuk line,
In December, 1942 the Kut-Baquba branch line
was opened to traffic and in the following month was handed over to a Polish
railway operating unit, which handled all traffic on the branch until August,
1943. "Aid to Russia" traffic was carried from Basra partly by rail via Baghdad
and partly by inland water transport to Kut and from there by the new line
to the railhead at Mubarak near Khanagin.
After the middle of 1943, when depots stocks had been built up, trafhe
In August, 1943, certain of the new crossing stations
were closed down and a start was made in handing back traffic operation from
the military to the Iraq State Railway.
At the end of 1943, the evacuation
of the Hindiyah and Mussayeb depots was begun and the depots finally close
down in May, 1944.
"Aid to Russia" traffic ceased in August, 1944, as the
Persian route was by that time capable of handling all requirements.
west 7/
WO 277/2
WO 277/2
28
