especially difficult to find sufficient supervisory personnel.
By the end of
1941, however, the training organization had been established and was beginning
to get under way with the individual technical training of unskilled recruits.
Supply of I.W.T. Units to Iraq
The I.W.T. organization in Iraq was fed from the Tn. Training Centre at
Bombay, and for many months detachments averaging 350 to 400 men were
sailing at the rate of two detachments a month.
River steamers and dumb
craft for Iraq were requisitioned in Calcutta, as the river steamer services of
India are all in East Bengal and Assam, and consequently the vessels had to
make the long sea voyage round India.
At this time no I.W.T. units were being
formed for service in India or Burma.
Training and raising of units, 1942-1943
Throughout 1942 the training of docks and I.W.T. recruits and the raising
and equipping of units proceeded rapidly.
With the Japanese occupation of
Malaya and Burma many experienced I.W.T. officers and crews joined the
service, mainly from the Irrawaddy Flotilla.
The steamers of the Flotilla had
unfortunately to be abandoned in Burma, and a fine fleet was lost at a time
when craft were at a premium.
Early in 1942 a number of I.W.T. operating
companies were raised and a group H.Q. was set up at Calcutta.
companies of this Group were employed on river ferries on the Brahmaputra.
The collective training of docks units continued to be difficult.
company was sent to Calcutta as a reserve in case of enemy air attack and
was trained in a number of key jobs in the port installations.
Calcutta was closed for some months in the spring of the year, and there were
therefore no facilities for training.
During the summer of 1942, a company
was sent to the Maldive Islands, where a Naval Stores installation was estab-
lished, and this provided good training though only for a small number.
Docks Group H.Q. and selected companies were sent to Bombay where they
began training in Combined Operations.
The period of preparation proved
to be a long one, as the first combined operation did not take place until 1945
at Ramree Island.
In March, 1942, Transportation was charged with the raising of a force for
patrol duties in the Ganges Delta or Sunderbunds.
This territory consisted
of hundreds of miles of rivers and creeks, which had to be patrolled owing to
the danger of Japanese infiltration.
The craft were river steamers and small
tugs requisitioned in Calcutta and armed with Bren guns and, sometimes,
a 2-pounder anti-tank gun.
The crews were Indian Engineers (Tn.) personnel,
many of whom were recruited for service in Bengal only.
Officers were a mixture
of Royal Engineers, Indian Engineers, and Royal Indian Navy, together with
a number of Infantry and Artillery officers.
This force, known at first as the
Sunderbunds Flotilla and later as 2,000 Flotilla, mustered some 40 to 50 craft,
and came under the control of Eastern Army.
The Flotilla carried out patrol
duties in the Delta until October, 1942, and although it was not involved in any
action its officers and crews gained valuable experience in handling their craft
in preparation for the next phase, which was the Arakan campaign.
The flow of I.W.T. drafts to Iraq continued steadily throughout 1942,
but except for one docks operating and two docks maintenance companies no
190
other docks units were sent abroad, as it was obvious that when operations
India could raise.
began again in Burma and Malaya there would be work for all the unratihas
A Docks Group H.Q., with a Docks Maintenance Company and two Docks
Operating Companies, was in Calcutta in the autumn of 1942 for to Docks
training; their work consisted of loading hired transports sailing to Chittagong,
which had been re-opened after having been closed and partially dismantled
under the denial policy.
The bombing of Calcutta in December produced a
labour crisis at the port, and two more Docks Operating Companies were
transferred from Karachi.
The Group, assisted by Pioneer units, did some
valuable work during this period, and caused the Port Commissioners to look
upon Th, units with more favour than hitherto.
An I.W.T. Group, consisting of a Headquarters, three Operating Companies
(two being equipped with country craft), detachments of an I.W.T. Workshop
Company and a Tn. Stores Company, and a Port Operating Company (Indian
type establishment), completed mobilization in Calcutta in the final months of
1942, and by the beginning of 1943 were concentrated at Chittagong and in
the Arakan.
A second I.W.T. Group was located at Calcutta from the spring
of 1942 and remained there until April, 1943.
In addition to assisting the
formation of 2,000 Flotilla, it was responsible for several I.W.T. units which
were in Bengal for training, and was also concerned with the requisitioning and
repair of small launches and outboard engines for its future operational role
with 4th Corps on the Chindwin.
An officer of this Group was attached to
4th Corps, and his reconnaissance reports were of great value in planning.
Planning for I.W.T. operating on the Chindwin presented many difficulties at
that time owing to the difficult and precipitous nature of the road from Assam,
the absence of any suitable vehicles for transporting even very small boats, and
the lack of suitable craft.
This was before the days of prefabricated sectional
craft which later were a feature in this theatre.
As a result of these difficulties, combined with the tactical situation, this
Group was not called forward to 4th Corps area, but in April, 1943, was moved
to Narayanganj in the Delta, where newly raised I.W.T. units were sent for
training.
These units did good work in the transport of food supplies during
the Bengal famine in the autumn of 1943.
Towards the end of that year the
Group movedto Chittagong, where they took over the rear L. of C, for Arakan.
In the spring of 1943, another I.W.T. Group was raised and located at
Gauhati in Assam.
Its role was the operation of I. W.T. traffic along the eastern
sections of the Brahmaputra, and it remained there until the spring of 1945,
when it moved down the Chindwin and operated the river L. of C. for the 14th
Army during the advance into Burma.
By this time, suitable craft were coming
forward from the United States and Britain.
The reception and preparation
of newly arrived craft were carried out at Calcutta under the D.D.Tn.
Collective training of docks units was carried out during 1943 at Karachi,
Madras, Vizagapatam and Calcutta.
The Group previously at Calcutta had
moved with three companies to Chittagong in anticipation of the increased
stores programme for the 14th Army.
The new Group at Calcutta, in addition
to their normal commitments of loading hired transports and erecting cranes
carried out an investigation into the working conditions of the port.
at the end of 1943 was badly congested; Lease-Lend cargoes and shipments
from Britain could note cleared fast enough, and the discharge of ships was
taking as much as 21 days.
191
we
W0277
