The forward Railway Operating Group, whose area
of responsibility extended from Orte to Pesaro exclusive, moved its head.
quarters from Foligno to Falconara area, while the second Group, which with
two Operating Companies was scheduled to take over the lines north of Pesaro.
moved up to that area from Bari.
In October, a South African Composite
Operating Company arrived and was installed in the locomotive workshops at
During October the L. of C. on the east coast was further extended.
railhead being advanced to Pesaro on the Ist, Cattolica on the 3rd, Riccione
on the 8th and finally into Rimini on the 23rd. To meet these extensions, the
Group Headquarters from Bari set up central control at Riccione on 8th October.
Rimini remained the forward railhead until Cesena was opened on 4th December.
In mid-November the line from Orte to Arezzo (line 65), which had been
handed over by the Americans to the Railway, had reached a bad state of
disorganization and much delay was being caused to military traffic. It was
therefore decided to bring this line back under military supervision and the
operating Group Headquarters from Falconara was moved to Rome.
In preparation for the spring offensive which was to force the enemy back
over the river Po, plans were drawn up and put into operation for improving
route 86 forward from Ancona.
i) doubling line 86 throughout from Ancona to railhead;
(ii) doubling line 65, from Rome to Orte;
(li) building a connecting spur from line 87 east of Chiaraville to line 86
north of Falconara;
constructing a new base marshalling yard at Mondolfo; and
(v) constructing a new south-bound yard at Rimini.
During February and March good progress was made with the long-term
policy of repair of fixed signals, both colour light and semaphore.
of signalling greatly improved train operation and thereby increased line capacity
with very little expenditure of military labour or material, as most of the work
was carried out by the Italian State Railways using equipment recovered from
lines not required for military use.
By 26th April all of the improvements
enumerated above had been completed and railhead was at Faenza. Traffic
was heavy, the average daily tonnage of 8,277 over line 86 being twice that
handled before the doubling of the line and the opening of the new marshalling
With the fall of Bologna and the rapid withdrawal of the enemy which
culminated in the
surrender of 2nd May, a situation developed which stretched
railway resources to the limit.
It was urgent to reconnoitre lines over the whole
of the north of Italy, and to push forward line 65 from Prato and line 86 from
Faenza to Bologna in order to reduce the long road haul from beyond the Po.
To meet this situation further railway operating units were needed in the North.
Line 65 was, therefore, handed over to the Italian State Railways on 15th April.
The Orte-Foligno section of line 87 had been handed back some two months
releasing a Group Headquarters which was sent to the Venice-
With the surrender in Germany on 8th May, the war in Europe was over,
but the task of the railway operating troops was by no means finished.
problem of maintaining the large allied armies scattered over
Italy, and there would soon be the new problem of moving the occupying
troops to their positions beyond the Italian frontiers, in Austria and Trieste.
The solution of these problems entailed much hard work and presented many
interesting situations, and it was not until September, 1945, that the task way
virtually completed.
Railway staff at all levels,
In retrospect all devsta, ding features were the willing co-operation of the
the Anglo-American solidarity.
From the
first there had been no difficulty in persuading the Italians to work their railways;
such troubles as arose were due to inefficiency rather than to any disinclination
on the part of civilian railwaymen to do their best. Although the difficulties
inherent in an Anglo-American Railway Service were never fully resolved,
the organization had functioned well, with goodwill on both sides, and all had
good reason to be satisfied with the results achieved.
The operating and
mechanical troops had had a strenuous time, and though much of their work
had been of a supervisory nature, they had had many opportunities, particu-
larly in the forward areas, of physically operating a route a type of work for
which they were better suited, by organization and training, than for the super-
vision of a civilian railway.
SECTION 3.—RAILWAY CONSTRUCTION
The North African Campaign
Railway Construction and ancillary units in the First Army Order of
Battle were:
One Railway Construction and Maintenance Group Headquarters.
Three Railway Construction Companies.
One Railway Survey Company.
Two Sections of a Railway Bridging Company.
One Mechanical Equipment (Tn.) Company.
One Railway Telegraph Company (R. Signals.).
The work of these units was directed by the Tn. 4 branch under an A.D.Tn.
assisted by one major and one captain.
Although information regarding physical conditions in Algeria and Tunisia
was very comprehensive, sweeping assumptions had to be made concerning the
extent of the damage that would have to be repaired, the attitude of the French
railway engineers, and the size of stocks of railway track and bridging material
in the country.
These assumptions led to the conclusion that the units available
were only sufficient for repair and maintenance in base areas and possibly
later for repairs on the L. of C., and that the decision whether they should be
employed on Base development would depend entirely on the co-operation of
the French railwaymen as operations proceeded.
The plan provided for tasks
to be carried out in the following order of priority:-
(a) Reconnaissance of damage in the Algiers
and Bone areas, and then
on the lines of communication and in other ports.
(b) Repair and maintenance of railways in the port
and base areas for
traffic between docks and base depots, if possible with the help of
civilian staffs, but if necessary without them.
113
WO 277/2
27
WO27 772
