to co-ordinate the work of the Transportation and Movements Directorates.
This post was filled by Mr. G. S. Slumper, who until then had been General
Manager of the Southern Railway.
He held the rank of Major-General, and
continued in the appointment until it was abolished on the withdrawal of the
B.E.F. from the Continent in the following year.
During the early months of the war, Transportation problems in the War
(a) The mobilization of Transportation Headquarters, B.E.F., and of the
Regular and Supplementary Reserve Tn. units of that force.
(b) The formation of further In. units for the B.E.F. in accordance with
pre-arranged and supplementary programmes.
(c) The expansion of technical training capacity for In. personnel, including
the formation of a second Training Centre at Derby.
(d) The interviewing and selection (in conjunction with A.G. 7) of candi-
dates for emergency commissions.
(e) The provision, mainly through the Ministry of Supply, of Tn. stores
and equipment for the B.E.F.
(f) The provision, by arrangement with civil railway and port authorities,
of additional facilities within the United Kingdom for the storage,
railage and shipment of army requirements.
In order to cope with these duties the Directorate was enlarged by the end
of 1939 to a strength of 29 officers and divided into three branches, namely
Q.M.G. 13 (Policy, Training and Stores), Q.M.G. 15 (Railways) and Q.M.G. 19
In February, 1940, owing to the expansion into Directorates of a number of
Q.M.G.'s peace-time branches, the titles of branches were altered in order to
give a clearer indication of the Directorates of which they formed part. The
three branches of the Transportation Directorate changed their designations
to G.T. 2, 3 and 4, the title of In. I being given to the personal staff of the
Between the end of 1939 and the fall of France in July, 1940, the only change
in the authorized establishment of the Directorate was an increase of four
staff captains and nine technical assistants in Tn. 2(b) (Transportation Stores)
to deal with the increasing volume of stores work; owing, however, to the diffi-
culty of finding suitable candidates, this increase was not fully implementea
before the requirement was temporarily reduced by the withdrawal of British
troops from the Continent.
Following the evacuation of France and Norway and the entry of Italy
into the war, the tasks of the Directorate became somewhat different in charac-
ter and wider in scope.
At home the imminent threat of invasion and the
virtual closing of East Coast and Channel ports, and later in the year the
damage done to communications by German bombing, called for the fullest
and most effective use of the few Transportation troops available, and also
for urgent measures to increase the capacity of the less exposed home ports;
while overseas the threat to the Suez Canal and operations against the Italians
elsewhere in North-East Africa brought planning and organization for the
Middle East prominently into the picture.
st this stage it was decided that all Transportation troops at home, both
units which had been withdrawn from the Continent and new units as thes
were formed, should be retained under direct War Office control for all purposes
other than local administration: this was essential because these troops were
spread very thinly over a wide area and were subject to constant movement
from one military area to another.
Accordingly it became the duty of the
Director of Transportation to ensure that every unit was technically efficient
and employed to the best advantage,
invasion.
and to plan its disposition in case of
In order to assist him in this work an Inspector of Transportation
Troops and Services was appointed in July, 1940, and a few months later
the Directorate was reorganized into five branches, viz.:-
Tn. 1.
In. 2.
Policy, planning, intelligence, organization and training.
Transportation stores.
In. 3.
Railway, Port, and Inland Waterway operation.
Tn. 4.
Railway construction and repair.
Tn. 5.
Port construction and repair.
The establishment of the Directorate now totalled 47 officers: each branch,
in addition to its other duties, acted as the staff of the Director for the command
and employment of the appropriate types of Tn. units at home.
In October, 1940, Brigadier McMullen (later Major-General Sir Donald J.
McMullen) who had held the appointment of Director-General of Transporta-
tion in the B.E.F., and subsequently that of Inspector of Tn.
Services, succeeded Brigadier J. P.
Greig as Director of Transportation.
Brigadier Greig, who had held the latter appointment since its creation, replaced
Brigadier McMullen as Inspector.
In December, 1940, the new Director drew attention to the increasing work
of the Directorate due to:—
(a) the decision to proceed with the construction by military labour of two
Military Ports on the west coast of Scotland;
b) planning, experimental work and training in connection with combined
operations and with the repair or reconstruction of captured enemy
(c) the new General Staff "Field Force Conspectus," which provided for
the formation of many new Tn. units,
with corresponding training
(d) the large number of new War Department Depot railways to be designed,
constructed and operated by In. troops; and
(e) the development of offensive operations in the Middle East, involving
increased demands on the planning and stores branches.
He therefore proposed to transfer the port and inland waterway operating
duties of Tn. 3 to a new branch, Tn. 6, and to organize the Directorate into
three main sections, each under a Deputy Director as follows:-
D.D.Tn. (O) Operations, organization, etc., and stores.
T. 2: Policy, etc, as belore.
D.D.Tn. (R)
Railways.
Tn. 3.
Railway operation and workshops.
Tn. 4.
Railway construction.
D.D.Tn. (D)
Ports and Inland Waterways.
Tn. 5.
Port construction.
Tn. 6.
Port operating and I.W.T.
WO 277/21
27
WO 27 7/26
