corps for which they were suitable and a number of French officers were granted
direct commissions.
One other nation, the Danes, must be mentioned separately.
Denmark was not
technically an allied power: there was neither a Danish Government nor any
official diplomatic representative in the United Kingdom, but the Danish nation
was whole-heartedly in favour of the allied cause and those Danes who were in the
United Kingdom or escaped hither were eager to serve.
Danes formed a Danish Committee, with whom the War Office was in constant
touch. A considerable number of Danes were enlisted through their agency, for
the most part into the Buffs, successive Kings of Denmark having been Colonels
in Chief of that regiment for many years.
When Denmark was liberated in 1945,
some 200 Danes were enlisted into the Buffs at the request of the Danish Govern-
ment, the men undertaking to serve for two years at least.
It will be appreciated that the enlistment of so many aliens of so many different
nationalities. was not without its dangers from the security point of view. It was
always possible that an enemy agent might reach this country in the guise of a
refugee or pose as an ardent supporter from a neutral country, and a check was
placed both on the enlistment and subsequent employment of aliens.
speaking, the policy at first was to allow neutrals, except Italians, to be accepted
for any corps. The citizens of enemy states, and Italians since the Italian
Government, even before their declaration of war, were patently on the side of
-were accepted for the Pioneer Corps only.
unavoidable at first, but it inevitably involved losing a large stock of high technical
skill and knowledge. It is strange to look back now on the composition of
those first alien companies of the Pioneer Corps.
They held in their ranks men
of every kind of profession, men sometimes of international reputation in juris-
prudence, in music, in engineering, in finance, who had once enjoyed both wealth
and honour in their own countries.
They held also young men, physically fit, who
were eager to bear arms against their oppressors, and it is greatly to the honour of
these men that they cheerfully accepted service in the Pioneer Corps, with its hard
manual labour to which many were wholly unaccustomed. As time went on it
became possible to relax the restrictions, and eventually a great many were trans-
ferred to fighting arms and to technical arms, not a few reaching commissioned rank.
A number of aliens were also enlisted in the Middle East, for the most part
refugees who had drifted into the Command from many European countries, and
the same general rules were followed for security checking and posting as were
followed in the United Kingdom. Elsewhere there were small numbers of aliens
who offered their services in various commands abroad, but as they were all dealt
with similarly it is not necessary to specify them in detail.
It will be of interest to refer briefly to the ultimate disposal of these aliens who
served in the British Army. The great majority of those who came from neutral
countries eventually returned to their homes, and in 1046 a rule was introduced
allowing them to take their release without awaiting their normal turns in their
The real problem lay in the disposal of the refugees and particularly the
groups. Austrians and Spaniards who had no desire to return to their former
It was at first decided that only those who had been enlisted in the
United Kingdom could be released in the United Kingdom, but the decision to
bring to this country those members of the Polish Forces who were unwilling to
return to Poland made it impossible to refuse similar admission to those aliens who
had actually served in the British Forces.
The reopening of naturalization and
the Government's decision to give priority of consideration to those who had served
in the British Forces gave a new opening and a new hope to thousands of men and
WO217/=2
Throughout the Empire the many Colonies all made their several manpower
contributions to the common effort, raising units for their own internal security
and defence and in many cases supplying units or drafts to other commands, but
the main interest lies in the very extensive use made of Colonial manpower in the
Middle East and in the East and West African Commands. From the entry of
Italy into the war in 1940 until the victory in Tunisia in 1943, almost all major
land operations took place in Africa, and the expeditions to Crete and Greece were
organized by Middle East Command. The imposition of a limit to the maximum
strength of the Army in the spring of 1941 forced the War Office to allot quotas
of United Kingdom manpower to all overseas commands, but there was in the
East and West African Colonies and in the High Commission Territories of South
Africa a very large supply of African manpower, the use of which was not governed
by the limitations imposed on United Kingdom manpower.
The Colonial Forces
maintained in East and West Africa before the war were of excellent quality but
comparatively small, and only a few of the African population had had military
African troops were not used in action against Germans and
Italians in Libya and Cyrenaica, but they were used extensively in Eritrea, Abys-
sinia and Somaliland, and eventually both East and West African Divisions fought
in Burma against the Japanese. The failure of General de Gaulle's expedition to
capture Dakar exposed the West African Colonies to a long-continued threat of
attack by forces of the Vichy Government. In the end no attack happened, but the
threat forced the West African Command to retain considerable forces for the
In 1941 Middle East Command, in consultation with the East and West Africa
Commands, drew up a comprehensive programme for the use of African manpower.
After allowing for the needs of those two commands, quotas were allotted to be
evided monthly buch colony recording to ies resou dea. The chief requiremen te
large numbers as drivers and as tradesmen in many of the engineering trades.
Enlistments were carried out under the authority of the Colonial Governments on
special terms of engagement to suit the local requirements. Training was for the
most part carried out in East and West Africa, and the men were usually sent to the
Middle East in complete units and not as drafts. Within the Middle East Command
they were used either in completely African units, such as Pioneer Companies, or
as sub-units within a British unit, such as R.A.S.C. companies, in order to dilute
The same arrangements were applied to the High
Commission Territories of South Africa and on a smaller scale to Mauritius, the
Seychelles Islands and Cyprus. Palestine furnished some combatant units, both of
The whole scheme for the use of African manpower as conceived and executed
by Middle East Command was a great success. Without it the expansion of the
British Forces in Middle East would scarcely have been possible. In view of our
changed relations with India and with Egypt, it may well be that in the future this
great supply of African manpower may become of greater and greater military
importance, and this bold experiment by Middle East Command holds valuable
There were three main factors which limited the numbers which could be obtained
from this source. In the first place, as the war continued, there was an ever-growing
demand for the production in Africa of food and other raw materials which had
The great increase in African agriculture
demanded more and more labour, and the development of food supply within the
Empire may have a considerable effect on the future supply of military manpower.
Secondly, it became very difficult to maintain a supply of British officers and
