more mobility became essential and the old proportions of the major arms were
uoset.
With a limited maximum strength, the only way to have more of one arm
was to have less of another, which meant that units must either be converted to a
new role or disbanded so that the personnel could be used elsewhere. This explains
the apparently endless vacillation on the part of the War Office in raising new
units and then converting or disbanding them. In fact, the Army is in a peculiarly
unfortunate position in this respect. In the Royal Navy a ship's company can be
posted elsewhere and no one thinks more about it; but if a new unit say an
infantry battalion-is raised in the Army, it immediately develops that particular
esprit de corps which goes with the regimental badge and title; conversion or dis-
bandment means the individual wearing a new badge, developing a new loyalty,
learning a new job, and often a discouraging feeling that the old training and the
old loyalties have been just a waste of time. No one would underestimate the value
of the regimental traditions and loyalties on which the Army is founded, but there
is perhaps
the greater loyalty which is ready to serve the cause wherever service
is needed.
When resources are limited, it is an obvious essential of prudent economy to
use them to the best advantage; consequently the scientific sorting of intakes
according to mental capacity as well as according to medical category and the proper
relation of those two qualities to the individual job become of first importance.
The sorting of intakes according to mental capacity involves some form of test at
entry; the relation of that quality to the individual job involves a thorough analysis
of every kind of job done in a unit to ascertain the standard of mental capacity
required for each.
The sorting of intakes was achieved by the introduction of "Selection Testing".
The full story of this is outside this volume, but selection testing had so important
a bearing on the use of manpower that an outline at least must be given here.
Up to October, 1941, recruits were posted from the headquarters of recruiting
divisions according to their medical categories and the recommendations of the
interviewing officers. In that month a start was made in applying the Matrix Test
at recruiting centres, by which men could be classified into selection groups.
This
grouping afforded a reliable gauge of basic intelligence, irrespective of educational
standards, but the information was negative rather than positive: that is to say, the
test did not purport to identify the man who would be suitable for any particular
job but rather to identify the man who would never learn that job or at most would
learn it slowly and with difficulty.
Thus it was possible to say, for example, that
no man in a selection group below 3 plus was capable of becoming a driver operator,
and minimum selection groupings could then be laid down for the posting of men
to various arms. Aptitude tests were applied at training centres to find potential
leaders, specialists and so on. Men who were of too high or too low intelligence
or who were too skilled for the arm to which they were originally posted were
transferred elsewhere.
This was a great improvement over posting simply by
medical category and the recruiting officer's recommendation, but there still
remained the great drawback that there was no way of governing the proportions
of men in any admissible selection group posted to training unit of any arm. If,
for example, a corps could accept men down to S.G.4, the majority of one intake
might be of that group.
What was needed was that a central authority should
review the whole recruit intake and allot it to arms in proportion to their several
needs.
To achieve this the men of the intake must be held somewhere and
thoroughly tested before posting to corps and it was therefore decided to create a
General Service Corps into which all intakes should be enlisted in the first instance.
Primary Training Centres were established to which all intakes were posted,
beginning with that joining on znd July, 1942. There, they underwent six weeks'
WO 277/22
basic military training, which was common to all arms, and were thoroughly tested.
The results of the test were recorded on individual cards and transmitted to the
War Office where they were sorted by mechanical means so that posting rolls could
be produced in time to post the recruit to the appropriate corps at the end of his
six weeks' basic training. This gave the War Office complete control over the
whole intake.
The proportions to be allotted to each arm could be decided with
proper regard to the future; potential officers, potential tradesmen, those with any
particular qualification could be picked out individually and noted for training in
this or that direction. The same system was extended to the volunteer. He was
required to enlist for the General Service Corps and ta join on the same day as a
National Service intake: he might express his wish for ultimate posting to some
particular corps and, if he proved suitable after testing, his wishes were respected;
but if he failed to conform to any of the standards required for the corps of his
choice, he could either accept posting elsewhere or claim his discharge, in which
case he became once again liable to be called up under the National Service Act.
The important point was that no man was posted to any corps, whatever his claims,
unless he underwent all the appropriate tests and proved himself suitable.
It will be apparent how very greatly the work involved in dealing with manpower
at the War Office had grown since the outbreak of war.
The much closer control
necessitated by the "ceiling" system had led to the establishment of a special man-
power planning branch in the Directorate of Organization, and one of the Deputy
Directors was specially charged with this work. The growing importance of
manpower problems tended all the time to enhance the importance of this officer
and in March, 1943, a separate Director of Manpower Planning was appointed,
and a brief digression will be of interest to glance at the relations between the three
Directors in the Adjutant General's Department who dealt with manpower.
general, the Director of Manpower Planning was the link between the Adjutant
General's staff and the General Staff: in consultation with the General Staff he
prepared the half-yearly demands for intakes and decided on their distribution
between arms. It was in fact his duty to put before the General Staff the manpower
limitations and to interpret strategic plans in terms, not only of manpower in sum,
but in particular types, classes and trades. The duties of the Director of Organiza-
tion are best explained by the new title given to this appointment in January, 1947:
Director of Personnel Administration. To him fell all matters of personnel records,
promotion, discharge, transfers and every kind of question relating to the officer
or soldier as an individual. The Director of Recruiting and Demobilization worked
the two machines by which men entered and left the Army. He did not decide
policy either of intakes or releases but was responsible for ensuring the delivery of
intakes at the places appointed and in the numbers agreed, and for carrying out
programme of releases decided on by the Government. Once the Directorate
of Manpower Planning had been set up, there remained only one reason for the
continuation of a Directorate of Recruiting and Demobilization, namely, to relieve
the Manpower Directorate of the burden of the mechanical details of intakes and
releases, details which amounted in sum to a formidable total for more than a year
after hostilities ceased. It was not until the end of 1946 that it was found possible
to dispense with this separate Directorate. The boundaries between the provinces
of these three Directors were often in practice very faint, but great mutual under-
standing and close personal friendship readily smoothed all difficulties.
The introduction of selection testing and of the General Service Corps may
fairly be said to have effected a revolution in manpower planning. It was no longer
necessary to rely on the recommendation of a recruiting officer nor on the Matrix
test applied at a recruiting centre, but each recruit could be scientifically valued by
staff trained for the work, and the whole intake could be allotted to arms by one
