wO 277/=2
Section D Reserve for a further four years might have been away from the Co.
for almost thirteen years.
Those in Section E were all older men who were car-
marked for administrative duties only.
It will be apparent that, although all Army
Reservists had served in the Regular Army, they must at any moment vary widely
in age and training.
Furthermore, some Reservists had taken up occupations in
civil life which were reserved under the Schedule of Reserved Occupations, and
although the statutory liability to be called out for service remained it could not
in all cases be enforced. About 28,000 Reservists had been re-called to the Colours
before mobilization.
The Supplementary Reserve comprised about 20,60o in Categories A and B, all
of whom were liable to annual training, and 22,000 in Category C, who did no
training.
In general, those in Categories A and B were well trained and a valuable
asset.
Those in Category C were Mechanical Transport drivers and tradesmen
whose civilian occupations would fit them to take their place immediately, as Army
tradesmen, without prior military training.
This category contained much
valuable material; but during the man's engagement, which might extend to four
years, there was no medical examination and no means of checking that he remained
working in that particular trade.
It was, therefore, inevitable that on mobilization
some of these Reservists proved to be neither so fit nor so skilled as was expected,
but on the whole this Reserve served its purpose.
Nearly 1,100 had been embodied
before mobilization.
The Territorial Army had a strength of 428,000 all ranks, of whom 113,000 had
been embodied before the war began, mainly for Air Defence of Great Britain.
The state of the Territorial Army and the effects of the recent increases have already
been examined, and here it will suffice to repeat, as an illustration of the rapidity
of its expansion, that on ist January, 1939, eight months before mobilization, the
total strength had been only 204,000.
The Territorial Army Reserve, including
the National Defence Companies, totalled about 20,000 of very varying age and
quality.
There were just over 34,500 Militia who had been called up on 15th July under
the Military Training Act, 1939.
These had just completed the elementary part
of their training; they
proved to be on the whole excellent material and many
became officers and N.C.O.s later.
The Officer Emergency Reserve had 10,600 names on its register.
The majority
of these men had not served since the previous war and were strange to modern
training, but the Reserve proved a valuable asset and many of its members filled
less active posts with conspicuous success.
Of the women's services, there were 7II regular members of the Q.A.I.M.N.S.
and 4,400 members of the Territorial Army Nursing Service and its Reserve.
No
soldier of any rank, who has ever seen the gallantry and devotion of these ladies,
will doubt for one moment the standard of the Nursing Service.
The Auxiliary Territorial Service had a strength of some 17,600. Units varied
in efficiency, mostly depending on the amount of help given by the military units
to which they were attached in peace.
But at the moment of mobilization the
greatest value of the Service lay in the fact that it provided a foundation on which
to build the very admirable body which the A.T.S. ultimately became.
The
detailed story of the A.T.S. will belong to another volume, and in this volume
reference will be made to it only in its relation to manpower planning; but it is
fitting here to pay tribute to those women who were serving before the war and
who formed so excellent a nucleus for the expansion of the corps and to the
thousands of other women who later played their part.
Such were the main manpower assets available when war began. The table in
Appendix A shows these, and some minor assets, in greater detail.
Mere figures are
illusory and the great majority of our so-called assets were sadly lacking in training
and equipment.
The human material was first class, and as the war proceeded
the British Army showed itself a worthy successor to those whose deeds have
passed into our history.
In appraising military values other things must also be
taken into account, and however good the human material, it cannot be claimed
that Great Britain entered the war with military forces of strength, armament and
equipment worthy of her prestige and responsibilities as one of the world's leading
