pg_0002.pdf:
intments (Sec. 36), and
and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NOTE B.-See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
NoTE C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.1),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2,—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
their formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factual experience
in regard to weapons, equipment, tactics, organisation and inter-service co-operation which
may be of benefit for short-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
later for the History of the War.
A war diary will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
on A.F. C. 2118.
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
(i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
and decisions taken.
(i)
Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
PILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
ay of mobilisation or
subordinate command
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice. At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.-Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(1) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(ii)
Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(iii) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para.
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author.
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118
(iv) Copies of important and relevant demi-official letters by commanders of formations,
including any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
they should be included).
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
be forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c G.H.Q.
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
(ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a brigade or higher formation will be
forwarded vithin a period of two months to the officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon for
transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.
The duplicate copies of
the diaries of units will be sent within a period of three months to the officer
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to records offices at home for safe cust
SPECIAL NOTE.—The time entered should be the time the information o
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text
reaches
known,
Instructions regarding War Diaries and Intelligence
Summaries are contained in F.S. Regs.,
Vol. I.
and the Staff Manual respectively.
Title pages
will be prepared in manuscript.
Month and Year June 1944
WAR DIARY
ORIGINAL.
SHEET 2
Unico En The Green En
Army Fort
Rhesk am.
Commanding Officer Hes:
R0125R.H.VS
Place.
Date.
Hour.
Southamp ton
At Sea
rea
Map Ref
79186
Ref. M.
s France
Sheet 7/E15
1.50,000.
2
5
6
2300
1000
1815
1900
0635
0710
0735
0737
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY.
(Erase beading not required).
Summary of Events and Information.
and. D Coys safely en aboard L.S. I's in SOUTHAMPTON WATER.
A:Tk and Corrier Fle still in mrshalling reas aiting embarkation.
A:Tk and Carrier Is moved to SOUTHAMPTAN from Camp
the fallowing moming..
Specialist Pls and Speci list personnel embarked on L.C.T's. The weather
wes not too good and the sea was 'choppy."
Today should have beenD "Day' with 'H' Hour at 0635 hrs, but oring to
adverse weather conditions, the landing has been postponed for 24 has..
I..S. I's with Coys aboard moved don the SOLENT towards the open sea.
L.G.Z's with Corriers, A:Tke and specialist pls aboard noved dow the
SOLENT towards the open sea in onehuge array- flotilla folloving flotilln!
verther moderate to fair but the sea still rather choppy!,
As the great armida of ships approach the French Coast in the dull mist of
the dawn, many flashos can be scen from the costline as Allied Bombers and
fighter-bombers fly in to engage eneny coustal batteries and targets that
A,B,O,D Coys and BHQ safely abourd the L.C.A's made their hazardous dash
for the minland in a son that did not favour a landing so important, whilst
Allied cruisers and destroyers heavitly engaged enemy shore batteries.
'H'Hour.
A and D Coys being the fwd Coys, assaulted the beach between Map Refs
and 918.868
goy attacked the highly ott be between t at it 91086)
and D Coy
attacked the heavily concreted gun positions in area MOVT FLEURY
Mer Ref 917863
The storming of both these enemy positions was highly.
successfuland the
In: suffered surprisingly low casualties.
The reserve Coys (C and B)
followed the landing of A and D Coys.
B Coy moved to area
908863
and attacked enemy posns, clearing a quarry
on route occupied by the enemy.
C Coy moved with little opposition to area of Pt 52 Mp Ref 104850
the Bn re-organising area.
Wt 13474/1805 1,200,000 7/40 BPL 51-7171 Forms C2118/22
Merences to Appen
LI Cal- DIARIES SECTION
Di Aham
2 G AUG 1944
c. H.0/2nd Echelon

