218 Ant Our CaL will provide on demand by St Control:
(e) Water trusks if necessary, with trained men.
2912776(3 an sars) for 16 Nursing Sisters from Guilsbor lint
to whittlebury L 1462 on
each of 31 Jan:
and 1 Feby and best:
each tuy (nidday
or evening).
TEAR PARRIES
218 will leavy one Offr and caretaldng parties at 0.C'e discretier,
in permstent Locations
216 will nove HQs complete and deal with all corrospondence
the fa.
This HQs (Bedford) will NOT move and Goys vill send usual.
DEs hero desly.
213 will
make own arrangements to have mails brought out
Prom perrazent location end distributed in the
fa;
despatch soldiers' nails.
No alteration of addrese will be
alloved,
FD DOCUIENTRANTON
Ses l pe unt fride to Doo tat) on in a theatro of War (oversens) 1942,
do rendered doily
necordande wath the above,
Nornel doomentation will otherwise continue.
For all RASC persornel engaged in this
cattrol etofle or nêm tot details - driving order, steel holnets.
exercise except on umpire or
Unt of tent vive endy a lot, cors oto will be att to the RASC
G9 EXERCISE STUDTNG ORDERS
To one incorer as varied in ST Exercise Unilt
genorally apply:
minor re-arrangements of
oC Coy.
65 Warrink: Averue,
25 Jan 44
00 Cleu....
SHOREE
Copy No..!
BOrOLSO RETTIN IT, 28 Jan to 2 Feb 44
ST Exeroise Instructions
Bulk Orders are for one do
returned on the same day
Pase mark this box when you have fini
Not all documents in your Bulk Order are guaranteed to
for the date you have requested, or they may have sp
requirements.
| One or more of your documents have speci
I requirements - Enquire at the Information I
One or more documents are in use els
Information Desk for full details
Object
This exercise is set and run by Med Second Army, and the primary objects
are to study the layout of a COS and a 200-bedded Gen Hosp;
practise the op of
to exercise med
porsonnol in loading, unloading, pitching and striking their canvas ete; and to
the above Units as regards the movement and hondling of patients.
(b) RASC are co-operating with tot, and the ST objects ere:
Amb Car Coy in evao
evao orders.
(iii)
on evac dutios in the fa.
to study and praotise the an of amb car pls, and smeller dets,
(iv)
study and proctise the moving of COSs and General Hospitals
vith avnilablo RASC tpt, especinlly problems arising from avivard
lifts and trailer loads.
General and Special Idoa and Outine of Mod Escorcise
The following prote cued by to are at and hold good for Ruso adarossees
Exercise Instrs, with Appx I and II (Mod)
Time Table
General Idea
( Particular Iden
Instre for Umpires (Med)
3 Outline of RASC Perticipation
(0) 23 in a Col one to le Do 2o carten partios at diortion
This Coy perfos a normal rolo of evad of oas COS - 200 bedded Con Hosp-
Base.
One pi will operato at oach stago.
The Coy 1a allottod to DDMS Socond Army, who suggosts as rogurds eveo:
(1) COS - Gon Hosp
Seos, each See boing replaced fid as it comes bnok through
the Control
(This type of evad might be by single cors)
(i1) Gon Hosp - Bage
In groups of one or two Seas at a time.
(b) 1 P1 218 Amb Car Coy
of evad ADS
The Coy is lotted to DIMS 12 Corps who suggosts ovao by single unb ants
moving baok through Control Posts which roplace those ambs from pool.
•••.•/(o)
