геоха иІ СанОлТА СЯКОмно (іі)
88 OUR LI DIALO
TA TY TIm
date you have requeste order are guaranteed to be avaine
equirements. ested, or they may have spella veno
requirements.
One or more of your documents have special viewing
requirements - Enquire at the Information Desk to arrange access
One or more documents are in use elsewhere - Enquire at the
Information Desk for full details
. ROUTINE ORDERS
IT COL JW OTIMINE, RASC
Serial No 2,
CaVITI COVERS.
no tavel s
res and tilt covers renoved, the canvas tilt cover Will ds
goes oute aotao torera
This will ensure that any perishables or loads dam
may be loaded at short notice, will have adequate treatmer pit by tho
the weather, wich
3(Authy: St Secona Any Has JI/5 dated 2 Jul 4).
CONTROTTIND STORES, INCI VINHS.
UI200T3 119!
Second Arny have new connenced to control centrally issue of the following stores:
a) C(SD) Secondamnd trailers. PiA Compasses
A11 guns.
latches.
A11 weapons (less rifles).
Mine Detectors®
All Sigs eqptoo o
Units under coma this Coln will demand their requirements of the above stores t
though this ta on & second him Thiat
Demands will be in the fory of indents in
triplicate, ided to thie HP ingelatoly the shortage avisess toro
3e fenand, mil state whother the iteme required aren-
a) An initial issue to complete unit holdings
to AT & 1098 scale. If so,
the An G 1098 scale and present holding Must be quoted.
(b) To replace losses due to enemy aotion, o
(o) To replace vehs or ept evacuated or to be evacuated. If so,, the procedure
In RO 9/25 (below will also be followed
(a) Io replage itens lost or destroyed through negligence by uni tipersonel.
Demands under sub-para (a) above will be submitted as soon as, they ocour.
Disciplinary actic
follow this procedure through their
• coe this will be done;
•(41 SIS E 50 (Authy: SAM/21/Q and SAN/2/Q(]) of 30 Tri 244). ci
1E2 1900 8 59 PIO
and it is essential that ai
i.on There/is an extreme shortage
as a last resort. us art g so melieura
short of cannibalisation,
lastimum use will be made of the wienal or resouro, dire dept for temporary
Where in the last resort it is necessary to ask for a weh replacenent, Appx "д"
hereto will
5.
Thas procature le retrospective, and witti be followest in, nspet of any existing
/ cas ......
WO171/2233
