• the date you have requested, or they may have special viewing
for the date you nave requested, or they may have special viewing
requirements.
One or more of your documents have special viewing
requirements - Enquire at the Information Desk to arrange
One or more documents are in use elsewhere;
information Desk for full details
Two forms are obtainable:
formation headquarters.
Army Form C2118B for
bane Aed a Coral for pro and deane used the Pree Cadis are
shown on page 4 of this cover.
hould he samn for use ay the begin for set cal consecutive days, a clear division being shown; but a fresh one
placed in pendi appen and " C" The signal log and messages kept by units or formation headquarters will be
• messages may be includede in
Appendix "Z" will be prepared and disposed of as shown in paras. 12-14 below.
DISPOSAL OF WAR DIARIES.
It. War diaries will be disposed of as follows: —
(a) ARMY GROUP, ARMY AND CORPS HEADQUARTERS
Tinh To 6H0 i Thin, A d Kidon, 21 Army Group
Vote: If the duplicate copies of diaries of these formations are required at an intermediate address for
record purposes, separate instructions will be issued
(b) HEADOU.
mont to hit i copy be forced by the diplon op mp evil i ped a) ce the
Jnits and formations of the Canadian Army will forward a duplicate copy of the war diary at the sam
me as the original and forward the triplicate a month late
se carly pia at in he co of engin on we formay no tripien in open, of the war day wil
Canadian units and formations
continue to maintain mansio
tained in Canadian Routine Orders.
CartgA may be used where Canadian occor dance with instructions con
TOP SECRET SUPPLEMENTARY WAR DIARIES.
filled in and will be placed in a sep
3. Supplementary
he normal channels for correspondence in the TOP
APPENDIX "Z." TO
War Diary of.…
Period
.....(formation of unit).
From.
..194
downgra posit so indication should be given on the inner envelope of the date on which the contents can be
riginals has been acknowledge
ne duplicates of TOP SECRET supplementary diaries may be despatched as soon as receipt of
