DISTRIBULION LIST
Distribution List 'L' will now comprise the following:
1 Coy
463 COy RASC
Coy PASC
(in B)
Wesps Pl
184 ORD FD PARK
Ref RO 29/135 Od Fa Pk and ADOS Dump now Located at BROHKSTRANI
MR 1335043.
Luthy: SAD message 0/7 of-12 Oct W. '
WIRNESS VAINIS
ROND-SICNS - SDANDIRDISATION AND CONUROT
and the eat one tit tie doesnte
contents of GRO 518/W4 are understood
DISE OF ABOA PAINS, JUP RAVIS MIC
Authy: SAT/5A/A, dated 13 Oat 44
Mr the sung.
SUBJECT: Hiring of Civilian Ipt.
Second Arnv.-
dated 12 Oct
effect, and confirm telephone conversations.
Ref: I•
T.7A
he Ministry is not
3. It is proposed to continue to use the services of the Ministry Agents as follows:
(a) To obtain further authorised tpt.
(b) To issue hiring requisition form.
• (a) To ascertain tariffrates, where not already known.
(a) To settle any disputes with owners.
In each of the avove cases continuing past practice.
Le l ted those in ourrent ontario Tate on hot a so co
!
rates.
is that POL ete supplied
The 21 Army Gp
letter
now says that POL will be supplied free;
this is done
owners of non petrol-driven vehs will obviously ask far increased tariff rates.
Pending your confirmation, the past practice of deducting the cost of POL ete from
bills will be continued.
Arrangements with Burgomasters.
(a) 4 copies of 21 A.Gp Form 80 will be given to the Burgonaster concerned in
respect of
each veh each week. The
form has been revised
meet current
form issued will be
(b) No Burgomaster so far
(c) The new system means dealing with many Burgomasters, even for a small number of
To a lot to a lot to me, but on ter dna mere condone:
Herewith at Appx "y"
(a) In order to ensure that the matter is
tied up, an offr. will visit each
Burgomaster concerned each week with the completed bills for payment; he will tale
also the form at Appx
"g" on which the Burgomaster will ack and undertake to pay
tha bills.
This offr will at the same time collect a certificate that last
week's bills have been paid.
Arrangements for Fayment.
(a) OIC Civ Ipt will make up a separate bill for each veh each week, get the owner's
signature to it
and att the completed signed daily work chits.
This HQ will
certify the bills for payment.
(b) The teet a da rue goat, are and and hy va be a loved for Finishing off b8115,
(e) Oners will be paid by the Burgomasters between 1800 and 1900 hrs
on Thu
or Fri weekly.
-(a) The Burgomaster will retain the certified bill with its daily work chits att, and
in addition will att as authy one copy of the appropriate Form 80.
will also obtain his own forn of receipt for the actual cash paid.
Tend a controls: Cont on in
no-one other than this IQ is required to certify the bills for
me by to and ta no at ey doord contract and tarte? rates
The new system does not provide for bills certified or
liabilities outstanding to
be notified
through Army channels.
If the reason is that the Burgomasters are
supposed to be the
hirars they are not at present aware of
exy ave Dete be made to see that the new aystem, and in
certified bills will be fwded to you from that week on unless Burgo
-hem.
(Sgđ)
J W CLEMENT,
BLA.
CRASC, 22 Ipt Coln.
16 Oct 44.
date you have requested, or they may have special viewing
equirements. seaven s
requirements.
One or more of your documents have special viewing
requirements - Enquire at the Information Desk to arrange
One or more documents are in use elsewhere-
Information Desk for full details
WO171/2233
