TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operation
of mobilisation o1
operations, topographical and climatic.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affectin
mportant phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
rainate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
as regards casualties the names and rante
and the number of ot
i addition then be units on the of l cheng sit of are, transport, be
(Vh) Metcorological notes
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur or to evento should te entered ip, not in the order (sive phove hit be the time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
36), and personal
nis representatives.
war diaries will be
NOTE b.— See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
The or a to gon in a it water or no a me die shoe he by it
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operation:
A.F. C.2118.
it will be entered up
entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
from a war diary isan oftene ud thah the cia stret and r
extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer
who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. I, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
Para. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance
(ini) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer requirec
for reference
4, iv a supplement the account
naming the auther. Reterill be
(See F.S.., Volt diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, ete.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the
for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
Yal Ulce. The dunlicate c
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to record offices at home for safe custody.
three months to the officer i/
the unit concerned.
SPECT NO the The time entered stood be the time the information or oder reth
WAR DIARY
Army Form
Unit. HQ CRASC, 22 L of C Ipt Coln.
Commanding Officer It Col J.W. Clement
References to Appendice:
Bedford
Monin and Year. March 1944
mary of Events and Information
Adjt visits 53 Coy.
News received re
450 Tk Tptr Coy's detail of 75 Sherman Iks to be collected
this journey
shuttle
and Reinford and delivered to Fordham.
15 tptrs
to do
system, taking 8 days for
complete turn round from Luton/Rainford/Fordhan.
The move to be ordered by 30
Capt Thomas,
450
Corps.
Tk Tptr Coy,
visits 12 Corps to test dvrs with HG experience
with view to cross-posting.
30 Corps supply instirs for move of 15 tptrs on 3 Mar
53
Carrying Coy on Coln Exercise
*TROOPER".
Capt Closs and Capt MaLachlan
$ as pa re for a further S tetre for tpt of tike from Donnington to Bast Anelia.
15 tk tptrs leave Luton on the 30 Corps detail. Advice received that the 5
tpurs
for Donnington not now required
GRASC LEGUILIN
Appx 1
Outriders rehearsed for visit of Gen Montgomery - 20 and 22 I of C Tot Colns
provide 2 DRs each.
2IC goes
to Rainford to witness loading of Sherman Is.
CRASC visits 450 Tk Iptr Coy.
Routine Orders
$ 46 - 30 785400
Ps W 3008 and W 3009F issued
WAR DIARIES SECTION
CRASC prepares first details of rehearsal for C-in-C's visit.
Rainford tk tptr detail proceeding satisfactorily.
16 APR 194.2
G. H.Q. 2nd Echelon
Appx 2
Appxs 3 & 4
Bulk Orders are for one de
returned on the same day
Pease mark this box when you have fini
Not all documents in your Bulk Order are guaranteed to
for the date you have requested, or they may have sp
requirements.
One or more of your documents have speci
I requirements - Enquire at the Information
One or more documents are in use els
Information Desk for full details
