ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
or mobilisation o
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
importini popical and chiat hoot iron out postific or opting
pordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(v1) Changes in
end the biner of oster ranke
c. 36), and personal
in adition in the case of units on the i. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
or rollards asalties the names and ranks
midis should br
(vii) Meteorological notes
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or politica
NOTE
—Events shoula h.
occur, or come to notice
his representatives
war diaries will be
a he entered up, not in the order 2a iven hove it ve the tine they
ParA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
NOTE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8
The or in to go in ate whether one to no day shot ho kept mi:
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
organisation a dada statior
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
which to base future improvements in army training, equipment
It will be entered
It is to
he daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
from a war diary is an oftene ted that thrication ad etention of appendices, maps, etc.,
NoTE.—It should be made clear that the officer
of other persit should be ma pe clear, that the office who initials the encies is the co.
› initials the entries is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
preparing a diary :-
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
() Ind decisit osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i) Dary tattion lovements durints of of foremations are of assistance.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
(111) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(See sA. Vam aries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.—(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
SPECIAL NOTE.
and chan to to in mite to cod of are not to eated, the ohior
of the diaries of units will er-Secretary of State, The Was to the officer i
the unit concerned.
—The time entered should be the time the information or order
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, it
TENT
Month and Year
Dare
louI
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form G. 211c
Unit HQ CRASC, 22 L of 0. Ist Coln.
Commanding Officer It Col J.W. Cleme
References to Appendices
Maj R A Dey reports for duty
as 2IC - posted from 23 L of C Ipt Coln.
Maj Somerville posted to 7 BSA.
Instrs issued to 510 GI Coy re Exercise "DAGLE"; 3 piS, 12 RDIS, Vesps & HQ involved."
In erise " " con undo supply went for terolse meta
Appx 1.
CRASO cross-posts CSI
a follows:
510 GT Coy,
CSM Chendler From
CSM. Vaughan from 450 Tk Totr Coy to
510 GI Coy
to 257 Amb Car COy,
CSM Albone
from 257 Amb Cor Coy to 450 Ir Iptr Coy, for the purpose of strengthening.
the Coys concerned.
CRASC and 2IC visit Army, 53 Ip Carrying Coy. and 450 T Iptr Coy.
278 and 257 Inh Car Coys to stand by at 12 hrs notice - infn received
trom ALMy•
CRASC and 2IC visit 510 GI Coy.
CRASC discusses umpires' reports on
xeroise "RELIEN IT with Haj Chivers
Infu received that main
party of 510 GT Coy not required at "BAGI"
exereise Location until later date:
Movement order issued to 510 er Co
53 Ip Cartying Coy
27.8-Ame Car-Cos
257 Amo Car co.
450 Pr Iptr Coy
486 Tipper Coy
MA 20081 V209.
Trucks 15-cwt GS.
Appxs 2 & 3
Bulk Orders are for one do
returned on the same day
Pase mark this box when you have fini
Not all documents in your Bulk Order are guaranteed to
for the date you have requested, or they may have sp
requirements.
One or more of your documents have speci
I requirements - Enquire at the Information
One or more documents are in use els
Information Desk for full details
