NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
of mobilisation or
(in) perile so Counted eatin Fat he or intent ocean pose as or rooping
important phases.
bordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changs in stablishmen of stre rah,
In addition in the case
of units on the I. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Metsorological notes.
ec. 36), and personal
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
1, T Even to should be entered of each in the order as given i ve hut at the time they
each day, events (vi)
a his representatives.
y, war diaries will be
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:—
(" on of car feld retun .. s the pet. wed ay the cut operation or
the war diary.
(ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
of other pet or thel he in decle, hot the fier who inito the ne tie a the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4 - In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :-
() Impotent osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i) Dare atii lovements during to at toenations are or asistance:
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
(ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(Se SA, i diaries will conform to the regilations for drafting orders, reports, ete.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
the unit concerned.
SPECTAT NO. T the in need should be the time the niem thin v
Place
Month and Year Jan 14
Hour
Bedfoza
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY.
(Erase heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Army Form
of C Ipt Co:
9. 2118.
Commanding Officer It. Col JW Clem
References to Appendices
att.
CRASC writes 20 [ of C Ipt Coln re Wardown Pk and use by Coys
under cand as vatorsplash.
Appxs 1 am 2
Appx 3.
hakes arrange-
Obtains provisional
army phone
doys sarised.
tho to don use ente intervioved by erast prtor to joining
510 gt. 092:
Tisher and O/st dartley report to this lu for auty.
Routine Orders 8 - 9 att.
Fot Detail 20 x 3-ton from 450 Tk
Totr.
COy for No 3 Special Dv
Wt.11030/1000 000,000 12/41 W.HI.& S. 51-4070
Apox 4.
/ sheet 2....
returned on the same day
returned on the same day
ease mark this box when you neve ill
Not all documents in your Bulk Order are guaranteed to
for the date you have requested, or they may have sp
requirements.
¡ One or more of your documents have speci
I requirements - Enquire at the Information I
One or more documents are in use els
Information Desk for full details
