WO171/2233
. 36), and personal
is representatives.
war diaries will be
Vors B.-- See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
he War Office, L
to C to que of shute whether or at a to dity told yo kent tor a mie
orga to tron and a
war diary is an
r other person men
person monto be made dear the the once to nits to he dies a the commander
PARA. 3.-Omittel.
prepare day so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded whon
(1) And decisit orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches reccived and issued,
(i) Daid loation Movementsun
Movements during the as trenty fos are of assistance
nd nrecent dispositionS
iti) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174)
of mobilisation or
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
As regards casualties the names and be nos
(vii) Metcorological notes.
(vili) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
out, or come into foul emere up, not in the cit gina cho ve ht tin tin thy
ParA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
() A copy of cuch field retun (4. Wife And e Covered ty of curten valine or
he war diary.
(1) Copie of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(See FrS.R. Voletes will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
the unit concerned.
M . The tim tch to a to the tim ho ten t hot or ton
Place
Month and Year..
ADr 14...
Date
Hour
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Delete heading not required.
Summary of Events and Information
In the Fà.
450 Coy RASC (Ik Totr) goes over to Fa Documentation with 02E.
Report received from 450 Coy on It M H P G Croft.
Ps W 3008 and N 3009 I issued.
merican Hostel.
loutine Orders 70 - 74 issued.
CRASC orderly room - Sjt Barlow promoted CSM and crossposted to 257 Coy RASC
(no car, i De, on charge of absenco i thout Leave.
Sit Barret promoted OSM and crossposted to 218 Coy RASC (Amb Gat).
Ritness reports being received from coys...
Adjt visits JAG's branch with two Court Martial cases and afterweras calls
218 Coy receive note instructing them to indent for NAPI pack.
53 Coy receive orders to demobilise..
RASC meets It Col Craig at Wardown Pk,
Luton, and afterwards visits 450 Goy.
IC submits report on 450 Coy to CRASC.
Second
Army •
ramp
at Wardown PK.
(Ra) to undertake the completion of the
Ho person sul vett 450 by firing range for grenado praotioe.
Army Forn.
Unit. HQ: CRASC, 22 Ipt Coln
Commanding Offcer It Col Jw Clem
References to Appendices
Appxs 1 & 2
Appx 3
WAR DIARIES
+9WAY 1944
returned on the same day
returned on the same day
Not all documents in your Bulk Order are guaranteed t
for the date you have requested, or they may have sp
requirements.
1 One or more of your documents have spec
J requirements - Enquire at the Information
One or more documents are in use els
Information Desk for full details
