0171/2233
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
reation of the particu
arary will der appintment by -
plicate from the first day of mobilisation or
(i) Each branch ub-area of the L. of C
he staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or :
(i) Unit commanders.
(i) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(in peroni/s GO. 2nd Echelon, ficers holding technical appointments (Se. 38), and
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
kept Yom the in they at of formation.
ns and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will b
NoTE B.- See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras, 1, 3, and 7.
orea nisation and
no a an a day on to a bite into unit i on record quipation.
History of no War research in ine inion and intenserie coy to be of value
initialled by the office
an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
and retention
or other per it shend he made die, that the offer who initials
i we detaitsts the ere desis the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
preparing a diary
- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(i) And decisions taken.
orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued
(* all cation cement during the at twenty four hours and preser
s and present dispositions.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
In addition in the case of units c
(vii) Meteorological notes.
Summary of important information received, whether military or political
our or Event oil he entered i not in the order even i, at the time thes
PARA, 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary:
Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(See F. Voll dianes will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :
for the preceding month will
are attached.
(i) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a brigade or higher formation will be
• officer i/c G.H.Q. 2nd Echelon to
-DECTAT•NOIE.—Ine Lul.
the unit concerned.
The time entered secorded should also be given in the text, if i
the information or order re
and so on,
Instructions re arding War dan to. d Totel
over will be prepare in linespo
Month and Year.
Jun 14+
Place
Date
Houl
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required)
Army F
Am C. 211
Unit. HQ, CRASC, 22 Ipt Coln
Commanding Officer. It Col J W
References to Appendices
In the
niola
Summary of Events and Information
CRASC completes outstanding personal matters at Il preparatory to touring Coys.
Routino Orders 37/50 issuede
Pinal arenagoonts nado fos colloction af additional ann and rum.
Cond Messages and Soldiers Guides issued to Coys for distribution on 'D' Day.
CRASC visits 379 COy.
News of nove
o 738 Coy recoived - noving to zonsoy mr southampton.
1678 Arty Pl (739 Coy)
receive orders to nove
to Marshalling arod
270 86111 chestng TANGs
•ond Pionic Baskots.
doficionaios - ali 739 coy colloctodo
2IC and Adjt visit 1678 Arty
P1 to confirm everything
in order for the move.
Pho only dolicioncios is in tho nor respirator - none have beon recoivado
Ar W 3008 and W 3009F issuedo
Ipt Details reccived from Second Army - given to 1675 Arty Pl (323 Coy) -
collection of 75mm Amn
30 vehe.
CRASC returns from visit
to Coys.
738 Coy noving to Christabunch to be with o AGRA,
-Wed Gloven gallo-to see GRAS,.
Exercise planned by 379 Coy - Coln spectators to attend.
1.646 Anty P1 (32 Goy
now to bo definitoly restriatod to 5ntons.
CRASC deals with outstanding office matters.
First announcement that operations on the Continent have commenced.
phảg áo tp! Dey, Londingo on the lenthomoonst of Prongo commence with
tomife air and sea supporto
weather is bad with
wind and rain.
Instmretions reocred con move ce
the Hanshalling redy
0o is due on D + 6.
ady element of this he moves
direovive on the op and one
of Anty pla in relation to Al adosa
•CR M8524/218 1200M 10/41 H.B. & Co. Ltd, 61-1541)
...../
Appx 2 &
"Girra: 2n0 cohe
contact
Go DRS,
DiG: 02E.
put in
not go arou
nave tinished:
