APPXI7
MON CONOr PRIVERS CART
Be el bo tho officer in chanco of the Cantoon.
It was decidod in botober that,
with the nivont of wintor, a Canteon was
contally situ tod,
in IE INVOURG, for uso by all convoy drivors of the
o columns 21, 35 and 41 and for all convoys pessior through.
On 29 COn "The Convoy Drivers Cantoon! vas poonod in a requisitioned Cafe
1o Squero of ID MUTOURG.
The facilitios offered included tea and cakos,
and sorre all, a concortabli
warn place where men could relax in the ovening to
ito lottors and do what they loased in comfort.
The stoff of threa vero obtained, one fron each of 213,378 and 706 Coys RASC
) and attached to HO CRASO 21 Dot Coin who also arran od for consorship of mail
i at the Canteou.
Rations and direzultos.
To authority vas obtoined for purchase of rati as fron PASC or NAAPI
artain purchases vor mado whilo
the bulk of
the rations were
from compenies out of thoir daily mtion
ontitlom nt.
phese were
ninod on a roster of ell cornnies using the fantoon.
ere suppliad partly free of chance through the Wolfore Officer at
I of 0 Su, Aroa and certi, by purchose fron the Woloro Depot at BAYBUX.
A piero vos includod in tha renuisition on the pronises.
chandle.
Ibrar, vas clso inetallod with books obteinod throuch unit and
sunar monir services vore arma od by the Padro at He CRASO 41 Ipt Coli
contos da? the forth Woet Front.
As of Fresud, Tel dun and Holland voro dis, layed showin the mintenance
in short, an
infornation roon for drivers was
4o Attonennoo.
articulenly on Bunar
there was a reulor attendance in the carly days of 200 per ni,ht,
This naturally fell off as companies loft the area.
mounting,
fe guaranteed to be a
rey may have special v
ents have special viev
he Information Desk to
are in use elsewher
details
A nominal char a was nade of one frano for all toa, cakos ote & Bel ian
boor way sold at 5 frones ter logs.
Cinerestos, witna paper eto were ali sola
at cost prico.
ato, ster
i Can recle, niton regin or ones, such as cloaning metarial.
comberate
writin- doin
coLt van sher anoutin to almost 13,000 francs.
moorly purchased by almost 50%, a not
Is 700 preoc Doteach CaRASO 21 and. 4,1
pt Coln thet this profit should b
divided patroos are anio
s in proportion to tho
time in the arca and the number o
weslied
It me surcher a pood that the Cola Hos shoula niso participato in the prol-
its no thois borsonnel were corter risitors and thor, in foot, shored the work of
or anásetion.
12.
tho attached encourts show the dintribucion of profits as agreed and cheques
o cover thin are boin damatonoà to tos and units.
The sharos of those wits
omini in the naca hore torny been handod over to 373 Coy RASC (GT) ho are
tim to hun the baboon on behale of ORASC 4t Mut 002 Allayule Major RASC,
to 14.
HQ CRASC 21 Transport Column.
Orficer IC Canteen Fund.
WO171/2232
