2 Eisenhower and Montgomery in England before D-Day
Patton (left) and Bradley in the air over Normandy, July 1944
PROLOGUE
I5
taken my parents into the garden, and as the roar grew I followed
and stood between them to gaze awestruck at the constellation of
red, green and
yellow lights which rode across the heavens and
streamed southward towards the sea. It seemed as if every aircraft in
the world was in flight, as wave followed wave without intermission,
dimly discernible as darker corpuscles on the black plasma of the
clouds, which the moon had not yet risen to illuminate. The element
of noise in
which they swam
became solid, blocking our ears,
entering our lungs and beating the ground beneath our feet with the
relentless surge of an ocean swell. Long after the last had passed
from view and the thunder of their passage had died into the silence
of the night, restoring to our consciousness the familiar and timeless
elements of our surroundings, elms, hedges, rooftops, clouds and
stars, we remained transfixed and wordless on the spot where we
stood, gripped by a wild surmise at what the power, majesty and
menace of the great migratory flight could portend.
Next day we knew. The Americans had gone. The camps they had
built had emptied overnight. The roads were deserted. No doubt,
had we been keeping check, we would have noticed a gradual efflux
of their numbers.
But it had been disguised until the last moment
and the outrush had then been sudden. The BBC news bulletin told
us why. 'Early this morning units of the Allied armies began landing
on the coast of France. The message was transmitted often that
morning, June 6th, 1944, drawing listeners anxiously to their sets
before
each
advertised
broadcast in the hope of hearing some
heartening change in the
anodyne form of words passed by the
censor. I had no patience with their incertitude.
The doorman at my
father's office, a figure of weight and importance to me because, as a
retired policeman, he was allowed to keep a pistol in the
drawer of
his desk the better to repel any fifth columnist bent on capturing the
files of the County Education Committee, caused particular irrita-
tion by being too busy with the controls of his set - bending his head
to the speaker and fussily adjusting the volume
- to show me the gun
as he usually did. He just, he said, wanted to hear how things were
going. Irritation gave way to scorn. What was the point of wondering
how things were going? A cross-Channel invasion
was
not, as it
happened, how I had visualized the war would be won. I had formed
no picture at all of the means by which the German army was going
to be brought to decisive battle. If anything, I had imagined some
gigantic, climacteric duel of aircraft,
in
which Spitfires without
