256
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Prussia', and hoping, via the right verbal formula, to frame orders
from which a successful offensive might yet be conjured from the
results of an unavoidable defensive withdrawal.
Military logic nevertheless wrung from Hitler the concession tha
the most exposed of the panzer divisions should be pulled out of the
extreme western end of the nocket to nermit their rearouning for hi
conjuring trick - what he called, a minor withdrawal of the front
between Sourdeval and Mortain - mid Kluge at once used it to
rescue them from imminent disaster. Far from thie freeing them for
counter-stroke, however,
he found that growing pressure by
Patton's XV Corps around Alencon obliged their piecemeal engage
ment simoly to hold the front First troth then tot ge and and SS
Panzer Divisions were drawn into a defensive battle, getting down to
the threatened sector as best they could along the three roads still
remaining open inside the pocket. Even though trying to confine
their movements to the hours of darkness all three suffered heavily
from air attack,
and sometimes from ambush by roving Allied
armoured columns, so that when their units were eventually assem:
north-west of Alencon on August roth their strength had
dropped far below the level necessary for anu attack+ tet SS had only
thirty tanks still running, 2nd Panzer twenty-five, 116th fifteen.
oth Panzer, which had tried to follow in their wake. had been all but
men present that day.
annihilated in the Forât d'Fcouves. it renorted twelve tanks and 200
Hitler's permission to regroup bour mieur sauter had also been
exploited bu Fberbach. Dietrich and Hausser to bring other divi
sions eastward. Their movement was accelerated on August 14th
mouth of the pocket at Falaise.
when the Canadian Matable ances hare down anaid on the
Totalize, which had preceded it on
August 7th, had frightened Kluge badly enouch - a breakthrough
.. such as we have never seen' was how he had descrihed it to
Hausser on Auonet 8th - and thie aaand incelat acriod him
more, but now he was harried by messages from Hitler anna less
realistic than those of a week before. There was, 'danger that Panzer
Group Eberbach. which was commite mut do the north
will again become involved in a sterile frontal fight' fit was struggling
to stay in being); gth and roth SS and z1st Panzer Divisinne can and
must be emploved' for an attant on tha Amarian that lasted
in mortal combat with the as a that tion of
the enemy near Alencon' was Kluge's immediate mission tha was at
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
257
his wits end to keep his own army supplied with day-to-day
necessities).
On the night of August 14th he set off on a tour of inspection
around the perimeter of his shrunken battlefield,
clogged with traffic and dispirited troops. At the headquarters of
Fith Panzer Army, Dietrich warned that the Falaise sector was
ready to collapse. The Führer's former chauffeur was not a man to
panic; Kluge would describe him in his last letter as someone 'whom
I have come to know and appreciate as a brave incorruptible man in
these difficult weeks", warm words from a field marshal of an old
behall brawler. If he warned of real danger, it was imminent. Next
morning Kluge set out early to get news of the southern edge of the
pocket from Hausser and Eberbach. Their rendezvous was fixed for
10 a.m. in the village square at Nécy, midway on Route nationale
158 between Falaise and Argentan, and so exantly in the eve of the
gathering storm. It was forty miles from Dietrich's headquarters at
Bernay and the field-marshal's command convoy was conspicuous -
a motor-cycle, a staff car and a radio truck. Its progress
clogged roads was also painfully slow. Before half the journey
was
done, but with only thirty minutes left to the meeting,
an Allied
fighter-bomber made a single pass out of the sun and destroved the
radio truck, killing its four occupants. Kluge took to a near-by ditche
After he had recovered his composure he set off again, but Allied
aircraft drove him constantly to cover. By midday he was in an agony
of frustration and sent his aide-de-camp ahead on a bicycle.
the aide at last arrived atiN dry, Bberbach and Hausser had returned
to their headquarters. Kluge therefore set off
the latter,
dodging fighters all the afternoon.
It was not until after midnight
that Seventh Army was able to signal Supreme Headquarters West
at la Roche Guyon word of his arrival.
Blumentritt, his chief of staff, at once transmitted the news to the
Fünterhauptquartier. It was one of many exchanges he had made
during the day, which Hitler was to describe two weeks later as the
worst ... of my life'. He
had woken to the news of the Allied
landings in the south of France. which he had long recognized would
require its immediate evacuation. He was much more alarmed by the
disappearance of Kluge.
The day before Himmler had brought him
further confirmation of the field-marshal's complicity in the July
zoth plot - mere allegations, we now know, but seemingly authenti-
cated by the presence during 1943 of so many of the real conspirators
