36
37
Canadian tanks forming up for the Battle of the Falaise Pocket,
August 1944
The Normandy Scene
4: the interior of the Falaise Pocket after its closure
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
255
to close.
which William the Conqueror had been born. The pocket was about
The Worst Day of My Life'
The sensation of encirclement was one with which Kluge had now
lived for over a week, if not longer, but certainly since the failure of
Litich on August Ith. It was all the harder to sublimate for his
inability to convey to OKW that the
situation was growing daily
more grave or to extract from Hitler any decision which offered the
prospect of escape. For some days after Lüttich he had acquiesced in
Hitler's discussion of plans
convinced
that his
to renew
inexperienced Americans
the offensive, perhaps half-
panzers
might still inflict a reverse on the
flooding
August gth he had pondered
past his left flank.
Thus on
with every appearance of genuine
absorption Hitler's proposal that Lüttich should be renewed two
days later. When events overtook that scheme, he debated other
moon would
dates, even one as far forward as August zoth, when the waning
give Panzer Group
darkness it needed to assemble a striking force.
Eberbach the longer hours of
brought him up short against the 'incredibility... of a large military
But the speed of Patton's movement towards Le Mans quickly
force of twenty divisions blissfully planning an attack while far
behind it an enemy is busily forming a noose with which to strangle
it'. Realities now so alarmed him and his immediate subordinates —
Eberbach, Sepp Sietrime d him ach's replacement at the head of
Fifth Panzer Armv). and Hausser, now commanding Seventh Army
~ that he actually managed to persuade Hitler on August IIth of the
need to use the panzer divicions arainet the American spearhead
before a second Latich was considered, a step in the right direction
because it at least meant bringing them a little nearer to safety.
Hitler however hamuead by and ocies with the eastern front. where
the extreme rigidity mussoviet amalhods had often in the past allowed
unforeseen advantages to be won from a Russian break-through, had
then negated the prospecto scape by decreeing that such an attack
should be aimed not
at Patton's spearhead but at
its lines
communication, in other words at much the same target as the
abortive Lüttich. 'It was a case, as the disenchanted chief of staff of
Seventh Army put it, of a command ignorant of front line con-
ditions taking upon itself the right to judge the situation from East
