218
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
with the Prime Minister, that he began to restore something of the
credibility of his leadership which he had lost through Goodwood.
Yet, had Eisenhower,
Tedder and Churchill been able to eaves-
drop on the secret communications of the enemy high command in
the aftermath of the offensive, they would have been heartened
rather than discouraged.
The
terms, gone well for
battle had, in strictly theoretical
the Germans.
After four years of tactical
experimentation their methods of dealing with armoured offensives
were well tried. In the Western Desert they had perfected a system
of drawing the British armour down on to their anti-tank guns by
flirtatious hithering-and-thithering with their own tanks. When the
enemy had passed beyond the uttermost range of their own artillery;
the eight-eights were unmasked, the British tanks destroved by
hich-velocity fire and their accompanying infantry, had they been
bold enough to keep up
with the armour, counter-attacked by
German tanks emerging from the protective screen. Things had not
quite worked that way on July 18chrOt wavese anti-tank guns which
had stood in the front line, and the tanks which had delivered the
coup de grâce. But the effect had been the same. Ground had been
lost - durine July 8th and the day of continued fighting which
followed the Canadians had cleared the whole length of the eastern
bank of the Orne to add to the enlargement of the 'airborne
bridrehead' won bu ruth Armoured Divicion _ but the perimeter o
the bridgehead had been maintained.
Between theoretical success and objective achievement, however.
there vawned a nerve-stretching gulf. Acadomic strategists on the
offensive in terms of an
German side might be able to explain the failure of the British
outmoded but none the less relevant
Jominian concept: that an attack should always he mounted, as nea
as possible, 'at right angles to the base of operations'. Montgomer
had flagrantly disregarded that sensible rule. The axis of Goodwood
ran at the shallowest angle to its base of departure and the difficulties
of sustaining the initial impetus could be attributed largelv to tha
fundamental if unavoidable defect in planning Rut even though in
meant that
the three armoured
succession (the 7th Armoured Division, last across the bridges,
divisions had attacked in
had
not really attacked at all instead of side bu side the decaders had
been terribly battered in body (it no side by side, their longer-term
strategic prospects gravely compromised. They too had suffered a
heavy loss of armour. Between them. They and 2tst Panzer
YEOMEN OF ENGLAND
219
Divisions had lost 10g tanks on July i8th, and about half the
anti-tank guns which had crippled the British onslaught had gone
too. A whole infantry division, 16th Luftwaffe Field, had
consumed in the cauldron of bombs and shells, a net debit as there
was none to take its place. The rational disposition of reserves had
been disrupted. Two panzer divisions which had been earmarked to
stand behind the American half of the front, where an offensive
masse de manoeuvre was clearly assembling, had been diverted to the
British front where they would have to stay while the menace of a
resumption of Goodwood still threatened. And the confidence of the
German high command in the west had been shaken to its founda-
Writing to Hitler on July zand, Kluge, Supreme Commander
West, warned:
In the face of the enemy's complete command of the air, there
is no possibility of our finding a strategy which will counter-
balance its truly annihilating effect, unless we give up the field
of battle. Whole armoured formations, allotted to the counter-
attack, were caught in bomb carpets of the greatest intensity
The result was that they arrived too late. The psychological
effect of such a mass of bombs coming down with all the power
of elemental nature upon the fighting troops, especially the
infantry, is a factor which has to be given particularly serious
consideration. It is immaterial whether such a bomb carpet
catches good troops or bad, they are more or less annihilated
the moment is fast approaching when this overtaxed front
line is bound to break. And when the enemy once reaches the
open country a properly co-ordinated command will be almost
impossible, because of the insufficient mobility of our troops. I
consider it is my duty as the responsible commander on this
front to bring these developments to your notice in good time,
my Führer.
But before the letter was written and despatched,
Hitler himself
would have suffered the sitects of direct bomb attack which would
locate the German Generalitat at the centre of his personal demon-
ology and disastrously strengthen his temptation to compel the
German people along his own path to immolation.
