78
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
cormal method of lying down and sucking in his stomach to fasten
the last catch.
When I tried to lie down, I found it impossible to bend at the
waist and had to fall into a prone position, breaking the fall
with my hands. Two Air Corps men came up and asked if I
needed help. I told one of them to stand on my back while the
other fastened the bellyband; after which I found it impossible
even to get to my knees.
The two men lifted me bodily, and
with much boosting and aruntine shared me un into the plane
where I pulled myself along the floor and with the aid of the
crew chief got into a bucket seat.
Later he fouad aL the bane to it door' (
iournalist ut flew with tham was to write that tute rarer!
and rest the weicht of the dese nad the ta da the coat itoolf.
The size and nature of theee eutena-dian he Lish nearl
doubled a man's weight and required for assumption something like
the assistance a kait none made its acant talla ni
great deal about the
of airborne operations.
Dramatic
though the immediate psycholorical advantages of a mass parachute
drop may be, the longer-term aifficulties it aresentad to the side
which launches it are immande Ru the nature of ite role a parachute
division confronts the first-line trothe nature of my, or very shortly
attracts them to its landing zonee In the battle which must follow s
artillery and support arms comparable in weicht and anate to the
enemy's, and to resunnly its needs for munition. firent. tram it
rear through a well-defined sustem of road. and duma. If it auffered
defeat, it
would do so for military reasons alone.
A parachute
division's predicament i ten
artillery is little more than symbolic 1n
character
in 1044 it
comprised a single miniature artillery battalion eanianad nith turelve
emotions felt for an ingenious toy, being aroused in illy dismounted
into nine parachutable loads but, when assembled 'very unlethal', as
a veteran ruefully recalled. The division cannot therefore hope to
match the enemy in richt of mat DatAba
respect - except that of the bravery and skill of its soldiers. It cannot
look to its rear for reinforcements or for resupply. Those must come
either by aeroplane, and only if landing grounds can be captured or
A child casualty of the invasion beine treated by medical corpsmen
on the morning after the airborne invasion
