136
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
that trap which the Germans had planned for the invaders all up and
down the Normandy coast and the Allies' half-tide landing hour was
designed to avoid. To port, starboard and dead ahead the spikes and
ramps of the beach obstacles,
festooned with Teller mines and
graze-fuzed shells, broke the surge of the incoming tide. It and the
engines of the landing-craft bore them inexorably into the belt.
Touch-down
In a few places where the obstacle clearance groups, first of all troops
ashore, had had time to work before the tide reached them, passages
had been blown and mines detonated. For these gaps the neares
landing-craft headed. Elsewhere,
'the larger landing-craft had to
drive on shore in spite of the obstructions and the smaller craft worm
their way through if they could'. About a quarter did not make it,
blowing up either as they touched down of pulled off for the retur
The commander
experience:
a group of five LCAs reported his
About three quarters of the troops had been disembarked from
LCA Igo when an explosion... blew in the port side. The
port side of L.CA 1059 was blown in by the explosion of one of
the mined obstructions after about one third of the troops had
been disembarked ... Another explosion holed L,CA 1137 and
stove in the starboard bow
All troops had been dis-
embarked from L.CA 1138 and the craft was about to leave the
beach when a wave lifted it on to an obstruction.
The explosion
which followed ripped the bottom out of the craft..
All
troops were discharged from LCA 115t without loss ... but as
we were leaving an approaching LCT forced us to alter course.
An explosion ripped the bottom out.
But even when their landing-craft were damaged or sunk, most of
the infantry struggled ashore, probably because the open troop space
did not confine the force of an explosion.
Equally important they
found their DD tanks already landed on wading in close behind
them, and with them the AVREs, Crab flail tanks and Royal Marine
Centaurs - though thirty-four out of forty of the last had either
foundered with the overladen mother ships or been forced back to
English ports - which were to break their way through the belts of
dry obstacles at the top of the beach. Almost everywhere the tanks
CANADA: TO THE SOUTH SHORE
were at once in action, for the Canadian infantry had now entered
the zone on which the fire of the defences had long been arranged to
bear, And those who directed it knew that they had only a few
minutes in which to destroy the impetus of the landing or themselves
As they cleared the landing-craft and looked for the tanks which
would support them, the Canadian infantry companies
instantly into the drills which they had practised a hundred times in
England. The Regina Rifle Regiment, disembarked under the
defences of Courseulles, strongest of the sector, had prepared with
particular thoroughness. From aerial photographs they had divided
the little fishing village and harbour into twelve sectors, each allotted
to a platoon. The six platoons in the two assault companies were to
take the seaward sectors, the six in the two follow-up companies
those beyond. Touching down at 8.15 to the east of the village B
Company met almost no resistance and quickly cleared its assigned
blocks. Its neighbour to the west, A Company, had a far more
difficult time. Landing six minutes earlier directly under the three
guns of the harbour strongpoint, the three platoons, each carried in a
separate landing-craft, ran for the sea wall. As they broke for cover,
they split into their sections, three groups of ten men organized
round the firepower of a light machine-gun,
which would support
the riflemen as they
another. They were immediately
moved to suppress one strongpoint
after
brought under
attack by
the
German artillery, into whose zone of fire they penetrated as soon as
they left the tideline, as well as by the machine-guns which had been
firing at them during the last stages of the run-in.
Fortunately B
Squadron of the ist Hussars had got its tanks ashore ahead of them
Nineteen had set out to swim from 2,000 yards out. Fourteen had
made the beach. They now began to engage the strongpoints from
the shelter of the beach obstacles, at ranges of about 200 yards.
strongpoint gun crews fired back, steadily if not accurately. No tanks
were knocked out. But the 88 mm gun beside the harbour exit and
the 5o mm behind it, the first of which had certainly sustained near
misses from the naval bombardment, went on firing until their
shields were pierced by the Shermans' shells. The 75 mm, out to the
right flank, held out for a good deal longer. It had fired over 200
rounds, almost its entire ammunition stock, before a ist Hussar tank
got it with a shell straight through the embrasure. And while this
gun-to-gun duel had been going on, the Canadian infantry had been
