332
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
over the Belgian plain, in 1941 through Stalin's refusal to believe
that he would attack at all. Until the autumn of 1943 there persisted
an element of self-delusion in his refusal to elevate the threat from
the west to the same plane as the strugole in the east. Thereafter he
could blind himself neither to the certainty that the Allies intended
to invade nor to the probability that when they did so they would
arrive undetected and without warning.
Had the Allies been able to take the measure of his anxiety, they
might then with confidence have comprehended the enormous
advantages they enjoyed. The Channel, instead of appearing an
obstacle, a zone of uncertain weather and hidden obstructions and an
enormous field of direct fire for the defenders' weapons, would then
have been seen for what it was; an impermeable barrier to German
intelligence and the smoothest of broad highways to the weak places
in the Atlantic Wall.
Indeed, given the Luftwaffe's inability to
overfly British airspace from the spring of 1944 onwards and the
complete penetration of the Abwehr's network of spies within the
United Kingdom, every place on the Atlantic Wall was a weak one.
'He who defends everything', as Hitler's spiritual mentor. Frederick
the Great, had warned, 'defends nothis And Army Group B, For
want of any but the crudest topographical i dination se to where the
Allies might make their descent, was on June 6th, 1944 defending
everything.
The result might have been foreseen: the instantane-
dus concentration of eight first-cless divisions against three weak
divisions and the almost immediate reinforcines t of the attackers by
another four divisions. On the first day, theretore, the Allies were to
achieve a superiority of four to one on the
intervention of a single panzer division on the do almost nothing to
ground, which the
Gone are such chances from the battlefield, present or future.
Wellington's "other side of the bill' has been coniured out of
neither he
existence, by the invention of intelligence-catherine devices of which
No power
today could prepare in secret a great seaborne invasion. Its gathering
would be spied out from the beginning bu satellite recou biance.
Even less can any power hope to muster undetected a concentration
of force in central Europe for an attack gornes an internationa
boundary in the manner of 1914 or 1940.
The sea provides the
means, if not today the opportunity, for tanke troons and ouns to
leap a hundred miles of space in a single night. Not so communi
EPILOGUE
333
cation by land. An army bent on the offensive must monopolize
road and railways for days beforehand, and its political masters find
convincing explanations if governments in the target area are not to
take their own precautions. Happily the governments of Europe are
now agreed that any significant disturbance of the fixed pattern of
military deployment is a legitimate occasion
for international con-
cern, to be announced before it takes place and monitored while in
progress. Perhaps it is still proper, none the less, for the peoples who
live in the shadow of the armies which line the border hetween east
and west to frighten themselves with the thought of what might
happen should they move against each other. It is certainly proper
for their commanders to plan how they might defend the pround on
which they are stationed phould crisis call them to do so. But if they
look to Normandy to tell them how to fight the battle, they will see
but the lesser part of what the story of the Second Front has to tell.
The greater part is that of how easily in the end the Allies won the
surprise they scarcely dared grasp at, and how utterly vanished are
the circumstances which gave it to them. Dare we guess that D-Day
was the last of Europe's great invasions?
