26
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Not that there were not plans. There was indeed a plethora, an
embarrassment of
plans, their number reflecting the diffusion of
responsibility for strategic direction which had prevailed in the War
Department until almost the day before yesterday, and the still
imperfect organization for
co-ordinating
all the ingredients of
strategic decision - economic, logistic and diplomatic as well as
military - which the unexpected arrival of foreign war had imposed
upon a nation unprepared for it. The War Department of the United
States had been reformed only twice in its history, first by Elihu
Root in 1903, then by General Pershing in 1921. The first reform
commander of the army and the heads of its internal bureaux; the
ended a century of internal warfare between
the military
second had provided the military commander - called, since 1903,
the Chief of caff - with a General Staff checifically organized to
plan and wage war. But even in this
new General Staff exact
responsibility for the crucial issue of command - setting strategie®
aims and choosing where how and bu whom they should he realized
- remained divided between its four original divisions, called G-1,
G-2, G-2 and Gra. concerned respectival with mersonnal intelli
rence, trainine and sunnly and a new castion Wa. Alas Division
(WPD). In a misguided attempt to simplify the strategic planning
process, Marshall, the new Chief of Staff had actually set up in Jul
1940 yet a third agency, General Headauartere I+ wao ta take on
from the War Plans Division its latent responsibility for wartime
command, meanwhile occupving itself with the training of the
hundreds of thousands of drafter the Selentin Servino Act of
September would brine into uniform Training was. however, the
direct responsibility of the Gus Divicine which net ATTO really no
clear-cut function, except the obvious though unintended one o
quarrelling with G-3 in particular and the divisions in general, an
activity all the more readilv stimulated by ite distance in the
suburban War College from their offices in central Washington.
Little wonder that almost every soldier above the rank of maior in
the capital in December 1941 had his own ideas about how the war
should be won. The notorious 'colour' plans of the 1020g - Green for
against Mexico,
Black against Germany, Orange against
Japan, Red against Britain, Orange and Red against Japan
Britain combined - were still current. even thoush thor had heer
conceived in a spirit of 'oure staff thinking' without rafarhad ta res
diplomatic circumstances, actual or anticinated Since May 1039,
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
27
however, they had been overlaid in importance by five so-called
Rainbow plans prepared by the Joint Army and Navy Board,
fore-runner of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in which the two services
were supposed to agree joint plans of action. The multiplication of
plans
and
planning
authorities
did
not
end
there.
The
American-British Staff Conversations, which had opened in great
secrecy in Washington in January 1941, bequeathed both a plan
(ABC-I) generally conforming to
Rainbow 5, and two further
consultative bodies, a British military mission to Washington and an
American one to London.
And while the former, being part of the
highly centralized Whitehall machine, would indeed only consult,
the latter was to have
authority to collaborate in formulating
military plans and policies'. The future Marshal of the Royal Air
Force, Sir John Slessor, a member of the Washington
Staff Con-
versations and an incredulous observer of the American govern-
mental scene, reported on his return: 'It is fascinating to anyone who
has been in close contact with our Committee of Imperial Defence
and War Cabinet system to watch the way even the most capable
Americans shy off
any attempt to formalise or
regularise the
governmental system.'
Much of the failure to formalize or regularize was the deliberate
omission of President Roosevelt. His temperament was hostile to
bureaucratic style; he 'kept channels open, fought routine, sabot-
aged institutionalisation', worked through a network of unofficial
friends and advisers (of whom the most important throughout the
war would be the puckish and irreverent Harry L. Hopkins). He ran
the White House very much on the relaxed lines
of his Hudson
Valley seat, Hyde Park, to which he retreated for days or even weeks
on end when the need for country air and family gossip overcame his
otherwise apparently inexhaustible zest for
the
intrigue,
vote-
bartering, compromise, high-minded moralizing, cynical dispensa-
tion of flattery and endless, teasing flirtation with the press which
comprised the art of presidential government as
displayed by its
greatest practitioner. But he had another reason for declining to
formalize methods of strategic decision. A single, strong, inter-
service staff, with authority to agree on priorities and to co-ordinate
land, sea and air action, would inevitably, however unintentionally,
have driven the United States down a one-way street.
And he himself had not come to any ultimate decision before
December 7th, 194I. He had committed the American taxpayer to a
