302
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
power available, the Army of Africa.
For the Koenig division,
destined to fight in the Mediterranean, that entailed no difficulty,
for it could be filled out with regiments of Algerian and Moroccan
mountaineers, whose former employment by Vichy could be for
because they were mercenaries.
But the Leclerc division,
chosen in March 1043 for transfer to the gathering invasion army in
England, would have to be composed as far as possible of native
Frenchmen if it
were properly to represent the nation at the
liberation. And those of the Army of Africa - officers foremost, but
men also - were soldiers to whom le Serment de Koufra had been
thrown down not as a challenge but as a reproach.
It is easy now to pour scorn on the soldiers who chose to serve
Vichy in the Armiotice Army pacier still thace wha continued a
duty with the Army of Africa.
were beyond the reach of the
Unlike those in the métropole, they
Germans, and outside the effective
authority of Vichy. But, even if they had their families with them,
they had other reasons for preferrino Pétain to de Gaulle. Legality
and the
legend of
Verdun apart,
both of which the Marshal
embodied. Vichy represented much that was to be valued by the
officers of a defeated France.
It kept alive a part of the historic
French army against the dau when shole micht be pananatituted,
It promised an end to the corrunt and defeatiat aninit of the Thir
Republic which traditionalists in the officer corps invoked as the
tions, above all the church, and fostered others, like the nationalist
"real' explanation of the débâcle of 1940.
Vichy honoured institu
movements,
Chantiers
Yeunesse,
Equipes sociales and
Compagnons de France, through which a healthier spirit of discipline
generation.
outdoor life could be inculcatted in the
The movements could be inculkerbocket trousers
and Celtic impedimenta invests photographs of their jamborees, ta
modern eyes, with strong overtones of Tintin and Asterix, but senior
officers of the period thought them worth hefty patronage.
all, however,
Vichy was a gutthem worth hefty sovereignty in the
empire. In the Far East, by grante of French sapanese, it saved
Indo-China from the fate undergone by Malaya, Burma, the Philip-
pines and the Dutch East Indies. Ale by Malaya, Beranean shore, it
preserved the French presence in Tunisia Morocco and Algeria.
Those were not stations where, in the pinino dave of neace,
diminishment
grandees of the metropolitan army had chosen to carva Rut the
power
home
disproportionately
40
A German prisoner in the hands of the Resistance
Liberators at the Lion of Belfort, symbol of French resistance to
the Prussians in the war of 1871
