212
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
back from the meeting at which these decisions were taken, Rom-
mel, overall commander of the bridgehead battle, had been gravely
wounded when his staff car was attacked by a roving British fighter.
But the command structure had continued to function despite this
numbing blow, and,
when Eberbach at Panzer Group West had
satisfied himself on the morning of July 18th that the attack into the
'armoured corridor' was the real thing, and not a feint to draw
German strength away from the west side of Caen, he had signalled
Ist SS Panzer Division to move from its position south of the cit
and prepare to intervene.
The Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler (Adolf
Hitler's Life Guard) was one of the most experienced armourer
formations in the German Army. Blooded in Poland, it had fought
in France in 1940, with Army Group B in Russia in 1941, taken part
in Manstein's attempt to relieve Stalingrad in 1042, been sent to
Italy in August 1943 to meet the Allied invasion and had, of course,
recently helped to blunt isth Scottish Division's offensive on the
Other side of Carpiquet. It enjoyed the Führer's warmest favour; as a
result it was usually un to strength. The heavy fighting of the last
weeks had reduced it,
IVs, as well as some assault guns.
but it still had forty-six Panthers and Mark
During the morning, dodoing from one patch of cover to another
these tanks had worked their way from the southern suburbs of Caen
edge of the 'armoured corridor', By 2.30 p.m. the
Panthers of the divisional nanter regiment had installed themselves
between Bras and Bourguébus, while the assault guns had pushed on
to line the ridge beyond.
From their position, at an elevation of 150
feet above the floor of the plain. the German crews looked down
directly on to the path of the oncoming British tanks. But while the
attackers stood naked in open country, the Germans could tak
advantage of the network of sunken roads which ran east-west along
the crest and the shelter of the small woods and villages on its slopes.
Trees, buildings and steen banks combined moreover to deny the
roving fighter-bombers of and Tactical Air Force a clear view o
their targets. In such circumstances. they should have been talked
on to them br the RAF forward ground controller, operating with
the leading waves of armour, but his tank had been among
knocked out in the morning and he had gone off the air.
little later in the battle, 'C" squadron of the 23rd Hussars urgentl
When, a
needed air support to drive off a German at theret he munable
to call it in and had to wireless the self-a-salla mine of Itth
213
YEOMEN OF ENGLAND
Armoured Division on the BBC frequency,
with a request
transmit it onward. It is therefore not altogether fanciful to compare
the situation at Bourguébus ridge in the early afternoon of July 18th,
1944, with that at Waterloo at the same time of day 129 years and one
month earlier. The attackers enjoyed enormous superiority in the
mobile arm. The defenders were battered and short of offensive
power. But they still retained hold of some key defensive strong-
points standing forward of their main position - Bras,
Soliers and
Cagny here playing the same role as Plancenoit, la Haye Sainte and
Hougoumont on Wellington's front - and the main position itself
was emplaced on perfect defensive territory, including a 'reverse
slope for the protection of the reserves. Any ascent of the ridge
promised to be a bloody enterprise.
It was towards that ascent that the grd Tanks and Fife and Forfars
were now moving, the first west of the
Caen-Vimont railway
towards Bras and Tubert-Folie, the second on the other side towards
Bourguebus itself. It was just as the leading tanks were level with
Hubert- Polie when the tun began', reported an officer of the 3rd
Tanks. I saw Sherman atter Sherman go up in flames and it got to
such a pitch that I thought that in another few minutes there would
Je nothing left of the Regiment.
I could see the German tanks
milling about just behind Hubert-Folie and over to the left. These
Were the Panthers of 1st SS. 'A tank battle was in full swing and the
Germans unfortunately had the commanding ground.' First to go
was the tank of a troop leader in 'A' Squadron, Major Langdon, hit
as it passed between Bras and Hubert-Folie,
which stand only 500
yards apart. Just before it caught fire, he and the crew managed to
jump clear, dragging with them the badly wounded gunner. Next
went two more tanks of "A' Squadron, and that of the commander,
Maior Close. An old campaigner, with a fierce determination to ge
forward, he ran across to the tank of a sergeant troop leader and
ordered him to dismount. Equally determined to get forward, the
sergeant ignored the order until Major Close, like
von Luck, also
drew his pistol and so put himself back in the battle.
It was then
going disastrously. Close could see 'the rest of the Regiment heavily
engaged, at least seven tanks blazing,
and baled out crews making
their way back to she embankment: Major Langdon's crew, shelter-
ing in a ditch with their wounded gunner, observed a mass of tanks
brewing up', which was Wo Squadron taking the impact of solid shot
from Panthers which outranged them, while other
tanks of our
