190
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
the teeth of air interdiction; it also presaged the arrival of up to ten
more, if Hitler decided to cut his losses and abandon the Mediterra:
nean coast to a secondary Allied landing.
Montgomery urgently
needed
therefore to sustain his
offensive initiative,
forcing the
Germans to commit whatever reserves they could find to battles
already in progress, at places of his choosing, and so deny them the
chance to make a considered counter-punch of their own at some
weak sector of his line.
armies
The junction of the British and American
between St Lô and
Caumont was an obvious point of
attraction for them, one indeed to which Hiter's eyes had been
early as
June zoth.
But where to kindle the fires?
Immediately south-west of Caen, in the angle of confluence between
the Odon and the Orne, stood Hill 112, against the long flanks of
which the tide of Operation Epsom had washed and broken three
weeks before. South of Bayeux, where the bridgehead was deepest,
the countryside marched away in a succession of steepening ridges,
thickly wooded, in laces densely forested cut bu river trenches and
cris-crossed by sunken lanes, towards the gorges, cliffs and castle-
crowned outcrops of la Suisse normande.
Germans
would
welcome a battle in that narrow countryside and would be waiting
Between Bayeux and St Lô the way into open country was barred b
the course of the Vire.
And west of that sector began the American
front, away from which it was the whole point of Montromery's
strategy to move the focus of heavy fiahtina Nor indeed could he
stand heavy fighting for its own sake. The Americans had dis-
embarked all the infantry divisions they had ready to hand in
England and would, during the rest of August, be transporting the
armoured divicine which should at thie stage of the invasion have
been needed for the expected exploitation into Brittany. The British
had no more infantry to send. Verv soon thair locese would have te
be made good by disbanding junior units and using their soldiers a
replacements.
Montgomery from now on would live with the
knowledoe that his army was getting smaller with each mascing week
debility:
And in the second week of July he was acutely conscious of another
a sudden
Headquarters,
ebbing of confidence at
Downing Street,
Supreme
Washington,
that
he could sustain the momentum of attack; hence his mile-by-mile
analysis of the map of battle west wart ack; hea to Carentan and
back again, rejecting one point of pressure after another until, by
a rigorous process of elimination his finger came to rest east of the
IgI
YEOMEN OF
ENGLAND
city.
As a starting place for a large operation, the 'airborne bridgehead
east of Caen looked highly unpromising. Only four miles by three, it
was sandwiched between the steep and heavily wooded
Troarn
heights, held at great cost by the Commandos of Ist Special Service
Brigade since June oth, and the Orne river and canal. The only way
into it lay across three pairs of bridges, from the main bridgehead on
to the mesopotamic strip between the two waterways and thence into
the airborne bridgehead itself. Four of these bridges were new, laid
by sappers since June 6th. The other two had been the target of
Major John Howard's daring glider assault in the darkness of D-Day
morning itself. Jealously protected ever since from attack - and the
Germans had constantly struck against them with aircraft and even
once with frogmen - they provided the only means of supply and
reinforcement to th Airborne Division in its private world of battle
beyond the lodgement area. And, given its light scales of equipment
and consequently low requirements of fuel and ammunition,
bridges had sufficed. But did they provide a practicable route for
three armoured divisions and the enormous impedimenta of guns,
ancillary equipment and stores which they would need to support
them in their attack? That was the crucial question, for it was with a
force of no smaller size tha Montgomery now felt impelled to make
his effort at regenerating the offensive.
On Tuly tath he wrote to stay the anxiatie of his most important
doubter, Eisenhower: 'Am going to launch a very big attack nex
Week... VIII Corps with three ar moured divisions will be launched
to the country east o the Oree. Note change of date from 17 to 18
July'. To Alan Brooke two days later he wrote a longer letter of
explanation:
we are fighting in ideal defensive country. We do the attacking
and the Boche is pretty thick on the ground. I would say we
lose three men to his one in our infantry divisions
Second Army…. will in fact get weaker as the
manpower
situation hits us... But [it| has three armoured divisions, 7, IT
and Gds [Guards]. They
are quite fresh
and
practically untouched
And so I have decided that the time
had come to have a real 'showdown' on the Eastern flank and to
loose [them) into the open country about the Caen-Falaise
