32
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
conquest. So the right, indeed the only antidote to Hitler's strateg)
for Germany - which was not autarkous and did not yet control a
panregion - was to outbuild her, tank for tank, aeroplane for
aeroplane, transport the result across the ocean by the shortes
possible route and get it ashore at Germany's nearest frontier. While
the force was assembling, preparatory operations should be vigor:
ously prosecuted - the sweeping of the Atlantic of U-Boats, the
achievement of overwhelming air superiority, the encouragement of
subversion in Nazi-occupied territories and, within strict limits, the
mounting of diversionary operations. But the real task was to build
an army which the Germans could not defeat. Wedemeyer, in a
paper demanded by the President in July 1941 on 'a strategic concept
of how to defeat our
potential
enemies',
had calculated what
manpower could be spared from industry against ratios of superiol
ity known to be necessary for success (the three-to-one rule), and
eventually decided that the army must be 8-8 million strong, and be
ready by July Ist, 1943. It could not, in any case, be sent overseas
until that date, since its transportation would require 1o million tons
of additional shipping not yet built.
More important than the army's size, however, was its composi-
tion. It was to contain sixtv-one armoured divisions. nearly a third of
the total and an altogether higher proportion than that present in the
German, British or Russian armies.
had, like all
duced to the idea of mass armoured tactics at the Kriersobodemie• he
Wedemeyer had been intro
professional soldiers, marvelled at their successful
application in the 1940 blitzkrieg: he was determined that the
United States should have the means to
when the time came.
outblitzkrieg
And so, unlike the British army,
building and training a host of small specialized units for raiding and
which was
diversion, the American armv. in Wedemever's plan tune en contain
only three sorts of formation: armoured divisions, a few airhornt
divisions to operate with them on the blitzkrier pattern, and a mass
of infantry divisions to consolidate the gains won by the tanks. It
was, in short, to be an army suitable for only one sort of operation:
large-scale, tank-infantry battles on the continent of Europe.
covering note, Wedemeyer revealed that intention and his own
philosophy of battle in unequivocal terms: 'We must prepare to fight
forces and definitely breaking her will to combat
Germany by actually coming to grips with and defeating her ground
forces will make important contributions hut effective and adenuate
Air and sea
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
33
ground forces must be available to close with and destroy the enemy
inside his citadel.'
Though a citizen of the most productive nation on earth, and one
with slack enough in its economy after twelve years of depression to
display a breathtaking burst of industrial acceleration, Wedemeyer
recognized that not even the United States was rich enough to
disregard the most fundamental of all truths about strategy; that it is
always a matter of choice. 'He who defends everything', Frederick
the Great used to warn his generals,
'defends nothing.' 'He who
attacks
everywhere',
Wedemeyer
might have echoed,
nowhere.' The United States,
Germany, could not at the same time build an army large enough to
fight a major war against the Japanese, wage peripheral operations
around the coast of Europe and attack the German heartland, while
still manning the factories which made her the arsenal of democracy.
Since all else depended on their output, there would have to be
The Japanese could not be ignored; the
Germans must be brought to battle; therefore the economies must be
made in peripheral operations. But they could also be achieved by
correct, early decisions about the way Germany was to be fought to a
standstill while the Japanese were kept in play. A war in the Pacific
must of necessity be amphibious, entailing the creation of expensive
amphibious task forces. The
- vent an amphilo promisit anou
whole undertaking. Once a beachhead was gained, the whole
invading force could pour in .. Transportation of the invad-
ing armies would thus become a massive ferrying operation
using conventional rather than amphibious shipping. Large
forces organised on a large scale meant low unit cost ...
Logistical plans could be stabilised far in advance. In essence,
the logistics of task force operations was retail, that of large-
scale invasion wholesale. The argument of economy favoured
the latter.4
This retrospective judgment by the American official historian may
be taken to encapsulate Wedemeyer's view. And, because held from
the outset and built into the foundations of the US war plan, it
determined of course that the argumegts of economy would prevail.
