310
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
scraps of paper, passing them into the throng in the hope that the
recipients would find time from their rejoicing to dia news of the
prodigal.
Thus a crop of tiny, poignant tragedies. For as the columns.
neared the centre, they began to hit the ring of strongpoint in the
ministries and public monuments still occupied by German soldiers
with orders to engage the enemy. And at least three of the liberaos
who had sent messages ahead, Lieutenant Bureau to his faber,
Sergeant Laigle to his fiancée, Private Perracci to his sister, vie
killed by fire from these last-ditch warriors before they could make.
their rendezvous.
Fighting
was particularly fierce around Di's
objectives at the Ecole Militaire and Invalides, where trees and open
space gave the defenders cover and good fields of fire.
The foreign
office building on the Quai d'Orsay was set shine in the exchanpe of
fire and a Sherman knocked out during five boure of fi haina which
cost the German garrison fifty dead.
There was heavy fighting too
Re anglade's axis. His men began the mornia by clearing the huge
Renault factory of Germans, then swund thronth the Porto St Cloud
into the Paris of the haute bourgeoisie followine the rue Michel-Ange,
avenue Mozart and eue de la Pome to tha foot of the avenue Vito
Hugo.
The Arc de
Triomphe stood before them.
Massu was
determined to be first to pav tribute to the tomb of the Unknown
Warrior beneath its vault, and launched his jeep up the long incline.
His armour followed. At the moment that he howed hie head before
the eternal flame, a 75 mm shell from a German tank parked in the
Place de la Concorde at the far end of tha Chamno Elon whistled
through the arch itself, disturbing the foids Chan enormous tricolour
which the sapeurs-pompiers
keystone.
of Paris
were suspending from the
By instantaneous recall of a wigure stemembered from a
school day lesson on the geogranhv of Paris the gunner of one of his
escorting tanks set 1,800 metres on to his sight und destroved the
German with his first return of shot his sin assu gathered his
followers UD and started on a triumphal tour d'hone to follow its
trajectory down the long vista.
Meurice.
He
was also bound towards the
Choltitz had passed the morning in his office, occasionally leaving
the hotel to anant to coldia mannina hacitin is the murde
Rivoli and in the Tuileries Gardens opposite; but until well after
noon the defenders of this battlefield de fussite, e not disturbed. At
about I1.30 a.m. however, Choltitz found himself in direct touch
FREEE FRANCE
ЗII
with the enemy via the offices of the Swedish consul-general. One
of his officers was visiting the consulate when Captain de la Horie
arrived with an ultimatum from Leclere calling on the Germans to
end resistance at once, 'in order to avoid the useless shedding of any
more blood'. The document was shortly in Choltitz's hands and
almost as soon back again with Nordling, together with an explana-
tion that a German officer's honour forbade him to surrender
without a fight. At about 2 p.m. therefore,
bearing operational
orders which read like a sightseer's guide - advance through the
Tuileries Gardens as far as the Pont de la Concorde, 'approach the
Hôtel Meurice via the Opéra and rue St Honoré', 'enter the Hôtel
Meurice by way of the rue de Rivoli" - three platoon/troop groups of
the Tehad and Chars de Combat set out from the Hôtel de Ville to
make the demonstration the general required.
He, however, had prudently not informed his outposts that a
quick surrender was his intention and realistic combat quickly broke
out along the line of the arcades which shelter some of the most
expensive shops in the world. Three Germans were killed at the foot
of the statue of Jeanne d'Are while sprintine to change position in
the Place des Pyramides. A Tchad infantryman was killed under the
walls of the Louvre. Three Shermans were set on fire in the Place de
la Concorde by grenades thrown from upper windows into their
open turret hatches, and there was a brisk battle for possession of
Gabriel's serene palaces which close its north side, the Ministère de
la Marine and the Hotel Crillon. But bound by bound, from one
pillar of the arcades to the next, the Tchad infantrymen drew nearer
to the front door of the Meurice and at about 2.30 p.m. the first
Frenchman burst in. On his heels raced Lieutenant Henri Karcher,
who, plunging through the smoke released by a phosphorus grenade,
took the stairs at a run and pressed some surrendering Germans to
show him to Choltitz's office. Entering and saluting, he asked the
general if he spoke German. 'Yes, probably better than you', was the
answer. Karcher, overcoming his excitement, introduced himself as
an officer of the army of General de Gaulle' and invited the
commander of Gross-Paris to make his surrender.
The formalities were quickly completed. A jeep took Choltitz to
the Préfecture de Police, where Leclere was starting a delayed lunch
in the banqueting chamber. In the billiard room next door the two
men conferred over terms of capitulation and then put their signa-
tures to a typewritten document. It arranged for
an immediate
