304
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
From these disparate elements - marsouins, bigorres, Cuir, Chas
d'Af - representing not only the two onnosed camns of Pétinisn
and Gaullism, but the three unminaline streams of which the dd
army was composed, métropolitain, colonial, Africain. Lecler serum
to make in the next twelve months a single fighting organization. An
important binding agent was the complement of officers who had
escaped to Africa from the Armistice Armv. out of the disgust with
Vichy, before the Allied landings of 1042; they might properly claim
a foot in both camps. The brotherhood of S+ Cur melted hearts also
difficult to hold at arm's leneth a cotain de promotion enon harder a
bazar one had
crowned with his casoar at the baptême of Marie ti
Verdun or Amiris Franco-Britannione. And was that carsfullu chose
title not in itself a reminder of nast hopes which deserved to h
revived? But the most dowerful arent in healing the division was the
danger of
personalitv of Leclere himself Reave with the total indifference to
the real cavalier, proud with th conceit, impassioned
without bigotry, selfless, relentless, he stamned ruthlesslv on al
expressions of mutual disregard - cowards and chirkan from on
side, 'rebels and adventurers' from the other - and drove all to work
Men had to be picked and trained the trick. of new eaninmen
learnt, the complex tactics of a formation of all arms endlessly
rehearsed. First in Morocco, then in England. the and Division
blindée (armoured division) - soon the 'Deuxième Dp' to all who
belonged to it - practised to make itself a match for the German
who had tossed aside the divisions cuirassées of too with suck
humiliating ease. Bu the eve of D-Day it was todd hothe br
under Patton's command.
Supreme Headquarters and on Auquet yet ordesad to France to com
Liberation
In two weeks of combat at Alencon and Argentan on the southern
flank of the Falaise pocket. the division had provod itself a skilfu
and flexible instrument of war. It had made munh of the mine in th
drive to close the neck of the nocket from the south and hut for
Bradley's change of mind michf have has that sout and, Dame
junction, it
was on the evening of Switch dead, when Ledere
returned to his headquarters with his elestrifving namas end in
open country south of Argentan. It had been settling down for
FREE FRANCE
305
another quiet night, the seventh since its relief from the battle for
Alengon. Word of the new mission threw all into activity. Head-
quarters tents suddenly showed light through the canvas as orders
were typed and commands telephoned. The division was to move in
three columns, commanded by Dio (one of the Chad originals).
Langlade and Billotte. Each was to be formed of a half-track infantry
battalion of the Régiment de marche du
Tchad, a squadron of
Spahis in reconnaissance, a squadron of the Fusiliers- Marins tank
destroyers, an artillery repiment, and one of the tank regiments: the
Cuirassiers with Dio, Chasseurs with Langlade, Chars de Combat
with Rillotte All nicht the crewe humned ammunition and hauled
jerricans of fuel, ran up motors, raced their last few doubtful runners
through workshops.
Next morning,
at first light,
throbbing,
blue-fumed mass of 3,000 vehicles, 12,000 men aboard, stood on the
line of departure.
Many had never seen Paris. Some, pieds noirs of Algiers and Oran
or children of emigrants to the Americas and the South Seas,
landed in France for the first time three weeks
But their
tanks and scout cars were blazoned, in the
French style,
with
splendid affirmations of homecoming:
The Cuirassiers had adopted
the names of the towns first liberated in the invasion battle, Caen,
Evreux, Lisieux, Cherbourg, Rennes, Lorient; the Chasseurs those
of old royal provinces, Barn and Guyenne, or Imperial Marshals,
Lannes and Murat. The Chars de Combat preferred battles, those of
Napoleon's will o' the wisp campaign before Paris in 1814 - Romilly,
Montmirail, Champaubert - of the grim episodes of the Meuse and
Vosges of the previous war - Douaument. Mort-Homme. Laffaux,
Vieil-Armand The Wusiliers-Marins alone chose to recall origing
rather than destination. Their tank destroyers bore the names of the
winds which carry sailors to safe harbour or drive the illfound and
unwary to run for shelter,
Bourrasque, Cyclone,
Ouragon, Orage,
Tempête,
Astral, Simoun,
Sirocco.
Both sorts would blow over
Paris in the coming days.
The division was still 120 miles short of the city, and the whole of
August 23rd was spent in a breakneck drive down narrow depart-
mental roads towards the outskirts, via Sées, Mortagne, La Loup
and Maintenon. Leclerc travelled at the point and reached Ram-
bouillet in
mid-afternoon.
There he found General de Gaulle
already installed in the presidential residence, killing anguished time
with English cigarettes and a volume of Molière extracted from the
