30
The loneliness of the battlefield: infantry following tanks during
Operation Goodwood
32
Operation Goodwood. a Cromwell tank of the rth Armoured
Division crosses the Caen canal for the start line
The exposure of the battlefield: infantry crossing the skyline
during the Goodwood advance
THE HONOUR OF THE GERMAN ARMY
239
the time had come to defend the west on different ground.
This was a warning which the Supreme Commander in the West
had given him even before the crack had occurred. For the first six
weeks of the fighting the various headquarters in
France
had
managed to sustain a strange normality in their way of life. Seventh
Army and Panzer Group West had been gripped by daily crises,
unavoidable to staffs at close quarters with the enemy. But Rund-
stedt, the aged and world-weary Supreme Commander, had con-
tinued to reside at his château at St Germain outside
Paris, only
rarely visiting the front and still finding time during his day for the
detective stories which were his escape from a reality he had long
before decided to sublimate.
Rommel, too, had maintained his
command post in his château at la Roche Guyon on the Seine, and
thouth he spent his days on the road, shuttling frenetically between
Seventh Army, Panzer Group West and their subordinate corps,
sometimes travelling 400 miles between breakfast and dinner, he
made dinner a fixed engagement, at which he and his staff would
reminisce about better times gone by and round off their evening.
with a tour of the battlements of the ruined castle above their mess.
Ruge, his naval staff officer, had had the shrubbery cleared up there
so that Rommel could enjoy the 'mother-of-pearl' vistas of the Seine
from his favourite bench,
twilight on what the future held, and Ruge would calm his chief's
where the two would muse
into the
anxieties with a rese future one with the Wind, his current reading,
its 'endless parallels with our time' and reassurance that 'rebuilding
was possible artles with our ti. The appearance of Kluge to replace
Rommel after the latter's wounding somewhat modified this agree-
able pattern of mess life. The new commander of Army Group B,
Rundstedt's
was also
Supreme Commander
unguarded expression of pessimism had taken him into retirement
On Taly eth haniched Parmale cronies from meals which he took
with his operational staff. But he, too, was always home for dinner
when, for all that his anxieties for the future were soon even sharper
than Rommel's had been, le sometimes relaxed his regime enough to
entertain guests.
His ability to banish the cares of the day from his evenings may
have been due to a belief that Hitler, with whom he always enjoyed
special favour and who had singled him out for the special responsi-
bility of the western command, would in the end heed his advice
about the proper strategy to be followed there. On July rath, only a
