224
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
An effort
was made to restore the normal and curiously banal:
pattern of Führerhauptquartier life. Hitler prided himself on his
imperturbability and, though Jodl and Keitel could remember acute
nervous crises from earlier in the war, he revealed no sign of one
now. Immediately after the explosion he had taken his own pulse;
when his wounds had been dressed, he donned a fresh uniform and
summoned his female secretaries for the usual midday collation of
vegetables and schwärmerei. He had been saddened by the news of
the injuries to his entourage: a larger fraoment of the table which
had peppered him had impaled General Korten, and General
Schmundt, his chief and favourite adiutant. had lost both legs; they
were in their death throes. But the sadness was momentary. His own
escape had induced in him a euphoria and sense of confidence, of a
turning point in his fortunes, which he had not felt since before
Stalingrad. When Mussolini, a pathetic husk of the superman whom
he had once so much admired, arrived at the railway station at 2.30,
Hitler babbled to him of hie anod luck and. at the door of the ruined
hut, spoke of his belief that his 'great destiny' would 'transcend its
present perils and ... be brought to a triumphant conclusion'.
He now awaited the arrival of Göring,
brunner, head of the Reich Main Security Office, whom he had
Himmler and Kalten-
summoned before ordering the outgoing telephone lines to be
disconnected to preserve the secrecy he wanted. He expected the
latter to identify the «Schweinhund, who were responsible for th
outrage. Suspicion had already begun to centre on Stauffenberg, fos
the investiontors were finding fragments of his briefcase — it had
been of a distinctive vellou loather all over the conference room.
Moreover, it was remembered, he was an aristocrat, a Catholic and a
regular officer of the Reichsheer, the pre-1933 army, all categories
vaguely suspect to practisine Nazis and, in combination, almost an
indictment of guilt. He had disappeared from the central compound,
was known to have tolled his way through the guarded rates in the
security fences and to have reachad to cirfield perhaps he had
fled abroad. Defection and aeroplanes had been neurotically con-
nected in Hitler's mind ever since the Hess episode in 194x, and the
threat of military treachery was an obsession which grew with every
broadcast from Moscow by the (Seudlite aroun) of turnaoat German
ifficers Improbable creature of the Botsheup both Stauffenberg
looked to be, complicity with the 'Free German Committee' seemed
the most obvious explanation of his motives and of the outrage.
THE HONOUR OF THE GERMAN ARMY
It was simplest to think of the act, moreover, as an aborted
Führerprinzip so dominated his own outlook that he
might expect it to dominate that of his enemies, believing them to
think that his removal would in itself achieve their ends, whatever
those might be. About 4 p.m., however, news began to percolate to
the Führerhauptquartier which suggested a far more complicated
plot. An automatic teleprinter link to the headquarters
Ersather started to chatter out copies of orders which were being
issued to Military Districts, announcing a state of
Prefixed with the codeword Valkyrie, they were familiar as stock-
piled instructions against the eventuality of a raising by the millions
of foreign forced labourers inside the Reich. But that was clearly not
the purpose of their transmission now. At about 5 p.m.
finally and unequivocally revealed. The circuit from the Ersatsheer
headquarters, at the Bendlerstrasse in Berlin, began to provide a
print of a telegram announcing that 'an unscrupulous
combat-shy Party leaders' had seized power and 'the Reich govern-
ment' had appointed the signatory
Commander with
absolute executive authority The signatory was Witzleben, a field-
marshal retired by Hitler in 1942 and long suspected of hostility to
the regime. The telegram was countersigned by Stauffenberg. It was
the proclamation of a military coup d'état.
The disadvantages of his isolation from domestic surroundings
and everyday events which Hitler had been at such pains to create
and maintain ever since the start of the Russian
war now began to
accrue very rapidly. Rastenburg was two hours' flying time from
Berlin, where the airfields might in any case be in the hands of the
conspirators; Stauffenberg had landed there, not at Moscow.
great bulk of the army, under commanders who could be trusted,
was at close quarters with the enemy, in Poland, the Balkans, Italy
and France. Such units as remained inside the Reich proper
few and the loyalty of their officers unascertainable,
Even if a
majority remained outside the conspiracy, they could be led as easily
by Witzleben and Stauffenberg as by Keitel and Jodl, for there was
nothing to validate the authenticity either of orders or information,
least of all the crucial information that Hitler was alive, angry and
out for blood, reaching their headquarters in the form of teleprinted
messages. Keitel did his best with the telephone, which had now
been reconnected,
but his voice was not Hitler's, and the con-
spirators were instructing Military District commanders to disregard
