252
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
deliver 2,000 tons of supplies a day - until the hard knot of German
panzer and infantry divisions had been driven farther from Mortan,
so enlarging the Avranches corridor through which all Pattons
supplies still moved. On the other hand, the situation map presented
another and even more spectacular solution to the problem of
establishing liaison between the questing spearheads of the Patton
army and the beaches over which they were still supplied. And that
was for the Canadians to crash through the crust of German defences
still intact south and east of Caen and join hands with them directly.
It would have the additional and priceless side-effect of encircling
the bulk of Army Group B between 2 1st and 12th Army Groups and
crushing it out of existence.
'Should this be a success', wrote a diarist at First Canadian Army
Headquarters, 'the war is over. The rest will be a motor tour into
Germany. Montoomery had already greatly altered the broad
Overlord conception, in particular by his decision of August 4th to
endorse Bradley's order, issued a day earlier, for Patton to clear
Brittany with 'minimum forces' and use the surplus in a turning
movement round Fifth Panzer Army's flank. He hesitated for a while
over the decision to launch the Canadians out of the bridgehead
towards Falaise, where they might link hands with Patton, perhaps
influenced by the sturdy German registance shown a. Dritis
southward drive on Caumont between July 2oth and Aumet 2nd
(Operation
Bluecoat).
He was also deterred by the losses the
Canadians themselves had swas also deter attacks out of the old
Goodwood Corridor into the
German positions on the crest of
Bourguébus Ridge and beyond, on July post and later: On August
sth, when the Canadians opened a new and very powerful drive
southwards (Oneration Totalize). he was still think i treme o
their swinging eastward when they rewaged Falaise and making for
the Seine, which he intended to he the backstop against which the
Germans would eventually be driven. Da ksgust 8th, however, as
Operation Lüttich cant into the sand he was to chaned hu Ceneral
Bradley, who had Eisenhower with him. wahe two had been confer-
ring and Bradley had pointed out to the Supreme Commander that a
"short hook' by Patton,
from Le
Mans towards Falaise,
achieve exactly the same object as a long hook trom Le Mans to the
Seine, but in quicker time and with less risk of the Germans getting
men or equipment out of Normandy in any quantity.
Montgomery
expressed anxiety about the intentions of the Panzer force remaining
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
253
at Mortain, but agreed that 'the prospective prize was great' and left
Bradley to issue the necessary orders to Patton. On August gth
Patton turned his two foremost armoured divisions, the jth and the
Free French and, northwards from Le Mans. Athwart their line of
advance lay the nucleus of a new German command, Panzer Group
Eberbach, formed purposely to oppose them, and two large wooded
areas, the Forêts d'Ecouves and de Perseigne. But the panzer
divisions composing Eberbach's force were already
overstretched
and were unable to make use of the natural obstacles the countryside
fered them. On August 13th a French patrol entered Argentan-
only thirteen miles south-east of Falaise, towards which the Cana-
dians were pushing from the north. The outlines of what would soon
be called the 'Falaise Pocket had now begun to stand out on the
maps and on the countryside of southern Normandy:
About thirty miles long and fifteen broad, its southern edge was
commanded by the American Third Army, its tail by the American
First, its northern edge by the British Second, whilst on the British
eft the Canadian First Army was working to close the unner jaw of
the mouth of the pocket towards the lower at Argental
Canadians were working with great force.
Operation
Totalize, in
which they had broken ou totthe old Goodwood Corridor on August
7th, had been a new type of armoured oneration. For the first time in
the history of warfare, the attacking infantry had been mounted in
heavily protected armoured vehicles, which had been formed up
close behind tho tank spearheads and had falloned thom on to their
objectives. These armoured vehicles were improvisations,
American
self-propelled
artillery chassis from
guns
had been
removed to provide accommodation for ten soldiers.
But they had
done what was expected of them,
deliver
their
passengers unscathed to their objectives: While the four infantry
battalions engaged in he attack had lost sixty-eight killed, the three
mounted had lost only seven. Totalize,
however, had not really
achieved its object. Despite the power of the ground force commit-
ted, and the support of 500 bombarding Fortresses,
the front of
attack was too narrow and was once again blocked off by
well-
handled German defenders, the familiar i2th SS,
supported by a
Tiger Battalion. The most notable, if unperceived, success achieved
by the Canadians was to bring to an end the career of Hauptsturm-
führer Wittmann, whose Tiger fell to a co-ordinated salvo fired by
five Shermans on which he was making a single-handed attack. It
