328
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
of Berlin, the First and Second Guards Tank Armies, the Eighth
organization and the solidification of the power of the satelie
regimes permitted in the early post war years a gradual withdrawalof
Soviet forces from the states of eastern Europe. But the strength of
the Group of Soviet Forces Germany remained constant at about
twenty divisions from one decade to the next, their status gradually
shifting from that of an army of occupation to that of an advance
guard of national power as relations between East and West moved
from alliance to hostility.
It is difficult to fix the moment at which the frontier between the
eastern and western military zones of Germany became known as the
Central Front.
Its use would have been quite inappropriate in the
7950s, when the western states, though already organized into the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, wholly lacked the force on the
ground to match that of the Russians beyond the Elbe. By the 19705,
when thirty years
of ideological confrontation had brought into
being in Germany an inter-Allied army of formidable size. it had
passed into common staff use. And staff thinking about how the
Central Front might be defended had moved during the same period
from unstated admission of inability to detailed doctrinal formula.
The policy of the r950s, a fighting retreat to the Rhine, had given
way in the i96os to a declared intention to use tactical nuclear
weapons against a Russian incursion. The dangers of an escalation to
general nuclear war, and natural objection to the devastation of their
territory by the Germans, who had come to provide NATO with its
most powerful land contingent, led finally to a doctrine of forward
defence' by conventional forces.
Forward defence implied that the mass of Soviet armour, should
it ever, and in whatever unforeseeable cissom stances, spill over the
Inner German Border on to the territory of the Federal Republic,
must be resisted where it was encountered, defeated and repulsed.
But the disparity in strength between it and the forces NATo could
deploy in opposition raised chronic do it a over their capacity to do
so. The Group of Soviet Forces fielded ten tank and ten motorized
divisions. American,
British and German divisions were equal in
number. But in numbers of men, tanks and cisensupport aircraft
deployed, the Western Alliance was at a disadvantage of between two
and three to one. Moreover, while British and American reinforce-
ments for their divisions in the field were at the wrong end of
EPILOGUE
329
vulnerable sea communications. Russia's reinforcements were land-
based and close to hand: eleven divisions in eastern Europe, sixty
divisions in European Russia and fifty
Warsaw Pact troops,
divisions of non-Russian
immediately behind the Central Front.
Czechs, Hungarians, Poles,
East Germans,
It NATO were to believe in its capacity to hold the Inner German
Border, it had therefore to find a plausible dontrine of defence, and if
possible one based on concrete historical example; not only a set of
rules but rules validated by experience in the but ton distant past
Where to turn? Neither in Vietnam nor Korea had armoured forces
clashed in strength. Britain's campaigns against Rommel in the
Western Desert had been fought in conditions topographically too
dissimilar from those of central Europe to be a useful source of
comparisons; and the same went, despite the modernity of the
equipment deployed, for the
Arab- Israeli
Russians'
success in resistine and repelling the German panzer wedoes on the
steppe in 1943 offered, by a strange reversal, heartening evidence
that blitzkrieg was not invincible; but their method relied on the
transformation of the terrain into a fended belte of entrenchmen
and minefield scores of miles deep, something quite inapplicable to
the thriving, heavily farmed countryside of Germany.
Where then to turn? Where else had tank met among standing
corn, orchard, co ps and hedgerow? Where had an armoured army
on the defensive given as good as it had got, held a line and won time
for reinforcements to arrive? In this aftermath of Normandy there
would have been to Allied soldiers prepared to concede that that
Was Army Group B3 achievement. Allied attention remained fixed
on the achievement that Overlord had been,
on the successful
gamble of the Channel crossing and the triumph represented by the
winning of the foothold under the guns of the Atlantic Wall.
But time dissolves the emotions of triumph. And the battle had
never generated any of that deep-rooted animus between the com-
batants which forbids sober analysis of its character for generations
afterwards. Recriminations by the Canadians against the 12th SS
Division apart, the invaders conceded that, by the curious morality
of battlefields, the Germans had fought the good fight.
Proof, if it
were wanted, of their attitude could be found in the
Normandy
cemeteries where, intermingled with the graves of the British dead,
in a fashion unthinkable to those who had fixed the character of the
Memorialization after 1918, stood the headstones of Silesians and
