282
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
who did not understand a word but roared with laughter all the
There was no laughter in Warsaw. The ist Armoured Division
CHAPTER 8
had held the ring; so too had the Germans around the Old Town.
Perhaps 70 per cent of the survivors of the Westheer had been
prevented by Maczek's men on the Mace from escaping to renew the
fight on the Siegfried Line. The whole of Bor's garrison had been
driven back into their bunkers and foxholes among the ruins, from
Free France
which they would be released only when. at the beginning of
October. the Germans tired of the effort to heast their recistance and
offered them recognition as combatants if they would surrender.
The Home Army, on the evening of August aret Inew therefore
that it was doomed to defeat. Marek could celebrate a victory. Next
day in the square at Chambois, in the presence of representatives of
the British and American armies. he accented an Iron Cross taken
krat the Allied armies in their beachlace
it t a ended in disaster. During
from a German
prisoner who had won it five years before in the
hi did tim Armies. In 1944 it had
Carpathian battle where the toth Cavalry Brigade had been des-
troyed for the first time. The trumpeters of the roth Dragoons
3. o, any Group Centre had gon
sounded the ceremonial march of the Polish army. A telegram from
at i hit Russia in June. In Augu
the commander-in-chief in London was read to the assembled
set before the Franco-American lan
officers and men. It declared, with uncertain optimism:
- at the Falaise Gap had com
sacrifices will enable the rights of Poland to be established on an
3 Coup , the largest in the order of
indestructible foundation.
During the next days the bodies of aar Dolich coldiero Lind in the
mix infantry divisions had foug
Battle of the Falaise Gap would be found makeshift graves near thi
positions where they had fallen. On the summit of the Mace itself
& besieged in the coastal fortsch
sappers of the Royal
Canadian Engineers,
in tribute to
ng 4o were remnants or shadn
comrades-in-arms, raised a makeshift sienboard. It bore. in English,
- he fateft to find a way actors
the simple inscription, 'A Polish Battlefield'.
+ ., 1 azer divisions, she.
ired proportionately. Two -
read units of infantry. The other
ratains, where there should ban
she dahare been 350, in tox
sonation and no tanks in the
ch ng on August 2350, 20
siment ost, amounting 1o %
at anes and hedgerov
hage. The missing men
i sat d the beachhead or
Sh un or dead ; at east.
ahotied in the confines
the
August
StAd with them, Kaise
000,
283
Château
