98
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
yelled. 'We're surrounded. That leaves one thing to do. Hit them in
the centre. So we charge them? One parachutist called back agree-
ment. Another, Private Sebastian, who had just been out to recon-
noitre the right flank, shouted his dissent. He had seen that they
were not yet cut off and urged that Turnbull should lead a breakout
rearward. The Chief, in a fashion more characteristic of Mao's army
than Eisenhower's, asked for a group decision. It was for Sebastian.
Turnbull gathered his survivors.
It
would be necessary, he
pointed out, to leave the wounded.
The aid man, Corporal Kelly,
offered to stay 'and surrender them if I can keep from getting
killed' ° Sebastian then volunteered, as the proponent of the retreat,
to stay as
well and hold the Germans off with his
Browning
Automatic Rifle. Two others made to stay with the wounded too,
but a German bullet killed one as he moved to take his position.
That death started the others, now numbering sixteen, into flight,
and they did not stop until they reached Ste Mère-Eglise. On their
way they passed unknowingly through the skirmish line of another
platoon Vandevoort had sent to their relief. Much earlier in the
afternoon he had fired a flare signal ordering their withdrawal, but
no one noticed it in the heat of the action.
Turnbull's stand on the high ground of Neuville-au-Plain - s0
reminiscent in its essentials of one of those little dramas of the Great
Plains in which his ancestors had tested their courage against the
horse soldiers seventy or eighty years before - on the great panorama
of events of that day looks neither particularly heroic nor particularly
significant.
Yet for men outnumbered
more than
four to one,
fighting on unfamiliar ground, at the end of a nerve-racking journey
by air, a parachute descent by night and a stiff cross-country march,
to hold up for eight hours against heavy small arms and mortar fire
and to engage and destroy two armoured vehicles into the bargain is
any reckoning.
And,
they had held up,
Mère-Eglise had been saved from assault from the north, precisely
at a moment when it had come under heavy attack from the south:
at 9.30 a.m.
Vandevoort's block on the
engaged by two infantry companies
Carentan road had been
supported by five armoured
vehicles. On the safety of Ste Mère-Eglise turned that of the whole
airborne bridgehead. So Turnbull belongs not only with the brave
but also with those who saved the invasion. He did not survive to
understand what he had achieved. On the morning of June 7th he
was killed by a mortar bomb.
99
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
2 The ist/ 505th at the Merderet
Mate Turnbull was fighting his Little Round Top at Neuville, a
in lao was being played out two miles to the south-west at the
manor of la Fire. Le Manoir was a collection of strong, stone-walled
buildings around a farmyard, at the eastern end of a bridge across
the Merderet which carried the road from Ste Mère-Eglise into the
zones of the goth and so8th Parachute Infantry Regiments. Not
caly was its seizure and use essential for their security, it was also
needed as a crossing place for the 4th Division, when it arrived from
the beaches, in its drive to the west coast of the Cotentin.
A whole battalion had therefore been assigned to seize both it and
the second Merderet bridge at Chef-du-Dont at the outset of the
landing; Major Kellam's Ist/ 505th, and Able Company in particu-
lar, were to secure le Manoir. The company had an excellent drop
1,00 yards east of its objective, collected all but 2 of its 136 men in
6o minutes, together with their equipment bundles, and marched for
the bridge. The leading files were actually despatched as the last
serials were touching down, a copybook achievement which the
planners had expected to be repeated all over the peninsula.
The company commander, pieutenant John Dolan, covered the
advance of the company with a stronf patrol under Lieutenant
George Presnell which, within 200 vards of Le Manoir, was sprayed
by machine-gun fire. It touched no one but drove them all to cover
from which Presnell, after hurling a futile
grenade, ordered a
withdrawal. His report persuaded Dolan that the bridge was too
strongly defended to be taken by cout de main, so Dolan set up the
company's battery of 6o mm mortars in a near-by orchard and began
peppering le Manor's masonry with their ineffective little projec-
tiles. Tiring eventually of this exercise, he decided to envelop the
buildings from the rear and sent oft a patrol on a long cast to the
south. And he then decided on a frontal assault down the road.
Frontal assaults on defended buildings, if unsupported by artil-
lery, verge on the suicidal and the platoon commander to whom the
order came, Lieutenant Donald Coxon, listening to the volume of
German automatin fire the mortaring had provoked, answered,
Well, sir, it I must send someone out into that, I'll go myself.
Taking a scout, he crawled down the hedge beside the road for a
hundred yards until a bullet killed his companion. He was almost
immediately wounded himself, and began to crawl back for help,
