36
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Five days later, in another note to himself, he was yet more
emphatic, and now precise about where the United States should go
to fight. "Tom Hardy [his assistant) and I stick to our idea that we
must win in Europe. Joe McNarney la colleague] not only agres-
but was the first man to state that the French coast could be
successfully attacked.'5
Eisenhower's achievement in perceivine strategic wood among the
forest of trees which flowed past his War Department window in
January 1942 had much to do with his carefully disguised menta
ruthlessness, but also with his training and backeround in the army.
For all the Kriegsakademie sneers at American military dependence
on factory production - her 'pitiless industry', as Hindenburg had
called it - few officers had any grounding in industrial mobilization.
Eisenhower
was one of them. He knew
Wedemeyer's
Programme, had seized from it the key concent offencive opera
tions in one theater [Central Euronel and concurrently defensive
operations in all others' (memo, February zoth) - had added to it
arguments which sprang from his fears of Russia's imminent collaps:
('We've got to do it - go after Germany's vitals - while Russia's still
in the war'), had identified allies who would support his advnce
(March oth, 'saw MeNaughton - commanding Canadians in Rrita
- he believes in attacking in Europe. Thank God!') & and at the end
of February
sat down
Programme into a plan of action.
to transform the thrust of the
His plan was presented to Marshall on March 2eth, just in tim
for the chief of staff to take it with him that morning to the White
House. There after lunch he outlined its elements to the President.
Roosevelt had lust concluded for the handsit of his quanto a strategie
tour d'horizon of his own and a scheme for action or reaction on every
sector of the worldwide battlefront which appalled Stimson,
veteran Secretary for War, as a 'dispersion debauch', Marshall's very
fine presentation' of a sinole, clear-cut. war-winnina sim brough
back sense to the meeting. Deflated, Roosevelt first cautiously sug
gested that Eisenhower's document should be sent to the Combined
Chiefs of Staff - the Anglo-American strategic committee established
at the Washington Conference - for its opinion Put discunded by
a warning from Harry Hopkins that 'it would be simply pulled to
pieces' and 'emasculated' by the Committee's clever young staff off-
cers, he then agreed that 'someone should take it directly to Churchill,
Pound, Portal and Brooke ….. and det it through them inary
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
37
As it stood, Eisenhower's paper was not persuasive enough for
presentation to an ally, so in the next three days he redrafted it.
When finished, it proposed two distinct operations: a full-scale
invasion of the continent on April ist, 1943 by thirty American and
eighteen British divisions - almost I•5 million men - to be landed in
France between Le Havre and Boulogne and to make an advance on
Antwerp.
were to be disembarked from seven thousand
landing craft, which had yet to be built and, though the paper did
not reveal it, were still tenth on the US Navy's list of building
priorities. This operation was to be code-named Roundup.
second operation, to be undertaken only if Russia seemed about to
collapse or if Germany's military position were suddenly 'critically
weakened', was to be an emergency landing by five British and
American divisions not later than the Autumn of 1942. It was to be
code-named Sledgehammer.
The Eisenhower paper itself would
become known as the Marshall Memorandum. So highly had the
chief of staff already come to think of its author, that he had decided
to take the paper to London himself.
The party - Marshall, Hopkins, Wedemeyer, a doctor to look after
Hopkins's delicate health, an aide-de-camp - embarked on April 3rd
in a Boeing 314 flying boat which in stately stages, via Bermuda and
Ulster, brought the party in five days to
London
and to
immediate succession of conferences.
Few of the participants had
met before. Well travelled though the soldiers were, their journeys
had
generally taken them in opposite directions
- the
British
eastward to Egypt and India, the Americans
westward to the
Philippines and China.
Exaggerated courtesy and over-ready agreement flourished at this
early stage, stimulating sudden friendships,
of
which
the
most
surprising was that formed between the chilly Marshall and the
extrovert Mountbatten.
But Brooke and Marshall also got on well
(reserving for their diaries opinions they did not show each other -
'lacks Dill's brains', wrote Marshall; 'pleasant and easy but not a
great man', wrote Brooke), and under Brooke's direction the British
chiefs of staff tackled the Marshall Memorandum with energy. Two
meetings, on April roth and i3th, were devoted to it, the second
followed by a meeting with Churchill to 'settle final details of reply
to Marshall'. On the next day the two sides reached agreement.
There had been much oratory and some telling criticism.
batten, for all the friendship he had shown the Americans, used
