210
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
dealt with, in some cases simply by running them over with the
tank.
But the anti-tank guns were a different matter. Opening
fire at almost point-blank range, they hit three of my tanks lou
of nineteen], which burst into flames; and I could see that the
squadron on my left also had several tanks blazing furiously.
My orders were still to press on and bypass the village.
Racing for the tunnel, and taking it in turn to give covering fire,
Close's tanks got through to the far side, where the high embank-
ment hid them from fire and view. There they were joined by the
rest of the regiment.
Our objectives, the villages of Bras and
Hubert-Folie lay ahead, over some 3,000 yards of very open ground,
on a very prominent ridge. It looked comparatively quiet and we
could see no signs of enemy. (But) as there was practically no cover,
it was impossible to move as we would have wished, bound by
bound."
Counter-attack
Major-General Roberts, commanding the Ith Armoured Division
from his Cromwell headquarters tank behind the leading regiments,
could now feel some satisfaction at the progress of the battle.
Guards Armoured Division was moving un to assume responsibilit
for the eastern edoe of the armoured corridor His western flank
was now clear of the suburhe of Caen and so bevand the reach of
what German defenders still remained in the ruins of the factories
Did industrial villages. At the back of the battlefield, Tth Armoured
Division was crossing the bridges over the Orne and would soon be
flooding forward with 25o fresh Shermans and Cromwells. Of his
own armoured regiments, the 23rd Hussars and the Northampton-
shire Yeomanry were still intact and. though the ard Roval Tanks
and the Fife and Forfare had each lost shout a acuadron's worth of
fighting vehicles, each still had forty running Shermans They were
now abreast of each other, beyond the Caen-Vimont railway,
stay the four little villages of Bras, Hubert-Folie, Soliers and Four
standing between them and their obiebeive of Bourguébus on the
summit of the final ridge line.
But this, from their points of observation on the ridge, was also an
appreciation which the Germans coryat inake. hhile von Luck had
been struggling on the floor of the plain during the morning, in the
2I1
YEOMEN OF ENGLAND
belief that nothing stood between the Germans and collapse but his
own handful of anti-tank batteries and fragments of tank companies,
the German higher command had in fact assessed the situation and
put in hand measures to contain the extent of the damage.
If the
German army prided itself and excelled in one activity of war, it was
snatching stability from the jaws of potential disaster.
The great
holes torn by the Russians time and again in the Eastern Front since
the winter of 1941 had regularly been filled by makeshift units
hastily cobbled together from the personnel of the rear areas. Anzio,
the Allies surprise descent on the coast of Italy south of Rome in
January 1944, had failed to unhinge the whole German line across
the ankle of Italy only because Kesselring had been able to activate
the well-tested expedient of forming
Alarmeinheiten
mainly
battalions collected at the railway stations from men returning off
leave - faster than the Allied commander could get his battalions off
the beaches. And regular German units were not given to quibbles
about functional demarcation. Von Luck's Luftwaffe officer was an
exception to a pattern of remarkable flexibility, in which clerks and
cooks would turn out as riflemen in an emergency and engineer
battalions down tools as man the front line. That was exactly the
shift which the commander of arst Panzer Division had organized.
The crest of Bourguébus ridge was now manned by his divisiona
enginer battalion, thickened up by the motorcyclists and scout-car
crews of the divisional
reconnaissance
battalion
Auftlärungsbataillos, on reconcation of the Enlightenment which
recalled university days to the donnish staff officers of the intelli-
gence branch at atst Army Group). Behind them stood his three
battalions of artillery, far he ond the range of the British guns back
on the wrong side of the Orne, and well placed to lay down an
offensive barrage along the foot of the ridge as soon
Armoured Division's tanks reached it.
More important, however, for the integrity of the German front,
Panzer Group West, the bicher headquarters responsible for the
defence of the eastern end of the bridgehead, was setting in motion a
counter-attack. Flare-light photographs taken by the Luftwaffe ic
the night of July 2th-t ph had revealed the weight of traffic
crossing the Orne bridges and certain precautionary moves had been
ordered as a result: 1ath S5 Panted Division had positioned a battle
group near Lisieux (exactly the right place
Goodwood to
succeed) and all units around Caen had been alerted. On the way
