146
SIX
ARMIES IN NORMANDY
the lyricist of the trench experience of the First World War, whose
Storm of Steel offered any young German soldier who had read it-
and they might be many, for Jünger was among the regimes
approved writers - a terrible warning of what the coming battle held
in store for each one of them. The party was still in progress when <
the first news of the parachute landings arrived. Speidel at one
signalled Rommel to return and meanwhile tried to get 1ath SS
started on the road to the danger spot. A morning and afternoon of
order and counter-order followed, as Hitler havered over the means
to use to deal
with the landings. At his morning conference he
greeted Keitel, chief of his headquarters, with the optimistic sume
mary: "The news couldn't be better. As long as they were in Britain
we couldn't get at them.
Now we have them where we can destroy
them.' Expecting the beach infantry to achieve that task. he cancel
led the movement of the panzer divisions. When the news worsened
after lunch. he changed his mind and devolved control of tath SS to
Dollmann's Seventh
Army.
division to intervene that day.
But by then it was too late for the
Its commander Priand führer (Maior-General) Witt reached the
headquarters of the devastated 716th Division during the night of
June 6th-7th, with a doleful storv of his journey: 'I have been on my
way to you for about eight hours. I lay a good four hours in roadside
ditches because of air attacks. The diy ision's marching columns are
suffering serious
however,
the
losses in men and material: Shortly afterwards,
commander
of the leading
column arrived, and
brought fire to the conference. He was Kurt Mever, paradigm of the
SS soldier, and a magnet of attraction to the Hitler Youth of whom
the division was formed. His plan was incisive and realistic. Rather
than look for yesterday's hole between he Canadians and British, he
proposed to create his own and drive the little fish' into the sea.
Battlegroup Meyer, which consisted of the three infantry battalions
of his own 25th SS Panzergrenadier Regiment and a battalion of the
division's
Mark IV tanks, would be inserted on the left of 21st
Panzer Division, and the two would drive side by side to the beach.
By noon of June 7th his leading units, which had averaged only four
miles an hour on their flame-licked forty-mile journey from the other
side of Lisieux (the conventual home of the Little Flower of Jesus
was to feature with incongruous frequency in the war reports from
the Normandy
front),
were in place.
He himself had found a
commanding point of observation in one of the turrets of the Abbey
147
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
of Ardenne, which overlooked Caen from the west; but about noon,
while waiting for the remainder of his force to arrive, he noticed
large numbers of Canadian troops - probably the North Nova Scotia
Highlanders - moving about inside their lines and he therefore
decided to attack at once, before they attacked him. This improvised
assault shook the defenders, and took some ground and prisoners, of
whom twenty-three were immediately murdered, an outrage which
would be repeated and make the Hitler Youth Division the most
detested formation the Allies would meet in Normandy. But the
powerful Canadian artillery, supplemented by fire from the sea,
broke the German attack up and allowed the Sherbrooke Fusiliers to
mount a counter-attack, to such effect that as Meyer arrived to put
heart into the commander of one of his hard-pressed battalions, the
unfortunate man's head was struck clean off by a tank shell.
By the evening of June 7th, therefore, 12th SS had failed in the
same task which the evening before had defeated zist Panzer -
which did not get back on to the offensive at all on this day. The
Germans had lost thirty-one tanks, yet would be faced from now on
with an ever-thickening crust of resistance as the Allies reinforced
their landing troops with the follow-up divisions, and bulldozed
fighter airfields into the Normandy clay. General Bayerlein, who
was bringing the Panzer Lehr Division up to the front, was already
re-discovering - he was a veteran of the desert - the implications of
close Allied air support of their ground troops:
By noon on the 7th my men were already calling the main road
from Vire to le Bény Bocage Fabo-Rennstrecke 'fighter-bomber
racecourse]. Every vehicle was covered by branches of trees
and moved along hedgerows and the fringes of woods ... but
by the end of the day i had lost forty petrol wagons and ninety
other trucks. Five of my tanks had been knocked out, as well as
eighty-four half-tracks, prime-movers and self-propelled guns.
These losses were serious for a division not yet in action.'
Panzer Lehr, the strongest armoured division in the German
army, was one of several which by the evening of June 6th Hitler had
released from reserve to make their way to the battlefront: and SS
Panzer had bepun the long journey northward from Toulouse th
SS Panzergrenadier had started erom south of the Loire and, closer
at hand, the iith Infantry Division had left St Malo and the 3rd
Parachute Division Brest. Romised was now back in France, after a
