248
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Force engaged pinpoint targets with salvoes of 6o-pound rockets.
Between noon and dusk they flew 294 sorties, the majority against a
concentration of znd Panzer Division's vehicles north of Mortain.
'We could do nothing against them', reported General von Lüttwiz,
the divisional commander,
'and make no further progress.' About
thirty of his remaining sixty tanks were knocked out by air attack on
August 7th. But he also lost vehicles to the fire of the American and
Armoured Division which, thanks to Ultra, seemed 'to materialize
out of thin air', as the American official historian - writing when it
was inter-government policy still to conceal that source of wartime
information - coyly described its calculated re-deployment at high
speed from
Vire to the banks of the Sée. Having done its worst
against Lüttwitz's
division,
it disengaged during the night and
turned up on the morning of August 8th on the other side of the
battlefield, where it went into action against the and SS.
By August 8th, however, the Americans had no further call for
reinforcements.
Operation
Lüttich had failed.
'I command the
attack to be prosecuted daringly and recklessly, were the words
reaching Kluge from the
Führerhauptquartier.
'Greatest
daring,
determination,
command.
imagination must give
wings
to all echelons of
Each and every man must believe in victory. But victory
had gone palpably to the defenders.
their main line of resistance.
They had not been driven from
ground
They had even regained some of the
initial
German
onslaught.
Hitler
chose
disregard the facts and even persuaded Kluge and his subordinate,
Cherhash to mole clane for a renetral of the offensive with extra
divisons under the latter's command The renewal was postponed on
August gth and finally cancelled on August 1Ith. By then Kluge had
a crisis on his hands even greater than that presented by the collapse
wing at Avranches.
he had launched
Lüttich to
demonstrate a German general's conformity to Hitler's narrow and
selfish standard of military honour - little good it had done him: the
attack failed because Kluge wanted it to fail, was Hitler's judgment
to Warlimont - he had now to fight for the salvation of the whole
German army in Normandy.
CHAPTER 7
'A Polish Battlefield'
UNTIL THE END OF JULY Hitler's management of his armies in
France, whatever its cost in day-to-day losses, had left him with a
reserve in hand. Better, with two reserves: west of the Seine his
panzer divisions, clustered against the British front; east of the Seine
his cordon of coast-watching infantry divisions under Fifteenth
Army which, as late as mid-July, still numbered fifteen.
reseryes, moreover, were so placed as to cover ground vital to him;
the crossings of the Seine and the plains of northern France, which
led by the shortest route to the frontier with Germany.
As British and Canadian pressure around Caen
had grown,
however, he had been drive pressured his infantry reserve from
Fifteenth Army across the Senne, necesarily slowly because of the
Allied air forces' destruction of the bridges,
but steadily enough to
ensure that by August 7th only three remained where there had been
five times that number a month hafare And. as they arrived to bold
ground on the British and Canadian front, the panzer divisions had
been shifted westward to mount Lüttich. Its
disastrous outcome
therefore found the German situation map radically and perilously
changed. Along the coast between the Seine and the Zuider Zee only
five divisions still stond to repel the second invasion' in which
Hitler, too late, had at last ceased to believe.
In the interior of
Normandy seven divisions were at close quarters with the British
and Canadians. Scattered before the advancing Americans between
Le Mans and Paris were another five. But the bulk, nineteen in all
were now bunched close together along the edge of the original
bridgehead, in beed close rivers Vire and Orne. And their relative
positions had been completely reversed. The ten nearest Caen were
all infantry divisions. lenine westernmost were all panzer, terribly
damaged by their effortto deliver the decisive blow of which Hited
had insisted they were capable and so constricted in their ground
249
