318
the invaders, by
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
prior arrangement.
The loss of Romania was
particularly damaging because its oil wells at Ploieti were by then
Germany's main source of natural oil. And, as had become mons
tonously repetitious, another sixteen German divisions disannaaron
along with them into the Russian maw. the bulk belonging to th
Sixth Army which Hitler had recreated to loan alive the memory o
its predecessor destroyed at Stalingrad.
And yet at the turn of the year, Hitler's Germany was no nearer
imminent collapse than it had been in the summer. By frantic
measures of rearmament and recruitment, a new strategic reserve
had been assembled, which endowed Hitler once again with the
power to counter-attack and so, locally at least. impose an initiative.
western front.
The locality in which he chose to do so was in the Ardennes on the
And though the closure of this offensive,
initial but illusory success, coincided with the opening of a new and
deeply menacing Russian attack through Poland towards Berlin, the
Red Army did not carry through its stroke to the capital itself.
During Februarv a strange lull fell over all the battlefronts and
persisted until the beginning of April. It was incomplete in places
particularly in East Prussia, where the Russis in ground inexorably
towards the Baltic, and in Hungary, scene of a final and remarkable
German counter-attack towards the oilfields near Lake Balaton. But,
in general, winter imposed a solstice on the fighting.
Not only winter. Logistics, the enemy of bad and over-successful
she alship alike, had laid its hand on the encircling Allied armies.
means of their advance on all fronts, east and west,
identical, the six-wheel GMC truck. The Americans supplied the
Russians with 375,000 of this model during the war, mostly before
29a5. They themselves had nearly 20, during the swart companies in
France, as well as thousands of others in the echelons of combat
units. And, since the fighting others in the echeld the railway
systems over which it passed, he there destrome literally the
vehicle of military manoeuvre. But, like the ship of the desert, it was
both consumer and subolier. As the distance hetween the point fran
which it
picked up
supplies and that where it delivered them
increased, so too in direct proportio hid where it elimade on its
most essential load, fuel. At the end of 1944 the fuel depots for both
the Russian and Anglo-American armies were several hundred miles
behind their fighting lines; in the west on the Normandy beaches
and western Channel ports, in the east beyond the Vistula, And until
EPILOGUE
319
those depots could be moved forward, by the re-opening of railways
and ports and the laying of pipelines, the armies
which depended
upon them were haltered where they stood by invisible but almost
inflexible bonds.
The Germans, in contrast, though also by a familiar strategic law,
had actually eased their logistic problems by retreating.
was to be short-lived, for in the first quarter of 1945 the Anglo-
American strategic bomber force could direct the weight of its attack
against the railway system east
disastrous effects on the movement of coal and so very swiftly on the
production of steel and its manufactured products. But for a short
while an interlude of deceptive stability descended on the battle
fronts, in the west from mid-January to mid-February. in the east
from mid-February to mid-April. Hitler's optimism revived.
visitors to the Chancellery, where he had establiched
quarters again, he spoke as in the past of wonder weapons and of the
inevitable and imminent folling out of Puccined the Tinited States.
With his staff he discussed coming operations in
the east which
would knock the Russian armies off balance and release the tank
forces necessary to defend the Rhine - which the Allies had not yet
crossed. He had become possessed by the philosophu of the eleventh
hour, of the night being darkest before the dawn and sustained his
spirits with the belief that, like Frederick the
Great in the
moment of the Seven Years War, he had only to keep his nerve for all
eventually to turn in his favour.
The trust in a miracle was illusory. But retrospectively the six
months between the end of the Pales of Normandy and Arm
Group Centre and the appearance on the Rhine and the Oder of the
armies which had won them certainly had something miraculous for
Germany about them. The Allies' failure to capitalize on their great
victories could not be laid at the door of logistic difficulties alone. It
had also to do with the continuing ability of German industry to
produce, despite every soctot damage to railways, factories and fuel
sources which the Allied bombers could inflict, and to the extra-
ordinary resilience of the German army.
The army's fighting power was legendary. Alone among those of
the First World War, it had retained its morale and cohesion almost
to the very end, and in the process brought about the disintegration
of the Russian army, inflicted something close to breakdown on the
French and Italian armies, and visited a severe moral crisis on the
