бо
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
That mark was, when he had arrived in France in December 1943,
scarcely defended. The ports along his four hundred miles of
Channel coast were, of course, heavily concreted and barbetted, and
had been since the Dieppe raid.
There were some impresive
strongpoints, as at Cap Griz Nez, from which a big-gun battery
regularly duelled with its twin across the straits at Dover, and there
were discontinuous belts of wire and mines covering the easiest
beaches. But since 1947 only 1-7 million mines had been laid he
reproached his staff with the reminder that the British had laid a
million in two months at a critical stage of his offensive against them
in North Africa - and they were spread far too thinly. His inquiries
revealed that explosive stocked in France was sufficient to manufac
ture il million anti-personnel mines alone
and he demanded in
addition the delivery of 2 million a month of all toes from
Germany. With these he planned to create an impassable zone 100
metres deep along the whole channel coast, containing 20 million
mines, and eventually to extend its depth to a kilometre by the laying
million.
increased from a rate of 40,000 a month to over a million and by
Weeks of his arrival, mine-laying had
mid-May 4 million were in place. He also dramatically accelerated
the rate at which obstacles were constructed, and by May rith over
half a million had been raised alone the Channel foreshore and on
likely glider and parachute landing zones behind.
Like Montgomery, he expected to have to ficht a hard battle and he
But he did not count meralu on naceive defence to ston the enemy
spent much of his time on his endless travels around the threatened
zone working to raise the will of his commanders and soldiers to
meet its stress. Their numbers were increasing
Since November,
when Hitler had at last issued a decree -
Order 51 -
instituting a state of pre-invasion alert in the west, the movement of
troops out of France towards the ever-hungry battlefields of the east,.
had been reversed.
The hard and costly struggle against Bolshevism during the
last two and a half years. [Führer Order 51 explained] has
demanded extreme exertions ... But the situation has since
changed ... a greater danger now appears in the west; an
Anglo-Saxon landing! In the east, the vast extent of the
territory makes it possible for us to lose ground, even on &
large scale, without a fatal blow being dealt to the nervous
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
system of Germany. It is very different in the west. Should the
enemy succeed in breaching our defences on a wide front here,
the immediate consequences would be predictable. Every-
thing indicates that the enemy will launch an offensive ... at
the latest in the spring, perhaps even earlier. I can, therefore,
no longer take responsibility for further weakening in the west,
in favour of other theatres of war. I have therefore decided to
reinforce its defences, particularly those places from which the
long-range bombardment of England [with pilotless and rocket
weapons] will begin.
In consequence, the total of German divisions in France rose
between November 1943 and June 1944 from 46 to 55.
Their
aggregate quality rose as well; France had long been used as a rest
area for divisions exhausted on the eastern front, those pathetic
skeleton formations of 'five bakers and a doctor' over which Rund-
stedt, the Supreme Commander West, had lamented during 1942-3.
More recently it had been used as a training centre in which divisions
formed from under-age and unfit recruits could be brought gradu-
ally to battleworthiness; there were six of these in the country on
June 6th, 1944, as well as two 'Luftwaffe Field Divisions', raised
from ground crews superfluous to the needs of Göring's shrinking
air force. A number of divisions fit only to hold trenches and
strong-points had also been created specifically for service in France,
and assigned to positions on the coast, which they were expected to
defend until relieved or destroyed. They were numbered in the 700
series and the average age of their soldiers was thirty-seven; some of
their dependent units,
moreover, were composed of hilfswillige,
prisoners captured on the Russian front who had volunteered for_
German service, of whom there were 60,000 among the 850,000
under Rundstedt's command. The number of 'earthrooted' (boden-
ständige) divisions were five and their fighting value was rated low
even by Supreme Command West.
But, subtracting these doubtful formations from the total, there
were still nearly thirty infantry divisions of reasonable quality ready
to oppose an Allied landing. A number were in the wrong place.
Six guarded the Mediterranean shore against the possibility of a
subsidiary invasion from Italy. Another stood alone almost on the
Pyrences. Seven, including two of the Luftwaffe's excellent para-
chute divisions,
were in Brittany,
which
was remote from the
