294
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Germany. On the morning of Anoust oth he telephoned with an
offer to arrange a truce with the other side. Choltitz gave his
agreement in principle. Thanks to the intervention of Abez, ho
had transmitted a calculated complaint to Ribbentrop about the
army's "brutality' to the Parisians, he felt his standing at Rastenburg
was sound for the moment. And, for his own part, he reasoned that.
truce might foment the antagonisms he knew existed within the
politically divided resistance, setting them against each otherines
of against his men. During the afternoon, therefore, on his astrace
that members of the F.FI would be treated as legitimate combatans
and would not be attacked in their positions as long as the German:
were undisturbed in theirs, firing from the Fl strongholds splet-
tered to a halt. And, by a bizarre coincidence, Choltitz was actual
able that evening to confirm the terms of the truce directly with
Parodi, who had been arrested bu chance while on his war from the
meeting of the National Resistance Counsil which had accepted
Nordling's mediation.
The meeting. however had lacked a auorum. The communists
busy with manifestos and infernal machines. had been represented
by only a single member, who had been outvoted. Rol's reaction,
when he heard of the truce,
during the next day, Monday. August 2ist. sporadic fichting brok
was immediately to denounce it and
out again. Colonel Lizé joined Rol in reiecting the truce and late tha
afternoon actually issued a call for the building of barricades - some
were already in existence. the outcome most likely to alarm de
Commune,
Gaulle, who was acutely conscious of the danger of a second
about the safe inheritance of his patrimony.
National Resistance Council wae tharefore reconvened in the even
ing, with full communist representation. and the decision taken t
abrogate the truce officially at the end of the next twenty-four hour
During Tuesday, August sand, however. tha tide of the fiehting
started to run the insurgents' way. Choltitz's troome in the heart of
the city had always been few. Their freedom of movement was now
much restricted by the barricades and they were not being re-
inforced. Colonel Rol accordingly made a remarkable move. Believ
ing that the gains made ~ largely by communist oroups - would
present de Caulle and the Allies than they and with the fai
accompli of a city under FTP control, he approached Parodi, the
Gaullist delegate-general, with the off, he approach his decision to
end or prolong the truce. Parodi, who had sbint the day achieving
FREE FRANCE
295
his own purpose, the installation in the abandoned ministries of their
future secretaries-general, weighed the military risk against the
political attraction of a submission by the FTP to his authority and
Both men were calculating as if the insurrection had already
achieved its object, but Choltitz, reduced though his power had been
by the spread of the barricades and the rising toll of German
casualties, was not yet to be counted out of the struggle for the city.
During August z2nd he received yet another order for its defence
from Hitler, by far the strongest so far. In history the loss of Paris
always meant the loss of France. Therefore the Führer repeats his
order to hold the defence zone in the advance of the city ... Within
the city every sign of incipient revolt must be countered by the
sharpest means ... lincluding) the execution of ringleaders... The
Seine bridges will be prepared for demolition. Paris must not fall
into the hands of the enemy except as a field of ruins.' Shortly after
its reception, he asked the Swede Nordling to see him again. He
began by complaining at the breakdown of the truce and at the
inability of the leaders with whom he had been in touch to control
their followers. Soon, he emphasized, they would drive him into
carrying out the demolitions which all civilized men would wish to
Nordling explained,
insurgents were a coalition, in which left and right sought to steal a
march on each other and could be brought to heel only by a superior
To Nordling's astonishment,
accepted that analysis and was now prepared to allow Nordling to
pass through his lines, make contact with the Allies and arrange for
their prompt arrival in the capital to overawe its dissidents.
Choltitz was later to offer a variety of reasons for his decision. The
best was that he had despaired of reinforcement (Hitler had airily
promised him two skeleton panzer divisions from Denmark), of
suppressing the revolt, even of carrying out at that late stage any
systematic demolitions, and was anxious only to make honourable
surrender to regular troops. The reservation which he made, but
carefully kept to himself, was that his conception of an honourable
surrender required a stout show of resistance before he raised the
white flag.
His brief meeting with Nordling thus upset many
