138
SIX
ARMIES IN NORMANDY
working through the trenches and dugouts in between the concreted
positions, killing all the Germans they could see who would not
surrender; but at a heavy cost: 45 Reginas were killed on D-Day,
most of them here at the head of the beach.
The Reginas' sister battalion, the Royal Winnipeg Rifles, had a
landing experience which was almost exactly identical Ite left-hand
company landed west of the strongpoint area and moved easily into
open country, clearing a path through one of the minefields strung
along the coastal dune
Graye-sur-Mer beyond it.
capturing the little village of
Six days later Churchill, Smuts and Alan
after that
Brooke would land with Montgomery on Graye beach, and four days
King George VI.
on the evening of June 6th a
sanatorium west of the village was still in the hands of some Russian
artillerymen who either would not or dared not surrender. It had
been left by D Company of the Winnipegs, who had gone on with A
and C, and their attached Ist Hussar tanks, to consolidate an outpost
at Creully, four and a half miles inland.
The other Winnipeg company,
B, had had a tragic ordeal. Fired
on while still vards out to sea, it landed to find that "the bombard
ment had failed to kill a single German a silence one weapon. Many
of the Canadians were killed 'while still chest high in water' anc
those who got on to the sand saw their only salvation in a direct
charge at the enemy. None of the u thus tanks had yet landed -
only seven were to do so after mishaps at sea - and the infantry had
to wait six minutes under accurate fire notil thou aeriand Whon ther
did, and all moved forward from the beach obstacles among which
they had been sheltering, casualties came chick and fast. By the time
the company had got into Courseulles itself. it had only twenty-six
men still standing and, among the ruined houses of the little port,
the ghosts of Dieppe seemed close at hand.
Canada at
Dieppe-like too was the landing of the Queen's Own Rifles of
Bernières.
landing craft 200 yards east of their assigned landing place directly
wind had carried B Company's
into the zone of fire of the village strongpoint, mounting two 50 mm
guns and seven machine-guns.
The tanks of the Fort Garry Horse,
which had not been allowed to swim off their LCTs, had not yet
arrived. For several dreadful
minutes therefore the soaked and
shivering infantrymen crouched for shelter among the beach obsta-
cles, while the bursts of German fire dropped one man after another
into the boiling surf. Sixty-five had been killed or wounded before
CANADA: TO THE SOUTH SHORE
thre, Lieutenant W.G. Herbert, Lance-Corporal René Tessier and
Rilleman William Chicoski, broke for the sea wall, there ten feet
high, and worked along in its shelter until within range of the
strongpoint. Using grenades and Sten guns against the firing slits,
they destroyed the defenders within. It had taken a quarter of an
hour, during which a troop of assault engineers working to dismantle
beach obstacles goo yards to the east reported that they too had been
kept under fire from the 50 mm.
Farthest east of all, on the outer flank three miles from the beaches
where the British 3rd Division was landing at Lion-sur-Mer, the
North Shore Regiment touched down at 7.40. Towering over the
beach on the St Aubin sea wall stood a large concrete gun shelter
which the naval bombardment had not touched. Swimming tanks of
the Fort Garry Horse, which arrived simultaneously
infantry, at once brought it under fire. But its 50 mm anti-tank gun
was valiantly served by the crew and two tanks were knocked out in
the surf. It had fired seventy rounds before it was overwhelmed by
the combined effect of shelling from the 95 mm of a Royal Marine
Centaur, the concrete-breaking petard of an AVRE and the high-
velocity shells of two of the Fort Garry Shermans.
Two hours after touch-down, all alone the five miles of coast which
the Canadians had just assaulted, little bursts of combat still flared
and died. In Courseulles B Company of the Royal Winnipegs
finding Germans alive and fichting in the ruined houses around the
harbour. In the Reginas half of the village on the other side of the
harbour, the enemy had filtered back into trenches and tunnels
which the first arrivals thought they had cleared.
The leading
company was forced to turn round and do again the bitter and
dangerous work of shooting and grenading from hole to hole.
Bernieres there was fighting on the landward edge of the village.
And in St Aubin the reserve companies of the
Regiment had blundered into by-trapped houses while taking the
village from the rear.
There was also a growing toll of casualties at the beach edge. In
Asault Group j2, which had brought the Queen's Own Rifles and
the North Shore to land, the LAs started to set off mines on the
beach obstacles as soon as they went astern and a quarter were sunk
