316
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
appeared in the process; a quarter of a million of them ver dead.
But there was more to the Allies' victory than that. A whole ON
theatre' had been obliterated in a single campaign.
"Supreme Com
mander West' remained one of the major appointment in the OK
chain of command, together with tray and Scandia nit.
the first week of June its boundaries had stretched from the Rink
and the Purenees to Finistère and the Beloian canet thou endosed
only ten weeks later little more territory than that marked by th
western frontier of the homeland itself And the Ince of France an
Belgium was much more than cumbolic in its importance. Fran
had been the golden
Kambf and the exactance of are when to hair's armies hal
goose of German Occupation policy. Mat
occupied the whole of White Russia and the Ukraine,
ditioned Germans to expect that in a future war their wheatbon
would lie in the east. Rut France had consistently contributed s
much food to German tables as the whole of the occumied east durin
I941-4, as well as 500.000 of the 2,700, 000 horses requisitioned t
move the Wehrmacht's tactical transport and artillery. On top of that
her industry and natural resources had also been ruthlas lu exploited
for German benefit, and her state revenues systematically taxed to
pay not only for the cost to Germany of occunving the country but of
many other German military expenses incurred hevond her border
Three-quarters of French iron ore, half her bauxite and Is per ce
of her coal production was compulsorily exported to Germany, a
traffic to which 85 per cent of rail movements in France wa
dedicated in 1044. The total value of onods and services extracted in
the last full year of occupation, 1943, equalled a quarter of Get
many's whole national product in the last full year of June 1938.
And the affat of the load of Franna wao dot morale negatly
Though a million Pach prisoner se a had hount Ger
many since 1940,
labour force, there still remained a large Dool of men of military 28
recruited, voluntarily or compulsorily, into
and half a million French workers had been
Germany's domestic
within the country. By 1044 some were already living a life of active
or passive resistance outside settled society and wond freely offe
their services to the Provisional overnment as soon as it ha
established teals To their number would short ha alad th
contingents which the Provisional Governme storean to conscript
for the national army. The recult was quick to appear. In July 1944
there had been only a single French division
the national
EPILOGUE
317
territory. By mid-August, with the arrival on the Riviera of the Anvil
force, there were to be five. By the beginning of 1945 there would be
seven almost all by then wholly French in composition, as a result of
the replacement of the Algerian and Moroccan regiments in their
ranks by units of the maquis. While the German army was shrinking
in size, therefore, and finding the recruitment of fit, native men to
replace casualties increasingly difficult, the French army was grow-
ing, and adding appreciable numbers to the swelling weight of Allied
soldiers now pressing against Germany's western defences.
Late in time though the Second Front had come,
its results
therefore ranked as the greatest military disaster Hitler had yet
suffered in the field. And it entailed further military setbacks of the
most critical nature. The loss of the French Atlantic ports was
virtually to bring to an end his ability to prosecute a U-boat war
against Allied shipping. Any hope of reviving it lay in the develop-
ment of new submarines, still under test in the Baltic, and the need
to safeguard their testing grounds would require him in October t
accept the otherwise pointless confinement of Army Group North in
the Kurland peninsula, where it was to remain until the end of the
war. At the same time the loss of the French and Belgian coasts
deprived the Luftwatte of its outer chain of early warning radar and,
as the end of the fighting in France also released Bomber Command
and the US Eighth Air Force from the ground support role they had
Played during Goodwood and Cobra, the cities
of Germany were
now to be exposed to renewed attack, against which the Luftwaffe's
fighter squadrons could make a less effective showing than ever
before.
So thick and fast were troubles to accumulate for Hitler in the
autumn of 1944, however, that neither the Allied victory in Nor-
mandy nor the strategic disadvantages which flowed from it were to
stand out for long from the rollcall of disaster. On the heels of the
destruction of Army Group Centre, the Red Army, now numbering
500 divisions,
with 15,000 tanks,
was to launch a succession of
Offensives into the bleeding eastern flank of the Reich. In mid-July it
had broken through the German defences south of the Pripet
marshes, and by early August the spearheads of that thrust had made
which had destroyed Army Group
Centre.
Contact with those
Together they stood on the Vistula just east of Warsaw. At the same
moment, the Ukranian Fronts of the Red Army advanced towards
Bulgaria and into Romania, both of which speedily made peace with
