216
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
fraction of apprehension about the fate which might await the author
on the other side of the Channel.
Repercussions
The news of Rex Whistler's death travelled in small waves of grief
through the circle of his friends in the regiment and beyond,
overlapping and intermingling with others tripped by word of the
passing of obscurer and more private men.
The fatalities, given the
storm wrack of ruined armour which strewed the slopes of Bour-
guébus ridge, were curiously few in total. The Fife and Forfar
Yeomanry had lost 26 killed, the ard Poval Tanks +8, and aard
Hussars 22. the Northamntonshire Yeomanry s. The infantry bad
The 3 infantry battalions had lost 16 men
altogether and the 8th Pifle Brigade. whoos half tracke had followed
the armour theonahout the day. only a. It was the lose of tanks which
was so dramatic and strategically disruptive. The division had lost
altogether 126,
half its strength, and the two spearhead
regiments, 3rd Tanks and Fifes, had each lost over 40.
losses, so that the regiment
night new tanks would be got forward to make good some of these
would next morning be ready to move
back into action at something like two-thirds strength.
But by then a storm would havebroken about the head of the
general who had directed the
battle which matched in figurative
intensity the hurricane of shot his coldiere had faced during it:
course. Montgomery's ambiguity about its object - 'writing down' on
breaking out had led him during the afternoon of Iuly 18th. wher
stale news filtering back from the front line led the staff to suppose
that German resistance was diminishing rather than increasing,
issue an ill-judged
communiqué.
this morning',
it read,
British and Canadian troons of the Second Armu attacked and broke
through into the area east of the Orne and south-east of Caen. Heavy
fichting continues. General Montromery is well cariefied with the
progress made in the first day's fighting of this battle.' Canadian
troops had certainly not broken through. even then. They spent thi
day fiohting at heavy odds in the rules at the industrial enburbs
'The first day's fighting' was accurate, for on July loth the armoured
regiments, materially somewhat restored if spiritually much bat
tered, were again to motor forward from what was becoming known
in the emotional geography of zist Army Groun as "the second
YEOMEN OF ENGLAND
217
railway line' to renew the assault on the ridge. But the characteriza-
tion of the battle as a "break-through' was so quickly shown to be at
variance with the facts that all those in the higher
command
structure of the Allied Expeditionary Force who did not esteem or
like Montgomery - and they were many, British as well as American
- saw in the disparity their opportunity to humble that supreme
egotist. The newspapers lent grist to their mills. On July 1oth The
Times headlined its story,
'Second Army Breaks
Through -
Armoured Forces Reach Open Country - General Montgomery
Well Satisfied'. Later in the week its Normandy headline read, 'Lost
Momentum of Break In', while the leader writer was reflecting that
the word break-through used in early reports can only be said to
have a limited meaning. The German defensive ring around Caen
has been broken but the German armour has not ... Possibly the
offensive was too much boomed when in its initial stages. It is always,
better to do the booming after complete succee has been secured.
By that stage, the newspapers were taking up ideas which had
filtered through to them from Montgomery's enemies and hints of
the direct displeasure expressed to him by his senior critics. First
among these was the airman who acted as deputy to the Supreme
Allied Commander, Air Marshal Tedder. He actually alleged to
Eisenhower that Montgomery did not really want to break through
and had deliberately misled him. "An overwhelming air bombard-
ment, he wrote on July zoth, 'opened the door, but there was no im-
mediate deep penetration whilst the door remained open and we are
now little beyond the immediate bomb craters. It is clear that there
was no intention of making this operation the decisive one which you
so clearly indicated itishould pel Bisenhower himself appeared
at Montgomery's headquarters on that day - Butcher,
his personal
aide, says ready to acdou artecs mendation of senior British officers
that Montgomery scound be removed because of a serious lack of
fighting leadershis - lad nexe day wrote to complain that when
armoured divisions of Second Army, assisted by a tremendous ait
attack, broke through the enemy's forward lines, I was extremely
hopeful and optimist the cought that at last we had him and wear
going to roll him up. That did not come about? The British War
Cabinet was itself alarmed enough to send its own liaison officer to
Montomery's headquarters. with orders to report on the progress o
operations. Montgomery gave his staff orders to freeze the intruder,
but it was not until July zah, when he was able to spend two hours
