276
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
the teeth of desperate resistance. Despite the support of forty-five
batteries of artillery. they had had to fight every foot of the way and
eventually achieved Chambois only because their superior weight of
armour allowed them to bypass German road-blocks by moving
across country. The Canadians, west and slightly to the rear of the
Poles, had had perhaps the most difficult battle of all. At St
Lambert-sur-Dives, between Trun and Chambois, a mixed collec
tion of tank and infantry units, which the only surviving senior
officer present, Major D. V. Currie, had taken under command,
struggled throughout August 19th first to take and then to hold the
village; though not on either of the two roads to Vimoutiers, its
bridge provided a crossing which the Germans were desperate 10
retain and,
when they lost it, they counter-attacked repeatedly,
though without success, to regain it.
These counter-attacks were local. One of Model's first acts on
relieving Kluge,
however, had been to give orders for larger and
better co-ordinated attacks on the Trut-ghambois sector from boin
directions:
east by the and SS and gth SS Panzer
Divisions, which had managed the acid of the pocket, from the
west by the best of che fremations still tranand A finally under the
command of Hausser, effective leadership there had passed to
Meindl, a parachute general, whose excellent young infantrymen
still retained the will to find a route of escape for the rest.
When Model's orders were issued on Audust 18th the mouth of
the pocket had not yet been closed. When his subordinates were
ready to implement them on August zoth Trun and Chambois had
both been lost.
The operation therefore took on the character not of
a holding but of a break-through battle, which could succeed only if
the light Allied blocking elements on the hivo roads to Vimoutiers
could be driven from their positions before o were reinforced.
Almost as soon as the roth Dragoons before they unted Rifles had
begun to celebrate with the 359th Regiment their joyous meeting
Karcz happened on some Polish vodka in an abandoned German
with which to toast Captain Nate aba the Poles and
Americans in Chambois had therefore to put the village into a state
and were pressed home with desperation.
of defence. The attacks from within the pocket began almost at once
But those from the other
direction, launched from a prepared line of departure and with more
deliberation, were yet more serious.
They tell however, not upon
the Dragoons and Mounted Rifles but on the other half of Macrek's
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
division, now located farther to the east.
277
This group, consisting of the tet and and Armoured Regiments
and the three light infantry battalions - Podolian, 8th and gth - had
arrived in their positions on the morning of August
1gth. Not
without difficulty: the light infantry had to make a formal attack to
drive the German defenders oft the high ground which was their
objective and the tanks which followed found the steep incline a
strain on their engines. When they reached the crest, however,
Marek's reason for directing them thither was made immediately
apparent to all ranks from the highest to the lowest.
They were
occupying a 'long whale-like ridge' which dominated the surround-
ing lowland and its valleys for several miles in
direction.
Maczek had called it after a glance at his map. "The More' and, with
its round head lying north of the Chambois- Vimoutiers road and
narrow tail crossing it to the south ite nantours did indeed resemble
one. And the contours were steep; so that the Poles were not only
positioned to deny movement to the Germans along the road below
but also secure against assaults to drive them off.
All they needed
was a regular supply of ammunition to ensure that anu Germans still
managing to filter aerose the Dives hetu Ten and Chambois
were turned back or stopped in their tracks. They had reasons then
for confidence. even thoush they were in the most exposed position
of all the Allied units striving to keep the pocket closed and - though
at the beginning this was not obvious - completely isolated, within
territory still German, from contact with any others.
The dangers of their isolation dawned slowly. The troopers of the
and Armoured Regiment and riflemen of the 8th Light Infantry -
the group which Colonel Koszutski had led on the false trail to les
Champeaux in the dark of the morning of August 18th - had had no
sleep for three nights and spent much of the morning of August I9th
- a Saturday, they would later recall _ dozing in and around their
vehicles. But by midday material considerations awoke their officers
to some of the facts of their situation. They were short of food, water
and ammunition, and very short of petrol; they were also encum-
bered with tion, and very shone ot
Supply columns should have
brought the hundreds oe fries and relieved them che their
mouths. None - either from their own Canadian echelons or from
the Americane arrived At I p.m.. moreover,
road from
Chambois to motive which ran immediately below their points
of observation began to fill with German troops and equipment
