158
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
The Fall of Cherbourg
On June roth the American First Army intelligence became avare
that another of the German divisions from south of the Loire, i7th
SS Panzergrenadier, had succeeded in crossing the river and was
now at the
battlefront, the first
German armoured formation to
appear
opposite their
It was not,
for a panzergrenadier
division, very heavily armoured; a single battalion of assault guns
rail flat cars).
provided its spearhead (and those, on June toth, were still on their
But its infantry were mobile, well trained, young and
dedicated. First Army looked to its defences.
Since the first two davs of the beachhead battle. ite situation had
been much improved bu a firm junation of the two beachheads
Under the road of Ficenhower's discatisfaction, the commander of V
Corps in the
Omaha beachhead had driven
his flank as far as the
river Vire by June gth. In the Utah beachhead VII Corps had a far
harder time breaking out across the floods and streams to join hands,
partly because the brunt fell on their airborne troops, who lacked the
heavy equipment to crack German resistance. Carentan, the small
but strong town which bladed adanana cautherando tomando g+ Lo
eastward towards Isigny, where
vanguards
waiting, was not taken until the morning on June 12th. It had been
held bu the Carman 6th Parachute Regiment and one can der
Heudte a storan of Crete. The regiment had fouch mich da much
skill and detamination de the attackere and inacadad duet wher
the fight became unequal. Its
soldiers then formed a new line of
resistance south of the town, ready to hold up any further American
advance. First Army was indeed anxious to up an in that direction,
since thither lav the route towards Rrittany But it was temporarily
more concerned to thrust forward the positions of V Corps, along-
side the British, so as to equalize the depth of the beachhead in the
centre, and to break westward out of the th ot ricted foothold at the
base of the Cotentin peninsula towards its other shore While 17th
SS Panzergrenadier Division and and Panzer Division which had
now appeared on the American front, were kept in play, therefore,
the main
weight of VII Corps was concentrated on the task of
crossing the flood belts and driving towards the Atlantic shore.
In the vanguard marched the parachutists who had been the first
to land there. But they had now been reinforced by the seaborne 4th
Division on D-Day itself and since then two more, the gth and goth,
15
Follow-up troops of the Canadian First Army prepare to advance
inland
16
The great storm: a petrol barge and three Rhinos driving onshore,
June 21st, 1944
