312
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
ceasefire, surrender of all German personnel and equipment, lo
tification of all prepared demolitions and the desach of orch,
officers to all outlying stronenoints to take to their garrisons to
message of capitulation. The last provision was essential becaus
while the conference proceeded, heavy firhting still raged in ai
around the Palais du Luxembourg, which was not finally broughte
a halt until 7 p.m. As the two generals appended their signature
there was a disturbance at the entrance. Colonel Rol, had appear
Ledru-Rollin like, to set his seal of approval on the surrend
Leclere had carefully taken it in his own name and that of th
Provisional Government of the French Republic, thus bren hing th
instructions of Supreme Headquarters that it alone was entitled lo
negotiate terms with the enemy. Rol. whom the Division Teelert
bothered to collect from his headouarters (as it had
Chaban-Delmas from his at the Place Denfert-Rochereau) insisted
on a co-signature and, tiring Leclere with his arguments, prevaled.
Pressed further. Leclere actually altered the document to make it s
surrender to the Commander of the Fift in the lle de France.
Literarv attemots to canture tha vintory for one narty of anois
were vain. For all the bravura of tha cecitance and nearlyd
thousand members of the FFI had been killed in the six days af
insurrection, Paris recognized its liberators in the Division Leeler.
Home of legitimacy as much as of revolution. it hungered in 194
not for the Commune but for the reassurance of Classh uniform
French words of command, French generals. On August 26th it go
three. Leclerc and Kanio Marched tooather in the frant rank of the
great crowd of résistante internal and eternal chih descended
throughout the hot afternoon from tha tea de Triamnhe to Notre
Dame for a solemn Te Deum of gratitude for deliverance. A little
ahead of them both walked de Gaulle already teaching the crowd
the strangest
those stiff sacerdotal gestures which would home the hallmark of
personal
politics of
postwar Europe.
uncrowned, he chose for his apore postwer me simple khaki
service dress worn by his subordinates The roll call of their victories
restored its dignity.
- Bir Hakim Fagran. Kufe _ inspired hu his callime casalve had
EPILOGUE
From the
Atlantic Wall to the Iron Curtain
AS THE DIVISION LECLER celebrated with the Parisians the trium-
phant repossession of their unravaged city, the rest of the Allied
armies were hurrying the remnants of Army Group B across the
Seine. They were few enough. Of the 50 infantry and 12 panzer
divisions which Supreme Headquarters West had had under its
command during the Battle of Normandy, only 24 infantry divisions
and iI panzer divisions preserved any semblance of organization.
The panzer divisions were down to to tanks each. The infantry
divisions were at one-quarter strength.
Best preserved were the
formations which had belonged to Army Group G, south of the
Loire. Surprised in their positions on the Riviera by the Allied force
committed to the 'Second D-Day', August Isth, the majority had
Americans and French of the Sixth Army Group. But they were too
been able to escape up the valley of the Rhône, ahead of the pursuing
few to bring any real reinforcement to their comrades
who had
fought the Battle of Normandy, too few indeed to do anything more
than head for the safety of the Siegfried Line. Hitler had hoped that
another line he had designated on his situation map, that of the
Somme and Marne, would provide a refuge for the Normandy
survivors,
along which they might stand while the
Reich
was
ransacked for reserves of men and equipment. But meanwhile he had
forbidden the construction of any fortifications on that position, lest
the news of the work dishearten the soldiers holding Normandy.
Now that he needed the line, Model warned him that its defence
would require thirty fresh infantry divisions, which he had not got.
And as a result the Allies brushed past it in the night of September
3rd, the armoured car crews which led the chase failing altogether
to notice that they had crossed an obstacle of any significance. A day
later, September 4th, these spearheads entered Brussels, at the end
of a pell-mell advance of 110 miles in two days, a feat unequalled
