102
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Legion at la Haye Sainte, done their duty to the end. There was a
more telling parallel between the two tiny sieges. La Haye had fallen
because Wellington did not get
word that the defenders were
running out of ammunition.
The great clouds of smoke which
enveloped the Waterloo battlefield cut sight of it off from him at the
crucial moments of the action. Le Manoir had held for as long as it
did for a similar failure of communication. Had the Americans been
able to recover their radio sets from the bundles parachuted into the
marshes of the Merderet, Dolan,
Lindquist, Schwartzwalder and
Oakley would have co-ordinated their movements from the outset
and the bravery of the German defenders would have availed them
scarcely at all.
3 The 2nd/ 507th at Cauquigny
But the consequences of the loss of the radio sets were not yet ended.
At the far end of the bridge covered by le Manoir de la Fière, a
sizeable fragment of the and Battalion, 507th Regiment had been
assembled by its commander, Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Timmes.
He himself had nearly been drowned on landing in the marshes of
the Merderet, but had collapsed his parachute at his last gasp and,
when recovered, had collected mens parachuted drabs until he had
enough to march on Cauquigny, the village immediately across the
river from la Fière into which its bridge and causeway led. At Cau-
quigny he had been fired on by a vigilant German picket and, after
losing eight men, had fallen back to an orchard a mile to the north.
He had no radio and thus no means of discovering that Lindquist
was probing westward towards him at le Manoir, separated from
Between 9.30 and II a.m.,
contact only by the handful of Germans in the bridge guard.
moreover,
he was busily engaged
encouraging his men to dig themselves in against German fire,
which was falling heavily in and around his concealing apple trees.
But he then decided that he ought to try again at Cauquigny, the
importance of which he had not forgotten, and selected Lieutenant
Louis Levy to take ten man back to the village and dig in round its
church. Their orders were to cover by fire the western end of the
causeway through the floods which terminated in the la Fière bridge,
denying it to the enemy until a stronger force of Americans could
relieve them either from the west or east.
Levy's group set off at once, armed with a Browning Automatic
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
103
Rite anda sackful of anti tank grenades. On the way they fell in with
kuler party of twenty from their battalion, commanded by
Lieutenant Joseph Kormylo. He had already been to Cauquigny,
ludged himself too weak to hold the bridge and withdrawn -
then changed his mind. He was thus on his second approach when
te d ery met. Exchanging notes, the two decided to send the
bulk the force back to Colonel Timmes in the orchard, while
Kormylo and a machine-gun team joined Levy. Together they led
te it enlarged party into the village, found it now empty of
Germans and sited their machine-gun to cover the road down to the
bridge. The riflemen dug themselves in behind the walls of the
churchyard and, that done, settled down to lunch off K rations; a
vilger appeared to soften the fare with milk and cider. Shortly
afterwards more Americans appeared, two lieutenants and thirty-
seven men of the goth, who offered to join them in the defence.
Lery readily accepted and sent a runner back to Timmes with the
news, justified by the circumstances,
that he had secured the
bridgehead. Kormylo, meanwhile, had gone to explore the bridge
ite and, the time being midday, caught the rattle of fire which
marked Oakley's and Schwartzwalder's final assault on le Manoir.
Shortly afterwards he saw an American approaching from that
direction, threw an orange flare to reveal his presence and not long
afterwards met Schwartzwalder himself leading his troops forward
to secure, as he thought, the position which Levy already held.
three officers shook hands hannilv Schwartzwalder had had a little
light on the causeway, but had killed or made prisoner all the
Germans there and now pronounced both it and the bridge clear.
Levy therefore doubled quickly across to see Lindquist
distance was less that a thousand yards - and doubled back to find
Schwartzwalder about to move off again, anxious to reach
original objective at Amfreville. When Levy told him of Timmes's
location, he decided instead to join forces with him and took all the
men in the churchyard, less Levy's original patrol, Kormylo and the
two other lieutenants.
Lindquist had followed Levy from le Manoir, surveyed his
position and returned intending to reinforce it. Before he could do
so, however, Levy's handful of stalwarts heard the sound of
approaching tanks, the unmistakable and unnerving squeal of metal
track on tarmac. Mysteriously an ambulance with German markings
appeared and a Red Cross flag was waved from the door before it
