14
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
the paramountcy of the British empire, to which we knew the United
States represented a principle in some way antithetical, held out
longest against American charm. I particularly resisted admitting
that the US Navy had demoted the Royal Navy to second place
among the world's fleets, even after the facts had told me differently.
But in time it got to us too. There was something in particular about
jeeps, and the way they were driven with one high-booted leg thrust
casually outside the cab, which softened even the most chauvinist
ten-year-old heart.
And, as spring became summer in
more
exciting
manifestations of American military power thrust themselves on our
attention. The GIs whom we had got to know had, we now grasped,
been engineers, builders and truck drivers,
who had been creating
settlements for the fighting troops still to come.
They were now
among us. And with them they brought a new wave of equipment,
half-track scout cars, amphibious trucks and gigantic transporters,
laden with tanks and bulldozers - a machine previously unknown in
Britain - which held to the main roade and when in convoy, were
usually seen heading southward, towards the ports of Hampshiit
and Dorset, on the Channel coast opposite France.
American air-
craft, too, appeared in great numbers, Liberators, Dakotas and occas-
ionally the dramatically
twin-boomed P-38
Lightning, glimpsed
rocketing across the sky like a shape of things to come. Dakotas were
the most common and the cource of tha mat deraction cience l
underwent that fresh, green spring. Some forgotten journey brought
hung, turning and swooping. But it was unlike any formation I had
ever seen, in that the
planes were linked together in pairs by
spider-thin cables. Suddenly and successively the cables fell slack
and the second in each pair of aircraft began to descend towards the
runway. Strangest of all, thev had neither propellers nor engines,
their descent was silent and, when they touched ground they came
to a halt within a few vards. From their interiors men tumbled out
and formed ranks, from which brilliant red and arean flaree were
shot in spluttering arcs towards the departing Dakota ture had had
assault on the rear of the enemy.
my first sight of a method of war which I had not dreamt. a glider
But not my last. One evening some weeks later the sly over out
house began to fill with the sound of aircraft. which swelled until it
overflowed the darkness from edge to edge. Its first tremors had
Eisenhower addressing Company E, 502nd Parachute Infantry,
who are about to emplane for Normandy
