282
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
who did not understand a word but roared with laughter all the
same.'12
There was no laughter in Warsaw. The ist Armoured Division
had held the ring: so too had the Germans around the Old Town
Perhaps 70 per cent of the survivors of the Westheer had bee
prevented by Maczek's men on the Mace from escaping to renew the
fight on the Siegfried Line.
The whole of Bor's garrison had ben
driven back into their bunkers and foxholes among the ruins, from
October, the Germans tired of the effort to break their resistance and
which they would be released only
when, at the beginning of
offered them recognition as combatants if they would surrender.
The Home Army, on the evening of August zist, knew therefore
that it was doomed to defeat. Maczek could celebrate a victory. Nex
day in the square at Chambois, in the presence of representatives of
the British and American armies, he accepted an Iron Cross taken
from a German prisoner who had won it five years before in the
troyed for the first time.
Carpathian battle where the roth Cavalry Brigade had been des-
The trumpeters of the toth Dragons
sounded the ceremonial marsh of the Dolich army A telegram from
commander-in-chief in
officers and men. It
London
was
indestructible foundation?
sacrifices will enable the rights of Poland to be established on an
declared,
read to the assembled
uncertain optimism:
"Your
During the next days the bodies of 325 Polish soldiers killed in the
positions where they had fallen.
Battle of the Falaise Gap would be found makeshift graves near the
sappers of the
the simple inscription, 'A Polish Battlefield'.
comrades-in-arms, raised a makeshift sienboard. It hore, in English,
Canadian
On the summit of the Mace itself
Engineers,
in tribute to
CHAPTER 8
Free France
HITLER'S SCHEME to devastate the Allied armies in their beachhead
had not merely failed; it had ended in disaster. During 1042 his
direction of the war had lost him Armies. In 1944 it had begun to
lose him whole Army Groups. Army Group Centre had gone in the
great encirclement battle in White Russia in June. In August Army
Group G had been scattered before the Franco-American landing in
the south of France. The Battle of the Falaise Gap had completed
the destruction of Army Group B, the largest in the order of battle of
the German army. Fifty-six infantry divicions had fought under its
command during the Battle of Normandy.
Allied lines;
Of these, 15 had been
formally dissolved or were besieged in the coastal fortresses behind
the remaining 40
were remnants or shadows, now
flitting eastward from the battlefield to find a way across the Seine
between Paris and the sea.
- had lost all their tanks and units of infantry. The other 9 varied in
German defence, had suffered proportionately:
Its in panzer divisions, the rock of the
Two - Lehr and gth
strength from 4 infantry battalions, where there should have been 6,
and 15 tanks, witantry battalions, whe he there shin le case of the
II6th. to one infantey hattalion and no tanke in the cace of the 2nd
The 2nd SS, which had battled so hard against the Poles to break
into the pocket canastad ita atranath on August 2ard as 450 men. I5
tanks and 6 guns. The ed ip ment lost, amounting to 1,300 tanks, lay
burnt or broken in he equipme lanes and hedgerow corners of the
bocage and the Pays d'Auge.
The missing men were prisoners
200,000 had been shipped out of the beachhead or were waiting for
transport in improvised stockades - or dead; at least 50,000 German
soldiers had been killed or died of wounds in the ten weeks since
D-Day. Thousands lay unburied in the confines of the pocket and
their
bodies,
decomposing
under
the August
sun
beside
the
thousands of horses slaughtered with them, raised a stench against
