262
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
point chosen. The formation nominated to pay the price of Bradleys
temporization was the most recently arrived and least experienced
under Montgomery's command, the ist Polish Armoured Division.
General Sikorski's Tourists
The Poles had been long on the road, however. Their story was one
of the most tragic and romantic of the Second World War, Devas
tated in September 1939, the Polish army had fallen to pieces. lis
greater part had been taken prisoner by the Germans in the mighty
encirclement of the Bzura river, and much of the rest had fallen into
the hands of the Russians after their cynical intervention at the
tail-end of the campaign. Fragments none the less had escaped, io
internment in Lithuania. Latvia Romanis and Hungarv. and with
them had gone the leaders who would form the Polish government-
in-exile. Later in tod? the government would arrange for Russia's
Polish ariannere those who had survived stamind mistreat-
ment, to make their way into Persia, whence as the Polish II Corps
would journey to the
Western Desert and Italy to fight at
Alamein and win the fourth and lact battle for the atentonin fortress
of Monte Cassino.
In time IT Corns would come to be recarnized de one of the great
fighting formations of the war, it piritcharged, Harold Macmilan
would recall. with a licht-hearted disdain for danger the like of
less conspicuous,
which he had met in no other. But there was a amand if smaller and
army-in-exile whose return to the fight had been
almost as painful as that of Il Corps and whose chivalric zeal was to
become as notable. Formed from the too add refuman ba in the
winter of 1939 reached France from the Baltic and Balkan states, it
had already provided the French air force by the following spring
a sizeable
contingent of pilots, plus a mountain brigade
earmarked for the Narvik campaion. and the Grench gemy with three
divisions of infantry and one of cavalry. Poles and Frenchmen were
old comrades in arms; it was in part the contribution of General
Haller's legion of émigrés to the victory of 1018 which had prompted
Clemenceau to espouse the cause of Polish Fanaissance at the peace
conference and to send them in 1920 equipment and advisers to help
them defeat the Bolsheviks in the Battle of Warsaw,
Major-General J.F.C. Fuller 'the eighteenth decisive battle of thi
called by
world'. But they could do little to help their old allies in the
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
263
ninetenth, little indeed to help themselves. Driven before the gale
of the German advance, only 17,000 of the western army-in-exile
reached Britain after the capitulation.
The pilots were at once re-employed; forming 4 out of the 56
squadrons of Fighter Command, they accounted for 15 per cent of
Getman aircraft destroyed during the Battle of Britain. The soldiers
were found a role less easily. Having brought with them to Britain,
via the Mediterranean or Biscay ports, even less than the British
army had salvaged from Dunkirk, they were a charge upon the very
limited stock of armaments available and it was only for calculated,
i understandable, purposes of propaganda that enough
weapons
Were found by the British to fit them out as fighting men once more,
and then only for simple coast-defence duties in a remote corner of
Scotland. The measure was naturally temporary.
It was expected
that, when weapons became more plentiful, the Polish formations
would be brought up to normal standards of equipment, probably as
was the intention.
conventional infantry. This, as far as British thoughts went in 1940,
The Poles thought differently.
Conscious of their restricted
numbers and the near impossibility of expanding them - though
patriotic appeals would bring in Polish emigrants from as far away as
Latin America during the next two ears - they were determined
that such formatione de they could raise would he of a sort
maximize the effectiveness of their personnel. Conscious too of
unspoken doubte of their capacity to evalue soldiere - anot
charging tanks' made for capad press pieces but bad professional
opinion - they were as anxigus as the British cavalry to shake off any
lingering reputation as hippomaniacs and embrace from the outset of
their third start in combat against the Wehrmacht the most modern
methods of making war. General Sikorski, their commander-in-chief
(and Prime Minister), accordingly set his heart
on forming his
contingent in England - derided by the German radio as 'General
Sikorski's tourists ana - an armoured division, fit to fight on equal
terms the panzers which had overwhelmed the Polish army in its
homeland in 1939. By persuasion he brought the British army es
agree to the principle; by manipulation of the government-in-exile's
Lend-Lease facilities he found the money for the equipment from
the Americans; from the ranks of his officers he plucked the one
leader
with the abilities and experience necessary to transform
aspiration into reality.
