SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
But the prevailing low, thick cloud frustrated its efforts. The results
of the bombing were described as 'spotty'. The heavy battery at
Mont Fleury, the target closest to the Canadians' beaches, survived.
At dawn the Americans had taken up the attack. But because there
were now large concentrations of Allied shipping under the overcast,
the staff of Eighth USAAF had secured Eisenhower's last-minute
agreement to the pathfinders delaying the release of their markers by
up to thirty seconds after they had crossed their aiming point. None
took the risk of releasing on time and, in consequence, the thousand
Flying Fortresses all dropped their bombs well inland, 'from a few
hundred yards up to three miles'. Because of the thinness of the
German beach defences, very few - and none in the Canadian sector
- were therefore hit,
the bombs falling in the open fields to begin
that great slaughter of the dairy herds of Normandy which was to be
one of the smaller horrors of the campaign.
The bombing did not even alert the defenders to what it presaged,
so accustomed had they become in the past weeks to the regular raids
of the two air forces. Nor did warning reach them from the higher
commands, since what signs Seventh and Fifteenth Armies and
Naval Group West detected were so scanty and conflicting that they
were not judred the basis for a firm directive. Deprived of radar
cover, and with the patrol groups of B-boats and U-boats taking
advantage of the unfavourable weather to lie in harbour,
(German supreme headquarters in France and the Low Countries)
was shorn of the antennae
forecasts of danger. Firstae on which merican airborne landings
which it counted for long-range
brought an order to both Seventh and Fifteenth Armies to go to the
state of 'highest alert'. But that had happened before and Seventi
consider that the alert required the
presence of the divisional commanders with their divisions, since no
cancellation was issued to them of a summons to attend the army war
game at Rennes the following morning. Nor did the beginning of the
naval bombardment, reported by LXXXIV Corps at 6 a.m., clarity
routine morning report to OB West read: •Purpose of naval bom-
bardment not vet apparent. I+ appears to be a covering antion in
conjunction with attacks to be made at other points later.'
By then the men in the beach bunkers were all too aware of the
purpose of the naval bombardment - the heaviest, though they could
not know that, ever fired from ship to shore. It was designed to kill
CANADA: TO THE SOUTH SHORE
them. From ga.m. onwards they had heard the whistle of heavy
calibre shells from Belfast and Diadem arching high over their heads
to land on the concrete battery positions of the heavy guns at
Ver-sur-Mer and Bény-sur-Mer. At 6.19 the destroyers had begun
firing and the volume of their fire swelled as they moved closer to the
shore. By 7.10 it was supplemented by that of the Landing Craft
Gun, and shortly afterwards by
embarked self-propelled artillery. While it was still possible to look
seaward, a few had seen looming through the dawn 'countless ships,
ships big and small, beyond comprehension'. After 7 a.m., H-Hour
minus forty-five, it was no longer possible to see and very dangerous
to look, for the whole of the sea front boiled with the smoke and
debris of explosions and the crash of aimed fire rang inside the
concrete of the bunkers. Few bunkers - only about 14 per cent a
target-analysis team later calculated - were destroyed, but the houses
prepared for defence along the beaches - those little brown and
yellow, half-timbered holiday cottages, style paysan, which sum-
moned their owners Aurust after August from Paris and Rouen
were collapsed from the inside, roofs falling on to floors and the
walls subsiding to choke insist, roofs fallin with banks of rubble.
The defenders, wherever they sheltered, were stunned by the noise
and shock waves, magnified a hundredfold at the last moment by the
gigantic salvoes of the rocket shins each discharging a broadside
equivalent to a hundred Diadem-class cruisers firing simultaneously:
Neutralization' was the technical term which the planning staffs
used to describe the effect they hoped the bombardment
achieve. It meant that those defenders left alive after the fire lifted
from their positions should not, through fear, shock and disorienta-
tion, be able to bring their weapons to bear on the landing parties
until they were upon them. How well the bombardment had done its
work would tell in the last few hundred yards of the landing-craft's
approach and the first minutes on the open sands of the beaches.
Run-in
It was a tonev-turvy world in the invading fleet Three hundred and
sixty-six ships of all sizes, from Landing Craft Assault to a 6-inch
gun cruiser, were milling about off Juno, in a sea area ten miles deep
by five wide. By 5-30 a.M. the slowest, the Landing Craft Tank with
the amphibious squadrons he slower,oured regiments aboard, had
