194
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
display in plenitude the 'Cavalry dash' for which it had been formed
and trained. The znd Household Cavalry - a wartime amalgamation
of the Life Guards and Royal Horse Guards - preferred to call the
coming event the
'Goodwood Meeting', a good betting man's
equation of warfare with the second most fashionable event of the
racing season, and its officers had braced themselves for it as if Ascot
were recently behind them. Driving through London to embark for
Normandy, one of the subalterns had wistfully recorded that the
smart crowd
were just leaving the Four Hundred Club as their
drill on
armoured cars passed in the small hours, and a latecomer to lifeboat
converted cross-Channel steamer arrived loudly
demanding to be shown to the 'officers' raft'. He was the sort of
young man whom the pre-war troopers, still burnishing their blanke
serge battledress to the consistency of thick cardboard knew an
understood The officers', wrote a corporal-of-horse (cergeant to the
rest of the army - not for nothing did the most senior regiments of
the British army cherich their reputation for eccentricity). 'although
suffering the worst they have vet suffered as far as rough living is
concerned, still manage to look pretty comfortable " And D Squad
ron had indeed settled in cheerfully at the chateau of Brecy, recently
evacuated by a grande horizontale of the Comédie Française. They
had been fed pineanole and frech cherries on their way across the
Channel, were now looking forward to eggs and fresh butter from
the farm in the shadow of the châtea's "consequential little gateway.
and were regretting that
Calvados,
fires, was easier to come by than wine.
though excellent for lighting
The and Household Covalry, being sauinned with armoured cars,
would not, however, be called upon to advance until the crust of the
German defences had been broken by the tanks of ith Armoured
belonged
to four
different
different ways the varying traditions which had gone to make up the
contemporary
regiments,
typifying in their
Armoured Corps. The z3rd Hussars was &
war-raised regiment but a resurrection of an older one which had
campaigned with Wallington in the Perimens he had resumed its
ancestor's battle honours, the horsed cavalru's habit of calling it
the hunting field.
tank sub-units 'sabre squadrons' and the jovial, everyday manners of
The hunting field wasvial, neural habitat of its
sister regiment, the 2nd Northamstonshire Yeomaney which pro
vided divisional reconnaissance. In Deacetime it code on parade to
the strains of Tahn Daal' nitched ite anest a finaf the
195
YEOMEN OF ENGLAND
great houses of the Midland hunting shires - Althorp, Boughton and
Rockingham - and chose its commanding officers from Masters of
the Pytchley. As a yeomanry regiment it had in peacetime only
a part-time existence, drawing its soldiers and officers from the
ranks of civilians who felt their place in county society required
them to play a military role in its life, farmers' sons, estate workers
from the big properties, local solicitors and land agents, landed
gentlemen from the broad acres round Kettering and Towester.
When war came, it formed ranks
and
marched away from
Northamptonshire for the duration, in 1914 to France and then to
Italy, in 1939 first to guard the south coast against invasion, then to
train in Wiltshire for the return to Europe, ultimately to take ship for
Normandy.
The third armoured regiment in the division, the and Fife and
Forfar Yeomanry, represented something of the same strain in
Scottish military life. Tenuously it could claim a link with the Fife
Yeomanry Cavalry, raised to defend the kingdom
Napoleonic wars and kept in being to preserve established orde
during the times of the Chartists. But its sounder origins were in the
Volunteer movement of 1859, that strange mid-century upsurge
enthusiasm for amateur soldiering, which had brought into being the
Fife Light Horse eurone ring, the cavalry volunteers of neigh-
bouring Forfar, the regiment had flourished, to send a mounted
infantry company to the Boer War, ride with the Desert Mounted
Corps in Egypt in the First World War, and after 1918 surrender its
horses for armoured carrsunder the command of the descendant of
the chieftain who had raised the Napoleonic regiment, Carnegy-
The fourth regiment represented the antithesis of all for which the
other three stood, and was the single solid element of experience in
the divisional armour. The 3rd Royal Tank Regiment had fought at
Calais in 1940, when it had left its first complement of tanks behind
at the evacuation beaches, in Egypt and Greece, where it had lost all
its tanks again in desperate rearguard action; in
defence of Alexandria at Alam Halla, in the victory of Alamein and
in the pursuit of Rommel to Tunisia. Few of the soldiers with whom
it began the war now remained with the regiment.
One - G.P.B.
Roberts - had been promoted away and now commanded the rIth
Armoured Division. Many had found graves on one of its numerous
battlefields. The survivors were harrowed and hardened men. But
