SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
The obiect which he sent his military assistant to explain personally
to the War Office, was to 'muck up and write off enemy troops….. all
[is] designed to help the [American forces in the west while ensuring
that a firm bastion is kept in the east'. But 'at the same time, he
take advantage
disintegrating'. Much would be made later of this apparent hedging
of his bets; a break-out if the front collapsed,
documentary evidence that all he had intended in the first place was
a battle of attrition. His operation order to the divisions which would
bear the burden revealed the same dual intention: 'Object ... I
engage the German armour in battle and "write it down", to such an
extent that it is of no further value .. Generally to destrov German
exploitation of success The tactical opening to either end was to be
as a preliminary to a possibly wide
an advance from the airborne bridorhead alone the eastern bank of
the Orne to the area Bourguébus-Vimont-Bretteville'. Meanwhile
the Canadians were to capture the defended zone south of Caen
'When [that] is done, then
VIII Corps can "crack about" as the
The Canadians could form a clear picture of what their coming
battle held in store for them, since the ground over which it was t
be fought resembled all too nearly the fortified zone they had just
cleared. But the ground bevond the 'airborne bridgehead' into which
the armoured divisions were to penetrate was unknown territory
Geometrically it formed a long narrow corridor, three miles by six, it
Bourguébus were taken as its terminus, between the Orne and the
long range of wooded heights which ran from the Bois de Bavent
southwards to Vimont. The eastern edee is an exceptionally pretty
prospect, a drift of beech woods rising gently from a small country-
side of lanes and tree-girt fields. The western boundary is hideous, a
jungle of industrial chimneys and cooling towers which follows for
four miles the banks of the Orne. The landscape in between is an
Montgomery
almost uninterrupted plain - it was that which recommended it to
as a stamping-ground for his armour
un-Norman in its lack of hedges and streams.
break its long horizons, which appear to stretch inland as far as a tank
Few features rise to
could drive in a day. But the appearance is decentive The plain rolls
southward in a succession of shallow quelle and a point of vantage.
like that provided hu the embankment of the Vimont railway,
reveals a chequerboard of small villages - Cuverville,
Démouville,
193
YEOMEN OF ENGLAND
le Menil-Frémentel, Cagny, le Poirier, Hubert-Folie - all no more
than a mile apart, each sunk in thick orchards and centred on a
stoutly built manorial farm.
An attack down the corridor was not therefore to be a stretch of
easy motoring but a complex navigation between strongpoints,
overlooked at a distance by commanding heights, natural or man-
made, still in enemy hands. Montgomery did not underrate the
menace which the tight German hold on the boundaries offered to
the flanks of his armoured units as they Dassed by. And so he had
arranged once more to call on the resources of Bomber Command
and the USAAF. Sir Arthur Harris, who believed that the effort of
his 'heavies' had been wasted the week before at Caen, was reluctant
to help but eventually agreed to lend the whole of Bomber Com-
mand, 1,056 Lancasters and Halifaxes, to drop 5,000 tons of bombs
on the shoulders of the corridor's entry point, the villages below the
Bois de Bavent on the east and the Colombelles steelworks along tha
Orne on the west Tha hambe were to he delaved-fuse which would
crater the ground but also crush the German defensive positions in
each of the thousand-acre aiming points.
Cagny, regarded as the
toughest of the defended villages in the corridor, would also be hit
by 65o tons, the ration in a normal operation for a sizeable town
target, but the bombs would be fused instantaneously to avoid
cratering the tanks' avenue of advance. The neck of the corridor and
its exit at Bourguébus would likewise be hit with fragmentation
bombs, dropped by 1,o21 heavy and medium bombers of Eighth and
Ninth USAAF. It was to be one of the largest air raids of all time
and certainly the 'heaviest and most concentrated ever attempted in
support of ground forces'.
The Waiting Armour
"We were told, and fully believed', wrote Lieutenant Roden Orde of
Household Cavalry Regiment,
that we
threshold of great events.' His regiment, the Corps Reconnaissance
Unit of VIII Corps, could expect by reason of its role to be in the
forefront. But the whole division which it should lead forward was
also excited by anticipation.
was to be rIth
For this operation
Armoured's first big battle. Te had taken a minor part in Operation
Epsom. Operation
gomery's push down the corridor,
Goodwood, the codename chosen for Mont-
would offer it the chance to
