156
SIX ARMIES IN
NORMANDY
having travelled on the main line through Limoges and Chateau-
roux, they found only one bridge in use, a single-track span at Port
Boulet, near Saumur.
After it was destroyed on June 14th, traffic
had to be diverted to another at Tours-la-Riche, which had been so
weakened by
bombing
that it would not take the weight of a
locomotive. The cars had therefore to be uncoupled and pushed over
singly and the train reassembled with a new locomotive on the far
side. Not until June 23rd did the last of the division's rail elements
reach the battlefront, having been seventeen days on a journey of 450
miles. In normal times it would have taken five.
The wheeled elements had made the journey faster but not
without trouble, though of a different sort. News of the landings had
sounded the tocsin to local resistance groups, which were strong
south of the Loire in the old unoccupied zone, and their franc-tireurs
had kept up a regular fusillade on the columns of and SS from long
range. The I Battalion,
Panzergrenadier Regiment 'Der Führer' lost
its commanding officer, apparently kidnapped when he stooped his
car in a villare, and his men spent a day and two niohts fruitlessly
searching for him. The IV Battaliou of the same regiment, when
an officer
to a sniper in the same area, reacted quite
differently. The nearest village. Oradour our Clane, was selanted for
an exemplary reprisal, its 642 inhabitants, including 207 children,
herded into the village church, which was set
fugitives shot.
on fire, and all
North of the Loire the Germans encountered little activity by the
forces. On June
resistance, but suffered comnaratively worse from the Allied air
Rommel reported to Keitel,
at Hitler's
headquarters, that 'the enemy has complete control of the air over
the battle area up to a distance of ab cut lete doed kilometres behind
the front, and with powerful fighter-bomber and bomber formations
immobilises almost all traffic by day
roads or in the open
country. The experience of one of the infantry divisions which was
making its way to the front - a vital reinforcement if the panzers
were to be got out of close combat and concentrated for a counter
attack - emphasizes how immobilizing this air attack was. A Battle
Group of 275th Division had been ordered to Normandy from its
station at Redon in south Brittany on June 6th. Unlike a panzer
division, a German infantry division had no mechanical transport, so
the orders entailed marching or taking the train.
The first three
trains, after suffering much interference from air attack, got away
157
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
from Redon on the morning of June ith and one actually reached
Avranches, on the outskirts of the battle zone, at 2 p.m. that day. A
lite farther down the line it was attacked by Allied aircraft and
destroyed. The next train, close behind it, was halted by cuts in the
line just short of Avranches and, while stationary, also attacked by
Allied aircraft. The engineer battalion aboard, which had suffered
numerous casualties, was then detrained and instructed to proceed
on foot. It was still sixty miles short of the front. The rest of the
divisional trains were thirty miles behind the leaders when these
mishaps struck, and had been halted because of news of three breaks
in the line ahead. Re-routed, they were then halted again by reports
that the alternative line was cut in nineteen places and spent
tventy-four hours waiting for orders. These, when they came, were
ior a detour via Fougères, which was then almost immediately
reported to be blocked. The rail backlog by then amounted to twelve
trains to which the military railway staff declared themselves unable
to guarantee onward movement. Higher command therefore decided
to disembark all passengers and equipment and send them forwarc
by road. They had taken two nights and three days to cover less than
thity miles and had at least another three days before them on the
road. First to arrive at the battlefront, on June lith, were two
infantry battalions which had covered the distance on bicycles.
these circumstances the headquarters of Seventh Army decided that
dependence on the use of the railways for military movement was vain.
and closed down the office it had set up on D-Day to organize traffic.
For all but the panzer divisions, therefore, the road to the
battlefield was to be longe and haron and necessarily all the longer
while Hitler forbade the movement of the nearest infantry divisions
from Fifteenth Army across the Seine Fven for the panzer divi.
sions, chronically shortcross and starved of resupply by Allied air
attack on the staging areas,
the journey
was to be marked
interruptions and anxiety. For the footslogging Landser, tramping
up from south of the Loire in his nailed 'diceboxes', leaning on his
chinstrap and sweating his tunic black in the long hot June days, it
was to be an anabasis of pain and fatigue, the toll of the miles to be
borne only by an endless repetition of the songs to which German
armies have route-marche repetie the Seven Years War, 'Ein Schiff-
Lein sah ich fahren: Schese si mein Heimatland ..? (Far to the east,
the armies of Konev and Rek, moviski were massing for the offensive
which would make Silesia German no more.)
