SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
who had one day confronted our austerely orthodox parish priest - a
man I held in considerable awe for his ability to transfer himself
from the ground to the seat of the monumentally upright bicycle on
which he paid his parish calls by a process akin to levitation - with a
request to be 'received' en masse. Many subsequent afternoons were
consequently spent at their settlement, a handsome Georgian man-
sion tepidly vandalized by their occupation, where my father carried
on high-minded conversation across the tea-table and I avoided as
far as possible the copious offerings of unrefined peanut butter on
which the community appeared principally to subsist. Less innocu-
ous was another of his church-door adoptees, an Italian prisoner-
of-war paroled to a local farmer. Swarthy and almost dwarfish, he
was, I suppose, a Sicilian or Calabrian peasant boy for whom the
Duce's call to live dangerously can never have sounded very loud, if
indeed it had meant anything at all in whatever southern dialect he
spoke. He had none the less learnt a sort of English and on his first,
only and never-again-to-be-mentioned visit he subjected my parents
to a lengthy description of what they eventually grasped to be his
single-handed massacre of a platoon of Australians in the Western
Desert.
distasteful
This wholly incredible tale lapsed into a deepening.)
pantomime of hand-to-hand combat, from which my
father took refuge in a hasty armchair nan while my mother sat the
fable out in frozen politeness to its loathsome end. Christian charity
did not extend to a second invitation.
Other military transients were more warml welcomed. the Slavs
in particular. I can still recreate the slightly stable-like odour left in
the car bu a Crech soldier diven a life on a raine day and though in
offended me at the time it was. I not raalina simale a coldier's
smell, compounded of infrequent baths and shoddy khaki. It clearly
repelled my father, who must have recognized it from the trenches,
not at all. He and his hitch-hiker passed an agreeable twenty miles in
companionable deprecation of the small midea of military life But
his regard for the Czechs, whom he illogically associated with
Chamberlain's appeasement policy took cerand clare to what bac
for the Poles. They were peerless: Catholic, high-spirited heroes of
the Battle of Britain, undaunted by exile, they satisfied every one of
his exacting tests of warriordom and ho cucht me their compan
whenever he could find it. 'Alwavs glad to helo a Pole' invariably
concluded the street directione he offerad tham anciere to anes
tions stumbled out often so haltingly that it was clear even to me
PROLOGUE
9
that the sentiment was quite lost on the hearers (though not perhaps
the good will).
The arrival of a Polish squadron at a near-by airfield allowed
ampler scope to his Slavophilia; thither his car developed a habit of
calling on its roundabout journey from
one refugee school to
another, to wait outside the mess while within he imbibed hospitality
and far-fetched dog-fighting stories with indiscriminate pleasure.
My harder-headed mother was less susceptible to Polish charm. It
was the chance appearance of peacetime friends, transformed by
khaki and the open air into bronzed and gallant cavaliers,
brought out the girlishness in her, sent her tripping to conjure up
cream teas and bottles of sherry from cupboards which should have
been bare, and tempted her to listen to talk laced with the shorthand
of wartime English - 'Gib' and 'Alex' and 'the Med' - without for
once any of that impatience I sensed she otherwise felt for a world
suddenly, self-importantly and sadistically masculinized.
I too was entranced by these incursions, for our visitors brought
with them the flavour of the 'real' army, quite different from that of
the few, drab, static units which populated our operational back-
water. The county town, true, was the depot of an ancient regiment
of the line, the lintel of whose castellated Victorian gatehouse bore
the deeply incised name of a Kiplingesque North-Wehouse bore
siege; but the guard at the gate was mounted by pensioners.
Convalescents in unbecoming bright-blue flannel suits occasionally
found their way from a local hospital on to the benches of the
municipal park.
And though a unit of the
Royal Artillery was
billeted in one of the larger houses in the town, it was equipped only
with searchlights. I knew that elsewhere the military scene must be
more glamorous, for I had a small book which depicted the badge of
every regiment of the army underneath a picture of the coloured
side-cap proper to each: green and yellow for
the
Inniskilling
Dragoon Guards; cherry red for the iIth Hussars; scarlet for the
I2th Lancers; purple and navy for the Essex Regiment; black and
grey for the Leicesters; maroon and black for the East Yorkshires;
yellow, blue and Lincoln green for the Sherwood
Foresters. 1
searched the horizons for this brilliant millinery. In vain: the only
soldiers I saw wore khaki from top to toe, khaki so ill-cut, shapeless
and hairy that I could find almost nothing in its wearers to admire.
'Battledress' was the official description of the outfit; but it was not
thus clad, I knew, that Wellington's infantry had stood in square
