240
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
week after he had arrived at Rommel's headquarters glowing with
confidence transfused by Hitler at their leavetaking, he had tele-
in his view the situation couldn't be grimmer' On adding direct
phoned the Führerhauptquartier to stress that though ' no pessimist,
command of Army Group B to his responsibilities, he had dis-
covered the last situation report which Rommel had written for
Hitler; in it the old Desert Fox had forecast that 'the unequal
struggle is reaching its end' after five weeks of fighting in which his
formations had lost 97,000 men and received only 6,000 replace-
have done, he ordered its transmission, with a covering letter of his
ments. Far from suppressing it, as a more timorous general might
own which warned that, though I came here with the fixed
determination of making effective your order to stand fast at any
price', the fact had to be faced that 'the moment has drawn near when
this front will break'. On July 3 ist, as the Americans rolled through
he stopped' and then raised with lodl. Hitler's operations officer,
Avranches, he had signalled his doubt whether the enemy can still
the question of withdrawing from Normandy and seeking to defend
a line nearer the border of the homeland.
Hitler, curiously, showed none of his doctrinaire objection to the
more familiar voice.
notion at his midday conference. By evening, however, he spoke in
Kluge could not grasp the whole picture, and
could certainly not solve the problems which would be raised by a
break-through. Therefore he should be told that first, he must fight
all circumstances,
secondly that this battle is decisive,
thirdly, that the idea of operating freely in the open is nonsense.
Warlimont Tall'e depute in the oberatione contion of OKW was to
leave for France at once to convey these instructions to Kluge 11
No sooner had Warlimont arrived than he found his mission
overtaken. On August 2nd
he conferred briefly
marshal. Next morning he was summoned to hear the news that the
with the field-
Führer had ordered a counter-attack from the aren east of Avranches
in order to re-establish nocitions on the coget and so once more close
the ring in southern Normandy'. He was flabbergasted. Kluge was
equally at a loss. *As he knew from his visit to Rerchtespaden. it had
been recognized at the end of June [when Hitler had had his last
conference with Rommel and Rundstedt] that there were no further
Dossibilities of conducting an offenciva defence As far as I was
concerned', testified Warlimont, I ad ten new instructions ...
THE HONOUR OF THE
GERMAN ARMY
241
There could be no doubt that once more Hitler had taken a snap
decision ... it looked as if this must have been taken the previous
So it had. But the kernel of the idea had been germinating for a
few days. Reports of the arrival in Normandy of fresh Allied troops
and fighter squadrons previously, though wrongly, identified as
belonging to 'Army Group Patton' and earmarked for the 'second
invasion' had alleviated Hitler's fears of a landing north of the Seine.
The situation map, which highlighted the
Americans communications through Avranches,
graphically pre-
sented the prospect of an out-trumping blow.
'We must strike like
lightning, he had suddenly declared.
When we reach the sea the
American spearheads will be cut off.... We might even be able to cut
off their entire beachhead. We mustn't get bogged down
mopping up the Americans who have broken through' - blind
optimism; he would haricans withe iron broom' he had threatened
to wield against the 'Augean stables' in the officer corps after July
2oth - their turn will come later. We must wheel north like lightning
and turn the entire enemy front from the rear? The failure of a
British attempt, launched simultaneously with Cobra, to break out
of their end of the bridgehead, had persuaded him that the rest of the
front was stable. He had therefore concluded that he
Darts of it of disicians and clay adain at the war of manoeuvre of
which he believed the German army alone to be the master.
Operation Lüttich
The operational verve of the German army would have been denied
by no soldier in any of the armies which opposed it, in the east or
west. Its quality rested in part on its equipment, some of which
even by the standards of 1944, was still splendidly designed and
engineered. The Panther was better than the equivalent medium
tank in the Russian and American armies, the Tiger had no equal,
and even the ageing Mark IV could still stand confidently in the line
of battle. Certain specialized weapons were the fearful envy of those
who faced them, notably the lethal and highly versatile 88 mm,
which could appear as a tank, anti-tank, assault or anti-aircraft gun,
the nebelwerfer
multi-barrelled rocket projector and the
machine-pistol. Quantity
of weapons,
counted
TOrI
much.
Though the number of tanks in the panzer divisions was in decline,
