290
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
much on his mind). He was also determined that the capital shoul
be liberated from without rather than within, where the communis
formed the strongest element in the resistance and migh use loce
victory to frustrate at the last moment his four-vear pilarimage to the
seat of government. On August r6th. therefore, he despatched the
head of the Military Delegations, Jacques Chaban-Delmas, who hat
been recalled to London for consultations, with specific instructions
to the Paris FEl to await the anta of Alliad fornon and under n
German garrison.
circumstances to unleash a 'premature rising' against the rump of the
They
were instructions which the Paris FFI received with very
bad grace. Its chief. Rol, was a communist and as anxious as an
comrade to monopolize for the party and the FTP the glory and th
fruits of an early liberation. His second-in-command was a regula
officer,
Colonel de Marguerittes, alias Liné, whose political viens.
were those of an orthodox soldier but who stout warrin. that he was
chated at inactivity when the enemy's weakness invited attack. Both,
moreover, were acutely conscious that elsewhere in France the Ffl
was in open conflict with the remnants of the Carman army -
passages of arms later to be characterised as the National Insurrec
tion - and were shamed at the thourht that the forces in the capital
should alone be seen to fail to strilo On the affairs to at Angus
I7th, therefore, Lizé and his chief of staff drew un orders for the
occupation the following day of all public utilities and municinal and
government offices in what the Germans called Greater Paris.
There were a bewildering number. Beside the mairies of the
twenty arrondissements into which Paris is divided the office of the
Prefect of the Department of the Seine in the HAtel de Ville wa
obviously a key point, as was the Préfecture de Police on the Ile de
la Cité. The residences of the President of the Republic (Palais de
l'Elysée) and Prime Minister (Hôtel Matienon), the Chamber of
Deputies (Palais Bourbon) and the Senate building (Palais di
Luxembourg) all had important symbolic significance.
So naturally
did the ministries and also, though they were too stronely onarde
for the resistance to attempt a dirent ascault on anu the various
German headquarters. chieh a
mander of Greater Paris, the Hötel ch wrise the the rue de Rivali,
Some of these buildings were empty or occupied aniu hu caretak
ers. Others were still in the possessins ne legitimature holders.
appointed either by the municipality or the government in Vichy
Whatever their state, however, there were too many of them, it soon
became clear, for the communists to occupy all, particularly as FTP
strength lay principally in the eastern arrondissements, XVIl, XIX
and xx, at the opposite end of the city from the official quarter. Rol's
orders, though issued, could not therefore be carried out and August
i8th passed without the general uprising he and Lizé desired. Yet
they sensed a growing demand for action in the population of Paris
itself. The railwaymen had been on strike since August tath, and the
police, whom the Germans were trying to disarm,
15th. They determined to put de Gaulle's representatives to the test
on the following day. The forum chosen was the National Resistance
Council, which met at i1 a.m. to hear their demand for a proclama-
tion of general insurrection. The communists were represented on it
by the Paris Liberation Committee, which saw itself as the future
municipal council, de Gaulle by his Delegate General (Chaban-
Delmas's political opposite number) Parodi.
communist case vigorously. He pointed out that the Allies intended
to bypass Paris and that a rising might leave it a field of ruins - as
Hitler was to order the city commander to make it three days later.
But, while he argued, he took account of the danger that obedience
to de Gaull's orders might bring: that he would be left an impotent
spectator of a battle which the local resistance, communist and
non-communist alike, would unleash
with irretrievable
damage to the Gaullist wuse resulting either from victory or defeat.
Eventually, therefore, he decided to add de Gaull's authority to the
But while the politicians argued, the people - or, to be precise, the
police - had acted. Policemen, it is a cliché, are survivors of all
political change. And the Paris police had indeed remained stolidly
on duty throughout the occupation and co-operated with the Ger-
man authorities when necessary. But co-operation had rankled with
many of them and by August 1944 the resistance was strong in their
ranks, where, as elsewhere, it took a politically tripartite form. All
three police resistance groups had, however, agreed on August 18th
to co-operate in direct action and on the following morning a group
of 3,000 entered the Préfecture de Police and hoisted the tricolour -
not flown in Paris since 1940 - over the roof. Rol, who happened to
be passing at that moment on his way to a clandestine meeting, was
as surprised as anyone else in the city to see it, and more surprised to
be turned away when he demanded admission.
When he got back
