180
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
find a shot; but they were immobile. The Piats were highly portable,
and could be brought into action wherever the two-man crew could
find space to lie. But the Piat round was a chancy tank killer. It
worked on the shaned charge' principle. which concentrates the
explosive force of a warhead - but only if it impacted at a right-angle.
If not, it glanced off, but with enough commotion to threaten doom
from very close quarters.
to its operators, for the Piat's short range required them to attack
Two tanks, over-bold enough to venture
down the sunken lane which ran through the centre of Gavrus, wer
attacked bu Piat gunners hiding in the bank and one was actuall
knocked out Three tantra which annearad on the athar side of the
position were engaged by Piat gunners in the hedges of the orchard
and menaced to a hal+ The tank commanders apparently chose not
to risk pushing the advance without infantry to protect them.
these successes could not be sustained. As the afternoon wore on
panzers and panzergrenadiers beran to work together with increas
ing effectiveness, nibbling into the weak spots of the Argylls's
defences. cutting one small aroun off from another and gradually
eating their war towarde the river and the bridges The commande
of B Company, Major William MeElwee in civil life a seventeenth
historian,
number
riflemen he could other from the dofance of his orchard nerimeter
counter-attacks
with what
But, as the evening began to draw in, his suneriors decided that the
position could no longer be held. His comnany was called hack to the
thick wood.
immediate vicinity of the bridges, where it dug in for the night in a
Corridor had at last been cleared of the enemy,
troops arrived to relieve it. During June 2oth the interior of Scottish
There it stayed until the afternoon
of the next day, when fresh
while its occupants,
given a clearly identifiable enemy to fiaht hu the aeriual of the oth
SS, had defended the flanks with great determination.
commanding II SS Panzer Corps, great dete minded to report to
Seventh Army that he had not been able to begin his main attack
north of the Odon. until mid-afternoon and that then murderous
fire from naval guns in the Channel and the terriblo Britch artillery
destroyed the bulk of our attacking and the err assembly area (the
guns had been alerted by a very timely Ultra decrypt].
tanks that did manage
The few
to go forward were easily stopped by the
British anti-tank guns.' Behind this screen of fire Montromery had
fed a new division, the 53rd, down into the corridor,
and with-
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
drawn the most exposed of his units, not only the Argylls, but the
tanks of the IIth Armoured Division which had been holding Point
112 beyond Tourmauville ever since the Argylls had captured the
bridge there on Epsom's second day.
The SS panzer divisions did attack on June 3oth, though late in
the day, and returned to the offensive on July Ist.
opportunities which had offered themselves only three days earlier
Were spent. Small though its strategic value was, Scottish Corridor
was now too strong to be destroyed by the force the Germans had at
last assembled. Epsom had not been a victory. It had certainly not
achieved its objectives, which lay not across the Odon but the Orne,
five miles to the south. Yet it had achieved, in a roundabout way, an
important purpose. Hitler's strategy, conceived long before the
invasion and implemented as soon as it began, was to use his armour
to drive a wedge between the Allies and drive them both eventually
into the sea. The necessity of stopping I5th Scottish
march down the 'Corridor' had diverted his armoured reserve from
that mission and so damaged its units that days would be needed to
restore them to an offensive state. Montgomery would not allow the
Germans that time. And so he Scottish division's losses - 2,500 mele
in five days - had purchased an important advantage. And the little
battle of Gavrus exemplified the nature of the
transaction. Un-
spectacular, muddled, wearisome and intermittently terrifying, it
had blunted the assault of one
of the most formidable fighting
formations in the german army and stood fit to rank with those
other small epics of Argyll and Scottish stubborness, the destruction
of the g3rd at the battle of New Orleans and the stand of the thin red
line at Balaclava.
