308
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
decided to halt for the night bevond Fresnes and open his final
assault next morning.
During the evening, however, he came under increasing presure
from Gerow, the American corps commander to whom he va
subordinate, to maintain progress, or surrender the right of first
entry to the accompanying Americans. Gerow and Bradley were
exchanging on the radio sarcastic remarks about Frenchmen "danc-
ing to Paris' - there had, in the intervals of the fighting, ben
impromptu celebrations in the little towns along the wav - and of
advancing on a one-tank front' to avoid the fighting which would
damage French homes The ribes were unfair The German anti
tank guns were more numerous than the Americans, advancing on 3
weakly defended sector, realized. But the threat alarmed Lecere
and, as he had essaved three days before. he now determined to slip a
reconnaissance column into Paris as a token of intention. Summon:
ing a captain of the
Tchad infantry, Raymond Dronne, he ordered
him to take a platoon of infantry and a troop of three tanks of th
Chars de Combat and by any means find a route into the city.
Slipping along byways in the gathering dusk and then, as the city
closed round his column, down side streets and back turnings,
Dronne found the Porte de Gentilly unguarded, crossed the Place
d'Italie through proude who half renaciend a i tha interattes of
his vehicles were unfamiliar, ran recognitiet of a burst of fire fron
an isolated German picket in the Care d'Austerlitz, crossed the
Quai des Célestins.
Seine bu the Pont d'Austerlita and drove un the richt hank along th
At 9.30 p.m. his
three tanks,
Montmirail,
Champaubert and Romilly, drew to a halt outsi do the Hatel de Ville
He was within a few hundred vards of von Choltitz's headquarters at
the other end of the rue de Rivoli.
The news of his arrival brought the bells of paris to life and
disturbed the sombre little dinner narty the general was giving for
his immediata taff in tha Maurina Malited for amant and
then withdrew to telephone Army Groue lisat St Germain-en-Laye.
Twenty-four hours earlier he had called B ate S, the chief of staff, to
assuee him with heavy irony that he has reidel, ed Hitler's order to
leave Paris a 'field of ruins', had placed three tons of dunamite in the
crypt of Notre Dame and was preparing to block the Seine by felling
the Fiffel Tower across it. Now, when speila peared on the line,
Choltitz raised the receiver to capture for hide are noise of rejoicing
from the steeples. He asked if there were any further orders.
FREE FRANCE
309
two men - one a July zoth conspirator who had thus far covered his
tracks, the other one of the Führer's disenchanted - understood each
other perfectly. Speidel said he had nothing to say. Choltitz asked
farewell.
him to see to the welfare of his wife and family and bode him
The bells. word of mouth and signals from the vanguard of thi
Deuxième DB alone the civilian telephone network kent Paris on
tenterhooks throughout the night. But the crawds which thronged
the southern faubourgs and the long avenues reaching to the heart of
the city had no certainty yet of the identify of the troops coming to
their liberation. They had heard that there were French soldiers in
the city. But they were expecting an American army. The morning
was misty, with the promise of a hot August sun which the last four
days had withheld, and the mist muffled the sound of tank tracke
and engines from the approaching columns.
Occasionally the rattle
of a burst of firing carried northward. Then suddenly, a little after 7
a.m. the vehicles were seen.
boulevards. Inside the line of the old fortifications, bevond the Porte
The crowds were thin beyond the outer
d'Orléans and Porte d'Italie, along the sweep of the avenue du Maine
and the rue St lacques, they were ranked twelve and twenty deep
on the pavements,
The khoki tanke and half-tracks they had haard of anneared, fronte
straining for a glimpse
of the first
Painted with the white star of the Allied armies.
But the heads in the
turrets were wearing caps they had seen before - red calots of Soahis
blue of the Cuirassiere the fer of the Chaoncure d'Afrique
unmistakable pom-poms of the Fusiliers-Marins.
Their liberators
were French.
Within a quarter of an hour, we were caught up in the atmosphere
of a full-blooded Fourteentu of July, recorded Captain de la Horie
of the Chasseurs d'Afrique. Food and drink was passed, pressed,
hurled into the vehicles ou the division, which time and again were
brought to a halt as the crowds burst across the roads, retreating to
leave the youngest and prettiest cast by the tide on their armoured
"Vive la France.
decks. An unbroken roar of cheers and greetings -
vive la division Leclerc' (suddenly its name was known in every
corner of Paris) - carried the columns forward, rising to such a pitch
that the tank crews, many of them Parisians frantic to see parents,
wives, sweethearts again after years of parting, often
without the
passage of news from either side, grew hoarse with the
effort of
shouting messages and scribbled names and telephone numbers on
