100
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
but was hit again by a bullet which tore open his stomach wall.
Before help could reach him he bled to death.
Worse was to follow. The other officer in the platoon, Second-
Lieutenant Robert McLaughlin, came forward to take the lead. His
radio operator was hit and, when he moved to give him aid, he was
hit also, the bullet passing through his thigh, buttocks and lower
stomach. The battalion executive officer, Major James McGinity,
who was watching the scene from the spot Mc Laughlin had just left,
was almost simultaneously shot through the head by a sniper. Dolan,
who was at his side, spotted the source of the fire before it shifted to
him, drilled the sniper with his tommy gun and then crawled to tend
McLaughlin's wounds.
The stricken second-lieutenant begged not
to be moved, because he was in such pain. Dolan therefore left him
but crawled back when it began to drizzle to cover him with a
raincoat. In the interval he had bled to death also.
Dolan had now lost ten dead and twenty-one wounded, almost a
quarter of his company, in its first eight hours on French soil. The
time was about 10 a.m. He dared not send any more men down the
road, and he feared that if he manoeuvred off ithe would run into
patrol he had detached under Second-Lieutenant Oakley and
risk an exchange of fire between friends So. for an hour. he lay and
pondered. At about I1 a.m. he sent a runner to look for Oakley, but
the man ran into the regimental commander, Colonel Lindquist, and
passed to him the news of the disaster which had struck Able
Company. As it happened, General Ridgway arrived at almost the
same moment, heard the news and ordered Lindquist to make the
battle for le Manoir his first priority.
Like Dolan, he
pondered, but
with rather more despatch. He
already had one force, a scratch collection of men of the go7th under
Captain Ben Schwartzwalder, out on the left of le Manoir, on which
it had made two costly
and unsuccessful attacks earlier in the
morning. He now knew of Dolan's and could pinpoint it on his map;
He therefore decided to co-ordinate the actions of the two and
launch a pincer movement against the farm at midday.
He sent out orders accordingly. Schwartzwalder was alerted. But
the messenger who should have reached Dolan got lost in the small
fields which surrounded
the manor and did not find him.
Schwartzwalder prepared to move off, he was departing, though he
did not krow it, on another of the lone missions which had already
failed several times that morning.
IOI
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
Mischance now intervened for the third time. Dolan's subordi-
nate, Oakley, whom he had been frightened of running
unawares, had not got lost, but merely followed a very circuitous
route to the far side of le Manoir. lust before midday, he judged
himself after three hours of hedgerow-crawling, to be in position to
attack. He and his platoon sergeant, Oscar Queen, braced them-
selves to charge from the last hedgerow to the stone wall which
surrounded le Manoi's farmyard. As they emerged from cover,
supported by the fire of the other members of the patrol, they were
counter-charged by
one of the
defenders, who
was firing a
Schmeiser machine-pistol. He fell dead, as did two others behind
him. But Queen had seen into the rear of the machine-gun position
which had killed so many of Dolan's party on the main road.
Covered again by the rest of the patrol, he made a short run to throws
a grenade but was toppled over by a counter-throw. Recovering his
senses, he heard the movements of a sniper in a tree above him and
brought the man down with a shot from his carbine. He then ran
back to Oakley to report what he had seen.
The patrol's machine-gun team made a dash for the spot Queen
had left, saw the German machine-gunners and killed them. They
were just about to make the final charge into the courtyard of the
manor when fire from the opposite direction announced the arrival,
quite unexpected to them opposchwartzwalder's column. The Ger-
mans were now at last enveloped and the survivors showed a white
flag. An American who stepped forward to accept the surrender was
shot dead, probably by one of those involuntary trigger reflexes so
common at the moment of capitulation. Magnanimously, the Ameri-
cans did not take their revenge. Three Germans had been killed by
Schwartzwalder. The survivors of the garrison were made prisoner:
They numbered eight.
Throughout the morning circumstances
exactly the opposite of those embroiling Turnbull at Neuville had
prevailed at le Manoir. It was the Americans who had outnumbered
the Germans, and by a very
About 300
considerable margin.
Americans, altogether, had tried in turn to capture the little fortified
farm. It had been held throughout by a platoon of the 1057th
Regiment of the gist Division, who had turned up, apparently on an
anti-invasion exercise at it p.m. the night before. They had roused
the startled owner, M. Louis Leroux, from his bed and he had had
the chance to count them They totalled twenty eight. Good soldiers
all, they had, like the znd Light Battalion of the King's
