84
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
hooked up and it really caused quite an uproar to get back into
position so we could make our jump.' Many of the aircraft were hit,
numbers of the parachutists wounded in the cabins and most sticks
called to jump either while their aircraft was taking evasive action or
when they were short of beyond their assigned dropping point.
When things went right, the sequence was as described by Corporal
Koskimaki, who was in General Taylor's stick:
Jumpmaster Lawrence Legere ... yelled, 'Get ready!' Bodies
went rigid as troopers waited for the next command. 'Stand
up!' Soldiers struggled to their feet with their heavy loads.
Everybody was anxious to leave the confines of the plane. Next
came the order to 'Hook up!' The snap of the anchor line
fastener clicking into place could be heard the full length of the
cabin. Each man made doubly sure he had hooked his static
line to the cable running overhead down the centre of the
ceiling. Next came the order to 'Check your equipment'. Each
man checked the connections of the man directly in front of
him to make sure all items were secure and would remain in
place when he was jarred by the opening shock of the chute.
Above the roar of the engines could be heard the call, 'Sound
off for equipment check'. From far forward could be heard,
'Sixteen - OK', 'Fifteen - OK', 'Fourteen - OK',
right on
down to General Taylor, who bellowed, 'Two - OK'. Quickly
followed the order, 'Stand in the door' from the jumpmaster
who was crouched in the open doorway looking for landmarks.
The members of the stick crowded in tightly behind him.
Movement was now limited and no one would be able to react
as an individual any longer.
When the order to jump came, the whole stick would leave the plane
at gymnastic speed, emptying it in less than ten seconds.
If things went amiss, this smooth sequence could be severely
disjointed. And much was going amiss in the aircraft General Taylor
could not see. Sergeant Louis E. Truax, of the ist Battalion, go6th
Parachute Infantry, described his jump:
The front men were jumping. The first twelve men got out
pretty close together. I was running down the aisle. Suddenly
the plane was hit in the left wing by flak. The wing went
straight up. My left shoulder crashed into a window.
With
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
85
ammo, a 1903 Springfield rifle, i2 grenade launcher rounds,
2 cans of blood plasma, 2 cans of distilled water, gas mask,
helmet, K rations I must have weighed 225-250 pounds -
stripped I weighed 130. I was surprised the window didn't
break. The pilot was fighting to right the plane. When he
succeeded, I was appalled at the view which greeted me - 1 was
the only one standing. Four men lay in a tangled heap on the
floor. I realized it was almost impossible for them to stand up
with their equipment loads. Also that an absolute sequence had
to be maintained or we'd have a glob of human hamburger
dangling outside the door at 150 miles an hour. One man dived
out the door head first. I stepped over the top of two men. The
closest man to the door crawled out head first. I grabbed the
ammo belt in the centre of the man I thought next and gave
him a heave out nose first. The next man made it crawling on
his own power. I reached up and pulled the salvo switch which
released the machine gun and mortars attached to the bomb
racks under the plane. Then I dived out. 1ยบ
Worse things were happening in other aircraft. In one, carrying
the headquarters of E company, 506th Parachute Infantry, a bundle
of high explosives was
detonated by flak and the aeroplane dis-
integrated with stick and crew in the middle of a formation,
knocking headlong the men waiting to jump in a neighbouring
aircraft. In others the door was jammed by over-large equipment
bundles er even to one bu an ammunition dou Came lines of
jumpers were interrupted when one man or several were
splinters, so that they had to be unhooked and left in the plane or
manhandled to the door and pushed out to take their
chance of
medical attention on the ground. Incredibly in that highly charged
atmosphere, and despite the sheer physical difficulty of standing
firm in the stampede for the door, a few men 'refused' - that is,
announced that they were unwilling to jump. In all, four men of the
fO5th Parachute Infantry, one of the go7th and two of the 508th
preferred to face the savage disciplinary consequences
and total
social ignominy of remaining with the aeroplane to stepping into the
darkness of the Normandy night. But 13,000 others, whether over
their drop zones or not, whether over dry land or the flooded valleys
of the Douve or the Merderet, whether over the Cotentin or already
beyond its wave-lapped coast, took their courage in their hands and
