I24
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
on a future occasion. And though not all these details were yet
known by Combined Operations Headquarters, after-action reports
and prisoner interrogation yielded enough information to point to a
depressing disparity between the power of the attack and the
defence. It clearly could not be overcome merely by increasing the
numbers of those embarked for the assault. That would be to repeat
the mistakes of the First World War, when the solution of greater
numbers resulted arithmetically in greater casualties for no territor-
ial gain. It would have to be offset by a change in technique.
It is as illuminating to say of Dieppe - as it was and is often said -
that it taught important lessons about amphibious operations as to
say of the ateliers nationaux of the 1848 revolution that they taught
important lessons about state intervention in the economy, or of the
Titanic disaster that it taught important lessons about passenger liner
design. In the last case no improvements could compensate the
victims, in the second none could rectify an experiment which was
fundamentally misconceived. Even it Canada could not do so, it was
better that the planners should forget about Dieppe. And so, in a
shee, they did. The Germans concluded from the experience that
the Alics, when they came for the Second Front, would still land
near a port but would seek to surround it. The planners decided that
would steer as far clear
of ports as possible. Fighter cover -
which had worked very well at Dieppe - and the maximum radius at
which it
could be provided would
impose the only territorial
criterion they would accept. Inside that line they would look for a
coastline with open beaches, low cliffs or none at all and a positive
absence of harbour facilities.
But one lesson was drawn, by the man best placed to perceive it
and, as luck would have it, subsequently to put it into practice.
Captain (later Vice-Admiral) John Hughes-Hallett had acted both as
Mountbatten,
Naval Adviser to the Chief of Combined Operations, Lord Louis
before the operations
and as Naval Commander
during it. He had come back from the raid naturally impressed by
the importance of air cover - the RAF had brilliantly succeeded in
sparing the
Canadians the crowning agony of air attack - and
concerned by the need to add to the number and types of landing-
craft, to rehearse their crews in a variety of simulated beach assaults
and to keep such a specialized force in permanent existence. But he
was above all determined to ensure that no landing should ever again
take place without covering firepower sufficient not simply to hinder
CANADA: TO THE SOUTH SHORE
the enemy from using his weapons but to shock him into inaction,
stun him into insensibility or obliterate him in his positions.
Lesson of Greatest Importance, his report capitalized and italicized,
is the need for overwhelming fire support, including close support,
during the initial stages of the attack! It should be provided by 'heavy
and medium Naval bombardment, by air action, by special vessels or
crat' (which would have to be developed) working close inshore,
and by using the firepower of the assaulting troops while still
seaborne ' He wrote while the naval events of the operation burned
fresh in his memory. It reminded him of his four little Hunt-class
destroyers, armed with four 4-inch guns, duelling with the German
shore batteries, forced to use hastily laid smoke screens for protec-
tion against the heavier metal which their thin sides did not provide
and still suffering grievous damage each time they emerged into the
sunlight. Goronwy Rees, aboard HMS Garth, recalled that 'the
manoeuvre became monotonous and repetitive, and each time
harder on the nerves, especially after we had been hit twice, the
second time with considerable damage and casualties'.? Garth sur-
vived (though HMS Berkeley, hit by German bombs, did not) but
she and all the other ships of the bombarding force limped home in
the knowledge that, in this latest episode of the four-century-old
struggle between ship and shore artillery, they had been clearly
Fire Support
By D-Day Hughes-Hallet had left the planning staff to get in his
sea-time as captain of HMS Jamaica. But he had left his legacy. The
fleet of landing-craft which
had disembarked the 2nd
Division had indeed been kept together, under his command (as
Force), had added to its complement all the specialized craft for
which he had seen the nis had rehearsed incessantly to improve its
approach, support and beaching techniques and, for the critical test,
were actually assigned once more to embark and deliver the Cana-
dians. It and the 3rd Division had practised together first in October
1043 during Operation Pirate, a large-scale exercise held at Studland
Bay, the Dorset beauty spot, and had perfected their co-operation in
Operation Trousers, held at Slapton Sands, Devon, in April 1944.
Though they did not know it, the Slapton Sands landing had
foreshadowed in almost every detail that planned for D-Day itself.
The sole missing element had been the full bombardment,
