48
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
the millions of untrained conscripts who had followed them into the
ranks when the volunteering impulse had died. No Briton, least of
all Brooke, could fail to take pride in their courage or their ultimate
mastering of their trade. But they had learnt it at the side of a strong
ally on ground securely barricaded against sudden irruption by the
enemy, who, in any case, had chosen to stand on the defensive in
France for most of the fighting there. And when the Germans had a
last been fred to attack, in the spring of 1918, Brooke had seen with
his own eyes how quickly an apparently battleworthy army could be
broken, as Gough's Fifth was on the Somme in March 1918, by a
superior force. The Dunkirk campaign had reinforced that impres
sion. 'There is no doubt that they are the most wonderful soldiers'
he had written of the Germans on May 23rd, 1040: it was an opinion
which did not leave him throughout the Second World War.
All the more was he moved to question the good sense of
prematurely confronting the Germans inside their own continental
fortress by comparison of their known strenaths and skills with those
of the fledgling American army. He had seen some of it in training at
Camp Jackson. South Carolina, in lune toaz and. though impressed
by the look of the young soldiers, had found the demonstration
manoeuvre they had put on for him 'disappointing' and come away
with the reflection that they had not 'yet realized the standard of
training required'. His disquiet was not restricted to feelings about
the lower ranks. The high command and its methods of working als
perturbed him. Marshall's achievement in rationalizing the
Department was admirable. but so recently completed that its
practice to which
purpose had not yet been translated into the smooth and rapid staff
Brooke was accustomed at home.
There poli-
ticians, civil servants and servicemen had been attuned to working
within a common organization, the Committee of Immerial Defence,
since before the First World War Britain's power though limited
financial and industrial
indeed already shrinking as the cost of the war eroded its
effectively as thought and routine could ensure.
base, was thus deploved as swiftly and
Brooke found the American system by contrast time-consuming
and inefficient. He envied Marshall his relationship with the Pre
sident, who had no military knowledge. was aware of the fact and
consequently relied on [Marshalll and listened to Thial advice': and
all the more because his
slightest doubt that he had inherited all the military genius of his
own head of government never had thi
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
49
great ancestor, Marlborough'. Brooke lamented the time necessary
to wean Churchill from his 'wildest and most dangerous ideas'. But
that diversion of energy was to be preferred to the
slow and tedious
process' of dealing with the American chiefs of staff, to whom 'all
matters have to be carefully and slowly explained and re-explained
before they can be absorbed'.
The particular issue which prompted his complaints of the need to
explain and re-explain was his effort, at his second meeting with the
Americans at Casablanca in January 1943,
to reorientate their
European strategy. Marshall arrived with the determination to force
through a decision in favour of some sort of cross-Channel operation
that year. To achieve it he was prepared to see all surface operations
in the Mediterranean closed down, as soon as the German-Italian
army in North Africa had been defeated, and all surplus ground
troops transferred to Britain. Other resources in the area he was
prepared to allot to the Pacific, where, as Admiral King was forceful
in emphasizing, only 15 per cent of Allied strength was arrayed
against the Japanese. Brooke had come with an argument prepared
for a different strategy in the Mediterranean. He took it as given that
the first task in the west was to break the U-boat campaign; not only
was it threatening to starve Britain, which required thirty million
tons of imports a year but could get only twenty-five,
but it was
actively postponing the cross-Channel invasion
from month to
month by preventing the transport of American troops to Britain and
diverting shipyard capacity from the building of landing-craft to
essential escort vessels. On land, however, the balance had swung in
favour of the Allies. The Germans were no longer attacking and the
defensive itself was now overstraining their resources.
Rather than
present them with the chance of an easy victory,
therefore - and a
battle on the coastline of France between the forty divisions they had
in the country and the twenty-two the Allies could find for the
invasion promised them a very easy victory indeed - he proposed
heightening the 'overstretch' from which they were already suffer-
ing. The elimination of Italy from the war was the most obvious
means to exert overstretch and it could be achieved by air and sea
offensives, perhaps supplemented by amphibious operations against
Sicily and Sardinia.
The result would be to force
replace Italian troops with her own, not only in the Italian peninsula
but in the Balkans and Greek islands as well, where Italy provided
much of the Axis manpower. Encouraged by this policy,
