134
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
begun to make their way shoreward, shepherded by pilorage and
control craft and the light support vessels. An hour after them had
started the heavier support craft, with the destroyers manoeuvring
on their flanks.
Next came the engineering group, Landing Crat
Assault (Hedgerow) armed with the bombs which would breach the
beach obstacles, the embarked assault tanks of the Royal Marines
and AVREs (Armoured Vehicles Roval Engineers) which were
equipped to throw heavy charges at concrete bunkers and tank traps,
and the floil tanta of the mine-clearing roone To their wake cam
the first wave of Landing Crait Asingt filled with the spearhead
companies of the infantry battalions. Fach was attacking with two
companies in the first wave, and two in a second wave to follow a
quarter of an hour behind. Behind the leading companies the rocket
ships took station and behind them the special Landing Craft Tanl
with the o6 Priests of the self-propelled artillery regiments, each
programmed to fire , chelle for every 200 vards covered towards the
Order, rehearsed in a dozen exercises, imposed itself on the
confusion. And the spectacle of the armada, so terrifying to the
Germans who could spare a glance for it, mara, ot courage and even
inspiration to the infantrymen peering over the bare steel gunwales
of the LCA. But it was difficult to feel inspired in the sea conditions
which the retreating bad weather had brought. The wind blew at
fifteen knots, raising four-foot waves, driving white breakers on to
which the choice of
H-Hour should have left uncovered.
infantry had been given anti-sea-sickness pills before they left the
landing ships, but they had also been fed a warrior's hrenkfast and
most suffered agonies of sea-sickness as their assault craft circled in
the chop waiting for the signal to run in their an it came, the motion
improved, but the increased speed brought wave-tops spuming over
chill of the grey morning.
the landing ramps, soaking clothes and equipment and adding to the
Some of the smaller craft found the sea conditions too much for
their low freeboard, puny engines and heavy loads.
Craft Assault (Hedgerow) found the going narticularly hand te had
been decided to tow them inshore but, inge paro, only one out of the
nine reached the right-hand Canadian beecs. The remainder had
foundered or had to be cut adrift before entering the swept assault
channels, apparently because they were being towed at excessive
CANADA: TO THE SOUTH SHORE
135
speed for the prevailing weather conditions? Other towed craft,
"Rhino ferries carrying wheeled vehicles, broke their tows and some
of the landing-craft fell back with flooded engine rooms or even
swamped troop spaces. Group Captain Stagg's break in the weather
looked hard to find among the short seas of the Bay of the Seine at
7a.m. on June 6th. Worst of all, the commanders of the DD tanks in
the second wave of landing-craft judged conditions too rough to risk
their barely amphibious cargoes in the water and, in both ith and
8th Brigade areas, the decision was taken to beach the LCTs and
disembark the tanks direct on to dry land. After passing the 7,000
yard mark, the Senior Officer of the 7th Brigade DD tank wave
changed his mind, and the tanks were swum off close inshore,
landing barely ahead of the infantry. On the other brigade front they
actually landed behind them.
Launching tanks at sea was nerve-racking to those involved, a
mesmeric sight to spectators. The LCTs slackened speed until dead
in the water, the bow ramp was then lowered on its chains, the sea
flooded in to fill the tank deck and the four DD Shermans, engines
already running, launched into the deep, plopping off the ramp into
the waves like toads from the lip of an ornamental pond. It was not a
manoeuvre to be attempted under heavy fire from the beach unless
well out to sea and the decision to risk it testified to the discovery
which almost all the asaulting Canadians were making in the last
4,000 yards of the run-in: that fire from the beach was light and
badly aimed. The coastan batteries were not firing because they had
been silenced, if only temporarily, by the bombarding cruisers.
field batteries inland were not hitting because they could not spot
their fall of at The beach guns were silent because the desion of
their embrasures prevented them from bearing until the enemy was
on the beach. That left only the mortars, entirely hit or miss when
directed aminet maritime targets, and small-arms fire which did not
cary farther than 2,oon yards and which most of the landing-craft
were stout enough to stop. But as the leading landing-craft nassed
the 1,000 yard marks a new hazard threatened unexpectedly,
present itself. H-Hour as timed zen minutes later on the Canadian
beaches than the Britivas timate the landing-craft over the Ber-
nières reefs. The rough sea ad delayed the run-in by a further ten
minutes. It was not therefore until y 45 on the 7th Brigade's front
and 7-55 on the 8th's that the landing-craft reached their beaching
points. And as they did so they found themselves faced with exactly
