34
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Had another man, an 'Easterner' with Pacific obsessions, a pilot
with Mitchellian dreams of victory through air power, an officer who
had acquired a Mediterranean angle of vision at the Ecole de Guere,
a genuine American Firster, been nominated to guide the President
through the maze of
strategic choice, quite different arguments
might have pre-occupied the War Department from the outset and
taken months to be expelled from the machineru of decision. As it
was, the Kriegsakademie, by a stroke of supreme irony,
wittingly planted in the machinery's control centre someone to
whom it had taught a philosophy of war eractly complementary to its
own, a landsinnig strategist with no thought but that of bringing the
Wehrmacht fare to fare with ite mirror-image and little concern with
how the trick was to be achieved. It thersha determined that the
coming struggle between
Germany and the
inevitably take the form of a great land battle between their two
United States must
the land
mass of
Western
Europe.
Wedemeyer's plan, transmitted to Roosevelt on September 2ist,
Presciently,
1941, was presented under the title of the 'Victory Pooramme' Its
Second World War.
conception and delivery we to be one of the decicive anto of the
There is a surprisingly long history of junior staff officers decisively
Eisenhower
influencing the outcome of great military evente - for gond and ill:
the role of Lieutenant-Colonel Hentsch in writing finis to the
Schlieffen
September I9I4 is the best
Wedemeyer was slightly too junior slightly too late to consolidate the
position of influence which chance had brought him.
re-organization in the War Department carried him away to loint
Planning with the Navy and Air Forces at the outbrenk of the war,
which brought to the War Plans Division another slichtly mor
senior product of West Point, Leavenworth and the Philippines
Dwight D. Eisenhower.
Like Stilwell, Eisenhower received his call abruptly by telephon
in California. 'The chief", said Bedell Smith says for you to hop?
plane and get up here right away?' Unlike Stilwell, Eisenhower had
met Marshall only twice. It was not personal acquaintance which
had recommended him therefore. but his army-wide ramutation as
first in his class at Leavenworth, protegé of Pershing, personal
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND
FRONT
assistant to MacArthur and chief of staff of one of the two opposing
armies in the 1941 Louisiana manoeuvres - a graveyard and seedbed
of many careers.
It was his experience in the Philippines which in
particular commended him to Marshall, who, as the defence of those
islands hung in the balance in December, urgently needed advice as
to how they might be reinforced and, with them, what remained of
American power in the far Pacific.
Within two months, as a result of a re-organization for which
decided.
They were entirely concerned with the Pacific, whose
importance he judged to be paramount. On January Ist, in a private
memorial of his first two weeks in office, he wrote: 'I've been
insisting Far East is central - and no other side shows should be
undertaken until air and ground are in satisfactory state. Instead
we're taking on Magnet [despatch of US troops to Britain], Gymnast
[an attack on North Africa, mooted by Churchill at the Washington
Conference of December 194T], etc., etc? Two weeks later he was
even more adamant: 'The whole Far East situation is crucial. My
own plan is to drop everything else - Magnet, Gymnast, reserves to
Ireland and make the British retire in Libya.
Then, scrape up
everything, everybody, and get it into (Netherlands East Indies) and
Burma.
We mustn't lose Netherlands East Indies - Singapore -
Burma.' A week after writing that, his view had changed absolutely.
He had had word of MacArthur's withdrawal to his final defence line
on the Bataan peninsula; the news from Malaya made it clear that
the colony would fall shortly to the Japanese.
Accordingly, he
reflected:
The struggle to secure the adoption by all concerned of a
common concept of strategical objectives is wearing me down.
Everybody is too much engaged with small things of his own -
or with some vague idea of larger political activity
to realize
what we are doing - or rather not doing. We've got to go to
Europe and fight - and we've got to quit wasting resources all
over the world - and still worse - wasting time.
If we're to keep
Russia in, save the Middle East, India and Burma,
we've got to
begin slugging with air at Western Europe; to be followed with
a land attack as soon as possible.
