74
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
were, from east and west, at St Côme-du-Mont, Chef-du-Pont and
Pont l'Abbé.
Thereafter the line of objectives,
from Pont l'Abbé
back to Exit 4, ran through the open countryside and would have to
be defended, if and when captured, by grit and hope.
The danger to this open flank would come, it was believed, from
the two German divisions which it was known had long been
stationed in the Cotentin, the yogth on the east coast and the 243rd
on the west, and the recently arrived gist, which had unfortunately
been positioned exactly astride the airborne area.
Moreover, while
the 7ogth and 243rd were static formations - what the Germans
called bodenständige, 'ground holding', a euphemistic admission of
their total lack of mechanical transport and the low physical fitness
of their soldiers - the gist was composed of voung men who had
actually been trained in air movement.
between them they
fielded no more than twenty-four batalions against the eighteen
which the Americans could parachute. Moreover. several of the
German battalions were not German at all in composition,
manned by more-or-less willing volunteers from the army of prison-
ers whom the Germans had taken in the east during 1941-2.
were indeed known as East (Ost) Battalions, for to have called them
Russian would have been inaccurate. They represented for the most
part the peripheral and unassimilated peoples of the Russian empire,
Cossacks,
Georgians,
Turkomen, Armenians, Volga Tartars, and
Azerbaiianis, who had swapped a tenuous dance of itizenalin for the
guarantee of regular meals, and miebt be expental to waver in their
new lovalty if pressed to fight for their sunners. That prosnent rathe
bettered the odds which the Americane calculated to fiold a more on
less even fight on the first day when most of the dead could be
pinned in their
positions.
worst, it was thought,
Germans would be able to find five battalione to mount a counter
attack against the parachutists, and to concentrate no armour against
them until the third day. The forecast was alichtly antimin: Ther
was also in the area a scratch panzer batalion, No. 100, equipped
old French tanks and makeshift assault guns, and the
Parachute Regiment, counting three battalions un highly trained
soldiers, whose average age was I7$ (it was 36 in the 709th Division).
But even this addition of a force so closely similar in quality to that of
the American need not mean that the operation was too risky to be
attempted (as Air Marshal Leigh-Mallory had argued). It did mean
that the Americans would have to put forth every shred of that Red
75
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
Indian bravery which, with a last-minute sprouting of Apache
haircuts and smearing of red and white warpaint, many of the young
bloods in the hattalions were nerving themselves to emulate if they
were to come through.
The approaching moment of departure evoked other rituals.
perhaps made all the more necessary by the disturbing effects on
laiened nerves of the invasion's postponement from June 5th to
June 6th. A rash of fights broke out, as men who had steeled
themselves to leave lost their tempers over minor irritations in the
resulting decrescendo. The divisional staffs hastily recalled the
regimental bands which had filled the encampments with music
during the recent hours, replayed over the public address systhes
the hit records of the moment and found new films to show. When
word of the renewed order of departure came, an officer of the
37th Parachute Artillery, the gunner regiment of the Screaming
Eagles, recalls that he found the men to whom he was to pass it
watching a Ted Lewis movie, Is Everybody Happy? and reflected, as
he climbed on to the stage to interrupt it, that "this was just the way
i would happen in Hollywood. There was an element of Hollywood
in the round of hand-pressings and exchange of home addresses
which folloved, avowares comradeship to death and promises to
visit bereaved relations if a friend should not return.
Hollywood too in the parting speech of Colonel Wolverton, who was
to be killed the following day, to his battalion of the
506th
Parachute Infantry: 'Although I am not a religious man, I would like
all of you to kneel with me in prayer - and do not look down with a
bowed head, but look up, so that you can see God and ask His
blessing and help in what, eare about to do." There was even more
Hollywood in the ferocious final briefing by Colonel Howard
"Seets" Johnson of the soost, which he concluded by whipping out
his jump knife, brandishing it above his head and screaming: in
siear to you that before tomorrow night this knife will be buried in
the back of the blackest German in Normandy.* His men screamed
back in exultation. But many
more sought consolation in quiet,
personal religion, making their confessions if they were Catholic, as
were so many from the big industrial cities of the north and east
where the divisions recruited, or simply retreating into
prayer. One of those who prayed most fervently was the commander
of the All American,
Matthew
Ridgway,
handsome features and soldierly bearing concealed a nature of the
