90
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
number were injured on impact. In one party of a hundred men
assembled by the S-3 staff officer of the goist, a quarter had sprains
or breaks. Some were far too seriously hurt to move. Private Robert
Barger, ironically medical-aid man in General Maxwell Taylor's
party, unintentionally collapsed his canopy while swinging to avoid
tracer on the way down and hit very hard; he sustained a broken
pelvis, cracked hip,
cracked ribs,
broken arms and dislocated
shoulder. Others unintentionally wounded themselves in their haste
to free themselves from
their harness,
cutting their fingers or
slashing through their clothes into flesh. Private Ernest Blanchard,
at Ste Mère-Eglise, realized only after he had got free that he had
sawn off the top of his thumb in the process.
But the sensation which afflicted all, hurt or whole, senior officer
or junior private, was that of intense and unnerving loneliness.
Almost everyone could see and hear the sounds and sights of battle,
close at hand or far away. A few, who had studied their maps
particularly hard and had had the luck to be dropped in the right
place, could tell where they were (Colonel Timmes, commanding
the and/goth was one of these). The majority were lost, lonely and
afraid. The cloud bank, which had broken the careful approach run
of the aircraft, scattered the serials all over the south of the Cotentin,
carried them far from the beacons which the pathfinders had set up
to mark the dropping zones, and encouraged so manv pilots to flash
green light at speeds faster than those normal for jumping, was the
cause of a dispersal far wider than the airborne planners had feared
in their 'worst case' appreciations. Only two of the six
parachute regiments - sogth, sienificantly a repiment which had
worked with its Troop Carrier Group, the 3zoth, since its first
operation in Sicily a year before, and sooth - achieved 'good' drops,
that is, the delivery of most of their men to the right zones (D7s 'O'
and C* at the right time. Two others, so8th and gorth, had very
bad drops, the former because it was scattered almost all over the
peninsula, the latter because most of its men, though dropped
tightly bunched and close to their zone (DZ N), fell into the
inundations along the Merderet. The last two regiments, forst and
so2nd, had mixed fortunes. In each, one of the battalions was
dropped well, but the other two were scattered and had to spend
hours or even days piecing themselves together.
This piecing together, with which all parachute operations began,
was in theory simple. A drill, called 'rolling up the stick' taught the
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
91
soldiers who had jumped first to note the direction of the 'aircraft
siream' as soon as they landed and to follow it, the soldiers dropped
last to move against its direction and the soldiers in the middle of the
stick to stand firm until the two ends met them. But the dispersion of
the aircraft serials on this nicht lete no aircraft stream' for the
jumpers to observe. Because many of the pathfinders had been
dropped in the wrong place or had been attacked by the defending
Germans, there were few homing beacons for the main bodies to
form on. And the battalions own marshalling parties found them-
selves often in the wrong place or without the equipment they
needed to call the sticks in: the znd/sooth, which rallied on a green
electric lantern and a large bronze bell, lost both in the marshes.
Gathering therefore dependede on luck, leadership and the wil
lingness of thousands of isolated individuals to brave the darkness
and look for each other. Some - in what number we shall never know
- could not bring themselves to do so, or soon gave up. Corporal
Kermit Latta of the 377th Artillery confessed that, on failing to find
another American, he 'wandered about in the shadows for an hour,
took a drink from a padd et et anant water, tound a deep ditch
covered with bushes and went to sleep'.
John Urbank, a mortar platoon-sergeant in the 3rd/ forst, 'strolled
around in the darkness for latoon-se and couldn't find anybody. By
then I was dog tired and so, being the country boy that I am, I found
a stand of wheat, walked so I wouldn't beat a path into it, curled up
under my innocence and slept until dawn?
Even when a lonely
paratrooper made contact with another, sleep might still supervene.
Sherwood Trotter, a machine-gunner in the ist/ go6th, landed alone,
eventually located a buddy with uns cricket (the child's cracker toy all
Screaming Eagles had been given) and then picked up another nine
or ten men.
We were headed in the general direction of what sounded like a
real battle. About daylight we got into a small skirmish with
our first Krauts. They were behind one hedgerow and we were
across the fields behind another.
Within a short time,
broke off the engagement and disappeared. We relaxed and the
next thing we knew there were two GIs standing on top of the
hedgerow looking down at us. Everyone of us had fallen asleep
and slept for the next two hours. 18
Even soldiers collected by a sunerior _ and the need to collect was
