28
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
great
programme
of national rearmament.
He had committed
American diplomacy to a policy of 'all aid short of war' for Britain
and of 'much aid' to Russia and China. But 'short of war' was his
sticking point.
It was not that, like Hitler the year before, of
Schlieffen two generations earlier, he was seeking some antidote to
the danger of fighting a war simultaneously on two fronts, east and
west. He was seeking on the contrary to avoid war altogether, hoping
that by the 'demonstration of his determination to mobilise and use
America's enormous war potential... Ihel might save Britain, deter
Japan and make
war unnecessary'. But to play that game of
deterrence and dissuasion, he needed to manoeuvre day by day
between enemies. friends and neutrals with a freedom, as much
emotional as political, he could not hope to enjoy if admirals or
generals stood at his elbow ready to warn that today's diplomatic
concession vitiated yesterday's strategic
decision
tomorrow's
balf-promise would compromise neyt week's binding commitment.
This is a period of flux. I want no authorisation for what may
happen bevond July ist. 104I'. he had told Unny, the Secretary of
the Navy, late in 1940, but he had withheld all authorization far
beyond that date. even though by December toat his position at
home had been secured by his second re-election and Rritain's acute
predicament much eased by Hitler's attack on Russia.
Presented with a series of strategic proposals - Admiral Stark's Plan
Dog of November 1940, which put the 'Atlantic First' and prefigured
Rainbow 5, Rainbow 5 itself and its inter-Allied version,
he had done no more than 'familiarize' himself with their contents
meanwhile withholding both approval and disapproval The cleares
glimpse - and it was no more than a glimpse - that he had given o
his strateoir inclinations - and they wers no more than inclinations
had come in a meeting with his "War Council an informal assembly
of the Secretaries of State for War and of the Nauv and the two chief
of staff, at the White House on January r6th, 194I.
discounted the 'worst case'
- concerted action by
Germany and
Japan - at 'one in five' but revealed that if it materialized, at the
outset he would stand on the defensive in the Pacific seek to do no
more than safeguard convoys in the Atlantic but,
maintain aid to Britain. As for the army's mission, it should not b
committed to any offensive until fully prepared to undertake it. In
the interim, he suggested, it might 'assist to a moderate degree in
backing up friendly Latin American overmanto against
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
inspired fifth column movements'.
29
would not be won in the jungles of Paraguay. If such a thought
crossed his mind he kept it to himself, and continued to fret for lack
of direction all through the spring and summer of 1941. Eventually
in June he decided that the President's withholding
approval' from Rainbow 5/ABC-1 implied, if not approval of the
plans themselves, then at least permission to transform their broad
outlines into detailed provisions.
The necessary work,
however,
proceeded so slowly through the mutual misunderstanding and
jealousies of War Plans Divisions, General Headquarters and the
G-Divisions, particularly G-4, that the day of Pearl Harbor found
little prepared that was concrete. War Plans Division numbered only
thirty-nine officers on December 7th, 194I and the time of many of
them was consumed in day-to-day trivia.
But the crisis demanded
action. The United States at war, above all the United States at bay,
expected not some ponderous, slowly unwinding strategic response,
but last-man and last-round defence where the enemy was strongest
and instantaneous and ferocious attack at his points of weakness. So
let the Philippines, Guam, Wake, be held at all costs. And let Points X.
Y, and Z be attacked at once with every man who could hold a gun.
But where
were Points X, Y and Z? Where was
the enemy
vulnerable? Not - spare the President's springtime illusions - in
Latin America. Not in Iceland, which he had sent American troops
to garrison under his 'short of war' policy in July. And certainly not
in iron-bound, bayonet-studded Europe. Where else then? Suddenly
the fruit of the years of 'pure staff thinking', all the theoretical plans
written in the academic spirit so carefully cultivated at Command
and General Staff College,
were at a premium, as the veterans of
War Plans Division and a flood of recalled reservists scrabbled to
produce anything which would stand up to the rigour of proper
military analysis
Enemy Forces,
Friendly Forces,
Assumptions, Mission, Execution,
Administration and Logistics,
Command. It was this activity which confronted Stilwell on his
arrival in Washington.
I find there is no basic strategic study in
existence
[he
confided to his diary]. For instance, shall we now go to work
and prepare seriously for war ... or shall we attempt to take
the offensive? ... There is tremendous pressure to do some-
