274
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Americans advancing from the south and the Poles descending from
the north reached out to touch each other.
Maczek had now divided his command into two. Towards the
high ground east of Chambois, separating and dominating the roads
from it to
Vimoutiers,
Regiment, Podolian,
he detached his ist and and Armoured
anti-tank
8th and gth Light Infantry battalions and an
Towards Chambois itself he launched the 24th
Lancers and the roth Dragoons in their half-tracks with the rest of
the divisional anti-tank
guns. Each group had orders to seize and
hold. The second, under the staff of the toth Cavalry Brigade,
departed from its start line near Trun in early afternoon. The roth
Mounted Rifles joined as brigade reserve.
Almost immediately the advance noint bumped some Panthe
tanks but, taken by surprise, the Germans were quickly overcome. A
the Ioth Dragoons
hot afternoon of deadly, small-scale fighting followed, the infantry of
dismounting from their half-tracks time and
again to engage small pockets of resistance, while the Lancer tank
worked round the flank to take the enemy in rear.
'From our hill',
the Poles fire support,
recorded a French-Canadian officer of an artillery regiment giving
'there was a panoramic view of the combat
St Lambert and Chambois.
zone. At our feet the battle raged for the possession of the villages of
We could see the Shermans advancing,
blazing away with their muns and machine-oune The attacking tank
and infantry exploited the folds in the ground for cover.' At about
4.30 p.m. the leading infantry passed from his sight as they reached
the orchards and hedred enclosures on the outskirts of Chambois
Second-Lientenant Karch. a troon leader in the Dragons' 4th
Sanadron, received orders to enter the village a little hofore co.m.,
for fear of hitting the
Americans,
whose patrols were reported
approaching from the far side, supporting artillery fire was stopped
He decided to leave the road supporting artilehrough the gardens
above Chambois to the east, and so descend upon the centre... We
were able to advance without incidentend upon ambush so many
Germans that my sixty men soon found themselves hampered by
two hundred prisoners. On his right, Lieutenant Kintzi, command-
ing the and Squadron, found the same encumbrance.
The village was delivered to the flames.... Our men winkled
out prisoners from everywhere. In the keep of the old castle
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
275
overlooking the plain alone they captured forty. I was sur-
prised to see them on the tower with their hands raised. It
would have been simple to fire on us as we approached. One of
the prisoners later gave me the explanation for his conduct.
They knew who their opponents were and were terrified of
reprisals.
Karcz, consigning his prisoners rearward, pressed on.
Working
through the orchards, he reached the road which entered the village
from Vimoutiers and had a short battle with a German machine-
gunner, in which he was slightly wounded. The eastern approach
secure, he despatched a runner to make contact with
squadron at the western end and moved towards the centre.
•The
place was on fire', he recalled later. "The roads leading to it and the
side streets were jammed with German armour already alight or
smouldering, enemy corpses and a host of wounded soldiers.
civilians were to be seen.'8
shouted news of the approach of a battalion of enemy infantry
Suddenly his second-in-command
attacking across the fields in open order,
800 yards away. Karcz
radioed for immediate reinforcemente denloved what men he had to
defend the village against recapture and had rapid fire opened on the
At once it stopped and went to cover, from which after a moment
white flags were waved. Karez wondered whether he was about to
add to his bae of prisoners Then signs were made for a parley. As
the group approached his lines under a white
embarrassment grew in Karez's breast.
The soldiers' helmets, so
clearly German at a distance, changed silhouette
shortened. Suddenly he could mistake them no longer.
They were
'Feeling rather crestfallen I jumped onto the road and waved my
hand. An American captain ran towards me, and, still running,
caught hold of me and lifted me in the air as if I had been a child it
That was the precise moment when the Falaise Pocket was closed. It
was nearly 1800 hours and the American's name was L. E.
The Mace
The American advance, undertaken by the goth Infantry Division
and the and Free French Armoured Division, had also been made in
