40
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
was undergoing and anxious to be briefed on the progress of the
current German offensive. Molotov had a terrible tale to tell. White
Russia and the western Ukraine had, of course, been lost in the
previous year, the eastern Ukraine since the recent spring.
losses of territory had transferred to the German war economy the
use of do per cent of Russia's coalfields, 60 per cent of her iron-ore
fields and 20 per cent of her wheatlands. The German advance
towards Stalingrad and the mountains of the Caucasus presently
threatened the loss of her Caspian oilfields, without which she could
not continue the war. Molotov did not reveal the extent of Russian
casualties but the Americans could guess that they already numbered
several million. In fact about five million Ruccian soldiers had thu
far met death or been taken prisoner, the latter fate usually but a
brief postponement of the former. The Germans were now inflicting
further heavy losses in their battle for the Crimea, which they were
about to capture, had bloodily repulsed a Soviet counter-attack at
Kharkov and were walking over whatever Russian forces they met on
the steppe. Roosevelt attempted to keep other issues alive against the
background of these revelations and the unspoken Russian question
of what the United States proposed to do to help - policy towards
Turkey, Iran and Finland, even the desirability of Russia's signing
the 1929 Geneva Convention. But the eastern front kept breaking
through and when, on the last day of the conversations (June ist),
Roosevelt infelicitously raised the pronaeal that Lend_I page ship
ments to Russian ports be reduced from a e to zie million tons over
the coming year so that larger stocks for the Second Grant might be
accumulated in Britain, Molotov's icy politeness cracked Roosevelt
then gave him his cue: ships. Roosevelt said in summarizing his
argument for Lend-Lease reduction could not be in two places a.
once; the Second Front was brought nearer by every ton shipped to
Enoland: the Soviets could not have their cal and eat it
The Second Front. Molotov retorted with inculting logic would
be stronger if the first still stood fact What would happen, he went
on, if Russia made the sacrifices requested and then 'no Second
Front materialized?' The unmistakable tone of his sarcasm outra
the tongue of the translator. He had brought from London ho wen
on, his delivery becoming more forceful, a new treatu of friendship
"What answer', he asked. bathe be to one tool
President's answer with respect to the Second Front?'
on the general question which has been raised? What ta the
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
41
Roosevelt's political success was built on averting the posing of
uncomfortable questions, usually by changing the subject or taking
refuge in secondary issues. Molotov, by his patient consideration of
any stray idea which had crossed the President's mind during the last
week, had exhausted all evasions. Roosevelt now had to answer or
keep silent. Silence was a gift he did not possess.
The Russian
Foreign Minister, he answered, could say that the Western Allies
expected to open a Second Front and that Admiral Mountbatten was
arriving from London the next day to complete the arrangements.
General Marshall would make further
arrangements with Mr
Molotov. And a joint statement, to be published to the world over
the names of Stalin, Churchill and Roosevelt, would be prepared at
once for his approval.
During the next two days the State Department drafted the
appropriate document. A suddenly cautious Marshall demurred at
the specification of 1942 but Molotov was adamant and eventually
wrote the key sentence himself. It read: 'In the course of the
conversations, full understanding was reached with regard to the
urgent tasks of creating a Second Front in Europe in 1942. On June
IIth, at a meeting of the Supreme Soviet in Moscow, news of
Molotov's journey to the Western capitals, together with the full text
of the communiqué he had brought back, were simultaneously
released.
The audience responded with a storm
of enthusiasm
which, for once, was wholly unfeigned.
Marshall
While Molotov had been successfully winning commitments on the
diplomatic front, Marshall had been fighting to hold ground on his
home territory. During April and May he had been deeply perturbed
by the persistent efforts of Admiral King and General MacArthur to
shake the American 'Germany First' strategy.
On March
29th
Admiral King had fired a warning shot with a message to Marshall
which, while conceding the needs of the Pacific to
be 'possibly
smaller than those of Europe', represented them as 'more urgent in
point of time'. On May 4th he stated his case formally to the Joint
Chiefs of Staff in a letter which demanded a decision. Important as
the mounting of Bolero [The American build-up in Britain) may bẻ,
he wrote, the Pacific problem is no less so, and is certainly the more
urgent - it must be faced now... we must not permit diversion of
