38
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
his expert knowledge to point out how short both countries were of
shipping in general and landing-craft in particular, without which
nothing could be attempted.
Brooke, making MacArthur's and
King's case, had warned that Japan's Pacific victories might force the
Western Allies to bend everything to the defence of India and the
Middle East; he also shed doubt on Sledgehammer, showing that no
more than nine divisions could be landed in France in 1942 and that
the Germans could certainly destroy them all it they chose. But late
in the evening the British withdrew the vestiges of their objections.
The Prime Minister assured Marshall that the two nations would
march ahead together 'in a noble brotherhood of arms'. The more
cautious Brooke recorded in his diary a momentous meeting at
which we accepted their proposals for offensive actions in Europe in
Thu perhaps and in 1943 for certain', a compact made explicit by
Churchill three days later in a telegram to Roosevelt;
"our agreed
programme is a crescendo of activity on the continent'. Its receipt in
Washington only just preceded the return of Marshall. who had been
cheered by a call en route on an American advance guard in Northern
Ireland and arrived home confident that they and the millions in the
training camps would soon be at grips with the German army in
recorded with satisfaction: 'Gen. Marshall returned from London
Eisenhower; metteur-en-scène
of Wedemeyer's scenario,
•.. He looks fine. I hope that - at lone last and after months of
committed to one concept of fighting.'
struggle by this [War Plans Division - we are all definitely
Molotov
Eisenhower's hope, like so many emotions of a young friendship,
exaggerated the unselfishnese of the other party. Generosity of spirit
towards the United States flowed stronoly in Britain in 1012. But it
was never unmixed with calculation At his most theatrical churchill
could laugh with his advisers about his transatlantic swept talking
before the United States had ioined tha harem, of hie switch to a
husbandly firmness immediately after. But he had, of course, neve
deluded himself that the United States was a captive bride and he
was still careful to cozen and beguile whito an four A marinan aldiers
and aircraft had actually arrived on his side of the ocean. He retained
realistic doubts about the feasibilitv of Sledgehammer and Round
up, and preferred the operation he had outlined in Washington in
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
39
December 1941, the invasion of French North Africa, codenamed
Gymnast. 'But I had', he wrote, 'to work by influence... to secure
agreed and harmonious action with our cherished Ally, without
whose aid nothing but ruin faced the world. I therefore did not open
any of these alternatives at our meeting on [April] 14?' And Brooke,
already approving Churchill's tactics, supported them all the more
strongly because he believed he had detected in Marshall's position a
cynicism which justified a measure of their own: '[Marshall] has
found King, the American Navy Chief of Staff, is proving more and
more of a drain ... continually calling for land forces to capture...
land bases in the Pacific ... MacArthur in Australia constitutes
another threat. To counter these moves Marshall has started the
European offensive plan ... it is a clever move that fits in with
present political opinion and the desire to help Russia.
Brooke could fall in with Marshall's espousal of a 'Second Front
Now' because it reinforced the westward orientation of American
strategy without, as he saw it, committing Britain to any precise
location or, more important, time-table for the invasion. 'It's earlier
than you think', would have summarized the answer he would have
given Marshall if pressed to name a date, but he did not believe that
the British on April 14th had agreed to anything more than a reading
of the banns. It was with alarm therefore that he heard in mid-May
of a different interpretation of the agreement apparently conveyed
by Roosevelt to Stalin. On April tith the President had cabled an
invitation to Moscow for Molotov,
Russian Minister of Foreign
Affairs, to visit Washington for discussion of a 'very important
military proposal involving use of our armed forces in a manner to
relieve your critical western front'. Stalin had eagerly agreed and on
May zIst,
after an extraordinary flight across
German-occupied
Denmark, Molotov landed in England. The visit was essentially a
passing one, but the Russians sought none the less to wring some
diplomatic profit from it. Simulating a belief that the British were at
one with the Americans in the object of his
Molotov
demanded an announcement of the imminence of the Second Front.
Churchill, however, stonewalled and Molotov was obliged to fly on
to Washington with no more concrete reward for his effort than
Anthony Eden's signature on a twenty-year treaty of friendship. But
in Washington, which he reached on May 29th, he met a more
friendly welcome.
The Americans were acutely sensitive to the ordeal which Russia
