26
German infantry counter-attacking, July 1944
Caen aftor the battle. a British soldier escorte a survivor. July 1oth
207
YEOMEN
OF ENGLAND
88mm guns deployed on the bearing. Choosing individual targets,
the gunners crashed out their first salvoes.
The first tank to be hit was Major Nicholl's. A moment later
Captain Miller's was destroyed. The rear troop of 'B' Squad-
ron, which had responsibility for flank protection, was next
involved. The strength of the opposition came as a swift and
unpleasant surprise.
The land laid waste by the bombers
seemed like a piece of devastated territory which could scarcely
conceal a living thing. Trees were uprooted, fields pitted and
littered with dead cattle, and theoretically nothing could be left
alive on this lunar landscape. Yet suddenly there came evi-
dence (ruefully recalled the Fife and Forfar's historian] that the
enemy was there and very aggressive too.
Twelve tanks, most belonging to 'C' Squadron, had been destroyed
in what to an observer looked like 'a matter of seconds'.
To their
rear, the 23rd Hussars were brought to a stop by the sight of so many
tanks bursting apparently simultaneously into flames. Soon towards
them across the parently sim survivors of the crews, blackened by
smoke and burns and running with the energy of men fleeing a
Von Luck, however caught only the rear of the
Fifes - more
argument from wever cauge officer and they would have got clean
past - and none of the waffl Tanks. Five intact tank squadrons,
hundred Shermans in all, had left Cagny to their rear and were
advancing towards their goal of Bourguébus. He had no
way of
stopping them ohio thorahte now turned to the rest of the front his
Battle Group was suppose to defend. East of Cagny the 'armoured
corridor quickly gave way to hedgerow country, dotted with small
woods, the out-liers of the forest along the Troarn ridge. Here lay
the route through which the Guards Armoured Division,
had emerced from the bi horne heidoehend) and ant into the tracks
of the Lith Armoured Division, was to take in its exploitation of the
offensive. But dotted about in the orchards and enclosures of the
which had
area were isolaott tanks and squads of infantrymen,
survived the bombing and might be activated, von Luck hoped, into
an effective anti-tank screen.
The 22nd Panzer
Regiment,
Panzer's tank regiment, had about nine Mark IVs still battleworthy,
around Frénouville and farther away near Emiéville was the Tiger
company of 503 Heavy Tank Battalion. The crews of the surviving
