178
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
up at comparative leisure. Early on the morning of June 28th,
therefore, the Argylls were ordered to send patrols along the river
bank to Gavrus. At 4 p.m. they reported to the Argyll headquarters
that they had found the bridges undefended - the Odon divided a.
that point and was crossed twice by the same road - and that the rest
of the battalion should follow.
It set off at once through the thick woods lining both banks of
the Odon All-round defence in such country was impossible
The going was vile, and at one place the whole march was held
up for over an hour while the anti-tank guns were manhandled
over a sticky patch. Any well-planned ambush might have
proved fatal; but fortunately there were only a few false alarms
of snipers and the Battalion arrived intact and complete at the
Gavrus bridgehead before dark.3
It had taken them five hours to travel a little over a mile.
The commanding officer. Lieutenant-Colonel Tweedie. had four
rifle companies. each of about 150 men, with which to hold Gavrus
and its bridges: a complicated spatial problem. The two branches o
the river were about 150 yards apart and separated by flat meadow-
The road down
descended a steep escaroment. dogleroed round a mill and a quarry.
in which Tweedie establiched battalion headquarters, ran straight
across the meadows and climbed into Gavrus village through a steep
cutting. From the quarry to the forward edge of the village, marked
as so often in Normandy by the thial hedoes of a cider-apple
Orchard, was about 1,000 vards. Because there were Germans both
to front and rear. the battalion had to be strune out along the whole
distance. The commanding officer's eventual solution of this tricky
tactical situation was to keep one company north of the river, two by
the bridges and the fourth in the village itself. There, after a quiet
night, the Argylls were visited by vario itstra ge Frenchmen, who
claimed to be members of the maquis and to be possessed of vital
information'. They were 'received with the deepest mistrust. Soon
afterwards they received far more sinister despers. At 3.10 p.m.
following a period of calm in which sinister visitorso served to the
front of the battalion and nothing thing add been of rest of igth
Scottish Division to ite rear (the division was weathering a last affort
by the Hitler Youth to out the corridor the right hand corner of
B Company's position in
Gavrus orchard received a fierce and
179
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
sudden attack from fresh German infantry.
It was to be the first of many delivered over the next five hours,
sometimes by infantry, sometimes by tanks, sometimes by the two
arms working together. They belonged to a division which had not
intervened before on the Normandy front, had come all the way
from Poland and had been a long time on the journey. Though the
Argylls could not realize it, they were on the receiving end of an
order which Hitler had given as long ago as June ith and which he
had intended to bring about the defeat of the invasion. On that day,
convinced by the news from Normandy that the armour in place was
too weak to mount the decisive counter-stroke he had long planned
to launch against a landing, he directed that II SS Panzer Corps,
comprising gth and rothS Pander Divisions, should start westward
from the location in Poland where they had been resting
defeating a Russian offensive at Tarnopol in April. The journey was
a return trip for the twensive at s, since they had been brought to the
eastern front from France especially for that mission; but its course
was to be nothing like as smooth as the outward journey. Entrained
on June zath for a passage expected to last under a week, the first
clements reached Lorraine four days later. There, like the divisions
stationed south of the Loire, they found the French railways so
devastated by Allied air attack that the wheeled units were off-loaded
and sent forward by road. But the tanks, with their curiously limited
mobility, had to be left on their flat cars, which, moving by night
and with endless detours, were to take another ten days to reach their
assembly area. Tanks and panzergrenadiers were thus reunited only
after Finsom had ant under way And the counter-stroke for which
Hitler had intended them had therefore to be transmuted into a local
counter-attack of which the Argylls were the first victims.
Much of the rest of 15th
armour to their rear alen folt its weight for Panzer Lehr. and SS
Scottish Division and its supporting
Panzer and ist SS Panzer - the latter a new arrival from Belgium -
also intervened in the battle on June z9th. But no body of men stood
so exposed as the Argylls. They could call on no tanks of their own to
meet the Panthers and Mark IVs of loth SS. They could call down
artillery fire by radio from beyond the river, and it came in plenty
when demanded, but it could not drive off the German tanks.
had therefore to depend upon their own small-arms fire to deter the
panzergrenadiers, and their 6-pounders and Piats to strike at the
German armour. The 6-pounders could punch a hole if positioned to
