186
SIX
ARMIES IN NORMANDY
corners of the Conqueror's city, stopped their ears and shut their
eyes, perhaps believing that no future agony could exceed that which
they had already survived.
They were
On June 3oth General Montgomery had
decreed that Caen must be taken (and the sooner the better, He
clung to his original strategy, that of holding as much German
armour as possible at the Caen end of the battlefield, so as to allow
the Americans a clean punch into their weakened lines south of th
Cotentin.
But he was now anxious that Bradley should make his
punch quickly. 'First US Army', he directed, will pivot on the let
in the Caumont area and swing southwards and eastwards to the
general line Caumont-Vire-Mortain-Fougères', to face, that was
east instead of south. These operations were 'to be carried out witt
the greatest drive and energy and were to begin on July 3rd. Bradley
now had the strength to set the manoeuvre in train. Since Tune 6tl
his forces had risen to fourteen divisions, against which the Germans
on a fifty-mile front could oppose only six, of which three were
forming one division,
remnants mangled in the battle of D-Day - gist, math and 243rd
although only in regimental strength.
265th and 275th another, 352nd a third,
Parachute, 353rd and I7th SS Panzergrenadier,
The intact divisions, grd
had little counter-attack edge. The toth gS armoured in name, ha
were strong, but
no more than the panzergrenadier's standard allotment of a single
armoured battalion. But the terrain, assisted bu skilful inundation,
favoured the defence On the Americans' left the deep valley of the
Vire nudged constrictingly at theiricans lend the German garrison
of St La cat immovably on the junction of all the cade to the south
and east. In the centre the flooded water meadows of the Taute and
the upper Vire, death traps for the parachuests on D-Day morning,
made the ground untankable. On the right a line of stann manded
hills around la Have du Puits was so entrenched and qua dad
that Bradlawa caff dismissed it as a feacibla castor for attaal That
left only a narrow corridor of drv ground in the centre through
to funnel the offensive.
But when measured it proved
so narrow - only a mile and a half at he chome point - that it too
had to be reiected. Bradley pondered hit the bullet and decreed
that the attack would after All have to meant to tana di
Puits, in the full knowledge of its strenath and the prevailing
German policy, enforced by the Führer, of vielding not an inch in
187
YEOMEN OF ENGLAND
Many Americans, it was clear, would die in the effort to break out
of the Cotentin. Their number would increase with every unit and
formation which the Germans were able to shift westwards to
strengthen the la Haye du Puits line. Montgomery had foreseen that
danger - hence his intention to take Caen 'the sooner the better',
since he could guess that Hitler's policy of unyielding defence would
apply equally there and therefore guarantee the continued presence
in and around it of the mass of German armour he had pinned there
since June 6th. This appreciation was correct. On July ist Rund-
stet had signalled OKW from Supreme Headquarters West to
advise that Caen should be evacuated, supporting the view with an
endorsement by Geyr von Schweppenberg, commander of Panzer
Group West. Hiter replied by dismissing both - in Rundstedt's case
with a pourboire of Oak Leaves to his Knight's Cross, for he could
not bring himself to disgrace the old warlord whose sin was cynicism
not disloyalty - and then telexed to Rommel that 'the present lines
are to be held. Any further enemy breakthrough is to be prevented
by tenacious defence or local counter-attacks'.
How seriously his order was taken emerged during the fighting for
Carpiquet on July 4th, when the Queen's Own Rifles of Canada, the
Chaudières and the Fort Garry Horse struggled all day to wrest the
airfield from a garrison later revealed to be no stronger than
young soldiers of the i2th SS Division.
And there were more
of
these fortress-like villages facing the British and Canadians across all
the approach routes to the city,
Franqueville,
Galmanche, Epron, Lebisey, each threatening hours of combat and
dozens of casualties before the ruined suburbs themselves were
reached. Montgomery flinched from the prospect. He had already
been encouraged by Eisenhower in a signal of June 25th to 'make
maximum demands for any air assistance that can possibly be useful
to you'. Now seeing a legitimate opportunity to blast the enemy with
everything we have', he arranged with Sir Arthur Harris to borrow
half of RAF Bomber Command to drop 2,000 tons of bombs on to
the northern outskirts of Caen.
In the planning of the bombardment, however, the risk of blasting
the Allied infantry as a by-product of blasting the enemy made itself
strongly apparent to the joint air-ground staff at Montgomery's
headquarters and an adjustment was made to the target
Originally drawn to overlay the chain of defended villages;
its
boundary
was pushed southwards to move the
'bomb line' an
