244
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
insubordination (and came increasingly to suspect treachery. When
things went right, as they did during the Kharkov counter-offensive
of 1942 or the sealing-off of the Anzio landing on January 1gth,
11944, his trust in his 'operational' judgment grew. Because of his
insistence on rigid defence, he in practice met little call to exercise
his powers of quick decision, since the inevitable collapse of the
fronts he refused to adjust led to situations too fluid for him to
influence. But he continued to believe that he possessed 'operational'
ability, and would make the decisive intervention when circum-
stances presented it. The break-through at Avranches was just such
an occasion.
But Kluge's talent, too, was operativ; he was one of the Wehr-
macht's great battlefield commanders, an ex-paladin of the Eastern
Front. And when he came to discuss Hitler's alarming new order
with the emissary, Warlimont,
he declared that he had of course
detected the same opportunity at Avranches as the Führer saw, but,
believing that it would yield no more than the time and tactical
advantage necessary to disengage Army Group B from the line of
battle and retreat into the interior, he had dismissed it from his
mind, since he knew that a retreat would be forbidden. If, however,
Hitler was now ready to sanction the movement of armour from the
eastern end of the bridgehead, opposite the British, to the western,
in order to strike at the Americans, he would of course issue the
necessary orders. But it would be on the understanding, for his part,
that the object was to restore the front for just as long as
necessary for a new line of defence to be completed nearer the
German frontier.
- for two reasons.
That was not. however an idea which he could diccuss with Hitler
battlefield commander could risk surreating retreat. dichonoured in
was general. Since July zoth no
Hitler's eyes, his generals could now only demonstrate their loyalty
to the regime by unswerving obediencely orders. The second was
personal. Kluge himself had had foreknowledge of the plot, was to
some extent implicated in it, and keen let his complicity must
eventually leak out; in fact, i, hint knew thalready been extracted
from a member of the inner circle on August Ist. He was therefore
condemned to
super-loyalist
for the
preservation. The ambiguity of his alisition was to have bizarre
results. He now pressed on at all sp position wes mounting of the
which entailed the concentration near Avranches of four
THE HONOUR OF THE GERMAN ARMY
245
divisions, r6th, and, and SS and ist SS Panzer Divisions, the last
of which had to come clear across the front from its battle station
Opposite the British at Caen. By August 6th they were in position
just east of Mortain and ready to move off to the assault under the
cover of darkness. During the day, however, Kluge was
called
several times to the telephone to hear Hitler, who now spoke not of
accelerating the counter-offensive - hitherto apparently his only
thought - but of actually delaying it. Other panzer divisions were on
the way from the south of France, he explained - the gth, which he
had promised to Kluge on July 27th, and the fith, which had not yet
begun to move. To those he also wanted to add the weight of the
9th and toth SS and so, with eight panzer divisions in line abreast,
inflict on the Allies a defeat from which they would not recover.
operation, after all, was codenamed Lüttich (Liège), the place at
which Ludendorff in August 1914 had, exactly thirty years before to
that day, opened the way for the great German march of encircle-
ment across the rear of the French army. It was an
'operational'
coincidence too striking to be missed, a portent too fortuitous to
bode anything but good for the outcome of his own great counter-
Four days earlier Kluge would have welcomed the news both of
the reinforcement and of the postponement. Now he une obliged to
argue for the same urgency which Hitler had wished upon him in the
initial directive. The tactical situation had changed, and much for
the worse. American spearheade were driving towards Le Mans, fa
to his south, threatening an ever wider envelopment of the whole o
his force; the British were pressing so hard at Caumont,
Caen, that any disengagement of oth and loth SS was unthinkable
His own preparations vemento advanced that they could not now
easily be cancelled. An he had good reason to suspect that the Allies
had scented his intentions Should that be the case, anv delay would
ensure that their air toons. - for all that the Luftwaffe had promised
300 fighters to protect the panzer spearheads - would catch his tanks
in their concentration areas and destroy them.
His suspicions fell short of actuality.
The Allies had not scented,
but documented his intentions.
On the night of August 5th-6th
Ultra, product of the decrypt service at Bletchley,
Montgomery and Bradley to the movement of the panzer
westward. At midnight on August 6th-7th, as the attack begans
Ultra was forwarding to France the timings of the attack and its
