SIX
ARMIES IN
NORMANDY
dropped and that they could not for the time being hope to function
as a divisional headquarters,
Taylor decided, 'It remains for us to
help the 4th Infantry Division in every way possible, and gave
orders for the party to march to capture Pouppeville. A few
specialists were left to man a skeleton command post.
The rest, with
the generals in the van, marched off towards Pouppeville. It was
about 6 a.m. and they numbered about eighty.
They had about three miles to cover and their route lay first across
country. When they found the road into Pouppeville they also began
to draw enemy fire from scattered outposts in the ditches and fields,
but pressed on to reach the outskirts of the village at about 9 a.m.
The party now numbered about 150, having picked up stragglers
during its approach march, but only 40 were combat infantrymen.
The headquarters personnel were to prove an encumbrance in the
coming fight.
Some, indeed,
asleep on the start line from
nervous anticipation as they waited for the order to attack. It came as
the first salvoes of onshore bombardment from the invasion fleet
impacted. The parachutists advanced to discover that the landward
edge of the village was covered by a network of trenches, but that
these had been abandoned by the Germans, who were hiding in the
houses of the village itself. They were not numerous but willing to
fight and not only shot accurately as the Americans broke from one
Place of cover to another but pushed fire groups out to take them in
flank. Major Legere, General Taylor's assistant operations officer,
was badly wounded in the leg in the village street, Colonel Ewell was
hit on the helmet, and a lieutenant and a private were killed as they
tried to work their way forward.
bounced off the side of the window he was trying to throw it through
casualty to one of his own men,
General Taylor almost became a
who mis-threw a grenade which
and exploded by their position. By relentless pressure during three
hours of skirmishing, however, the parachutists drove the Germans
from one house to another until only the village chool remained in
their hands. A bazooka was found to bring it under fire and after a
few shots a German officer ran out. Ewell shot at him but missed.
He was trying to offer surrender. When the facts were established he
called out the rest of his men to surrender. They numbered 38, the
survivors of an original garrison of 630. The Americans had lost 6
dead and 12 wounded.
A few more Germans were observed running along the causeway
towards the beach and a party was sent after them.
The fugitives
113
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
were found hiding under a small bridge and summoned to surren-
der. As they filed out, more movement was observed nearer the sea.
A tank appeared. The Senior American present, Lieutenant Luther
Knowlton, was asked by his sergeant if it was German. 'Damned if I
know; said Knowlton. 'To hell with it, I'm firing, ' said the sergeant.
The patter of his shots on its armour brought it to a halt. An orange
recognition panel was displayed from behind its turret hatch. It was
an American Sherman. Knowlton threw an orange smoke grenade in
reply and it ground forward to make contact. In its wake a line of
it range flags showed above the lip of the roadside ditch, waved
by American infantrymen who had also made their way up from the
beach. They belonged to the and Battalion, 8th Infantry Regiment
of the 4th Division and their officer, Captain George Mabrey,
walked forward the 200 yards which separated the two invasion
forces, airborne and seaborne, to shake Knowlton's hand and clasp
him in embrace. This element of the Overlord plan had worked
almost to perfection.
As the tanks and infantry of the 4th Division began to file through
Pupperile, they passed General Taylor standing in the village
street to watch them through. "The invasion is succeeding', he told
Colonel Higgins. We don't have to worry about the causeways. Now
We can think about the next move. He had to think of strengthening
his road blocks at Ste Mère-Eglise, securing the bridgeheads across
the Douve which would give access to the Omaha hinterland, and
opening and holding the causeway across the Merderet
to the
positions of the 82nd in the interior of the Cotentin. There were days
of hard fighting ahead, and it would be harder still in Ridgway's
divisional area, where Ste Mere-Eglise would be counter-attacked
heavily next day and German strongpoints continue to hold out
within the landing zones across the Merderet until June
Throughout those days and until long afterwards, the
lost and
scattered parachutists of both divisions would continue to find their
way back to the now solidifying perimeter. One group 33 strong was
adrift 14 days before coming in, and lost 2g of its members in daily
skirmishes while coming in; another was lost for 17 days; some
groups, dropped as much as 25 miles south of their assembly points,
deep within enemy-held Normandy, were never heard of again. But
Taylor's snap judgment was nevertheless the right one.
For all its
wastefulness, the airborne descent on the margin of the Utah Beach
was a success. The very extent of its scatter,
for all that it was
