270
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
all. Next year in Warsaw? The Return is not difficult for individuals.
Vindictiveness has ceased to be
the
policy of the communist
government. The Poles of the West come and go with little concern
or formality. The fires of the army-in-exile have sunk into embers
How fiercely they burnt in August 1944. Each soldier of the ist
Armoured Division wore as a symbol on his sleeve a miniature of the
high feathered crest
which had nodded over the helmets of the
knights of the Polish kingdom in its great campaigning days. Kiev
had been Polish then. as it bad sain for a moment in 1020, and
Polish garrison had once even wintered in the Moscow Kremlin. No
Pole doubted the military prowess of his country or that the disaster
of 1030 had been an aberration aradused by Russian tasshary and
temporary German technical superiority.
Technically they were now
the Germans' match and they bad already thrown their tanks agains
German infantry north of Falaise with all the verve shown by the
German nanzere an theie territory five vaare botan mt Lad noid a
lost twenty-six
price. At St Aignan-de-Cramesnil the and Armoured Regiment had
tanks in a desperate fight with the Hitler Youth
Division, nine to a single 88mm gun.
But the plentiful maw of
Allied coutamant regeruad had conladad tha matt nualties
could now be made good from the canine Poles resident in the
Warthegau and Danzig-West Prussia contrinted into the Wehr
macht and taken prisoner in France.
The episode had also taught
prudence. Maczek had warned that, while losses must be borne, thes
were not to be suffered merely for effect.
So eager were his soldiers for the honour of closing the gap,
however, that when Montoomerv's order to denart saached them of
the evening of August 17th, effectiveder to dep next day, the units
detailed to form the Doint _ the and Armoured Recimant carrying
waiting for their re-supply of fuel and ammunition.
Their route lay
almost due south from their start in ammunitof Falaise, and was
angled to cross the last two roads out of the socket still in German
hands, both of which led from the briot the por the Dives at Trul
and Chambois to Vimoutiers. The Polesges overy athwart the grain
in Normandy.
in the country, here as thickly wooded an router aly contoured as any
The Pays d'Auge, home of the Camembert - the
Village where Madame Harel inventhome of the Camheese lay just
to the left of the divicional avie ie the mant abria. saned
all the Normandy landeranes and line taste nails. nius
38
Ceneral Maczek
Commander of the lct Polish Armoured
Division, with Montgomery in Normandy
