200
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
soldiers around the bridge at Bénouville, the target of the D-Day
coup de main, who were 'comfortably housed in the old shell of the
6th Airborne Division's discarded gliders - washing was hung out on
the lines between crashed planes and the now returning French
peasants were cleaning among the heaps of twisted aluminium',
Ahead 'tanks were passing us on a taped track as we drove alongside
on the road. We drove down and over a canal bridge and up the step.
side beyond. Notices everywhere "Dust brings shells" - it did.
Others, "Tracks Left", "Bridge Class 40". Up the hill, the ominous
notice saying simply "Mines" ? The mines were British and the plan
required fourteen gaps to have been cleared through them. The
senior officers of zoth Armoured Brigade, whose vehicles when
deployed covered a square mile of ground, wondered how quickly
allotment.
they could funnel them through the three gans which were thei
Bombardment
At about i a.m. on June 18th, zoth Armoured Brigade reached its
start line and the tank crews. tired hu two davs on the road, though
of sleep. H-Hour was 7•45 a.m. Long before that moment, even the
heaviest sleepers had
woken. 'For at osoo', wrote a Grenadier
waiting across the Orne,
a distant thunder in the air braucht all the aleenu-eved tank
crews out of their blankets. A thousand Lancasters were flying
in from the sea in groups of three or four at 2.000 feet. Ahead
of them the pathfinders were scattering their flares and before
long the first bombs were dropping. After a few minutes the
area was a turmoil of dust and smoke with the Ack Ack tracer
soaring above. Occasionally
an
swaying leaf, flaming to the ground.
aircraft would fall like a
anti-aircraft batteries,
Only six were eventually counted to have fallen to the German
which themselves
attack from the artillery of the corps and divisional artilleries, about
were under devastating
400 guns in all. supported by the fire of two cruisere and the
venerable monitor HMS Roberts, whose monstrous 15-inch pieces
had last been in action at the Rattle of Tutland Heavy bombardment
from the sea was the experience the Germans had learnt to dread
most since June 6th. Rut neither they nor anu other collars who had
ever lived had stood:. the way of the huricane of hich-explosive
201
YEOMEN OF ENGLAND
which now blew down from the Lancasters upon the shoulders of the
armoured corridor' and the defended villages on its floor.
A company of the 2znd Panzer Regiment of 21st Panzer Division
was located in the left-hand shoulder target area, directly under the
heaviest of the bombing, and one of its tank wireless operators,
Werner Kortenhaus, described the agonizing ordeal. It had begun,
i or the British, with shri droning of approaching bomber squad-
ron, what a Welsh Guardsman had heard as a faint and steady hum
- growing into an insistent throbbing roar until the whole northern
sky was filled with aeroplanes as far as one could see - wave upon
wave, stepped up one above the other and spreading out east and
West until it seemed there was no room for any more'. The sight and
sound had brought all the Guardsmen out of their vehicles staring in
awed wonder'. In Kortenhaus's company the warning noise had the
opposite effect. The men got into the tanks and closed the flaps, or
crawled underneath for protection. We saw little dots detach them-
selves from the planes proteche other side the Welsh Guards saw
hundreds of little black clouds puffing round the bombers as they
droned inexorably towar clouder targets), so many of them that the
crazy thought occurred to us; are those leaflets? We could hardly
believe that they could ato us, are then began the most terrifying
hours of our lives. It was a bomb carpet, regularly ploughing up the
ground. Among the wasader of the explosions, we could hear the
wounded scream and the insane howling of men who had been
driven mad.*
Mad' was no exaggeration. In Captain von Rosen's company of
503rd Heavy Tank
Battalion, a neighbouring unit to
tenhaus's, one man was driven
insane from the effects of the
bombs' and two more, unable to stand the terrible apprehension of
waiting for whammere, unable to vitable, committed suicide during
the course of the bombardment. Fifteen of the company's comple-
ment of a hundred were killed, either by fragments or by blast,
which was strong enough to turn one of the company's Tigers,
weighing sixty tons, upside down. Three others were destroyed. In
Kortenhaus's company the lighter Mark IV's were bounced up
and down by the roll of concussion and later, when the storm had
passed on to engulf the panzer battalions on the floor of the corridor.
the surviving tanks had to be dug out with bare hands from the
mounds of soil which had been thrown up round them.
opening in the hulls had been clogged with earth - gun-muzzles, air
