KEY
Armoured division
British front, morning July 18th, 1944
German front, evening July 20th, 1944
7, Allied forces
272, German forces
Ranville
ie Bavent
Escoville
Ste Honorine-
lombelles *la-Chardonnerette
Cuverville
Touffreville
Giberville
Sannerville e
• Démouville
Mondeville
110
Manneville
Cuillerville •
le Mesnil. Frémentel
Emiéville
Fleury-sur-Orne
2 Cdr
St Martin-de Fontenay
272
• 2 (Gp)
Verrières
• May-sur-Orne
Grentheville
Bras
le Poirier •X E
Soles, D
3 Cdn
Hubert-Folie •
Bourguébus
....!
SISS
Tilly-la-Campagne
• la Hogue
1012 SS
ouville
Rocquancourt
• Garcelles-Secqueville
St Aignan-de-Cramesnil
St Sylvain
retteville-sur-Laize
Map 5 Operation Goodwood, July 18th-19th, 1944
185
YEOMEN OF ENGLAND
of the bombarding force were constantly called on to lay down fire
on the city. 'Interdicting fire' was the technical term, designed to
deny the use of the routes through the city to the enemy. But most of
the routes were already impassable and the shelling merely added to
the destruction. On June gth the spire of the church of St Pierre, to
which Pugin had brought fellow Gothic Revivalists to study
original in its most perfect form, was hit by a shell from HMS
Rodney fourteen miles offshore, and felled. Sixteen direct hits struck
the near-by convent of le Bon Sauveur, a mental hospital in which
400 nuns cared in normal times for 1,500 women patients. Their
number was swelled in the first week of the invasion by 4,000
refugees who believed that its status would protect them from
bombardment. When the shelling continued the Mother Superior
led the occupants in a mass exodus from the city. The sane found
refuge with the 10,000 other fugitives who had taken shelter in the
caves of Fleury, from which Caen stone had been quarried by the
Norman kings for Westminster Abbey and the Tower of London.
The nuns' charges, the senile, the demented, the congenitally
insane, were led in a straggling column, the Blessed Sacrament at its
head, westward along the line of the fighting towards the daughter
house at Pont l'Abbé, forty miles distant in the Cotentin. Blundering
at times into the ragged and indistinct no man's land which separated
Germans from Americans, and shocking both into unofficial armis
tice by their macabre ints, ion from a third world of the mind, these
aliens were at last got to safety.
Behind them le Bon Sauveur burned to the gable-line. But still
there were Caennais who refused to leave - those who dared not,
those whose property held them more fiercely than the fear of death
repelled them, those bound by responsibility to others who could or
would not move. There were still nuns, priests, doctors and teachers
in the city on July 6th, many attending the inert crowd of a thousand
homeless who had camped on the flagstones of William's abbey
church of St Etienne, eerily untouched among the surrounding acres
of devastation. On June 29th the Germans, expecting hourly a final
assault on the city, had ordered their evacuation, together with the
occupants of the Lycée Malherbe - that severe classical spirit too was
a Caennais - and the sick and wounded who had been reaccommo-
dated in the cellars of le Bon Sauveur. The hour passing,
relented, though urging everyone to go while there was still time.
Some had heeded the warning. But thousands, hidden in the broken
