198
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
gun which made it a match for the Mark IV Panzer and the Panther.
And it was comfortable to live in. The five men who made up its
crew - commander, who was trained to ride standing with his head
out of the turret hatch; gunner, who sat by his right leg with his eye
close to the rubber-padded telescope of his gunsight; loader/
operator, who 'netted in' the radio to the frequency of the other three
tanks in the troon or to that of the regiment for talk to the rear, an
otherwise manhandled the heavy brass-cased shells into the breed
and the empties out; driver, a level below them in the bow of the
tank: and co-driver-machine-gunner at his side - looked on the
tank as home. In the snaces between the ammunition they stowed
socks, cleanino-bags, letters from home and all the canned food. tea
and ciorattes that smooth talk and light fingers could win from th
lines of supply. Illegally, they would licht solid-fuel cookers on the
tank's floor in quiet moments to produce stew or hot chocolate and,
when the around was dry enough to secure that the tracke would not
sink in during the night, they
would sleep under it in summer,
wrapped in the tarpaulin covers of the engine hatches.
These
looked with
comforts and the tank's thick walls endeared it to the troopers, who
them squealing like rabbits when the machine-guns caught then
pity on the shelterless infantrymen.
'You could hear
"They couldn't touch us.
round our tanire, a sergeant of and Paul Tank Paniment recalled.
there weren't many of them.'
There was only one thing that could and
The 'one thing' was the high-velocity, armour-piercing shot fired
(anti-tank units).
by another tank's pun or the specialized weapons of the Panzeriäge
But, when such a round hit solidly
effects were instantaneously horrible. At best. if the shot lodged but
did not penetrate, the blow to the face of the armour detached
high-speed fragments from its rear into the interior, which inflicted
multiple small wounds on the crew. If the shot penetrated, it would
retain some of its velocity but be confined by the armoured skin and
worst, it
so ricochet shout inside smashing all it touched matal or flesh. A
would ignite ammunition and fuel - which first wa
immaterial since the burnt torether - incineratino whoever coule
not reach the hatch.
Tanks burn in a way that has its own grotesque poignancy.
The flames are explosively fierce and vet are tightly contained
in the hollow steel shell: so, the seokee rushed out with
199
YEOMEN OF ENGLAND
tumbling fury ... From the turret, black smoke alternating
with intense flame thunders forth in a monstrous jet. But then
from time to time the smoke is forced into huge expelled puffs
by the exploding shells within. Each black puff, from the
circular turret hatch becomes with grotesque perfection a
rolling smoke ring. Such a smoke ring we associate with quiet
reflective moments - old men showing their skill with a pipe in
the chimney corner, to admiring children. The perfect black
smoke ring shooting up from a burning tank suggested some
grotesque devil's game in the thing, a derisory joke of the
fiends, over dying men. A burning tank, because of this,
looked like a monster, a dying dragon, vomiting up the life
within it in black gouts, and blowing aloft ghostly rings which
mounted, curling in on themselves, high into the air. Beneath
these sad signals, a red and white glower would roll in the eyes
of the dead monster, the hatch holes, through which the crew
had entered, never to emerge again.?
All crews, whatever sang-froid they cultivated, lived with the know-
ledge of their tanks dual nature - preserver and destroyer. Many in
3td Royal Tank Regiment had had tanks shot underneath them:
drivers had escaped iron beneath a shambled turret, commanders
had jumped clear of a flaming hull. Some whole crews could think
with gratitude of an old friend which had lost its track to a winging
round or absorbed a killer in the body and let them get safely away;
but they were in the minority. So there was a flicker of anprehension
in all the armoured regiments of the three divisions - 7th,
and, leading, tith - as they jostled their way down to the bridges of
the Orne. Each contained 3,500 vehicles and, although much of the
wheeled transport was no to cross until later, it was imperative to
pass over the river the 300 White half-tracks of the motor battalions,
the infantry's 68o tracked carriers and the 87o fighting tanks, on time
and in the right order. Each of the three pairs of bridges was fed by
two lanes, one for wheels, one for tracks,
and all movement
forward. No return burns, were allowed. First across on the night
of June i7th was the tanky brigade - Zgth Armoured - of the rith
Armoured Division. The Guards and the 7th waited on the west
bank for the is to the Guarde mbly area and move through the
gaps which had been cleared in the defensive minefields.
Following
the frant columes a troop leader of the Hount la Carley nassed
