118
SIX ARMIES IN
NORMANDY
driven the Canadian Pacific from coast to coast, strung the beads of
shanty townships along its unifying thread, pushed the frontier of
settlement to the edge of the permafrost and yet, however sharp the
goad of poverty or intolerance which had driven them from home,
volunteered in
their hundreds of thousands to make the return
journey in khaki and, in their tens of thousands, die for King George
in the trenches round Ypres or on the long downland slopes beyond
Arras.
There was another, older Canada. It too had powerful military
traditions - of settlement by the Régiment de Carignan-Salières,
fresh from victory over the Turks at St Gotthard in 1664, of endemic
warfare against the great Iroquois confederation, of Frontenac's
daring excursions into British America, of the triumphant defence of
Quebec against the British in the War of the English Succession. But
the central and abiding element of the tradition was threnodic.
French Canada lived with the memory of Montcalm's defeat by
Wolfe at the gates of Quebec in 1759, which, like Victor Emmanuel's
defeat of the papal army at the Porta Pia in Rome in i870 - there
were French Canadians among the Pontifical Zouaves - had not
merely imposed an alien sovereignty on a Catholic patrimony but
had driven its leaders and subjects into a self-imposed internal exile.
French Canada, in its heart, had never accepted the severance of the
link with France. But equally French Canadians shunned association
with the
French of
Third Republic. They too
rejected a
revolution and, through their loyalty to a clerical church, semi-
feudal society and narrow provincial patriotism, had isolated them-
selves both from their conquerors and from their historic homeland.
The outbreak of war in Iota therefore presented their leaders with
an exquisite dilemma.
'Je me souviens' is the motto of Quebec
Province, and the memory is rich in associations with the land and
civilization of Old France, which the German invasion of August
and September violated both in fact and spirit. Memory's stirrings
were powerful enough in the circumstances to tempt politicians and
churchmen alike in Quebec to overcome their distaste both for the
Godless republic and the protestant empire and encourage French
Canadians to volunteer. And the men were thete. French Canada
had not been immune to the volunteering impulse of the 186os, and
there were numerous French-Canadian battalions of militia - like the
Carabiniers de Mont-Royal, the Battalions of Joliette, St Hyacinthe
and Trois-Rivières - from
might have
been drawn the
119
CANADA: TO THE SOUTH SHORE
nucleus of a powerful increment to the Canadian Imperial Force.
But the bigotry of the Scottish and Orange Presbyterians who
dominated the Canadian defence establishment determined that that
should not be. Their decision had dissolved the old battalions of the
militia. It also denied that French-Canadians should have their
chance to serve together in the new numbered battalions. By the
tine the decision was reversed, enthusiasm for the adventure had
waned and the firebrands of nationalism were reminding their
audiences that the 'Prussians of Ontario' were not only as anti-
French as the 'Prussians of Europe' but much nearer at hand anc
better equipped to do French Canada harm.
Thus, of 300,000 Canadians serving overseas in August 1917, only
14,0 e French, 4'5 per cent of the Imperial Force, though the
French represented 2o ppe cent of the population of the dominion.
And they were all volunteers, with few at home willing to reinforce
or replace them. And, by 1917, the replacement of casualties had
become the most pressing need in all the armies party to the First
World War. The French and German armies had always
conscript, the British had adopted conscription the year before,
It
its now Canada's turn. But the prospect of conscription, even more
than the menace of «Regulation Iy' which imoosed Prolish language
leaching in the French schools of Ontario, outraged the French
Canadians' sense of nationhood. Their representatives fought the
pasage of the Conscription Bill tooth and nail through parliament,
and when at last it was passed its targets disappeared to the forests
and fishing grounds of the St Lawrence in numbers so large as to
make it an empty measure.
So grave was the threat to the shaky unity of Canada offered by
the conscintion risis that onst war federal averamenta determined
never again to impale the country on a military issue. The right to
declare or abstain from war independent of Britain was extracted
from the home government in tope and, on the repatriation of the
Imperial Force, the old militia was reconstituted with its traditional
names and comfortable local loyalties. At the outbreak of war in 1939
it was the militia battalions which were called out and, as in 1914,
each individual serviceman was invited to decide whether or not he
would serve overseas.
Mackenzie King, the Prime Minister,
delayed the declaration sufficiently to emphasize that it was made in
sovereign independence - and also to allow French Canadians to
reveal the undoubted support they felt for the Anglo-French cause,
