SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
he was to have his office. For the rest of the autumn we saw little of
him. His days were taken with settling schools, half-schools, frac-
tions of schools into church halls and village institutes the length of
the Quantocks and Mendips and coaxing children and teachers back
into the routine of the time-table. Meanwhile my mother, losing
patience with the gimcrack villa to which long-distance arrange
ments had brought us, found a pretty white Regency cottage in the
fields beyond the town, into which she settled her three children and
their nursemaid, a kindly
middle-aged soul in an advanced but
harmless stage of religious mania, for the winter. By Christmas my
father's daily round had slowed to the pace of our own, and there, for
the next five years, our share of the war stopped.
Petrol rationing had already brought silence to the high road
which ran beyond our front garden wall broken only bu the buzz of
the infrequent rural bus, the roar of a very rare tractor passing from
one field to another and the clatter of hooves of ponies seeking to
escape the whiphand
of an intimidating breed of leather-faced
landed ladies, whom the war had out back into governess carts long
cobwebbed and forgotten. My father, categorized as an essential
user, retained his car and set off each morning, exactly as he had
done days without number in London before the war, to call an
headmasters and headmistresses. Monitor standards of reading
among eight-year-olds, cast an eye on probationary teachers, discuss
leaving certificates with their seniors and in general unhold the
all which inspectors of
austere but uplifting ideal of standard and compulsory education for
schools had represented since
Matthew
Arnold's appointment to the first inspectorship a hundred years
before. I often accompanied him. my private enhan halidate aver
lapping the terms of the state schoole in his care an anomaly to
began my discovery of the secret world of the English countryside -
which at the age of six or seven I gave no thousbt at all mie!
in 1940 literally secret, for among the flurry of anti-invasion
directives issued after the fall of ran a daring
uprooting of all rural signposts. Whatever twist that megenre might
have given to the wanderings of varshand Carman parachutiate in
had the effect of taking the two of us down every other wrong
turning which offered itself. These false starte were and poly
by random knocking at the doors of remote cottages imitably
occupied by crones who regardad all strangers ae forcinind so
to be denied any but the moet misleading information be hushanted
PROLOGUE
conversations with ploughmen following their horses in the middle
distance of fieids too muddy to enter. Staple Fitzpaine, Curry Rivel,
Curry Mallet, Isle
Thornfalcon, Buckland St Mary, Combe St Nicholas: how slowly
and circuitously did my father's car learn to pick its way from one
hidden place to another through a countryside as silent and empty as
it had been before the coming of the railways.
my own, no doubt of short range but in memory of immense extent,
excitement and mystery. The war having taken the young men from
the farms, and forced their employers to concentrate on essentials,
hedges and roadside trees grew unchecked from one springtime to
the
next, turning every lane in summer into a
waist-deep at the verge with campion and cow-parsley, and trellised
overhead at harvest with the yellow of corn stalks scraped from the
tops of wagons bringing grain to the threshing machines. Near by
the tunnels led to farms from where eggs, pots
sometimes an unplucked chicken found their way, in the teeth of all
rationing regulations, on to neighbours' tables, our
farms where there were ricks to be scaled, pigs poked, rats chased,
cats followed to their litters of kittens in
high, hot,
dusty hay-
lofts, and sheds filled with obsolete horsedrawn machinery to
be
examined, with much squeaking of rusty levers and squealing of
long-frozen gears.
Farther away the tunnels led to stranger destinations,
to secret
lakes in overgrown woods where swans rose screaming from their
nests with a flap of wings which we children believed, with the force
of gospel truth, could break a man's arm at a single blow; to small
waterfalls tinkling bright in the gloom of stream-cut grottoes under
bridges at the turn of an oak-hung road; to short-tufted upland sheep
runs where we improvised picnics in the wheeled,
hump-backed
sheds in which shepherds lambed their ewes; to an isolated crossroad
forge, dark as midnight within even at high summer and pungent
with the smoke of hooves burning under red-hot iron - I was seeing
the last days, know it though I could not, of a thousand years of
heavy-horse farming. In summer the horses
came to the fields
behind our house and we rode beside their drivers on
machines
seemingly no different from the cast-offs discovered in our explora-
tion of the neighbouring out-houses, waiting for the word to lift the
blades on the turn and leave the long swathe of mown grass to lie like
