Beach, June 8th, 1944
A patrol of the soand Parachute Infantry at St Marcouf, Utah
Parachutists of the 50rst and villagers of Ste Marie-du-Mont,
June 7th, 1944
79
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
constructed within the dropping zone, or by more parachuting. And
treater, until the ground troops break through to join hands, the
equipment and supplies it receives will not differ at all from what
was brough in the first place. And supply will be chancy.
Hence the necessity for parachutists, like mountaineers making a
Cah for the summit, to be self-sufficient, to carry with them all and
more than the enemy's infantry will have but also token means of
defence and attack against his armour and artillery. Those were what
Burget's blocks of TNT. Hawkins mine and Gammon grenade (a
ump of plastic explosive stuffed into a stockinette bag) were meant
to be. The Gammon grenade would, if accurately thrown, adhere to
the outside of a tank and. when it exploded, cause a 'scab' to detach
ite rom the internal face of the armour, cannon about inside the
lighting compartment and kill the crew. The bazooka, with which
One man in each rifle squad was equipped, would achieve the same
result, and at slightly less risk to the attacker, since its range was
several times greater than a grenade throw. And the 60 mm mortar,
pecked in a'leg bag' which the parachutist suspended by a twenty-
toot line once he had left the aireraft, would provide the semblance
of artillery support, if chiefly in the form of noise, until heavier
weapons arrived by 'parapack' - the containers holding equipment
to bulky to drop on the man, like the 81 mm mortar - by glider
most importantly, 57 mm guns of the airborne anti-tank battery) or
by land transport (which would in any case spell relief).
That relief lay in the very problematical future. And knowledge of
how fragile a shield these puny weapons offered to the advance guard
of his great enterprise had decided General Eisenhower to spend the
evening hours of D- with the Screaming Eagles. His arrival at
Welford was unannounced and his appearance among the waiting
sticks, sitting tensed under the wings of their planes in the gathering
dusk, created a muted sensation. Corporal Kermit Latta was struck
by the terrific burden sendecision and responsibility' which showed
on his face and by the sincerity of his effort to communicate with his
young soldiers. He paused to speak to their group and we can detect
in his exchanges something of that deft personal appeal which was to
make him the United States' most popular postwar President:
'What is your job, soldier?'
'Ammunition bearer, sir;
'Where is your home?'
'Pennsylvania, sir?
