30
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
thing.
The Limeys want us in with both feet. So the answer is
we must do something now, with our hastily-made plans and
our half-trained and half-equipped troops. The next question
would naturally be, if we must take the offensive, where shall it
be? Because we are not strong enough to do anything serious in
both the Atlantic and the Pacific ...
His impression of the scenes in the army offices he visited was
even more derisive.
My impression of Washington is a rush of clerks, in and out of
doors, swing doors always swinging, people with papers
rushing after other people with papers, groups in corners
whispering in huddles, everyone iumping up iust as you start
to talk, buzzers ringing. telephones ringing, rooms crowded
with clerks all banging awav at toewriters. *Cive me 1o copies
of this AT ONCE. " Get that secret file out of the safe?" Where the
hell is that Yellow Plan (Blue Plan, Green Plan, Orange Plan,
etc.)?' Everybody furiously smoking cigarettes, everybody
passing you on to someone else. etc.. ete Someone with a loud
voice and a mean look and a big stick ought to annear and vel
'HALT. You crazy bastards. SILENCE. You imitation ants. Now
half of you get the hell out of town and the other half sit down
and don't move for one boot hun he all the
papers and start fresh.?
Stilwell's Washinaton irritations would not has and longer to
run. Within the month he would he off to China where hie hear
was, where he could give his hest and whore here la lead a vellow
army on a strange and terrible anahacie throuph the mountrina n
northern Burma. His visit to Washinoton had not therefore been in
vain and his impatience with its headless-chicken bureaucrats may
even have had a salutary effect on those to whom he showed it. Bul
he had misread. or at least migranresentad the War Denartment ith
saw it as an animal entirely without senses or a cantral nervou
system. Amid the scurrying ranks of staff officers searching for
paper solutions to real crises. at the scale of which they could as yet
only guess, there was at least one man who had forceen what was to
come, had taken its measure and was ready
with a plan for the
American army to fight its way down the road back. The man was a
recently promoted lieutenant-colonel of the War Diana Mirision
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
3I
Albert C. Wedemeyer. The plan would very largely determine how
and where the American army would fight the Second World War.
Wedemeyer was not unknown to Stilwell - he had served between
the wars in Stilwell's old regiment, the 15th, at Tientsin - and their
careers were not dissimilar. But while Stilwell was weather-worn,
uncouth and angular,
smooth ('thinks well of himself, that young man', was Stilwell's
comment on their obvious differences) and his inclination was to win
arguments by determining beforehand the terms on which they
would be debated rather than trusting to the
tongue in the duel itself. It was this intellectuality which had
recommended him to Marshall; that, and the particular circum-
stances in which he had refined his mind. For Wedemeyer was that
rare bird in an Anglo-Saxon army, a graduate of the German Staff
College, class of 1936-8. The Kriegsakademie had taught him to
think of war as a life and death struggle. It had also implanted in him
a philosophical distaste for peripheral operations, which he sus-
pected the British favoured. He was, via the lectures of Haushofer,
now familiar with the teachings of the British geographer Mackin-
der, who believed that power in the world flowed from a country's
place on the map. In the past the maritime states, like Britain and
Holland, had exercised power out of all proportion to their popula-
tions because sea transport round the periphery of the 'world island'
- Europe-Asia-Africa - moved men and guns and the wealth they
won faster than land transport within it. But the technology of the
twentieth century - railways, motor vehicles and the aeroplane - had
begun to reverse the odds, threatening to 'enable a continental
military empire to outflank the oceans' which 'in popular parlance
would put America... in the hole'. As the United States satisfied
Haushofer's conditions for strategic greatness in at least two respects
- it was 'autarkous' (economically self-sufficient) and controlled a
'panregion' (North and South America) - her strategic position was
not irretrievable. But to capitalize on her advantages she would need
in a world war to seize a foothold on the world island at woe earliest
moment, and a foothold as near as possible to the heartland.
The 'heartland' was, roughly speaking,
European Russia, into
which the Wehrmacht was driving its tanks down deep corridors of
