314
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
in war, and to a reception almost without parallel. For the bit
and nights Brussels celebrated without restraint and tun weeks li
the reverberations of the welcome still rumbled on.
Brussels's liberation confirmed bevond cavil the result of t
Battle of Normandy. It now ranked to stand beside the thre otat
great disasters which had overtaken the German army in the
thus far, Stalingrad, Tunisia, and the recent battle in White Ru
which was simply known as the Destruction of Army Group Cen
How did it compare?
Stalingrad still struck most chill into German hearts; none st
home would forget the three davs during which the state radio in
plaved nothing but the solemnest of solemn martial music, li
'Eroica' and Bruckner's Seventh Sumphony, endlesslv repeate
Hitler himself could not forget it, complaining in the spring a h
to an army doctor that his nights were filled with f taff maps in th
dark and my brain goes grindine on and ..... I can sketch exa
where every division was at Stalingrad. Hour after hour it gu
... ' But terrible though Stalingrad had been in human terms, it had
eventually cost Germany only twentv divisions. of which only t
were armoured: about one-tenth of the number in Russia and
one-fifteenth of the army's whole strenath. Enouch remained k
mount at Kursk during the following summer the largest armoured
offensive undertaken by the German armv in the whole war. And
while the defeat lost Germany much pround - the army was not to
see the Volga again - it still left her forward line 500 miles inside
capitulation had, in contrast, elim at many pointan presence in t
Russia and strongly established at many points.
The Tunisian
whole theatre of operations and ended Hitler's hopes of sustaining
the war outside Europe. It had also destroyed Italy's empire ana
125,000 German soldiers had fallen val from the he Allies at Tunis
accelerated that country's withdrawal from the Axis.
But, though
the number of divisions lost had been quite small, only eight.
in scale the disaster was not much lan quite small, suffered by the
strategic significance it stands comparison.
British in Malaya and Burma in the spring of 1942, with which in
The Destruction of Army Group Centre was altogether different.
The result of an offensive Opened hu the Russiane a Tuna sand
Bart, timed deliberately to coincide with Russians anniversary of
Barbarossa, it had been launched by 140
Soviet rifle and tank
divisions again had been a cued and i S irmies. Attacking
EPILOGUE
315
on a front of 350 miles, they had in three weeks driven forward 250
miles, from the Dnieper to the Niemen, to re-cross the Polish border
of 1939 and halt within fifty miles of East Prussia itself. And in the
process 300,000 German soldiers were killed or taken prisoner and
28 divisions written off the German order of battle, dissolved as if
they had never existed. For several weeks an enormous gap had
yawned in the line covering the eastern approaches to Germany and
it had been only the headlong pace of the
overreaching the capacity of their supply columns to keep step with
the vanguard, which had spared Hitler the wholesale collapse of his
north-eastern front.
The Destruction of Army Group Centre, little known as a battle
though it is in the West, must therefore count among the greatest
defeats ever inflicted in warfare. And yet, if strict comparisons are
made between its results and those of Normandy, it may yet appear
that the Western Allies' victory was the greater. The Allies commit-
ted far fewer divisions to Normandy than did the Russians against
Army Group Centre, only thirty-four in all; even after making
allowance for the smaller size of Russian divisions and the larger
number of Western 'corps' and 'army' troops in the divisional slice,
the ratio between effort expended and result achieved stands very
much in their favour. The number of enemy divisions destroyed also
counts to the Western Allies' balance. Such calculations are compli-
cated. In the middle of September, when the German high com-
mand in the West began to put its books in order, it was able to show
that almost every division which had fought west of the Seine was
still represented in some form on the new line which had been
established in Holland and along the West Wall. But in most cases
only by fragments. The twelve armoured divisions, which should
have fielded 1,800 tanks, could show only 120; 2,200 had been
destroyed in the Normandy battle. Of the 48 infantry divisions
under Rundstedt's command on June 6th, only 21 still stood in the
order of battle in mid-September. Three had been evacuated from
the West altogether. Nine were being reconstructed in the Replace-
ment Army. Seven were besieged in French ports.
Eight had been
dissolved as beyond repair. And of the twenty-one in nominal
existence, eight were classified as remnants. Twenty-seven infantry
divisions had therefore been ground to dust by the British and
Americans, and eleven of the twelve panzer divisions reduced to
bits and pieces. Five hundred thousand German soldiers had dis-
