12
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
olive-green, pressed-steel, four-wheel-drive juggernauts,
with what car salesmen would call optional extras of a sort never seen
on their domestic equivalents - deep-treaded spare tyres, winches,
towing cables, fire-extinguishers. There were towering GMC six-
by-sixes, compact and powerful Dodge four-by-fours and, pilot
fishing the rest or buzzing nimbly about the lanes on independent
errands like the beach buggies of an era still thirty years ahead, tiny
and entrancing jeeps, caparisoned with whiplash aerials and sketchy
canvas hoods which drummed with the rhythm of a cowboys
saddlebags rising and falling to the canter of his horse across th
prairie. Standing one day at the roadside, dismounted from my
bicycle to let one such convoy by, I was assaulted from the back of
each truck as it passed by a volley of small missiles, which fell into
the ditch beside me with the same soft patter I had provoked under
my grandstand at the artillery display. But when I burrowed in the
dead leaves to discover the cause I unearthed not walnute but a little
treasure of Hershey bars, Chelsea candv and lack Frost sugar-cubes
a week's, perhaps a month's ration, of sweet things casually dis
bursed in a few seconds. There was, I reflected as I crammed the
spoil into my pockets, something going on in the west of Enoland
about which Hitler should be very worried indeed.
For a time it was only as the distributors of haphazard largesse
that the Americans impinged, though the town soon began to be
surrounded by encampments of neat, weathertight wooden huts
again altogether superior in quality to the straggling settlements of
corrugated iron
which housed British units; one formed a large
alternative medical centre.
modern hospital which was to survive the war and become the town's
But gradually personal contacts were
made, the first by our pretty, black-rinalted Welsh cursemaid
who had appeared soon after the evening when a drunken
British parachutist had made an assault on the bedroom window of
her dottily pious predecessor. Annie came to us from a convent.
where she had emphatically not been prenaring to enter the sister
The look assumed bu my mother. as Annie cared towards
GI territory in the centre of the town on her afternoons off, her pink
plump and rather wobbly legs eovered for the nuting in a hottled
brown preparation called liaid atockina Lish did antima duty
for the real thing, implied a napping anxiety that sha a cliating
with another sisterhood, from which the convent had
been enlisted to rescue her. Rut though all stockie dant to
presumably
replace liquid ones, as did supplies of Hershey bars and Spearmint
on a scale which rapidly devalued mine, Annie was apparently asked
to give nothing in return or, if asked, not pressed. My mother's
alarm subsided.
Quite soon my parents had collected an American circle of their
own. One member, a major of engineers, became a lifelong friend
and, in 1945, godfather to a new daughter,
children born into the family in the war years.
encountered at the church door, came to replace the earlier wave of
expatriates who had called for tea on Sunday afternoons. Most, like
them, seemed to want no more than an occasional glimpse into a
domestic interior as a comforting leaven in
enthralling military experience.
A few gentler souls became more
dependent and appeared more often. One, Sontag - I knew him in
no other way - a thin, dark-haired, soft-eyed young man, must have
been acutely afflicted by homesickness and perhaps by the fear of
what lay ahead. Squirrel-like, he accumulated in a spare corner of
the house a store of small, valueless personal possessions, which he
called to fuss over at intervals and one day, after which he was not
seen again, asked my parents to keep safe for him. Their overheard
murmur of agreement at lunch months later that 'Sontag won't be
coming back' awoke in me a guilty, prurient curiosity, and that
afternoon I picked his little store over, and found a GI torch, a
webbing belt and a Pocket Book edition, in gritty grey paper, of
A Tree Grows in Brooklyn. It seemed a small enough stake to have
put down in the country.
But by then - it must have been in the winter of 1944 - there was
very little left at all of the Americans' transient presence.
It had
during that spring swollen to almost all-pervading proportions, so
that there seemed more Americans than natives in the district (as
there may well have been). American transport monopolized the
roads, American uniform became as commonplace as that other
uniform of the penultimate war year, the high-shouldered overcoat,
wedge-heeled shoes and turbaned head so often seen on its arm.
American accents, much enjoyed, much, if badly, imitated, passed
as an alternative local dialect and some of the ease, nonchalance and
generosity of American manners had permeated and softened local
formality. The feudal west would never be quite the same again, and
a good thing too thought many, particularly the young.
We relent-
lessly patriotic little prep-school boys, imprinted with our idea of
