126
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
destructive to be unleashed even on remote beaches which had seen
no holidaymakers since August 1939. Now, as the battalions bobbed
queasily in the
LCAs alongside the mother LSIs,
British and
Acadiens
of the North
Shore Regiment,
Scots of the Canadian
Scottish,
Québecois of the Régiment de la Chaudière,
English of
Ontario in the Queen's
Own Rifles, prairie settlers of a dozen
backgrounds in the Winnipeg and Regina Rifle Regiments, their
flotilla was enveloped on either hand and as far as the northern
horizon by an enormous fleet of bombarding vessels.
Heaviest and farthest out were two battleships,
Ramillies and
Warspite; the second had fought under Beatty's orders at Jutland
twenty-eight years and four days before. They both mounted four
I5-inch guns, and there were two more in Roberts, their accompany-
ing monitor.
Their chief task was to engage the large-calibre shore
batteries between the Orne and the mouth of the Seine, but so great
was their range - over eighteen miles - that they could in emergency
be called in on to anv target in the British bridgeheads bu nan of the
thirty-nine naval forward observers who would land with the troops.
Immediately
port and
starboard of the lowering position
disposed a line of twelve cruisers, the smallest, like Diadem, mount-
ing eight 25-inch guns, the largest, like Belfast, twelve finch.
Both were covering the
Canadian beaches, their guns initially
targeted on batteries at Ver-sur-Mer and Moulineaux. In front of the
Canadian lowering position manoeuvred the supporting destroyers,
eleven for the Tuna sector. each mounting hatron fan had sinh
guns of 4- Or 4: 7 inch calibre; one was Norwegian, one French, two
Canadian, HMCS Sioux and Also was dimmediately ahead of
assault-wave infantry was deployed a small fleet of support
landing-craft: eight Landing Craft Gun, a sort of small monitor
mounting two 4 7-inch guns; four Landing Craft Support, bristling
with automatic cannon; eight Landing Craft Tank (Rocket), on each
of which were racked the tubes for 1, 100 stinch rockets, to be
discharged in a single salvo; and eighteen Landing Craft Assault
(Hedgerow), which were to fire their loads of twenty-four 6o lb
bombs into the beach obstacles and so explode as many as possible of
the mines attached to them.
That did not exhaust the provision of on-board fire support. The
fourth group of assault vessels comprised twenty-four Landing Craft
Tank, each carrying four 'Priests', a 105 mm field gun on a Sherman
chassis, of the self-propelled artillery regiments. They were to fire
127
CANADA: TO THE SOUTH SHORE
at selected targets on the run-in, concentrating on four identified
resistance nests': Two squadrons of the
2nd Royal Marine
Armoured Support Regiment would join in, firing with the 95 mm
howitzers of their Centaur tanks from hull-down positions in the
water as soon as they reached shore. And, of course, most celebrated
ingredient of the landings, there were the DD tanks. DD stood for
Duplex Drive - the term revealed the American origin
of the
invention - a gearing device which used the Sherman's Ford V.8
engine to drive either the tracks on land, or in water a pair of
propellers. The DD Shermans' speed in the water was not great -
four miles per hour was a realistic allowance - and they could not fire
while afloat, since they derived their buoyancy from a canvas screen,
supported on struts, which rose high above the turret. In the water,
indeed, the crew were literally submariners, their seats being below
sea level and the commander steering by standing on the turret top
and shouting instructions through the open hatch to his driver. A
small pump expelled the sea lop which found its way over the top of
the screen, in moderate seas at any rate. But when the tank touchec
ground, the canvas screen was deflated and the gunner could at once
bring his 75 mm to bear on beach targets. A DD tank regiment had
been assigned to each of the two Canadian brigades which would
land on D-Day, and would swim thirty-eight of its tanks ahead of the
landing-craft. To compensate for their slow rate of progress, they
were to be the first craft which would actually commence the run-in
to the beaches, though their departure time was so calculated that
they would arrive only just enough ahead of the infantry to shoot
them in' as their Landing Craft Assault touched down.
All in all, therefore, 3rd Canadian Division could look to a weight
of support for its venture to the south shore over twelve times as
great as that which had covered and Division's assault on Dieppe
two years before. Instead oe te inch guns, there were to be 1g8
pieces firing. Some, like the 48 Priests, were to be rough and ready
in their effect, which was to stun and deter rather than
Others, like the guns of the destroyers, were to direct pinpoint fire at
bunkers and batteries on the braghes and to keep on firing at them
until they were silenced. The big guns of the cruisers, directed y
the refined techniques of naval ballistic sciénce, were to crack the
concrete shells of the hea a coastal batteries, invisible inland. And
the one-shot rocket salvoes of the specialized landing craft,
create devastating blast waves at the
main German
centres
of
