Máridor
Map 7 The Battle of the Falaise Pocket, August 16th-20th, 1944
Vimoutier
CANADIAN , E
St Pierre-,
5 12 SS
FIRST
Armoured division.
- German front, evening August 16th, 1944
German front, evening August 19th, 1944
German counter-attack, August 20th, 1944
Allied thrusts. August 17th-19th. 1944
Allied front, evening
August 19th, 1944
59. Allied forces
2. German forces
aNODaS
COUNTER-ATTACK
SEVENTH ARMY Cha
Rem
Pierrefitte
R ROI
SEVENTH ARMY
PANZER GROUP EBERBACH
THIRD
AMERICAN
AMERICAN
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
251
as to be scarcely capable any longer of manoeuvre.
Thus, while the German centre of gravity had been shifting in the
wrong direction, that of the Allies had been travelling on course, to
positions which it had been the main object of German strategy to
deny them. And while the Germans' liquid reserves
had been
mortgaged to daily expenditure, the Allies' bank balance had been
steadily rising. The British, it was true, had no fresh formations to
commit; indeed, they would shortly begin cannibalizing part of their
Liberation Army to make good losses in the rest, chilling evidence of
what five years of war had cost them. But the Canadians had recently
brought an armoured division the 4th. to ioin their and and 3rd
Infantry Divisions, which now formed the First Canadian Army.
Two émigré formations, the Free French and and
Armoured Divisions, were also arriving. And American strength had
decupled in two months. It now stood at fourteen infantry and six
armoured divisions, recently reorganized into two Armies,
Third and the First, new commanded by Hodges in place of Bradley,
who oversaw them as chief of I2th Army Group.
So preponderant
had American strength become that direction of the land battle must
soon in propriety pass to Eisenhower, who had already established a
small command post in Normandy,
which he used as his forward
headauarters on his frequent visits from suAFF to the bridgehead.
Conduct of the battle nevertheless remained with
Montgomery.
And his situation map, transformed in the three weeks since Bradley
had unleashed Cobra, scintillated with opportunity.
It was now a
much larger map ora, scintil which he had pored over during the
netye-racking weeks of attrition in June and early July, when a gain
of half a mile angers of attrition i Can and St Lô had been a matter
of sipnificance. Caen and St Lê were now well within his lines,
which had reached out beyond the boundaries of the departments of
Calvados and Manche to embrace nine more Ille-et-Vilaine. Mor-
bihan CAts du. AT._] Ministère Loire-Atlantiana Maine-et-Loire
Sartha Dure at Tair Orna and Mavenne - about a tanth of the land
surface of France a, One reach towards those which bordered the
Seine: Eure,
In these departments all
Seine-et-Oise and Yonne.
main roads led towards Paris and on every one of them a British,
Nearest Paris and at
Canadian or American division now stood.
Greatest liberty to manoeuvre were those of Patton's army.
But it
would not be sate to hurry them onward, nor would it be possible
easily to supply them, even by air - though the air forces promised to
