50
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
might enter the war, thus providing short supply routes to Rus.
whose land campaign was currently hurting Germany most, and a
basis for further operations against the occunied Balkans.
Brooke had brought his British colleagues to accept this strats.
by hard argument during the months since they had defeated
Marshall in July; and they stuck by it throughout five days of tense
and testy negotiations at Casablanca. He had much greate diffely
rallying the Americans. It was central to bie aronment that the poor
road and rail communications to southern Eurone would make an
German build-up there painfully slow and difficult, while the Allies
enjoyment of free movement by sea and air would allow them t
deploy
rapidly wherever they chose. Marshall interpreted 'free
movement' to mean "diversion', and warned that 'every diversion or
side issue from the main plot acts as a suction pump':
plot', by his lights, included the war against Japan, and he chal
lenged the British to explain why, if they were not anxious to take
direct cross-Channel action against the Germans in 1943, men and
materials made redundant by their heel-dragging should not be
redeployed from the Mediterranean to the Pacific.
It was the Joint Planners that groun of ataff slicers who arenared
papers for the American Chiefs of Staff Committee who eventuall
produced a compromise. Asked for a fundamental statement l
strategy, they produced on lanuary 1ath a document which set th
destruction of the economic and military power of all our adversarie
at a rate exceeding their powers of replacement' as the primary aim.
Little matter that thie wae a resort to that princinlo of initile
industry' which the German professionals despised. It amountedto
an argument for attrition. which was exactly Bronto's starting pain
Like all British veterans of tor-r8 he shrank from the mathods of
attrition practised on the Wastern Pant home dand hie reluc
tance to risk attrition by assault across the Channel. Attrition by
overstretch - of the Germans' limited stock of divisions eauiomen
and fuel - was however what he meant his Mediterranean strategy tO
impose; the results of Passchendaele without its cost in blood. And
by repetitious advocacy, concessions to American needs in the
forces thither as soon as Germany was defeated, he ultimately
Pacific and firm reassurance of Britain's intention to transfer all het
brought Marshall round. An important induleence of Marshall:
the Supreme Allied
abiding concern was an agreement to appoint a chief of staff "
Commander (cossac) for the cross-Channel
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
51
invasion force who would work to have plans ready for the Supreme
Allied Commander as soon as he was appointed, so that preparations
might go forward even though a date for the operation had not yet
been fixed.
Marshall returned home less dejected than he had expected to be.
His hopes for a cross-Channel invasion in 1943, never high either on
his estimate of British will or joint Allied resources, had not really
been dashed. And he believed he had set a limit, of aims if not of
time, to further embroilment in a secondary theatre. Prospects for an
end to dissent at the next Allied conference seemed set fair. No date
for one had been fixed at Casablanca; but the imminent conclusion
of the Tunisian campaign in April prompted the Prime Minister to
propose a meeting in May.
The President accepted and on May
IIth, after a six-day crossing on the liner Queen Mary, the British
arrived in New York. The conference itself convened at the White
House next day. Its opening session immediately revealed that the
divisions between the two allies yawned as wide as ever. With this
difference: it was now the sensation of success in the Mediterranean,
rather than fear of repulse elsewhere, which armed British argu-
ments for further advance in that theatre. The totality of the Axis
collapse in Tunisia, the first in any theatre of war, had so elated the
British that they could not bring themselves to forgo the chance of
repeating it by crossing to Sicily. Brooke rehearsed now-familiar
arguments, Marshall his familiar warnings. His only variation was
one
of metaphor, from the suction pump to
the vacuum.
'The
Tunisian campaign had sucked in more and more troops ... The
invasion of Sicily would establish a vacuum in the Mediterranean
which would preclude ... a successful cross-Channel operation and
Germany would not collapse... from air bombardment alone.
' He
foresaw a protracted European war, with calamitous effects in the
Pacific, unless all available force in the theatre was transferred early
to France. His swipe at the British belief in Germany's 'collapse -
though he did not tax them with their rapidly devaluing credence in
the power of 'blockade and subversion' to achieve it - drew Brooke,
and a good deal further than reflection would have allowed him to
gO. A victory in Europe was unlikely in any case,
he insisted, until
I945 or 1946, 'since it must be remembered that in previous wars
there had always been some eighty French divisions on our side.
'Did this mean', Marshall countered, 'that the British
Chiefs of
Staff regarded Mediterranean operations as the key to a successful
