52
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
termination of the European war?' Caught too far out on a limb,
Brooke hedged. And the two sides withdrew to consider their
differences. Once again Marshall and King prepared to play the
Pacific card but, sensitive to that probability, the British at the nex
session forestalled them by a stout declaration of commitment to an
early Roundup
- or Overlord as the invasion was
now to be
re-codenamed. It therefore remained to find an interim strates)
which they might agree to pursue until Overlord could be mounted.
Eventually the Americans proved willing to discuss the Mediter-
ranean in return for a British commitment to a firm
date for
Overlord. ideally April 1044. Brooke 'nimbly countered' that April
I944 would only be possible after Italy had been knocked out of the
war and the Germans obliged to divert thither the divisions which
otherwise would oppose the Allies in France. On those positions a
compromise was achieved. The British eventually accepted a target
date of May Ist. by which time seven divisions would have been
transferred from the Mediterranean to
Britain; the
Americans
assented to 'such operations in exploitation of Husky [Sicilvl as are
best calculated to eliminate Italy from the war'.
A year remained to fill. The collapse of the defences on Sicily
invaded on July roth, was so precipitate and complete, the oppor-
tunities offered by the Italian request to treat for peace which it
provoked so attractive. that for once the British and Americans
found no difficulty in agreeing to enlarge the campaign.
showed himself indeed as enthusiastic de Churchill for a full-scal
assault on the Italian mainland, and as high up the peninsula as
possible, even though the assault would consume almost the entire
tion there of all the
Anglo-American army in the Mediterranean and require the reten
landing-craft promised for
Overlord.
Quebec conference which followed in Aurust therefore ran mor
smoothly than those at Washineton and Casablane Though temp
eraments clashed, the issues which divided Americans and British
the inter-relationship,
were smaller. Brooke again felt obliged to enlain to the American
which they
between Mediterranean attrition
have never
passage which drove Admiral King to 'verv undiplomatic language
and cross-Channel assault -
to use a mild term' - but the main debate turned on the size of the
force to be launched into france. and an acceptable canada wa
worked out. It included a provision for a subsidiary but simultane
ous invasion in the south of France to be mounted with the French
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
and most of the American troops currently campaigning in Italy.
Yet, from behind the façade of common purpose, came the creak
of shifting foundations. It would grow louder as the autumn drew
on. For to the British the prospect of subordinating the Mediterra-
nean campaign to Overlord now grew increasingly fraught with
disappointment.
detailed plans approached completion, so too did the necessity to
face the brutal implications of a direct assault in the teeth of German
prepared positions. 'Memories of the Somme and Passchendaele and
many lesser frontal attacks upon the Germans were not to be blotted
out by time or reflection', Churchill wrote later of his state of mind
Brooke's was similarly haunted; for him the cross-
Channel operation had become 'very problematical'. He was even
more afflicted by a sense of disappointment.
of 1943 had achieved much of what he had always promised it would
- the elimination of Italy, the 'attrition by attenuation' of German
manpower (fifty of Germany's three hundred divisions had been
drawn into Italy and the Balkans), the free use of the inland sea for
inter-continental shipments, the winning of air bases close to the
industries of southern Germany - he could think only of how much
more might have been done, and still lay within the Allies' power to
consummate if time and resources were granted.
To the Americans, who scented their ally's deepening irresolu-
tion, the explanation seemed to lie in Britain's incurable imperial-
ism, which they suspected of seeking a focus in the eastern Mediter-
ranean. That was inaccurate: Britain's attachment to the Mediterra-
nean was not directly material. It was, however, deeply psychologi-
cal. Not only was the sea a bridge between the homeland and the
East, it was also the amphitheatre in which for two hundred years
they had played grand strategy, longer indeed than
they had played
it in India and with quite as much personal involvement. There were
families in Britain as Mes much pers as others were "Indian', who
could count grandfathers born in Malta or the Ionian Isles,
great-
great-grandfathers in Gibraltar, and to whom the ports of the Levant
and the politics of its hinterland were as familiar as the forts and
dynastic intrigues of the Frontier to the servants of the Raj. Brooke
belonged to neither clan; his roots were in the older
garrison of
Ulster. But as a maker of Brition stratesy, which had for so long
exerted one of its centres of effort in the Mediterranean, he
attuned to campaigning there
and disinclined
surrender the
