IO
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
to receive the charge of Napoleon's Cuirassiers at Waterloo.
The
'real'
army,
of course,
was elsewhere,
capturing,
if the
propaganda photographs were anything to go by, Italians by the acre
in the Western
Desert.
Term by term the boys at the top of the
senior school left to join it - less often the navy or the air force - news
of their service occasionally percolating back to us, commissionings,
decorations, sometimes a death in action. I had known them too
little to be touched.
The only death which at all punctured my
cocoon of serenity was that of a stupid, jolly sixth-former, who, the
masters despairing of his passing exams, had been allowed to spend
his last term learning to manage a pipe and a shotgun, equipped with
which he had become a familiar sight under the rookery
which
swayed in the tops of the
gigantic elms below the cricket field.
Almost as soon as he left, it seemed, he was reported killed in the
Sicily landings, a private soldier, not quite eighteen years old. By
then, as I can now date it, the army had left North Africa and begun
the invasion of Italy. But still there was no sign of the soldiers who,
failing the arrangement of my tête-a-tête with Hitler, were going to
bring the war to an end. There were hints of their existence. Once a
glittering battery of 25-pounders came to the school to give a
demonstration of firepower, to such effect that the shock of their
first salvo almost dislodged me from the walnut tree in which I had
established a vantage point,
my neck-saving clutch at a branch
sending a cascade of ripe nuts to patter a muffled answer to the echo
of their thunder on the soft turf below. On another afternoon a
squad of Herculean young commandos training for some amphibi-
ous derring-do, came tumbling over our garden wall in flight from
the "enemy' and took refuge among the fruit trees and vegetables.
Their heavy breathing and wordlessly transmitted wish that I should
remained to thrill
stop staring so pointedly at their hiding place and play elsewhere
and disturb me long after the crash of their
departure through the strip of adjoinine woodland had died hahind
them. But thrills and disturbances by anuthina recambling a genuine
menace to the Germans were an few and irram lar that had I not
been possessed by mu unreasoning cartrint in victory I might
with a little reflection. have allowed muelf to aueation during 1042
and 1943 how it was ever going to be won.
And then, suddenly, there were the Americans There had han
portents of their coming, in particular the appearance of a te Office
of War Information booklet. snanned up by me from a town
PROLOGUE
bookstall, on the Eighth US Army Air Force (USAAF), filled with
photographs of the construction of the airfields from which it was to
begin its bombing campaign over Europe, and containing a cut-away
drawing of the
Flying Fortress,
for which, through counting the
enormous number of machine-guns it mounted, I quickly formed
almost as strong a regard as I already had for the Spitfire. There had
been outriders, a scattering of officers in the unfamiliar rig of olive
jacket and beige trousers -
'pinks and greens', as I subsequently
learnt veterans nostalgically describe it - whom I used to see walking
home on warm sunlit evenings to the lodgings which had been found
for them on the outskirts of the town. On one of these, astounding
myself by my forwardness and in flagrant violation of family rules, I
tried the formula, which I knew to be in universal circulation, 'Got
any gum, chum?' and was rewarded by an embarrassed halt - my
embarrassment was altogether greater - a rummaging in pockets and
the presentation of a packet of Spearmint. As it happened, I did not
like chewing gum.
But the superiority of the American over the
British product, and particularly the sumptuousness of the wrapper
and the lustrous simplicity of its design,
instantly and deeply
impressed me. Much of that evening, which would normally have
been spent reading at a gap illicitly opened in my bedroom curtains,
I devoted to a study of its elements, struggling in an increasingly
trancelike state to draw from its symbolism the message which I
sensed the designer sought to convey.
Thus I
made my first
encounter with the science of semeiotics; but also with the bottom-
less riches of the American economy.
They were shortly to be made manifest in super-abundance.
Towards the end of 1943 our backwater, which British soldiers had
garrisoned so sparsely for four years, overflowed almost overnight
with GIs. How different they looked from our own jumble-sale
champions, beautifully clothed in smooth khaki, as fine in cut and
quality as a British officer's - an American private, we confided to
each other at school, was paid as much as a British captain, major,
colonel - and armed with glistening, modern, automatic weapons,
Thompson sub-machine-guns,
Winchester carbines,
Garand self-
loading rifles. More striking still were the number, size and elegance
of the vehicles in which they paraded about the countryside in stately
convoy.
The British
army's transport was a sad
collection
of
underpowered makeshifts, whose dun paint flaked from their tinpot
bodywork. The Americans travelled in magnificent, gleaming,
