288
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
sheltering an active maquis band fewer still. And so it was literall to
the maquis - the brush-covered slopes of the Massif central or the
bare upland plateaux of Savoie far from centres of population and
industry - that the larger bands of the resistance had to take, where
they enjoyed relative immunity from German anti-partisan columns
at the humiliating price of keeping themselves to themselves. When
they erred, retribution was swift and terrible. In March 194 the
maquis on the plateau de Glières in Haute Savoie, which had been
launching raids against German lines of communication in the area,
was destroyed in a single brutal operation; and as late as July 104
the Germans found the force operatione same fate on another
highland maquis at Vercors in the Dauphiné.
Significantly each
army, who had gone underground after the German occupation of
was commanded by officers of the regular
the Zone libre in November 1942. To their maquis they had been
able to bring not onlu their military abille hut olen access to stocks of
arms hidden from the authorities in 1940-41. It was these weapons,
much as those
parachuted to them by the British Special
Operations Executive, which had all the hem to carry battle to the
enemy. The Paris
Resistance,
enjoyed no such resources.
at the beginning of August 1944,
Colonel Rol, head of the communist
networks in the city, estimated the number of arms available at only
400, about a
Komorowski on the same date.
of the armament at the
disposal of Bor-
That arms
were so scarce was due in part to the pattern of the
campaign of 1940, which had been fought far from the capital and so
left no tidewrack of weapons to be hidden bu patriots, in part by the
co-operation of the French authorities with the German disarma-
ment commission (lovingly created bu Hitler to match that whick
Versailles had inflicted on Germany in to10). But there was another
organization
in
Special Operations
Executive and the
communists,
London, fearful
whose strength lay in the ciedin had taken care to see
that the preponderance of parachute drons fell in the open country
between February and May ToA M6000 Sten mins and 28.000
tively were consigned to Paris.
pistols were parachuted into France. but only tre and tA respec
De Gaulle carried his mistrust of the communists - founded less
on hostility to their i dastary than an Litician of a Bans librentat
from party Dolitica - bevand denving them armoUis outlinary
FREE FRANCE
289
success thus far in sustaining a unique and independent role for
himself among the Allied leaders had lain in his skill in manipulating
all the organizations of external and internal resistance - those he
had founded himself, those the Allies had foisted on him, those
spontaneously created - to his advantage.
His technique was either
to pack them with his own nominees - his recipe for dealing with
Giraud and the Committee of National Liberation at Algiers in 1943
- or to cap a paramount organization which had escaped from his
control with another of his own. By the beginning of 1944 he had
judged that the CNR had fallen too heavily under the influence of its
communist element, the Franc-Tireurs et Partisans
(FTP).
solution, which served another of his purposes (that of seeking
constantly to exaggerate the size of the armed forces at the disposal
of Fighting France), was to create in February 1044 a general staff
for what he denominated the French Forces of the Interior (FFI).
These, comprising the Gaullist Armée Secrète and the military
resistance movement, Organisation de Resistance de l'Armée, which
as well as the FTP. were out directly under the command of General
had come into being after the German occupation of the Zone libre,
Koenig, hero of the Free French epic at Bir Hakim and de Gaulle's
chief of staff.
Shortly afterwards
Eisenhower was persuaded to
recognize him as a co-equal of the other national commanders -
British, Canadian and American - under Supreme Headquarters
Allied Expeditionary Force.
He at once began to issue orders to all resistance unite incid
France. But de Gaulle was already aware that the communists had,
where strong enough talen charge of local FET atruntuead and
where not, were tending to operate independently.
With an eve to
the political future, therefore-end, like the F TP, he saw resistance
largely as a means to future political power - he decided to reserve
the essential functions of koenies general staft, supply, signals and
finance, to yet another organization. This, the Military Delegations,
belonged directly to his
Provisional Government in
London,
which it effectively formed the defence ministry. And because it held
the purse - from which arms and money
were
parachuted into
France - it determined which maquis should have the means to fight
and which not.
He was particularly concerned that the Paris maquis should not
fight. Not only did he wish to spare the city itself from destruction
(Warsaw, where he had served as a military adviser in 1020. was
