300
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
French by local hot-heads. The military attachés in seren Lain
American capitals declared for him, as did a number of ear
colonial officials who guessed that old enemies in Petans ner
regime would now settle scores.
But the trickle of committed
Gaullists - the term was not yet current - who found their way
across the Pyrenees to his side in London after June 18th, 1940 was
pitifully thin, and composed for the most part of the young and
unknown.
He looked in vain for companions of his own quality.
Until the arrival of Leclerc.
Leclerc - properly the Vicomte Jacques-Philippe de Hautecloque;
the pseudonym was assumed to protect his wife and six children
from reprisals - belonged firmly writhin the society of which de.
Gaulle's family was an appendage, the conservative, Catholic aris
tocracy of the north English readers would recognize the Haute
cloques in the d'Archevilles of Mottram's Spanish Farm. It exactly.
denoted the social distance between them that Leclere's father, 2
regular officer and a landowner. had sent Philippe to the Jesuit school
in Paris of which de Caulle senior was headmaster. But Leclerc was
much more than a son of the château. a Georges d'Archeville with a
contempt for the Germans and an urge to shine in the cavalr
Cavalryman he was but he had also passed first into the Ecole de
Guerre and stood on the threshold of a brilliant career when disaster
overtook the
French army in 1940.
He might still have enjoyed
preferment in the Armistice Army, that rump of a hundred thousan
woundingly
allowed Pétain to keep in beine in the Zone libre: brainboxes and
calculated tit-for-tat,
patriotism lay
particules were to flourish there, all auick with explanations that re
fausse particule who claimed to embody France in London. He had
towards Vichy and easy sweets at the brigadier de
not even thought of it. Recognizing defeat when he saw it. he had
obtained his divisional commander's permission to leave the battle
field, had twice escaped from German hands on his way out of
France and had arrived in London onlv a week after the armistice to
denied him one.
demand a fichting command. The naucitv of de Alla'c troop
But the general had another task for which hi
needed a capable subordinate. Anti-Vichy declarations in French
West and Central Africa promised him a foothold there, and in
August he sent Leclerc to Nigeria with orders to consolida.e the
military situation. While his own arcadition a Dolar in Contember
failed. Leclers was able to capture Caban and thanne to tranafer ti
Fort Lamy in the colony of Chad, where the garrison had come
It was not large nor particularly French. The bulk of the soldiers
were black, Senegalese of the Régiment de Tirailleurs de Tchad,
their officers a Kiplingesque bunch - d'Ornano, Dio, Massu - who
had chosen to make their lives, and so sink their careers, far from the
But the Senegalese
were legendary
d'Ornano's subalterns a swashbuckling crew. With them behind
him, and even though a thousand miles of the Sahara lay between his
base and the nearest hostile position, Leclerc found means to carry
the war to the enemy. In February 1947, at the end of a gruelling
trek across the wastes, he fell on the Italian garrison in the oasis of
Kufra in southern Libya and seized it for Free France.
tricolour he had hoisted over the fort, he led the officers who had
accompanied him in an oath 'not to abandon the fight until the flag
of France shall fly again over Metz and Strasburg'. The significance
of the formula was a double one: his promotion (1922-4) at St Cyr
had chosen the denomination 'Metz et Strasbourg' to celebrate the
return to France of the two provinces of which those cities were the
capitals; it had been a condition of the armistice of 1940 that they
should again be incorporated in the Reich. Leclerc was dedicating
himself not only to victory over Germany but to the repudiation of
Vichy and all its craven compromises.
In 1942 he made another raid into enemy territory and captured
several places in the Libyan province of Fezzan, accompanied this
time by patrols of the British Long Range Desert Group, which had
established contact with him across the wilderness. And at the end of
the year he abandoned his base in Chad for good and took the whole
of his command up into Tunisia to join the Anglo-American armies
which had rendezvoused there after the twin victories of Alamein
and Algiers. A consolidation of Free French forces could now take
place, of Leclerc's column
with the brigade
which
Koenig
had
commanded with such tenacity at the glorious defeat of Bir Hakim
the previous year. But Koenig's force was as heterogeneous as his
own: some Foreign Legionaries, a regiment of Moroccan Spahis,
some remnants of Dentz's Army of the Levant, which had 'rallied'
after the tragic little fratricidal war in Syria and the Lebanon in
1941. And it was not much stronger. If two divisions were to be
formed on their cadres, and such was de Gaulle's wish, they would
have to incorporate recruits from the only source of French man-
