152
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
(Desert Rat). Fielding four armoured regiments, with nearly three
hundred tanks between them, manned by crews which had stood in
the Alam Halfa line,
broken Rommel's position at Alamein and
chased his Afrika Korps down the long coast road from Egypt to
Tunisia, it was a proven fighting force of great strength. Montgom-
ery knew it of old, trusted it and believed that with it he could now
begin to lever his way westward round Caen, where the panzer
divisions were pinned, and unhinge their positions from the rear.
His plan, he explained to his chief of staff, was for th Armoured
Division to advance through
'Panzer'
Tilly, just west of the point where
Meyer had made his recent night attack, 'secure Villers-
Bocage and Evrecy and then exploit south-east' (i.e. towards Paris);
Meanwhile, the sist Highland Division, one of the follow-up'
divisions of D-Day, would attack southwards, east of Caen, towards
Cagny'. He would then 'put down the ist Airborne Division' still on
call in England) 'somewhere south of Caen in a big "air lock" and ..
link up with it from Evrecy and Cagny'. The result would be to
enclose Caen in a three-sided envelope of armour, infantry and
airborne troops,
which would ensure its capitulation.
A by-product of the 'Sigint' which had prompted the air attack on
Panzer Group West, however, was the warning,
extracted by the
Bletchley 'Ultra' apparatus, of its impending offensive. And in that
context Montgomery, who had landed in Normandy on June 8th and
set up his headquarters at
Creully, midway between Bayeux and
Caen, decided that his own would merely run into trouble - perhaps
end in the destruction of ist Airborne Division (three months later
over Arnhem, he would be less prudent). Instead he settled for the
more modest aim of sustaining pressure on the Germans on both
sides of Caen. During June roth-12th, therefore, the gist Highland
Division pushed inland from the 'airborne bridgehead', menacing
Cagny but never threatening to reach it in the teeth of 2ist Panzer
Division's opposition, while the 7th Armoured Division struggled
southward from Tilly towards Villers-Bocage. It was the first serious
venture into that difficult and most characteristic Norman country-
side. 'Pleasantly shaded woodland', says Larousse for 'bocage'. The
woodland stands between small, thickly banked hedgerows, enclos-
ing fields first won from the waste by Celtic farmers who tilled the
land before the coming of the Romans, and separated by narrow and
winding lanes. Through over a thousand years of growth the roots
of the hedgerows have bound the banks into barriers 'which will
153
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
rebuff even bulldozers', while winter rains and the hooves
of
Norman cattle have worn the surface of the roadways deep beneath
the level of the surrounding fields. The countryside is thus perfectly
adapted to anti-tank defence. Tank crews which will brave it must
expect a bazooka shot from every field boundary or risk ambush in
lanes so constricted that they cannot traverse their turret. And if, in
the hope of faster progress, they cling to the larger roads, they will
be brought every few hundred yards to strong, stone-built villages in
which every house forms an infantry fortress, every barn a hiding
pace for an anti-tank gun. Bocage, for all the soldiers of the
Liberation armies, swiftly lost its pleasant sylvan undertones. Boc-
age came to mean the sudden, unheralded burst of machine-pistol
fire at close quarters, the crash and flame of a panzerfaust strike on
the hull of a blind and pinioned tank.
The particular stretch of bocage into which the Desert Rats were
now venturing had been assigned for defence by
Bayerein's Panzer Lehr Division. Strong though the division was, it
had ten miles of front to cover, which meant that ite twn tank and
four infantry battalions would be badly stretched if they were to be
everywhere. Bayerlein's best hope was that the Desert Rat Division
would attack on a narrow axis, which would allow his tanks and
half-tracks the chance to counter-attack. Fortunately its commander,
General Erskine, chose to do so, yielding Panzer Lehr,
attached SS battalion of Tiger tanks, some prime targets.
four days of slow and bitter fighting, the British edged towards
Villers-Bocage, but lost men and tanks at every bound forward. On
June x3th the advance muard of 7th Armoured Division at last
entered Villers-Bocage but, when it passed through to the country-
side beyond, was ambushed by 50rst SS Heavy
which had been on the move from Beauvais, beyond the Seine, since
June 7th. The company commander of its leading company,
turmführer Wittmann, coma eteran of the Russian front, where he
had won the Knight's Cross, and then the Oak Leaves to it,
extraordinary skill and bravery in tank combat; his personal score of
knocked-out Russian tanke as 117. Waiting in a small patch
woodland beside the rond o was Villers-Bocage on the morning of
June i3th, he observed the head of 7th Armoured Division's column
leaving the town. It was formed of a tank battalion,
4th County of
London
Yeomanry
(Sharpshooters),
supported
by
the
motor
battalion, the ist Rifle Brigade, in half-tracks.
