Map 3 The Canadian beach assault, June 6th, 1944
KEY
---== D-Day objectives
German resistance nests
a Allied forces
3 HQ 3rd
CDN INF DIV
German forces
Allied front line at midnight,
June 6th-7th
angrune-sur-Mer
Petit Enfer
SWORD BEACH
3rd BRITISH
INFANTRY DIVISION
Juistreham
GOLD BEACH
50th BRITISH
INFANTRY DIVISION
JUNO BEACH
3rd CANADIAN INFANTRY DIVISION
9th CDN INF BDE
7th CDN INF BDE
27th CD WITH
RESERVE BRIGADE
Sh CDN ARTH RECT
VITH
R WPG RIF
REGINA
8th CDN INF BDE
WITH
10th CDN ARMD REGT
NORTH
OF CO SHORE R
117
CANADA: TO THE SOUTH SHORE
for amateur soldiering which had dotted mid-Victorian Britain and
the empire with an outpost line of frustrated patriots, burning to
close with an enemy who stubbornly refused to materialize.
Hodden-grey doublets and stout canvas gaiters had been their livery,
romantic territorial titles their trade-mark. But nowhere, not even in
the English Nottingham where the Robin Hood Rifles had stood
foth to defend the city against Louis Napoleon, had their titles
rolled more romantically off the tongue than in Canada: Voltigeurs
de Québec, St Clair Borderers,
the Grey Battalion, Manitoba
Grenadiers, Argenteuil Rangers, Megantic Light Infantry, Lisgar
Rifles, Princess Louise Fusiliers, 48th Highlanders, Temiscouata
and Rimouski Regiment - the roll call read as if by Tennyson (Form
Riflemen, form!') out of James Fenimore Cooper.
When a real enemy, the Kaiser, had at last presented himself, and
Canada had responded to the challenge - 'Our answer goes at once,'
Laurier, the French Canadian imperialist had trumpeted to parlia-
ment, 'and it goes in the classical language of the British answer to
the all of duty, "Ready, aye, ready!' - these titles had gone into the
melting pot of a new army. The Canadian divisions which had
captured Vimy Ridge in 19X7, the Canadian Corps which, with the
Australians, had won the great battles of autumn 1918, had been
composed of anonymously numbered battalions. But the men had
been the same as those who had combined to soldier for
Victoria - descendants of the United Empire Loyalists who had fled
the United States for Ontario and the Maritimes after the War of
Independence (Historically a Canadian is an American who rejects
the Revolution'), Scots in their thousands displaced by the Highland
clearances or tempted from the lowland city slums by the word of a
'working-class empire' across the Atlantic, English and Irish caught
by the dream of free land on the prairie,
an infinitesimal dot on the vast expanse, a wagon drawn by a
yoke of oxen, a woman and a child or two on top, a man driving
the animals... moving away from the railway, day after day,
stopping at night along the trailless way, until at last it reached
its destination, the long-dreamed of quarter section ... they
searched until they found the surveyors' signs, three freshly
dug holes and a marker ... no house welcomed them, no barn
- nothing but the land and the sky.
These were the people who had made the new Canada, who had
