86
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
followed their leaders out into the tempest of their aircraft's slip-
Descent
The static line of the American T-5 parachute, a broad webbing
strap hooked at one end to the anchor cable in the aircraft, tied at the
other to the top of the parachute canopy, was fifteen feet long. As the
parachutist emerged from the cabin of the DC-3, throwing himself
outward towards the port wing with a pull of his hands on the edges
of the doorway, he was flicked by the slipstream - a combination of
propeller
and the wind of the plane's own forward
movement - to the static line's end. The resulting tug ripped the
cover off the pack tray, exposing the canopy of the parachute which
it began to pull free by a thinner cord attached to the canopy's арех.
At the same time the jumper's body, acting under the force of
gravity, began to leave the slipstream and tall earthwards. In the
piening sequence of the British & parachute, under which the óth
Airborne Division's soldiers had jus landed at the other end of the
bridgehead. this separation of jumner and canopy occurred a
relatively low velocity, since the static line deployed the rigging
lines, twenty-two feet long, joining canopy and jumper's harness so
that he was at rest, relative to the canopy itself, when it began to
deploy. With the T-5, however, separation of canopy and jumper
was dynamic, the canopy itself pulling the rigging lines from his
pack tray, and the resulting moment of arrest, as deploying canopy
and falling body worked against each other through the rigging lines,
could be
extremely severe.
Known as the 'opening shock', and
dreaded by all, it exerted a force of up to five G on the human body
and threatened to injure it if the harness were not properly adjusted,
As its apogee, it broke the tie at the end of the static line and released
parachutist and canopy to fall to earth together.
The sequence took three seconds and the descent, from seven
hundred feet, about forty. Burgett, who landed just north of St
Martin-de-Varreville, gives a vivid account of his experience:
Doubled up and grasping my reserve chute, I could feel the
rush of air, hear the crackling of the canopy as it unfurled,
followed by the sizzling rigging lines, then the connector links
whistling past the back of my helmet. Instinctively the muscles
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
87
of my body tensed for the opening shock, which nearly
unjointed me when the canopy blasted open. I pulled the risers
apart to check the canopy and saw tracer bullets passing
through it; at the same moment I hit the ground and came in
backwards so hard I was momentarily stunned.... The sky was
lit up like the Fourth of July. I lay there for a moment and
gazed at the spectacle. It was awe-inspiring. But I couldn't
help wondering at the same time if I had got the opening shock
first or hit the ground first; they were mighty close together."
Colonel Vandevoort, dropped by a flak-wary pilot at far above
jumping speed, reported that 'the opening shock popped lights in the
back of your eye-balls and tore off musette bags, field glasses and
anything else that wasn't tied down securely. Lieutenant
Brandenberger, of the tst Battalion, Soznd, was cradling a rifle in
his arms. "The opening shock tore it from my grasp. I can still
remember the thought flashing through my mind that it would hit
some damned Kraut and bash in his head.? Private Sherwood
Trotter, of the ist/soth, lost a 3o machine-gun to opening shock
and Lieutenant Robert Matthews, of the 377th Parachute Artillery,
was knocked out. 'When I got that tremendous opening shock, my
chin snapped down on my binocular case and out I went.
just off the ground and was knocked out again when I hit. 12
Some of the jumpers suffered more serious wounds in the air,
though few of these were the result of aimed shots. Despite the
moonlight, the falling parachutes showed up poorly against the sky
and only in two places, at Angoville-au-Plain, where the Germans
deliberately set fire to a house, and at Ste Mère-Eglise,
building was ignited by the Allied preparatory bombing,
did the
Germans see well enough from the ground to pick off individuals.
One of these was Colonel Wolverton. But there was a great deal of
loose metal criss-crossing the parachutists' airspace, and some of it
found a billet. Private Guerdon Walthall saw tracer go through the
fellow below me and I really started sweating about getting hit
before I reached the ground', but he did so unharmed. Captain Felix
Adams, medical officer of the 377th Artillery, was hit on the helmet
(good old helmet') by a piece of flak and landed unconscious, and
Captain
Caumartin,
and/ goth, disalt officer, Captaine nose - and I worried about
what my wife would think when I returned without a nose' and then
