42
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Pacific ..,
we to rope pratie no nut out or there
Unable to resolve the matter between themselves - the Chits cl
Staff Commitee had been set up only in February and Marshall and
King represented two-thirds of its voting strength - the chiefs o
staff referred the matter to the President. But he had simultaneously
come under
pressure
from MacArthur, who
dexterously
adopted Roosevelt's concern for action to keep Russia in the war as a
means towards his own strategic end "That [secondl front'. he ha
urged on May 8th, should be in the Pacific Theater. Nowhere die.
can it be so successfully launched and nowhere else will it so assist
the Russians.' In an earlier letter to MacArthur on the same subject,
the President had revealingly suggested that his own approach to
strategy was to keed all his allies 'reasonablv satisfied' and avoid 'any
Sledgehammer and Roundup, his placatory response to the Pacific
although
apparently
committed
commanders kept Marshall on tenterhooks throughout May.
May 6th he had extracted from the President an assurance that he
dealing with a request from King for
did 'not want Bolero slowed down'. But as late as May 24th he was
even over Bolero'.
aircraft, 'as rapidly as possible, giving the objective first priority
reinforcements of army
The President was known to be soft on the aircraft issue: indee
he had conceded King's request in principle on Mav 6th. What saved
the 'Germany First' strater was the great victory of Midway on
Tune 4th. After Midway noadmiral no pacific general not even the
silver-tongued MacArthur, could plausibly represent the Imperial
Japanese Navy, reduced overnight to mere parity with the American
Pacific Fleet, as a force which retained the initiative. The battle had
made it as clear to Roosevelt's government as to the Emperor's that
the ne plus ultra lines of the Pacific war had now heen atrained and
1942 or nearer the Japanese home islands.
that all future battles would be fought on the battle line of lune 4h.
This release from domestic struggle was welcomed all the more by
Marshall because much of his energy during the spring had been
consumed in an internecine conflict to reform the antediluvian
structure and methods of the War Department. In December I945
sixty-one officers had the right of direct accese to him pu Mare
1942 that number had been reded to it he die an By condi
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
43
the re-organization at every step. If they had been beaten it was
because of the extraordinary personal authority which the chief of
staff had already established within the organization he had so
recently come to head. Marshall, who rarely lost his temper and
never raised his voice, was terrifying.
Tall, spare, his heavily
handsome face expressionless save for a permanent suggestion of
disappointment at the world's failure to match his own Olympian
qualities of mind and comportment, he had deliberately cut himself
off from old friendships as he rose to the top of the army and, now
that he had reached its pinnacle, appeared to subsist without any
companionship whatever.
Yet he was no mere technocrat.
"The thing that stands out in
everybody's recollection of General Marshall', wrote Dean Acheson,
the loftiness and beauty of his character.' Explicitly
politician, Marshall possessed a vision of a better world which as a
postwar Secretary of State he would do as much as any man in this
century to realize. And in 1942 he had convinced himself that the
shortest step towards it was by way of a Second Front. Hence the
support he had given Eisenhower while he himself was battling to
reform the War Department, hence his own embassy to London
with the Marshall Memorandum in the spring, hence his relief at the
tidings of Midway. And hence his sense of betrayal at, and aggress-
ive reaction to, the news that the British would not, after all, stand
by their promises for 1942.
The news came to him in a roundabout way. Mountbatten, whose
impending arrival Roosevelt had used to convince Molotov that the
Western powers were on the point of writing an operation order for
Sledgehammer, had in fact been sent to Washington to warn that the
British did not think it feasible. As Churchill had put it in a caveat to
the Molotov communiqué, naturally not published with it, it would
not further either the Russian cause or that of the Allies as a whole if,
for the sake of action at any price, we embarked on some operation
which ended in disaster ... we can therefore give no promise in the
matter'. Mountbatten's explanation of the apparent double-dealing
turned on the disparity of strengths and lack of suitable ships, and
was convincing. He showed that by September the United States
would at best field 3 divisions in Britain, that Britain had in the
home islands only 13 divisions fit for action and that in any case
there were sufficient landing-craft to debark only 4,000 troops
(about a third of a division) at one time. Meanwhile the Germans,
