234
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
and inevitably find themselves clear of the obstacle belt and out into
open country.
Moreover, their armoured divisions were now coming into line.
Advancing behind
pattern of high-explosive laid by medium
bombers on the morning of July 26th, the ist Armoured Division
drove southwards all dav towards Marigny while on the other flank
of the corridor the and, which had learnt the hard facts of combat in
the North African campaign, outstripped it to reach St Gilles and
press through it to the next objective, Canisy. Sensing that there was
now little to stand in his way, the commander of the forward Combat
Command of the division, General Rose, decided to brave the risks
of night movement and ordered his tanks forward through the dusk
and gathering darkness to seize the high ground beyond. When the
next day dawned he had established positions on the pastern flank of
the corridor which would guard the advance of the rest of the Cobra
force between it and the sea.
July 27th saw the advance pushed with ever greater energy. The
and Armoured Division continued to lengthen the defensive flank it
had established south of Canisy. To its west, the 3rd Armoured and
ist Infantry Divisions, working in tandem, hurried towards Cou
tances at the junction of the St Lo and Cherbourg roads, their object
being to cut off the retreat of the German divicions still trying to
hold the line on the coast The panzer divisions and and rath SS
were hastily cuitched to menace their flank and hu hard fighting did
prevent the Americans from entering Coutances on that evening;
Next dav. lulv ≥8th. however, the annearance of two new armoured
divisions. ath and 6th. drove them off and out the town in American
hands. Chasing a cloud of
stragglers before them, the victorious
columns of Shermans and White half-tracks pressed on through to
reach, as evening fell a new chase lino de much as fifteen miles south
of that from which Cobra had been unleashed four days before.
Patton
Reporting the state of his force to Supreme Command West three
wrote of this period:
days later, Hausser, the commander opthe German Seventh Army,
A large proportion of the divisions which had been fighting
continuously since the invasion began disintegrated, as a result
THE HONOUR OF THE GERMAN ARMY
235
of the enemy armoured break-in on the Army's left flank, into
small groups which fought their way back through the enemy
lines on their own. Whether acting on proper rallying orders,
or on unconfirmed verbal instructions, most of these groups
were without officers or NCOs and roamed at random through
the countryside, heading east or south-east ... The stragglers
are for the most part in very bad state.5
On July 28th Bradley had as yet no inkling of the extent of the
damage he had inflicted on Seventh Army, nor was he able to foresee
what advantage he could wring from his success. His thinking before
the opening of the offensive had been for a pause at this stage, while
such gains as he had made were consolidated. Whatever the obs-
curities, however, he now grasped that he had won a great victory
and, rather than settle for the safety of a conventional tidying up,
decided to maintain the pressure and thrust fresh troops into the gap
he had opened. Fresh troops were available to him in abundance.
More important, he had a man to hand who, if anyone could, would
transform the break-through into a break-out. The man was General
George Smith Patton.
Patton had been allotted hitherto in the invasion campaign a
calculatedly obscure role.
The 'Patton Army Group' of forty-five
fictitione divicions alleredly located in the south-eastern counties of
England opposite the Pas de Calais, was the principal means by
Which the Allied deception organization had kept alive in the mind of
German intelligence the chimera of a 'second invasion' down the
short route to the Rhineland eves at the end of July of the first
movement from across the Seine of infantry divisions of Fifteenth
Army - the 326th and 363rd Divisions completed the journey on
July 3oth - somewhat relaxed the need to maintain the pretence. But
Eisenhower neverthe/re remained anxious to camouflage the per-
sonal intervention of Patton in ground operations.
For the name could mean as much to the Germans as it did in the
American army, where it stood for an extraordinary and ruthless
driving power at critical moments' capable of getting the utmost
out of soldiers in offensive operations', as Eisenhower had character-
ized him to Marshall the year before. In an army which laid supreme
emphasis upon logistics, had brought to the making of war the
techniques of the Harvard Business School and actually maintained,
alone among the armed forces of developed states, a staff college
