264
SIX
ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Stanislaw Maczek was an odd-man-out in the hierarchy of the
Polish army.
Like many of his generation an Austro-Hungarian
subject by birth, he had fought the First World War not in the ranks
of Pilsudski's Legions, from which the future high command would
be chosen
orthodox
almost without exception, but as a Kaiserjager of the
Habsburg army.
Through great natural ability, and a
glittering reputation won in the defence of his native Galicia against
the Bolsheviks in 1919-20, he had overcome this false start to his
career and in October 1938 gained command of one of the only two
armoured brigades maintained by the army. Long an apostle of
mobility, he was dejected to discover that his new command had all
the drive of a 'village fire-brigade'. In the year remaining to him h
worked unceasingly to transform it into an arm of modern warfare
and to such effect that in
September 1939 it actually counter-
attacked the future Field-Marshal Schörner's mountain division
outside L'vov
ground back
from it. But its isolated
successes could not alter the course of events even in its own
Carpathian sector, let alone that ofuhe campaign, and by September
some of his veterans in France,
Igth Maczek found himself a refugee in Hungarv. Re-united with
he reformed his loth
Brigade inct in time for it to be broken again in the German invasion
Scotland.
of the west and thanno found bie way via Alain and Morocco to
Painfully the pieces of the roth Cavalry Brigade were put back
together and in April 1042 sufficient other units inined to it to forr
the armoured division General Sikorski wanted.
And for the next
two vears while II Corns fought ite way darnes the Moditorranean
the Home Army
constructed its
underground
network
resistance cells in the fragmented territory of the homeland,
invasion army. Its organization
followed the weary round of trainine set to all elements of the
pattern; but the proud Polish titles of its regiments retained, roth
was consolidated on the British
Mounted Rifles as the reconnaissance regiment, 24th Lancers and
ist and and Armoured Regiments as the tank battalions,
Dragoons as the motor battalion Padalian and 9th and oth Light
Infantry as its infantry battalions For divis was not a King's
German Legion, a formation of mionhe enlisted in the Reitish army
It was a constituent element of the army of the Republic of Poland
beaches in triumphant return.
on to whose territory Maczek looked forward to leading it from the
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
265
Even before the invasion year had dawned, his prospects of doing
so had been cast into shadow. Stalin had quickly made it clear to his
allies that he intended to repossess the zone occupied by his troops in
1939, Poland's right to which, established by conquest in 1920,
Russia had never conceded. Though Sikorski knew that its Polish
population was a minority, he could not of course negotiate such a
re-adjustment while in exile. And since the Russians recognized that
he would be even less likely to do so once he returned to Warsaw,
Stalin took steps to foster an alternative government-in-exile inside
Russian lines which was pliable to his wishes. The accidental death
in July 1943 of Sikorski, a magisterial figure whose force of character
even Stalin seemed to respect, removed all chance of settling
Russo-Polich differences on a personal basis, and the return in
January 1944 of the Red Army to the occupied zone of
obliterated any motive Stalin might have had for keeping relations
with his successor alive. Official relations had, indeed, been broken
off the previous April, since when the Polish Home Army had been
pressing on with its preparations to rise against the German army of
occupation as soon as the prospect of an interregnum was glimpsed
Its hope, like Tito's,
was to welcome the Red Army to a country
already liberated by its own efforts, and so avoid the imposition of a
government of Kremlin nominees. But the partition of the national
territory effected by the Nazis made military co-ordination difficult
to the point of impossibility.
The former zone of Soviet occupation was under German military
administration. The western provinces had been incorporated into
the Greater Reich as the
Gaue of Wartheland and Danzig-West
Prussia, the border to the east closed and the Polish middle classes
domiciled there expelled or deported to concentration camps.
Home Army might therefore only organize itself with any degree of
coherence inside the 'General Government',
the core
of the old
Polish republic east and west of the Vistula which the Germans
administered as a colonial territory.
Of volunteers to the Home
Army there was no lack; by 1944 Bor-Komorowski, the Home Army
commander, reckoned there were nearly 400,000 enrolled members,
a remarkable total in a population of ten million depleted by the exile
of many of the younger males to forced labour in Germany.
weapons and warlike stores there was a crippling
dearth.
So
complete had been the collapse of the national army in 1939 that
very little
of its equipment had been smuggled into hiding and
