24
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
bearable because the route constituted a sort of pilgrimage across the
heartland of the 'old Army's' past. It began north of the deserts of
Arizona,
where the black regiments of
US Cavalry - 'buffalo
soldiers' to the Indians - had endured the Saharan summers of the
American interior, ran south of the hunting grounds of the Sioux,
for which Custer had died in battle at the Little Big Horn, and then
across the endless steppe of the Great Plains dotted by the stockaded
outposts of settlement, Forts Kearney and Niobrara,
Omaha and
Sydney, Dodge, Ellsworth, Hawker,
Hays and
Wallace,
a few
thriving and populous, most garrisonless and forgotten, through
which the army had shepherded the trek west. At Kansas City he left
behind one of the most sacred places of the army's emotional
geography, holier even than Battle Monument at West Point or the
eternal flame at Arlington National Cemetery, where at Leaven-
worth, on the bluff above the Missouri still scarred by the aban-
doned Oregon-Santa Fé trail, stands the tiny memorial chapel of the
regiments which fought for the frontier in the Indian wars of the
1860s and 1870s. It is there in the low-eaved gloom,
between the
cannon barrels which serve as pillars to the roof, amono the slios of
commemorative marble to scalped subalterns, that the American
officer reminds himself of the days of 'real soldiering'; days when
men sweated their necks sore, swallowed spit and chewed their boots
for supper, rode all day to the musical creak of the McClellan saddle,
slept to the dving fall of Tana Faded the chel And cel Goeth
day/ Cometh night/And a star/Leadeth all To their reat' _ and
celebrated return to the safety of the palisaded camp
with eye-
burning shots of rye and all the sweet water a soldier could swallow
It is the shrine of those Indian-fighting troopers whom Frederick
Remington has immortalized in paint for the American nation and
the freemasonry of Uncle Sam's army.
whose days on the prairie he has left as a vision of the perfect life to
And, to the long-service soldier of Stilwell's stamp, it was a vision
which cut deeper into the imagination even than the panoramas of
glory and tragedy composed in blood on the great hatrlefields of the
south - Atlanta, Chattanooga, Spotsylvania and the Wilderness -
which lay beyond the horizon as he winged onwarde from St Louis
to Cincinnati. The Indian ware had been the privato annearn of 'y
homogeneous class - straight, lean. sanare iatred plear-aved mous
tachioed soldiers, professionally goine shout their husiness without a
flicker of fear or a moment of self-douht the American equivalents
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
25
of Stalky and Co. and inhabitants of a world equally self-contained.
The Civil War had been a war of the people, miscellaneously armed,
shoddily clad, often unwillingly conscripted and corruptly officered,
ragged in step, clumsy in drill, uncertain and sometimes panic-
stricken in the face of the enemy - blue or grey.
They had formed
armies over which the West Point classes of the 1840s had wrung
their hands in despair and with which their descendants from the
Long Gray Line still felt less fraternity than with the disregarded
apprentice regulars who had been driven from Washington by the
British in 1812.
But, as Stilwell might have reflected as he touched down on the
reclaimed swampland along the Potomac on December 24th, it was
again a people's war which he had come to organize.
white-painted officers' quarters which - as if for a stage setting of a
Carson McCullers novel - line the lawns in front of the War College,
where he called that afternoon, was almost as unfitted to fight a
world conflict as was Winfield Scott's that which had broken out
between the states in 1861. True, it no longer ranked 'nineteenth
among the world's armed forces after Portugal' or 'forty-fifth in per
cent of population under arms' as in September 1939. In the 27
intervening months it had multiplied its strength eight times, from
190,000 to I•5 million, and its 93 battalions of infantry and 14
regiments of cavalry had been lost inside an army
of new large
formations - 30 divisions of infantry, 2 of cavalry and 5 of the new
Armoured Forces, equipped with tanks (for which the American
general staff in the interwar years had shown even less enthusiasm
than the British). But tanks were as yet arriving from the hastily
mobilized factories in dribs and drabs and, as with the aircraft for
the 40 new Air Groups, much of the production was earmarked for
shipment to Britain or Russia. American industry, like a knight in
rusty armour, groaned to put forth its strength; meanwhile little
equipment reached the divisions training in the hundreds of hutted
camps hastily thrown up all over the south-eastern and western
United States. Eight million Americans were docketed for drafting
into the army, but the officers who would lead them still knew little
more of their duty than they had been taught in afternoons at college
ROTC courses.
None of this mattered as much, however, as the lack of a plan by
which to employ the army when it eventually graduated from the
training camps and, fully equipped, stood ready to face the enemy.
