44
SIX ARMIES IN
NORMANDY
with 1go divisions in Russia, 15 in Scandinavia, s in the Balkans and
3 in the Western Desert, still kept 27 in France. And they could find
1, 500 first-line aircraft to meet an Allied air force of 1,200 Bish
fighters and less than 100 American.
"It's not on', was the brunt of Mountbatten's message. The Brin
won't fight', was no doubt how Stilwell would have put it. Marshal
was less corrosive. But he was not to have Roosevelt to himself for
long enough to shake the doubt Mountbatten had nanted in his
mind on lune loth. For on lune loth, undeterred either bu the risk
or fatigue of another of his twenty-eight-hour transatlantic flights,
different strategy for 1942.
Churchill arrived in Washington bearing arguments for an entirely
While be tackled the President, his
persuasive military supporters kept the chiefs of staff in play. And
the ground was
when all met at the White House on June 2 ist, Marshall found tha
surrender
unmoved that the dav had also brought news of the humiliating
gone from under his feet.
Churchill, outwardly
of the Tobruk garrison in the Western
Desert, led
Roosevelt with him in a running argument against the Second Front
Now. And when he and his advisers had left, the President asked
Marshall to stav behind. and then put it to him that the United
ary force to the Middle East.
States should plan to commit its painfully accumulated expedition
Marshall, finding himself at that moment as close to losing his
to discuss the project and withdrew.
self-control in the President's company as be ever came declined
But his sense of strategie
surrender. The aftermath of the 'Day
necessity forbade him to acquiesce in what he saw ge the Dresident!
immediate
counter-attack,
of Dupes' gave him no
though
London, whither Eisenhower had departed on lune 2ard as con
reports from
mander of United States Forces Europe, heightened his suspicions
that the British were squirming off the hook of the Second Fron
When, on July 8th, Churchill conceded as much bu sionaling the
Gymnast (North Africa) must now replace Sledgehammer as the
Allies' main offensive endeavour for 1942, he decided to play some
politics himself Toother with Kino whamar mar mat have sel
through what Marshall later confessed to be a transparent ploy, he
drew up a memorandum for the President advising that, in default o
'forceful, unswerving adherence to Bolero plans' the two chiefs of
staff were 'of the opinion' that the United States should 'assum
a defensive attitude against Germany, excent for air anoration
JOURNEX TO THE SECOND FRONT
45
and use all available means in the Pacific.
Roosevelt took fright. Rejecting the memorandum, but seeing that
he could not sustain an effective alliance while his chiefs of staff and
the British differed over the next - effectively the first - step of joint
action, he ordered Marshall and King back to London at once,
where, with Hopkins, they were to come to a final agreement over
strategy for 1942. The politician in him prayed that it would be for a
bold and successful operation before congressional election
(November 3rd); the stateman recognized that, in a grand alliance,
the rules of Cabinet government apply; that what is agreed is less
important than the fact of agreement itself. Marshall, too, in his
heart accepted that. Nevertheless he was determined to try and get
the British to co-operate in
some
sort of early
cross-Channel
operation. After consulting Eisenhower and his staff, who had set up
shop in Grosvenor
Square,
he hit upon the
notion
of giving
Sledgehammer a precise objective - the narrow Cotentin peninsula,
which reaches out towards the west of England ports. His reasoning
was that the physical dimensions of the Cotentin - about twenty-five
miles long by twenty wide - made it a landing area which could be
seized and, more important, held by the size of force which might be
available in the coming autumn; and that, if held through the
winter, it would provide the jumping-off place for Roundup in the
following spring. Privately his calculation was that unless he could
commit the British to securing a foothold in
Europe in
1942,
Roosevelt's need to do something, almost anything, in the current
year would entail the diversion of the American expeditionary force
to the Mediterranean and its effective squandering on some mission
which would harm the Germans very little.
For three days, from Monday to Wednesday, July 20th-22nd, the
American mission and the British chiefs of staff dissected the
proposal point by point. And point by point the Americans were
defeated. Ultimately Eisenhower, who remained firm in his convic-
tion that 'we've got to go to Europe and fight', suggested to Marshall
that they offer the British the sop of an American armoured division
for use by the Eighth Army against Rommel in the Western Desert,
so that the rest of the Bolero force could be kept in Britain and used
for Roundup in the coming year. But Marshall, who recalled the
attempts to use Pershing's army as cannon-fodder in 1918,
adamantly opposed. Even more strongly than wanting an American
strategy, he wanted an American army one and indivisible to fight
