128
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
resistance. All the German defences would, in addition, have been
subjected to heavy air bombing before the landing fleet came within
sight of the shore, an ingredient of the offensive the German
defenders of Dieppe had been spared for fear of killing large
numbers of French civilians.
The German Defenders
Yet more heartening to the Canadians, had they known the facts,
would have been the knowledge that the German defenders of the
Beach they were to assault - codenamed luno - were considerabl
fewer than those present at Dieppe There, on an offensive front o
about four miles, which exactly equalled that of Juno, the German
302nd Division had had two battalions in line - eight companies each
of about two hundred
men
engineers.
They
had been
and two companies of combat
disposed, moreover, in commanding
positions on the cliffs or in bunkers along the sea front, difficult to
distinguish among the man buildings of the town and immune, by
Cabinet fiat, from air attack. By t944 the goand was long gone from
France. A mobile field formation of hit and mature men, it had
departed for the maelstrom of the Russian front. The soldiers whom
the Canadians would meet were of a diferent order. They belonged
to the 716th Division, one of a group of bodenständige organized on a
weaker scale than the field divisions, equipped with older, very often
foreign weapons captured in earlier campaigns,
and lacking the
transport to manoeuvre effectively should they be expelled from
their initial line of defence. As a token of mobility, one battalion in
each bodenständige division was mounted on bicycles. The only other
mechanical, and sole automotive, unhicles the formation possessed
was the divisional commander's staff car. Everything else - the guns
of the divisional artillery and the supply wagons of the infantry
battalions - was pulled by horses. The men were expected to march.
And they could not march well. By definition the soldiers of the
bodenständige divisions were too old or too feeble to find a place in
the first line. The German army had not yet been reduced to
crisis of the
forming 'dyspeptic' and 'flat feet" battalions, as it was to be in the
coming
716th's soldiers - under
eighteen, over thirty-five or victims of third-degree frostbite - were
not the physical equivalents of the magnificent young Canadians,
hardened by two years of intensive and realistic training, who now
CANADA: TO THE SOUTH SHORE
129
bobed offshore in their landing-craft waiting for the signal for the
run-in. They lacked the Canadians' fitness. They lacked their variety
o experience. And, most important of all, there were fewer of them.
At Dieppe the Germans had opposed six battalions with two and a
half. On Juno they were to oppose nine battalions with less than one.
The 736th Infantry Regiment was one of two in the 7l6th Division.
Its sister, the y26th was largely absent from the divisional area,
however, only one battalion remaining in reserve behind the
defences of Juno. This allocation of force meant that General
Richter, the divisional commander, had only four German battalions
with which to defend a front of nineteen miles. He had also been
given two 'East' battalions, the 642nd, which was not in line, and the
147st, which was; its quality was believed to justify the risk of using
it in a close reserve role but, on D-Day, it was to run away all the
same. He had naturally put his Germans in the immediate front line,
a string of bunkers and trenches which closed the exits from the most
open beaches. He had also tried to retain a reserve, to counter-attack
against a break-in, choosing the Il Battalion, 726th Regiment. In
consequence, each of his twelve companies of the 736th Regiment
had to hold over a mile of front. There were therefore only three
directly in the path of the Canadians, the gth and 6th Companies and
part of the 7th, numbering in all about 400 men. And they were
about to be attacked by 2,400 men in the Canadian first wave,
supported by 76 swimming tanks and a shattering weight of air and
sea bombardment.
If they were to hope to survive, it would be through the greater
degree of protection which they enjoyed and the response of their
own artillery. The 716th Division, if weak in infantry, was officially
reckoned to be strong in artillery. The division had its
complement of field and medium batteries, 8 of the former and 4 of
the latter. There was also a self-propelled artillery battalion of 3
batteries belonging to a Panzer Division in its area and under
General Richter's tactical control. Extra to the divisional allotment
were 3 batteries of 155 mm guns and 2 of coast artillery. The tota
number of pieces on paper was 83. However, 3 of the divisional
heavy and one of the field bateries had been lent to 35and Division,
defending Omaha and Gold Breches to the west, so the true total
was 67, including 4 Polish, & Czech and 5 French guns, captured in
the Wehrmacht's easy days, of very varied calibre. All the heavier
guns were supposed to be under concrete, but Rommel's accelera-
