58
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
(American). Gold (British), Juno (Canadian) and Sword /British
Admiral King also donated, late and grudgingly, enough eri
bombardment ships to ensure that every vard of the beaches and the
routes to them would be drenched by fire from the sea. The extr
aircraft needed to fly the
American 82nd and 101st Airborne
Divisions to the western flank and the British 6th Airhorne to th
eastern, and to extend fighter and bomber cover over the larger
beaching zone. were procured without difficulty: though it took firm
words from Eisenhower to quash the opposition of his air deputy
Leigh-Mallory, to the airborne landings. The Air Marshal's pess-
mistic judgment was that losses of 5 per cent of men and aircraft
excellent working relationships
were to be expected. Montgomery himself had quickly established
subordinates:
Dempsey, who was to command the British Second Army, Bradley
of the American First Army, and Crerar of the
Canadian First
That he was able, with his abrupt and egotistic personality, to
communicate of
enlist their confidence is explained by the assurance he managed to
Montgomery was not a Brooke.
understanding and equalling the task in hand.
Chief of the Imperial General Staff (but very few other men), he ha
Though he greatly admired the
no complex or subtle strategic views. His personal military experi
ence was bloody - he had been wounded near to death in his firs
campaign in 19I4 - and he never shrank from confronting the
ultimate truth about war. that it is won or lost with the lives of
human beings. Like Brooke he had drawn from his First World Wer
experience a conviction that the squandering of life is the cardina
military sin; and he had deliberately adonted a stule of comman
which ensured his close supervision of all the expenditure of life that
he ordered. But he did not seek for ways to avoid battle itself. Where
Brooke had hoped that the octopus of Mediterranean strategy Would
strangle the Germans to death in its tentacles, and the COsSAc team
had looked little beyond the difficulties of transporting an invasion
force to the coast of France, Montgomery focused sharply on the
battle that must follow its arrival. For it was in 'arranging' battles, in
audience of
the old-fashioned sense, by correct disposition and 'balance', that his
skills chiefly lay. 'We must blast our way on shore'. he told his
senior invasion commanders assambled at his head
quarters in St Paul's school on May 15th 'and get a good lodgemen!
enemy can bring
up
sufficient
reserves
JOURNEY
TO THE SECOND FRONT
59
us out ... We must gain space rapidly and peg out claims well inland
•.. then we will have the lodgement area we want and can begin to
expand.'
To do so he planned to fight a large and relentless armoured battle
around Caen, in the British eastern sector, so that the Americans to
the west might progressively build up their strength to twenty
divisions, break out into open country and turn the Germans' flank
in a drive to the Seine. But it would not, he warned, be easy at any
stage. For all that the Allies, deploying 12,000 aircraft,
would
outnumber the Luftwaffe by over twenty to one, it must be expected
that the German army would still find the means to move reserves to
Normandy. Their forces already there were formidable.
were commanded by Rommel. He, Montgomery concluded,
is an energetic and determined commander; he has made a
world of difference since he took over ... He will do his best to
'Dunkirk' us - not to fight the armoured battle on ground of his
own choosing, but to avoid it altogether by using his tanks well
forward. It is now clear that his intention is to deny us any
penetration: Overlord is to be defeated on the beaches.
Rommel
Montgomery's penetration of his old desert adversary's intentions
was almost telepathically accurate, and oddly
sO T
because it was
Rommel rather than he who preached the need to empathize with
the enemy. Montgomery, it is true, displayed photographs of the
enemy commanders in his command caravan and searched in their
features for clues to their future actions.
Rommel, out of a similar
distaste for the château generalship under which both had suffered
in the First World War, had also inhabited a caravan in the desert,
but used it as a base to establish even more direct contact with his
enemy's moods and shifts of purpose, which he believed were best
detected in the front line itself. Now that the Channel intervened
between him and Montgomery his antennae had temporarily ceased
to function.
He harboured no hunches about the timing of the
invasion and was inclined to suspect the Pas de Calais would be the
landing area. But his intentions towards the invasion fleet, when it
appeared, were, as Montgomery had
guessed,
unequivocal. He
would stop it and its passengers at the low-water mark.
