80
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
'Did you get those shoulders working in a coal mine?'
'Yes, sir.'
'Good luck to you tonight, soldier',6
As he moved among them, many of the sticks began to emplane,
struggling through the fuselage door to find their places within. To
those with whom he had not spoken a mimeographed sheet bearing a
farewell message was passed. To all was issued the second dose of
the air-sickness pills the divisional medical officers had prescribed,
which had the important side-effect, intended or not, of inducing a
comfortable drowsiness. Many
were grateful for them as they
fidgeted to find the least uncomfortable position in which to make
the flight, joined sporadically in the medley of songs started by the
most wakeful and tried to empty their minds of thoughts of the
immediate future.
The time was 10.15 p.m. and the darkness of the night of June
5th-6th had begun to close over the long lines of C-47s, at Welford,
Membury, Ramsbury, Greenham Common and Aldermaston, and
at the Devon airfields of Merryfield and Upottery. At the Lincoln-
shire airfields of the 82nd, Fulbeck, Barkston Heath, Saltby, North
Witham, Folkingham, Cottesmore and Spanhoe, the engines had
already begun to turn for take-off, to carry the flight serials down to
imaginary localities above the Channel bearing names more familiar
to American ears
Flatbush,
Hoboken,
Reno and
Spokane.
Towards It p.m. the men of the oist caught the sounds of the same
sequence, the whine of the starter winding up; a few throaty coughs
as the engine caught and finally roared into a full crescendo. The
lead pilot ran up his engines and then taxied slowly down the
runway to a position facing into the wind. The other planes fell into
single file much like soldiers assembling and followed the lead craft.
At Welford General Eisenhower raised a salute to each which
Then at 2245 [Corporal Koskimaki noted], our plane began
moving down the runway, gathered momentum rapidly and
gently
lifted from the concrete surface. The rest
of the
[forty-five] planes in our serial followed at seven-second inter-
vals until the entire group was airborne. The planes continued
to circle ... until all forty-five were airborne and in formation.
Our plane served as the point.
The planes flew in Vs of nine
planes. The centre plane of the three lead planes of each
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
ne plane group served as its immediate point. Wing legins
it on and it was a beautiful spectacle so behold thesnugt the
open doorway?
limes do the last time but two that anyone would wee much a thunge
Like the dreadnought fleets of 1910-20, the ught of situct man
curing in close formation in the narton water of the Norto Bea
kite ate in those who had winesed it something of the
ferinted a tet by relier sumbling anovaces on an elephares
Bargard, the great airborne armadas were to prove obsolese saturns
as soon as conceived. The naval pachyderms, sedi immunerable so
tach oter attack, had been withered out of existence in a few year.
by the apearance of the iragile but lethal carries-bore aeroplass,
Massed troop-carrying aircraft were to engoy an even shorer lite
san In the not yet planned Market Garden Operation pilots would
find themselves flying directly into concerarated antimacorals for
and surviving only because their parachutists in many cases bei
directly on the gun positions and disabled the crews. Is Operatin
Varsity, which would be staged to cross the Rhine in the coming
sping, the pilots were to discover that the odde had moved eyen
more sharply against then; 440 out of 1,59p troop cartiers were
severely damaged or destroyed and a parachutes who survived dae
curtains of flak would recall the hortor of watching the crews df tha
sicken aircraft which had just dropped them at minimum aliends
coming to the doors of blazing planes and then, reading they were
below the height at which they could hope to operate their caves,
turning back into the machines to wait their fase on impact, Wichin a
few years, when ground- and air-launched missiles would have been
added to the troop-carrying aircraits enemies, no general anywhere
would consider sending formations en masse againet prepared post-
tions, and the role of the parachutist would dwindle to that if the
clandestine interloper.
But on this June night of 1944 it was at its aponse, and the yes
fleets of C-478 could ride the cloudless moonlit sky with all the
confidence and something of the appearance of fellicne's and
Beat's squadrons breasting their way southward to their render,
vous with the High Seas Fleet.
The sight
was 'extraordinary,
"breath-taking, 'majestic', and the naval
analogy
more
than
metaphorical for, as Ridgway recalled, with the "V of Ve only 159
feet from wing tip to wing tip, no lights to guide them except lake
