278
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
making
the dash from the
Dives valley towards safety.
More
Germans were spotted filtering around the ridge to the north. The
two armoured regiment commanders, Koszutski and Stefanewich,
hurriedly conferred. Their 1,500 infantry and 8o tanks were don-
ously cut off and surrounded behind German lines and, they knew,
lacked the fuel to break out. On the other hand, as long as they
stayed where they were, they could reasonably hope to hold their
Positions. and hu neing their weanone and calling down the fire o
own and the Canadian artillery could arrest all German
movement they could see. They had become, as it were, the cork in
the neck of the pocket. Captain Sévigny, their attached observation
officer of the 4th Medium Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery, vas
at once instructed to concentrate a recimental shont un the enem
traffic jam and within minutes they were able to watch salvoes of
could see several vehicles alight', recalled Captain Sévigny, 'terrified
5:5-inch shells falling into the 'moving mass.
What a massacre. I
horses trying to break out of their harness, men trying to file. It was
useless. Shells soon found them and I saw bodies fly in the ait.
the Polish tanks on the ridge joined in,
exacting payment for the
great extermination battle in the bend of the Bzura river where the
mass of the Polich army had been tranned and annihilatad in ins
such a situation ... five years before'.
The execution went on until
smoke from the burning mass of material below (thisened by a
sudden rain couall) rose to obscure the target The tont, dera
and allowed those Germans who wished to surrender to be collected,
those who were wounded to be dressed and thace whn decnaired o
fighting their way through the ring of steel to fond hank again
towards Chambois.'
Koszutski, the senior officer, nevertheless recognized that the
respite was temporary. The Germans etheless recognumerous and
soo hard-pressed to be deterred from another attempt to break out
simply by indirect fire.
Shortly they would be bound to make a
deliberate assault on the Mace itself (in Polish, the Macauga, a word
peculiar significance
because the
weapon was the symbol of
sovereign power ceremonially accepted ay he was of state at the
moment of their installation). He gave some essential orders.
"The
northern peak of Hill 262 (the Macel so essecame a fortres,
recorded Captain Sévigny. 'Our only hope lay with the Americans
coming up from the south who were to join us during the night. But
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
279
the Americans had been halted at Chambois. There was no hope of
help - the Poles could only count on themselves?
Koszutski called a conference of his officers. 'Gentlemen, the
position is serious. Our brigade is completely cut off. The enemy is
still fighting. His only retreat routes are those which you can see to
the left and right. No one except us can stop them. That is what we
are trying to do. No question of surrender. I speak as a Pole."
That evening in Warsaw the commander of the garrison in the Old
Town also took a momentous decision. He recognized that his battle
had reached a climacteric. The Royal Palace and the Cathedral of St
John, twin symbols of Polish national sovereignty, had been reduced
to ruins. Nine hundred of the thousand buildings in the Old Town -
cherished by Poles as the most easterly expression of the Baroque
movement in European architecture - had been destroyed.
hundred thousand citizens had been driven by concentric German
attacks into the cellars under the rubble, while the Home Army
garrison, about 10,000 strong at the outset, had suffered casualties of
between 50 and 80 per cent. Bor-Komorowski therefore determined
that, with the assistance of relief attacks by Home Army units from
outside the Old Town, he must lead his men in a break-through to
safer positions from which to carry on the fight.
August zoth was thus to be a momentous day of struggle for the
Home Army and the army-in-arile For both the chiect was survival.
but while Bor could at best hope to survive with a crown of honour,
the Ist Armoured Division mipht through survival consummate the
destruction of the German army in the west. All night the men on
the Mace had heard the rumble of German transport moving across
country at the foot of their fortress. Early in the morning Koszutski
accordingly sent a small-tank infantry force to seize the tail of the
Mace, where the Vimoutiers road ran across it, intending to forme
block there, but before itters establish itself he was forced to order
its recall. A sudden and heavy German attack, supported by armour,
had started to come in against the northern edge of the Mace and
reinforcements were needed to beat it off. After an hour and a half of
fighting, between g a.m. and 10.30 a.m., the position was restored;
one of Meindl's parachute battalions had been badly hurt in the
proceedings. What Koszutski did not realize, however, was that the
tanks his men had driven off came not from within the pocket but
without; they belonged to the znd SS Panzer Division,
which had
laagered overnight.
near
Vimoutiers and
wae now
beginning the
