266
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
such arms as the patriots had were largely defective, or poor things
of makeshift manufacture. In Warsaw itself 40,000 Home Army
members disposed of only 1,000 rifles and 25,000 home-made
hand-grenades.
On July 26th the Red Army had crossed the 'Curzon Line, that
Proposed by the British Foreign Minister in 1919 as an ethnically
logical division between Russia and re-emergent Poland, and one for
which Churchill and Roosevelt were prepared to give the Poles ther
support in negotiations with Moscow. Like the Germans, however,
the Polish government-in-exile, which was now treating with Russia
only as an ally of allies', counted on the inherent 'contradictions of
the Soviet-Western relationship to work out to their advantage and
would not budge from the 1939 frontier. Mikolajezyk,
successor, though actually in Moscow at the end of July, insisted on
negotiating with Stalin as if from strength and would give nothing
away. At one and the same moment Stalin gave his recognition to the
authority of the 'Lublin Committee of communist Poles in the
liberated eastern territories, and the Germans in Warsaw seemed to
be preparing to evacuate the citv at the approach of the Russian
vanguards, now within a few miles of eastern suburbs beyond the
Vistula; the high command of the Home Army therefore decided
that it could postpone striking no longer. On Iuly 3ist, the day or
which ist Armoured Division had crossed he Channel from Tilbury
Arromanches,
Bor-Komorowski
(Tempest) for the seizure of Warsaw.
issued the codeword
uprising had begun.
On the following evening the
By August roth the battle for the city had already started to go
badly for the Home Army. The Rusians had hatted at the outskirts
of Praga, Warsaw's suburb on the east bank of the
Vistula; they
would later claim that they had outrun their lines of supply. It was
certainly the
case that,
after an initial show of withdrawal, the
Germans had not merely halted their resirement but brought up
reinforcements - including the Hermann Gäring Panzer Division
which threatened with defeat anv Ruesian affort to mann tha river
and at the same time provided the detachments necessary to reduce
the strongpoints held bu the Poles Those seized at the outset had
given the Home Army control of a large sector of the inner city.
it had been too weak to drive the enemy garrisons of the prisons,
police stations and military buildings from their positions,
which
had long been fortified against an uprising, thei so found difficulty
A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
267
in arranging communication between one sector and anather except
through the sewers. While the surrounded Germans, who between
them occupied 194 city blocks, engaged the efforts of the
Army detachments in the Old Town and its neighbouring districts,
German reinforcements outside began a systematic reduction of the
approaches to the insurgent-held areas.
4th the
Luftwaffe undertook continuous bombing raids along the axes which
their ground troops were following, with such success
August i5th the Home Army had been forced out of the main
cross-city arteries.
This turn of events gave back the German high command use of
the bridges across the Vistula and so the means to reinforce its field
units standing before the Russian outposts on the far side of Praga.
To these Bor-Komorowski was now transmitting appenle for help via
his radio link to London, but without response.
succession of difficulties even in the way of efforts by the British and
American air forces to dron supplies to the embattled patriots
Warsaw being too far from English bases for their aircraft to make
the flight in a round trip, with a useful payload, they had petitioned
the Russians for permission to land at their forward airfields.
until September
Stalin agree to provide facilities.
Meanwhile a Polish bomber squadron attached to the Royal Air
Force undertook a number of missions, but their effect was sumbolic
and losses very high; missions flown by
British and South African
squadrons were even more costly. At the price of a critical worsening
of relations with their Presh allies - the Polish parachute brigade in
Britain, which a month later was to drop into Arnhem,
hunger strike on August 13th - the British therefore put relief flights
on a low priority; the
Americans eventually flew two strong mis-
sions but managed to drop onlu about to her cent of their loade int
Polish-held areas.
Conditions of existence within those areas - normal life had ceased
from the outbreaks of che rising - deteriorated from day to day.
Communication with the outside world, except by radio, was broken
off. Food had been too strictly rationed by the authorities for large
reserves to be accumulated beforehand,
short within the first days; 'spit soup', so called because it was eaten
to a regular rhythm of spitting out the husks of the unmilled grain
from which it was boiled, became the standard diet,
consumed with all the appetite which had revolted against it when
