SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
these rifles surmounted by their tin helmets, looking like strange
fungi sprouting up haphazardly through cornfields, remembered an
observer. The sight, a universal of that Normandy summer and soon
all too familiar to
was particularly unnerving to the
innocent, like the Borderers waiting in second line who would find
the first wave's wounded 'We felt nervously energetic. Officers and
sergeants preserved calm exteriors... The Jocks felt the moment.
- goodness knows what about, but it didn't matter.
apart as they just listened to the
enormous effort of the guns. All were joined by an under-current of
emotion that obliterated rank. All were smoking. It was steadying to
smoke. The word to advance came over the wireless.
We arose... The wide fields of ripening corn rolled away
before us, the mist already lifting to an overcast sky of grey
cloud ... There were periodic stabs of small-arms fire, con-
fused, some way off in various directions. Isolated elements of
the Hitler Youth, having crawled to ground under the barrage
and stuck it out, were attempting to fight, often Iving low to le
the leading battalions pass over them in the corn, and bobbing
had stumbled
hp in the rear. There was a shout over in Eight Platoon. They
stunned from the guns,
on a position.
But the SS
defenders,
had no time to collect themselves.
Their hands were up. Someone was detached to escort them
back. Others were stumbled upon; things in the corn that
would never bob up again - and a thrill of revulsion when yet
others were in all too familiar khaki.
A little farther on, where the countryside began ta change from
the corn of the Formine-lIn Place to the bocaos of the battlefield
the Borderers thought that they had met the real enemy.
'There were
some pale obiest in the ground bu the annocit, Lodeo Hre human
chances, and watched for reactions. I raised hu binoculars Sick I
told the gunner to ston. We had haan firing at our own dead 12
Farther on, the Cameronians and the Glasgow Highlanders were
meeting a living enemy, who were all around in the standing corn,
on the right flank, on the ridge in front, in the ruins of Cheux itself.
Cheux had been battered to pieces byt, in the ruins the land and sea
bombardment. But on the way down in weightoe Highland Light
Infantry, advancing under rain and a lowering sky', found *control
175
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
difficult and direction lost in the orchards'. There was a sniper scare
and 'a lot of indiscriminate firing in all directions'.
They passed
through Cheux, whose defenders had been destroyed or driven out
by gunfire, then struck trouble. Machine-guns opened up at the
leading companies which, shocked by the suddenness of it, went to
ground. Our supporting tanks replied, the tracer ricocheting in all
directions, a source of fear to all. Each time the leading companies
tried to advance, they were met by heavy fire, and the advance
petered out.'
It should now have been pressed by the tanks of the Irth
Armoured Division, which were supporting the Scots, and by the
attached Churchills, the heavy infantry tanks of the gIst
Brigade. But as soon as one of them showed itself over the crest it
drew fire, and there were already three or four in flames just in front
of us', noted an observer. Meyer's tanks and anti-tank gunners were
reacting vigorously to the threat to their front, despite distractions.
An unwanted and unheralded visitor to divisional headquarters in
mid-morning was
the adjutant of the German foreign minister, von Ribbentrop.
The official reports had dissatistied his chief. He wanted to
know why the Allies made steady progress though we had
destroyed hundreds of their tanks.
The adjutant
was still
talking when a panzer officer broke the news, 'British tanks
and infantry have entered Mouen' - half a mile north-west of
our divisional headquarters. Almost at the same moment, tank
shells exploded in our immediate vicinity. All members of the
staff who could be spared were ordered to defend the village.
Ribbentrop's adjutant disappeared in a twinkling,
while Meyer
departed to oversee the response to this break-in. He had formed the
mobile elements of his division into two battlegroups, called Grain-
ville and Mouen, taking command of the latter himself, and was now
trying to pinch off the
head of Scottish Corridor by concentric
counter-attacks from those two places towards Cheux. And thus far
he was having considerable success.
The Scottish Division's attack
had gained a good deal of ground. But it was on a very narrow front,
not much more than 2,500 yards, while behind the point of the
advance there stretched a dense traffic jam,
six miles long,
which it was becoming increasingly difficult to develop any
really
powerful thrust. The defenders, still largely invisible, were so few in
