230
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
decreed Sippenhaft, arrest because of kinship, sanctioned the deten-
tion of every member of the thirty-one leadine families involved and
allowed Himmler to threaten that the Stauffenberg clan will be
exterminated down to its last member'.
Prosecution of the war required some public moderation of this
private mood of vengeance.
On July 24th Bormann, the Führer's
right-hand, published a directive to party officials which forbade
every attack lon] the officer corps, the generals, the nobility or the
armed forces as a body'. It was arranged that a military court of
honour should be convened by the army itself to expel the guilty
from its ranke before they were handed over to the Gestapo. And
there were ostentatious reaffirmations of lovalty by the senior ranks,
which Hitler accepted at face value, even the demeanine offer ta
adopt the Man; "heil' in nlace of the military salute the armad forces
customarily exchanged. But both parties to the uneasy relationship
knew that its equilibrium had been altered for good. The patriotism
of the army had never hefore been questioned because patriotism's
central issue in a totalitarian state - for or against the leader - had
never been put to the test. In consequence, and despite the arbitrar
risks entailed, officers of sufficient stature and boldness - Manstein
was one. Guderian another _ had alwaus in the last resort been able
to question the Führer's military iudgment and argue with him for
an opposite point of view. That freedom had gone. Henceforth the
generals would be bound to the wheel as tightly as their brave
obedient and uncomplaining soldiers who bore the consequences af
the decisions taken at noon and midnicht in the air-conditioned
isolation of the Führerhauptquartier.
Break-through
A decision of the greatest importance - for Hitler, for Germany, for
generals, for their suffering divisions at the front -
confronted the high command almost before the immediate shock
waves of the coup had died away. Early in the morning of July 24th
the forward infantry of Panzer Lehr Division, manning the front
opposite the Americans west of St La renorted that the enemy were
their positions
and retiring across the line of the
Lô-Périers road, without apparent reason. Shortly afterwards they
reported the addroach of heavy bomber farmations. which they
could not observe through the overcast, and then the impact of a
THE HONOUR OF THE GERMAN ARMY
231
dense bombardment, falling in but also forward of their positions.
Later during the day the American infantry returned to their
positions, fighting for their re-occupation where the Germans had
infiltrated troops forward to take the abandoned ground.
This passage of events puzzled the staff of L XXXIV Corps, since
it seemed uncharacteristic of the American method of making war.
Early next morning, its explanation was made only too plain.
again the rumble of approaching aircraft formations was heard in the
German lines and this time, the day being clear, the aircraft was
soon revealed. They were Flying Fortresses, in hundreds upon
hundreds, flying straight and level at 12,000 feet and more. As soon
as they reached the line of the St Lô-Périers road, they again began
to dump their enormous bomb loads on and behind the German
positions. The effect was catastrophic. General Bayerlein, com-
manding Panzer Lehr, described how
back and forth the bomb carpets were laid, artillery positions
were wiped out, tanks overturned and buried, infantry posi-
tions flattenedt, cans roads and tracks destroyed. By midday
the entire area resembled a moon landscape, with the bomb
craters touching rim to rim ... All signal communications had
been cut and no command was possible. The shock effect on
the troops was indescribable. Several of my men went mad and
rushed round in the open
until they
were cut
splinters. Simultaneously with the storm from the air, innum-
erable guns of the American artillery poured drumfire into our
field positions.*
The guns in fart numbered e22, the combined artilleries of four
infantry and two armoured divisions and that of VII Corps,
had them under command. Its mission
was to attack and break
through the German line between the rivers Vire and Lozon and,
pivoting on St Lô, drive south and west towards the gateway into
Brittany. Originally the attack had been scheduled to begin the day
before but the bad weather had obliged the recall of the bombers
while they were in flight. Those which had dropped their bombs had
not received the cancelling signal. The clear weather of June 25th
had given them the sight of their targets they needed and, even
though a number bombed short, killing over a hundred of their own
soldiers (more excusably, bombing through cloud, they had killed
