106
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
streams of fire poured against those who fell more accurately. The
light from the blaze helped him to use his compass and map, and he
quickly identified the bearing of the battalion assembly area and
moved on it, cutting across the fields. He found the spot empty and
so began to search for lost parachutists, until he had assembled two
lieutenants and thirteen enlisted men.
His foundlings suggested
waiting until the party was stronger before marching on the objec-
tive. But Sheettle thought differently and his voice carried a note of
authority. So the sixteen set off for le Port and its two bridges, the
farthest downstream on the course of the Douve, a mile from the
drop zone.
Their orders were of the simplest: they were to take
possession and hold against all German attacks until relief came,
when the crossing places would be used to connect the bridgeheads
of Utah and Omaha Beaches.
Shettle reached the bridges at about 4.30, soon after dawn. On the
way he had picked up another two officers and sixteen enlisted men
and at the objective he was joined by another twenty parachutists,
five of them officers. (This large ratio of officers to men, 10:49, was
typical of the airborne operation in its early stages, leading General
Maxwell Taylor to comment, Never in the history of human combat
have so few been led by so many'). Shettle called a short conference,
which decided that they would have to put a party on the far bank,
and then called for volunteers.
Two men stepped forward. One,
Private Donald Zahn, had a light machine-gun. The other,
Private
George Montilio, had the ammunition. The first was ordered to race
to the far end and set up his piece. He made it, though his sprint
called to life at least one German machine-gun, hitherto undetected
and he reached the safety of a ditch amid a hail of bullets, Montilio
also made the passage unscathed but, though they then began to
return the enemy's fire, the reinforcement which Shettle sent after
them - two teams each of five men and an officer - found it possible
to get across only by swinging arm
between the treadway and the water.
over arm along the girders
During the next two hours, by aggressive use of fire and move-
ment, Zahn's machine-gun covering short dashes by the riflemen,
the fourteen men on the south bank of the Douve shot or grenaded
three German machine-gun crews. But the volume of fire did not
abate and Shettle, forced to recognize that the Germans had more
men available than he had ammunition, decided at mid-morning to
recall his men from the other side and seek help elsewhere. He had no
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
107
radio and so no glimpse of how the battle was developing, and his
first thousht was that he might get help most quickly from the south
rather than the north. He therefore sent off a brave officer and two
men to break through the German lines and make contact with the
American V Corps at Omaha Beach, quite unaware that at that
moment V Corp's ability to leave the water's edge and find a foothold
ahore hung in the balance. By mid-afternoon, without word from
any direction and still more worried, he decided to leave the position
and seck help from his regimental commander, if he could find him.
After a good deal of searching, he ran Colonel Johnson to earth in
some farm buildings at la Barquette, also on the Douve, where he was
tring fruitlessly to take possession of a lock across the river. John-
son was in a furious temper. He had lost many men from his small
party and the commander of his one intact battalion, Robert Ballard,
had just refused a direct order - if for the good military reason
that circumstances dictated otherwise - to muster on his position.
Shettle, at the best of times a poor advocate, thus got nothing for
the trouble of his dangerous journey, except an order to hang on and
a promise that the attached naval officer, Lieutenant Farrell, who
had miraculously recovered his large specialized radio from the
marshes, would pass on news of his predicament to General Taylor.
Farrell, who had trained as a parachutist in peder to support tha
Screaming Eagles rained as a pour-hearted as any who jumped that
night, was busy directing the 8-inch guns of the USS Quincy on to
German positions between Carentan and St Côme-du-Mont, but
found time to pass on the message. It brought no succour, for Taylor
had none to offer. The arrival of forty stray parachutists in early
evening helped Shettle repel an enemy attempt to recapture his end
of the bridge, but they had no machine-gun ammunition with them
and this last effort had consumed his reserve.
As the dusk of D-Day
fell, he remained in precarious and incomplete control of what he
knew was one of the division's most vital objectives, but with no
assurance that he would not be driven from it next morning as soon
as the Germans could mount a counter-attack in strength."
* Shettle was able under cover of darkness to wire the bridge for demolition, thanks to
the arrival of some parachove incere with their equipment, and during the nure day
more of the battalion appeared, until he had 150 men present. Before he could use his
new strength to mount a further attack, however,
American P-51 fighter-bombers
appeared overhead, failed to see the orange recognition panels put out to warn them
off, and destroyed both bridges by bombing. Shettle was finally relieved in his lonely
outpost on D+2
