66
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
to his staff, and take birthday leave in Germany. The same evening,
in his advanced headquarters
at Portsmouth,
Eisenhower read
weather reports which convinced him that he must postpone the
salings he had ordered for next morning. In its early hours, fresh
information indicating an unexpected break in the clouds persuaded
him to change his mind. As the dusk of June 5th drew in, the
thousands of ships and aircraft he commanded across the breadth of
the south of England prepared to depart from their bases. As they
left ports and runways behind, he scribbled for himself a note of
inculpation against defeat in the battle the men he commanded must
fight: 'Our landings in the Cherbourg-Havre area have failed to gain
a satisfactory foothold and I have withdrawn the troops. My decision
to attack at this time and place were based on the best information
available. The troops, the air and navy did all that bravery and
devotion to duty could do. If any blame or fault attaches to the
attempt it is mine alone?
These were the words of a great man and a great soldier; the
greatness of Eisenhower as a soldier has indeed yet to be portrayed
fully. But, as a soldier, he knew secretly that the outcome of all he
had planned now rested not with him but with the troops who were
about to land, with those who would follow them to fight the great
battles inshore and with those of the enemy who would oppose them.
At a distance, such as that which isolation in a Supreme
quarters lends, the troops, Allied and enemy alike,
Head-
might easily
reduce to a formless, featureless mass of field-grey or khaki.
But
battles are not fought by masses. Armies appear masslike, but their
effective parts, the fighting units, are quite small. Of the Il million
men in the United States Army Ground, Air and Service Forces, for
example, less than 2 million belonged to the go combat divisions of
the land forces, and of those 2 million less than 700,000 represented
tank crews or infantrymen. Yet the whole effort of the army, via
selection, training and support, was dedicated to transforming those
700,000 into groups of comrades whose skill and loyalty to each
other might overpower the skill and loyalties of similar groups on the
other side.
What follows is a study of several such groups: of the parachute
infantry battalions of the American airborne divisions in their first
bewildering hours on French soil; of the seaborne battalions
Canadian infantry debarking from their landing-craft under the guns
of the
German beach defences; of the
Highland
and Lowland
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
67
infantry who fought to open the first corridor out of the bridgehead;
of the English and Scottish armoured cavalry regiments which
spearheaded the charge to break the German ring around Caen in
July; of the German panzer battalions which
Hitler sent to the
destruction in his final, foredoomed effort to win the Battle of
Normandy in August: of the Polich Dragoons and Riflemen who
sacrificed themselves to stem the flood of the Germans' flight home;
and of the Free
French of Leclerc's and Armoured
Division
returning in triumph to liberate Paris s
Together their experience
makes the story of the Battle of Normandy.
