92
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
the first thought which came
to every officer after he had freed
himself from his harness and identified (or more probably failed to
identify) his position - betrayed this strange readiness to sleep.
Ballard, the commanding officer of the znd/goist, who had hap-
pened both to fall in the right spot and to recognize it for what it was
tairly quickly collected about 250 men of his three companies, one of
the best assemblies of the day. He himself, through a combination of
responsibility and severe nettle stings, found no difficulty in keeping
awake. But he was acutely worried by
the dazed reaction of most of his men. Only the soldiers who
had landed in the marsh seemed relatively alert; soaked and
shivering, they
had to keep
moving for warmth.
different with the men who had landed dry; some of them fell
asleep standing, while Ballard talked to them, then fell head-
long. When the formation pulled away from the assembly area,
then paused briefly, Ballard saw men fall in their tracks and hit
the ground with their eyes closed. 17
The phenomenon was probably the result of nervous tension
fortified by loss of sleep and
(Drapomine), which had a sedative side-effect.
dosing with the air-sickness pills
But these clinical
speculations would have been of little comfort to Generals Taylor or
Ridgway or to their regimental and battalion commanders,
whose
urgent need was to organize a dozen striking Darties and set off to
their objectives before dawn broke. By first light a dozen parties had
been collected, but in nothing like the strenathe prescribed and most
often in the wrong spot. In each division over 2.ooo soldiers were
either lost or - though this was not yetrealove already dead. Only
its planned zone.
one battalion, the znd/ 505th, had dropped both concentrated and in
And, because
most of the radio sets had been
dropped separately from their operators in bundles which had gone
astray, few commanders at any level could communicate news of
their isolation and weakness
up or down the chain
command. Many, moreover, were quite simply lost and could not
establish where they were either from maps, air photographs or such
signposts as they stumbled on.
An obvious thought was to seek directions from the inhabitants.
But few French people in that densely garrisoned countryside were
willing to fall for what might have been a Gestapo ruse or to help
fly-by-night raiders with retribution hot on their heels. Lieutenant
93
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
Guillot, whose ancestry stretched back to the land he was invading,
had the door slammed in his face when he knocked at a farmhouse
near Picauville. An old French couple who did answer near Ste
Marie-du-Mont were sure that the Americans were going to kill
them, and a farmer whom Colonel Sink of the sooth extricated from
his cotage near St Côme-du-Mont with the phrasebook assuranced
The invasion has begun, shook so hard with fright that he could
scarcely lay his finger on the right point on Sink's map. Later, as the
sheer volume of the airborne descent made its impression,
country people overcame their nervousness, began to volunteer
inteligence of the whereabouts of the Germans and of hidden
crossing places in the inundations, pressed milk and cider on their
liberators and lent help to the medical men who brought wounded
into their dwellings. These were inevitably to include, as the battle
wore on, some of their own number; Bill Kidder, an aid man of the
3rdl/softh, recalled twenty years later the gratitude shown him by a
French father whose six-year-old daughter had received a severe
head wound and who offered what must have been his
posession, his gold pocket watch' in thanks for the bandaging.
But before the dawn most French people kept to their beds or
their cellars, leaving the Americans to blunder about looking for
each other and their assembly points. Fortunately, until light broke,
the Germans on the Cotentin showed no more willingness than the
civilian inhabitants to leave the security of their known positions.
And so, in the precious hiatus between landing and daylight, half a
dozen parties of Americans were given the time, leadership and
direction to gather themselves and their weapons and to move out on
what would prove to be the vital missions of the operation.
I The 3rd/ 505th at Ste Mère-Eglise
Ste Mère-Eglise, the large stone-built village astride Route nationale
13, had seen the first serious shedding of blood between Germans
and Americans on invasion night. Two sticks of the and and 3rd
Battalions, S0sth Parachute Infantry, had been dropped by their
pilots directly over the village, in which a house had been set alight
by the Allied air raid which preceded the arrival of the parachutists,
and many of those floating earthward had been killed in mid-air by
