64
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
were allowed to see. Such sightings tended naturally to confirm the
existence, carefully fabricated by false radio traffic, of a major Allied
formation, the non-existent ist US Army Group, in the counties
opposite the Pas de Calais. And this bad intelligence confirmed the
belief, now firmly held by Rommel, though not by Hitler, that the
proximity of the Pas de Calais to the German frontier must oblige
them to land there.
Wherever the Schwerpunkt should fall, however, neither man
shrank from the coming battle. By May 1944 Hitler welcomed a
return to the throw of the
dice after two years of remorseless
grinding down of his armies and people by Russian land and Allied
air offensives. Gone were the days when the RAF lost more air crews
than it killed civilians in raids on German territory. Since June I943
Pointblank campaign had
regularly
brought
thousand
American bombers by day and a thousand British by night to drop
their loads on German cities. By April 1944 the 26,000 acres which
represented the centres of the 43 cities most heavily attacked had
been levelled; in Hamburg, the worst hit, the population had been
reduced by 30 per cent. And
exaggerated though the bombing
propagandists' claims were of the damage done to the German war
economy, which flourished strangely in certain engineering sectors,
the long-term danger to communications and synthetic oil produc-
tion could not be disguised.
Losses at the front were equally
alarming. In the year November 1942- October 1943, the eastern
army (Ostheer) had lost 1,686,000 men dead, wounded or missing
and received only x, 260,000 replacements. Heavy engagements, as
in the Dnieper bend in October and November 1943, consumed the
effective worth of a division's manpower every three days; full-scale
offensives, like Kursk in July, exhausted the strength of whole
armies in a week's fighting. And such battles - mercifully Kursk had
no parallel in 1943 - also imposed tank losses at a rate beyond the
means of the
factories
make
zood
Between
January
December 1943 Germany's stock of tanks declined absolutely from
5,700 to 5,200.
The U-boat war had been lost and there was no hope of returning
to the Atlantic until the improved Schnorkel types were ready in the
autumn. But their performance was as fraught with uncertainty as
that of the 'secret weapons' - V-1 flying bombs and V-2 rockets - on
which Hitler now counted with increasingly desperate optimism to
reverse the trend of attrition, industrial and psychological, in the
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
65
strategic air war. And beyond the frontiers of formal conflict, land,
air and maritime, the other certitudes of German power were also
shitting and slipping. Not only had the Italian government, together
with half its national territory, passed to the Allied camp; but the
other satellites, even tiny but once ferocious Finland, grew less
ardent in their devotion to the Axis with every yard that the Russians
won towards their borders - and by May the Red Army had returned
to the shores of the Gulf of Finland, begun the ascent of the
Romanian Carpathians and menaced Bulgaria at a distance of two
hundred miles. Intelligence from Hungary and the puppet state of
Slovakia suggested that their armies, which had carlier campaigned
with the Germans in the east, were preparing to open the gates to the
Russians. And to their south occupied Yugoslavia teemed with
guerrillas so numerous and warlike as to require the presence of
twelve German divisions which could be ill-spared from other
hard-pressed fronts.
Little wonder that a battle against a shipborne enemy, even one
who might have learnt the secret of swimming tanks ashore with its
infantry, appeared to ofter Hitler almost his only chance of breaking
the run of losses and regaining an initiative. On March 18th he had
summoned all the generals in the west to Berchtesgaden to explain to
them that,
once defeated, the enemy will never try to invade again. Quite
apart from their heavy losses they would need months to
organize a fresh attempt. And an invasion failure would also
deliver a crushing blow to British and American morale ... We
shall then transfer lour divisions in the west] to the eastern
front to revolutionise the situation there. so the whole
outcome of the war depends on each man fighting in the west,
and that means the fate of the Reich itself.
Rommel too looked forward to the battle, and with assurance. On
May sth he had dictated to his secretary, I am more confident than
ever before. If the British give us just two more weeks, I won't have
any more doubt about it? The growing suspicion, felt by Hitler,
that Normandy, not the Pas de
Calais, was the threatened zone
drove Rommel to fuss over its defences during the rest of the month.
But on June 4th, convinced that the tides and approaching bad
weather made any invasion impossible until after June 2oth, he
decided to leave supervision of his now almost complete preparations
