268
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
first served. The wounded could not be evacuated or properly
tions, conducted from the outset in grossly septic conditions, were
treated in the makeshift underground hospitals; and surgical opera-
soon undergone even without anaesthetics. It was not surorising
that, as in Dublin during Faster Week, many of the civilians trapped
in the area of fighting should have developed a fierce hostility to the
Home Army soldiers, whose resistance cubiented their infants and
old people to lingering starvation when it did not bring death by fire
or entombment in the collapsed buildings.
But, once embarked on their struggle, the insurgents had no way
out. The Germans shot all whom they captured _ manv ordinar
Poles were shot simply for being male (the SS shot women too).
Hence the desperate search for means with which to prolong the
Any unexploded shell or bomb among the thousands
dropped into the city was prized by the Home Army's engineers as a
source of explosive for their hand-made hand-grenades, and pains
takingly dismantled despite the danger of its fuse operating during
the process. Suicidal attacks were made with bricks and clubs on
German positions in the hope of winning a few functioning firearms
The flaming fuselare of a crashed allied bomber chat down on a
was invaded by insurgents seeking to strip it of its
machine guns before it exploded. And frantically urgent appeal
were broadcast to anyone who might hear for the supplies needed,
above all for ammunition. One, which was become famous among
the émigré communities,
went in verse from the Home Army
transmitter, Lightning, to the government-in-exile: 'Hello... here
is the heart of Poland!
Hear Warsaw speaking!/ Throw the
dirges out of your broadcasts. / Our spirit is so strong it will suppor
even you!/ We don't need
nition! |1'2
your applause!/We
demand ammu-
That particular broadcast was not made until Aumet sath. But
already all Poles in the diaspora hung upon news of the rising:
after day the crews lof the British-based Palich bomber saundrans
would return from operations over France and Germany, dirty and
invariably,
tired - often after desperate air battlee and their many nation was
"What news from Warsaw)", For one crew. its captain
remembered, listening to the loud speakers, the only vital question
was: Warsaw is fighting - when do we fly to helo thomas Ru air,
Warsaw was only eight hours away, and the hrustration of being
forbidden to flv thither to bonh the German besiegera me at tonat to
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
269
take the supplies for which the Home Army clamoured, was violent
and bitter. The soldiers of the ist Armoured Division, also hourly
alert for the broadcasts from the city which was home for many of
them, could not even comfort themselves with the thought that they
might give help if allowed. The signposts they had raised along their
divisional supply route read Caen- Warsaw'; but they well knew that
two German armies lay between them and their brothers-in-arms.
There was no hope of breaking the ring which the Ostheer had
thrown round the Old Town. But at least here in Normandy they
had the chance to turn the tables. to camnlete the parienlement of
what remained of the Westheer and so, if only in bitter symbolism, to
bring succour to their comrades fighting and dying on the banks of
the Vistula. The order to drive on Chambois brought - as attack
orders rarely do - jubilation to their ranks.
Contact at Chambois
The veterans of the Ist Armoured Division are growing old today.
Once a year, each unit, Lancers, Dragoons,
Mounted
Riflemen,
congregates at the London Sikorski Institute for its regimental day.
under the canony of the great marlich tont booty from Siommy,
Ill's victory over the sultan's army in i6z1, which crowns the
staircase to the regimental shrines. The standard - scarlet and white,
gold-fringed, embroidered with the words "Cod. Honour Country',
heavy with battle honours, Warszawa 1920, Narvik,
Francja 1940,
Francja 1944, and painted with the images of St Stanise the
Blessed Virgin of Czestochowa, to whom all Christian Poles pray in
the hour of their country's need - is reverently uncased and escorted
down Princes Gate to stand before the altar at Brompton Oratory
while mass is said and the aching hymns of a people long oppressed
vodka and
are droned into the gloom of the dome.
smoked ham at the Polish Hearth Club. the mood changes. Heads
grey with the years of exile lift at the sight of old friends, once
tank-gunners or platoon leaders, now in import-export or retired
from the lower tanta of the Pritich civil service Faces light at the
news of children saliched ritish civil fessions of their adopted
country - the new estaeration of Poles, through the dedication and
most successful
self-sacrifice of their parents, have become
immigrant community ever absorbed into British life - and brows
clear at the thought that the years between have not been so bad after
