6th Royal Scots Fusiliers advancing into the morning mist during
the Epsom battle
159
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
had landed, with a fourth, the 7oth, to follow. Opposite them were
four German divisions, of which the grst had lost 4,000 of its 10,000
men since June 6th, the 7ogth and 243rd
were 'ground-holding
divisions of low mobility and the T7th was one of those which had
suffered in the march up from its pre-invasion base in lower
Brittany. The VII Corps Commander, General J. Lawton Collins,
was a veteran of the
fighting on the
Pacific
island of
Guadalcanal the year before, where casualties had been suffered at
every yard of the way through dense jungle, and was inclined to
drive his subordinates and their soldiers
with a disregard
casualties more typical of an American
Civil War than a Second
World War general. When the commander of goth Division did not
get on fast enough for his liking, he was dismissed and gth Division,
which had fought in North Africa, was leapfrogged through to take
the lead. On June i3th the parachutists appeared across the Mer-
deret, to the consternation of the
Germans both there
Rommel's headquarters, and next day were discovered to have built
a bridge behind them. While this move distracted Rommel's atten-
tion to the probability of a drive out of the peninsula south-westward
to Coutances, Granville or vranches, Collins in fact was driving his
men straight ahead. On June 17th gth
Division made a six-mile
advance which brought it to within sight of the sea
and on the
following day, after a night of fighting against desperate
German
rearguards, its leading infantry arrived in Barneville on the Atlantic.
Collins immediately manganized his command. The two airborne
divisions, 82nd and forst, together with the superseded goth, were
re-aligned to face sotors, toe others, which had crashed across the
peninsula, 4th, oth and 79th, were swung into line facing northward
and directed to a daneth, wherwung Collins thus confronted
Hiter, who the day before had arrived in France to confer with
Rundstedt and Rommelo with what in pre-invasion
days he had
always regarded as the most dangerous threat to the security
of
Fortress Burope, ah the most manor purt. He had already brought
that danger closer by issuing orders to keep open the neck of the
Deninsula after any chance of doing so had been loet He now further
hastened the end by insisting that the defence of the
organized in open country,
far outside the shelter of its fixed
defences, where Allied airpower and armour could wreak their worst
on his unprotected infantry. A dawn attack by the American 4th
Division on Juneed in tantry, the Channel flank of the line on which
An SS tank officer and
crewman under escort to the
rear during the Epsom battle
23
Soldiers of the 15th Scottish
Division bringing in a
prisoner
