272
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
followed, veterans read the names of skirmishes - Wysoka, Nap-
rawa, Myslenice - which had left their vehicles riddled and burning
under the summer sky five years before.
The little battle decided, Koszutski swung his tanks south-west
towards Chambois, six miles away. To their right the toth Mounced
Rifles were heading towards the same place on a more direct route,
while the 24th Lancers followed a parallel course down the valley of
the Dives to Trun. A little short of Chambois, Trun actually lay in
the 4th Canadian Armoured Division's zone of operations and was
still in German hands. But little good possession of it did them.
The small narrow roads of Trun met at the Grande Place in the
centre of the town and into this square, from all the traffic:
choked side roads, oozed carts, armoured personnel carriers,
tanks, soft-skinned lorries, staff cars and foot columns. Thanks
to the determined efforts of their junior officers the SS vehicles
was husbanding to hold the shoulders of the
nocket or counter-attack to clear its mouthl were swung left out
of the town
and reached the Vimoutiers road. There the
congestion was if anything worse ... all the time the Spitfires
of the Royal Air Force rose and swooped over the columns,
cannon guns supplementing the work of destruction which the
Typhoons had earlier carried out with rockets and bombs.
Slowly, inch by inch, the German olumns, four-deep, inter-
mingled with groups of men, guns, horses and vehicles, strove
to achieve the Mount Ormel heights, pursued by the Royal Air
Force, harried by the artillery, unaware that very soon they
would be under attack from the Poles."
The weather, so contrary during much of the bridgehead battle,
had now set blindingly fair in the Allies' favour, and all day the
squadrons of the and Tactical Ait Fole manured with relentless
and gruesome regularity between their airstrips and the choked
roads of the pocket. "It seemed s their airstrips at caught in the
inferno, 'as though I was on the stage in the last act of the Valkyrie
We were surrounded by fire: A pilat win the lad a later examined in
a secondary road near Trun the effect of one of the 1,200 sorties
flown that day found
destruction
complete and terrible to the last detail
under semi-darkness of the arching trees in full August leaf. It
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
was obvious what had happened. Typhoons had spotted the
column ... and had destroyed the leading and end vehicles, in
this instance two armoured cars. They had then passed up and
down the lane using rockets and cannons. The vehicles were
immed bumper to bumper and each bore the sign manual of
the Second Tactical Air Force - a gaping hole in the side or
turret. It was quite impossible to move past them and almost
impossible to clamber over them. Grey-clad, dust-powdered
bodies were sprawled everywhere - propped against the trees,
flopped over driving seats or running boards - the once
rust. I gave up trying to walk over this mile of utter destruction
crimson stains on their uniforms already turned the colour of
and we made a wide detour onlv to reach another lane, also
impassable. It was grimly guarded by four German privates
crouching against a high bank, their hands to their heads,
Beside them a mill stream rippled over their upturned vehicle.®
pressing them down in a gesture of futile concealmenie®
Since on the night of August I4th-15th Army Group B had
ordered the withdrawal of all anti-aircraft artillery from the pocket
while the Luftwaffe simply could not find the aircraft to contest
control of the skies above it with the Allies,
broken and
intermingled divisions on its floor had no means with which to
to press ever more urgently towards Trun and Chambois. Disaster
defend themselves against aerial attack and no hope for survival but
had now dissolved all distinction of rank, as in
between civilians and those who claimed the status of soldiers of the
Warsaw it had
Home Army. There senior officers made their way through the filth
West of Trun and Chambois the staffs of Seventh Army and Panzer
of the sewers on their tours of inspection from one sector to another
Groun Pherbach trudead the farm tease the anonunnue ranks of
their soldiers, diving for cover to the shelter of the ditches when
Allied aircraft annadead ahead haring coward in the chor
intervals of relief the novel August 18th brought a pause to the
air attacks and some coherent eastward movement was achieved by
the twelve of the twenty trapped divisions still operating as entities:
3rd Parachute, 84th, 276th,
Divisions, Ist,
277th, 326th,
353rd, 363rd Infantry
loth, I2th SS, and and I16th Panzer.
But August
Igth dawned clear again.
The Allied air forces
appeared early
overhead. And on
the far bank of the Dives the hands of the
