'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
271
which leads eventually to Cabourg, Proust's Balbec, one of the most
visited and best loved by those equipped to celebrate the beauty of
the French countryside. But those who write guide-books do so
without an eye - why should they have one? - for
military
exigencies. The Auge is dreadful country through which either to
retreat or to advance - narrow, steep, deep, wriggling, overgrown,
hedged, banked and densely watercoursed. The Germans at least
knew where they wished to go, though the constriction of the pocket,
now only six miles wide by seven long, reduced movement along
their two roads to a snail's pace and drove many of the fugitives out
into the open fields. The Poles, moving by night into unknown
territory, soon lost their way.
Half an hour after we moved off [wrote Ensign Stanislaw
Gunther of the znd Armoured Regiment), the French guide
who had been leading our column disappeared.
Complete
radio silence had been imposed, and the terrain
was very
difficult for tanks. We knew that at a road junction we had to
take the wider of two tracks, but in the darkness it was easy to
be deceived; the turning we took looked wider, but soon
narrowed to such an extent that to turn some sixty tanks and
twenty various vehicles would have been courting disaster. We
had to press forward.'
The road they had taken led not to Chambois but to les
Champeaux - Polish pronunciation may have confused the French
guide from the outset -a place through which the Germans had to
pass but only after they had escaped from the pocket proper. But the
mishap had an odd and not altogether disadvantageous outcome.
The regiment's advance brought it to a crossroads which an enemy
was using astride their
path and the
German traffic-
controller actually halted it to allow the Poles through. Koszutski,
the regimental commander, believed that the German recognized
them for who they were and pretended otherwise
to avoid
disastrous close-range encounter. It was a pretence in which he was
happy to acquiesce for the chance to get forward and, though when
day dawned he discovered that he had arrived at the wrong place, he
also found a prize target he would have missed if he had stuck to the
right route. It was a cluster of vehicles of the and Panzer
Division,
the same fought by the loth Cavalry Brigade in the Carpathians in
I939. In the paybooks of the prisoners taken in the fracas which
39
French Armoured Division down the Champs Elysées
