SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
had also been knocked out and the remainder were
withdrawing off the ridge'. Major Langdon's tank had begun to
explode as the flames reached its ammunition storage chamber and
he and the crew had to leave their ditch close by, 'and move away
without delay. At least two hundred yards to the nearest cover.
uncut corn, the ground between completely open and covered by
enemy fire from Bras and Hubert-Folie. We picked up the wounded
was shortly after to die at the dressing station) and
carried him away across the open ground.'"
They were not fired on a parting mercy, for it is not a convention
of armoured warfare, as it is of war at sea, that a stricken crew are
immunized from battle when they leave their protective armour. As
they made their
they saw beyond the Caen-Vimont
Fife and Forfar were also in trouble.
Squadron had got ae forward as Four and Soliers, the two defended
villages overlooked by Bourguébus, when
they found themselves up against massive opposition. Both
villages were occupied by German infantry of excellent quality
and through the storm of metal the Fife and Forfar men could
Panthers near the village of Bourguébus.
Captain
Hutchinson, with two troops of 'A' Squadron, went over to the
east flank to counter the fire coming from
Here he
bumped into some Panthers and though he was able to destroy
two of them the fire from the others held up any further
movement. From Cagny
through Four and Frénouville to
Soliers tank fought tank in inconclusive action.®
To their rescue came the 22-d Hussars, whom the various delays
in the advance had now allowed to close the distance.
They had
halted just the other side of the Chen Vimont railway when they saW
the telltale pillars of black smoke, interspersed by the circular puffs
from exploding ammunition, begin no ripersom the foot of the ridge.
Ordered forward
Brigadier
Harvey, commanding the Iith
Armoured Division's tanks they Motorad do far as Soliere where the
mese of the Fife and Forfar were stopped, before discovering that
there was no rescuing to be dene stopped es toad been destroyed.
One of their officers ran out of e. The fifes blazing tanks which
represented 'A' Squadron to shout that all but four of the regiment's
tanks had been knocked out. Like most reports from the heat of
battle, this was an exaggeration. But it st repo closely enough with
YEOMEN
OF
ENGLAND
215
the visual evidence, reinforced by a salvo from some Panthers which
suddenly appeared on the ridge above them and set the four tanks of
a troop of 'B' Squadron ablaze, to convince them that they must
withdraw. With the anvil chorus of solid shot on high-tensile armour
ringing in their ears, the Hussars put their Shermans in reverse and
dropped back from the foot of the ridge. As they went, a final
broadside from the village of Four caught 'C' Squadron, which had
arrived to support the leaders but not soon enough to recognize their
predicament, in flank. With no time for retaliation, no time to do
anything but take one quick glance at the situation,
almost in one
minute, all its tanks were hit, blazing and exploding, wrote the
regimental historian.
Everywhere wounded or burning figures ran or struggled
painfully for cover, while a remorseless rain of armour-piercing
shot riddled the already helpless Shermans. All too clearly, we
were not going to "break through' that day. It was going to be a
matter not how much we should advance, but whether
should be able to hold on to what we had gained. Out of the
great array of armour that had moved forward to battle that
morning, one hundred and six tanks now lay crippled or out of
action in the cornfields. 10
This was not quite the end of the armoured charge.
At about
Sp.m. the Cromwells of the Northamptonshire
Yeomanry were
ordered to make a final attempt on the ridge from the west, crossed
underneath the Caen-Viment railway and got to within 1,000 yards
of Bras, There they were stopped by high-velocity shot and limped
away, leaving sixteen of their tanks behind. On the other side of the
battefield, the and Welsh Guards, reconnaissance regiment of their
division, were probing into Emiéville at about the same time. Held
up by enemy fire, one of the troop leaders left his tank to confer with
his squadron commander. As he moved across open ground, he was
hit by a fragment from a mortar bomb and died shortly afterwards.
He was Rex Whistler, whose charming transplantation of the spirit
of the eighteenth century into contemporary art had made him one
of the best-loved painters of his generation. His last work had been
to decorate a room in the Prince Regent's Pavilion at Brighton,
where the Welsh Guards were billeted, with a highly characteristic
capriccio of George IV as Prince of Pleasure. It had been completed
on the eve of the invasion, its light-hearted grace betraying not a
