Map 6 The Mortain counter-attack, August 6th-7th, 1944
KH.Y
Armoured division
Allied front. evening August 6th, 1944
German front. evening August 6th, 1944
German thrusts, August 7th, 1944
American divisional moves. August 7th, 1944
28, Allied forces
2, German forces
Miles
Kilometres
2 (Gp
363
84
Erranches
353
Gathémo
© 116-
Sourdeval
R Sée
le Mesnil-Adelée •
3 - (Gp)
le Bazoge
Fontenay
Chérenc
le Mesnil-Tối
Belle Fontaine
Juvigny
Chevreville
02
t Barthélémy
O255
17 SS Pzgren (Gp)
lortain
< Romagny
317
= (Gp) / Barenton
THE HONOUR OF THE GERMAN ARMY
223
who had come to report on the raising of new divisions.
Hitler
directed at him the famous, light-blue stare of encounter,
then
turned back to his maps. Stauffenberg, whose report was to be made
next, moved to the end of the long map table, placed his briefcase
under it and, explaining to a neighbour that he must telephone,
slipped out of the room. After a moment, Keitel began to fret about
his absence. Stauffenberg had already slid away once before that
morning and the moment for him to make his report was approach-
ing. Heusinger was drawing to the end of a dispiriting summary of
events on the eastern front: 'The Russians are wheeling west of the
Duna in great strength towards the north.
Their advance guards are
already south-west of Dunaburg. If the Army Group is not at once
withdrawn from Lake Peipus,
then a catastrophe.
moment, it seemed to Jodl, a great chandelier descended on his
head. A "blindine sheet of dazaline vellow flame' filled the room and
Hitler, six feet from its flashpoint, heard 'a distinct double crack -
probably the initial blasta and then the noise of his own eardrums
bursting'?' Outside, eyes drawn by the crash of explosion saw the hut
engulfed in a cloud of dust and smoke, through which after a few
moments airborne sheets of paper began to drift earthward.
Figures appeared. Keite's adjutant picked himself up from
underneath a window through which he had been blown. Warlimont
climbed out after him. Brandt. to whom Stauffenberg had whis
pered his explanation, was seen struggling to follow, and was helped
out; he had left his foot behind in the room.
Then, through the
central door of the hot, Keitel emerged, supporting the
Führer,
whose face was cut and bleeding, his trousers in shreds and still
smouldering from the flame.
'Somebody
grenade', Hitler remarked to his bodyguard as he was led back to his
quarters. His immediate thought had been of an air raid, then of a
parachute attack. After his doctors had undressed him and treated
his wounds - they found a hundred splinters from
the map table in
his thighs - he thought again.
Four years before he had narrowly
escaped the explosion of a bomb hidden in a wall at the Munich
Bürgerbräukeller. lovents, he decided, had repeated themselves:
'Probably one of the Tods Organization workmen installed a bomb.
He sent a party to search for the cable which would have triggered
the fuse. But their inspection revealed that the explosion had taken
Place under the table, not in the structure. He ordered investigations
to continue and that the incident be kept a complete secret.
