Maps
I The German order of battle in the west, June 6th, 1944
2 The American airborne landing zones, 82nd and roist
Airborne Divisions, June 6th, 1944
The Canadian beach assault, June 6th, 1944
Operation Epsom, the Battle of the Scottish Corridor,
Operation Goodwood, July 18th-19th, 1944
The Mortain counter-attack, August 6th-7th, 1944
The Battle of the Falaise Pocket, August 16th-zoth, 1944
The liberation of Paris, August 25th, 1944
page
xviii
70
116
144
184
222
250
284
Foreword
Five years ago, in a book I called The Face of Battle,
I set out to
explore the predicament of the individual on the battlefield. Though
a practising military historian, and the colleague in my academic life
of professional soldiers, I had no understanding of the risks which
the warrior faced in his encounter with his enemy, or of the means he
found to quell his terrors and
master himself at the 'point of
maximum danger'. What I discovered, however near to the truth it
was, surprised
me.
I learnt of the universality of fear,
of the
operation of inducements and coercion in its conquest but, above all,
of the importance of male honour, as judged by a man's immediate
comrades, in sustaining the soldier's resolution.
But,
despite my concentration on the individual and the small
group, I was also drawn to a recognition of the peculiar nature of the
larger body to which both belong,
the army itself. Armies are
universal institutions
which, in the dimension of purpose
and
authority, closely resemble each other. Yet each is also a mirror of its
own society and its values: in some places and at some times an agent
of national pride or a bulwark against national fears, or perhaps even
the last symbol of the nation itself; elsewhere and otherwise an
instrument of national power deprecated, disregarded and of very
last resort. It seemed to me worth finding some episode through
which the varying status of national armies might be exemplified.
And in the Normandy campaign
of 1944 I believed that I had
stumbled upon it. I knew the battlefield well. I had long been struck
by the very
different motives inspiring the armies which
action
conjoined there. And, over the years, I had become familiar with the
wealth of corporate history and personal reminiscence which the
campaign has thrown up.
What follows is therefore another attempt
to understand,
from a different angle of vision, the role
which
warfare and its institutions play in social life.
xili
