206
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
events of the last hours and advised that there seemed nothing left of
the Battle Group with which to fight. Von Luck,
who had the
Polish,
French,
Russian and Western Desert Campaigns behind
him, and was not in any case a colonel at the age of thirty-three for
nothing, swallowed the report and went to see what he could find.
He headed first for Cagny, the substantial village just north of the
Caen-Vimont railway which the route of the British tanks would
leave on their left hand. As he got into it, he saw from the orchard on
its forward edge the mass of Shermans wreathed in their dust cloud
moving to pass between Cagny and its neighbouring village to the
north-weet le Mecnil Prémentel But they did not seem to b
accompanied by infantry (thought each regiment with it had a
company of Greenjackets in half-tracks, they were not up with the
leading armour), nor did they seem to be bothered about flank
Here was an opportunity,
all the more firmly to be
snatched heronce von Tal foodl Lal from leave, had no nicture
the general tatiadl citation and Lalorad that the ramains of his
and the open country beyond the bridgehead perimeter. On his way
through the village he had seen one of his Mark IV tanks, miracu-
lously untouched by the bro tons of bombs which had been Cagny's
particular dose. an 88 mm anti-tank pun of the divisional Panzerjage
battalion and. too me. mi 00mm ha
long been adanted for the dual aloof fighting hoth aircraft anc
and still had their barrels pointed towards the sky from which the
had vainly been trying to shoot the now departed heavy bombers
The tank and ott tact min commandors heilla cheved van Turt
open fire on the British tanks.
command to rot this mennone be it adan of the prahand and
The Luftwaffe officer demurred. His
task, he explained, was to shoot down aircraft, not puncture armour,
and replied that the airman could pons. on ow on my responsi
whatever the capabilities of his weapons.
Von Luck drew his pistol
bility or win a decoration on his own'.
The pistol, or the Knight's
Cross round von Lul, nod. Jated bureaucratia ciridities O
side of the armoured
By the time the leading British Shermans which on the Cagny
Yeomanry.
canne
column belonged to the Fife and Forfar
opposite the orchard, presenting
armoured side-plates
their thinly
to the waiting
five
Germans.
there
were
24
The Normandy Scene
2: a British mortar team firing in a cider orchard
25 The Normandy Scene
3: dead cattle in the fields around Fontenay-le-Pesnel
