246
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
immediate objectives, Brécey and Montigny, between Mortain and
Avranches; but that
was less important than the earlier
transmission, which had allowed Bradley the time so to re-align his
forces as to ensure that the 'Mortain counter-attack, as the Alie
were to call Operation
Lüttich, would run into a solid wall of
resistance just beyond its start line. Three divisions of the American
First Army, the 3rd Armoured, 4th and goth, had been fighting
their way southward during the first week of August. On the evening
of August 6th they were disposed on either side of the valley of th
river Sée, down which the Germans planned to drive to Avranches
3rd Armoured and 4th on the north bank, goth on the south in and
around Mortain itself. And another armoured division, the and, was
bound thither posthaste.
Whichever timetable,
Hitler's or Kluge's, the Germans adopted,
Lüttich was therefore compromised from the outset. But, in th
circumstances, the latter's urge to begin made better sense than the
former's desire to wait And. When it came to it lure had his was
Harried by news of the difficulties of assembly - the detachment of
its strength, the 1I6th
Ist SS, en route from Caen since August ard, had lost 3o per cent of
promised tank battalion to 2nd Panzer - he allowed his subordinates
Division had failed to detach a
to postpone H-Hour to midnight of August 6th but insisted that that
deadline was final. Meanwhile he sionalled to OK W for the Führer:
'I am pressed for time and have no guarantee that the infantry will
hold the position [north of the assembly areal for long against the
British and American tanks. I must attack as soon as possible. On
schedule, therefore,
but in much smaller strength than planned,
Lüttich departed from its start line in the earl dark of the summer
night. Down narrow
distant, drove three armoured columns tun from and ge Panzer On
corridors towards Avranches, twenty miles
the south bank of the Sée, one from and Panzer on the north bank; a
fourth column which and Panzer should have provided was left to
surprise on which Kluge still counted.
preceded the jump-off It was honad thorehu to beinhton the
wait for the arrival of the tanks of Ist SS.
No artillery barrage
The southern columns did achieve some surprise. The American
3oth Division had not been reinforced and most of its road blocks on
operations officer refused to be panicked hu the attack however,
the approaches to Mortain were quickly overrun.
The divisional
which he charactiad ae a move bu too ted unite attempt-
THE HONOUR OF THE GERMAN ARMY
247
ing to escape rather than aggressive action' - so much for the dread
reputation of Das Reich's storm-troopers - while the lower echelons
behaved with even greater sang-froid. Recognizing that they were
surrounded, the infantrymen of the foremost battalions withdrew to
the high ground of Hill 317, overlooking Mortain,
dug
in for
all-round defence and called down their own artillery on to the fringe
of their positions. Its heavy salvoes at once brought the onward
movement of znd SS to a halt, and while some tank crews settled to
battle things out with the divisional tank-destroyer battalion -
fourteen were to fall to the American guns - many of the others
drove off the roads to drape their vehicles with camouflage nets
against the air attack which they knew must come as soon as they
were caught when stopped
The northern column was not opposed by American force in such
strength, and should have made better progress.
At first it did.
despite the non-appearance of a tank battalion from rz6th Panzer
Division to bolster its strength. But soon after daybreak, and three
miles short of its objective for the day, it ran into the American gth
Division's line of resistance and halted. Soon afterwards the rest of
and Panzer, which had delayed its departure to await the promised
detachment of ist SS, was also brought to a stop and
reinforcement by ist SS could not restart the advance.
Hausser,
Klug's immediate subordinate as chief of Seventh Army, then tried
to unstick things by calling on 116th Panzer Division to intervene, as
it should have done already. But its commander,
Schwerin,
incited that he tune too hand pressed hard hantand to tole the risk
of disengaging; this verbal formula may have concealed an unwil-
lingness to act, for he was a committed conspirator and had been
driven into the plot by his loss of faith in victory. Hausser, the senior
SS officer in Normandy, relieved him at once for dereliction, but the
moment had passed when Iz6th Panzer could have
altered the
course of events.
Events were now principally influenced by the air forces, which
had been alerted to engage the multitude of ground targets which
Lüttich was expected to present. Far way from the battlefield, Allied
combat air patrols established a barrier around the Third Air Fleet's
runways near Paris and prevented any of its 300 promised fighters
reaching the Mortain area. In the area itself American medium
bombers struck hard all day at German movement on the roads to
the front, while British Typhoon fighters of Second
Tactical Air
