292
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
dressed in the uniform he had worn as a Republican soldier in the
Spanish Civil War, it was to find de Gaull's nominee a Prefect of
Police, Charles Luizet, installed and in charge of the defence.
Rebuffed, Rol bicycled off to his headquarters in the basement of
the Paris sewage administration in Montoarnasse. Thence he could
put himself in touch with the many groups which would obey his
orders and, during the morning of August igth, began to do so. By
early afternoon most of the places he and Lize had earmarked lor
occupation two days before were in the hands of the FI, traffic had
stopped in the streets, citizens were sheltering indoors and the
intermittent rattle of small-arms fire could be heard all over the inner
city. The fighting, except at the Préfecture de Police and the maine
at Neuilly, where the Germans brought up some old tanks, was not
intense. But, like drizzle in summer, it had clearly set in and had
begun to vield a steady drip of casualties About ree French people
were to be killed during the day, maste of them résistants. They, in
their turn, were to kill about 50 Germans.
Truce
The outbreak of fighting had taken the commander of Greater Paris,
Generalleutnant Dietrich von Choltitz, unawares. Appointed to the
post only two weeks before, he had been unawares Hitler because of
his reputation for unvarying obedience and his great ernerience in
defensive operatiane. he had inct same fram commandino a corns in
the Cotentin. It is alleged that, at the interview at Rastenburg when
he received his orders,
Hitler instructed him to leave Paris utterly
destroyed, nothing must be left standine, no church no artistic
monument'.
The words, if spoken,
Choltitz arrived in Paris apparently without special instructions. But
were not written down and
his orders were certainly to defend the city vigorously,
August
lith, after four days in office,
the
prerogatives of a fortress commander.
he had been given
For centuries,
all over
Europe, the meaning of that status in time of siege had been well
understood: absolute authority us in tim within the siege lines,
civilian as well as military,
demolish private and public property for their defence.
and legal power to appropriate or
at its perimeter,
He had initially assumed, however, that he wasto defend the city
along a notional line drawn by his predecessor
around the southern and western suburbs. And although he had
FREE FRANCE
293
taken certain precautions for the demolition of the Paris bridges,
Should that become necessary, he had not envisaged having to fight
within the city itself and certainly not against the inhabitants. Nor
did he wish to do so. Prussian though he was in appearance, in an
Erich von Stroheim style, cropped above the ears, thick of body and
short in the leg, he was neither brutal nor philistine. His personal
code was that of the honourable soldier and, as a former page of the
queen of Saxony, he had no difficulty in appreciating the aesthetic
significance of the city on which the Wittenburgs had modelled
Dresden. But, like Hitler's other recently appointed fortress com-
manders, he had reasons beyond those of automatic military obedi-
ence for fulfilling his orders to keep Paris German. He had left his
wife and children in
depended upon his fidelity.
Germany, and knew that their welfare
With skirmishing spreading throughout the official quarter, mili-
tary vehicles ambushed and ablaze in the streets and the crowds of
shirt-sleeved young resistants swelling as fast as they could improvise
FEI armlets, he was obliged to sustain his side of the fight. And,
though all too conscious of the civic disaster which would flow from
the interruption of public services in a city of three million, a stream
of inquiries from Model, at St Germain-en-Laye, and Jodl, at
Rastenburg, forced him to press forward
preparations
dynamite the electrical power plants,
telephone
exchanges and
railway stations, as well as the forty-five bridges of the city and a
dozen of its most famous buildings - Les Invalides,
Palais du
Luxembourg, Palais Bourbon, Quai d'Orsay, Ministère de la Marine
- which housed occupation staffs.
The prospect of a sustained insurrection horrified others who
were not party to the fight. One was Otto Abetz, German ambas-
sador to the Vichy government, whose wraiths still inhabited the
capital (on August 13th Laval had actually returned for a moment
with the notion of reconvening the Third Republic's Chamber of
Deputies and extracting from it the powers which
would have
allowed him to greet the Allies as a legitimate head of government;
but not even the Gestapo was prepared to countenance
charade). Another was the Swedish consul-general, Raoul Nordling.
As his fellow-countrymen Bernadotte and Wallenberg were to do on
the other side of Europe a little later, he now prepared to act in the
best traditions of neutral diplomacy. He had already seen Choltitz in
an attempt to halt deportations of French political prisoners to
