94
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
German soldiers who had turned out to stand curfew guard over the
volunteer fire brigade. Two, loaded with mortar bombs, had fallen
into the interior of the burning house and been killed there, either by
the flames or, more mercifully, by the detonation of their loads.
Others had hung up on roofs or trees, to be riddled by the Germans
before they could cut themselves free. Then, as those lucky enough
to land unscathed were taken prisoner or made their escape, the
firing had died down and the Germans had gone back to bed.
The readiness of the German defenders of Normandy to observe
the normal routines of military life throurhout the events of June oth
is one of the stranger features of that extraordinary day. Soldiers are
incurably fond of sleep; air raids had become commonplace along
the Normandy coast; but the parachuting was a novelty which makes
the Germans'
adherence to domestic
convention
inexplicable.
Nevertheless, back to bed the domeson of Ste Mère-Eglise went.
Thus when Lieutenant-Colonel Edward Krause, commanding the
3rd/ 505th, came to earth a mile west of the village, exactly in the field
he had selected for his assembly, signalled the rest of his stick and
took stock of his surroundings, the resistance he was expecting to
encounter was already evaporating.
His stick was quickly divided
into four and sent in opposite directions to collect stravs with orders
to be back in forty-five
minutes.
This netting gathered another
revealed that the German infantry battaion which had garrisoned
the village until a week before was now camped outside. leaving it in
the hands of a transport and supply company.
Krause quickly
re-organized his command into two comnanies and marched on the
village, keeping to the hedgerows. He had issued, for no good reason
"except that it sounded hard-boiled', the o ise chat there was to be no
rifle firing until daylight; use grenades, kniven and bayonets only.
As the outline of the buildings showed through the dawn,
detached six patrols to set up blocks on all the roads out of the village
except the one he planned to use himself. When he calculated that
they were in place, he left what remained of his force, crept into the
centre, found the cable point carrying all German communications
from Cherbourg and cut it through. "That was one he wished to boast
about later! Finally he called up his main body and sent them to
search the buildings around the Place de l'Eglise. Thirty Germans
were captured in or next to their beds, eleven were shot on the run,
rather more made it into the countryside. At 5 a.m. he sent a runner
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
95
to find the regimental commander, Colonel William Ekman,
the message, 'I am in Ste Mère-Eglise' and, Napierlike, an hour
later, the message 'I have secured Ste Mère-Eglise'. But the runner
went astray.
So many messages went astray that morning, or remained unsent
because of the lack of means to transmit them, that the misdirection
of Krause's news is entirely unremarkable. It did not in truth go
entirely astray since it was passed to General Ridgway. But the
runner failed to tell him for whom it was intended and Ridgway did
not have a radio with which to inquire of Colonel Ekman, who was
less than 1,000 yards away, if he had got the word by another route,
Moreover, his mind was chiefly occupied with the fight for the
bridges across the Merderet. In consequence Ekman continued to
believe until mid-morning that
Ste Mère-Eglise was in German
hands thus distorting what might otherwise have been a smooth
deployment of his three battalions.
His znd Battalion, commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Benjamin
Vandevoort, had made one of the very few compact and accurate
landings of the night, and by daylight had collected 575 men out of
the 63o who had jumped. Vandevoort had broken a leg on impact, as
had so many of the senior officers whose slightly greater age made
their bones vulnerable to shocks which the private soldiers absorbed
unhurt, but had commandeered a small farm-cart and,
eighteenth-century Spanish general miraculously endowed
with a
lion heart, had ordered his men to wheel him on to the battlefield.
His mission was to secure the northern approaches to Ste Mère-
Eglise, in particular by erecting a substantial roadblock at Neuville
au-Plain,
Route nationale
which a German
counter-attack was expected. At 6.15 a.m. when almost there, he got
word from Ekman, with whom he was in radio contact,
should 'halt in place. For an hour and three-quarters he heard
nothing more, until at 8 a.m. he was subjected to one of those
order-counter-order-disorder episodes
so characteristic
of fluid
operations. Ekman first signalled, 'Have heard nothing from the 3rd
Battalion'; at 8.10, 'Turn back and capture Ste Mère-Eglise'; at
8.16, 'Proceed to Neuville; I think 3rd Battalion is in
Ste Mère-
Eglise; at 8.17, 'Disregard the last order; move on
Ste
More
Eglise 18 Vandevoort's response to this flurry of contradictions was
remarkably judicious, all the more so in view of the pain
suffering. He at once turned his force to retrace its steps, but not
