I66
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Channel seas into the breakwaters of the Mulberries, that Mont-
It was on the following day, as the great gale began to drive the
Gomery issued a directive designed to quieten the criticism of his
failure at Tilly and forestall the building of the Schwerbunkt for
which Hitler had just laid plans. He emphasized how well the Allies
had done so far, in establishing their lodgement area - the linguistic
obverse of Hitler's last piece of French soil held by the enemy' - and
exhausting Rommel's mobile reserves. But he predicted, correctly,
that the enemy would now attemot an armoured counter-attack and
prescribed the antidote.
'We must now capture Caen and Cherbourg
as the first step in the full development of our plans. Cherbourg was
a plum clearly about to fall, and he did not therefore elaborate plans
for that half of the scheme.
proposed an envelopment east and west of the city, that on the east
For the drive to capture Caen he
by troops in place, that on the west by new divisions which were only
just coming into the battle the tuth Armoured Division the sard
Division, infantry
Scottieh Divicion, which was to make the main effart fo doo men in
all were to be engaged, supported by 6o0 tanks and 300 guns, with a
heavy-gun monitor and three cruisers standing offshore to provide
long-range fire. The objective was to be the high ground east of the
Orne. in its bend between Can and Falsice and the advance was
intended to sweep up the German positions on the flanks of the
corridor as it was nushed southward bringing in particular pos-
session of Carpiquet and the Abbey of Ardenne, Mever's pirate lair
on the heights above the citv. The attack was to begin on June 22nd
and was to be code-named 'Epsom'.
Scotland the Brave
The great gale imposed an immediate postponement of the starting
impact of the subordinate operation
date; and meanwhile the uncertainty of sunny diminished the
- originally
intended to be the main thrust - and of a predaratory attack near
Tilly. Not until June 23rd did Montgomery therefore decide that
June 26th should be the day for reth Senttich Division to attack
Domestically the delay was welcome. On lune 18th, when he had
issued his directive, the division was still disembarking. As a result
of the gale, the last elements did was arrive isembarke z4th, and had
to move directly from the beaches to the assembly area for the attack.
167
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
June zith was therefore the earliest day it could have been ready for
the battle - which was to be its first.
Its first in actuality. But war is part of the spiritual climate of
Scotish life. Scotland's history is bloody with battles, against the
English, against each other, and her national heroes - Wallace,
Bruce, Montrose - are men of the sword. The military ingredient of
Scotish life goes deeper than that. For to the Scots, as to the Swiss,
Swedes, Albanians, Prussians and other peoples of Europe's margins
and infertile uplands, war has been something of a national industry.
Scots had soldiered in the service of foreign kings - the nearest
guard' of the French Kings were Scots - since the Middle Ages, and
the officer rolls of the armies of Austria, Russia and the German
kingdoms are thick with Scottish names from the seventeenth to the
ninetenth centuries; did not von Mackensen claim Scottish ancestry
until the battle of Mons made it no longer politic to do so? And
bands of Scottish mercenaries had hired themselves from
military marketplace to another throughout the wars of dynasty and
religion, changing sides whenever pay called but always bearing with
them the reputation, first framed by Joan of Arc, as 'men who made
good war'. Hepburn's Regiment had served as mercenaries to the
kings of Sweden and Francebefore it returned to the Stuarts as the
Royal Scots, and whenance British crown began to raise
regiments of its own, from the Black Watch in 1739 onwards, they
instantly proved themselves among the fiercest and most dependable
of its soldiers, In Canades and America they had played much the
same hard-bitten, foot-loose role as the Hessians hired into British
service to war beside them against Redskins and rebellious colonists.
In the Peninsula and the Loansountries their military staunchness
and the barbaric allure of their dress had made them an object of fear
to their enemies, and of a romantic cult to the populations among
whom they campaigned and the students of the picaresque who
followed the propaign of the armies. Wild and high the Cameron
Gathering roseogress of the armieLochiel's, which Albyn's hills/
Have heard and heard, too, have the Saxon foes/How in the noon of
night that pibroch thrills/ Savage and shrill?
But in the long run it was not to be Byronic poetasters who most
eagerly consumed the myth of the Highland warrior - nature's
gentleman soldiet, 'a lion in the field, a lamb in the house', brave,
stern, frugal, obedient, frighteningly respectable - but the Scottish
People themsebedient, rightenin defines that extraordinary trans-
