Gliders of the American Airborne Corns in Normandy on the
morning after D-Day
Dead of the 505th Parachute Infantry awaiting identification at
Ste Mère-Eglise, June 7th, 1944
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
47
Brooke
Churchill's will to combat was doubted by none, not even Marshall
at his most pessimistic.
Whatever disappointment the American
professionals may have felt at the decision to postpone Sledge-
hammer in favour of Torch, they recognized that
Churchill's
advocacy of the North African plan had stemmed ultimately from a
genuine desire to win victories over the Germans in 1942, and a
belief that victory was certain there, while any invasion of France
was likely to end in calamity. But their belief in British commitment
to the right choice of strategy at the next stage of decision was less
wholehearted. For Marshall had already detected that the guiding
compass which charted Churchill's course through the war was not
his own overpowering urge to march to the sound of the guns but the
watchwords of caution and calculation voiced by his chief of staff,
General Sir Alan Brooke. And in
Brooke's attitude to the war
Marshall had identified a tepidity of enthusiasm for the cross-
Channel attack which he disliked and mistrusted.
Brooke's cautiousness should not have aroused surprise. For his
background and experience might have been designed to school him
in that mode of outlook. By training and service a gunner, he had
made his name in the army by his adaptation during the First World
War of French artillery methods to British practice. In particular he
had taught fellow British gunners the technique
of the 'creeping
barrage'. The basis of the technique is in part
mathematical,
an
application of the science of ballistics, but in part also psychological,
requiring judgments about how human beings react to extreme but
apparently impersonal threat.
Mere 'searching
forward does not
guarantee the effectiveness of a creeping barrage, since infantry may
go to ground while the curtain of fire passes
'searching back' is essential also, to catch the unwary as they emerge
from cover in the belief that the danger is past.
A fine judgment
about human self-protectiveness in the aggregate
tinguishes a good from an indifferent barrage plan.
therefore
dis-
Brooke possessed
exactly that judgment; but its logic is the opposite of that which
animated the blitzkrieg and the break-through.
Brooke's cautiousness was heightened by his experience of how
additionally uncertain are operations mounted with
unblooded
troops. The British army's campaign in France in 19T5-18 had been
fought for the most part by amateurs, the Kitchener volunteers and
