236
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
dedicated to the study of industrial mobilization, Patton was a
soldier who represented the Napoleonic tradition. Rich in his own
right, richer by marriage, he had used the security wealth gave him
to cultivate the hieh-born and well-placed in American society and
politics and to pursue his real military interests - the literature of
generalship and derting-do, the techniques of the new warfare of
aircraft and armour - with a disregard for routine which humbler
officers dared not risk. Like the rest of his military generation, he
had known the thrill of dizzy promotion in the First World War,
when for a blissful moment he had been a full colonel at thirty-three,
but he had not been soured by the inevitable descent to substantive
rank which peace brought.
Nor had he been made professionally
cautious by it; from his first re-encounter with the German army, at
successfully to bend the orders of superior officers which is so often
Gabès in Tunisia in March 1943, he had shown all that willingness
the mark of the truly talented soldier. In Sicily, by then head of
Seventh Army, he had pushed his dramatically personal approach to
war too far when he had ohysically chastised a pair of soldiers who
did not meet his own exacting standards of physical courage, and
been removed from command.
But, even in an army ruled by the puritan intolerances of General
Marshall, his talent
Eisenhower had determined to make a place for him in the invasion
bulked too large to be neglected for long.
force. Bradley, once his subordinate, had uncomplainingly accepted
the notion that it should be
place had taken time to find. Now, as a new Third Army controlling
within his sphere of command.
all the reinforcements which July had brought into Normandy came
into being, Patton emerged from the shadows to direct its opera-
tions. He was a new name to the maiority of the voung conscripts
who filled its ranks but,
with his brass buttons, pearl-handled
revolver - relic of his davs as Olympia pentathlete and champion
army pistol shot _ burnished helmet and dittering eiding-boots, not
a figure they would need to see twice to remember. And his troops
would see him often. Patton led from the front.
His double mission, propose fromith front by Montgomery on
July z7th and confirmed in writing by Bradley on August ist, was to
take Third Army out of Normandy and into Brittany, as far as
Brest at its western point. An armoured and an infantry division
were allotted to each obiective - 4th and Oth to the firet fth and noth
237
THE HONOUR OF THE GERMAN ARMY
to the second - while he kept gth Armoured, 83rd and
goth
Divisions in reserve to exploit their success. Even as Third Army
became operational, the 4th Armoured Division captured the key
exit point from Normandy, the coastal town of Avranches, after an
advance of twenty-five miles in thirty-six hours and by the following
evening, July 3ist, was in Brittany proper. Its crucial achievement
as to have seized intact the bridge at Pontaubault, which carried
the road from Avranches southward across the river Sélune, since
that provided the only ready route towards the objectives Bradley
had given to Patton. He now made assurance of its fullest use the
overriding concern of his staff, sending clusters of senior officers out
to the feeder routes whis statt to it with orders to keep the vehicles
rolling without regard for strict sequence of units; at the other end
the bunched columns were unscrambled by the simole means of
marking each of the roads which fanned from it for a separate
division. In this way, which defied every rule of staff college
logistics, his seven divisions were got into the new theatre of
operations in seventy-two hours.
As the tail of the army crossed the bridge, its spearheads were
already eighty miles bevond. The interior of Brittany was empty of
German troops, who had either already left for the Normandy front
or were even then concentrating on the Atlantic const for the defence
6th Armoured
of its ports. Nothing, therefore, stood in 4th of
Divisions paths; for several days the only armed men they met were
those of the resistance now appearing along the roads of the
province to guide the Americans forward. By August 4th Rennes
had been Canturad and ith Armoured Division had crossed Brittany
to reach the south coast at Vannes, where it stood poised to take the
important naval port of Lorient. The oth Armoured was half way to
of First Army
Brest on that date, while in their rear the units
manoeuvred to consolidate the Avranches corridor and drive the
Germans eastward trom its inner flank. The capture of Mortain by
the tet Division on August and anchored the Army's line on hich
ground which dominated the routes the Germans must use if they
Were to attempt a counter-attack against the break-out.
So little did
Bradley count on that possibility, however, that on this day he issued
orders to Patton to close down his drive into Brittany - a major
revision of the long-laid Overlord plan - and turn east
with all
available strength.
On August 4th
Montgomery amplified these
instructions. The shape of his bridgehead had changed dramatically
