56
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
subordinate who, it was easily decided, should be British. Churchill
favoured Alexander, to him a paragon among soldiers, and Alex was
also Ike's choice; their relationship had long been on nickname
terms. Brooke insisted, as he firmly believed, that Montgomery was
the better general and drove through the appointment.
On January
znd, 1944 the commander of the Eighth Army flew from North
Africa to England to immerse himself in COSSAC's Overlord plan.
But he had already seen its outline and communicated his opinion
of it to Churchill, my first impression is that the present plan is
impracticable. Not because of cossAc's chosen landing area, quibble
at it though he might. To that selected, in the Bay of the Seine
between the Cotentin peninsula and the river Orne, there was no
alternative. Other sections of the French coast which lay within
effective fighter range were backed by high cliffs, and those nearest
British ports, though closer to the exploitation route into Germany,
were therefore better garrisoned as well Not because of the air and
sea arrangements either The crose Channel chinment of the assault
and follow-up, their escorting,
beaching
docking and the
ship-to-shore bombardment which would ree the landings were
irreproachable in conception. Over a thousand naval vessels, a
assembled or earmarked to
thousand merchant ships and three thousand landing-craft were
sail on the day - D-Day as the plan
identified it. Massive air bombardment was assured bu an amicably
arranged interruntion of the createdio hamlina acci dormany.
The air 'interdiction' (denial of use) of road and rail communications
in and to the Normandy front promised to be comolete indeed so
generous in scale was it that by over-concentration on targets outside
the 'lodgement area', as the COSSAC staff now called Normandy, it
would significantly assist the deceits which were to guarantee, it
anything could, the success of the disembarlation Nor could he find
fault with the deception plan which would orchestrate dozens of
procedures and devices to mislead and confuse the Germans as to
time and place - some highly technical. like the dropping of metallic
chaff to simulate the movement of an invacion fleet in the Channel
narrows while German radare alsewhere wara blindad athare chep
whimsy, as in the despatch
ranean haunts.
of a junior officer
resembled Montgomery to impersonate him in his old Mediter
who dubiously
What aroused Montgomery's doubts was the inorediant of the plan
he was best fitted to indoe the eize and danloumant of the landing
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
57
force. COSSAC had settled ultimately for a force of three divisions,
which were to be followed over the beaches in quick succession by
twelve more. "This would lead', he wrote to Churchill on January
ist, to the most appalling confusion on the beaches and the smooth
development of the land battle would be made extremely difficult, if
not impossible ... The initial landings must be made on the widest
possible front', fifty not twenty-five miles, with a
British and
American army landing side by side and each deploying two and
possibly three corps. And there should be a descent by an airborne
division, rather than a brigade, on the eastern and western flanks, to
secure them against early German counter-attack.
It was the fear of immediate counter-attack which alarmed him
most, followed by concern that 'reserve formations might succeed in
containing us within shallow positions with our beaches under
continuous covering fire'. He rightly looked beyond the technical
difficulties of the landing, to the solving of which years of thought
and experiment had been given, to the invasion battle itself. And he
could not forget that he would, at the outset,
fight at a crazy
disadvantage of numbers. Against his five divisions, all infantry,
though to be supported by some swimming and ship-loaded tanks,
the Germans would in theory oppose fifty divisions, of which ten
were armoured. Only eight infantry and three panzer divisons were
close to the landing area.
But they would outnumber and outgun
those he could put ashore in the first wave. It was therefore essential
to drive forward on as wide a front as possible in the first days, so
that room was made as quickly as possible for the follow-up divisions
(of which there were thirty in England) to arrive and reverse the
odds.
He convinced Eisenhower, at their first executive
meeting on
January zist, of the need for the extension of the front, and their
authority rapidly sufficed, as the dedicated General Morgan's tech-
nical submissions had not, to win from the Combined Chiefs of Staff
the additional resources required. At great expense to the British
ship-building programme, at a little cost to Admiral King's Pacific
campaign, by the deferment of Anvil until after D-Day and by the
postponement of D-Day itself for a month, one thousand extra
landing-craft were found to add to the three thousand already
earmarked; they would accommodate the two extra divisions to be
disembarked and allow the use of five instead of three beaches, to
be codenamed, in order from
west to east, Utah and
