Map 4 Operation Epsom, the Battle of the Scottish Corridor,
June 24th-July 1st, 1944
KEY
Armoured division
British front, evening June 24th, 1944
British front, evening June 30th, 1944
-attacks, June 29th
and July Ist, 1944
53, Allied forces
uso. Gierman torced
N
3 Cdn
e12 SS
Tilly-sur-Seulle
luvigny
Tessel-Brettevile
Rauray
Queudeville
2 SS(Gp)
09 cc
ROdon
Bougy
3110 SS
110
neux
Bas-de-1 SSIG
• Mouel
43 •
Grainville
15 Mondrainville
Tourmauville
•Baron
< Hill 112
Esquay
Evrecy
Amaye-sur-Odon
Carpiquet
Villers-Bocape
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
145
probed and then withdrawn in the dusk of D-Day. But these
interlinkings still left two holes in the Allied front, a small one
between the British and American landing-places north of Bayeux
and another much larger one between the American Omaha and
Utah Beaches across the tidal mouth of the Douve. These gaps
offered tempting prospects. The difficulty was to find the troops to
inset into them. Rommel's immediate reserve, 21st Panzer Divi-
sion, was already committed. The two other panzer divisions which
he controlled were in the wrong place; 116th was beyond the Seine,
and was even farther away beyond the Somme. Panzer Lehr and
12th SS Panzer, though both in Normandy, were also at some
[distance from the battlefield and still 'under OKW control', which
meant in practice that they could be released to the battle only with
Hitter's express permission. The infantry divisions were, for pur-
poses of immediate reinforcement, useless. Those nearest the land-
ing places, on the other side of the Seine, could not be touched as
long as Hitler believed that they might yet be called upon to repel a
second invasion on their coast. Those farther away simply lacked the
mobility to get up to the battlefront in time, or to manoeuvre when
they reached it.
Rommel, moreover, commanded on June Ith in absentia. He
had gone home on leave to his native Swabia on June 4th, leaving
his chief of staff. Speidel, in charge, and though the two had
thoroughly discussed ... the measures to be taken in the case of an
attack', the deputy could not speak with the voice of the master.
Worse, the two officers at the next level of command below were also
absent from their posts on the night of invasion: Dollmann. chief of
Seventh Army, which occupied Normandy, was running the war
game in Rennes from which the commander of the gist Luftlande
Division was returning when ambushed by the American parachut-
ists; Sepp Dietrich, commander of I SS Panzer Corps, to which
12th S$ and Panzer Lehr Divisions were subordinate, was
Brussels. The German chain ovisom mand therefore ran upwards
from Speidel to Rundstedt, far away in his headquarters at
Germain outside Paris. and thence to the Führerhaubtquartier,
temporarily installed in the Berghot at Berchtesgaden; downwards it
ran directly to the commanders of the panzer divisions.
Speidel had been conducting a dinner party as the parachutists
made their approach to the landing zones at either end of what would
soon be the Normandy front. Among his guests was Ernst Jünger,
