228
SIX
ARMIES IN NORMANDY
The dramatis
personde
of the plot does read as if taken from
Benrath's
Ball
auf
Kobolnow,
where Graf Solduan-
Schömschö, Friedrich Schönfeld-Wöllendorf, Blanche von Berry
and the Prinzessin Maud Satulin tremble at the thought of a tour of
inspection by the self-appointed priestess of their circle, the terrily.
ing Fürstin Kaatzenstein (mit zwei a') and Baron von Elsenburg
neichhour who has taken the citizenship of the new Poland, where
in Ton der Garde 1900,3 at the caste treachery of a
his estates now lie. Many of the conspirators had made their first
tentative
affirmations
commitment at Kreisau,
the Silesian
Kobolnow of the conspirator Helmuth von Moltke, and many of the
soldiers in particular
secret monarchists and social reac-
tionaries. But not Stauffenberg - and it was on him, in the end, that
everything turned. He shared his fellow regular officers' distaste for
the majority of professional Nazis. Far from seeing their elimination
as an end in itself however, as necessary to put a stop to the war in
the
restore a 'decent'
west, or to preserve Germany from another Versailles, or to
among
domestic society, or to cleanse her reputation
conspirators, he was
nations, some or all of which aims motivated the other
bent on nothing less than revolution.
revolutions go, it was to have been an oddity among those of the
twentieth century; economically distributive,
diplomatically inter-
nationalist, ideologically neutralist, its basis
Christian,
its ethos
fraternal and its precipitating act the assassination of the Antichris
whom the profoundly religious and romantic
Stauffenberg had
persuaded himself that Hitler was. But it was revolution all the
Those who shared his vision were chiefly young officers who had
come under his considerable personal spell. And that was appropri-
ate, for to Stauffenberg the army was a key institution, a force fo
social good as well as a means of national defence. He was disgusted
by the self-serving of so many generals, their political timidity and
their ability to ignore or even condone atrocities committed in their
areas of command, and hence believed that the honour of the
German army required the cathartic blow to be struck by one of its
officers. It was at that point, and perhaps only that point, that his
outlook and Hitler's touched, even if they did so back to back. Both
accepted the unique and sunreme importance of military action
against the head of state. But, just as Stauffenberg saw it as a duty of
honour, Hitler saw it as the ultimate treachery. Taught by the failure
THE HONOUR OF THE
GERMAN ARMY
229
of his putsch at Munich in 1923 that the domestic power of the army
was absolute, he had scrupulously avoided all further conflict with it
in the years before the seizure of power and afterwards carefully
exempted it from the policy of nazification. All other institutions of
German state and society - civil service, police, local government,
trade unions, employers' federations, schools, universities,
youth
movements, even the national churches - had been gleichgeschaltet,
which meant their absorption into some parallel party organization
or the replacement of their leaders by party nominees or, at the very
least, the enrolment of those leaders as Nazis. None of those
measures had been visited on the army.
Hitter had indeed emasculated the one party organization which
might have, which indeed had, sought to take the army's place, the
Stratelungen, and, though he had at times used his ultimate
powers to alter the composition of the high command, he had always
filled the vacancies he created with men acceptable to their brother
officers. And, Hitler further calculated, to a relationship founded on
the observance of constitutional properties,
had added the
sweetening of rearmament,
mass professional advancement and
victory. In his public dealings with the army - whatever his private
arrière-pensées about its attitudes, whatever the nature of his camou-
flaged blows against his tinemies in its ranks - his conscience was
clear. Clear too, therefore, was the stage for a parade of outraged
emotion against the traitors, dupes and ingrates in
field-grey.
the ordinary soldiers. the Frontbämbfer with whom he had identified
himself from the beginning of his political life,
he continued to
express total, if quite impersonal, admiration. In 'his' generals e
Model, Schörner,
Wenck, who shared his own memories
trenches and ready willingness to shed blood -
he maintained
complete confidence. On the traditional officer class,
tainted not
Only by obsolete politics but by cosmopolitan connections and
intellectual pretensions - Helmuth von
Moltke was half-English,
Staufenberg s mosher had beema friend of Rilke and he himself was
a member of the circle of Stefan
George - he vented a tide of
passionate vindictiveness. *We'll be taken prisoner and get decent
treatment, particularly
we who are
of noble families',
mocking characterization of the plotters' attitude to the defeat he
affirmal hair cushese would haus entailad For thas who fell into
his hands he accordingly prescribed imprisonment of the harshes
For their relatives
severity and execution of savage cruelty.
