42
43
de l'Hôtel de Ville, August 25th, 1944
Ae moured cars of the and French Armoured Division in the Place
German officers await the prison camp in the Hôtel Majestic
FREE FRANCE
303
enhanced the importance, real and symbolic, of French Africa. And,
by cleverly playing on the strategic danger which its fall - to a British
drive from Egypt, to a Free French advance from the equatorial
colonies - would level at Carman intersets in couthern Furane and
the Atlantic, Vichy diplomacy had actually been able to exclude
most of the Army of Africa from the disarmament provisions of the
Armistice. Its officers, when they confronted the minority who had
chosen the other path in 1940, had grounds for arguing therefore
that they too had trodden the road of patriotism, and had swallowed
their pride to do so.
Leelerc, who had seen his column as 'a sort of shining spearhead',
was as ready as any of his Jacobins to throw these casuistries back in
the teeth of those who uttered them. Petain, for him, was the hook
on which men hang their cowardice. But his idealism was realistic.
The Americans had promised him the equipment for a full armoured
division, the strongest force which Free France had yet fielded. To
man it he would enlist any Frenchmen who would do duty. From
the Army of Africa, therefore, he took two regiments of artillery.
From the Dakar garrison, which had now rallied', he took a tank
regiment, the 12th Chasseurs d'Afrique, which
smuggled
thither a handful of armoured vehicles from under the noses of the
disarmament commission in 194I.
garrison yielded the manpower for another, the rath Cuirasiers.
The navy,
the most pro-Vichy of all the services, provided a
battalion of Fusiliers- Marins to form the anti-tank regiment; his
admonition to its officers was particularly stringent: 'You have been
doing nothing for three years but now you have your chance. You
have to regain the right to be respected? The
reconnaissance
regiment, the ist Spahis Marocains, was Gaullist.
It had escaped
from Syria in 1940 to join the British in the Eritrean campaign. The
infantry, Gaullist from the start, had reluctantly to be remade. The
Senegalese would not do as liberators and so, against their will and
their officers' - had they not been good enough to march in the front
rank of Nivelle's 'victory' offensive of 1917? - were sent home, to be
replaced by Frenchmen. The Régiment de marche du Tchad would
return to France as a white regiment.
Christian Arabs from the
Lebanon,
who had 'rallied' after the defeat of the Army of the
Levant in 1941, provided the engineers. The third tank regiment,
the 501st Chars de Combat
was built on a nucleus of original
enthusiasts who had declared for de Gaulle in London in 1940.
