140
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
or disabled. The Canadian Scottish, reserve battalion to the Winni-
pegs and Reginas, was held up on the beach while a way was sought
through the minefield on the dunes, and was heavily mortared. The
other reserve battalion, Le Régiment de la Chaudière, saw all bui
five of the landing-craft sunk under its leading company, by mines o
mortar bombs.
The men took off their equipment and swam ashore
and, though most made the beach, they were driven by fire to sheler
under the Bernières sea wall until the Queen's Own Rifles released
About a quarter of the landing force was thus still tied to the
immediate area of the assault at H-Hour plus 2. Some of it would be
there much longer.
overcome resistance at St
The North Shore Regiment would not finally
Aubin until 6 p.m. But already it was
possible to see that the majority of the two leading brigades was
safely ashore. unencumbered by the enemy, and ready to move
inland as soon as the
way was open. Behind them the reserve
brigade, the oth, had begun to land, together with its supporting
armoured regiment, the
Sherbrooke Fusiliers. The beaches were
clogging with men and vehicles while the tail and engineer tanks
struggled to clear gaps in the minefields - 14,000 had been laid
between Courseulles and Bernières - and blow gaps through the sea
wall and dunes for
wheeled vehicles to exit. At Bernières a
flooded area beyond the dunes comolicated their task so that it wa
and bridging across it.
not until noon that a crossine was built by sinking a tank in the mire
The infantry companies which had landed
first, however, had already begun to march towards their obiectives
And in their wake the rest of the division would follow as soon as it
It was an almost deserted landscape through which the Winn-
pegs, Reginas,
moving.
Canadian Scottish and Chaudières found themselves
The French Canadians of La Chaudière had found a few
terrified natives in the ruins of Bernière Ch auditor in their common
From the
countryside beyond the inhabitants had dis-
appeared me bad been billed bo the sone
which had fallen havand the strongpoint lins must had taken to
their cellars. But, if there were no french, equally there were very
Germans.
The
policy - and shortage of men - which had
dictated that all should be put at the very forward edge of the
defended area meant that there were almost none left to hold the
chain of inland villages beyond the beach. The Reginas found none
141
CANADA: TO THE SOUTH SHORE
in Reviers, two miles south of Courseulles, and the Winnipegs only a
few half-hearted snipers in the neighbouring village of Banville.
There were also snipers in Colombiers-sur-Seulles, west of Reviers,
who fired on the Canadian Scottish as they approached the place
through confields in the late morning. After they had been chased
away, the advance continued and the Queen's Own Rifles on the left
flank also found that, once out into open country, the worst of their
ordeal was over. They met a little resistance in the village of
Anguerny, but had taken full possession of it by late afternoon.
Nor was any of this in retrospect surprising. General Richter,
commanding the 716th Division, later revealed that of his four
German and two Russian battalions there remained at the end of
D-Day only one German battalion still extant, at about 80 per cent
strength. Of the rest there were only handfuls of demoralized
soldiers, sufficient three days later to furnish a single battlegroup of
202 officers and men. For practical purposes, the 716th Division had
been destroyed. And, unlike the Canadian 2nd Division
Dieppe, it would not rise again. Fears of comparable Canadian losses
proved unfounded. Nearly 2,000 had been expected, to include 600
drowned. The actual total was 1,000, which included 335 dead. The
Winnipegs, Reginas and Queens Own Rifles had 55, 42 and 61 fatal
casualties, mostly in the assault companies which had landed under
the beach strongpoints.
As the survivors pressed cautiously
steadily on into the Norman countryside, following their attached
tanks wherever the armour had been able to get up to them, they
took with them a blessed sense of release from the spectres born
twenty-two months before on the beaches seventy miles to their east,
a release which would ease the anxieties of all Canada when the first
full news of the landing reached them the next morning.
Details had already relieved the tensions at Supreme Headquarters
Allied Expeditionary Force. There Eisenhower and Montgomery
had followed at a few hours remove the progress of the fighting all
along the landing zone, from the American airhead at the base of the
COotentin to the British eastof the Orne. They had been content with
the reports of the British seaborne landings at Gold and Sword
Beaches, west and east of una. They had been gratified by the case
and speed with which the American 4th Division had got ashore at
Utah to rescue the parachutists. They had been coked bu the
sufferings and near failure outine American ist Division on Omaha,
which had taken 2,000 casualties simply in the business of crossing
