330
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Saxons who had died on the wrong side of the line at Caen and
And so, in the politically and militarily transformed world of the
oil crisis and the inter-continental missile, Normandy became news
again: not newspaper news; but news to the editors of the pro-
fessional military journals whose business is to speculate about the
nature of future warfare, and to the authors of those works of future
history' whose attempt to give it, literally, reality was one of the great
publishing successes
landscapes
of the decade. The similarity between the
of Normandy and the Central Front was noted and
measured. The battlefield was re-walked, by military tourists whose
motives were now exploratory instead of nostalgic. Lines of sight,
pockets of dead ground, routes of approach, angles of defilade were
plotted and calculated. The war diaries of units long dissolved were
disinterred from the archives.
Veterans pensioned off years before
found that their war stories had a new audience. It was the shape,
thythm and tempo of the fighting in those June and July days nearly
forty years before which today's experts sought to recreate, hoping
therefrom to draw the elements ox a stical system by which the
descendants of the warriors who had fought in Normandy could
defend with confidence the distant ceasefire line the victory there
had won.
Perhaps there is point to their work. Certainly no European can or
should contemplate with complacen the concentratine nitar
power which continues to occupy the centre of his continent so long
after the formal closure of the events which called it there, And no
western European can rest easy at the disproportion which exists
between the force which defends his half of the continent from that
which threatens it from the other. But one wonders if the search for
reassurance in the example of the German defence of Normandy is
not a taking counsel of fears, an indulgence in that "waret race' theor
with which the tough-minded in the world of atratorin analysis
choose to alarm and provoke their more optimistin that? For real
hindsight allows us after fortv vears to see the great Second Front
debate, and the battle in which its conclusion rasha tirel
differently from those who argued for and against the running of thi
That risk, it was conceded by both British and Americans, was the
defeat of the invasion force in its amphibious phase, that is. either
offshore or while half-ashore. Might it be got safely to dry land and
EPILOGUE
331
as Montgomery put it, a good lodgement area Degged out, both
Allies agreed that their superiority
in airpower,
mobility and
material would give it the edge in the battle of the breakout. To that
the Americans looked forward with a greater confidence than the
British, marked by the memories of the First World War, could
muster; but it was not an ordeal from which either shrant To th
event their estimation of the difficulties of the battle ashore were
both exceeded and under-fulfilled. Under-fulfilled because,
the German line broke, it did so irreparably; there was no chance for
Army Group B to fall back from one river line to another across the
breadth of northern France, since it had given its all in the defence of
the lodgement area. Exceeded because the Allies had not expected
that it would fight so fiercely, successfully and lone at the very point
where they chose to land.
Had the pessimists in the Allied camp foreseen and been able to
persuade the makers of policy that the battle behind the beaches
would have lasted as long as it did, it is possible that the invasion
would have been further postponed: even that the Second Front
protagonists might have los their case and seen the power of the
Western Alliance dedicated to an enlargement of the campaign in
Italy and the Balkans. But that would have been to make the gravest
of strategic mistakes. For there the Allies felt themselves to be at
their most vulnerable in their Second Front strategy was preciselv
where their greatest strenoth lave in their reliance on the sea for tho
movement of their forces.
The sheer technical difficulty of transferring land forces from ship
to shore, emphasized by the disaster of Dieppe, and reinforced by
memories of Gallipoli, was the medium of obfuscation. But, as the
success of the Sicily and Salerno landings
demonstrated,
difficulty had been overcome a year before D-Day by solutions set in
hand a year before that: the construction of specialized landing-
craft, the creation of major airborne units, the refinement of direct
fire support from naval guns and fighter aircraft and the utilization
of air power to isolate the landing zone from the rest of the enemy's
defended area. Given those innovations, everything in an amphibi-
ous strategy then favoured the Allies. For, granted roughly equival-
ent strength between attacker and defender, what makes an offensive
work is surprise. Hitler had twice achieved stupendous surprise over
his opponents, but only because of their stubborn self-delusion: in
1940 through the French and British conviction that he must attack
