148
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
breakneck car journey, to deploy them as they reached the front. He
reached his headquarters at la
Roche Guyon on the Seine on the
evening of lune 6th and first thing next day went to call on Gevr vo
Schweppenbera, the commander of Panzer Group West, unde
whom the panzers were to be grouned for the counter-stroke. The
situation
map still offered attractive prospects.
The American
bridgeheads were shallow and widely separated, and the larger of the
two still apparently held in the main hu narachutiste The invader
moreover were there obliced to face two wave southwarde towards
the divisions approaching from Brittany, northwards towards thos
in the Cotentin.
The other
American
beachhead, Omaha, also
tempted attack - its occunante had suffered the worst casualties o
any of the landing forces on D-Day. They might be supposed to be
still shaken and indeed had not consolidated their footholds into a
firm defensive
position. It might pay to attack on either side of
Omaha, since in each case a success would tend to hold the enemy
apart. Captured documents revealed that a drive on Cherbourg wa
an early intention of the Americans, making a push into the gap
between Omaha and Utah particularly desirable. But it was equall
rational to think of attacking on the other side between the Britist
and Americans, in the hope of levering their beachheads even wide
apart and eventually destroying first one and then the other.
spoke against these calculations Was distance It wac forty miles from
British and American brideeheads. The panzer divisions, if the
Caen to the Utah-Omaha gap,
twenty to the hole between the
could be extricated from the close fightina states la cover
the distande to sto first gap in a night's march to thand in two.
But, once
arrived,
was no guarantee that they could be
recovered with any speed and, while they were away, every expecta-
tion that the Dritich would take Caen. or break out Must he the city
Or both. And from Caen to Paris was only a hundred miles across
level and unobstructed plain.
Rommel naturally decided, therefore, that while he must attack
before the enemy's numbers grew anv larger, and particularly before
they had parity with him in armoured divisions, the point of assault
must be laid as close to Caen as possible. Early on June 8th he gave
orders for the three panzer divisions in place - 2rst, Lehr and i2th
SS - to concentrate and drive in the Allied Front between Bayeux
and Caen, where there was room for them to attack side by side. It
was easier to propose than dispose. General Feuchtinger's 215t
Panzer Division was still entangled with the 3rd British Division
around Caen, its infantry fighting in the hedgerows and villages, its
ranks intervening to close off gaps in the line wherever the invaders
struck hardest. Meyer's Hitler Youth and the Canadians had tem-
porarily declared quits, but the rest of i2th SS, though now arrived,
was so short of petrol for its tanks that it could not manoeuvre.
Panzer Lehr was still straggling up from Chartres. At Falaise its
columns had experienced air attack by what the German army in
Normandy would soon come to call 'Nuremberg Rally' formations
(Parteitas Geschwadern), squadrons of Allied bombers stacked up
straight and level across the open sky. A little farther on General
Bayerlein had been caught on the road in his staff car by three
fighter-bombers. He had been wounded, his driver killed and his
aide-de-camp saved only by falling from the burning vehicle into the
mouth of a concrete culvert.
Rommel was realist enough to recognize that he would not get his
armoured offensive moving that day with so little to hand. As he
had, however, to keep up the pressure on the bridgehead,
directed 1ath SS to resume its attack against the Canadians. A day
and night of murderous fighting followed - literally murderous;
another forty-five Canadian prisoners were shot under the walls of
the Abbey of Ardenne during its course.
Early in the morning the
Royal Winnipeg Rifles during circled at Putot, on the Bayeux road
west of Caen, fought surrounded all day and had to be rescued by
the Canadian Scottish and the ist Hussars that evening.
their four companies had suffered so many casualties while cut off
that the whole battalion had to be sent out of the line. At about the
same time as they were being extricated, Meyer intervened in the
battle at a point nearer Caen. It was growing dark. Leading on a
motorcycle, his preferred command vehicle, he drove westward
down the Caen-Bayeux road with the divisional Panther (tank)
batalion strung out behind him and the men of the reconnaissance
battalion riding on their hulls. Just short of the headquarters of the
Regina Rifles in Breteville FOrgueilleuse, the tanks stopped to shoot
up the village. Then,
when persuaded that resistance had been
crushed, they advanced and drove round the Reginas' positions
Sioux-style to look for a way in for the kill. The Reginas had been
holding their fire and so why ved the feat, rare for an infantry battal-
ion, of inflicting crippling losses on a tank force with their own few
static anti-tank guns. Six Pans ers short of the twenty-two with
