Map 2 The American airborne landing zones, 82nd and
101st Airborne Divisions, June 6th, 1944
BAY OF THE SEINE
lagneville
UTAH BEACH
'St Martin-
Z
la-Hubert
• Mère-Eglise
82
1011
- 206
Para, Bin)
Ste Marie-
Vierville
----
Objective line
Parachute artillen
Miles
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
71
publisher could still sponsor a book warning that parachutists might
appear disguised as 'postmen with collapsible bicycles in postman's
bags', policemen with grenades 'of small size under peaked cap'.
butchers' boys with grenades 'in meat basket covered by white cloth'
or clergymen 'with machine-guns under cloak' - presumably
Anglo-Catholic from their garb and therefore doubly dangerous.
Even at that moment, however, British soldiers in strange Sorbo-
rubber Lana Turner turbans were learning at Ringway airport
outside Manchester to fall through a hole cut in the floor of a Whitley
bomber, and far away among the pines of Fort Benning, Georgia,
Americans in Superman overalls were descending on steel ropes
from the pinnacle of a 250-foot tower into the hot southern sand. As
German parachute formations grew in numbers and confidence, so
that in April 194t they could assault and take the island of Crete over
the heads of an impotent Royal Navy, the first experimental airborne
units had begun to take shape in the Allied armies. Tentatively in
Tunisia in 1942 and then on a larger scale in the invasion of Sicily in
July 1943 British and American parachutists had jumped directly
into action in the teeth of enemy opposition. Many had died by
misadventure, dropped into the sea or on to windswept crags miles
from their landing zones. But the survivors had kept their faith in
the technique intact, had spread the word and seen the airborne arm
continue to grow through the middle period of the war.
While the
German parachutists, though established as an élite of the Wehr-
macht, lost their access to aircraft and found themselves increasingly
committed to earthbound heroics, on the other side of the lines
pilots, planes, specialized equipment - airportable vehicles,
itzers and even tanke _ men and money came in profusion to the
Allied airborne divisions.
By the spring of 1944 those ready in Britain for operations num-
bered four, the 82nd (All American) and roist (Screaming
of the US Army, the oth and ist of the British. Under the invasion
plan the first three of thesed est of swoop across the Channel in a
single night flight, drop into darkness at the eastern and western
ends of the bridgehead and seize the rivers which delimited its flanks.
The bridges over them were to be blown, the approach roads mined
and their banks garrisoned against all enemy attempts to pass troops
across. In this way the sea branst sault waves could be assured of a
little security, a diminution one a ferocity of the counter-attack they
must undergo as soon as they had stepped ashore.
