xvi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Chandler, Eric Morris, Richard Holmes, Nigel de Lee, Christopher
Duffy, Ian Beckett, Paddy Griffith, Bob Godfrey, David Johnson,
John Pimlott,
Buck Ryan, Keith Simpson,
Michael Orr, Tony
Thomas,
Francis Toase,
Ned Wilmott, Tom Maley and Paul
Thomas. John Hunt, our Librarian, put the resources of the Central
Library at my disposal as generously as ever, and I am grateful to
him and his staff, particularly Miss King and Mrs Stevens, and to
Mr George Parker for his assistance with inter-library loans.
Ken-
neth White, the Librarian of the Staff College and a veteran of
Normandy, again allowed me to borrow freely from his shelves and
also put his detailed knowledge of the campaign at my disposal. 1
also owe particular debts for help to John Jolliffe,
Derek Anyan,
Brian Mitchison, Professor Michael Howard and Professor Richthe
Cobb, and to Malcolm Deas, of St Antony's College Oxford.
College, which made me a Senior Member while (though not
because) this book was in progress, has been a happy haven of retreat
from the typewriter. What I produced on it was made legible by
Miss Monica Alexander, formerly principal secretary at the Staff
College and a princess among typists. I am grateful as always for the
support and encouragement of Liz Calder, Tom Maschler and
Graham Greene of Jonathan Cape, of David Machin, formerly of
Jonathan Cape,
of Alan Williams of The Viking Press, and of
Anthony Sheil, Gill Coleridge ard Paul Marsh of Anthony
Associates; I hope I have not disappointed them after all they have
done.
Finally, thanks for help and family hospitality while writing to
Mary and Maurice Keen, Clare and Christopher Dow, Francis and
Julia Keegan, Mollie Keegan, Martin and Susan Everett and Charles
and Vanessa Everett; and, last of all, love returned to my children,
Lucy, Thomas, Rose and Matthew, and my darling wife, Susanne.
Sandhurst
JOHN KEEGAN
March 2gth, 1980
Credits
The author would like to thank the following for permission to
reproduce the photographs:
Bundesarchiv,
Koblenz, 4, 5, 26;
Robert Hunt Library, 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, I0, II, 13, 16, 17, 24, 25, 27, 34,
37, 39, 40, 42; Imperial War Museum, London, 3, 12, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, 23, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 36, 41, 43; Keystone Press
Agency, 2, I4, 35, 38; Popperfoto, 15; and is grateful for permission
to quote material to George E. Koskimaki, author of D-Day with the
Screaming
Eagles; Leo Cooper Ltd (Lion Rampant by
Robert
Woollacombe); the Souvenir
Press
(Caen, Anvil of Victory by
Alexander McKee); Paul Elek Ltd (The Battle of the Falaise Gap by
E. Florentin); Macmillan Ltd (Night Drop by S. L. A. Marshall);
Harper Inc. (Soldier by Matthew B. Ridgway) and Hutchinson Ltd
(Currahee by Donald Burgett).
xvii
