108
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
5 The Ist/ 502nd at WXYZ
Shettle's bold and brave effort to seize his objective had been
frustrated by the presence of superior and well-prepared enemy
forces, against which only
the full battalion might have been
expected to prevail. Away on the northern extremity of the airhead,
however, an even smaller force meanwhile had succeeded in over-
coming superior forces at a critical point, largely because of their
unpreparedness and the manic recklessness of a single soldier.
He was Staff Sergeant Harrison Summers. His battalion com-
mander, Lieutenant-Colonel Patrick Cassidy, short of men and with
a yariety of missions to perform, had assigned to him the task of
capturing a German coastal artillery barracks, known from its map
signification as WXYZ, while he set up a command post and sent the
rest of his slim battalion
northwards to
Beuzeville and Foucarville, between Neuville Turnbull's field of
mount road blocks at
glory) and the beach. He could allot Summers only fifteen men, few
of whom were from the ist/goznd, and Summers had no time even
to ask their names.
They followed him willingly enough from
Cassidy's command post but, when he deployed them within
assaulting distance of WXYZ, he detected that they had little
enthusiasm for his leadership or the coming fight.
He decided
therefore on the most dangerous course of action a leader can adopt:
to advance alone in the hope that his example would draw the others
in his wake.
WXYZ was a collection of thick-walled, stone farm buildings
strung out along some 700 yards of road leading to the beach at Exit
4. The nearest was a small farmhouse.
Summers sprinted for the
door, kicked it in and sprayed the interior with his Thompson
sub-machine-gun. Four of the defenders fell dead, the rest escaped
through a back door to the neighbouring house. Summers looked
round. Not one of his men had followed. They were sheltering in a
roadside ditch. He charged the second house. The enemy left before
he entered but his example now had its first effect. One of his
fifteen, Private William Burt, came out into the open and set up his
light machine-gun to cover Summers's movements. This took him to
the third building, fifty yards away, from which the defenders were
shooting through loopholes. On his run Summers noticed that he
had been joined by a lieutenant he knew, Elmer Brandenberger, but
the officer was badly wounded as they reached the door and
109
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
Summers entered alone. Again he sprayed the interior, killing six
Germansand driving the remainder out of the back.
Summers was temporarily overcome by the physical and emo-
tinal shock of his single-handed demonstration. He crouched beside
the building he had most recently cleared to recover, and it was hal
an hour before he moved again. But as he rose to go he found at his
side an unknown captain from the All American, misdropped by
miles, who said, 'll go with you! He was shot through the heart
almost with the words on his lins and Summers again found himself
entering an enemy-held building without company. This time he
killed six Germans and the rest ran out to surrender to his followers,
who had crept up the ditch to within talking distance. One of them,
Private John Camien, spoke.
Why are you doing it?' he asked.
I can't tell you', answered Summers.
"What about the others?'
"They don't seem to want to fight', said Summers, 'and I can't
make them. So I've got to finish it?
'OK, said Camien, I'm with you."
Side by side, they worked their way down the row of buildings
ahead of them five in all. nausing to rest between each and swapping
Camien's carbine for Summers's Tommy gun to take turns between
charging and giving covering fire. In their rear, Burt, the machine-
gunner, followed along to give extra support
with his heavier
Weapon. Between the thiee ol them they killed thirty more Ger-
Two buildings remained untaken. Summers charged the first and
kicked the door pemato find inside, inexplicably deaf to the fight
raging around them, fifteen German artillerymen
seated at mess
tables eating breakfast. He paused neither to reason why nor think of
mercy; battle-crazed, he shot them all down in their places.
The last building was the largest and strongest in the
WXYZ
complex. Between it and the American party, which now included
some of the stragglers who had been following Summers along the
cover of the roadside ditch, stretched a small, flat and open field.
From the cover of a bank, the attackers surveyed the objective. To
one side of the building stood a shed and a haystack; Burt,
Summers's lone machine-gunner, set up his weapon to fire tracer at
them. Within minutes both were ablaze, the shed exploding as
ammunition stored within caught the heat, driving its thirty German
