306
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
library (his sense of protocol forbad. him ta male anu other use of
the head of state's perquisites). A tactical conference ensued. Leer:
explained that Bradley had started forward an American infanny
division, the 4th, on his right, which was to assist in the capture.
The plan was that it should make its approach from the east, the
French from the west. Telere indond howater that bie aloo
route, via St Cyr and Versailles, was the more heavily defended and
he therefore proposed shifting his weight towarde the Americans to
beat them to the finish. De Gaulle with the priamatin remark that
Leclere was a lucky man to liberate Paris, appeared to approve. 'Go
quickly', he said, 'we cannot have another Commune.
Leclerc now issued precise objectives to his three column com
manders. Langlade was to cross the Seine at the Pont de Sèvres
enter the city at the Porte de St Cloud and aim for the Arc de
Triomphe. Dio was to cross the line of the outer boulevards at the
d'Orléans
Invalides Eiffel Tower Pillotte was to enter bu the Dato lite lie on
and take
possession of the Ecole Militaire-
the same axis and aim for the Pantheon and the Tle de la Cité. Each
represented an area of sumbolic importance of known German
resistance and of possible demolition.
Leclerc's
advance. Langlade, taking the ceremonial route past Versailles and
objectives were
well selected but not his lines of
St Cyr (ruined but days before by a Flving Fortrese raid) found
resistance spirited but patchy. It centred on small grouns of tanks
and mobile anti-tank guns which defended willan ord renssroad
until outflanked and then withdrew. By early afternoon the sub-
group Massu had pushed almost to Route mational doc at louy-en-
Josas. Twenty years later a little farther down the road at Petit
Clamart, de Gaulle would survive the most serioue of the attempt
made on his life by the intransigents of the OAS. Massu, whose
victory in the Battle of Algiere was to dive that concried mison
d'être, now won his first experience of street fiohtine in the back
gardens of this shabhu little suhurh for four hia dismounted
half-track crews stalked anti-tank pune and motoricad as men nannon
through hedges and orchards. Three Shermans were lost in tank-to-
tank fights; a wet and overcast afternoon enied all resource to sir
support. Eventuall at a cast of a dozen dead lee ten had
made the long journey from For dozeny desel, Jouy-en-Josas
taken and the Spahis, pressing their Stuart tanks to the crest of the
high ground beyond, saw the valley of the Sains halow and cinnalled
FREE FRANCE
307
to Langlade in triumph that the Arc de Triomphe was only three
hours away.
Langlade, however, could only enter the city in company with Dio
and Billotte. And they in mid-afternoon of August 24th had a real
battle on their hands. Two small tributaries of the Seine, the Yvette
and the Bievre, lay across their path and could be crossed only at the
existing bridges, which were here dominated by the buildings of the
Paris banlieue. That over the Y vette at Longjumeau was bounced by
twin companies of the Chars de Combat and the Tchad infantry and
a subsidiary island of resistance at Massy was overcome by Dio's
12th Cuirassiers. But on the Bievre, Billotte found himself con-
fronted by a well-prepared triangle of strongpoints commanding
Route nationale 2o, the broad southern highway into the city which
had become his main axis of advance.
To his left lay the little
industrial suburb of Antony, to his front the village of Croix de
Berny, to his right the fortress of Fresnes prison.
Throughout the
afternoon, Billotte's leading elements fought to drive the German
anti-tank gunners from the crossroads at Croix de Berny and by
7 p.m. had it in their hands. But Fresnes, from which fire swept the
Paris road, still held out. It was garrisoned by the German military
defaulters who had the day before been confined
cells,
supported by several anti-tank guns; an 88 mm was ensconced in the
sepulchral gateway of the prison itself. At a range of three hundred
yards along the sweep of the avenue de la République, a duel opened
between the anti-tank gunners and three French tanks.
One was
manned by a native of Fresnes who had crossed the Zone libre and
Spain to join de Gaulle, another by an escaped prisoner of the
Gestapo who had been held in the prison.
The Germans' first shot set the leading Sherman ablaze; its
commander died in sight of the church where he had been married.
The second tank destroyed the 88 mm with its return of fire. The
third, driven by the former internee, crashed through the gateway,
tossing the wreck of the gun aside, and took possession of the central
courtyard. But the battle had taken an hour and had cost four more
Shermans, caught in enfilade from guns sited at other points around
the prison perimeter. Billotte reckoned that he must regroup; some
of his tank commanders were signalling a lack of fuel and ammuni-
tion; he had only two hours of daylight left on this overcast evening.
Reluctantly,
because he could feel the hot impatience of de Gaulle
on his neck and sense the growing crisis within the city,
Leclerc
