326
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
or thrown together in the mass graves into which the vistims of th
Falaise pocket were heaped, in the years after the departure of th
armies they were disinterred and brought together into more fitting
places. The bodies of the 9,000 American dead not repatriated ver
buried together under a forest of white cruciform headstones at St
Laurent above Omaha Beach. At Orglandes 10,000 German soldiers
were interred in collective graves, marked by monumental granit
reproductions of the Iron Cross. The British, with their genius for
the funereal and with the experience of a previous labour of
memorialization behind them, worked by a different and more
intimate
method. Northern
France and Flanders was already
covered by a patchwork of the small oardened remeteries of the
Imperial War Graves Commission into which had been gathered the
million casualties of the First World War. Its landscape architects,
obedient to the rules laid down by Lutyens and Kipling thirty years
now began to reproduce in Normandy the
Remembrance. Crosses of Cacrifice percolas more walke rost
beds and flowerine shrubs among which it had benome traditional
that the dead of British battlefields should lie.
At both Ranville and Baveux. close to the cantree of finens fichtin
other spots,
on the Orne and Odon. space had to be made for , ooo graves. A
Douvres-la-Délivrande, Combes-en- Plaine, Fontenay:
le-Pesnel. the cemeteries could be smaller. small enough to b
hidden among the regrown hedgerows from all but the mos
determined visitor.
But, as the
countryside took root and blossomed more colourfully from one
native flowers of the English
numbers began to make the cross-Channel journey to seek them our
summer to the next beside the headstones,
visitors in growing
Many came for reasons of bereavement or out of someadoshin with
lost friende: others came in arganized narties reuniona of materan
who had been that way in the invasion months. In time the visit
acquired formality Turns in Pitain from cleat ate tone had lef
to embark for the liberation antarad into faral acadition with the
French towns to whish thau had beauche in Lies n
mayors and councillors began to acquire an annual a mintanc
wreath-layings, vins
cuisine.
d'honneur and substantial municipal
Regiments, too, incorporated the Normandy pilgrimage
into their round of ceremony, finding the funds to raise memorials to
their exploits on the sea fronts of the small watering places where
they had landed, and to despatch bandsmen and colour narties to do
EPILOGUE
327
them honour at the appropriate anniversary. During the ig6os the
sight of red poppies in white-gloved hands and the sound of the Last
Post bugled across sand dune and esplanade
became a familiar
ingredient of Normandy tourism, something for which campers
would gather and which caravanners would halt to contemplate for a
small moment of sentimentality and half-comprehension.
Other soldiers also came to make the return, serious students of
the great amphibious, airborne and armoured operations which were
their professon's most recent extended exercise of its business easily
available for analysis. In the immediate postwar years analysis took
second place to something like self-congratulation, since the memory
of the risk run in committing the liberation armies to the unknown
dangers of the Channel and the Atlantic Wall still bulked largest in
the visitor' minds. Later, attention would focus on the issue of
leadership, particularly at small-unit level, as veterans explained to
officers unblooded by any postwar experience what a battle was like:
at what distance the enemy was encountered; what was seen, heard,
smelt; what soldiers said to each other, to their sergeants, to their
Platoon commanders; how their sense of self-preservation might be
overcome to carry them forward to positions which had to be taken.
At the Merville battery, around Pegasus Bridge, under the sea wall
at Ouistreham, in the deep-banked lanes by Gavrus, on the skyline
of the long cornfields over which the Goodwood tanks had galloped
to disaster, there, too, at stated intervals of the year, clumps of
pondering sightseers, unmistakably military in tweed jackets and flat
caps, became a familiar feature of the Norman summer, disregarded
by tractor-drivers and apple-pickers getting
harvest the
countryside had been brought to yield again.
Imperceptibly, these visitations took on a more serious cast as the
years of peace attenuated into an anxious present. The formations
which had made the great journey from Normandy to the boundary
of the Russian
zone of occupation in Germany had remained
throughout the postwar period exactly where they had come to rest
in 1945, replacing their soldiers as tours of duty ended but preserv-
ing apparently unchangeably their titles and their stations.
British 2nd Division in Westphalia and the American ist Division in
Bavaria had become over time fixed elements of the local landscape.
But so.
ton
in the east had the formations
which
Katukov
Bogdanov, Chuikov and Kuznetsov had commanded in the Battle
