320
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
British army. In 1045 it was to demonstrate an even greater anc
more remarkable resolution.
East Prussia, in Silesia, on the
Vistula and at Lake Balaton,
it was to lose men in hundreds of
thousands, many killed by weapons of mass destruction it could no
longer match or forced to throw their lives away resisting tank
attacks with
short-range, hand-held missiles.
And yet it would
continue to fight until denied room for its battlefield. How the
Germans resisted the advance of the Red Army as they did remains a
mystery. Fear of falling prisoner to a pitiless enemy plaved its part;
so too did the resolve to spare German women and children from the
terror of a Russian occupation. The long columns of refugees which
set off beside the fighting formations whenever they were forced to
give ground were a chilling reminder to the soldiers that they ano
the nation.
only they, now stood between the enemy and the disintegration
But external stimuli were not the whole enlanation. The fishtine
pirit of the German army derived ultimately from its own character.
Unlike the American army, or even the British, which for all its
parade of territorial titles was quite lax about matching them with
the regional origins of its soldiers, the German army had always
taken the greatest care to see that its units were formed of men fron
the same province or city, that replacements for casualties also came
from the same places and that returned wounded went back to the
with which they started. Thue even though the army
essential nature
diminished rapidly in size during the first months of 1945, its
Bavarians, Brandenburgers were driven inexorably inwards on the
heartland, their determination to resist was heightened by
increasing proximit of their own home basa. Only thain tanaciti
they knew, could stem the great Volkswandermo which the cam
paign on the eastern frontiers had set in motion. Tike the warriors of
the Teutonic tribes of old, they were resolved if necessary to die
population from the eastern invader.
where they stood, should that be necessary to protect the uprooted
There is a limit, of course, to what human will and courage can
achieve. And in April that limit was reached hu the Germans Their
conquered
Army Groups B, G, Centre, South, once separated by 2,000 miles ol
Europe,
meridian of the homeland.
between the Western and Russian zones of occupation ran along the
EPILOGUE
321
Elbe stimulated a final effort of resistance on the river. even after
Hitler's suicide on April goth, so that refugees from the east might
find a way into future western territory before a ceasefire
imposed. But Hitler's successor,
Dönitz,
recognized that
the
arrangement of a ceasefire was his first and only real duty of state. I
came into force everywhere on May 8th. By then the Allied armies
had been in touch across the remnants of the German front for
nearly two weeks; troops of the American V Corps had met Russians
of the first Ukrainian Front at Torgau on the Elbe on April 25th
The ten months which separated Germany's two fatal a feats - the
destruction of Army Group B in Normandy and Army Group Centre
in White Russia - and her eventual collapse have been taken in retros
spect to imply a fundamental fault in Allied strategy. Two mistakes
in particular are identified: Eisenhower's preference for a 'broad front'
advance to the German border in September and Stalin's abandon-
ment of the drive along the Baltic in Februarv. A 'narrow front'
advance, it is held, would have got an Allied force across the Rhine
before winter, and so isolated the industrial centre of the Ruhr.
Persistence on the Bal is route would have brought the Russians to
Berlin at the beginning of March instead of the end of April.
There is no doubt some weight in both these contentions. It does
seem as if the leaders chose to be guided in these decisions by
political rather than strictly strategic considerations i
Eisenhower's
rejection of the narrow thrust seems to have been dictated by his
desire to keep both the American and British halves of his army in
action simultaneously rather than risk disappointing
one of the
Allied peoples - it would in this case have been the Americans - by
consigning its national army to inactivity. Stalin, for his part, was
anxious to see that the Balkans were safely secured as a buffer zone
for Russia's post war security and was prepared to resist the pull even
of Berlin in order to do so.
Yet there is no certainty that different - in the critics' view better -
strategies would have significantly shortened the war.
The rate of
advance of the two converging armies after their great victories of
July imposed strains on their systems of supply and transportation
which would have been heightened unbearably by the effort to
sustain it.
Moreover, both offensives, in Normandy and White
Russia, had derived much of their effect from being fought where
they were.
Both battlefields were at the far edge of the German
operational area. Both could be, and were, isolated from adjoining
