238
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
in eleven days. The L of the coastal strip and Cotentin had noy
sprouted at its angle a ballooning appendix, the outline of which
enclosed a great tract
of empty
German defensive zone in Normandy. From it the First and Third
country west and south of the
American Armies might turn to take the German Seventh Army and
Panzer Group
West in flank and rear,
with incalculable con-
sequences for the outcome of the campaign. 'Everyone', he therefore
instructed, 'must now go all out day and night. The broad strategy of
the Allied Armies is to swing ... towards Paris and to force the
enemy back to the Seine? The Battle of Normandy looked within
weeks, perhaps days, of its end.
The Will of the Führer
The need for decision with which the unleashing of Cobra had
confronted the German high command suddenly admitted of no
compromise.
Six weeks before, the German army in the east had
suffered a catastronhe at the hands of the Russians. Timing they
summer offensive to coincide with the third anniversary of Opera-
tion Barbarossa, the Red Army had launched 118 infantry divisions
and 43 tank brigades against Army Group
Centre in its positions
along the Dnieper in White Russia. Within a few days its front had
been riddled to a pepper pot its strong points surrounded and it
mobile elements chased pell-mell westwards towards the stop-gap
safety of the old Polish fortified frontier of 1020 When ten daus later
the fatigue of the chase brought the Soviet Fronts to a halt an
Field-Marshal Model, the
'Führer's
Fireman' sent to
stampede arrived to take stock, it was found that a 250-mile gap had
been torn in the German line and 28 irreplaceable divisions
disappeared. The disaster was worse than Stalingrad Kursk or the
running out of mannower Rafare to Dant Diate Footsheer was
Crimea, and had come at a worse time.
For Germany
supplying the army with only 60,000 new soldiers a month
destruction of Army Group Centre 350,000 were lost in ten days -
and though Himmler, Fromm's replacement after it quadruple
that fioure. their incorporation into feat fichting divisions would
take until October. Until that date Germany
pursue any strategy which set the possession of territory above the
could not afford to
preservation of fighting formations. The disintegration
flank in Normandy was therefore a clear
that
warning to
Hitler
,8 Tank and infantry offinare confer before Oneration Goodwood
39 Men of the 4th Dorsets waiting to advance during the Good wood battle
