104
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
drove off. Then five shells fell a little short of the churchyard, and
others beyond it along the river bank. Levy shouted a warning to
expect an assault, called Kormylo and a private from his line of
riflemen, and ran forward along a sheltering hedgerow towards the
sound of the advancing tanks.
They were preceded by infantry, a
small group who passed Levy's hiding-place without seeing him.
Kormylo and the private - the two officers never discovered his
name - fired on them and then, as the tanks appeared opposite them
in the road, ran. Levy stopped to throw a grenade at a machine-gun
team who were setting up their weapon, jumped into the road to kill
the survivors with his rifle, emptied the rest of the magazine on the
front armour of the leading tank, and joined Kormylo and the
unnamed private, who had stopped to cover his flight. Levy was
helmetless, bleeding from the shoulder and laughing like a maniac.
The strange euphoria of combat which sometimes comes to a man,
often in the most desperate circumstances, had him in its grip. He
ran back past Kormylo into the churchyard where only six of their
parachutists were still in position, and stood throwing grenades at
the German's tanks until he had none left. Then, with Kormylo, but
without their faithful private, who was killed by a bullet at the last
moment of the fight, they left the field.
They were not the last to go. Private Orlin Stewart, who had been
posted apart from the others, had not seen the course of the fight and
was still in position when the leading tank appeared beyond the
churchyard. Mysteriously it was hit by a shot from an unidentified
source and burst into flames.
Stewart had a supply of Gammon
grenades and, seeing two other tanks behind the flaming leader,
picked them up and ran towards them. When he paused to shelter in
the ditch, he was joined by a sergeant and another private, strangers
to him, who were also carrying Gammon grenades. The sergeant
said, 'Hi!'
and, as the tanks - two old French Renaults - drew
opposite, he and his companion stood up and threw.
Stewart,
electrified by their example, stood up also and fired his Browning
Automatic Rifle. The others continued to throw grenades, theirs and
Stewart's. Five heavy explosions followed, the tanks slewed burning
to a halt, and the crews jumped out of the hatches. A moment later
another tank, accompanied by a large party of infantry, came round
the corner and Stewart and his nameless comrades, taking one look,
legged it into the fields to catch up with Levy, Kormylo and the
other heroes of the Cauquigny fight. Decisively outnumbered, they
105
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
had decided to fall back on base in the orchard and seek security
with the Timmes party.
4 The 3rd/ 506th at the Douve Bridges
The lack of radio communication between Timmes on the west bank
of the Merderet and Lindquist on the east had thus had dispiriting
consequences. It had denied the two colonels the chance to make a
concentric advance on the bridge when that vital link across the
mashes might have been theirs for the asking. It had hidden from
them the fact that, by mid-morning, both ends were effectively
under American control which only a stretching out of hands was
necessary to consolidate. And
by happenstance and the
bravery of a few individuals, the bridge had actually been secured for
their use, it had blinded them to the slenderness of their hold on it
and so had given it back to the Germans. The American parachutists
would nav terribly in the nevt dave to recover the dieregarded prize
Eight miles to the south-eat, in the most exposed corner of the
airhead, a second task force ass groping to find crossings across the
other vital waterway, the Douve,
but in full realization
diffinities and in the teeth of heavy German resistance from the
outset. The task force was drawn trom the gorst Parachute Infantry
and the 3rd Battalion, soth. Most of the four battalions had had
good drops, but two,
Colonel Ballard's 2nd/50ist and
Wolverton's gra/sobro, had fallen on to ground which the Germans
of the gist Division had identified as a likely dropping zone and
where they were lving in wait. There had been instant carnage
3rd/ sooth had suffered particularly grievously. The battalion
mander, Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Wolverton, his executive officer
and ann of the ifle camnant commanders were lillad on the dros
ZOne mL. hand toes company commander and La ather two rifle
company commanders were taken prisoner, and there were pro-
portionate casualties among the junior officers and soldiers.
117 of the battalion's 8o0 men were to appear at the objective, and
the operations for which the battalion had been trained would be
commanded by a comparatively junior staff officer from battalion
headquarters, Captain Charles Shettle.
Shettle, 'one of nature's silent men', had the good luck to fall on
the edge of the drop zone,
which the Germans had illuminated by
setting fire to a petrol-soaked building, and so avoided the deadly
