172
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
were at least twenty-eight separate nests on the 15th Scotish
Division's front of departure, as well as eleven larger trench-systems
for German riflemen.
And although the defensive belt was not
continuous, as a First World War trench system would have been, is
elements interconnected along well-reconnoitred tracks and covered
ways. Defenders expelled from one position would therefore easily
be able to fall back on another, and so maintain their resistance.
Beyond the line of Battle Outposts, the ground fell gently towards
the course of a small waterway, the Mue, and then rose again to the
crest of the ridge which formed the north bank of the Odon.
Following the flank of the ridge ran a line of orchards, small woods
and tiny villages, of which the largest was Cheur, where the north-
south roads in Scottich Corridor converted The Germans had made
centre point of their second defensive belt, or Advance
Position. About two miles sou softhe Scote startline, it consisted of
the same
elements
as the Battle Outposts, thickened by wire
entanglements and minefields (though there were also mines sown in
the forward belt), and reinforced by batteries of heavier direct-fire
weapons and mortars. There were twenty-sir machine-gun nests and
at least fifty heavier weanon positione in this sennnd holt Its infantry
garrison, which consisted largely of the engineer battalion of the
12th SS Division - an example of the Germans' readiness to make do
with other troops
any circumstances.
available - were dug in and were not expected to give ground under
when no
ordinary infantry
Position.
To the rear, about another three miles to the south, ran the Main
In Scottish Corridor it followed the line of the Odon,
which there flowed in a deen treach hut was an assembly areg rather
than a fortified zone Selected snots of bioh frowd b till ero
formed its key points, around which were concent, hateve
few enough. The 12th
reserves the German commander could Wind. for Epsom' they were
SS Division had already suffered heavy
casualties in the defence of Caen, its fron aures twelve miles wide
and, in order to cover the ground at all int wahaving to deploy its
anti-aircraft regiment in line as if it were it was have artillery unit; it
provided the engineer battalion achen with most of its close
support fire. Weight for weight, therefore, all the advantages were
with the British in the attack: nine infantry battalions against two,
one of which was really an engineer unit; twenty-three artillery
regiments against two, both of which were deficient in tanks.
173
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
offset this disparity, 12th SS must depend upon the tactics its
officers and NCOs had learnt on the eastern front:
to hold fire until almost point-blank range so that the first shots
would obtain a kill. Then, before the British artillery could
range in and bombard the position, to choose a new location
and open fire from a new direction. Used by both grenadiers
and panzer
men, these tactics would reduce the British
superiority in numbers and cause them to believe that the
defenders were more numerous than they really were.
How effective these tactics were to be the Cameronians,
Fusiliers, Glasgow Highlanders and Royal Scots in the leading wave
were shortly to find out. They had come up to the start line jauntily
enough, here and there with a piper to play them forward to 'Cock o'
the North', 'Highland Laddie, or 'Blue Bonnets over the Border.
But the morning of June 26th was dispiriting. It had rained heavily
all night, the thick, leafy countryside dripped from every twig and
the sky was so Overnet that the promised hombing programme and
fighter patrolling had to be cancelled. At 7.30 a.m. the barrage burst
forth, 'hurling itself over strongpoints, enemy gun areas, forming-up
places, tank laagers and above all concentrated into the
thousands of gunners bent to their tasks. Little rashes of goose flesh
ran over the skin', recalled an officer in the 6th King's Own Scottish
Borderers. 'One was hot and cold and very moved. All this "stuff" in
support of us. Every single gun at maximum effort to kill; to help
Alas, on the right, where the gth Cameronians were waiting to
advance, a company
commander had just
discovered
transparent map overlay on which gunners draw their barrage plans
had slipped in the tracing, so that his outer flank would now have to
advance through its own artillery
He spent
wirelessing to effect a last-minute change; when he found it was
impossible to arrange, he walked back to say his goodbyes to the
battalion commander. He expected to be killed in the cornfield into
which he was shortly to advance. When the moment came, he was
indeed hit together
with many
of his riflemen.
paused for a moment to mark their positions in the standing corn
with a down-thrust rifle and bayonet, helmet balanced atop,
proceeded towards the source of the fire. 'It was poignant to gaze on
