120
Their motives were ideological rather than nationalist: sympathy for
the Catholic Poles and hostility to Hitler rather as the Bolshevik
friend than Britain's enemy. But the effect was the same. A Montreal
militia battalion, the Régiment de Maisonneuve,
Canada to produce a full complement for overseas service and, by
January 1941, over 50,000 French Canadians were serving in the
armed forces. They provided nearly a third of the strength of the
Royal Canadian Navy and fifteen of the seventy-five infantry
battalions. Of those, only four - the Royal 22°, the Régiment de la
Chaudière, the Régiment de Maisonneuve and the Fusiliers de
Mont-Royal - were to find enough volunteers to join the Canadian
army abroad, the rest remaining in home service.
other expeditionary units
significant proportion of
french Canadians - like the Royal Rifles, tragically thrown away in
the defence of Hong Kong - so that in general the federal govern-
ment, whose Deputy Minister of Defence was a French Canadian,
could congratulate itself by 1944 that it had taken Canada into the
war without, as in 1914, dangerously threatening the unity of the
It was keeping to itself the anxiety that the coming battles of the
Second Front threatened to inflict such losses on the First Canadian
Army as could only be filled by pressed men. But all Canadians,
even if they did not yet foresee how the invasion might precipitate a
second conscription crisis, had special reason to hold their breath as
what must be the invasion summer drew on. For Canadians had
been to the south shore of the Channel once before in this war, to
Dieppe in August 1942. The appalling
casualties which the and
Canadian Division had suffered on the beaches there in a single
morning, had then forced even the most optimistic advocates of a
Second Front to recognize that 'Now was certainly premature, that
1943 might still prove too soon. And neither they, nor the great mass
of ordinary citizens of the dominion - English and French,
Scots,
Irish, Ukrainians, Poles, Finns, Swedes and all the other immigrant
contingents who had chosen the St Lawrence instead of the Hudson
as their gateway to the new world - could be certain even in June
Dieppe.
1944 that the 3rd Canadian Division was not bound for a second
Dieppe: the Awful Warning
Dieppe, in retrospect, looks so recklessly hare-brained an enterprise
CANADA: TO THE SOUTH SHORE
that it is difficult to reconstruct the official state of mind which gave
it birth and drove it forward. Churchill himself in the planning
stages expressed anxiety, and was confirmed in support for the
operation only by the insistence of General Sir Alan Brooke that "if it
was ever intended to invade France it was essential to launch a
preliminary offensive on a divisional scale'. Churchill was moved too
by the need to offset in some way the recent loss of Tobruk, to say
nothing of his loss of face with Roosevelt and Stalin through his
opposition to Operation Roundup. And there were the
successes achieved by the Commandos - his 'Tigers' - at Vaagso and
the Lofoten Islands to lend reassurance. But a few Viking victories
by the pick of the army over the small and third-rate garrisons of
remote Norwegian fishing havens provided no basis at all for judging
how a full scale military operation against a defended Channel port
would go. The Commandos, clinging to the edge of the sea mists of
the far north, had always achieved surprise.
The 2nd Canadian
Division was to sally forth in high summer from ports only seventy
miles from the German-occupied coastline and disembark on the
esplanade of a French seaside resort. The justification for choosing
an objective which the Germans were known to occupy in strength
was that the feasibility of capturing a harbour by direct assault had to
be tested. The risks were discounted by the argument that
mandos would disable the flanking batteries which bore on the
beaches and harbour exit and that the close-in defenders would be
overcome by tanks landed from the new Tank Landing
directly in the muzzles of their machine guns. And, to cap their case,
the staff officers of Combined Operations Headquarters invoked the
legendary fighting qualities of the Canadians, who had broken the
Hindenburg Line in September 1918 after two years of abortive
effort by the rest of the Allied armies.
But bravery was to count for nothing on the morning of August
Tgth, 1942. The Commandos, attacking up the high cliffs
march almost to the mouth of the little river Arques on
which
Dieppe stands, achieved their customary surprise and silenced the
flanking batteries. But the batalions of Canadian infantry and the
tanks they had brought with them were stopped almost as soon as
they left their landing-craft, sometimes before.
The Royal Regiment of Canada, one of the three permanent
battalions the dominion maintained in peacetime,
was detailed to
land in the mouth of a narrow gully which led into the cliffs at Puys,
