SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
and Forfars clambered across, each tank doglegging to avoid expos-
ing its belly, and then jostled into line side by side. There were now
sixty-four tanks in the leading wave, with a second and third of equal
strength behind, but the delay had still not allowed the Hussars to
close the gap behind.
Following behind came the division's infantry brigade, the god
Monmouths, Ist Herefords and 4th King's Shropshire Light Infan-
try, all Territorials from the
Welsh borders who had spent the
preceding four years training in England, much of the time within
travelling distance of their homes.
The Shropshires had heard
enemy fire at close hand for the first time on June zgth, had suffered
their first fatal casualty the next day, had never before been in battle
+ true too of their sister battalions - and were now moving forward to
the essential task of clearing the surviving enemy infantry from the
first villages of Cuverville and Démouville.
With them came the
reconnaissance regiment, and Northamptonshire Yeo-
manry, which lost four of its Cromwell tanks to uncleared mines in
the minefield gaps. Bevond the minefield the leading waves of the
infantry began to come under shell fire from German guns hidden in
the ruins along the Orne and south of the river beyond Caen
eye-witness recorded, 'than the
have been more inspiring', a proud Shropshire
advancing in open order, dropping on their faces as each salva o
sight of the sections doggedly
advance. Their luck was in.
shells landed, and immediately rising to their feet and continuing the
middle of Corporal Lavender's cention and kill or wound every one
Next day a shell would land in the
The Monmouthe found their wa. into Curerrille hu 8.20 a.m
and began looking for Germans who wished to surrender.
Herefords entered the orchards south-east of the village a little later
where they quickly took the surrender of fifty. But ahead loomed the
ruins, choked streets and gap-toothed church of Démouville, from
which bursts of fire warned that its nossession would not be so easily
gainid. The brigade gathered its possessio a deliberate assault.
would take time to
prepare and deliver. But with every passing
quarter of an hour their sister tank brigade moved farther away from
them, pressing deeper down the corridor into a holt of illages which
its own Greenjacket motor battalion (8th" Rifle Brimadal Sould no
have the men to skirmish through.
The tanks had not yet quite entered the danger zone though they
YEOMEN
OF ENGLAND
205
were approaching the point where their supporting artillery, most of
which was marooned the wrong side of the Orne, could no longer
give them covering fire. Yet so far Captain Lemon of the 3rd Tanks
rather enjoyed [things] as I think most of us did. There was
very little opposition and one had a wonderful feeling of
superiority as many Germans, shaken by the preliminary
bombing and shelling, gave themselves up. As time passed
though, they grew more aggressive, having overcome the
effects of the bombs and shells ... Targets kept appearing in
the hedgerows and [beyond] the villages of Cuverville and
Démouville there were a couple of embankments
to cross
which proved awkward obstacles.
The first of these ran athwart the line of advance of the whole
armoured brigade. Carrying the railway between Caen and Vimont,
it stood in places ten feet high with steep sides. To cross, the tanks
would have to fan out, slow down and individually pick a way over
the top. That would be a dangerous moment for each
crew, as it
exposed itself on the skyline to a high-velocity shot
from
any
anti-tank gun that was waiting to strike on the far side.
But as the
squadrons motored down
towards their
pinnacles
of decision,
sharper and more immediate danger suddenly unmasked itself in the
foreground.
Battle Group von Luck
The bombing had killed, wounded or demoralized a very large
number of the Germans in the armoured corridor, and destroyed or
disabled much of their equipment. Most of the infantry of the roth
Luftwaffe Field Division quad been knocked out of the battle, and the
I Battalion Panzergrenadier Regiment 125 had been broken into
fragments. But the enombing had not destroyed everything and
everyone. A man it had not touched at all was the commander of
one of the Battle Groups of zist Panzer
Division, Oberst Hans
von Luck. It had not touched him because he was still on his way
back from three days leave in Paris while the bombs were raining
down and reached his headquarters
Frénouville,
Caen-Vimont railway line, at about the time the British tanks were
passing Cuverville and Démouville. His deputy briefly reported the
