188
SIX
ARMIES IN NORMANDY
unshakably safe distance from
the British front line, until for
convenience it was made to coincide with the three map squares
which began 6,000 yards south of its forward edge. This rectangle
actually excluded the villages, and ran well into the northern half of
the city. Moreover, the pathfinders of 625 Squadron, who were to
lay the bombing markers, had been emphatically instructed not to let
the aiming point 'drift back', the natural tendency when every crew
was anxious to release its load as early as possible and turn to safety,
but to keep putting down target indicators throughout the raid as far
forward as possible.
The counter-tendency would therefore be to
Overcorrect and to push the bomb-line deeper into the city, towards
the university quarter, thus far not badly damaged, and the "island of
refuge' around St Etienne.
Coming in over the coast on the evening of July 7th, a pilot of one
of the Lancasters saw exactly that result. There was 'tremendous
concentration right on the markers' and in the headsets of all the
converging aircrew boomed the voice of the Master Bomber shout-
ing,
"Back up the reds [target indicators], back un the reds!' A
rifleman of the and Kind's Roval Pifle Crens, watching from the
fields across which he was to advance next day wrote 'colossal raid on
Caen. Marvellous and awe-inspiring sioht Terrible to watch, Dust
obscured the sun Dot incido the city a refugee mother, oressing a
pillow over the face of her son to protect his eves from the flyin
glass which had blinded two of her neighbours' children, felt the
whole earth shudder. It went on and on for fifty minutes with a
single break of five minute And at at Ron Sauveur a an alonfelt
the earth 'shake with the storm of falling bombs. in the basement
the "Hail Mary" could be faintly heard above the diabolical fury of
the bombardment. Evidently the complete destruction of Caen - or
what was left of it - had been decided unon.' When towards 8 p.m
the last of the Lancasters and Halifaxes turned away very little
indeed of the northern half of the city still stood. It had received in
an hour as many bombs as had Hambure a citv of twenty times its
population, in each of the great firemburg, a city a year before, One
of the British soldiers who entered on Tuly oth, after another day of
heavy fighting for possession of the ruins found «junt a waste of brick
and stone, like a field of corn that has been ploughed. The people
gazed at us without emotion of any kind; one could hardly look them
in the face, knowing who had done this' And wrate one of the
heroic doctors who had stuck out the month of Caen's Calvary. 'the
189
YEOMEN OF ENGLAND
bombardment ... was absolutely futile. There were no
military
objectives ... All the bombardment did was (further] to choke the
streets and hinder the Allies in their advance through the city'
It had not even achieved its objective of delaying the transfer of
German divisions from the British to the American fronts. Hitherto
al reinforcements, which by Hitler's orders had had to be found
from within the resources of Supreme Commander West, had gone
to the British front. Because of Hitler's injunction against touching
the neighbouring Fifteenth Army's capital, amounting to seventeen
infantry divisions, Rommel had had first to commit his panzer
divisions, which at least had the means to march up to the battlefield
independently of the shattered railways, and follow them with
infantry divisions from tattere afield, the 6th Luftwaffe from the
Netherlands, the 7o8th from the mouth of the Gironde, the 276th
from the Biscay coast and the 27znd and the 277th from the Riviera.
Their journey
had necessarily been slow and,
while they were
plodding west and northwards the panzer divisions
had had to
sacrifice their highly trained riflemen and their almost irreplaceable
tanks in small-scale hedgerow fights quite inappropriate to
counter-attack role. The firow infantry reserves, however, had now
arrived and, in response to Bradley's pressure on the la Haye du
Puits corridor, two panzer divisions, the ferocious
2nd SS
Panzer Lehr, once the strongest armoured formation in the Wehre
macht and still a fom strong est e, had slipped westward from the
British front to put a finger in the dyke. And it stopped the hole. In
six days of fighting, between July 3rd and 8th, the Americans were
able to advance only five miles, on some of those days only a few
hundred yards and always at very heavy cost. A secondary push to
unlock the road-block at St Lô made even less ground, and on July
roth Bradley decided that he must pause to rest his formations and
replace their 40,000 casualties.
Planning a Break-through
Checked at the foot of the Cotentin, and stalemated at Caen, where
the Germans still held the little Stalingrad of factory suburbs south
of the city, Montgome t now had a strategic crisis on his hands.
appearance of the four fresh German formations from First and
Nineteenth Arthe four fresh e Loite revealed not only a Germin
capacity to pass unwieldy troop columns across unbridged rivers in
