SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
storms' which would "ut them off in their rear' making 'everything
all right'. But they
Montgomery's strategy of keeping the Germans stretched, so that
had not weathered it without setback.
they should not assemble a reserve for a counter-attack, had been
successful enouch to see him through the davs when his artillery had
starved for ammunition and the armies had survived only by living
their hump,
both
of
supplies
and manpower.
But it had
prevented him from decisively
planned to do in the week the storm had raged. The setback inflicted
taking the initiative, as he had
by Panzer Lebr and and Panzer on the Desert Rats at Tilly had been
grave enough to raise murmurings of doubt about his leadership
among his critics always numerous, at British. American and Allied
headquarters. The further postponement, imposed by the great gale,
of firm offensive action would strengthen their voices, besides giving
comfort in the quarter that really counted, OKW, OBW and Army
Group B.
Epsom
conscious of that,
self-serving reasons, than Montgomery himself. He could feel, if he
though for the least of
could not directly see, the renegotty ts the Germans were making
to gather their forces for the counterstroke aborted by the air attack
the Panzer Group West. They were urgently in hand. On June 17th,
the day before the great storm, vite had made a journey to France,
his first since that to meet Franco at hen madein October 1940. He
had flown as far as Metz in his
Focke-Wulf Condor, down an air
corridor from which the rest of the Luftwaffe had been banned for
fear of an accidental engagement, and then driven to Margival, the
undereround headquarters near Saissons he bad huilt ae a command
pisit from which to oversee the invasion battle. It was to be his only
visit. Its purpose was to hearten Rommel and Rundstedt,
whose
nerve he rightly believed to have been shaken by the power of the
Allied attack,
and to outline counter-measures.
'Don't call it a
beach-head, but the last piece of French sensueld by the enemy, he
began. "They require seven million tons of shipping space, he went
on - the use of unchallengeable statistics was one a hia favourite
methods of dealing with doubters - 'and cannot last longer than
through the summer.' Seated on a stool, with the field-marshals and
their chiefs of staff standing before him, he described how the next
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
165
stage of the battle was to be fought. A Schwerpunkt (centre of effort)
was to be created with four SS panzer divisions - two, the gth and
toth, were on their way from Russia - and a new drive was to be
launched at the junction of the Allied armies.
Meanwhile the flying-bomb attack on London, which had begun
five days before, was to be intensified. The resulting combination of
pressure against the Allie' military front and their civilian rear
would quickly break their resistance. The field-marshals listened.
They were visibly impressed, an observer noticed, by the report
from the Luftwaffe representative of the progress of the flying-bomb
campaign. But they remained pessimistic about the course of the
Normandy battle. Rommel insisted on emphasizing the power of the
Allied tactical air forces, nois reinforced by that of their naval
gunnery, and proposed a withdrawal into the heart of the bocage
country, beyond the range of the ships' guns, where natural cover
would allow the infantry to form a strong defensive line. Even
though the proposal
promised to release more armour for the
offensive, Hitler would no more hear of it than of any other move
entailing the voluntary surrender of ground. 'He seemed to agree,
recorded Blumentritt,
Rundstedt's chief of staff,
but made no
decision and then changed the subject? After lunch, when he spoke
and his generals listened, the conversations were renewed.
now raised the forbidden topic of coming to a political agreement
with the enemy in the west and, when Hitler tried to cut him off,
insisted on knowing his real opinion of the chances of continuing the
war. 'That is a question which is not your responsibility,' bellowed
Hitter. You a question which is not me! It was a cardinal principle
of his managemenve to leaver that he divided the direction of the
eastern front from that of the western, and kept the fighting generals
ignorant of both diplomatic and economic matters. Rommel, though
he tried to sustain the argument, therefore lacked the means to do sc
and was dismissed at about 4 p.m., with the promise that Hitler
would visit the headquarters
of Seventh
with him
morning. That evening, however, one of the flying bombs in which
the Führer now placed such hopes ran wild after launching and
impacted within the Margival compound directly above the com-
mand bunker.
escaned ininey Rut the mishan decided him to return to Germany at
Hitler, protected by twenty-two feet of concrete,
once. He cancelled his programme of visits and left France that
evening, never to return.
