SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
their outlook from the first had partaken of little of the light-hearted,
improvising,
all-right-on-the-night attitude which had always
allegedly characterized the British cavalry's approach to combat.
The officers of the Royal Tank Regiment, the Tank Corps of the
First World War had known the hostility of the whole horsey half of
the army - cavalry, gunner and polo-playing infantry regiments- in
the decade after 1918 when its fodder bills had been weighed in the
balance against their petrol by a cheese-paring Treasury. They had
listened with clenched teeth to their opponents' arguments that the
tank had reached the limite of its potential development and would
never be more than an ancillary to the infantry. They had seen the
means of damonetrating a rejoinder the Funerimental Machanizec
disbanded after a single season of trials, to the ostentatious
satisfaction of Lancers,
their unfashionable messes and the cinder-block classrooms of the
Hussars and Dragoons. In the privacy of
Rovington Tank School they had sustained each other's snirits with
repeated
reassurances
time and events would punish the
reactionaries for their flippancy and lack of professionalism.
had not enjoyed the interwar years, and when war had come they
had seized on the opportunity it offered to evangelize the new army
of civilians with their message and to push leaders with their ideas
into the places so lone held hu devotees of the antiquarian. It was not
coincidence that the celebrated second badge worn by Montgomery
- most abrasive and innovative of the new generals - was that of the
Royal Tank Regiment.
outbreak. They had made it clear that they sought not the mechan
But they had not been tactful. either before the war or after its
ization of the cavalry, but its disbandment and replacement by a
larger Tank Corps. And so it said much for the improvising spirit of
the cavalry which they affected to spurn that, when confronted with
the inescapable requirement to bid horses farewell and to take to
tracks, the old regiments had responded not merely uncomolaining!
but with the enthusiasm of the born-again. In its heart, the cavalry
had known that armour was an idea whose time had come. An
cavalrymen too had felt a secret shame at the secondary, oversafe
role to which trenches and barbed wire had consigned them in the
First World War, from which so many of the bolder had escaped to
ride steeplechase around the wide skies the France and Flanders.
Their regular officers had also therefore grasped at the opportunity
offered bu the Second World War to remake the reputation of their
YEOMEN OF
197
ENGLAND
arm. Recognizing their turn to listen. they had learnt all they could
of the doctrine which the tank men preached. made it their own and
resolved to infuse it with that dash of cavalier temper which they
believed no plus-fours-and-puttes soldier could ever properly simu-
late. To some of the converts, the Royal Tank Regiment pro-
fessionals quickly conceded their respect. Towards the cavalry as a
whole they sustained their guard of doubting watchfulness. Perhaps
in time they became over-watchful; some senior commanders had
begun to feel that by 1044 the Tanks had made themselves the
prisoners of their own orthodoxy. keener to adhere to the letter of
their cherished doctrine than to win the rewards a violation of it
might bring.
Moving Up
Yet there was sense in the veterans' caution. Recklessness could lose
a regiment half its tanks in a few minutes; there were even instances
of units ending a day of battle with no tanks running at all. And an
armoured regiment without its armour was exactly as useful as a fleet
without ships. Hence the Tanks' obsession with maintenance,
their view the cavalry's weak spot, since in the early days of tank
operations it was mechanical breakdown rather than enemy action
which caused the majority of casualties. The balance had now swung
the other wav and with the arrival of the Sherman from the United
States to replace the misbegotten British designs of the early war
years, mechanical breakdown was now the exception. The Sherman
was a magnificent
expression
American
mass-production
engineering, and indeed a great deal of the American motor-car
industry had been re-tooled to produce it as a standard design. Built
round a Ford engine, which could be removed and replaced with a
spare in a few minutes, it had 5 inches of cast armour on the turret
and front plate, stowage for seventy rounds of main-armament
ammunition, and stowame high-velocity gun. It had its defects.
caught fire too eas sl amd, bhen it did so, burnt fiercely, for it was
petrol rather teasily and, whed its in was now outclassed by the
75 mm of the German Panthers, and also of course by the 88 mm of
the Tigers. And iman Panthers, iph, so that it was seen sooner than
the British Cromwell, which equipped the divisional reconnaissance
regiments But some of these dafonte had already been taken in hand
notably by the re-arming of one tank in four with a long 17-pounder
