226
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
orders issued from the Führerhauptquartier: it did not strengthen
Keitel's hand that Hitler had appointed Himmler, from whom even
the most Führertry soldier would accept orders with reluctance, as
temporary commander of the Ersatzheer. Hitler might have come to
the telephone himself. But until 7 p.m. he insisted on fulfiling his
duties as a host to Mussolini,
whom he entertained with tea and
cream cakes, while Göring
and Ribbentrop quarrelled and the
generals
and admirals competed in loud
protestations of their
services' devotion.
The Berlin radio station, which the conspirators
had not secured, had broadcast the news of the attack and its failure
at 6.30. But as Mussolini said farewell to Hitler half an hour later -
they were never to meet
possession
Bendlerstrasse headquarters and of other key
again - the conspirators remained in
points in the capital, and the coup was no nearer suppression.
A few minutee later. however. some more of that luck in whic
Hitler so earnestly believed once more came his way Coebbels, to
whom he had already spoken on the telenhone with news of his
survival, called again to report that he had at his side a Major Remer,
the commander of the Guard Battalion Grossdeutschland, the only
combatant
unit in the capital. The major was confused by the
conflicting orders he was being given - by the Bendlerstrasse to
restrict the movement of all government ministers, by Goebbels to
arrest Witzlehen and Stuffenberg: perhans the Führer would speak
to him? The conversation was one-sided. for ge vet Litler could hea
very little. But it was the sound of his voice which counted, and it
was decisive. 'I am speaking to you as your Supreme Commander',
said Hitler.
'You are to restore order in Rerlin . Shoot anvbody
who tries to disobey my orders.' Four hours later, the coup was at an
The dimensions of the conspiracy had still to be estimated. Its
principals stood identified:
Stauffenberg, his superior
colleague Mertz von Quirnheim and adjutant von Haeften; all four
been shot by
Fromm,
mend adjutant commander, on the
evening of July zoth (it did that semi-conspirator no good - 'just
covering his tracks'
They were serving officers. Three other landare were on the retired
was Hitler's dismissal on hearing the news);
list, Witzleben, Hoepner and Beck. the last attempted suicide twice
on July zoth and succeeded the second time. Quickly arrested with
the former were most of the other inner conspirators, some military.
some civilian. Under interrogation they revealed more names and
THE HONOUR
OF
THE GERMAN ARMY
227
others came from the conspirators' teleprinter messages to the
Military Districts, appointing liaison officers and political repre-
sentatives. The bones and sinews of the plot now began to stand out.
Some branches of the army had been extensively penetrated,
particularly the Signals, parts of the high command (OKH), and the
headquarters at Paris; the staffs of the Military Districts had been
only patchily, hence their general failure to act decisively
Witzleben's orders. There was some penetration of the Abwehr (the
tri-service counter-espionage organization): none of the navy or the
air force. A few senior civil servants were compromised and many of
the old party politicians of Weimar days were later found to have
been included in lists of provisional ministerial appointments; that
they had often not been consulted was not to spare them. And later
in August there was a mass round-up of former
members
parliament and party officials, which has given currency to the
round figure of 5,000 for the number of conspirators.
The round-up, however, had long been planned by the Gestapo
and its timing was essentially an expression of police frustration at
their inability to establish whom exactly the plot comprehended.
Hitter already had his own certainties in the matter: von Stauffen-
berg, von Haeften, Mertz von Quirnheim - the dead of July 2oth;
von Tresckow, von Freytag-Loringhoven
suicides
of the
immediate aftermath; Yorck von Wartenburg, von Schwerin, von
Kleist, von der Schulenberg
- the subordinates arrested in the
Bendlerstrasse; von Trott zu
Solz,
Schack,
vOIl
Oertzen
accomplices arrested in the first week. The names, to say nothing of
the titles so many bore,
were indicators enough.
attacked by his hereditary enemies, the military aristocracy of north
Germany and their Swabian and Balt running-dogs, the servants of
the old house of Brandenburg and of the little monarchies of the
south he detested even more strongly. Their ancestors belonged in
the pantheon of German nationalism; Stauffenberg was descended
from the Gneisenau whom Hitler had recommended as an example
to von Schlieben at Cherbourg.
Their fathers were the unimagina-
tive generals and civil servants who had thrown away the victories of
the First World War.
The conspirators themselves
were a vain.
empty, snobbish clique, rooted in the values of their feudal estates
and nostalgic for the glittering Kasino life of the vanished Leib-
Husaren and Garde-Kürassiere.
There was a grain of veracity behind Hitler's furious contempt.
