62
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
more probable invasion beaches,
and one was in the Channel
Islands, and so effectively imprisoned. A round dozen of first-class
infantry divisions, however, lined the Channel coast.
They were
smaller than Allied divisions, and without much mechanical trans-
port - go per cent of the German army was still dependent on the
horse or the train for movement in 1944, because the German
automobile industry lacked the capacity
to build the necessary
military vehicles, which the
German oil industry (natural and
synthetic) could in any case not have fuelled. But they were strong in
fire-power and very strong in experience. Unlike the Allied forma-
most of which
were unblooded,
they contained a high
proportion of officers and NCOs who had already met the enemy,
learnt the wiles of the battlefield and could pass on their skills to
their inexperienced soldiers.
Behind the infantry divisions stood the reserve of panzer divi..
sions, whose fighting power was undoubted. By Tune 1o44 they
would number eleven, with another two on temnorary detachment
to the eastern front. One of the divisions, the 1yth SS,
panzergrenadier formation,
and so had only a single armoured
battalion, equipped with assault guns instead of tanks.
Two others,
Il6th and zist, were newly raised, the latter to replace the original
2ist lost in tha Tunis disaater Tank strenath in these and in th
and, gth and ith Panzer Divisions was low. less than a hundred o
so, only half that in their Allied equivalents. But the equipment wa
of good quality. And in the other armanend formations Danger Tehi
and ist, 2nd and 12th SS
Panzer Divisions, not only were tank
numbers up to establishment but the quality and motivation of the
personnel was beyond the ordinary. Other elements of the Germa
army in France might be content to eniov the pleasures of garrison
industrial towns. were not unfriendly Tha resistance marement, to
And they were considerable.
The population, outside the
any German who had
been in Yugoslavias stauld have seemed
unobtrusive. The countryside produced more food than could be
consumed by the inhabitants. who were willine to sell the surplus
even at the grossly unfavourable exchanes rate of frane soninst mark
Wine, denied an export market was more olentiful ouen than 11
peacetime. And the climate even alono the Channel cout in winter
to be softened by these temptations.
was gentle. The élite panzer divisions were prepared to anior but no
trained to fight. They were accustomed to victory, even against
They had been raised and
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
63
apparently overwhelming odds. Their leaders and soldiers were
confident that they would deal as competently with the Americans
and the British as they had consistently done with the Russians.
The outcome of the battle, however, would turn not just on
morale but also on dispositions and chains of command. And here
Rommel grappled with difficulties he could not resolve by instruc-
tion or exhortation. He was not master in his own house. Above him,
as Supreme Commander West, Field-Marshal Rundstedt exercised
control over his own Army Group B and Blaskowitz's Army Group
G south of the Loire. Army Group B had the bulk of the infantry
divisions, but they were disposed in two separate Armies, Fifteenth
and Seventh, east and west of the Seine respectively. And the one
could not be used to feed the other without Rundstedt's express
permission, ultimately to be sought from the Führer. Worse, an
attempt made by Rommel in March to take tactical control of the
armour into his own hands had resulted in a further fragmentation of
command. Rundstedt, an orthodox tactician who had never experi-
enced the Allied air forces' power to nail mobile forces to the ground,
had as early as November 1943 created a central armoured staff,
Panzer Group West, to hold the six panzer divisions in
northern
France in deep reserve. His scheme
was to commit them in a
massive, classical counter-attack against the main enemy landing
when its size and axis had been identified. It conflicted absolutely
with Rommel's plan, based on the reasoning that success would
come early or not at all, to deploy the tanks forward and fight on the
beaches. But an appeal to authority, though it gave back to Rommel
control of three of the panzer divisions, reserved the other three to
Hitler's own use, through his operations staff at Wehrmacht Sup-
reme Headquarters (OKW). The arrangement promised delay at the
moment when speed of decision would be most critical.
When that moment would come none of the German side could
guess. Weather forecasting provided the best clue, since the Allies
would need the assurance of several days of calm sea and open skies
to risk setting forth, but their dominance of the Atlantic made the
readings Rommel's meteorologists needed for prediction as hard to
come by as their control of the Channel intelligence of troop
dispositions within the United Kingdom. So infrequently
German aircraft penetrate British airspace (only 129 sorties were
flown in the six weeks before D-Day) and so carefully were those
that did shepherded by the RAF that they reported only what they
