258
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
at his Army Group Centre headquarters in Russia - and he nov
heard at his midday conference of an intercepted Allied transmission
asking of Kluge's whereabouts. The origin, even the actuality of
such a transmission remains mysterious; there is no record of it in
Allied files and it may have been a German misinterpretation of a
casual and low-level inquiry between intelligence officers inside the
bridgehead. But it instantaneously revived all Hitler's neuroses
about military disloyalty and betrayal. Later he would describe his
fears thus: 'Field-Marshal Kluge planned to lead the whole of the
Western Army into capitulation and to go over himself to the enemy
... It seems that the plan miscarried owing to an enemy fighter-
bomber attack. He had sent awav his staff officer, British-American
patrols advanced, but apparently no contact was made ... Neverthe:
less, the British reported being in contact with a German general.'1
At the time he kent his anxieties to himself. but ordered hourl
reappear.
from Supreme Headquarters West until Kluge should
By 6.30 p.m. he had still not done so and Jodi, in conversation
with Blumentritt, was told that the situation weet of Argentan 15
worsening by
the hour'
and that,
Eberbach and Hansar tan overall danision Li. 1. made'. Tod
the opinion of Dietrich,
countered with what he knew wa. Hitler's determination to 'solve
well understood this as a veiled demand for a
withdrawal. He
the situation bu attacking again. 'Tam in duty bound to raint nut the
state of the armoured divisions', riposted Blumentritt.
They were
desperately short of petrol. If the intention of the proposed attac
was to win room for the evacuation of the nocket. all well and good
if it was a preliminary to some more ambitious offensive that was
once. 'As Kluge is absent
now out of the question And someone must take the decision at
... it can only be Hausser,
Dietrich or
Eberbach', he advised. 'He must be given a clearly stated mission
without any strings attached.. As far as I am concerned.' he went
on, 'I am as cool ae a cucumber. Rut ' hamean, i must say that the
extremely tense.'
responsible people at the front contemolate the situation as being
This Moltkeian understatement apparently impressed Jodl, who
at once recommended to Hitler that Hausser should take over Army
Group B. Hitler had never liked that sanaral'e "ornfty little eves', but
recognized that as an GO officer he was. ha tructed "hea agreed
But he also telenhaned both Vesselrina tiamaalia Traly, and
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
259
Model, his fireman', and requested their advice on a permanent
replacement for Kluge, whom he had now written off.
probability his decision was already made. He intended to appoint
Model, the worker of miracles on broken fronts. Meanwhile he
directed Jodl to re-emphasize the need for a panzer attack at
Argentan and sketched out further
grandiose
schemes for co-
operation between forces, either broken or non-existent,
which
would turn events to his advantage.
His 'worst day' ended with his most acute fears unrealized. The
army in the west had not been led into capitulation. It had not even
surrendered much ground, though Fifth Panzer Army had reeled
under the Canadian attack at Falaise. But he felt nevertheless that he
had been led to the edge of the abyss and, whether he could prove
anything against Kluge or not, was determined never to trust him
again. Model got his orders to go to France shortly after Kluge had
reappeared, and arrived on August 17th not only with full powers to
replace him but with instructions that he was to be kept out of the
pocket. Yet, curiously, having decided to rid himself of the agent of
his nightmares. Hitler accepted from him as partine advice the very
solution to Army Group B's besetting dangers which he had insisted
on rejecting all the previous week. No matter how many orders are
issued, Kluge told Jodl in his last message from the pocket in the
carly morning of August 16th, the troops cannot, are not able to, are
not strong enough to defeat the enemy. It would be a fatal error to
succumb to a hope that cannot be fulfilled ... That is the situation.
He then proceeded to issue orders for a withdrawal in anticipation of
Hite's endorsement, shich in fact arrived late that afternoon,
realities of the pocket had at last made themselves felt at Rastenburg:
'Roade virtually impeccable tanke repeatedle immobilized for lack o
fuel, ammunition supplies erratic,
troops hungry
communications almophon-existent'; a staff officer of Army Group
B, his thoughts on the roeat from Moscow, described what he saw
a8 having a 'Napoleonic aspect'. And as the remnants of Army
Group B, releaspd at last from their pointless struggle, turned ed
look for crossings over the Dives and the Orne, they were indeed
facing nothing less than a disaster of the proportions of 1812. For, at
exactly the moment that Hitler signalled his laissez-aller,
gomery and Bradley between them decided to use all force at their
disposal to close the Argentan-Falaise gap and squash the pocket for
good.
