202
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
filters, engine grids, exhausts.
thrown out of alignment and the engines, when they caught, ran
The sighting telescopes had been
roughly with the mistreatment they had suffered. Yet it had been
worse for the infantry who did not have armoured vehicles under or
in which to hide.
The survivors of the r6th Luftwaffe Field
Division, ground crews remustered as riflemen from Görings
shrinking Luftwaffe, who had already undergone the bombardment
of Caen ten days before,
Colombelles shaking uncontrollably from the noise, blast and inter-
were found in the reploughed ruins of
nal terror which they had suffered. Many were unable to co-ordinate
their limbs and, when collected to be marched off to the prisoner-
of-war cages,
had to
be
allowed to sit by
the roadside until
sufficiently recovered to walk in a straight line.
In the middle of the corridor the attack of the American Havocs
and Marauders of Ninth Army Air Force was particularly effective
It had hit the positions of two of the German units best equipped to
do ith Armoured Division harm, a battery of 21ct Panzer Divi-
sion's Assault Gun Battalion 200, equipped with 75 mm and 105 mm
guns on converted French tank chassis and part of its I Battalion,
125 Panzergrenadier Regiment. All of the muns in the first and most
in the second had been put out of action.
advance which was about to berin for British intelligence reckoned
This boded well for the
on the presence in the immediate vicinity of only two battered
German infantry divisions - I6th Luftwaffe and 346th, both in the
wrong place and too weak to offer resistance - and the single panzer
division, 2ist. Continually in action since D-Day. it had lost many
men and much material leaving it bu Reitich calculations with only a
thousand or so riflemen in its twa panzerorenadier regiments. 125-
reckoned to deploy not more than thirty or forty anti-aircraft and
192, and fifty tanks in its
panzer regiment, 22. It was also
anti-tank guns of 50 mm up to 88 mm. The nearest reserves, I2th SS
and Ist SS Panzer Divisions,
intelligence maps,
but were
were not exactly located on British
plotted south of Caen.
Both were
expected to resist strongly we plotted south of CatS still had a
hundred tanks - but neither was expected to come to the battle. The
British tanks should therefore have only a few of their own kind to
meet, and some static anti-tank ouns which the causley ornanted +
blanket or outflank. Older tank hando had they bear able to coun
the number which had escaped the aerial bombardment would have
crossed their fingers.
203
YEOMEN OF ENGLAND
Into the Corridor
As the monstrous drumming of the bombardment gave way to the
drone of the departing bombers which had laid it, intermittently
audible through the detonations of the artillery barrage, the tanks of
2glh Armoured Brigade started their engines and motored forward
towards the neck of the corridor between
Escoville and
Honorine-la-Chardonnerette. On their left, the division's infantry
go up from their waiting positions and moved forward also, to clear
the flank of German weapons which might impede
the tanks'
advance. The first obstacle they met, however, was man-made, the
gapped minefield. The grd Royal Tank Regiment and the Fife and
Forfars had negotiated the gaps while the bombardment was in
progress. The z3rd Hussars, stacked up behind them, had had to
wait. Swollen by a half-track company of infantrymen and a
self-propelled battery of artillery, the regiment was a lengthy column
and, by the time it wasthrough, the Tanks and the Fife and Forfars,
still in line ahead. was hrough, m well behind. This extension was
tactically undesirable, since the plan was that the Tanks and Fife and
Forfars should deploy abreast as quickly as possible, and the Hussars
close their rear as an immediate reserve.
The advance had thus
already begun to straggle. But little of that was apparent to those at
the point. Captain Lemon, in a flimsy Honey tank of the 3rd RTR's
reconnaissance troop, rather enjoyed the first few minutes as I
think most of us did rathere you". These two words echoed
throughout the Regiment and the tanks slowly surred forward
Then suddenly about a hundred wards in front of the leading tanks
the earth started "boiling" all along the front as the rolling barrage
from the 2e-noundere haras 15 To a Fife and Forfar tank to his rear,
Lance-Corporal Coxs was watching the view through his periscope.
He saw the sun came cut from behind the Saharan dust storm which
the bombers had raised, and recalled moving forward some distance
behind a creeping bard, and ren we stopped. I remember opening a
new tin of jam and spreading it thickly on innumerable biscuits and
passing them round the crew. We exchanged banter. I think the
humour was a bit forced and had a slight hysterical touch to it for we
Were all aware that this was going to be something rather big? This
pause was imposed by the line of the Caen-Troarn railway,
obstacle to
narrow-g um industrial track, but just enough of an
waste twenty minutes of the brigade's time as the Tanks and the Fife
