286
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
reaching out towards Melun, on the Seine south of Paris, and at
Mantes, north of the city, an infantry division had already estab-
lished a bridgehead on the far bank. Paris was thus encircled around
half its circumference and must fall as soon as its garrison - which
had orders to hold the city as a bridgehead - was overcome. The
garrison
325th, and twenty
was not strong. It consisted of a 'security' division, the
batteries
of 88 mm anti-aircraft guns,
seventeen-year-old crews, which could at a pinch be deployed in an
anti-tank role; Colonel Meise, on the staff of the German comman-
der of the city, had pointed out that they were superfluous in their
orthodox function because the Allies are never going to bomb
But nor were they going to fight for it. Hitler's and their strategies
at this
moment
completely
mismatched. While he,
hopelessly misplaced optimism, saw Paris as a bridgehead acros the
Seine, through which his Normandy army micht make a quick
retreat to his new defence line along the Somme and Marne rivers.
profitlessly absorb
Montgomery and Eisenhower saw it as a sponop which would
good troops
capture and afterwards
enormous quantities of food and fuel needed for the advance to the
German frontier.
useless
Neither Allied general used the term
mouths'. but the harsh lodic of that old concent of siege warfar
underlay Supreme Headquarters' outline plan for the next phase of
Operations. «If taken early. Paris will harame a sariano finitation to
out ability to maintain forces in operation'; the feeding of its
inhabitants would entail a civil affairs commitment conal to main-
taining eight divisions in operation airs commit itth of the force at
Eisenhower's disposal (due to assume direct control of the land
battle on September ist, major sassume decisions were now increas:
interrupt
ingly falling to him). The immobilization of eight divisions would
one or other of the two most promisino mation
currently on band. the essential
of the fugitive Fifth Danzer nad Coral Amia Lu suranian alone
the south bank of the Seine trom Mante mesourt to the estuary:
and the subordinate but degmatic Opportunity to thrust Patton's
Third Army eastward from its briopportunit elun and Troyes
towards Lorraine and the Siegfried Line.
Montgomery in his
directive to the Allied armies written on Aumat anth therefore
warned that it was not General Eisenhower', intontine to tale Paris
'until it is a sound military proposition to do so'.
FREE FRANCE
287
Insurrection
The Allied generals had discounted the intentions of the Resistance.
Like Warsaw Paris sheltered a secret army with the will, and some of
the means to hend the strategy of the forces of annunation and those
of the conquerors standing bevond its outskirts. Its actions would
now determine when, and how, the battle for Paris would be fought.
The Paris Resistance was far smaller than the force with which
Bor-Komorowski had begun the insurrection in
Warsaw. And,
unlike the Home Army, it was many organizations rather than one.
Effective opposition to the German occupation had been slow to
develop in France and then grew trom many budding points. Until
the German invasion of Russia in June 1947 the Communist Partye
by its nature the most apt for clandestine activity, had matched the
occupier' policy of 'correctness'. And, until November 1942, the
population of the unoccupied zone, south of the Toire hod dutifully
acepted the authority of Marshal Pétain's government in Vichy.
The only declared opponents of the armistice of 1940 operated in the
north of France, drawing their inspiration from the pre-war political
parties of the left and from contact with de Gaulle's organization in
London. His ambition naturally was to unite all forms of resistance
under the banner of Free (later Fighting) France,
but it was not
until May 1943, by which time the Communist Party had put itself
in the forefront
of opposition to German occupation,
succeeded in persuading all groups, of whatever party or affiliation,
Catholic, military or trade union, and wherever located, to accept
the legitimacy of a National Council of Resistance.
Even then the CNR remained a confederacy, and one without
much force at its disposal. The French countryside offers little
terrain suitable for guerrilla activity; and the extremely efficient and
overlapping network of governmental power - police, gendarmerie,
Renseignements généraux, Surveillance du territoire,
well as the
agencies of préfecture, canton and commune - all of which were at
the disposal of officialdom, German or Pétainist, made subversion a
risky business for the individual. It was not
until the
rigorous
imposition of forced labour decrees in mid-1942 that young French-
men, presented with the stark choice of resistance or deportation to
Germany, began to choose the former in any number. And even so
their choice did little to harm the German war effort. Arms were few
and localities willing to run
the risk of reprisals
attendant
