I54
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Holding his fire, Wittmann allowed the leading Cromwell of the
Sharpshooters to approach within eighty yards, when he destroyed it
with a single shot from his 88mm gun, thus blocking the road.
Confident of the impermeability of his armour to the Cromwells
75 mm, he then left cover and motored along the length of the
column, brewing up one British tank after another and devastating
the infantry vehicles with machine-gun fire. Plugged into the road
by the burning Cromwell at its head, the British column was unable
to advance,
orderly
while the collapse of tactical control prevented an
withdrawal. The 8th Hussars, divisional reconnaissance
regiment, advanced to the rescue but, as soon as it broke into view,
was engaged by four other Tigers of Wittmann's company deployed
to his rear, lost tanks
driven off.
The noise of the
engagement had by then alerted another company of the Tiger
battalion, commanded by
Hauptsturmführer Mobius. In the best
tradition of marching to the sound of gunfire - Panzer Lehr was
maintaining radio silence to deny the attackers tactical intelligence -
he now advanced. found the way open to Villers-Bocage and entered
the town. Its forward edge was defended by the 7th Armoured
Division's anti-tank regiment, with its 6-pounders positioned in the
streets covering the approaches. But that excellent gun, lethal to a
Mark IV
Panzer,
following Mobius,
could
only rarely hurt a Tiger.
Wittmann,
was an unlucky victim when a 6-pounder shot
took off one of his tracks, forcing him and his crew to bale out and
run for cover. The rest of the Tigers pressed on down the narrow
streets. One of the British anti-tank guns was put out of action by a
Tiger demolishing the house in whose shadow it stood.
The rest
were bypassed. It was only when over-confidence took the German
tank crews too deep into the built-up area that they began to fall prey
to close-range
weapons handled by the British infantry hiding in
cellars and on rooftops. After two Tigers had been set on fire the rest
withdrew. Later that
afternoon,
however, the infantry of Panzer
Lehr launched an enveloping counter-attack against Villers-Bocage
and retook the town.
local gains and fell back on Tilly, having lost 25 tanks,
The 7th Armoured Division abandoned their
tracked vehicles and suffered a heavy toll in human casualties.
28 other
The March to the Battlefield
A major factor prompting General Erskine and General Mont-
155
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
gomery to draw off from the fighting was news of the appearance
among the scattered elements of Panzer Lehr of those of another
German armoured division, and Panzer. It was identified when
some of its infantrymen were captured by the British goth Division,
which had been operating on 7th Armoured Division's left, nearer
Caen. Here was a development to cause anxiety. For not only was
and Panzer one of the most experienced armoured divisions in the
Wehrmacht, with a roll of battle honours reaching from the Polish
campaign to the defence of the Ukraine in 1943; it was also the first
German armoured division to have reached the Normandy front
from beyond the two great rivers - Seine and Loire - which marked
its military boundaries. The division's base was at Amiens, 120 miles
from Caen, towards which it had been ordered on June 7th. It had
therefore not averaged better than twenty miles a day on the road.
But the point was that it had arrived. And there were other panzer
divisions still to come; 116th from Paris, 17th SS Panzergrenadier
from south of the Loire, and SS from the region of Toulouse, tIth
from Bordeaux, Ist
SS from Brussels, perhaps even gth from
Avignon on the sunbaked lower Rhône.
When and if released by
Hitler's authority to join 12th SS. zist and Lehr. how long would
they take to make the journey and in what sort of state would they
arrive? These were questions of overriding importance and immedi-
acy to Supreme Allied Headquarters as the invasion battle drew into
its second week.
What Allied air power had done to the French communication
system was known in broad outline, and for some localities, via the
networks of the resistance in which the French railwaymen were
strongly represented, in greater detail. What Montgomery could not
yet know was how well the German formations with orders to march
to the battlefield were coping with the obstacles they found in their
way and the attacks directed at their transport. Had he been able to
see their side of the hill, he would have been greatly encouraged. A
fair example of German dificulties were those undergone by znd SS
Panzer Division, which started from Toulouse in the far south of
France on the evening of June 6th. Some wheeled vehicles got on the
road that day. The tanks, which would have worn out their tracks
before reaching Normandy had they folliwed were necembled at
Montauban to load on to rail flat cars, but had to wait four days for
trains. The marshalling yard was then heavily bombed, imposing a
further delay. When the first trains reached the Loire on June fith,
