76
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
deepest romanticism. June oth was to be the day of his first combat
jump. The night before, as on other nights awaiting an ordeal, he lay
with his God in the dark, listening for the words spoken to Joshua, I
will not fail thee nor forsake thee', and, in all humbleness, without
in any way seeking to compare His trials to mine'. reflected on the
Agony of Our Lord in the Garden of Gethsemane and +old himsel
that if He could face with calmness of soul the great suffering, He
knew was to be His fate, then I surely could endure any lesser ordeal
of the flesh or spirit that might be awaiting me'."
Flight
In the days before June oth the airfields near which the tented staging
camps had been pitched had gathered in the hundreds of aeroplanes
needed to drop the 13,000 parachutists into action, Eight hundred
and twenty-two were needed for the first drop. all C-47s, as the army
called the twin-engined DC-3 airliner with which Douglas Company
had revolutionized internal air travel in the United States before the
war. Painted now in khaki with three broad white stripes on each
wing, which was to be the inter-Allied renanition sion for D-Day
and after, each could carry eighteen fully laden parachutists, besides
the pilot, co-pilot navigator and crew shif Thee the nermanent
crew of the aircraft. belonged to the Army Air Force but despite the
extremely risky nature of their mission they stand low on the toten
pole of its prestige. Officially they were rated 'non-combat' hecause
the C-47 was not armed and conla nat care hambe and as mOS
aircrews 'would rather lav an egg or shoot a gun than fly a truck of
tractor', it was in the nature of things that the least qualified were
assigned to the Troop Carrier Commande rather than the Ramber O
Fighter Wings. The ugly ducklings' disgruntlement was heightened
by their knowledge that parachute dropping was both technically
demanding and operationally hazardous, since it required the pilots
to fly in tight formation at heights of bas men factored -
about 120 mph - which made them excellent targete hath for fighters
and anti-aircraft guns. The crews of the cand Troon Carvin Wing
which had worked with the All American since the Sicily landings.
had developed none the less a close and mutually trustful relation-
ship with the division, based on some plain selking early on after
numbers of parachutists had been dropped to drown in the Mediter-
ranean. One of its groups, however, was inexperienced and another
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
77
had been withdrawn for nearly a vear before D-Day to fly transport
misions, a common experience for all 'non-combat' units. It had
certainly been that of the other Wings in IX Troop
Command. which as a result were undertrained articularly in night
flying. And the drop of both divisions was to be by night.
But night comes late in an English June and the trucks taking
the men to the runways unloaded them besides their aircraft in
daylight. Eighteen to each stick (planeload), they were tipped out
with a mountain of packages which it seemed impossible to dis-
tribute about a human body. With each other's help, and then that
of the aircrew, they began. Private Donald Burgett, of the so6th
Parachute Infantry, 101st Airborne Division, contemplated his
One suit of Olive Drab, worn under my jump suit - this was an
order for everyone - helmet, boots, gloves, main parachute,
reserve parachute, Mae West, rifle,
•45 automatic pistol,
trench knife, jump knife, hunting knife, machete, one cart-
ridge belt, two bandoliers, two cans of machine gun ammo
totalling 676 rounds of •30 ammo, 66 rounds of • 45 ammo, one
Hawkins mine capable of blowing off the track of a tank, four
blocks of TNT, one entrenching tool with two blasting caps
taped on the outside of the steel part, three first-aid kits, two
morphine needles, one gas mask, a canteen of water, three
days'supply of K rations, two days' supply of D rations, six
fragmentation grenades, one Gammon grenade, one orange
and one red smoke grenade, one orange panel, one blanket, one
raincoat, one change of socks and underwear, two cartons of
cigarettes.
Burget's multiplicity of knives reflected not a particular blood-
thirstiness but an anxiety, shared by all American parachutists,
about ease of escape after landing from his parachute harness which,
unlike the British pattern, was secured not only by a single quick
release catch but by five buckles. Although in theory easily opened,
in practice they all to often defeated thumbs and fingers, because the
harness served not merely to support the man in descent but also to
secure the enormous load of kit close to his body,
was therefore
strained iron-hard about him, and had to be cut if he was not to be
dragged when he touched ground. Burgett was so heavily loaded this
evening that he actually could not accoutre himself, even by the
