242
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
numbers
of other weapons in
the infantry divisions had been
increased during 1943-4 to provide great superiority in automatic
and mortar firepower over their American equivalents. Some of this
superiority was offset by the altogether lower mobility of German
formations, still dependent on horses and boot leather for getting
about the countryside, but immobility mattered little in the sort of
static defensive battle to which most German divisions were now
consigned by the run of the strategic tide. The same tide tended also
to minimize the disadvantage of operating without air cover to which
the catastrophic decline in the fighter strength of the Luftwaffe- it
could oppose only 300 to over 1,200 Allied fighters in France -
condemned it.
It was not, however, either in quality or quantity of equipment
that the excellence of the German army ultimately lay. Traditionally
it had always rather scorned the belief that technology provided the
means to victory. For, though sensitive to technical change, and
generally ready to incorporate new weapons and equipment into its
order of battle (its failure to recognize the sionificance of the tank ir
the First World War was an uncharacteristic lapse), it rightly took
the view that weapons are no more formidable than those who use
them. And it was therefore upon the training and motivation of the
users that it had alwavs concentrated its corporate energies. Muct
effort had been given to the implantation
in the mind of the
Germans - a nation only since 1 - of the idea of military service
as natural and honourable And with toniching success In the
thirty years between 18ro and 188o the patchwork of tiny German
armies had been rewoven into a single garment. the old alleriances
commemorated only in a parent single guntitl, to that of the new
imperial units - II5th Kaiser Wilhelm's Infantry
Regiment (Ist
Archducal Hessian) - and personal lovalties firmly focused on th
Prussian king and German emper loYalties process, astonishingly
unprecedentedly,
military service
had actually been
popular with those who had to pestorm it. For three hundred years,
all over Europe, the appearance of the recruiting sergeant had beer
the signal for a district's young men to take to the woods and hill
The army of united Germany, symbol of nationhood and vehicle o
its triumphs over the pride of older states, was conscripted almos
without coercion to farruite renortina for radiotration fait for the
beginning of the school-year - which in a sense they were - anc
departing on discharge with sentimental trinkets of their service to
THE HONOUR OF THE GERMAN ARMY
243
decorate the family parlour. The débâcle of 1918 dampened but did
not extinguish this national military enthusiasm.
'Heerlos,
Wehrlos,
Ehrlos' (no army - no defence - no
honour) was
one of the
catch-phrases of the Versailles years and Hitler's abrogation of the
military terms of the treaty was as widely popular as the economic
measures by which he demobilized the armies of the unemployed.
Within five years of his coming to power, hundreds of thousands of
Young Germans were once more not only wearing field-grey but
demonstrating that apparently instinctual readiness to bond them-
selves to comrades, heed orders and interpret them intelligently
Which had made the German army of three earlier wars the world's
paradigm of military efficiency.
Even higher in the German army's scale of values than the nurture
of the warrior spirit in its conscripts, however, stood the cultivation
of operational' talent in their leaders. Operativ is an adjective which
does not translate exactly into the English
military vocabulary.
Lying somewhere between 'strategic' and 'tactical', it
describes the
process of transforming paper plans into battlefield practice, against
the tactical pressures of time which the strategist does not know, and
has been regarded by the German army as the most difficult of the
commander's arts since it was isolated by the great von Moltke in the
186os. Taught, in so far as is can be taught, in his famous staff
college courses, its traits were eagerly looked for in the performance
of general staff candidates and its manifestation
in practice,
wartime, was rewarded by swift promotion. Manstein had the skill in
abundance, Guderian too; in the previous war, Hoffmann,
Luden-
dorffs chief of statt, had been reckoned a supreme exponent. And sis
also had his master, who had rebuilt a compromised career by his
swift and courageous display of decision at the taking of Liège in
During the years when he had stood at the head of the German
army, Hitler had not at first tested himself against the exacting
standards by which 'operational' skill was matched.
Encouraged,
however,
by clear evidence of the occasional superiority
of his
strategic judgment over
that of the professionals at
OKH - his
preference for the Ardennes route in 1940 was the first example -
and then persuaded that radio and teleprinter had abolished for him
his disadvantage of distance from the front, he had begun during
I941 to take
of his campaigns,
alleged
day-by-day
he
increasingly
lower level.
When
things went
wrong,
