I6
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
number would have overwhelmed the Germans first in the sky and
then on the ground. But if a cross-Channel invasion it was to be,
that was an end to it. The Allies had determined a means different
from that I had visualized. But the outcome was no more in doubt
than it had ever been. They were going to win. The Germans were
going to lose. News of events would add colour and interest while
we waited, and should be enjoyed in that spirit. But the outcome
was not in doubt. Allons, enfants de la patrie; le jour de gloire est
arrivé.
And thus, in a curious way, the war released me from its grasp.
Another world of the imagination, that of the more distant past, had
already begun to
possess me and, for what remained of my
enchanted exile in the countryside, it was there that I dwelt. The
surrounding
landscape
planted
particularly
medieval churches, and dotted with villages and townships on which
Georgian domestic builders had laid a wide and kindly hand. I had
got to know many of these buildings well in my travels, learnt to
distinguish Norman from Perpendicular and both from Victorian
Gothic (on
which I directed a scorn untinged by
Betjemanite
doubt), come to admire eighteenth-century proportionality and the
gentle adaptation of Doric and Corinthian severity to cosy market-
place front doors. And I peopled them with the dwellers who seemed
to me proper to their spirit; the churches with pre-Reformation
parsons best resembling
the Benedictines at our neighbouring
abbey, Oxford and Cambridge men who interspersed their plain
chant with rough shooting and rugger; the houses with decorous,
benevolent, politely educated lane Austen families differing only
from their current retired-colonel occupants by wau of buckled shoes
and lace. Both sets of characters I found deeply attractive,
surrounded them with the appropriate cast to play supporting roles -
with pious, sparsely prosperous villeins, craftsmanly,
guildsmen, white with stone-chippings or sawdust, packhorse drov.
ers looking for packhorse
bridges, millers, merchants,
bargemen, village schoolmasters with a thumb in Chapman's Homer,
scarlet-coated
town worthies with a deen nocket and an eye for a classical cornice,
grenadiers soberly supping ale beside their sprie-
muslined maids. The two worlds ran together in the mind's eye as
easily and naturally as, in the prettier townscapes, did the two
Anglican, Plantagenet
architectures, producing a vision of the past at once Catholic and
and Hanoverian,
feudal and
municipal,
PROLOGUE
17
pastoral and mercantile, and throughout friendly, easeful and utterly
pacific.
Time, teaching and reading would show me that it was all the
most perfect nonsense; that the world of the past was not a potpourri
of its quainter elements but as getting-and-spending a one as that of
the present,
the getting harder, the spending stingier; that its
prevailing mood was not harmony but conflict, which man's nastier
qualities were more often deployed to resolve than charity or reason;
that the lyrical emotions it aroused in me, dissolving all differences
of class, interest, period and place in a poetic haze, were a positive
obstacle to grasping its
passions,
hopes and needs.
I struggled
against the death of romance and the dissolution of my peaceable
kingdom. How could an age that had built Glastonbury Abbey not
be kinder than that which had built cotton mills? How could a world
of hand tools not be more satisfying to work in than a world oa
machines? How could travel by horse not be more fun than by steam
or oil? Who would not choose to live under thatch instead of slate,
eat stone-milled instead of shop-bought bread, wear broadcloth
instead of rayon? Disease, I accepted, was a hazard which afflicted
the inhabitants of my imagined and vanished England with a
frequency and severity we were spared. But that they were afflicted
also in the vast majority by seasonal hunger, winter cold, constant
poverty, backbreaking labour for little return, legal inequity, illiter-
acy, ignorance and frequent disorder was a view to which I retreated
reluctantly, step by step, and with a lingering conviction that the
sun-warmed stones of cloister and market-cross could not really lie.
And of course they do not altogether. But to begin to see how and
why was to take as much time as unlearning the myths of beauty and
peace they had spoken to me of in the first place. In the process I was
taught a great deal about other places and times than the England of
the late middle and early modern age and of other subjects than the
social and cultural history which were my starting points. I learnt
enough imperial history to accept that it had two sides, enough
political history to perceive that power was important and parties
had purpose, enough intellectual history to distinguish
between
debate and dissent, enough economic history to see that work was
about business not pleasure, enough military history to grasp the
cardinality of force, dubiety of valour and marginality of the just
cause. A child of war, it was military history which particularly
aroused me. In time I grasped that I had lived through great events
