322
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
theatres by the systematic cutting of the railway systems which led
into them. Both were relatively unfortified - for, as we have seen,
the Atlantic Wall was but the thinnest of crusts, which was easily
cracked on the first day of the amphibious assault. The defences
which gave the British and Americans such difficulty later were
improvised in the course of the fighting.
in
Given that Hitler could find new formations to replace those lost
White Russia and Normandy, therefore, a second great effort,
nothing less than a battle for the frontiers of Germany itself, may be
seen to have been a necessity before the Eastern and Western allies
could finally
overcome the power of the Wehrmacht and take
possession of its homeland. And those formations were found.
Twenty-five scaled-down 'Peonle's Grenadiar, divisions ten panzer
brigades, three parachute divisions from the Luftwaffe were created
in the west in the autumn and, after the majority had been lost of
disabled in the Ardennes offensive numbers were made un b
drafting
Todt Organization workmen, police and the staff and
demonstration units of training schools to the front Himmler's SS,
whose order of battle had always been inflated by units of largely
symbolic value, redoubled its efforts to produce formations to which
the title of division could be given.
And in the last resort the civil
population, organized as the Volksturm under party control and
equipped with captured enemy weapons, could be thrown into the
battle for the defence of the eastern cities. At Breslau in Silesia,
35,000 soldiers and 15,000 Volksturm held out though encircled
from mid-February until a week after the end of the war, when only
20,000 remained alive and unwounded.
Another people, under another leader, might have been shocked
into capitulation by the great defeats of the summer of 1944.
Germans under Hitler displaved a resistance to catastronhe at the
front, round-the-clock bombing at hose, and he tearful psychologi:
cal and material hurt entailed by both. which flew in the face o
reason and of every Allied expectation, Or did it? The occupation
zones agreed by the Eastern and Western allies in 1944 and modified
at Yalta in February 1945 to allow room or a french share, were
divided between them by a line following the Fibe and Werra rivere
The final fighting line coincided with this thnnel German Border, a5
it would come to be called in later veare with a reman in degre
if accuracy. Only in Saxony did ye As, eric a advance spill over
into what would after the surrender become Russian jurisdiction.
EPILOGUE
323
Allowance must be made for Dönitz's foreknowledge of the zonal
grement. It was that which stiffened the resolve of the German
soldiers on the Elbe to hold the river until the Allied spearheads
should reach it. For, as long as they did so, the refugee population of
the east would have time to cross from future Russian into future
Western territory. But the neat approximation of the military and
diplomatic maps was not brought about by the last-minute despera-
tion of the Wehrmacht. The document which revealed the Allies'
post-war plans for Germany does not seem to have come into
German possession until early April. And by then the German
armies, east and west, were already almost back to back.
Rather it was as if the Allies had accepted what lay in Hitler's
mind, which, as so often in his touch with that of the German
people, also represented their inner will: that every inch of German
soil would have to be fought over before they would be brought to
accept defeat. Hence even as late as March 28th,
with the Rhine
already crossed and the Ruhr about to be encircled,
Eisenhower
could still write to Montgomery as if a great battle lav ahead. My
plan is simole. it aime at dividing and dosterina the enemy forces
and icinine hands with the Russian army. Mv mirnase is to destroy
the enemy forces and his nower to resist Hence as if by symbiosis,
the extraordinary spasm of final combat which convulsed Germany
in late March and during April.
Ten thousand German prisoners
Were captured by the British and Americans every day in March and
the figure rose to 30.000 a day during Abril. But those Germans still
at liberty battled on, fighting and dying at every river line between
the Rhine and the fibe, nounter-attacking when they could and
compelling the enemy to turn into rubble every other provincial
town they approached. Ibbenbüren, Verden, Lingen in the British
area, defended here by a division of sailors, there by an NCO school,
held out for days at a time, to be taken only after tactical air power
had thrown down the houses on to their defenders' heads. In the
American Zone south of the
Ruhr,
the Germans in the Harz
mountains resisted for ten days in mid-April and at Crailsheim and
Heilbronn in Württemberg counter-attacked strongly enough to cut
off an American armoured division, reduce it to dependence on
aerial resupply and eventually force it to break out and withdraw.
And in Berlin, where Hitler had promised that the Russians would
suffer their greatest defeat, the garrison came near to exacting from
them a price for their victory as heavy as that of Stalingrad. In the
