18
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
and that the determinism I had imposed on them - the certainty of
victory, the indulgent contempt for the enemy, the patronizing
acceptance of allies - was merely an index of how limited and local
had been my viewpoint. Britain, I learnt, had not been strong, but
weak. The long delay in bringing the Germans to decisive battle had
been a matter of necessity, not choice. The Russians, whose war I
had thought entirely marginal, had, I discovered, fought the greatest
of the land campaigns. The empire, whose sheer size I reckoned the
principal source of Allied power, had, I learnt, been unable to arm
itself. The European allies, whom I had thought important by
reason of their number alone, had, I gathered, been little better than
refugees. The Japanese, of whom I had not thought at all, had, I
found, come close to making the Pacific their own. And the
Americans ...
It was my misunderstanding of their place in things which was
hardest to correct. They had been all about me and yet I had had no
curiosity about what had brought them. During the period of
Britain's isolation I had counted them, when I did so at all, as
benevolent spectators,
clearly on
our side because they spoke
English but, since we had Australia. Canada and South Africa with
us, not wanted or even necessary as allies, a viewpoint which l
presumed was also their own. When, nevertheless, they had begun
to appear in England, it was, I supposed, because of a failure of
patience, similar to that I had felt, with Hitler's effort to win a war
he was bound to lose. And, in their coming to England,
definitely presumed that they were putting themselves, if not under
British command, at least at Britain's dienneal. We after all had
obliged to respect them.
established property rights in the war and lateramere would be
There, as childish perceptions go, I may not have been so wide of
the mark. Popular sentiment, though oventlowingly warm to the
Americans as individuals, was not,
themes of 'blood, toil, sweat and tears',
after years of exposure to the
'taking it',
the few' and
standine alone' at all adantable to the anato site British
and American
American authority. That the invacion should kara been mounted
effort, still less of any
subordination
under the operational control of a British soldier,
General Mont-
gomery, and that Britich Commonwealth transent la have heen in
the majority on the invasion
therefore
national feeling about the fitness of things Had it heen mesible to
accorded with
PROLOGUE
19
take a poll of popular strategic attitudes in June 1944 it would
probably have revealed an expectation that, though the Americans
might in time come to supply the larger number of men in the battles
for the liberation of Europe, and naturally the lion's share of the
equipment, the direction of the campaign would be determined by
British minds and exercised by British commanders, even if General
Eisenhower might, for diplomatic reasons, have to be accorded a
titular primacy over the armies in the field. And the justification for
that division of responsibility would have been that the invasion was,
after all, a British conception, an endeavour long promised, by
Churchill to the country,
by the British to themselves, an act of
historical vindication, a paying back five-, ten- and twenty-fold for
the nation's expulsion from the continent four years before and for
all it had subsequently suffered.
It was hidden from the majority, hidden from all but a very few in
the inmost circle of policy-making, that this simple, legalistic view of
how strategy had been made and would thenceforth unroll was quite
at variance with reality. And it would remain hidden until long after
the war. Only in the early 1950s would it start to become apparent
that a cross-Channel invasion, for all its obviousness as a cardinal
means to defeat Hitler, had carried nothing like unanimous assent in
the Allied camp. Gradually it would be revealed that, despite much
lip service to the concept, the British had shown nothing like the
commitment to it that the Americans had done; that they had not
merely advanced practical objections when it was right to do so,
during the periods of Allied inferiority,
but had,
even after the
reversal of the balance of strength,
argued so
persuasively for
alternative approaches to Hitler's heartland that the Americans had
come to suspect a lack of resolution in their allies.
The
'Second
Front debate' was, it gradually became clear, the crux of the most
important of all wartime Anglo-American misunderstandings.
