SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
a broken wave on the stubble behind; a day or two of sun took us out
again with pitchforks to turn the drying crop and then, mounted
behind a horse rake, to gather the drift into lines, watch it pitched on
to wagons and, last of all, brought to the stacks for thatching against
the storms of winter.
And yet I remember no wartime winter. The German Sixth Army
froze in its filthy, iron-hard foxholes at Stalingrad; I pined for snow
on a bright Christmas Eve and thought myself cheated when the
morrow brought not a flake. The PQ convoys skirted the edge of the
pack on the north Russia run, shrinking by every mile of sea room
they could find from the basilisk eye of the Luftwaffe; I scouted the
hedge-bottoms for a ditchful of bearing ice and came home with wet
socks. The Hunger Winter of 1944 sent Dutch families to scratch for
potatoes in the twice-dug earth of north Holland; I
cracked hazelnuts in the November sun on Sunday afternoon woll
with my father and returned to hot treacle flapjack by the kitchen
fire. Perhaps there were other corners of war-enwrapped Europe
where children lived as well-fed, warm anar-en wrappe us.
wonder if any retain, as I do, a memory of six years so consistently
illuminated by sunlight, so deeply suffused by happiness, so utterly
unmenaced by danger? Today conscience attacks memory
accusations of involuntary guilt at what I was spared. But at the time
it was simply as if the war was not.
Chance decreed that I had no close relatives of an age to serve in
the armed forces: nor apparently had anv of the familias who lived
round about. Our nearest neighbour with military connections was a
long-retired colonel of Indian Mountain Artillery, venerated by me
for his gift of a patent field-sketching pencil presented to him on his
relinquishing command of a screw-gun battery at Aden in 1903. His
incomprehension of current military realities was as total as my own.
Locality ensured that not a bomb fell within thirty miles of our
retreat; on one thrilling night of, inevitably false, alarm, we were
taken in our pyjamas to sit in the cellar of the large house across the
way, and on another my parents stood in the garden for an hour after
the nine o'clock news to watch the glow of Bristol burning beyond
the horizon. But on neither night, nor on any other, did we hear as
much as the engine-note of an errant German bomber.
Parental
protectiveness shielded us entirely from disturbing facts or rumours.
My father, who had spent what I now realize to have been two
horrible years on the
Western Front in 1917-18, was nightly
PROLOGUE
5
badgered by my sister and me for stories of what he had done in the
'First War', as he called it; but the world of active service he
conjured up was all friendships, horses and rest from the trenches in
billets as warm and secure as the darkened bedroom in which we
prompted him down his train of entrancing, evasive memories.
Habits of rural independence and self-sufficiency spared us any real
want; in a countryside of mixed farming cultivated by yeoman
tenants as close-fisted in their dealings with the War Agricultural
Committees as they had always been with landlords,
there was
inevitably a tithe of produce which escaped the official collection,
circulating by barter, payment in kind or down-to-earth cash from
larder to larder within the parish. The only deprivations I therefore
suffered were entirely psychological and largely formed by reading. I
yearned in particular for the company of Roger, Susan, Nancy and
the rest of Arthur Ransome's Swallows and Amazons children, whose
Lakeland life seemed so enviably and eventfully different from ours
but which, save for the absence of a dinghy and a stretch of navigable
water, I now recognize mine must have closely resembled.
And yet, in this unruffled pool of peace, the war entirely possessed
me. I walked to school each morning - a walk along paths I again
recall permanently dappled by sunshine, against
which
we wore
curious regulation grey flannel hats apparently inspired by E. H.
Shepard's drawings of Christopher Robin - in the pleasant con-
fidence that between arithmetic and Latin there would be half an
hour of commando raids behind the football hut, or hard-driven
bargains in Dinky Toy models of Blenheims and Hurricanes, or
detailed technical discussions of the Lee-Enfield and its laughingly
obvious superiority to the Mauser and the Mannlicher-Carcano
which, as the possessor of a small brown linen-covered manual of
small arms, I knew to be the contemptible equipment of the Italian
army. I also possessed an out-of-date edition of Jane's Fighting Ships,
which I had read even more often than Swallows and Amazons, a
complete set of Ministry of Information pamphlets on the war effort
(Combined Operations, Bomber Command and the rest, now collec-
tors' pieces and still a model of what sensible propaganda can
achieve), and a file of articles on military subjects torn from Picture
Post, including a particularly informative one on the Red Army.
This last provoked my father, who held unchangingly to the view
that we had declared war in solidarity with Poland and could not
forgive Stalin for partitioning it with Hitler, to contemptuous snorts.
