46
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
the decisive battles of the war against Hitler. Regretfully, therefore,
he declined this chance to keep an early Second Front alive and, ind
doleful mornine in his suite at Claridge's, set himself to write a plan
for 'the least harmful diversion'. Recognizing that 'we couldn't do
Sledgehammer and that there was no immediate prospect of Roun
up ... I started writing a proposal... for an expedition into North
Africa, with operations. limits, nature and the like' 7 As he finished
Admiral King entered and, to Marshall's astonishment, signified
that he would give it his support.
The British naturally gave it their instant support it was exactly
the outcome for which, soldiers and civilians alike they had honed
Some of them quibbled at Marshall's suggestion that a final decision
for Gymnast - soon to be recoded Torch, under
which name the
North African landings would eventually pass into history - b
postponed until September 15th, perhaps
device by which Torch and Sledoehammer might jointly he hidto
recognizing
rest and Roundup revived in 1943. General Alan Brooke, recognit
ing victory when he saw it, overcame them concerted Cabinet and
before they left. They were a dispirited
chief of staff agreement and delivered it intant to the Americals
party.
recognized that the North African landings,
Marshall now
Sledgehammer, probably wrote off Roundun for Toa2 and commi
besides scuppering
ted the Allies to a 'defensive, encircling
Continental European theater'. He was
line
of action for the
discover, soon after his return to Washington, that
persuaded Roosevelt, through Hopkins,
more cast
down to
Churchill had
postponing a date for Torch and had ant it fived for Ootpher goth.
entailed a passage of laburinthine dealine with at we hu repr
3oth became, in the
November
sentatives in North Africa, a murky and inept attempt to replace the
Free French Forces, and a campaien grainst the attenuated nower of
the Afrika Korns less than magnificent to manade ito ericades
But Marshall, stifling every occasion
ing the British down the wrong strategic turning.
self-justification, forbore to reproach the President with follow
events to
which provided him with
It was now for
Roosevelt,
must, and Churchill, who might be made to - that a cence-Chant
prove to
attack would not
whomsoever
prudence.
ever
calculations
of safety
4
Rommel inspecting the defences of Normandy before D-Day
Anti-aircraft sentries of an SS division in Normandy, June 1944
