232
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
twenty-five the day before),
the disorganization caused in the
German lines far outweighed in tactical importance that inflicted in
their own. Two American units, a regiment of the gth Division and a
battalion in the goth, were unable to move off at the prescribed hour
because
they
were
still
evacuating casualties (many of them
psychological). But, promptly at 11 a.m., the three leading divisions
of the six under command of VII Corps crossed the startlines and
moved off into the 'moon landscape' the 1,500 Fortresses of the
Eighth Air Force had just created.
The attack, codenamed Cobra, was Bradley's third attempt to
escape from the constricting neck of the Cotentin peninsula.
first, begun on July ard, had been checked by the hard fighting of
the enemy's infantry along the floodline of the Douve.
The second,
begun on July I3th,
had after five days resulted in the capture of the
crucial communication centre of St Lô, but only at the cost of 11,000
casualties Cobra promised better. The preliminary operations had
carried the American line
to the outskirts of easier country,
though on the inner flank the line of advance still stretched into the
bocage, on the outer it reached towards the coastal plain, over whic
could make rapid progress. Now, too, there was more
armour than Bradley had had before, and it had been ashore long
enough for the infantry to have practised with it the tactics of
co-operation essential for a clean break-through. The tactical ain
force, of which after some early mishaps the ground troops had
grown wary, had also greatly improved its technique of close suppor
and would in future be eagerly summoned to remove points o
resistance in the wav of forward movement Put shove all, there
were now numbers on Bradleys side me fall of Cherbourg, which
had corrected his facing-both-wavs posture. had released three
divisions to the boran. feant. The steady cranace of reinforcement,
from an army with cared still at how hecides othere nearer to
hand in Britain, had brought more so that he now had fifteen
divisions in line, against nine German. many of them remnants and
750 tanks against 110. Faced with this evidence of a remorseless shift
that 'the
in the balance. Rommel had written to Hitler ten dave hefore to warn
approaching
when
defences will crack'. On July 25th the moment had come.
our hard-pressed
infantry divisions,
The sounds of the break were muted at the start.
The three
4th and 3oth,
assigned by Bradley to
spearhead the sa had the two small Mariana
THE HONOUR OF THE GERMAN ARMY
233
St Gilles as their immediate objectives. Each was about three miles
inside German territory, just beyond the strip, six miles square,
which the air force had devastated that morning.
Their capture
would, as in the Epsom operation a month before, open the neck of
a corridor into the German positions down which Bradley planned
to pour his armour as soon as the crust of German resistance - their
nests of machine-guns and anti-tank guns, infantry strong-points
and tank lairs - was broken. Progress at first was slow. For all the
sound and fury of the bombing and despite Bayerlein's dramatically
pessimistic assessment, many of the German infantry had survived
the holocaust and, as soon as they found themselves alive and faced
by the visible presence of their tormentors, manned their weapons
and opened fire. The Americans,
obstructed by their own crater
fields, found it difficult to make progress, and were not helped by
the assistance of some of their medium bombers,
dropped their loads short. By the evening of the first day, only two
miles of ground had been won at the deepest point,
objectives still lay beyond the bivouacs of the vanguard.
The day,
indeed, had passed much like the first of Epsom, with the advancing
infantry unable to identity the sources of fire which struck them
from time to time, or to make use of the armour which would have
neutralized the opposition they met because of the narrowness of the
front on which they were advancing.
But the anatomies of Cobra and Epsom fundamentally differed.
Not only was Bradley attacking with far greater force than Mont-
gomery had been able to muster four weeks earlier.
He was also
confronted by an enemy who was critically weaker. Realize it though
they could not, his infantry had on the first day very
largely
destroyed the resistance which the bombing had left untouched.
And behind the outer crust, far from there being a surplus of fresh
and strong panzer divisions to shore up the front and stop up the
holes the attack opened, there was almost no reserve at all. The two
panzer divisions on the front, and SS and I7th SS - the latter only a
panzergrenadier formation, with a single armoured battalion - were
fully committed to the defence of the line.
Lehr, though still in
place, had effectively been destroyed in the bombing
and the
fighting which immediately followed. And the intact infantry divi-
sions - 243rd, 353rd, grst and 5th Parachute - were all immobile
and seriously under strength. If the Americans could but sustain
pressure and progress of the first day, they
would shortly
