254
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
was a fitting end for the leading tank ace of the Second World War.
But it did not count in the scales against the losses inflicted by the
off and surround. At the end of this tragic little action on August
9th, the British Columbia Regiment had lost forty-seven of its tanks,
effectively its entire strength,
and the accompanying Algonquin
Reriment tun companies of ite infantry It an attaind o
the dangers inherent in cornering first-class
German formations
however battle-worn and whatever the odds stacked against them.
On August rith, nevertheless, Montgomery resolved to try again,
and all the machinery of an armoured drive was reassembled for a
tinal advance on Falaise, now only seven miles distant from the line
won in Totalize. The new operation was codenamed Tractable, was
to begin on August
I4th, and was to muster the Canadian 3rd
Infantrv and 4th Armoured nia tens in parolle columne an a
narrow a front ne before It une alad to bo sarandad hu the massed
bombing attack which cince Goadwood had been the atandard
prelude to advance on the ground. Eight hundred British bombers
took part dennino nearl odo tone of bambar ,..ch fel
within friendlv lines - this too une becoming gruesomely familiar.
to kill 150 Allied soldiers.
But when the armoured columns entered
the enormale dust hich the iced tent
the sun which chawed anly ae a end to theouch at t the
tound the Germans On this occasion m...l lece ready to resist
12th SS Hitlerjugend had been with druch into reserve behind the
front, which was held by two went infantru divisions 8eth and 8oth
the latter recently arrived from the backwater of Norway.
Those of
their soldiers who had survived the
eagerly and thauch the ear meAn man's
bombardment surrenderea
unit - re-anneared to bar the way the bambias had asened
drimpanies were now so weak that hal Domired tanks had to be
driven out of the battalion workshops only a mile hahiad the lines
to reinforce the remaining serviceable, only a mminously, too, some
of the Tigers had to Ce
was not coming up the line of supply. Wherever the
Canadians
pressed hard. therefore thay tank the cared than canted And co
the advance which had bern on the morning of Ahaunt eith with
the unforgettable sight of hundreds of morning of Ahicles massed on
the plains of rolling corn in the Orne valley' drew to a close on the
evening of the following dov with she echo door a tie i
34
American infantry shelter from German gunfire during the
Mortain counter-attack
German nrisoners taken bu the Amos. in thereat break-out o
July 25th, 1944
