122
SIX
ARMIES IN NORMANDY
east of the harbour. It was defended by a company of the German
57Ist Regiment and some Luftwaffe anti-aircraft gunners. They had
watched the approach of the landing-craft and, as soon as the ramps
went down, directed the desperate fire of outnumbered men at the
open mouths of the vessels. The Canadians, like the Irishmen on the
River Clyde at Gallipoli, reeled momentarily before the storm and
then burst through the curtain to find shelter under the sea wall. It
was capped with
wire.
They blew a gap with their bangalore
torpedoes. The first few scraped through to the cliffs beyond. The
rest were barred by fire on the gap and killed by machine-guns firing
'in enfilade' - that is, at an angle to the Canadians' line of advance -
from under the
landing-craft arrived. and soon after a third, carrving a company of
Twenty minutes later a second wave of
the Black Watch of Canada.
The landing-craft drew off behind
them. Fire implacably denied their advance, By 8.30 a.m. every man
on the beach was dead or captive. They had begun their landing only
three hours before. The party which had crossed the sea wall was, by
Division,
annihilated by assault
detachment of 23 (Heavy) Aircraft Reporting Company' - a hastily
assembled band of Luftwaffe technicians. Out of 554 Royal Cana-
dians who had disembarked, ees mer cent had become casualties;
227 had been killed. Almost all were from the city of Toronto.
At Pourville beach, west of the town. the South Saskatchewans
and Cameron Highlanders of Canada found a landing place pro-
tected from the worst of the German fusillade, fought all morning
and got off with only a hundred casualties apiece. But in the centre,
at the harbour and along the
complete as at Puys, and highly spectacular. For here
promenade, disaster was almost as
Combined
Operations Headquarters had decided to experiment with the direct
disembarkation of a new tank - the Churchill from a new tune of
assault vessel, the Landing Craft TCh hall - carried three tanks.
There were ten LCTs, of which the first three were to beach with
the craft carrying the two assaulting infantry battalions, the Royal
Hamilton Light Infantry and the Essex Scottish. In the event they
arrived late, and only five of their tanks managed to get off the beach
on to the promenade.
The three following waves got ten of their
tanks on to the promenade. But their crew, like those in the first
wave, found that access to the town was blocked by large concrete
obstacles, which the accompanying sappers were unable to destroy
with explosives. All the tanks were therefore confined within a zone
123
CANADA: TO THE SOUTH SHORE
on which heavy German fire played. At first the fire was from guns
to light to penetrate the thick armour of the Churchills, and the
officers aboard the landing vessels offshore listened with admiration
on their radios to the 'cool and steady voices' of the tank crews co-
ordinating their fire to support their infantry comrades. Gradually
however the enemy brought heavier calibres to bear and, one by one,
the Calgary Regiment's tanks fell silent. None was evacuated from
the beach. Very few of the Hamiltons and the Essex Scottish got
away; the first lost a hundred, the second two hundred dead. And,
to crown the tragedy, at the last moment the force commander
landed his floating reserve', Les Fusiliers de Mont-Royal, who were
bracketed by concentrated German artillery during their ten-minute
run in to the beaches, and drenched with fire as they touched ground.
The French Canadians nevertheless stormed from their landing-
craft. But shortly they too had lost over a hundred men killed and
were pinned to the shingle, unable either to advance or retreat.
When the badly shocked survivors of that terrible morning were
got home and heads counted, only 2, I1o of the 4,963 Canadians who
had set sail the day before could be found. It became known later
that 1,84 were prisoners, but of these 568 were wounded and 72
Were to die of their wounds, while 378 of the returning were also
wounded. Sixty-five per cent of the Canadians engaged had there-
fore become casualties, almost all of them from the six assaulting
infantry battalions, a toll which compared with that of July ist
1916, first day of the Battle of the Somme and blackest in the British
army's history. The and
Canadian
Division had, for
practical
purposes, been destroyed. Six months later it
was still in the
category of lowest priority for employment in the Canadian army.
Strategic as well as human criteria applied in measuring the scale
of the disaster. All the tanks which had been landed had been lost, 2
by swamping between ship and shore, the other 27 by enemy action
or mechanical breakdown.
Lost also were 5 of the Io
precious
Landing Craft Tank. And, auguring worst of all for the future, the
damage had been done not by hastily summoned reinforcements but
by the forces already present; the 3 Canadian battalions which had
stormed the central beach had been opposed by a single German
company - at odds, that is, of t2 to 1 - and the tanks and landing-
craft destroyed by 28 pieces of pre-placed artillery, most of medium
calibre. The gunners hetes of pre-placed artillery,ns showed 7,458
shells fired - but they could not be expected to work any less hard
