208
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
vehicles had worked frantically to start motors and free armament
from clogging earth. The Mark IVs were the first to get into action
and trundled forward to engage the 23rd Hussars as they followed
Fifes towards
Cagny. Outnumbered and still half-crippled,
however, they failed to deliver a concentrated blow and all but one
was knocked out.
The Tigers were a more formidable threat, Captain Freiherr von
Rosen, commanding 2 Company of 503 Heavy Tank Battalion, had
got six of his eight tanks back into running order by midday and
probed forward from his battle station in the Emiéville orchards to
see what he could find. What he found was the Guards Armoured
Division. At last clear of the 'airborne bridgehead" and through the
Baps of the minefields, the Guards were pushing hard to get south of
Emiéville,
where they
towards Vimont and the open
were scheduled to wheel left and drive
country. In the lead was the and
Battalion Grenadier Guards which 2. 000 vards short of Cagny, was
stopped by anti-tank fire, emanating it believed from the village.
The battalion commander, therefore,
decided to edge away nearer
Emiéville leave a squadron there as flank guard. and send another to
take the anti-tank guns in Cagny from an unexpected direction. A
Soon, however, as the Guards' Shermans strayed from the 'armoured
from another source.
corridor' into the more broken country from its edge, they met fire
It was rapidly identified as coming from
Tiger', but that did not save nine of the Grenadier crews, whose
tanks were soon burning. In their wake came the 2nd Battalion Irisi
Guards, who were alan held un for a long time before Cagny and
eventually diverted leftwards by the resistance from the front. An
enterprising troop
Lieutenant Gorman, nosed forward
through tall hedgerows to see if he could identify whence the enemy
fire was coming, and was startled at the top of a small rise to find two
Tigers and two other German tanks on the other side less than 200
yards awav. His gunner fired at the leader but, to Gorman's dismay
he saw 'the shot bounce off and go sizzling up into the air. I ordere
the gunner to fire again, but a hollow voice came up from the bowels
of the tank, saving "Gun iammed, sir" , Seeing the Tigers' letha
88mm guns training on to his bearing and remembering that he
had been trained to advance when in doubt. Gorman ordered his
driver to accelerate and steer for the enemy. Fortunately, the Tiger
turret was notoriously underpowered and so, just before its gun
was aligned, the Sherman hit the Tiger amidships. Both crews took
this as the signal to bale out and look for cover. The Irish Guards'
wireless operator found himself in the same ditch as the Germans,
where, under heavy shelling, the two sides declared a local truce.
Gorman ran back to where he had left the rest of his troop, collected
another Sherman, a 'Firefly armed with a tank-busting 17-pounder,
and with it set the rammed Tiger on fire.
Out on the opposite flank, yet another element of Battle Group
von Luck had been making itself a menace to the armoured advance
while this little battle had been going on.
The German army in
France was a make do and mend force, which had had to supplement
the unsteady flow of equipment from the domestic arms factories
with jury rigs of its own. One such makeshift was a self-propelled
anti-tank gun produced by marrying a German 105 mm
captured French Hotchkiss tank chassis. Assault Gun Battalion 200
had five batteries of these weapons, each of six guns, and was under
the command of their designer, Majör Becker. One of the batteries
had been destroyed by the bombing in Démouville, another
intact in the outskirts of Caen but beyond the battle zone.
remaining were in the path of the armoured charge,
Grentheville just beyond the second railway line and Batteries 4 and
5 in le Mesnil-Frémentel.
The grd Royal Tank Regiment, which had orders to bypass all
points of resistance and keep going for the summit of Bourguébus
ridge, had not been hurt by von Luck's press-ganged 88 mms ir
Cagny, from which it had been shielded by the mass of the Fife and
Forfars. It lost only one tanken the batteries in le Mesnil-Frémentel,
drenching the village with a regimental broadside as it passed. But
bevond the railway it began to pay the price of leading an armoured
charge. Its designate route lay across the angle of the Caen-Tronan
railway and the very steeply embanked Caen-Vimont line, which ran
south-east. The ery steal commanded by Becker's Battery 3 am as
soon as the British appeared over the first railway line and man-
oeuvred to find the way under the second - it ran through a tunnel -
they crashed out. The range was short and the guns hit home. Major
Close, commanding 'A' Squadron, recalled seeing
several anti-tank guns among the trees and ... the gunners
frantically swinging their guns round towards us.
Cornfields swinging their guy multi-barrel mortar positionly
which were already firing over our heads. They were quickly
