142
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
the beach from surf to cliff foot. But nothing in the day's news
brought as much satisfaction as the account of the Canadian landing:
Not only had the ard Division extricated the Supreme Command
from the danger of visiting on Canada a second national tragedy only
two years after the first, but it had also won an important victory. At
the end of the day its forward elements stood deeper into France
than those of any other division.
The North Shore Regiment was
still battling near the beach to reduce the command post of the Il
Battalion, 736th Grenadier Regiment at 8 p.m. But the North Nova
Scotia Highlanders, who had landed fresh on the beach at noon,
were in Villon-les-Buissons, only three miles from the outskirts of
Caen. Late that evening a patrol of the zist Panzer Division, tardly
released by Army Group B to Seventh Army for the only German
counter-attack of D-Dav. aimed at the gap between the British and
Canadian bridgeheads and blundered into the pickets of the North
Nova Scotias. Nineteen prisoners fell into Canadian hands. The rest
of the Germans fled into the night. The Allies were ashore.
CHAPTER 4
Scottish Corridor
THE PAILURE of 21st Panzer Division to push its way to the coast on
the evening of June 6th cast the first shadow of doubt on the
confidence Hitler had always expressed at the outcome of the Second
Front. "They will get the thrashing of their lives,' he had predicted
eatier in the year. I am convinced that when the time comes it will
be a huge relief, just like Dieppe? But his confidence had rested on
his ability to hold the Allies on the beaches and destrov them there.
perhaps with the assistance of bad weather but certainly with the flail
of air power. 'If only they would land half a million men,' he had
mused on December goth, 1943, 'and then foul weather and storms
cut them off in the rear. Then everything would be all right? The
foul weather would come. By air power, and particularly the just
'one jet', the Messerschmitt 262, on which he counted to force them
*to take cover and ... waste them hour upon hour' until his reserves
were on their way, had not shown itself; the Luftwaffe flew only 379
sorties on June 6th, and lost many aircraft, the Allies flew 12,015, of
which not one was interrupted by enemy air action.
The Fight of the Panzer Divisions
The defeat of the landings would therefore depend on the action of
the ground troops and above all on their ability to keen the Allies'
still shallow footholds separate from each other. On the evening of
June oth the British seaborne infantry had joined hands with the
parachutists in the 'airborne bridgehead', just as the Americans of
Utah Beach had done with their parachutists earlier in the afternoon.
The Canadians had made early contact with the British on their right
(who had almost reached Bayeux before the end of the day), and
would on the morning of June 7th close the gap between themselves
and the British on their left, into which the 2tst Panzer Division had
143
