SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
the and Gordon Highlanders and the and Argyll and Sutherland
Highlanders, belonged to the division as a result of a more recent
ordeal. Originally Territorial too, they had in May 1942 taken on the
identity of the regular battalions of their regiments which had been
forced to surrender at Singapore two months earlier to the Japanese.
Thus it was that the Teth Battalion. Arovll and Sutherland Highlan
ders found itself invested overnight with all the weighty traditions of
the old g3rd Highlanders, Tennyson's line of scarlet tipped with a
streak of steel' of the battle of Balaclava, the 'thin red line' of popular
None of these regiments bad ever smelt powder in earnest. For
four and a half years they had guarded the coasts against invasion
and the inland counties
trained in endless divisional 'schemes' and regimental manoeuvres,
of England against parachute descent,
and fired their weapons at pader targets and squares on the maD. A
few of the most senior officers had been juniors in the trenches of the
First World War. Their subordinates were solicitors, schoolmasters,
bank clerks, business
who had given their pre-war
weekends to the Territorial army. or schoolbous and universit
students whom the war had swept into the Officer Cadet Training
Units. A few of the sergeants were old sweats, with a North-West
Frontier medal to sew on their battledress blouses. The rest. and the
men without excention were innocents to war inasmuch as Sante can
ever be. Epsom was to be their initiation.
Finding the Enemy
The countryside into which the i5th Scottish Division began to
move on the morning of June zoth was the beginning of the true
Norman bocage. On the previous night it had concentrated north of
Meyer had ridden his
Route nationale 13, the road from Caen to Bayeux down which
motorcycle to the attack of Bretteville
l'Orgueilleuse eighteen days before. It to crossed that road to form
up in the early hours, and at 7.30 a.m. began to move forward
through thick corn towarde the danse wondlood and coall enclosed
fields which led down towards the Or wandats tributaries. Of these
the Odon was the first objective.
The division was attacking two brigades up', which meant that six
of its infantry battalions were in the first wave, the other three
waiting in the rear to support the leaders. WAs each brigade also
171
attacked 'two up', however, there were in fact only four battalions in
line, each strung out on a front of about 1,000 yards. And since the
battalions, about 750 men strong. likewise kept one or two of their
four companies in reserve, the true number of men who started
forward into the cornfields was probably no more than 700. They are
best pictured, as they would have looked from the cockpit of any
passing spotter aircraft, as 24 groups of 30 riflemen, separated by
intervals of about 150 yards across the mouth of the funnel which
was to become known as 'Scottish Corridor'. Each of these groups, a
platoon, consisted of three smaller groups, called sections, which
were led by a corporal and centered on the light machine-gun which
gave them their firepower. Their task was of the simplest. As soon as
the barrage fired by the hundreds of guns behind them began to phay
on the ground to their front, at a distance of 500 yards or so, they
were to shoulder their weapons and walk forward. The soldiers
were, in short, being asked to do exactly what their fathers might
well have done in the same battalions during the First World War -
the 6th Royal Sco the same battalbe left flank of the advance was the
battalion Winston Churchill had commanded in the trenches,
officers certainly the counterparts, perhaps the relations
young Scots of the middling sort' he had found when he entered
their mess in January tor6 They were to 'follow the barrage'.
with this difference: each of the brigades was accompanied by a
regiment of tanks, which marginally decreased the danger of the
operation; but the path of the advance, far from presenting the bare
and open appearance of the First World War trench landscape, on
which the positions of the enemy stood clearly revealed, was covered
by dense vegetation which concealed every trace of his defences from
view. The barrage followers would know of his presence only when
they stumbled over his entrenchments or were dropped in their
tracks by his fire.
The enemy, who had now had nearly three weeks to prepare the
defence of the banks of the don, had made the most of the natural
advantages it offered him. The embanked hedgerows, sunken farm
lanes, woods, coppices, streambeds, ditches and strong, stone-buil
barns and farmpouses, shich lay beyond the cornfields had been
integrated into a barrier nearly five miles deep. Its foremost tier
formed what was called the
Battle Outposts, a honeycomb of
machine-gun nests in hidden positions sited to command broad
fields of fire down which the British infantry had to advance. There
