260
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
Command Indecision
That they had not done so already was the outcome of a curious
passage of inter-Allied discord. Kluge, flying homeward from the
western front towards what he knew would be a Gestapo reception,
penned before taking poison a final letter of exculpation.
Führer, I think I may claim for muself that I did everything within
my power to equal the situation. Both Rommel and I ... foresaw the
present development.
manders,
We were not listened to.' The Allied com-
Montgomery, Eisenhower and Bradley alike, had nor
foreseen it. Their strategic view had been shaped by the COssAC plan
of 1943, which had expected the Battle of Normandy to take the
form of a succession of linear offensives from one line of natural
obstacles to another, until the whole of the lodgement area between
the Seine and the Loire had been occunied. The cossAC plan had
assumed a steady rate of advance, from the D- Day 'phase line to one
embracing Caen and A vranches in twenty davs and thence to the two
great rivers in another seventy. The time-table had not worked ou
like that in practice. Because of Hitler's insistence on Army Group B
fighting for every hedgerow. the real 'phase lines' had lagged weeks
behind those projected • cossAc's 'D + 20' had not been achieved until
D+ 55. Because he had stripped the interior to defend the front, the
American break-through had then made much faster progress than
anticipated, so that in some places the planned and actual D+65
phase lines had coincided, notably along the Loire.
military thinking - and the cossac plans were highly orthodox in
theme - would presume for the Germans a prudent surrender of
threatened ground at that stage. But, inexplicably except in terms o
Hitler's mistaken correlation of Westorn with Soviet unlnerability to
shafts of 'operational' brilliance, the Germans had not retreated; had
the 'phase lines' of three weeks before.
indeed not merely stood their ground but driven hard back against
The Allies had made some strategic adiustment to take aapount of
the erratio shifte of this tima table manil LAte Dan away
from a full-scale drive into Brittany on Aroust and That had heen
Bradley's decision, and a good one, taken in that spirit of leaving
inessential parrisons to wither on the vins, which currently animated
MacArthur's strategy in the Pacific. But thereafter Bradley's imagi
nation had failed him: and so too had that nart of his conscience
which should have prompted him to make his intentions clear to
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
261
Montgomery. Apparently concerned that his soldiers might, if they
pressed northwards from Argentan towards Falaise, fall into a 'battle
between friends' against the advancing Canadians, he ordered Patton
on August i4th not to take advantage of the insane mistake which
Hier had made, and was persisting in, over Littich, but to head for
the 'D + go phase line on the Seine in a 'long hook' against Army
Group B's ultimate line of escape. He was to leave at Argentan only,
as much of his force as was necessary to make it a 'hard shoulder'
against enemy counter-attacks. This Nelsonian independence would
have been forgiven if right-headed. even though wrong-headed i+
might still have been forgiven if frankly explained and justified to
Montgomery. But Bradley chose not to explain. As a pretevt for his
omission, he cited the evictence of an inter Aid boundary north of
Argentan which he claimed i not proper to cross; but to himself he
argued if Montgomery wants help in closing the gap ... then let him
push on to the west.'
ask for it. Since there was little likelihood of him asking, we would
to hold a gap through which nineteen German divisions, weak in
Later he would claim that he doubted the ability of four divisions
men and material but strong with the desperation of the trapped.
Were struggling to escape. Events would subsequently prove that
doubt plausible. But when the doubt took him the Germans were
not flooding eastward, but waiting immobile inside the pocket for
some word which would release them from their agony.
Word did
not arrive until forty-eight easurs atter he had sent half Patton's
Army towards Charty-s and holes s. The consequence was to make
the closing of the artres and Orleans. To to astempt it was taken, a
race against time instead of the deliberate military manoeuvre it
might have been. Montgomery telephoned the
decision
on the
afternoon of August 17th.
Its timing was inspired by
Ultra
intercept of Kluge's last appeal to Hitler for permission to disengage
and it had therefore to presume that, by the time the Allies began to
move, the Germans would already
have started
eastward.
The
projected point of junction between the Americans and the British
army groups had thus to be set some miles beyond the Argen-
tan-Falaise line, to ensure a firm encirclement;
and the drive
towards it made, in Montgomery's words alameost and as quickly
as possible', even though the force available to plug the hole was
one-third smaller than it had been three days earlier.
Chambois. on
the more southerly of the two roads still in German use,
was the
