SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
interior, the very flexibility of its elements ensured their destruction.
Several of the pierheads broke from their moorings early on and
drifted about, damaging the sections of roadway which had been pu
in place. Then the Phoenixes, which had been sunk to the sea bed,
began to shift from their places - by the third day only eight of the
thirty two in the American harbour were still in place - and through
the breaches this movement produced the seas thundered in, rising
six feet high as the winds gusted to force eight on the Beaufort Scale.
The small craft at mooring or anchor could not stand the extra strain
and their cables parted, transforming them into haphazard battering
rams which charged about the harbour, damaging whatever they me
and holing themselves in the process. Most eventually were driven
onshore. some ending up above high-water mark. where they would
remain until the next spring tides brought the sea to refloat them.
Amid tha havor the navy and the shore parties did their best to keep
supplies moving.
But there was little that they could do.
Here and there [remembered an eye witness), the wonderful
little DUKWs [amphibious trucks) wallowed like hippo
potamuses between the coasters and the shore. They carried
mostly. In places, from time to time, a few
landing craft beached. Some broke their backs, crushed by the
surf as a dog crushes a bone ... Someone said, 'I reckon this
will be the most famous gale since the Armada'.... Any engine
failure meant certain disaster A destrover struck a mine and
drove on shore, and as night fell a big coaster grappled by two
tugs bore down on us.
your port bow is No 269 she contains 3,000 tons of ammuni-
tion'; but the tugs held her like terriers all night and she was
Unloading came almost to a halt. From 22,000 tons a day, before
June x8th, tonnages landed declined dura, obe dour days of the
storm to 12,000 tons altogether. When, rin June zand, the wind's
shriek dropped to a long drawn sigh en od in the west a rent in the
sky revealed a streak of blue', the reappearin sun shone on a scene
of apparently irreparable damage.
At the American Mulberry,
nearly a hundred small landing craft had been lost, leight
hundred had been sunk or driven ashore along the whole coast]
163
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
in addition to a large number of tank and larger landing craft.
Of twenty Rhino ferries only one remained operational. All
types of craft were strewn along the entire beach, partially
blocking every exit. Exit Three was complete disorder.
tentative check revealed that eighty craft, including 35 LCMs
(Landing Craft Mechanized], I1 LCTs, 9 Rhino Ferries, 3
LCis and various smaller craft were piled opposite the exit.
Nearby an L.CM straddled the deck of an LCT, a coastguard
cutter had cut into a nest of LCMs and wound up sideways on
the sand, and four LCTs were piled together deck to deck.
The Mulberry was a total loss,
with the exception of the
blockships, and even these had pulled out of line and half of
these had broken their backs. Many of the Phoenixes had
likewise broken, and one had piled on the cliffs at the western
end of the beach. One of the piers was completely ruined. The
other was bent in a great arc.
The Americans decided that the damage was indeed irreparable.
Many of their logistic experts had felt from the start that piers which
Moated up and down with she tide was a romantic rather than a
practical solution to the problems of shin-to-shore supply and had
been restrained from saying so publicly only by the august authority
of is advocate. Now that h so ple had made him a Canute, they saw
no point in persistine in methods which did not convince them, anc
their commanders
shipment of stores by beaching craft was to be preferred.
opinion was borne out by results. Landing directly on to the open
beaches, in the coming weeks the Americans were to achieve dail
delivery totals whit adad those mada chenich the elaborate
machinery of the artificial port. The British, whose port had not
been so badl damagad and uhn remained under the immediate
impeas of Churshill eat in the mattor made good the harm
the storm had wrought and continued to trans-ship on to the floating
roadwave and so into the waiting convare of tricks which fed the
fighting divisions. By Tune soth their deliveries reached the record
total of II,ood tons. but in the same week the Americans were
receivina 7.000 tone a dor at litab and 1a con tons at Omaha
respectively 124 and 115 per cent of planned capacity.
Thus the Allies had weathered what Hitler had always assured his
commanders would he that downfall a chell of fond ather and
