88
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
in the leg. He landed on his unwounded leg near St Martin-de-
Varreville, in a field lined with German machine-guns which sent
'streams of tracer in cross fire only a few feet over my head.
Others were dropping into the same field and they were being hit
and hurt' i3 After dosing himself with his own morphia, he dis-
regarded his wounds, crawled off to a hedge and set up his aid post.
Landing
Medicine could do nothing for those injured in the way parachutists
feared most - by landing with a malfunctioning or unfurled para-
chute. Malfunctions are always rare with a static-line parachute and,
because the Americans carried a reserve (which the British then did
mal, even more rarely fatal. There are no surviving reports of fatal
malfunctions from the 82nd or
Iost on June 6th (though one
gloriously unlucky private managed to open his reserve in his DC-3
as it approached the dropping zone, filling the cabin with billowing
silk and driving his stick companions to flights of blasphemy
unequalled even by the drill sergeants at Fort Benning). But a
considerable number reported being
dropped so low that their
parachute scarcely had time to deploy or of seeing others whose
canopies had not deployed at all. Burgett at St Martin-de-Varreville
saw a DC-3, coming in low and diagonally across the field where he
was struggling to unbuckle his harness diamarae a cial f vague,
shadowy figures... Their chutes were pulling out of the pack trays
and just starting to unfurl when they hit the ground. Seventeen men
hit the ground before their chutes had time to open. They made a
sound like large ripe pumpkins being thrown down to burst against
the ground '14
Some sticks fell to their deaths because their pilots gave them the
green light when they had already crossed the east coast of the
Cotentin, though at least one dropped close enough to the beach for
most men in it to struggle ashore and hit a track through minefields
and German strongpoints to dry ground - as hard a way of invading
Europe as anyone found that day. Many who landed on the Cotentin
drowned all the same, for the floods of the Douve and the Merderet,
undetected on the aerial photographs and invisible from the flight
path, stood two and three feet deep among the reeds and ripe hay of
the water meadows. A man making the regulation sideways roll on
landing finished beneath the surface and, if he could not free himself
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
89
on one lungful of air from his imprisoning harness, breathed water
and died. Private James Blue, an All American, just escaped that
fate A North Carolina farm-boy, he was strong as well as fit, had the
good luck to find hard ground under the flood and managed to
struggle to his feet. 'Before he found his balance, his parachute
dragged him over backwards and he went under again, weighed
down by his equipment, fumbling at the buckles of his harness had
he was half dead when he got clear, sick from the water he had
sallowed and trembling from the shock?
All along the valleys of the two little rivers, other parachutists
were fighting their own little battles with the unexpected enemy.
Corporal Francis Chapman, of C Battery, 377th Artillery, landed in
water about five feet deep. Managed to stand up after a bit of
swimming. Reached down, got my jump knife from the boot top and
slashed my harness, cutting right through my jump jacket in the
process. I managed to wade towards shallow water' 15 Father Francis
Sampson, Catholic chaplain of the sooth Infantry, landed in water
ovet his head, cut free his equipment and was then dragged by his
parachute to a shallow patch. He took ten minutes to free himself
from his harness, crawled back exhausted to where he had touched
first and, after five or six dives, recovered his Mass equipment. As
he did so, he saw first one and then two other aircraft crash in flames
near by, and offered prayers for the repose of the souls of the men
within. Hugh Pritchard, a radio operator with a set in his leg bag,
fell into water with 14, badio quipment securely fastened
body and a back injured by opening shock', lost his knife as he.
struggled to cut his way to the surface and was reprieved at his last
gasp when his parachute collapsed and ceased to drag him along the
bottom. "The terror that first night, he recalled in 1967, remains
so vivid even today that sometimes I wake up in a cold sweat and
nearly jump out of bed
Gathering
Other jumpers had fallen into trees, into hedges, on to the anti-glider
poles sown across the flatter fields and known to the
defenders as Rommel's asparagus, one - later to be made famous in
a scene in the film The Longer Day - on to the steeple of the church
at Ste Mère-Eglise. But whatever their landing place, those who had
avoided the water had reason to be grateful even though a great
