296
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
expectations: Parodi's, that he could repossess Paris for de Gaulle by
negotiation; Rol's,
that he could legitimize communist claims co
power by winning Paris in battle; and Eisenhower's, that he could
avoid a battle for Paris altogether. But the capture of Paris by Alied
troops would upset the Gaullists most of all. for their leader hadlong
set his heart on taking Paris hims host of alion of what was trigh, od
a solution
'worthy of France', demanded it; but so too did the
ambiguity of his position.
Now that de Gaulle has passed into history, it is difficult to recal
that there was a time when his co-equals in the Allied leadership of
the Second World War denied his claims to parity. The 'Free French
epic' has been subsumed within the story of a career which seemed
destined towards triumph. as inevitably during its unwinding as in
retrospect.
But as late as August 1944 even the Allied leaders with
whom he was most frequently and closely in touch were not yet
prepared to recognize him as leoitimate head of a loitimate French
government-in-exile. He had been, certainly, a minister of the last
government of the Third Republic. He was, certainly, a general -
very junior and of the lowest rank - in the French army. He had
been, certainly, the most senior French officer to reject the armistice
of June 1940
demonstrate that the powers of the Republic were inherent in his
from the outset.
But he had not been able to
Nor had he
person or that they had migrated with him from France to England.
yet
been able to show that the popular will had
transferred spiritual sovereignty from wherever it currently resided
perhaps still in Pétain's Etat Français - to his Provisional Govern-
ment. It did not of course help his cass that he overstated his clains.
overplayed his
hand, dealt in tantrums, sulks, insults, postures,
silences, Olympian detachment, political self-righteousness, moral
holier-than-thouery and, when it suited his book, double-dealing
and backstairs intrigue characteris suited his third Republic at is
most underhand. All that might have been overlooked (though so
genuine doubts
without it, might have been his claims) had there not been
about the legality o claims) kanization and his
1944 Marshal Pétain had made a state visit from Vichy to Paris and
personal acceptability to the French population.
As late as March
been ecstatically received. Currently, noisonly in Paris, but through
out the provinces of France there were thousands - soon to be
hundreds of thousands - of active resistants hous only of the left but
also of the right and centre on whom she is bel saulliste did not fit.
FREE FRANCE
297
*Général, nous voila, was not a cry which the crowd of liberated
Paris could be guaranteed to chorus.
Hence Parodi's
preoccupation
with installing
the
Gaullist
nominees in the buildings of the ministries, almost before they had
been vacated by the Germans or the Vichyists. Hence the urgency
with which de Gaulle had despatched his commissaires-généraux to
occupy the prefectoral offices of each départment as it was liberated.
Hence above all his search for some means to forestall American or
British troons in the formal militarv entru to the canital The initia
Allied intention to bypass Paris had suited his plans, for there was a
Free French formation in Normandy, the 2nd Armoured Division,
which Eisenhower had long promised should eventually have the
honour of entering Paris. The rising had awakened his old anxieties
of being cheated of his prize. The news of Choltitz's démarche to the
Allies - transmitted via Parodi's radio station - raised them to fever
pitch. He had written to Eisenhower on August 21st to threaten
politely that if the Supreme Commander would
not release the
division, he would take the responsibility of ordering it to Paris
himself. And when his emissary, Juin, brought him the news that
Eisenhower was not to be moved, he endorsed an independent
decision by Leclerc, the commander of the and Armoured, to start
its reconnaissance elements towards the capital without American
approval.
His frustration at his inability to determine events was heiahtener
by his lack of a fixed base of operations. He had, until August 2oth,
made but one brief visit to France, and that a day trip to address the
population of Baveux, where be was so little ernested that the firat
official representatives he met in the town, two policemen wheeling
bicycles, failed altogether to recognize him and had to inquire his
name. In the interim he had returned to Alriers. seat of the Nationa
Committee which only his co-exiles, the Czechs, Poles, Norwegians,
Yugoslavs and Belgiy his co-exiles, the Chechs, Pole
accept as the
Provisional Government, and had thence flown to Washington. He
Went at the invitation of Roosevelt, implicily to restington. He
Personal antagonism and official differences - the President had
always taken the General's 'egoism' in bad part, besides choosing to
regard the Gaullists merely as one of several groups with claims to
share in the postwar government - and although the meeting was a
partial success, he had come back to Algiers without the United
States' de jure recognition. He was now nevertheless determined to
