324
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
twelve days of fighting which the reduction of the city required, i s
estimated that 200,000 Russian soldiers became casualties.
The armies which breasted to a halt against the line of armisticin
the first week of May had, therefore, been stretched to the point of
exhaustion.
The American army, still growing in numbers from
divisions shipped directly from the training camps at home, had bet
been able to absorb the punishment of the last months.
British was already shrinking in size, as existing units were dissolved
to make good losses in others. The Canadians had used up their pool
of volunteers for overseas dutv. The French, though not short of
neither the money
nor means to equip them.
Russians, with 500 divisions in the field, appeared at the peak of
their strength; but their formations were bulked out with the old,
the very young and the unfit, conscripted as a desperate measure to
replace the seven million servicemen who had been killed since 194.
Even amid the devastation and despair to which a year of fighing
and three years of bombing had reduced the land they were now to
occupy, the armies were therefore content to enjoy the peace they
had won. The prospect of transfer to one Partic and another ordeal
by fire was soon dissipated. Though eighty Russian divisions were
railed eastward across the Soviet Union in mid-summer for the
autumn offensive into Manchuria, no British or American division
which had fought in north-west Europe was engaged against the
Japanese. The vast majority of Allied servicemen were demobilized
directly from Germany to their homes. And the demobilization was
rapid. Between August 1945 and June 1946 the United States Army
was reduced from 8 million to r'5 million men, the British army by
June 1947 from 3 million to 400,500. The Russian army, 12 million
strong at the end of the war, numbered 3 million by the end of 194);
The Polish army-in-exile had disappeared altogether; but 5,000 of
the 228,000 Poles abroad in 1945 chose to return home to live under
communist government. Only the French, with wars still to fight in
a vain effort to retain its pre-war empire, chose to expand rather than
reduce its army. Leaving three divisions of the Army of the Rhine
and Danube to occupy its zone in Baden and Württemberg, it
shipped all its regular soldiers eastwards for the start of the long
campaign in Indo-China. Its neighbour, the British Army of the
Rhine, counted only twa divisione after toad the Amate fore
while only one, the ist Infantry. Even the Group of Soviet Forces
Germany, giant among the Allied armies of occupation, had its
EPILOGUE
325
strength fixed at a mere twenty divisions. For the first year of
occupation the conquering armies were
outnumbered by their
captives, the 8 million former members of the Wehrmacht who, in
long columns, marched out from their makeshift detention camps
each day to pick over the rubble of their homeland.
In Normandy, where the first great breach in the defences of
Hitler's fortress had been won, the rubble was being cleared from
he towns and villages over which the armies had battled.
hundred thousand buildings in the province had been destroved.
Some places had been devastated as severely as those in the Zone of
the Armies in 1914-18. In the village of Vesty, over which Patton's
army had rumbled in August, 6ss out of too inhabitants had lost
their homes, at Saintenay 151 out of zar housee had been destroved.
Lisieux, Coutances, St Lô, Falaise, Argentan, were in ruins.
was a mountain of broken stones: A.Oo0 of it ee and huadings had
been bombed or shelled flat. And it was not as if Normandy were the
only zone of devastation in France, which had sally suffered
greater damage during the Second than the First
hundred thousand buildings had been
World War. Nine
damaged or
ruined in
1974-18, twice that number in 1939-44:
And while the French
economy had boomed in the first conflict. it had been systematicall
robbed under German occupation.
The tragi-comedy of French politics in the postwar years pro-
mised badly for the work of reconstruction. But while the parties
bargained and sauabbled in the capital, the formidable machine o
French bureaucracy harnessed American aid and native energy to a
labour of unsung but spectacular achievement.
The devastation of
the First World but spectacula gold until 1928. By 1957 mostoe
ruined Normandy had been rebuilt. Le Havre by 1950 was
again a functioning port with a magnificent transatlantic terminal.
By 1954 Caen was reporn, the capstone to its rebirth the reconstruc
tion of the spirest the church of St Pierre toppled in the great ais
raid of July 7th, 1944. The Mount of William the
Conqueror's
Castle, cleared of the jumble of buildings which had disguised its
outline for centuries, rose above broad tree-lined boulevards in a
new town plan which brought urbanists from around the world to
admire its distinction and humanity.
There was another work of reparation to be done; the gathering in
of the bodies of the soldiers who had died in Normandy's fields and
Orchards. Buried where they had fallen in the ten weeks of fighting,
