6
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
As a result of this diet of print, I can still recite the characteristics
of most models of British equipment from the earlier half of the war
with as little effort as the two-times table - Supermarine Spitfire
Mark II, top speed 265 miles per hour, service ceiling 35.000 feet.
B-inchent eight - 303 Browning machine-guns, HMS Norfolk, six
8-inch guns, 10,000 tons displacement, 33 knots - and instan
taneously recreate their silhouettes without the need to shut my eyes.
It is only the earlier models with which I have this trick; later and
improved types, like the Typhoon fighter-bomber or the Dido-class
cruisers, interested me but failed to imprint themselves in the same
way. Perhaps this was because they lacked the very striking grace of
the designs conceived in the interwar years, when aesthetics could
stake a claim beside mere lethality, but chiefly because. I conclude
consciousness
on reflection, of the fixed conviction I had formed as soon as mi
grasped the issues - and which
therefore
improvements in equipment quite irrelevant - that Britain was going
to win the war. But that formula does not convey the strength of m
conviction strongly enough. It was rather the case that I knew. with
an unshakeable moral and intellectual certainty that Britain could
So powerful was this sensation that my feelings toward
Hitler, a figure whom the newspapers rarely let one forget and who
was represented by every medium of public information as a mixture
of monster and leper, were those of protective indulgence Ifanlu.!
used to muse, I could get him to muself for a moment or two, tall
things over, put the facts straight. anen his eves he'd have to se
that there was no point in going on that it would he better to chuck
the towel in at once and ask to be let off. The sense of silent and
unconsummated communion with the Führer had the parallel effect
of compromising and devaluing for me all official efforts to put heart
into an anxious and
subjected during the war years.
uncertain people to which the British were
aroused by a National Savings Committee poster, displayed month
after month
My disa phich was particularly
over the ping-pong table in one of my prep-school
day-rooms, which showed an exangeratedly agorescive lion snarling
into mid-distance over the cool ca it
tastelessly overstated as an expression of the national spirit,
I was certain the artist. had he cal made the richt inquirie
would have found as sublimely confident of ultimate victory as my
My conviction had its roots, I now diagnose,
in
two circum
stances. The first was my sense of place at the centre of an enormous
empire. Not only did our school atlas show its
(Couldn't Hitler see
...?') and not only did we
Australians, Canadians, New Zealanders, South Africans, Indians
were back here, as they had been in the First World War, to take
their place at our side, but, in my class of eight-year-olds, the life of
the empire was actually an immanent presence. One classmate's
father was the squadron leader who held the record for long-distance
flying between Britain and Australia, another's a district commis-
sioner in West Africa, while the boy with whom I shared a desk was
the son of a soldier commanding a brigade on the North-West
Frontier of India, standing where
Pakistan, a country not yet
invented, and Afghanistan, then totally disregarded, now meet. By
not one flicker of prescience was it suggested to us that within five
years India, the jewel in the crown of empire, would have fallen
away and within twenty all but the smallest seed pearls would have
followed. The very scale of the empire was a guarantee to us of its
unshakeable permanence.
That quality determined the second reason for my confidence in
the war's outcome. It was clearly the reassuring stability and solidity
of Britain's imperial power which had brought all those other people,
unlucky enough to live outside its boundaries, to join us also. If you
counted them all in,
Chinese and Russians and Norwegian and
Dutch and Free French and the bits of empire (not, of course, to be
spoken of in the same breath as our own) which
you found that almost everyone
('Couldn't he see ...?')
Moreover, these co-belligerents were not propaganda figments,
like the overdone lion in the day-room.
Their representatives,
wearing British uniform differentiated by cloth shoulder patches
which read 'Netherlands' or 'Free French' or 'Belgium', were here in
Britain among us and could occasionally be seen walking the streets
of the county town. Religion assured that I should meet a dis-
proportionate number in the flesh, for ours was a Catholic family
and the local church, a very solitary beacon of the faith in the deeply
was a natural haven
for uprooted and lonely
fellow-believers. There were some oddities and mistakes among the
acquaintance Sundays brought us. My father formed an inexplicable
affection for a community of conscientious objectors, bearded men
and sandalled women otherwise largely clad in untanned sheepskins,
