Ібо
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
he had decreed his men must stand, and by nightfall of the same day
it had advanced as far as Valognes, last major town on the COotentin
before Cherbourg itself. Next day all three divisions were lined up
outside the fortifications of the city. All that Hitler's 'stand fast"
order had achieved was to ensure the loss of half the soldiers needed
to man them - though, so broken were the four German divisions
on the
Cherbourg Landfront that their commander, von
Schlieben, did not in fact know how strong or weak each was.
But the fight for the city and port was to prove bitter none the less,
Strongly fortified in the nineteenth century. the defences had been
thickened by the
who, anticipating a Singapore,
studded the approaches with concrete pillboxes.
Collins paused for
two days to bring up his artillery and prepare the assault. When he
struck on June zand, the initial blow cracked the outworks on the
three ridges which controlled access to the port; but then the
Americans found themselves in the pillbox zone and were able to ge
forward only by fighting with bazookas and demolition charges from
point to point. The Germans impressed the useless mouths' of the
garrison - sailors, clerks and Todt Organization construction work
ers - into the ranks and von Schlichen freely distributed Iron
which he had parachuted into the perimeter.
means he delaved the Americans' entry into the centre of the cit
until June z6th, but on that day the resistance he had organized fell
apart. That evening, having just signallerato Rommel that further
sacrifice cannot alter anything', and received the reply: 'You will
continue to fight until the last cartridge in accordance with the
orders of the Führer', he surrendered to the commander of the
he had taken shelter.
American oth Infantry Division at the mouth of the tunnel in which
The Great Storm
The utter destruction of the port and its unloading facilities,
achieved before the capitulation pod revealed to the Americans over
the next few days, spared Hitler the remaldiate consequences of its
loss, but it did not assuage his anger. He had radioed to von
Schlieben on June zst that he expected him to fight this battle as
epics of the Napoleonic
Gneisenau once fought in the detence of Colberg - one of Prussia's
wars. News of its imminent surrender
provoked him into ordering courts martial for all those who had
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
contributed by fault or omission to the disaster, and the threat drove
the commander of Seventh Army, General Dollmann, in whose
sector it lay, to take poison on June 28th. The true nature of the
blow was psychological. Hitler and all his commanders, had per-
suaded themselves that while the Allies, with their now considerable
experience of amphibious operations, could not perhaps be kept
trom setting foot on the open beaches of France, they would not be
able to develop any major offensive out of so precarious a foothold
and so would eventually be defeated. The battle for Cherbourg had
been a major offensive and it had succeeded, even though during its
course the Allies had suffered exactly that mishap in which Hitler
had always trusted to undo their reckless amphibious enterprise, a
summer storm on the southern shore of the Channel coast.
On June 17th Admiral Ramsay, commanding the naval element of
the invasion force, felt encouraged enough by the prevailing spell of
good weather to order that the last and most fragile component for
the great artificial harbour works under construction at St Laurent
and Aromanches should begin their journey across the Channel.
This was the floating roadway. which would eventually provide
seven miles of flexible whard within the waters of the Mulberry
harbours. A few lengths had already been installed. On June igth
sections amounting to two and a half miles were towed out
southern English ports. Within sight of the Norman coast, they were
assailed by onshore winds which quickly whipped up heavy seas and
all foundered. That by no means completed the damage to the
Mulberries. Each, the product of two years of imaginative design
and costly preparation, consisted of five main components.
were breakwaters:
Bombardons, a chain of inflated rubber bags
intended to absorb thembardons, ashore waves; Phoenixes, hollow
concrete barges the size of a five-storey building; and Gooseberries,
obsolete merchant and warships, sunk to the sea bed when correctly
positioned. Gooseberries and Phoenixes formed the walls of the two
Mulberries proper. Through the gaps between them landing ships
entered to discharge their cargoes at Lobnitz pierheads (the realiza-
tion of Churchill's idea of piers which float up and down with the
tide' which had given the original impetus to the whole conception):
From the pierheads, the floating roadways, or Whales, led onshore.
The storm soon tossed the Bombardons from their moorings, and
all twenty-four at the American harbour were driven on shore. When
the sege found this way through the harbour entrances into the
