72
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
The parachutists were to start their rendezvous with destiny - the
famous phrase was chosen by the historians of the to 1st as the title of
the divisional chronicle and is entirely characteristic of the romante
and rhetorical spirit
of the parachute pioneers - from
scattered billets in the Midlands and the south of England, the 82nd
from the flatlands of Lincolnshire and the rotst from Devon,
Hampshire and Berkshire, where its camps abutted dangerousl
close on the cantonments of the British 6th. Fighting for the
company of the local girls had been a popular inter-Allied weekend
activity in the small towns of the Berkshire Downs during the spring
of 1944. But so too had been beer-drinking in the tiny villages, with
names which the veterans would recall with nlencurable disbelie
thirty years later - Oebourne St Georoe Perwick St James Lower
Slaughter, Middle Wallop - and coriously enlarging friendships
with local families, from which the survivors would bear back across
the Atlantic a small army of GI brides when the war was over.
On May 3oth, however, all intercourse with the outside world had
abruptly ceased for the parachutists.
encampments of the British army which litter Salichury plain, the
Victorian red-brick cantonmente of Rulford the Firet World War
hutments of Tidworth, named indifferently after the victories of the
Peninsula and the more doubtful triumphs of the Crimea, Talavera
Albuera, Inkerman, Balaclava, were confined to quarters.
dispersed in civilian lodgings were formed up, packed into buses and
driven away to hastilv pitched tented staging arane when they were
to be quarantined until take-off A lieutenant of the toret canalled his
unconvincing attempt to persuade the villagers of Aldbourne that it
was departure merely for anothet rehearsal The English knew we
were pushing off
did."
The
parachutists, too,
it got me to see them cry and take it as they
passed. They were volunteers. bous in the main from thanracide
of the tracks in S.L.A.
were affected, but the mood soon
Marshall's recollection, who joined for
adventure, had survived the nine-mile rune "Cimme trentu fire
(riships) and endless Hubba-hubbas (hurry, hurry in what the
drill instructors inexplicably believed to be Hebrey) of airborne
training, had jumped in practice by day and night a dozen times and
were now ready to try the real thing. Pent up in their temporary
stockades, they gorged on a high-protein diet and submerged their
frustration in endless, high-stake gambling.
For the commanders and the junior leaders there was more serious
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
73
preparation to be done, the fruits of which they must eventually pass
on to their men. On maps, air photographs and models constructed
trom them, they studied the terrain of the Cotentin peninsula, the
locations of the German units garrisoning it, as far as they were
known, and the objectives the parachute divisions must seize.
lay within a kidney-shaped area about ten miles long on its east-
west axis and five from north to south. It was bounded on the east
by the sea and on the south-east and south-west by the course of the
lite river Douve. On the west and in the north the boundary of the
airborne area ran through open country, flat and unwooded near
the Douve and its tributary, the Merderet, then closely hedge-
rowed on the slopes which rose gradually into the interior of the
COotentin. The river valleys had been inundated by the Germans
and, because they were shallow, were flooded for a wide distance - as
much as a mile in places. The floods in the valley of the Merderet.
were a particularly irritating obstacle, because that little waterway
divided the western third of the airborne area from the main landing
and dropping zones to the east, and the bridges across it, which
would be called the Causeway', were therefore an "important initial
objective'.
Another important initial objective was the little town of Ste
Mère-Eglise, through which ran Route nationale 13, the main road
from Cherbourg to Bayeux in the British sector, and the only
first-elas road available to the Germans in the Cotentin as an axis of
reinforcement. All the other objectives lay on the perimeter. First
and most important were the four exits from the beach, codenamed
Utah, which the American 4th Division would need when they came
to move inland from their landing-places. Because the coast was low.
and marshy, these exits on to dry ground were each about a mile
from high-water mark, at Pouppeville
Audouville-la-Hubert (3) and St Martin-de-Varreville (4).
Pouppeville, along the estuary of the Douve, the objectives were a
series of locks across the river, which the parachutists were to seize
and hold so that they might be used for moving between the Utah
beachhead and the Omaha beachhead to the east when the time came
to join the two. The objectives along the course of the Douve were
also a series of crossing places, some of which were to be destroyed to
deny their use to the Germans, the others to be held either for the
immediate use of the parachutists or for a break-out later by the
beach-landed infantry and armour. The most important of these
