1110
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
occupants into the open,
where they were shot down.
A new
reinforcement to Summers's group now arrived with a bazooka and,
deciding that the walls of the last strongpoint were too stout to be
penetrated by its rockets, fired at the roof instead. After seven shots
flames began to lick through the rafters and torn tilework and to
spread downwards. As the upper storey took fire the Germans in the
lower storey continued to maintain a steady fusillade from loopholes
in the walls. But as the heat rose their fire slackened and the
collapse of the floor above drove them out to the waiting muzzles of
the parachutists. Fifty died in the open. The survivors scattered into
the hedges, but their escape was short-lived. When the Americans
moved forward with levelled guns, thirty-one emerged with raised
hands to offer their surrender. Those who had run earlier may have
made the same gesture. But now that resistance was at an end, the
mood of this terrible little battlefield
changed.
attackers,
suddenly numerous as the noise of fighting died away, lowered their
weapons and hustled the prisoners to the rear. WXYZ thus passed to
the invaders, and with it the last obstacle to free movement between
Exit 4 and the landing zones. The ist/soand had accomplished its
Summers, bruised and bleeding all over his body from sharp and
sudden encounters with door frames and house corners - a charac-
teristic minor wound pattern of the street-fighting soldier - collapsed
exhausted by his five hours of combat. As he lit a cigarette, a witness
of his extraordinary exploits asked him, 'How do you feel?'
"Not very good', he answered. 'It was all kind of crazy. 21
6 The 3rd/ 50Ist at Pouppeville
While Sergeant Summers had been fighting his almost single-
handed battle on the road to Exit 4,
another group with an
embarrassment of leaders had been assembling on the route to Exit
Parachute Infantry,
1, three miles to the south of WXYZ. The grd Battalion, 5o1st
commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Julian
Ewell, was a reserve battalion whose initial mission was to protect
the drop of the headquarters party of the tolst Airborne Division.
The assembly point was on Drop Zone C, near Hiesville, east of the
road joining Carentan and Ste Mère-Eglise, from which it was to be
moved later to reinforce other battalions which signalled that they
needed help in taking their objectives.
11 The aftermath of the Dieppe raid: damaged landing-craft and
Canadian dead, August 19th, 1942
12 'Romme's asparagus': German engineers scattering for cover
under Allied reconnaissance aircraft before D-Day
