298
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
establish himself in France, but, since he needed Allied permision
to visit the country, had been forced into the humiliating pretence i
expressing a wish to inspect the liberated areas in order to extracti.
It was therefore merely en mission that he had eventually arived at
Cherbourg on August zoth and he had peripateted via Rennes and
Laval before arriving, on August 22nd, at the first place where he
might establish an official presence, the country seat of French
presidents at Rambouillet. While en route he still had no assurance
that he could proceed from there to Paris, that Lecler' recon
naissance
column
would not have been called back by the
Americans, that the Allies would not have preceded it. that the FTP
would not have won the battle for the city or that Choltitz would no
have reduced it to the field of ruins which the Führer wanted.
But now a stroke of misinformation suddenly directed events, and
in his favour. A number of missions, besides Nordling's had made
their way through the German lines around Paris on August 22nd.
One. led by the chief of staff of the FFI in Paris, Roger Gallois, had
succeeded in reaching Patton's headquarters. where Gallois ha
managed to convince Bradley's chief intrigence officer that the
truce was still in force (which it was not), that it was due to expire
the following dav fit had already broken down), that Chainita would
then probably crush the insurrection (unlikely) but that he would
withdraw at the approach of regular troops (not his intention). 'To
avoid bloodshed, it was essential that Allied soldiers enter the city
promptly at noon, August said These mistepresentations switaly
reached Eisenhower, who had already been shaken in his decision to
bypass Paris by de Gaulle's threat to take Leclerc's division under
direct command. Eisenhower was rare among Allied leaders in
holding de Gaulle in high regard. He had am Algiers in 1943, given
the assurance to de Caulle in person that a French force would
liberate Paris, and had arranged that Leclerc's division should be
transferred from North Africa to England before the invasion for
that purpose. He had been impressed land be combativeness of the
FFI units which had sorung to life at the annenach of the Allied
armies and was grateful for the part they had played in mopping up
the remnants of German resistance the had detected how strongly
devoted many of them were to de Gaulle and how ready they were to
accept him as the national leader. The FFI's appeal, via Gallois,
gave him a neat excuse to repay the FFI for its help and further the
cause of a man he admired.
Because it was made on military, not
FREE FRANCE
299
political grounds, and by an integral element of his command, which
the FFI theoretically was, he might represent a change of mind to
Washington and London as a purely operational decision.
Change
his mind he now did accordingly, so that, late in the afternoon of
August z2nd, Leclerc could hasten from a suddenly convened
meeting with Bradley to shout to his operations officer, 'Gribius
mouvement immédiat sur Paris!' For him it was the culmination of a
four-year pilgrimage from humiliation to glory.
La Division Leclerc
At the heart of de Gaull's anomalous position among the exiled
leaders lay the fact - to be camouflaged but never successfully
hidden - that so tew Frenchmen had been willing to declare at the
outset for Free France. It did not really matter that he was not a
head of state or government: the exiled cabinets of Belgium, Norway
and Denmark were accorded full recognition as allies even though
their kings remained within the occupied homeland.
It did not
matter that he brought with him not a scrap of territory, national or
colonial, where his authority ran: Poland and Czechoslovakia were
both totally occupied and indeed dismembered, vet Sikorski and
Benes were recognized as sovereign national leaders. It did not even
matter that Pétain was the undoubted constitutional successor of
President Lebrun: given that he had abolished the Third Republic
by fiat, Britain - and later the United States - had good grounds for
denouncing the legitimacy of the Etat Français had they so chosen.
But numbers - of ships, of soldiers and, distressing though it was to
admit it, of hearts - were with the Marshal and, unless and until de
Gaulle could begin to match them, Allied interests lay in keeping a
back door to Vichy open.
Such numbers he could not match. The great majority of French
servicemen marooned in England after the armistice of June opted to
go home, and were allowed to do so; at the end of 1940 only 7,000
soldiers and sailors had donned the Cross of Lorraine and of those
the largest contingent was a demi-brigade of the Foreign Legion, by
definition not French in nationality. And even fewer Frenchmen,
however strong their anti-German feeling, had shown themselves
ready to take the yet more extreme step of quitting France to join de
Gaulle in England. Some corners of the empire - the New Hebrides,
the French Congo, Equatorial Africa - were declared to be Free
