176
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
number that, could the British high command have counted them, it
would have ordered a headlong assault to brush them aside. But
the sniper fire all over the area, greatly intensified by wildly
aimed retaliation in all directions, was not recognized for what
it was; not snipers at all, not a thin screen out in front of the
main German
battle line; those scattered shots, with the
occasional burst of machine-gun fire, were the main German
position - all that was left of 12th SS Panzer Division on that
front, a handful of determined teenagers, toughly arrogant at
the havoc they were causing.
Their success was an example of a curious but familiar military
paradox: that, where confusion reigns. small numbers often achieve
more than great.
Two factors had contributed most to the confusion
which undoubtedly reigned on the first dav of Ensom - the densit
of the countryside into which the British had driven their corrido
and the weight of men and armour they had thrust into it, against
unreduced defences and down unreconnoitred routes. By the end of
the day, many of the British units were simply getting in each other's
way and either doing nothing at all or else jobs which were not theirs
- the artillery commander of the division had been gravely wounded
while manning an anti-tank oun he had happened on in the course of
a visit to one of hie forward observation officers (a vinit ho chould not
have had to make). The armour in Darticular was largely serving no
purpose at all; 'what little space in as iticun tie lanes seemed to be
filled by our own tanks. closed down and deaf to all annasle None
who was in Cheux that morning is likely to forgat sinanfusion
Little wondos that the Hitler Youth merely fine date to brown
had sown such havoc.
Across the River
hit upon the correct antidote to the sifused resistance the Germans
wate offering its advance. It decided to extriests one of the reserve
battalions from the ruck behind Cheux. pass it through the village
and race it southwards towards the Odon with orders not to reckon
for the safety of its flanks The weak were to fioht the weak At
Snd Sum, on June 27th the commanding of to figh the and Argyll
and Sutherland Highlanders was called to headquarters for orders.
177
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
At 6.30, as the Highlanders were warming themselves with breakfast
after a miserable night in the open, he returned to start them on the
road. Their objective was the bridge over the Odon at Tourmauville
two and a half miles to the south.
The marching columns were
assembled with a shout and hurried off towards Cheux.
The
battalion vehicles - trucks carrying ammunition and light armoured
carriers towing anti-tank guns - joined their tail. By the time these
had literally fought their way' through Cheux, where shut-down
lanks were still sitting sluglike in the ruins of the main street, the
infantry were crossing the designated start line. Fortunately, they
got on so fast in the early stages that the anti-tank guns were not
needed at the point of the advance. And when tanks were eventually
met at Mondrainville, halfway to the Odon, the guns had been
manhandled through Cheux and were up with the leaders. A quick
shot destroyed one of the two
German tanks - identified, as all
enemy tanks were by inexperienced infantry, as Tigers,
which they
were certainly not - and the other drew off. The Argylls were now
less than two miles from the Tourmauville bridge, and they set off
for it at the run. Short of the village they burst out of orchards and
hedgerows into open cornfields across which three machine-guns
opened fire at them, but their dash and training-school tactics
carried them across the danger zone with miraculously few casual-
ties'. Within a few minutes they had crashed across the bridge anc
posted pickets in a little 2o0-yard circle on the far bank.
The tiny foothold was large enough. Word of its winning brought
the motor battalion of she ich Armoured Division pressing down
the road from Cheux, and close behind it the division's tanks.
7 p.m. the bridgehead was secure and the road opened for a new
advance across the bridge towards the Orne and open country.
Argyll spent the night on the alert, though they had the reassurance
of tanks between them and the threat of a German counter-attack.
To their rear, however, the Tourmauville- Cheux road was still
under small-arms fire, from Hitler Youth who refused to give up the
fight, and the divisional command still could not co-ordinate its
units effectively enough to silence them. Rather than risk a repeti-
tion of the first day of the offensive, therefore, it decided next day
not to feed more units down the corridor, but to direct the Argylls
westward from their bridgehead at Tourmauville to the next bridge
at Gavrus.
That manoeuvre
would draw a base-line
across the
bottom of the corridor, the interior of which could then be cleaned
