150
SIX
ARMIES IN NORMANDY
which he had begun his Walkurenritt six hours before, Meyer tuned
his motorcycle as the glimmer of dawn showed towards Bayeux and
rode away from the burning ruins.
He expected to be back. But Rommel decided later that day, June
9th, that he would defer the counter-offensive until more of the
marching divisions from the interior had arrived. Its planing,
meanwhile was consigned to Geyr von Schweppenberg.
officer's headquarters had hitherto plaved the role of government-
in-waiting for, though specifically organized to prepare and control
large armoured operations, the necessary troops had been withheld
from it until the appearance of the Allies on the beaches. and indeed
for some time after that. Now called to life. it had installed itself with
some amplitude at Thury-Harcourt, twelve miles south of Caen
where Geyr and his officers lived in the château of la Caine and the
clerks and signallere worked under canvas in the archard outside
Communication was provided via four large radio trucks. As soon as
they had come on the air. however their transmisciona had been
picked up by the
British monitoring service and the intercepts
subjected to Traffic Analvsis. Traffic A nalusis is a technique which
helos to identify where and from whom transmissione emanate
rather than what the encoded messages contain a that information
was extracted by the Ultra service at Bletchley.
Ultra was to plav a maior and. towarde the and perhane a decisive
part in the winning of the Battle of Normandv. The reason is simpl
explained The Cormans Hike all other maine militner ensuers, had
in the years before the Second World War sought to simplify their
need to tranemit securely enormous quantid be dia macendes
by encoding them mechanically. The machine they had chosen for
resembled a typewriter.
commercial model, called Enigma.
Externally it
There is indeed a famous photograph of
Guderian in his command car with his Enigma operator at his elbow
whom the uninstructed for
electrical circuits of the
years took to be his typist.
machine,
when complexified for military
purposes, enabled the typist to encode a complex in any one of one
hundred and fifty million million million possible ways, any particu-
lar setting being changed every twenty-tops hours Not unnaturally,
the Germans believed that me sweet -enchdur were unbreakable,
were, however,
mistaken.
The Poles, before 1939,
succeeded in reconstructing an Enigma machine a model of which
they handed over to the British. The British then assembled a team
151
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
of mathematicians, cryptographers and engineers at Bletchley Park,
outside London, who by 1940 had designed additional electro-
mechanical devices which could sort their way through the possible
variations of an encoded text - given sufficient time. Fortunately for
the team, certain careless practices adopted by some German
senders, mostly Luftwaffe, allowed the electro-mechanical devices,
called bombes', a head start, thereby greatly shortening the delay
between reception and decoding of enemy messages. Intelligence of
the greatest strategic value thus became available in quantity; and as
soon as the delay was reduced - as it was - to a matter of hours, many
of the messages became of superlative tactical value. Measures to
forestall an enemy attack, for example, might be taken before it was
launched (as they were against the German Mortain operation in
August 1944). In such circumstances it became of overriding
importance to conceal from the enemy the insecurity of his com-
munications, lest catching a small fish now lose one the whole shoal
tor the future. The choice of what Enigma intelligence (called Ultra)
was to be used was therefore often of exquisite difficulty; and the
most remarkable element in the Ultra story is that the choices so
made never did in fact betray the source.
Traffic Analysis, at which the Germans themselves were expert,
threatens no such danger, if all that is required is immediate
disruption of the enemy's command structure.
mandy battle nothing was desired more; the ancient convention by
which commanders granted each other tacit immunity had in any
case been interred much earlier in the Second World War. So, on the
evening of June toth, rocket-firing Typhoons of 83 Group,
Ait Force, and Mitchell medium bombers of 2 Group suddenly
appeared over la Caine and subjected it to devastating attack. Geyr
and one of his officers escaped with wounds. His chief of staff, von
Davans, and twelve see peacers were killed, the equipment of the
headquarters destroyed, and the survivors transferred to Paris. For
the time being, Panze, Group West ceased to function altogether
and command of the armoured divisions was temporarily entrusted
to the chief of I SS Panzer Corps, who decided that he did not share
Gey's beliet in the feasibility of a major armoured counter-stroke.
As it happened, such a counter-stroke would have run head on
into a British armoured a cosive coming the other way. Montgom-
ery now had an armoured division ashore, the ith, well known to
Rommel and Roverlein from Wastern Desert Jave aa tha Caringmans
