Map 8 The liberation of Paris, August 25th, 1944
Miles
Kilometres
Gare
Bois de
Boulogne
So codd
voli
PARIS CITY LIMIT
Bois de Vincen
Porte d'Italie
KIRT
Ile de la Cité
Notre-Dame Cathedral
flotel de Ville
Préfecture de Police
Place du Châtelet
Place des Pyramides
Hôtel Meurice
Théâtre de l'Opéra
Hôtel Crillon
Ministère de la Marine
Palais de l'Elysée
Place de la Concorde
Palais Bourbon
Hôtel Matignon
Quai d'Orsay
Arc de Triomphe
Eiffel Tower
Poloic du Luxemboun
Pont d'Austerlitz
Gare de Vincennes
FREE FRANCE
285
which the pilots of Allied light aircraft, surveying the devastation,
wrinkled their noses at 1,500 feet.
But, amid this utter wreck of hopes and effort, the improvisational
genius of the German army did not desert it. The high command
had paid the price of Hitler's strategy as heavily as the men they led.
Three corps commanders and twenty divisional commanders had
been killed, wounded or captured, and there were the suicides and
dismissals of the Army and Army Group commanders to add into
the score as well. But the lower staffs continued to function, as they
would do with unshaken resolve to the very last months of the war
(in the Battle of Lake Balaton in Hungary in March 1945 the tank
recovery company of the ist Cavalry Division would be commanded
with complete efficiency by the senior medical officer, co-opted by
the divisional commander because he was his last pre-war regular).
Their current task was to convey the rampante of Chanth and Fifth
Panzer Armies across the Seine, without the use of permanent
bridges and under the Argus eye of the Allied air forces which had
destroyed them. They tackled it with the skill learnt in a hundred
24th they
retreats across Africa, Italy and Russia. Between August zoth and
brought into
operation,
by
later
twenty-three ferries between les Andelys,
British
calculation,
south of Rouen,
and
Ouillebeuf, on the estuary. and a pontoon bridoe at Pont de l'Arche
During the day the terries and pontoons were hidden under the
flying from Allied airfields - the boats were swung out into the
river bank; after dark - three days of bad weather interrupted night
waterway and men and equipment flung across to the far bank.
The return of davlight caught many vehicles massed on the wrong
side waiting for a crossing, and these the Allied air forces destroyed
in thousands. But, at the end of five nights of ferrying,
soldiers and, more
300,000
north bank.
remarkable, 25.000 vehicles had reached the
Their route lay onward towards the line of the Somme, along
which Hitler yet hoped to construct a second line of resistance. But
there were still German formations south of the Seine whose orders
were to remain. Three of these, 33ist, 344th and 17th Luftwaffe,
had escaped encirclement in the pocket and had the mission
defending the 'Paris-Orleans gap' between the Loire and the Seine.
Far too weak to form line against the spearheads of Patton's army,
they would shortly be brushed aside by his armoured divisions and
fall to pieces. By August 21st the American armoured divisions were
