96
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
before detaching a platoon of forty-one parachutists under Lieuten-
ant Turner Turnbull to organize a skeleton defence of Neuville.
Turnbull was half-Cherokee, known as 'Chief" in the battalion and
much respected for his soldierly qualities, which he was about to
demonstrate in their plenitude. Leading his men at a jog-trot, he
reached Neuville within a few minutes. It was little more than a
hamlet and its east-west axis short enough for the platoon to hold its
whole length. On the west was an orchard bounded by open fields,
on the right one of the high-banked hedges of the Norman field-
system probably already old when William left to conquer England,
which met the road at right angles. He put a squad of ten men with a
machine-gun he had retrieved next to the orchard, its flank resting
on a large manure heap, the rest of the platoon behind the hedgerow,
a team of three with a bazooka - the 2-36-inch rocket-launcher with
which, with luck and a great deal of bravery, an infantryman might
disable a tank - in a building on Route nationale 13 and settled to
await events. He did not have long to wait.
After about twenty minutes the men behind the hedge saw a long
column of German infantry approaching down the road. They were
a company of the 1058th Grenadier Regiment, g1st Division, about
10o strong, and they were singing - another of those bizarre flights
of insouciance displayed by the defenders throughout the morning;
The squad in the orchard, who were a little farther forward, had
observed them also but were waiting for the range to close. When the
head of the column was about level. the machine-runner anened fire
Germans,
ditches. Some of them managed to return fire, for the lieutenant in
charge of the squad, Isaac Michaelman, was wounded almost
simultaneously.
But at the same moment Colonel Vandevoort re-appeared. He had
now found a jeep, landed in one of the gliders which had flown in the
division's heavy equipment three hours after the drop. It was towing
a 57mm anti-tank gun, extricated with some difficulty from the
landing zone. He heard the exchange of fire, saw the German
column disappearing into the undergrowth and asked the bazooka
team at the road block what was happening. They assured him that
the Germans were prisoners, being escorted to the perimeter by
some parachutists, and Vandevoort briefly persuaded himself he had
seen some American orange recognition panels among the field grey.
Moreover, a mysterious Frenchman on a bicycle, who quickly made
97
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
inst care confirmed the story. But the swelling volume of fire
aped it. Turnbull's men behind the hedgerow had spotted
Germans leaving the line of the road and moving into the fields to
urn their flank. They sprang into action,
bringing to bear two
30m machine-guns, two Browning Automatic Rifles and fifteen
ils. Heartened by the sound, but unable to see for himself what
ts happening, Vandevoort sent a runner to Turnbull to ask: 'How
are you doing? Do you need help?' He returned with the assurance:
OK, everything under control, don't worry about me?
Trusting in the Chief's reputation,
Vandevoort unhooked the
Sim to reinforce the bazooka team, and started back in the jeep for
Ste Mère-Eglise. As he disappeared, however, mortar bombs began
le fall along the line of the hedgerow and shortly afterwards a
talippled gun came into view about 50o yards up the Cherbourg
road. With its second shot it killed the bazooka gunner at the road
block and with its fith drove the anti-tank gunners from their piece.
They took cover in the houses but then took heart again, re-manned
their gun and hit the SP with two shots.
Seeing a tank behind it,
which they identified as a Mark IV, probably wrongly for there were
ten of those heavy models in the Cotentin, they continued firing and
The fight then settled down into one between infantry and
infantry, with the disadvantage to the Americans that they
outnumbered and unsupported by heavy weanons While they held
their line. behind the hedgerow on the right and the stone wall in the
orchard on the left, they were secure. But the Germans' numbers
allowed them the chance to work through the open field beyond and
eventually to find positions from which they could shoot into the
Americans rear. It was slow going for them,
vigilant, resolute and well supplied with ammunition.
afternoon his position was close to collapse. He had only twenty-
three men still in the firing line; of the others, eleven were stretcher
cases and nine were dead. Mortar bombs fell in a steady stream along
the bank. A sniper had found his way into the hamlet and Private
Clifford Keenan, who was posted on the right flank, was killed when
he tried to pinpoint his position. Fleeting glimpses of the enemy at
hedge gaps revealed that left and right pincer jaws were only 200
yards apart and threatened to close across Route nationale 13,
cutting Turnbull and his men off from Ste Mère-Eglise.
His Cherokee blood stirred. 'T have heard about spots like this', he
