I30
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
tion of the building programme had not touched everywhere in
716th Division's area, and only two battery positions - mounting the
Czech 100 mm guns - had been completed. Elsewhere the crews
were protected only by unroofed bunkers; many were in earthen gun
pits in the open fields. Unable for the most part to change their
positions while in action - it would be out of the question to bring
the horses to the gun lines during a counter-battery duel - th
German gunners were thus fated to fight where they stood against
three times their number of guns, all mobile either by sea or land,
and many of far heavier calibre than they could match.
The infantry companies were better protected. On the Canadian
beaches they occupied four
at Vaux, Courseulles,
'resistance nests' (Widerstandnester)
Bernières and St Aubin, each centred on
one or more heavy concrete gun positions.
The gun positions were
supplemented by
trenches
gun-pits, usually concreted, for
machine-runners and riflemen, and surrounded bu barbed wire and
minefields.
All the weapons were
sited to fire along the beach in
enfilade, and their zones of fire were calculated to interlock on the
menacing array of obstacles arranged just below high-water mark.
These - lines of concrete stakes pointing seaward hacked succes
sively by rows of wooden ramps raised six feet at their landward end,
Concrete tetrahedra, iron 'hedgehogs' and finally in some places, as at
Courseulles and Bernières, by 'C Elements' (sections of massive iron
obstacles stripped from Belgium's pre-war anti-tank defences of her
eastern frontier) - were designed to tear the bottom out of invading
landing-craft as they attempted to beach on a falling tide. Many were
also festooned with
Teller mines, fused to explode on touch.
combination of fived obetarles and enciladina fien funer the resistance
nests was deemed to guarantee the destruction of any landing force.
So, at any rate, the defenders were assured. But no senior officer,
and certainly not General Richter, could feel that the beaches were
really adequately defended.
The resistance nests were 2,000 yards
apart on average, at the extreme limit of automatic weapon fire from
each other, and none was occupied by more than a platoon of men.
They had a certain number of crew-served guns to supplement their
personal weapons: at Vaux, where the Winnipes Rifles would land, 3
75 mm gun; at Courseulles, the Regina Rifles' objective, 3 50mm,
2 75mm and an 88 mm, as well as 12 machine-guns, the largest
concentration of weapons on the Canadian beaches; at Bernières,
objective of the Queen's Own Rifles, 2 50 mm guns and 7 machine-
CANADA: TO THE SOUTH SHORE
13I
guns; and at St Aubin, for which the North Shore Regiment was
destined, a 50mm gun and 4 machine-guns. There were also 7
mortars, of 50 or 81 mm calibre, distributed between the strong-
points and a number of electrically operated flame-throwers.
But. however the odds were
counted, the human
disparity
remained. About 400 Germans were about to be attacked by 2,400
Canadians. The defenders were forbidden to give ground. Hitler
himself had decreed the doctrine of 'an unrelenting line of resis-
tance, in which he had been schooled in Flanders as a soldier of the
Tóth Bavarian Reserve Regiment. And even should they try, they
would be prevented, for their encircling girdles of wire and mines
served not only to keep - they hoped - the enemy out, but also to
Keep them in. Nor could they look for any large or quick reinforce-
ment from the hinterland. The four reserve companies of the 736th
Infantry Regiment were disposed two miles inland on average. The
main reserve, Il Battalion, 726th Regiment, was nearly four miles
inland and in the wrong place at the far western end of the divisional
area. None of these units could move faster than their feet would
carry them. And the nearest mechanized reserve, the
panzer-
grenadier battalions of the 21st Panzer Division, were six miles away
at Caen, and their half-tracks highly vulnerable to air attack on any
daylight journey. Like the Goths slaughtered at Vesuvius by the
Byzantines in 553 - a folk-memory increasingly favoured by
propagandists as the shadows drew in over the Reich - the striplings
and greyheads of the y16th Division had death before their eyes on
the morning of June 6th.
Bombardment
The weather had spared them, however, from the first instalment of
destruction which the Allies had planned to deliver on their posi-
Two major air-bombing raids had been included in the
preparatory fire-plan, a midnight attack by the heavy night bombers
of RAF Bomber Command, and an early-morning raid by the Flying
Fortresses of the Bighth US Army Air Force. The RAF's standard
of accuracy had greatly improved in the last year, aided by the target
indicating skills of the marblinder squadrons it had added to its
strength. And in weight of bombs dropped - 5,268 tons - the D-Day
raid was the heaviest Bomber Command had yet mounted, the
unusually short range allowing i to economize fuel against payload.
