82
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
lavender lights you could hardly see, only a thousand feet from one
flight of nine aircraft to the next and with as many as five hundred
aircraft flying on the same track, it was extremely easy to overrun the
plane ahead' The formations were in fact controlled in exactly the
same way as ship flotillas, by a show of lights from the plexiglass
astrodome of the lead aircraft in each serial of forty-five. At its
signal, shown when radar or visual beacons were picked up from the
ground or sea, all turned on the pre-determined marking points,
later switched on their internal red lights announcing the approach
to the dropping zone (DZ) and finally the green light which was the
order to jump.
Between 1.15 and 2 a.m. on June 6th, after half an hour flown at
500 feet to escape detection by the German radar and a shorter
period at 1,500 feet to establish landfall, the troop carriers dropped
to 700 feet to make their approach runs. Some aboard had slept the
trip away, helped by the air-sickness pills, many had smoked it
through, 'the ends of their cigarettes glowing white in the dim red
light'. Some had done both. Hugh Pritchard of the torst had given
way to drowsiness, then roused himself to dig out a cigarette. 'I
asked the man next to me for a match; his reply, "There will be no
more smoking as we are approaching the French coast." I thought -
"Oh brother, I'm a long way from home. The same thought had
run through thousands of heads, filled with memories of families -
favourite sisters figured curiously
frequently in the subsequent
recollections of veterans - and carefully controlled fears of the
coming descent. Lieutenant Richard Winters of the 2nd Battalion,
Softh Parachute Infantry, had found himself soon after take-off
'making a last prayer. It was a long, hard and sincere prayer
never really did end for I just continued to think and pray during the
rest of the ride. General Ridgway, watching the men in his C-47 (it
was at the heart of the parachuting ethos that generals and privates
jumped together), saw little of this show on their faces.
sat quietly, deep in their own thoughts.
'The men
They joked a little and
broke, now and then, into ribald laughter. Nervousness and tension,
and the cold that blasted through the open door, had its effect upon
us all.'
He had watched 'glints of yellow flame from the German anti-
aircraft guns on the Channel Islands... curiously and without fear,
as a high-flying duck may watch a hunter, knowing that we were too
high and too far away for their fire to reach us'. Others had lifted the
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
83
itle lack-out curtains which covered the windows to share the view
but he looked 'straight across the aisle through the doorless exit'.
And suddenly he saw land.
No lights showed ... but in the pale glow of a rising moon, I
could clearly see each farm and field below. How peaceful the
land looked, each house and hedgerow, path and little stream
bathed in the silver of the moonlight. I felt that if it were not
for the noise of the engines we could hear the farm dogs baying
and the sound of the barnyard roosters crowing for midnight.
And then the view was extinguished by
cloud, thick and turbulent. I had been looking out of the
doorway, watching with a profound sense of satisfaction the
close-ordered flight of the great sky caravan that stretched as
far as the eye could see. All at once it was blotted out. Not a
wing light showed. The plane began to yaw and plunge, and in
my mind's eye I could see the other pilots, fighting to hold
course, knowing how great was the danger of collision.'
This bank of cloud, unpredicted and probably unpredictable by the
meteorologists, stood across the approach routes of both
the 82nd
and the roist. The serials of both divisions flew straight into it. And
on all it had the same effect. Pilots instinctively separated, horizon-
tally and vertically, so that the tight V's of V's dissolved and when
after hours (actually seconds or minutes) we came out', recalled
Lieutenant Harold Young of the 326th Parachute Engineers,
were all alone. I remember my amazement.
Where had all those
C-47s gone?' Ridgway's plane too
emerged into sudden isolation,
and at once the red light came on in the cabin which warned of four
minutes to the dropping point. He and his stick stood up and clipped
the hooks of their static lines to the cable. In other aircraft, however,
the sticks were already standing when the pilots met the cloud and
their manoeuvring threw the men off balance or even off their feet.
And others emerged from the cloud to find themselves not alone but
in close proximity to other aircratt and under fire from German light
and medium anti-aircraft guns positioned immediately under the
flight path. 'Our plane', remembered Private Donald Wilson,
flying low and suddenly went straight up to miss a number of others
which crossed suddenly in front of us.
We were all "stood up" and
