168
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
mutation of the barefoot cattle thief of the eighteenth century into
Queen Victoria's John Brown, the tamed savage whose sharpest
weapon was a stare of disapproval at almost everything not wee, free
and teetotal (give or take a dram or two). 'Balmorality' nowhere put
down deeper roots than in the Scottish regiments of the British army
and the adoring attitude towards them of the Scottish public. We can
catch its effect in the marmoreal gravity of Roger Fenton's hichland
faces. nhotographed on the steps of the Scutari hospital at the end of
a Crimean winter, faces which imply resistance to every human
frailty, moral as well as physical. We can trace its progress in the
enthusiasm the Scottish public manifested for amateur soldiering
when the Volunteer craze struck the kingdom at the end of the
under the influence of the Free Church and Gladstonian politics,
Scottish recruitment was twice the national average and,
Scottish Volunteering shortly took that sharp, self-contradictory
twist into what has been called "liberal militarism'. Soldiering in the
rest of Britain was regarded as shameful if professional and slightly
comic if amateur. Soldiering in Scotland, full- or part-time, was held
to be serious and commendable providing an onnortunity not
qualities the
merely to wear tartan (invented if necessary) but to demonstrate the
Victorian
admired, companionability,
steadiness and decent self-respent Highland regiments with all the
Danooly of lilte, sporrans and cines are created bu the Scottish
Volunteers in the most lowland of the new industrial cities, where
their appearance was a force for resistance against the creeping
anglicization of Scottish urban life. By a natural extension, Scottish
Volunteer regiments became part of the impedimenta of the national
diaspora, appearing as a focus of exile nostalgia, along with the ritual
of Burns Night, Hogmanay and Caledonian Ball societies. Not only
London (the London Scottish won founded in 1859) but in
whatever corner of the empire to whi founded h ambitions and
nineteenth
eithusiasm for the imperial idea which Scottie race during the
century.
By its end there were Scottish
Volunteer
regiments not only in abundance in Canada but also in Australia (the
Scottish
Rifles and
the Melbourne
Scottish),
Zealand (the Canterbury Scottish), in South Africa (the Transvaal
Scottish and the Cape Town Highlanders), and even in India, where
the existence of the Calcutta Scottish deno end even culiar ability of
the Scots abroad to combine commercial association with some lofty
public purposes, in this case the defence of the Raj.
169
SCOTTISH CORRIDOR
Many of these colonial regiments were to turn up on one or other
of the far-flung fronts opened by British empire against its enemies
during the First World War. The domestic Scottish regiments were
all to appear. And, to the extant Volunteer - now Territorial -
regiments, the upsurge of Scottish patriotism in 1914 added a new
wave of amateur formations, the Kitchener battalions. They took
their name from the appeal made at the outbreak by Kitchener, the
newly appointed War Minister, for 'a hundred thousand men' to
serve for three vegre And so strong was the resnonse in Scotland
that it provided the earliest complement of numbers sufficient to
form a whole division, the gth, quickly sacrificed in the slaughtet at
Loos in September 1975. A second Scottish complement swiftly
furnished another, the teth. which also suffered at Loos but made
is greatest sacrifices later in the war.
Both were disbanded at the armistice. But in 1939 the 15th was
one of the divisions raised again for the new war. This time it was to
be composed for the most part of Territorial regiments,
reinforced by a few regular battalions, and as the war crept on its
ranks would be filled out by conscripts; the urge to service anc
sacrifice which had produced the Kitchener volunteers
phenomenon of time and place which could not be repeated.
Its
composition, when it landed in France in June 1944 for its first
battle, nevertheless encapsulated the whole of Scottish
history as well as much of the ordeal which all of Britain had also
undergone in the war thus far.
Seven of its nine battalions were Territorial, three from the
Lowlands, three from the Highlands, one, the and Glasgow High-
landers, a product of that Romantic nationalist revival which in the
nineteenth century had brought the kilt into Lowland streets from
which a hundred years before its wearers would have been hissed
and stoned.
belonged by association to Hepburn's Regiment which had tramped
One of the Lowland battalions, the 8th
Royal Scots,
the campaigning fields of Germany in the service of France during
the Thirty Years War. The 6th King's Own Scottish Borderers was
descended from the government regiment which had fought the
Jacobite army at Killerankie in 1689, and the gth
Cameronians
from the Jacobites' religious enemies, the Puritan Covenanters of the
south-west. In memory of their persecuted past,
all Cameronian
battalions still held they church services in the open air, with sentries
posted to
warn
attack.
The two
non-Territorial
battalions,
