54
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
rewards it promised. 'When I look at the Mediterranean', he
confided privately to his diary on November ist, 'I realize only too
well how far I have failed Professionally he continued to work for a
softening of the 'Marshall strategy'. The result was a Chiefs of Staff
paper, significantly dated November Ilth, which advanced, for
what would turn out to be the last time, the anti-Marshall case.
We must not lit ran] regard Overlord on a fixed date as the
pivot of our whole strategy... The German strength in France
next Spring may ... be something which makes 'Overlord'
impossible [or) 'Rankin' not only practicable but essential.
with the Germans in their present plight the surest way to win
the war is to attack them
continuously. in every area
where we can do so with superiority ... our policy is therefore
clear .. we submit the following proposals for the Mediterra-
nean...
The offensive in Italy should be nourished and
maintained until we have secured the Pisa-Rimini line.. we
should bring Turkey into the war ... we might form a limited
bridgehead on the Dalmatian or Albanian coasts.
Second thought counselled them to suppress the last sentence.
But the
American mistrust.
reference to 'Rankin' was in itself enough to inflame
For 'Rankin' was a long-laid plan to occupy
France in the event of a German collapse, entailing no need to fight
at all. Its bracketing as an alternative to Overlord implied that the
British were again shrinking from the knife. Brooke dissembled by
arguing that he was only seeking means to reduce the rate at which
the Germans could 'build up' with divisions on an Overlord front;
and at Teheran in late
November he succes ded in persuading the
Americans that an advance to the Pisa-Rimini line in north Italy
actively contributed to that end Put there he found that he had
driven his ally to the sticking-point; though the mark was in fact
made by the Russians rather than the Americans. This first joint
meeting of the Big Three gave Stalin's military professionals the
chance to fix the British, in the presence of the Americans,
fundamentals: "Marshal Voroshilou asked Sir Alan Brooke if he
could say a little more precisely whether he regarded Oneration
"Overlord"
as the most important operation, as he understood the
United States to think so? Brooke twisted on the hook,
warning
again of the strength of the Germans and of the need to drain their
divisions away from France by subsidiary operations.
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
Russian was remorseless: Brooke's diary records that 'he did not
insist on an operation against the South of France' (Anvil, which
Brooke disliked because antithetical to advance in Italy) 'but ... did
insist that the operation against the North of France should take
place in the manner and on the date already agreed on'.
And while Voroshilov gratified Marshall by his exposure of
Brooke's ambiguities, Roosevelt abandoned Churchill to stringent
interrogation by Stalin. 'Do the British really believe in "Overlord"
or are they only saying so to reassure the Soviet Union?' As the
conference wore on he pressed harder. He demanded a date, he
wanted operations in Italy recognized as diversions from the inva-
sion of southern France, he wanted a commander named for
Overlord, if not at the conference then within a week of its closure.
Abandoned by Roosevelt,
who had fixed on the meeting as an
opportunity to forge personal links with Stalin, Churchill could find
no room for manoeuvre on any of these issues. Brooke had already
been immobilized by the combined pressure of Marshall and
Voroshilov. Appropriately it fell to him on November goth to read to
the three heads of government the unanimous recommendation of
the Combined Chiefs of Staff, 'that we will launch "Overlord" in
May, in conjunction with a supporting operation against the South
of France on the largest scale that is permitted by the landing-craft
available at the time'.
It
Montgomery
remained only to choose the Supreme
Commander
Allied
Expeditionary Force. Both Marshall and Brooke, for all the latter's
misgivings, had hoped to be named; both indeed had been promised
the appointment, but Brooke had known since August that it must
go to an American. Marshall was the obvious man; he greatly desired
to leave Washington for the command in the field he had never
exercised and believed Roosevelt would release
him.
But
December 5th - within Stalin's time limit of a week from the end of
the Teheran conference - Roosevelt nerved himself to tell his chief
of staff that he could not sleep at ease if hel were out
Washington'. Eisenhower, therefore, would move from the Mediter-
ranean to London. But he was not to command the ground forces
in the initial stages, when air and sea operations would require
two-thirds of his attention.
That responsibility
was to go to a
