I3
14
German infantry practise manning beach defences before D-Day
Wounded of the 3rd Canadian Division awaiting evacuation on
Juno Beach, June 6th, 1944
III
ALL-AMERICAN SCREAMING EAGLES
The hottalion's serial of Dakotas had been badly scattered on the
run-in however - one gallant pilot who failed to find the mark
circled over the Channel for some time before picking up the
beacons on a second attempt _ and three were shot down by flak,
with the loss of most of the passengers.
Ewell was one of the few
members of the battalion who landed close to the rallying position,
but when light broke and he was able to count heads he found he had
only 40 of his 6oo men. But because the pilots of the headquarters
planes had drodded accurately. his group also included most of the
divisional staff, includino the commander. General Maxwell Taylor
and the artillery commander, General Anthony McAuliffe (who, six
months later at Bastogne, would return the immortal 'Nuts' to the
surrounding
Germans' demand for his surrender).
Taylor had
landed alone in a field of cows, searched for some time for a fellow
American and warmly embraced the first one that he met, one of
Colonel Ewell's riflemen.
Together they had set out to look for
more, picked up General MCAuliffe on the way and arrived at base
to discover that officers almost outnumbered men in this corner of
the invasion battlefield. Besides the two generals, there were three
colonels, a major and numerous captains and lieutenants waiting to
command a collection of signallers and clerks. Regular riflemen and
machine-gunners were in a minority.
The signallers, too, were without their radios. General Taylor's
heavy command set had been dropped in two separate loads, and
though one half had been brought in by its operator, the other could
not be found. The divisional artillery could raise no answering call.
Taylor was therefore sionala the means to communicate with the
rest of his command or to discover how the land lay - literally, for
during much of the night he had been unable to persuade himself
that he was in the right place. It was only when dawn showed him
the loom of the distinctile church tower of Ste Marie-du-Mont a
mile to the east that he was able to convince himself that he wan
where he ought to behe was about troops to lead, that knowledge
did him little good. He and his chief of staff, Colonel Higgins,
conferred. The map told them that the nearest point of significance
was Exit 1, at the told them that Utah Beach, through which the
leading infantry of the 4th Division were due to make their
inland later that mornith The road to it ran through the little
coastal village of Poupinville, organized as a German strongpoint,
After agreeing with Higgins that the division must have been badly
