I14
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
unintended, had multiplied the effect of confusion in the German
high command, preventing it from offering any organized riposte.
It was appropriate and characteristic that the effect should have
been produced by Americans.
Like pioneers in an unknown land,
ignorant of its language and landmarks, uncertain of what danger the
next thicket or stream-bottom might hold, confident only in them-
selves and their mastery of the weapons in their hands, the best and
bravest among them
Yod the we pons fears, marched forth and
planted the roots of settlement in the soil that was there for the
taking. Whether or not it might be held would turn on the strength
and resolution of those who came later, on D-Day, on the fighting
skills of the shipborne divisiam elated, barked in the wake of the
nichorne landings. I+ wae they who must fight the hottle of the
beachhead which Montgomery had warned from the start would be
the test of the cross-Channel strategy.
CHAPTER 3
Canada: to the South Shore
THIRTY-FIVE MILES BAST of the drop zones of the American para-
cuts, and five hours after they had touched earth, the North
Shore Regiment of the 3rd Canadian Division started the difficult
transhipment between the ships in which they had crossed the
Channel and those from which they would step out on to the beaches
d France. They had come as far as the lowering point', seven miles
Out, in a Landing Ship Infantry (LSI), a converted cross-channel
steamer which, in peace, had carried tourists to France. Conversion
had meant no more than stripping its sides of lifeboats and replacing
their davits with a heavier-duty type, from which could be swung a
port and starboard row of L.CAs. The Landing Craft Assault was the
lowliest class of vessel admitted to the books of the Royal Navy.
Commanded by a petty-officer coxswain. it provided nothing but
rough benches for thirty-five men - a platoon of infantry - and a
diesel engine just powerful enough to push them ashore at ten knots.
When its flat bottom touched ground. the bow ramp would swing
down and the passengers would catch their first elimpse of the
Continent. Now the lines of LCAs bumped and grated along the
flanks of the mother ship, pitching between the tops of four-foot
waves under an overcast sky. From some Landing Craft Infantry
(LCts) the assaulting infantrymen slid to the waiting steel bottoms
down a canvas helter-skelter, to land with a loud thud. From most
they negotiated a painful and dangerous descent down scrambling
nets, strait-jacketed in sixty pounds of
equipment,
footholds which would save them from the mincer of the two hills or
the deep six in between.
The North Shore was a New Brunswick regiment, from the coast
opposite Prince Edward Island, a land of old settlement both by
French and Scots. An interwar amaleamation of several local militia
battalions, it had its older origins in that great surge of enthusiasm
115
