22
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
come to call
D-Day - retains an equally compelling interest. How
she chose those paths is best understood by following the footmarks
of the professional military
men who translated their political
leaders' will to victory into reality.
Seven - and one civilian
personify the principles and pre-
dicaments of the strategies by which their nations strove to achieve
victory or avoid defeat in the years when the Second Front was in the
making: Stilwell, whose career incarnated the poverty and back-
wardness of the American army in the interwar years and his
country's strategic involvement with Asia rather than Europe;
Wedemeyer, the
military technocrat,
whose European
helped to commit the United States none the less to a continental
invasion by a mass army; Eisenhower, whose intellectual flexibility
and political touch found the means to give American strategy a
coherent direction; Molotov, remembrancer of Russia's agony to
Britain and the United States; Marshall, Roosevelt's strategic con-
science; Brooke, book-keeper of Britain's dwindling strategic assets
and editor of Churchills wavward genine. Montoomery, his hat
field executive; and Rommel, on whom devolved responsibility for
translating the folly of Hitler's ambitions into military sense.
The story of the Second Front begins with Stil well at the moment
when Japan, by her unannounced attack on the American Pacific
Fleet at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii, ended a vear of diami hing and
indecision and irrevocably committed herself and her ally,
many, to war against the United States.
Stilwell
Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor hrought noot haste feam Monterey to
Washington one of the unlikeliest officere of the Tinited States army.
Joseph Warren Stilwell - Warren to his family already Vinegar Toe
to subordinates and superiors who knew the whinlash of his tongue-
was commanding III Corps on December 7th,
recently a formation
1941.
Until very
artillery, transort and sional to matabaht no in linited
as large as a corps -
with
50,000 soldiers
States only on paper, and even in the late autumn of 1041 after two
years of rearmament. Ill Corne'e real and namer strenath were still
embarrassingly different from each other.
But Stilwell had been
his chin-strap in the
raised in the old army of tiny and scattered unite had marched on
weary pursuit of Filipino rebels, eaten the
JOURNEY TO THE SECOND FRONT
23
dust of summer on the Chinese plains, and camouflaged genteel
poverty behind the white clapboard of officers' quarters at Leaven-
worth and Fort Benning. A corps, however filigree its fabric, and
incomplete in its establishment,
was a command of which as a
turn-of-the-century West Pointer he could scarcely have dreamed
and as a Great War veteran in the Depression years had abandoned
hope of seeing again. To have watched III Corps come into being
was to sense life pulsing again in the moribund army of the United
States; to have been given command of it was to feel on his brow the
crowning laurels of a soldier's career.
The call to Washington meant not only separation from his family
but farewell to their beloved Carmel on the Monterey peninsula,
where he and his wife had come to settle before the First World War
and where the headquarters of III Corps had later been fixed. Its
dark cypress groves and operatic crags, the Steinbeckian charm of
the waterfront and the rag, tag and bobtail of the crowd which
peopled it - Polish sardine-canners,
Italian seine-boat fishermen,
Chinese grocers, the hoboes from the Palace Flophouse and the
dollar-a-day privates from the regiment in the Presidio - made it an
unlikely setting for a military headquarters. Perhaps because of that
Stilwell had reacted with uncharacteristic alarm to news
an
imminent Japanese descent upon its enchanted coast during the first
weeks of the
war. 'Jap fleet 20 miles south,
miles
west
Monterey', he wrote in his diary, 'I believed it like a damned fool.
two [US] battalions along the coast... two battalions in reserve for
I75 miles ... six tanks coming from Fort Ord. (The others won't
run) ... Had the Japs only known, they could have landed anywhere
on the coast, and after our handful of ammunition had gone, they
could have shot us like pigs in a pen. By December 22nd, when the
call from Washington came, he had regained his objectivity and it
was only the general unpreparedness of the nation which continued
to give him 'that old sinking feeling'.' But to leave the Pacific, which
had consumed his professional life, and the Salinas Valley, which
possessed his heart, required a deliberate effort of will. Going was
made easier by the speed of departure.
He had an overnight stop
with his family. Then on December 23rd he took the plane east ward.
Trans-continental flights in 1947, flown at 170 miles per hour in
the ubiquitous DC-3 in stages of 500 miles, still lasted over a day.
But for a sublimated romantic like Stilwell the long passages from
San Francisco to Salt Lake City, Kansas City and Cincinnati was
