280
SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY
counter-offensive which Model and Hausser had agreed on two days
before.
Soon after the opening of this assault on the northern edge of the
Mace, more German movement was snotted on an adioining hill,
Point 239, from which the enemy could bring the crest of the Mace
under observed fire. Koszutski therefore desnatched another tank
infantry group to drive them off Rut the annesition wae found to be
too strong and the group had to return pursued by artillery and
mortar salvoes which destroved five Polish Shermans. Allied air
power should have made this dangerous sortie unnecessary; but a
break in the weather, of which the previous afternoon's cloudburst
had been a prelude, obscured targets and was to do so throughout
the day. The German artillery was accordingly freed to build up a
steady play of fire on to the summit of the Mace and, under its cover,
onwards.
a series of direct assaults were launched un the clones from noon
Every combination of tactics was used: conventional infantry
assaults,
combined
panzer
grenadier,
unsupported
Panther attacks, savage bombardments or no barrage at all.
Against each and every assault the Poles held firm. Some of the
slopes of the Mace were so steep that the SS climbed them bent
double and pulling at bushes to bring themselves forward; at
other places the ground formed a natural hollow and into this
killing ground poured the grenadiers driving for the summit,
only to be shot down by machine guns on the tanks and blown
apart by their shells. 10
The assaults reached a climax at about 7 p.m when the German
infantry supported by tanks did at lasu break into the north-eastern
sector of the perimeter. They were eventually driven out only when
the men of a mortar platoon, who had expended all their bombs,
Came forward with rifles to strengthen the line of the gth Light
Infantry, which was bending under the pressure.
Behind this furious, day-long activity,
achieving some of his purpose.
Meindl had succeeded in
The Polish lines had been forced
back a little from the commanding position above the Vimutiers
road and, with the skies clear of Allied aircraft, some thousands of
the press of men still inside the pocket manate to wade or ford
the Dives and get away to open country; anay included Generals
Meyer, of
I2th SS, and
Hausser,
Seventh Army
commander,
'A POLISH BATTLEFIELD'
281
both wounded, Hausser very seriously. Koszutski had also been
wounded, by a shell splinter in the chest. Late in the evening he
summoned his surviving officers to his bedside. They were very few;
casualies in the battalions approached 3o per cent and the hunting-
lodge and farm buildings on the plateau were crowded
wounded. 'Gentlemen,' he began, 'all is lost. I do not think the
Canadians can come to our rescue. We have ... no food and very
little ammunition ... Fight all the same. There is no question of
surrender. Tonight we shall die."
The night in fact passed without incident.
But early in the
was a 'suicidal' assault off the Vimoutiers road towards the Poliah
lines on the southern lip of the Mace. So fierce was it that the last
morning of August zist the attacks started again and at noon there
reserve, a troop of anti-aircraft tanks, had to be called forward to
effort seemed to be the last of which the garrison
bursts from their twin machine-guns, they ultimately did. But the
repel the massed waves of German infantry which, with the final
ammunition by parachute dropped its load in error five miles away
flight of American Dakolas which should have resupplied them
was capable.
A
and Stefanewicz, describing the condition of all, signalled Maczek
at divisional headquarters that he could no longer stand up from
physical exhaustion'. Shortly after middav and the ebbing of another
German assault, however, sounds of tanks were heard to the north,
the distinctive engine note of Shermans. Sévieny, asleep on his fast
was shaken awake be his signaller. Captain, I can hear our tanks.
But was it only a patrol? Might it not be driven off? A troop of the
and Armoured Regiment under Second-Lieutenant Niewinowski
was hastily assembled and launched down the slopes of the Mace to
make contact. A mile and a half beyond the perimeter, it met the
forward echelon of the Canadian Grenadier Guards, who had set out
within the
that morning to bring relief. An hour later the Canadian tanks were
perimeter.
'The scene',
the Grenadiers'
diarist
war
recorded, was the most savage the regiment had ever encountered.
The Poles has the most savage thes for three days; they had several
hundred wounded ived mo they had been unable to evacuate; they
held eight hundred prisoners, carelessly unguarded in a field. The
road was jammed with burnt out vehicles, theirs and the enemy's.
There were corpses everywhere, unburied and dismembered.' Amid
these horrors,
the Polish commander received us
shaking
emotion and his soldiers told long stories in Polish to the Canadians,
