Another aspect of the comparison related to the organization
motor industries of the United Kingdom and the U.S.A., which must influence
the selection of a system of transport operation.
Continuous running involves
a higher replacement rate of lorries.
Absence of responsibility
of the driver
for his vehicle, and scantier maintenance, must mean this.
For
the U.S.
Army, this was merely a shipping matter, as it operated standard vehicles
produced in mass by the world's largest motor industry.
Replacement was
a desperate matter of supply to the British Army, which had to accept the
vast miscellany of makes and types which its own small motor industry and
the surpluses of the Allies could supply.
Again, the pool maintenance and
repair system presupposed in the
"Red Ball" Continuous
Running could
cope with standard lorries, but not with a variety of companies of which the
majority had individual makes of truck, each requiring different spares.
Finally, it has to be emphasized that the average speed maintained by
convoys is the deciding factor as to whether any appreciable advantage is
to be derived from the continuous running system.
If both systems are
reduced to a common denominator of 15 miles in the hour during the working
day of each, the dividend paid by the continuous running is in the region
of five per cent. only.
The essence of the matter is therefore a clear running
route as stated above.
This it was apparently
possible to achieve in the
American area; and a continuous stream of vehicles travelling at a high speed
down cleared routes was the result.
But it would have been impossible to
operate such a system on the roads available to 21 Army
Group unless
many more bridges had been built, and unless the vast volume of operational
and other traffic of varying speeds, which was a constant obstacle to main-
tenance traffic, had been firmly diverted on to other routes.
(Note.—The above is based on a paper written by D.S.T., 21 Army Group.)
400
APPENDIX VIF
(See Vol. I, page 345)
FULL AND ECONOMICAL USE OF TRANSPORT IN THE FIELD
A paper prepared by the General Staff
1. In considering the full and economical use of transport in the field,
particular
study is being given to the use of transport in forward areas.
There is a very large variation in the mileage run in a year in an average
campaign by
the
various
transport echelons, ranging
from about 20,000
miles a year by vehicles in G.T. companies operating behind divisions, to
about 7,000 miles a year by load-carrying vehicles of unit first line transport.
This in itself is not sufficient evidence that unit first line transport is in excess
of requirements, but it does focus attention on whether it could be more
fully employed during particular phases of a campaign.
2. It is obviously uneconomical for R.A.S.C. units to be held as second
line transport purely as an insurance against any emergency
call; on the
other hand, occasions undoubtedly
arise when second line
transport has
abnormal calls made upon it while first line load-carriers are lying idle.
This frequently occurs during the build-up period before an operation when
a formation may be grounded and its R.A.S.C. only is used to the full extent.
Under such conditions, it is obvious that a valuable contribution should be
made from unit first line load-carriers.
3. It is possible that, during the war, there was an over-insurance in
first line transport which resulted in available resources being locked up
uneconomically.
Experience has already shown that behind divisions the
greatest flexibility and economy of transport can be achieved by a system
of pooling.
It is for consideration whether such a system could be extended
to divisional level.
4. There are three main ways of approaching the problem: —
(a) To restrict unit first line transport to the present lighting and
administrative echelons, and to augment
second line R.A.S.C.
transport with the bulk of the present unit "B" echelon load-
carrying vehicles.
(b) To have in being an accepted drill whereby R.A.S.C. will have a
call on load-carrying vehicles of first line transport made avail-
able in administratively self-contained sub-units.
(c) To accept the necessity for unit " B" echelon load-carrying vehicles,
but to have a proportion of these manned by R.A.S.C.
5. With regard to 4 (a), while it is appreciated that scales of ammunition,
P.O.L., etc., have a distinct bearing on the problem, these scales are not
considered really fundamental to the consideration of the broad principles,
because they will always be variable as between first and second line.
flexible organization is
therefore necessary
at all times;
might
suitably be met by attaching R.A.S.C. vehicles to units as necessary.
6. To enable 4 (b) to be effective, it would be necessary to have an accepted
universal organization which would enable units to form quickly and detach
at call one or more sub-units organized on the same lines as R.A.S.C.
sections or platoons.
401
west 17
WO 277/21
27
