to commanders not below the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel.
agreed to reduce the minimum limit of 11 miles for lemale stall, as tha
It was not
would have given them greater concessions than were enjoyed by A.T.S.
Instructions were then promulgated regulating the conditions in connec-
of N.A.A.F.I. personnel
transport could be used for the conveyance of personnel when public service
facilities or other means of conveyance were not available; the normal
repayment rates or other particular charges were to apply.
journey a day was allowed for personnel unavoidably accommodated at
a distance of more than two miles for men, or lz miles for women, from
N.A.A.F.I. personnel on duty might travel in spare
space in W.D. vehicles, but no transport was to be specially detailed for
their conveyance, nor might it deviate for their benefit.
penny a mile was made for each individual so carried.
be used for recreational purposes under the usual general conditions, except
that repayment would be at one penny a mile for each individual.
As regards the conveyance of supplies when public transport services or
other means of conveyance were not available,
used on application to the local officer i/c transport. If space were available
in W.D. vehicles performing a duty journey, the supplies would be carried
free of charge, providing that no deviation of route was involved.
W.D. vehicle was specially allotted to meet N.A.A.F.I. requirements, such
as the urgent conveyance of perishable goods, a repayment charge would be
made at the authorized rates for N.A.A.F.I. services.
Assistance to U.S. Forces
When the U.S.A. entered the war, the question was
considered of the
extent and nature of the assistance which could be afforded to the U.S.
Forces which were expected to arrive in the United Kingdom.
Space could be made available for American vehicles and M.T. stores
at a R.A.S.C. M.T. Depot until the U.S.
Forces could make their own
No vehicle repair assistance could be afforded, except in
extreme emergency. Help, in the form of the loan of W.D. road transport,
could be given on receipt of definite requirements.
The scheme, known as "Bolero",
, was initiated in May, 1942, to deal
Unit Kingdo The iS Forde, in port come sent a de i eins ng
for S.T.3 to provide the home commands affected with additional G.T.
companies, to facilitate transport assistance.
The largest commitment was in connection with the movement of
American Army vehicles from assembly plants in the United Kingdom, which
had to be undertaken by the British Army for about six or eight weeks
from June, 1942, and employed from 1,500 to 2,000 drivers.
C.T, companies without vehicles were allotted from R.A.S.C Mobilization
Contes, and these worked under a M.T. depot, R.A.S.C., Which carried var
executive control of convoys through its existing organization, under War
A small but important matter was the loan of six R.A.S.C. drivers t
act as guides to U.S. Army car drivers, who had
at first in
become accustomed to it.
inding then way about London and the country generally until they hao
192
Sight-seeing by American Personnel
The question was soon raised of the possibility of U.S. Forces arranging
for the use of either military or civilian vehicles for the purpose of sight-
seeing tours by American personnel.
The War Office view was
that the
use of W.D. transport for recreational purposes by British troops had been
curtailed, and the loan of W.D. vehicles for use for such purposes by American
troops would cause misunderstanding among the British.
In accordance with
Government policy, the use of civilian transport for purely pleasure purposes
had been eliminated by the withdrawal of the basic petrol ration
from
private owners, and of the basic allotment from car and coach hiring firms,
and these could now get petrol only for contract journeys of national impor-
tance.
From the War Office point of view, therefore, the matter appeared
to be essentially political, and one for the M.O.W.T. to meet by issuing
petrol to operators of civilian vehicles.
Provision of Vehicles
The U.S. Forces required a number of cars and motor-coaches to be
provided in the United Kingdom to save shipping such vehicles from the
The commitment fell into three classes.
conversion to ambulances, were arranged for by the M.O.W.T. Another
100 coaches, required for establishing local services at U.S.
were provided by contract, with the agreement of the
1,500 cars were asked for, and these were requisitioned by the Ministry
under existing machinery.
Acquisition was the sole responsibility of the
M.O.W.T., with the existing organization operated under C.I.M.T., R.A.S.C.
The policy was that the War Office, and not the M.O.W.T., should deal with
the U.S. Forces in these matters, and S.T.3 became responsible for taking
all action with the M.O.W.T., and for notifying the U.S. Forces of the
Between July and November, 1942, about 100 cars a
week were acquired from owners who were laying them up.
delivered to a nominated M.T. depot, R.A.S.C., and accepted there on behalf
of the U.S. Forces (until these could undertake the business themselves) by
a detachment lent to them by the Directorate of Warlike Stores.
Financial Policy
The procedure in connection with the financial aspect of road transport
arrangements made for the U.S. Forces was that the War Office made
through commands where appropriate) all arrangements for transport services
as if they were for the War Department, and a note was made of the items
for a record of their financial effect.
Where vehicles were requisitioned by
M.O.W.T. on behalf of War Office, they were handed direct to American
custody by their owners and the receipt of a responsible U.S. officer was
This satisfied the M.O.W.T., and the claim was paid by the
W.D. against the receipt. Spare parts, etc., for the maintenance of requisi-
tioned vehicles handed over to the U.S. Forces were obtained by the latter
on demand from British Army depots.
The U.S. Forces were unable to
buy spares for these vehicles from local dealers, as all stocks were controlled
by the Ministry of Supply.
WO 277/21k.
27
