pontoons towed by the DUKWs.
These carried all the troops, tanks, guns,
and transport, some eight miles downstream to the point where the road
The same platoon towed into position the sections of the
could be regained.
1.00-Fot Bailey bridge which was constructed at Kalewa, and stocked the
Divisional Maintenance Area in the bridgehead with thousands of tons of
stores. The second platoon supported 20 Division in its advance downstream
s Monywa, providing a river L. of C. in conjunction with I.W.T. outboard
ime trip of sixty miles to Maukkadaw took three days,
lessels and rafts.
owing to the uncharted sandbanks.
Difficulties of Air Supply
The administrative plan for the second and subsequent phases of Operation
"Capital" was for formations to be maintained by supply drop until air-
strips could be opened.
On 21st December, 2 Division went through the bridgehead, and advanced
through Ye-U to Shwebo, which it reached on 8th January, 1945.
moved ofi carrying 150 miles of P.O.L. for each vehicle, in addition to second
line reserve and three days' reserve rations. In spite of this, the shortages in
the supply drop between 21st December and 10th January, when the Ye-U
airstrip opened, were such that the division arrived in Shwebo with empty
fuel tanks and was on half rations for three days.
The Army Air Transport Organization was not yet working satisfactorily,
this being attributed to the circumstance that C.A.A.T.O's. staff was quite
When the Ye-U strip opened, supplies and petrol came in very fast, but
despatches were unbalanced. 100,000 gallons of petrol arrived without the
proper proportion of lubricants; rations arrived without bread or biscuit;
and there were often big shortages of important items.
When the airstrip at
Shwebo opened, however, stocks were more balanced, and a reserve was
Necessity for Advanced Airfields
So completely had the Army now come to rely on air supply that, in
January, 1945, the C.-in-C., A.L.F.S.E.A., appreciated the situation as being
that, without extra resources of transport aircraft, not only would the advance
to Mandalay and beyond be arrested, but it might even become necessary to
withdraw behind the Chindwin for the 1945 monsoon.
The Army was travelling faster than had been expected; and the farther
it advanced from the air supply bases the greater was the number of aircrat
required to carry even the same amount of tonnage to maintain them.
maximum economic range of Dakotas was abnut 250 miles, after which the
payload decreased rapidly in proportion to mileage flown.
As Fourteenth Army advanced. landing strine for the transport aircraft
were levelled in the paddy fields, and stocks were thus built up to some extent;
still necessary.
but the long trip across the mountains from the Chittagong-Imphal arc was
This trip was halved as the result of the successful campaiga
in South Arakan. The battle that was fought here in January. 1945, was in
essence a fight for airfields, a successful attempt to employ the otherwise use-
less Arakan as a taking-off
point for the Dakotas far nearer to their delivery
points in Central Burma. The aim was to secure airfields so located that the
range from them to delivery points should not exceed 250 miles. Akyab was
not much farther than that from Rangoon itself, and Kyaukpyu, on Ramree
Island, was within the distance.
Operations in Arakan, October, 1944, to March, 1945
There were no large scale operations in Arakan in October, 1944, apart
from the move of 81 (West African) Division across to the Kaladan valley.
Early in November, this formation captured Paletwa and began to advance
It was maintained entirely by air drop through-
out its operations on the Kaladan until it was withdrawn in March, 1945.
Porters provided the means of carriage, but in November a mountain battery
and three troops of a pack company were added, involving an increase in the
air drop of grain and fodder for 700 animals.
The essential preliminary to the capture of Akyab was the clearing of the
The subsequent operations fell into the following main
(a) The capture of Akyab.
(b) The assault on the Myebon Peninsula.
(c) The capture of Ramree Island.
(d) The assault on Kangaw.
(e) Operations in the Ru-Ywa and Tamandu areas.
Ramree was taken by 26 Indian Division.
All the other operations were
carried out as a continuous and co-ordinated series by 25 Indian Division,
and provide an interesting instance of maintenance by water, the principal
method used throughout.
The water transport organization was under the
control of Transportation Branch in this campaign.
The plan for clearing the Donbaik peninsula was for 53 Brigade to move
down the Kalapanzin River; 74 Brigade to advance down the coastal strip;
and 51 Brigade to secure the base in the Maungdaw-Buthidaung area.
53rd Brigade was to be maintained by air drop.
east or west of the river, so that even jeeps were out of the question, and
mules and water transport were consequently provided.
only be accepted every third day, so as not to impair mobility.
proved a hindrance in the repeated crossings of waterways, while their food
was a major air supply commitment, and its carriage between air drops a
They were therefore all sent back, and the column depended entirely
on its water transport (Burley boats; barges, both powered and dumb; and
These craft had been carried across to the Kalapanzin in 3-ton
74 Brigade could not spare troops to picquet the road behind it, so it
demolished the bridoes as it nassed them and became a detached force
Shortage of aircraft precised air supply, but it was not necessary, as the
coast and the weather were suitable for maintenance by water transport, which
operated from Maungdaw to beach-heads, an intermediate base being opened
117
WO 277/21
27
