system of railway rates; and the certificatioN de these bills, which were then
disposed of to the Command Paymaster, Aldershot Command, who dealt
with all railway bills for the sake of better co-ordination about rates.
veral of the Vi. The a in is urtin, and por vision proper
employment.
In this respect he acted as the local representative
Assistant Director of Military
Transport (q.v., in Chapter II, Section 1)
The officer i/c transport made the necessary
arrangements for the berthing of W.D. vessels bringing stores from other
stations, and for their discharge and distribution.
He also arranged for
the employment of civilian barge traffic in any case where this was practic-
able and economical.
Transport Offices on Mobilization
In view of the existence of this organization, and its successful operation
in peace by R.A.S.C. officers and men trained in the work, it might logically
have been supposed that it would be co-ordinated with the Movement Con-
trol Organization which came into operation on mobilization.
On the precautionary period being put into effect, the
executive duties of the officer i/c transport, regarding the carriage of military
stores, etc., by rail, were at once removed from him, and placed in the
hands of railway traffic officers of the Movement Control Organization.
In the Instructions for Movement Control at Home in War, the R.A.S.C.
were completely ignored, except for a reference to the provision of road
transport to make good a breakdown of rail traffic.
the executive duties for rail transport, the officer i/c transport continued
to be responsible for documentation, registration, checking and passing bills,
and action in regard to loss and damage.
In other words, he kept the
accounts for a service for which he had no responsibility.
Relations between Officer i/e Transport and R.T.O.
When Movement Control Districts were set up in the United Kingdom
in the latter part of 1940, instructions were issued departmentally by both
Movement Control and S.T. to their local representatives that the latter
were to co-operate with each other, but their relationships were not defined.
Until this time, it had been in effect left to units and establishments to decide
for themselves whether they would despatch their stores by road or rail.
Under the peace-time system, it was the responsibility of the officer
sto transport to use the most economical method for the conveyance of
stores, having due reference to all the circumstances.
Thus, while a unit
me tr submit a requisition for road transport to carry stores, the officer
vice ransport might arrange to send them by rail, if that were cheapet: or
After the divorce of rail transport from the transport oftee.
there was a natural tendency for the officer i/c transport and the R.T.O.
controlled, as the line of least resistance.
control do the work that came his way with the means of transport that he
While, no doubt, officers on each
side did co-operate to ensure that the best form of transport was employed
for a particular service, and while of course the policy referring to the con-
veyance of large consignments was decided by the staff, no one was re-
sponsible for ensuring that small consignments were channelled by
most economical means of transport.
Lack of co-ordination by a single
authority no doubt caused a certain amount of unnecessary expenditure.
When instructions were at last issued with the object of overcoming this
weakness (A.C.l. 1914 of 1941), while they did not provide for a single
authority, they did at least do something towards clearing the existing
unsatisfactory state of affairs. The provisions were as follows:
Demands for the movement of such quantities of W.D. stores as necessi-
tated programme and planning, were to be passed to Movement Control,
and plans would then be made for their movement by such method as
Movement Control might decide.
Demands involving 30 railway wagons
or 50 lorries were normally to be dealt with thus.
Demands for the conveyance of smaller quantities of stores
be submitted to the officer i/c transport, who then consulted the local
Movement Control Officer or R.T.O. regarding the best method of despatching
stores which, if moved by road, would involve the use of lorries totalling
30 tons capacity, for journeys of over 25 miles.
For road movement of less volume or distance, the officer i/c trans-
port was responsible for making all necessary arrangements. Before arrang-
ing for the move by road of stores, involving the use of more than ten lorries
for more than 25 miles, the O. i/c transport was required to confirm with
his O.C., R.A.S.C., that the urgency justified the use of road transport.
If the stores were to be sent by rail, the O. i/c transport made the necessary
arrangement, in conjunction with Movement Control for consignments of
a wagon-load or more, or especially urgent or important stores.
At depots, the Movement Control Officer was always to be consulted
regarding the method of despatch; and, if this was to be by rail, the arrange-
ments were made through the R.T.O., or, if by road, through the O. i/c
Interrupted Railway Facilities
Where, owing to serious damage to railway facilities, it was necessary
to use road transport amounting to ten vehicles or more to convey stores
Which would otherwise have gone by rail, the consignor, after the usual
consultation with the movement control officer, passed the demand for
such transport to the O. i/c transport concerned.
The O. i/c transport
told the R.T.O. how many road vehicles would be required for the service,
and reported to his O.C., R.A.S.C., for the information of the D.D.S.T. at
The service was then, if necessary, co-ordinated with
any general demands by movement control for the provision of road trans-
port in substitution for broken or interrupted railway facilities, and for
the provision of labour for loading and unloading.
Reorganization of Transport Offices
As the war went on, great diversity was found to exist in the transport
office organization in various commands and districts, and some standardiza-
After trials in selected districts,
tion and reorganization became necessary.
a new system was introduced generally in March, 1944, and proved practical
and satisfactory in operation.
27947/57
WO 277/21
27
