(1) Petroleum Pipeline Platoon.- Establishment only amended in minor
details.
following clause at the end :
Pipe role remained unchanged, except for the addition of the
"with total capacity not exceeding
2,400 tons for every 24 hours ".
(s) Technical Equipment Depot.—This was the former Petroleum Techni-.
cal Stores Depot, redesigned to include a wing for holding supply
technical equipment in addition to petroleum technical equipment.
It was organized as a H.Q. and an advanced section and a main
section.
Technical M.T. clerks and storemen, or storemen (sup-
plies), were allotted according to the type of stores held by sections.
(h) Petroleum Laboratory.— This unit was redesigned, on the basis of a base
laboratory, with two mobile detachments designed both to control
quality of petroleum products at major ports of entry and along
the L. of C., and to inspect captured enemy fuels and lubricants.
Composition.—Three
petroleum chemists (one
major,
captains), and ten
other ranks
assistants,
etc.
Transport
included
including chemical laboratory
two mobile laboratories,
mounted on 3-ton lorries.
APPENDIX III
(See Vol. II, page 249)
PORT DETACHMENTS, R.A.S.C. (HOME)
TECHNICAL DUTIES
Extracts from the instructions issued by C.P.O. (Foodstuffs), October, 1943
1. The primary object of Port Detachments, R.A.S.C., is the responsibility
for the identification and technical supervision of the loading and unloading
of R.A.S.C. supplies.
unloading of ships, the checking of receipts against Bills of Lading, the notifi-
cation of deficiencies, and the clearance of supplies from the dock area, the
port authority will give the Os.C., port detachments concerned, access to such
documents as they may require to enable them to carry out their responsibili-
ties as set out below :—
(a) To verify that all wagons of supplies, etc., advised by S.R.Ds., Petrol
Depots, and M. of F. buffer depots, are correctly received and
shipped.
(b) To call forward, as required by Movement Control, all supplies being
provided direct from M. of F. sources, so that they are available
at the loading berth in accordance with requirements.
(c) To examine all supplies and petrol (including the spotting of " leakers"),
prior to loading into ships, and to notify C.P.O. (F.S.) and S.T. 2
(for petrol) of any replacements required for any
appreciable
quantities which may be found unfit for shipment.
(d) To assist in identifying all R.A.S.C. commodities received for ship-
ment, and to advise the sea transport officer through Movement
Control as to the most suitable stowage to be allotted to :—
(i) Dangerous goods.
(ii) Items most prone to pilferage.
(iii) Other commodities requiring cool or special stowage.
(iv) Food supplies in relation to other stores.
(e) To assist to the limit of their power in the repair of damaged packages
of supplies, which can be effected at the landing berth.
(f) To obtain instructions from C.P.O. (F.S.) or S.T. 2 for the disposal
of any supplies or petrol damaged beyond repair or " shut out '
(g) To ensure that supplies, etc., left in
transit sheds for any length of
time prior to loading or despatch are adequately protected against
damage or pilferage.
Arrangements will be made for the necessary
protection through Movement Control.
(h) To examine and identify R.A.S.C. supplies and P.O.L. discharged
from vessels, and to ensure, through Movement Control, their
despatch to the appropriate consignee.
351
AA D
wenger
+17
wO 277/21
27
37477)
350
