RESTRICTED
(e) The organization of support amphibians was to be on the lines of an
armoured regiment, and that of load-carrying amphibians as normal
G.T. companies, R.A.S.C., equally capable of handling amphibians
and normal lorries.
Such companies were to be organized on the
normal four-platoon basis, with an amphibious platoon added.
When
operating amphibians,
the company would only be equipped with
90 task amphibians, plus 10 per cent. spare, the personnel of four
transport platoons together with R.D.Is. being
adequate for the
operation of these.
When operating land vehicles,
the company
would be equipped with 120 task vehicles, plus 10 per cent. spare,
and the amphibious platoon would have the function of holding and
maintaining the 99 amphibians until they were required again.
(f) Basic and unit training
was to be the responsibility of the service
concerned.
Some naval assistance would be required during the
training of Amphibian Companies, R.A.S.C., in seamanship.
(8) All Army companies, equipped with load-carrying amphibians, were
to be trained for all three possible rôles: —Beach group work, normal
maintenance, and carrying troops in the assault.
(h) The provision and operation of four companies of assault amphibians
for each brigade group for the assault would be a R.A.S.C. respon-
It was also War Office policy to train all R.A.S.C. transport personnel, of
suitable medical category, and who were to be sent out to the Far Eastern
theatre, in the driving and maintenance of amphibians.
Water Transport Planning
The requirement of water transport for the war in the Far East was very
large, some three times as great as that of 21 Army Group.
Not only was
the planning on a large scale, but it was very much complicated by the climatic
conditions which would have to be encountered, and by their effect on vessels
Planning at War Office was originally for the provision of the following
units, but the number was subsequently modified as shown: —
Two H.Q., C.R.A.S.C., Water Transport Units.
Two Fast Launch Companies; reduced to one.
Two Harbour Launch Companies; increased to five.
Two Military Oil Barge Companies; reduced to one.
One Ambulance Launch Company.
Two Coaster Companies; not required.
Two Floating Workshops; reduced to one.
Two Boat Stores Depots; reduced to one.
The proposals of the Lethbridge Mission were not implemented in respect
certain new types of unit were introduced to meet special requirements.
of the organization of water transport units in two types of regiment; but
110
Ambulance Launches and Floating Workshops
The new types of unit were the Ambulance Launch Company and the
Floating Workshop, both of which required the provision and manning of
large sea-going vessels.
The handling of these called for a much higher
degree of skill both in seamanship and navigation, and the training of their
complements had to be brought up to the standard necessary to be satisfactory
for the vessels on long sea voyages.
fully in Chapter XII.
The
Ambulance Launch Company was intended to be used for the
evacuation of casualties in combined operations, and for the movement of
casualties from minor to major ports.
Each launch could carry 20 lying, or
40 sitting, cases.
The company was equipped with sixteen 112-foot launches,
each with a crew of twelve.
Details of some of the modifications necessary to
convert the craft for their new role are contained in Appendix VIID.
view it would have been most interesting if the unit had actually taken up its
the war with Japan.
The Floating Workshops
intended for the repair of craft and
amphibian vehicles, and the requirement was originally for one hundred craft
of this type.
Extensive preparation and planning took place for the allocation
of suitable craft, but the units were not formed owing to the end of the war.
It had been decided to allocate L.C.Ts.(E) (see Appendix VIID) for the
purpose; but the selection of this type of craft was influenced by the factors
of availability and the element of time necessary for preparation, rather than
by its suitability for long sea voyages.
The requirements in respect of coastal shipping craft included a total of
21,000 tons' capacity of bulk tankers, made up of craft of 500 or 1.000 tons
each, specially equipped as petrol depot ships.
was to be fitted as floating petrol service stations.
The 80-ton self-propelled oil barge, with which the two Military Oil Barge
Companies in the
United Kingdom were equipped, was considered by
A.L.F.S.E.A. to be unsuitable for employment in the Far East.
sion with the Admiralty, the Ministry of War Transport (Tanker Division),
and S.T. 2, it was decided to employ two types: one, an Admiralty type,
steam-propelled, oil-fired, 100-feet long, and with a cargo capacity of 120
tons; the other, diesel-engined, 99-feet long, with a cargo capacity of 140
tons, which was a Canadian product.
The Fast Launch Company was to be equipped with new 45-foot fast
launches, for employment
with beach groups, and specially designed for
Six 90-foot motor fishing vessels were provided for conversion to fire boats
for employment in the Far East.
They had to be considerably modified to
allow for suitable quarters for the crew, and for the installation of special
fuel tanks, pumps, and fire-fighting equipment.
There was a requirement for
swamp gliders for use as reconnaissance and rescue boats.
A description of
these craft is in Appendix VIID.
111
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
