(1) Field Butchery Platoon.—Designed to slaughter
and dress cattle to
provide
fresh meat for 5,000
Troops
daily.
Composition-17 butchers, 2 clerks,
etc.
(k) Cattle Holding and Conducting Platoon.- There was a requirement for
such a unit, which had not previously existed in the R.A.S.C.,
though similar units had existed in the R.I.A.S.C.
The unit was
designed to receive, inspect, and hold, up to 600 cattle or 4,000
sheep, including conducting the animals to the abattoirs.
Com-
position- One officer and eight British other ranks, and 30 civilian
herdsmen, with one officer and one other rank, R.A.V.C., attached.
(1) H.Q., Cold Storage Depot Company. —To command and administer
up
to five Cold
Storage Depot
Platoons.
Composition-Two officers and 12 other ranks.
(m) Cold Storage Depot Platoon.— Designed to receive up to 200 tons of
frozen meat, and to issue, in bulk, a similar tonnage monthly, and
to maintain a holding in cold store of up to 600 tons.
Composition-Two butchers, two clerks, two storemen (supplies),
and two engine fitters, I.C. and pumps.
(n) Port Platoon.—In substitution of Port
Detachment.
To exercise
technical supervision over the loading or unloading of up to 8,000
tons monthly, of supplies or petroleum products or R.A.S.C. water
transport stores, or a combination of any two or all three.
It was
agreed that there was no necessity for a separate Petroleum Port
Detachment.
" A "
" B"
Composition :-
Detail
Platoon
H.Q.
Section
Section
Captain
Clerks
9
Storemen (Supplies)
Driver-batman, drivers
3
Cooks
One subaltern was to be added when the platoon was operating
independently of a H.Q. Supply Company.
(o) Pest Destruction Advisory Unit.—To operate under S. and T. service of
force H.Q., in the supervision of the control of pest infestation of
R.A.S.C.
supplies.
assistant advisers (captains) : three storemen (supplies), specially
Composition.-Adviser in pest destruction (major), and two
trained in pest destruction ; two clerks and one driver.
19. War Establishments of Petroleum Units
A large number of petroleum units had been created during the war, a
new establishment being designed for each new role as occasion demanded.
Eventuallv. the nosition was that few of these units ever fulfilled the role for
"Light"
which they were originally intended.
For the war in the Far East,
units were created. "i.e. multi-nurnose nlatoons co-ordinated hv Petroleum
Company H.Q.
A decision was required as to whether there was still a
requirement for specialized petroleum units, or whether a small number of
petrol units could be evolved, capable of meeting all P.O.L. commitments
348
The following basic decisions were taken by the same Conference :-
(a) There should be two types of operative platoon, one for base work,
and one forward.
(b) There should be one standard company H.Q. for all headquarter
duties, to be employed only where control of platoons was con-
sidered necessary.
(c) There should be a C.R.A.S.C. in command of Petroleum Units,
capable of being used to command both base and forward units.
(d) It was necessary to retain the following :-
(i) A separate type of platoon for pipeline duties.
ii) A unit to perform the duties then carried out by the Pet-
roleum Technical Stores Depot.
(iti) A unit to perform the work then done by the Petroleum Repair
Platoon
(iv) A separate Petroleum Mobile Laboratory.
(e) There was no requirement for a separate establishment for a Petroleum
Station Company, but that " ad hoc" arrangements should be made
by using existing establishments for Station Company work when
necessary.
The following War Establishments of P.O.L. units were considered, and
the decisions taken are indicated :-
(a) H.Q., Petroleum Group.—Formerly H.Q., C.R.A.S.C., Petroleum
Units, and with a similar establishment, but with a petroleum
engineer and assistant petroleum engineer, and no chemist or
mobile petrol laboratory. Designed to command a number of
petroleum units.
(b) H.Q., Petroleum Company.—Establishment as for the former H.Q.,
Petroleum
Bulk Storage Company,
with minor
amendments.
Designed to command up to six R.A.S.C. platoons.
(c) Petroleum Storage Platoon.—For base work.
This unit was pre-
viously the Bulk Petroleum Storage Section.
The role of the unit
was altered to read " To operate and maintain Bulk Petroleum
Installations".
(d) Petroleum Platoon.—For forward work.
Establishment as for Petro-
leum Platoon (Light), with minor amendments.
The role of the
unit was stated as : A general purpose platoon, capable of (i) a
maximum holding of 8,000 tons packed P.O.L., with a maximum
daily turnover of 1,500 tons; or (ii) a maximum daily container
filling of 120 tons; or (iii) the operation of a number of Petrol
points.
(e) Petroleum Maintenance Platoon.-
-Substituted for, and with an estab-
lishment similar to that of, a Petroleum Repair Platoon with certain
amendments.
The role of the unit was stated as " To maintain
containers and unit
technical equipment".
A subaltern
was
placed in command of each section, and the number of welders
was increased, and that of coppersmiths decreased.
349
137477)
wet
WO 277/21
27
