Transport Situation Pre-war
The R.A.S.C. M.T. company in Malaya consisted of 39 vehicles only in
peace-time.
The pre-war arrangements for augmenting the peace-time
strength in the event of mobilization were based on two phases, the emergency
precautionary stage, and the war period.
In the emergency stage, the necessary vehicles for conveying units and
their equipment to their war stations, were provided by hiring transport with
Asiatic drivers.
On the outbreak of war, all civilian road transport vehicles
were liable to be impressed by the local registrar of vehicles.
The transport
available and the requirements of the Services were known to the Transport
Sub-committee (of which the O.C., R.A.S.C., was a member) of the Govern-
ment Defence Committee of the Colony.
The Army's requirements were to be delivered by Asiatic drivers to the
R.A.S.C. Vehicle Reception Depot, from which they would be issued to units
to bring them from a peace to a war footing.
The number of M.T. vehicles
to be dealt with by the depot was over 500.
Proposals had been submitted to the War Office in 1938 for a second M.T.
company to be stationed in Malaya in peace-time, to enable R.A.S.C. trans-
port commitments to be adequately met in the event of a war.
This was not
approved, but authority was given for the existing company to be reorganized
into five sections, which would provide on mobilization the five M.T. units
rotion to be rearin
required.
The sections would become respectively a Vehicle Reception Depot; a
Reserve M.T. Company of 96 vehicles to be used for troop-carrying; an
ammunition section of 16 vehicles; a supply section of 9 vehicles; and a trans-
port section of a Motor Ambulance Convoy comprising 21 vehicles.
Super-
or Asiatics.
At the time of the 1938 Munich crisis, part of the local emergency scheme
was put into operation, and a troop-carrying company had to be mobilized
without an officer or N.C.O., regular or volunteer, being earmarked of avail-
able.
the officers.
The O.C., R.A.S.C., collected twelve European residents to become
but a "common sense" unit.
Had the unit actually been raised it would have been untrained,
As the result of the experience at that time, the formation of a Malaya
Army Service Corps Volunteer Transport Company was approved, as part
of the local defence forces, under the administration of the Commandant.
Straits Settlements Volunteer Corps.
On mobilization being ordered in September, 1939, the scheme went into
A reinforcing contingent arrived in Malaya in August, 1939, which in
cluded a cadre transport unit of the R.I.A.S.C.. inte Add so form the nucleus
of a reserve M.T. company.
The rest of the force however. arrived without
transport and with very few trained drivare and the personnel of this trans-
port unit were detached to act as first line drivers with units of other arms,
and its headquarters formed a driver training school.
34
To equip the force with transport, the O.C. R.A.S.C. was called on to
buy suitable vehicles as soon as possible, and did so through the local im-
porters of vehicles.
Owing to the urgency of the demands, it was necessary to
accept standard commercial vehicles, with hastily built bodies approximating
to W.D. pattern, but not so strong.
Owing to tyre troubles, there were many
breakdowns due to overloading, and the load capacity of the tyres had to be
Later, the R.A.O.C. took over the purchase of " B" vehicles, the
R.A.S.C. remaining responsible for the purchase and design of their own
In consequence of the constantly growing demands for transport, an
approved in February, 1940. Implementation was difficult, however,
to the shortage of British personnel and the necessity for employing civilian
drivers and artificers.
The number of lorry units being maintained was 85,
and this was done by two British N.C.Os. Skilled Asiatic labour was difficult
to obtain at the rates laid down locally.
Civilian drivers proved unsatisfactory during an emergency in 1940, and
it was consequently decided to raise two special Reserve M.T. companies,
with enlisted Asiatic drivers, but there were difficulties over pay, as that of
the local Asiatics differed from the Indian rates. The provision of artificers was
insuperable, as the high rates of civilian pay deterred enlistment, and it was
therefore decided to continue to employ civilian artificers rather than have
These companies were later reorganized as L. of C. Brigade M.T. Com-
Four Reserve M.T. Companies were raised locally, partly from
volunteer elements, and in one case from the Chinese community.
Ambulance Car Company of 50 cars to operate in Singapore was also raised.
All locally enlisted units were organized on the old War Establishments.
It was proposed to reorganize on the standard " brick" system in January,
1942, but the outbreak of hostilities prevented this.
in any case in applying the normal establishments to a native company, owing
to the different nationalities and castes in each company.
Apart from the units composing the Australian Imperial
Reserve M.T. Companies and a Motor Ambulance Convoy were provided by
The Australian Force brought two second line companies, and the third
line consisted of a section of a Reserve M.T. Company and a Divisional
Ammunition Sub-park.
The total second and third line transport brought
from India up to the end of the operations comprised ten Infantry Brigade
Transport Companies, one Divisional Troops Transport Company, and one
Base M.T. Installations
The question of raising Base M.T. Installations, R.A.S.C., for Malaya
was considered at the War Office in September, 1940, as the vehicle strength
was then about 1,000.
The establishments for a Combined M.T. Depot (in-
cluding a H.R.S., a M.T.S.D., and a V.R.D.) R.A.S.C., and a M.T. Inspector-
ate, R.A.S.C., were eventually approved in June, 1941. The C.M.T.D. was
35
7
WO 277/21
27
