with the B.E.F. Officers and other ranks ought to be given every opportunity
in peace-time of acquiring experience in all the duties they may be required to
perform in war.
The division of responsibility
created difficulties in connection
planning in peace for feeding the troops in war.
with
The local representative
of the D.S.T. found himself in an anomalous position, as he had no direct
control over the local N.A.A.F.I. representative; and, although he was
supposed to be responsible for the feeding of the army, in fact he was
unable to speak with authority in respect of the requirements of a wide range
of foodstuffs when discussing food supply plans with the civil authorities, but
was obliged to bring in a third party, responsible to a more or less independent
corporation.
The officer i/c supplies was placed in a more invidious relation to the
N.A.A.F.I.; for
the
R.A.S.C.,
which he
represented,
was
categorically
made responsible by a note at the head of the home service ration scale,
(see Appendix IX) for the correctness of every item of N.A.A.F.I. issue
so far as quality and quantity
were concerned, and all complaints went
to him.
Yet the R.A.S.C. had no part in the local provision of these items,
no say in the conditions of purchase, and no control over the personnel
issuing the foodstuffs, or their operations.
The O. i/c supplies could only
pass complaints to the local manager, and report any failure to rectify them
to higher authority.
In N.A.A.F.I.,
the Army had to depend on another agent for an
important part of its feeding arrangements.
N.A.A.F.I. stocks were not
under R.A.S.C. control, and reserves might have been reorientated without
warning
They were in fact discovered to be thus in 1940-1941, and the
R.A.S.C. thereupon took over from N.A.A.F.I. the supply of a number of
items.
In 1939, the R.A.S.C. plans for dealing with the expansion of the
rationing organization were implemented on the whole as planned; but, for
a variety of reasons, which are dealt with below in the paragraphs describing
the feeding arrangements on the outbreak of war, N.A.A.F.I. was not ready
on the due date.
In the mounting stage of Operation " Overlord", it was
planned that the troops going overseas should transfer from the home service
ration scale to the field service (U.K.) scale at the latest possible date, owing
to the lack of variety in the field service (U.K.) scale; but it proved necessary
to change over considerably
sooner than had been anticipated, the main
reason being the inability of N.A.A.F.I. to deal with the cash element in
the home service scale.
As was the case in 1938-1939, there was difficulty in effecting turnover of
the R.A.S.C, reserves of those commodities which in the United Kingdom were
items of N.A.A.F.I. supply, and in war were an R.A.S.C. issue overseas.
This would not have arisen if the R.A.S.C. had controlled the issue of these
items at all times.
Finally, the existence of a civilian element in the rationing system in the
United Kingdom in time of war was undesirable, as there was the risk of it
breaking down in case of an emergency.
A number of instances will be
found in this history of civilians proving inadequate when called upon
Carry out administrative duties in active anaratianal conditions. for which
they had neither the training nor the discipline.
It could scarcely have
been expected that they would carry o dishpin duties in the same way as
236
properly trained troops.
It was presumably this circumstance which was
the cause of the provision in the original instructions for feeding the troops
in the United Kingdom in the event of an emergency, that the RASPS
would, if necessary, take over the N.A.A.F.I. items in bulk and issue them:
but this instruction was modified in the later version of the instruction.
Another complication was that, in C.S.Ds., as the N.A.A.F.L. personnel were
only on duty in the depot during normal working hours, the whole duty of
guarding the depot, including the N.A.A.F.I. part of it, and all fire-fighting
outside working hours, fell on the R.A.S.C. personnel.
had been soldiers, these duties would have been lighter.
If all the personnel
Standard Diet Sheet Introduced
When the A.D.G.B. supply organization
was set up, a standard diet
sheet was produced as a guide for unit messing officers.
It was so constructed
that the cost of the diet was within the value of the ration at that time.
Although it was by no means a ration scale, it was a first step towards a
simpler system of rationing.
The diet sheet was warmly received. 'As a result, the D.S.T.
proposed
that a similar arrangement should be used on mobilization for all units, so
that, in the first few weeks of war, they would only be required to indent
by rations,
and to account for rations on the basis of entitlement in
accordance with actual feeding strength.
He suggested that payment for
N.A.A.F.I. items should be made by the paymaster without reference to
units.
This project was opposed by other branches concerned, on the grounds
that if N.A.Á.F.I. issued fixed rations, they would have to be regarded as con-
tractors,
which would not only entail provision at cost or contract
nicer.
but would involve difficulties over the rule by which contracts had to be
made by the open tender procedure; and that there would be a loss of
rebate on items normally provided at retail prices.
On the declaration of war, however, it was announced that, while peace-
time accounting would continue, units could demand from N.A.A.F.I. in terms
of standard rations, instead of by commodities.
an approved system of demanding by rations, but merely an attempt to
simplity procedure without departing from the peace-time system of pro-
visioning by reference to the cash value of the ration.
It was the intention that issues in kind should begin as soon as the
necessary expanded organization was ready; in the interval, it was necessary
to adopt the system of feeding troops by means of a subsistence allowance
(3s. Od. a head for men, 2s. 6d. for women).
The period during which this latter expedient was necessary could not
be reduced, as, although the R.A.S.C. expansion had been comparatively
effective, there was delay in opening a N.A.A.F.I. organization for the T.A.
with the Food (Defence Plans) Department of the Board of Trade; ove
This was the result of a variety of causes, including difficulties
the impressment of M.T.; and regarding accommodation and staff.
237
(37477)
WO 277/21
27
