Home Guard Drivers
In November, 1942, in connection with the question of the policy to
be adopted regarding the provision of transport for administrative services
in the United Kingdom in view of the withdrawal of field force transport
units, the position of the Home Guard driver
was considered at the War
It was assumed that in the event of mobilization of the Home
Guard, civilian drivers could be conscripted into the Home Guard, but it
was thought that jealousy might be created by their high civilian wages,
especially if they were given any continuous employment side by side with
drivers of the R.A.S.C., etc.
It was suggested that such drivers as would
be required in the event of " Action Stations", including those earmarked by
Commands, should be conscripted into the Home Guard forthwith,
and
formed into Home Guard companies, of a different category from those
already formed.
It appeared, however, that there was not likely to be any difficulty
about compulsorily enrolling the men required into the Home Guard so
far as N.C.Os. and drivers were concerned, but if artificers and the tools for
them to use were needed, a more thorough investigation would be necessary.
The question of pay was satisfactorily settled.
Home Guards in M.T.
companies were eligible for compensation for loss of earnings like other
Home. Guards, and the required numbers were being recruited without
difficulty over pay.
Civilian Transport for use in Emergency
The first attempt at laying down a standardized procedure for earmarking
and accepting civilian transport to be used for military purposes in the
event of the invasion, and for its subsequent release, was made in September,
1941.
It was variously interpreted in Commands,
and a " Model"
Scheme
was accordingly issued in May, 1942, which applied also to the provision
of vehicles for the Home Guard.
No civilian transport was to be requisitioned before " Action Stations"
unless G.H.O.. Home Forces, had ordered earmarked vehicles to be called
OUL.
Any civilian transport required before either of these conditions was
effective, was to be hired through officer i/e transport, R.A.S.C.
Earmarking
was to be carried out through the Regional Transport Commissioner.
Units
stated the number and type of vehicles required, the purpose for which
needed, and the precise rendezyous to which they were to report when called
These demands passed through formation headquarters to "Q" Staff,
Command Headquarters, and thence, when approved, to D.D.S.T., Command,
who then instructed the Military Transport Liaison Officer (see p. 196) t0
marking.
arrange with the Regional Transport Commissioner to complete the ear-
A requisition notice was then completed, except for the date, by
the R.T.C. and passed by the M.T.L.O. to the o licer i/c transport con-
corned in duplicate. One of these copies was sent to the unit.
A Certificate
of Acceptance, containing spaces for recording the condition of the vehicle
on being called out, receipts, location of rendezvous,
to the owner of the vehicle. On "Action Stations" being ordered,
etc., was then sent
a local civilian driver delivered the vehicle at the rendezvous,
either
or a regular
128
soldier or Home Guard driver collected it. It was then inspected at the
rendezvous, and the Certificate of Acceptance was then completed as to
condition, and forwarded to the officer i/c transport.
All earmarked civilian transport, when called out, was to be driven by
Regular or Home Guard drivers.
The officer i/c transport was responsible
for ascertaining whether the driver of an earmarked vehicle was a member
of the Home Guard, or willing to be enrolled as such. If he was unable
or unwilling to do so, the officer i/c transport either arranged with the local
Home Guard Commander for a member of the Home Guard to drive the
vehicle, or arranged with the M.T.L.O, to earmark another vehicle whose
driver was already a member or willing to enrol.
Release of Vehicles
Particular attention was directed to the importance of adequate planning
for the return of the vehicles to their owners in due course, and for the
rapid settlement of claims.
This was because there had been severe criticism of the delays and
losses which had occurred in connection with the release of vehicles after
the Dunkirk emergency in June, 1940.
This state of affairs was partly due
to the hurried way in which the requisitioning had been carried out, often
without adequate inspection to ascertain condition on being taken over.
Vehicles were handed over to units, which subsequently moved about, and
it was difficult to trace what had become of the vehicles.
In many cases,
they were only found as the result of being handed in, or even abandoned
as no longer serviceable.
They then had to be inspected to ascertain their
condition, and an agreement was reached with the owner as to the deprecia-
tion and losses incurred, and their value.
Under the new rules, vehicles found unfit on reporting at rendezvous
were to be returned at once to the owner, with the Certificate of Acceptance
suitably endorsed.
Vehicles released, when no longer required, or on termina-
tion of hiring on account of breakdown or other cause, were to be sent
to the Vehicle Collecting Centres which were to be established by commands.
There they
were to be inspected, and a Certificate of Release was to be
completed as to condition, and signed by the owner's representative.
Revised Procedure for Requisitioning
A year later the scheme required revision in the light of the new and
increasing responsibility placed on the Home Guard in the anti-raid defence
Under the existing procedure, the authority
of G.H.Q., Home Forces,
was required on the
order " Action Stations", before earmarked civilian
transport could be called up.
It was, however, probable that G.H.Q. would
not receive warning of minor raids on the coast, and further delay would
be caused in implementation of the authority to requisition by the necessity
for completion and serving of the requisite forms before a civilian vehicle
could be taken into use.
An amended procedure was agreed with the
Ministry of War Transport delegating the authoritu to requisition earmarked
WO 277/
27
