In February, 1941, full War Establishment scales of transport were issued
to the Polish Forces in the United Kingdom for equipping one Corps Train
and three Brigade Trains.
Administration of Allied Vehicles
It was necessary to define the procedure for the administration and
control of W.D. vehicles used for military purposes in the United Kingdom
It was decided that all such vehicles were to be the
property of the Governments concerned, and that they would carry a W.D.
identification number, as allotted under War Office arrangements, plates
being carried with the distinguishing international lettering used on cars
when touring out of their own countries.
A system, similar to that of the British Army,
was to be adopted for
vehicle records, and for the control of drivers, e.g., work tickets.
The question of insurance was
difficult, as some Governments were
not in a financial position to assume liability for claims against their drivers.
Regional Transport Commissioners
The representative of the Ministry of War Transport in each region of the
United Kingdom was a Regional Transport Commissioner,
sponsible for the co-ordination of civilian road transport services and rail
The War Department was at first only concerned with the R.T.Cs. in
connection with the earmarking of civilian vehicles for use in case of an
obtained by direct arrangements between the officers i/c transport and
operators, under contract or by casual hire.
time did not directly control civilian road transport, but exercised indirect
control by means of petrol coupons, for whose issue to operators they were
If an operator proved recalcitrant in any matter, he could be
deprived of petrol, and this was consequently a potent weapon.
at this time was organized voluntarily in groups, under a locally chosen
organizer, with sub-area managers, and so on.
Military Transport Liaison Officers
In June, 1940, the Ministry of Transport suggested that a R.A.S.C.
oficer should be appointed for liaison duties with each Regional Transport
Commissioner in the United Kingdom, in the same way as R.A.F. officers
had already been appointed by the Air Ministry.
These officers would deal
with questions of military transport requirements to be met from civilian
The idea was favourably received in commands, and 14 officers
Their duties also included liaison with the regional transport commissioner
ira so armarking of civilian vehicles to meet the W.D. requirements of
transport in the event of active operations in the United
Kingdom;
and assist of the " return load" scheme, described elsewhere in this chapter.
to essential services affected by strikes, etc.
and assistance to the civil authorities in the wav of allotment of W.D. vehicles
196
The appointments continued until after the end of the war,
when the
duties still carried out by the M.T.L.Os. in regard to liaison and the " return
load " scheme were transterred to the officers i/c transport.
Hired Transport.—Initial Policy
The pre-war policy of the War Office regarding the provision of transport
for general administrative services in the United Kingdom on mobilization
was that hiring should be adopted, on a relatively high scale, in the initial
It was proposed that hired vehicles should be progressively released
as W.D. vehicles became available from impressment and new production.
This was carried out to such an extent that hiring costs which had risen
to €356,000 in December, 1939, had fallen to £150,000 in April, 1940.
The Ministry of Transport did not like impressment, and preferred that
hiring should continue, so that ultimately all vehicles employed in W.D.
service would return to civil
operation, where they were very
By the end of April, 1940, the production of new vehicles was
such that the achievement of this object was well in sight.
Situation, 1940
The situation was, however, completely changed by the evacuation of
the B.E.F. from France.
The Army had to be re-equipped with essential
transport, and a large amount of transport was also required for the carriage
and distribution of stores and ammunition until those vehicles which were
of suitable types could be acquired and W.D. vehicles became available.
Hirings thus greatly increased, reaching a peak of £680,000 in July, 1940.
By the end of the year, as the result of acquisition of civilian vehicles and
of new production, the figure had fallen to £300,000.
Responsibility for Hiring
During the early months of the year, there had been some departure
from normal procedure in the hiring of civilian transport for military services;
and in May, 1940, it became necessary to restate the correct procedure.
The hiring of transport for all W.D. services was affirmed as the re-
sponsibility of the R.A.S.C., and was to be carried out solely by the R.A.S.C.
officers i/c transport in districts and sub-districts.
divisional R.A.S.C. to arrange hirings, and no R.A.S.C. officer serving with
was to be charged with making or administering hiring
All existing contracts or agreements for hired transport, made
direct by units, were to be transferred to officers i/c transport.
hensive instructions were also issued covering the procedure to be adopted
for meeting the requirements of units in hired transport.
units which held vehicles on continuous hire were directed to notify the officer
1c transport as and when the services of any such vehicles could be dispensed
with, and it then became the duty of the officer i/c transport to terminate or
reduce the hirings affected.
In consequence of the threat of invasion and the possibility of vehicles
hired by the War Department being used in operational conditions, it bicaine
necessary in August, 1940, to review the question of the status of the civilian
197
WO 277/21
27
