given standing authority to sanction the use of w.D. road transport for
urgent deliveries of ordnance stores from those depots beyond the limit of
a radius of 40 miles then in force, which had been determined to save
rubber and petrol.
In March, 1944, it was decided that road transport could be employed
with advantage to facilitate arrangements for the transfer of ordnance stores
between M.T. Central Depots at Chilwell, Derby, Bicester and Feltham for
the purpose of assembly into complete sets of landing reserves and beach
It was enjoined that vehicles should be used to their
At the same time, as the result of special representation by Ordnance
branch, S.T.3 agreed to instruct R.A.S.C. Officers i/c Transport to allow
units to use their first line transport for collecting stores from ordnance
depots where permission had been given by the commandant of the depot
The practice of units sending their first line transport
at will to ordnance depots, sometimes over considerable distances, to collect
possibly small consignments, had been specifically prohibited some time
before, as it had proved a very wasteful practice.
Other expedients used
to expedite the delivery of ordnance stores and economize in road transport
were the collection and delivery of stores by vehicles visiting units on a
" milk round" system; and arrangements for the collection of stores for a
Field Force formation in bulk by second line transport, and distribution
under formation arrangements.
The position which arose in connection with the distribution of ordnance
stores owing to congestion on the railways in the months preceding " Over-
lord " is described in Chapter VIII.
The "milk round" system was also employed for the collection and
delivery of barrack stores for exchange and replacement.
Indents for stores
for exchange had to be sent to the E.S.A. some days in advance of require-
ments, in order that the necessary stores might be prepared for despatch, as
and when a vehicle load was completed.
The E.S.A. co-ordinated require-
ments of transport with the officer i/c transport, who arranged for the
provision of the requisite transport to carry out the deliveries.
accompanied the vehicle, delivering and collecting en route.
The advantages were considered to be a saving in unit transport, and
that it would normally be unnecessary for unit representatives to visit
barrack expense stores, which would obviate the previous continual flow of
individuals in and out of those establishments.
The use of this system was not always possible, owing to the general
layout and location of the units in relation to the position of the barrack
Movement of Heavy Loads
The Movements Directorate, War Office, in December, 1941, propose
that a pool of heavy W.D. vehicles should be organized to deal with the
Cy roadd and increasing need for the movement of heayy and bulky loads
oy rode. the ming or suitable ciVillan vehicles was a considerabie expense
S.T.3 agreed with this idea, and a start was made with the collection
of some 25-ton vehicles into a Station Transport Company in London while
the formation of a special transport company was considered.
This move was followed by the necessity for finding means
porting tanks in the United Kingdom.
The American heavy tanks,
some were expected to arrive in April and May, 1942, weighed 55 tons
and were thus beyond the capacity of the heaviest W.D.-type
then in existence. Firing would therefore be necessary.
In April, 1942, top priority was accorded to the formation of a War
Office transport company, to be equipped with low loader 10-ton lorries,
tank transporters, and other vehicles necessary for the transportation of
amoured fighting vehicles between depots, ports, etc.
Six special tank trans-
capable of carrying 70-ton tanks, and ten 40-ton tank transporters
and trailers, were included in the unit.
A number of gun tractors were also
included for the movement of radio-location sets, each of which weighed
Supplementary Arrangements
As far as it was practicable, full use was made of the tank transporters
of field force units, to assist in the tank traffic.
Tank Transporter Companies on loan from 21 Army Group were required
to be released for operational reasons.
As a means of reducing demands for tank transporters, it was agreed
that, with certain exceptions, tanks and self-propelled artillery equipments
should move by road on their own tracks up to a distance of 150 to 200
For the movement of American-type A.F.Vs. and self-propelled
equipment, the commitment amounted to 135 loaded journeys a day, whereas
the combined capacity of rail wagons and tank transporters was only 102
It was therefore decided that American Sherman tanks would
move on their own tracks up to 300 miles.
The commitment for moving tanks was expected to increase in April,
May, and June, 1944, and three home service tank transporter companies
were consequently formed by the conversion of three G.T. companies which
were surplus to the operational requirements.
Situation, June, 1944
A review of the tank transporter situation in the United Kingdom
June, 1944, showed total assets of 1,000 Diamond "T" vehicles, of which
840 were needed for 21 Army Group, only 160 being available for tank-
At least 210 were necessary if the build-up of 21 Army Group
programme was not to be interfered with.
By various adjustments between
vitish and American resources a total of near mon
available for ferrying services, to be supplemented by
transporter companies until these were required for operational purposes.
173
WO 277/21:
27
