scheduled number of companies.
The progressive equipping with vehicles
of new R.A.S.C. units for field force rôles would also cause a reduction in
the number of vehicles available for the emergency companies.
It was estimated that, before long, not more than 15 companies would
be able to be raised.
At the same time, Home Forces commitments in
the event of invasion would not permit of any reduction in the number
of companies required. It was decided, as a temporary expedient, to reckon
against the commitment 13 General Transport Companies being raised in
Mobilization Centres; and to consider the possibility of the Home Guard
forming some of the companies in future.
The estimated number of companies which could be raised continued
to drop, and in July, 1942, as the result of reorganization of R.A.S.C.
Driver Training battalions and of other changes in the availability of reserve
vehicles, it was reported to be almost impossible to raise the companies
until August.
In the meantime, only units forming in Mobilization Centres
could be made available.
The situation was not, however, so desperate as
might appear, as, during 1942, the transport at the disposal of Home Forces,
in organized and equipped units, had very considerably increased.
On top of this came a representation by the General Staff that over
3,000 vehicles, held in M.T. Depots, and reserved for issue to Emergency
M.T. Companies on their formation, were very urgently needed for equipping
R.A.S.C. units preparing for inclusion
in the
Expeditionary Force.
It was, therefore, a question whether the Emergency Company scheme
could be dropped, and the vehicles reserved for them used to meet other
urgent and concrete liabilities.
Invasion was still a possibility, but Home
Forces agreed that it was uneconomical to tie up vehicles against that con-
tingency, and that they might therefore be released.
This meant the cancella-
tion of the scheme for raising Emergency M.T. Companies; but that for
raising Home Guard Companies continued to be pursued.
Home Guard M.T. Companies
A scheme had already been in force since July, 1941, in connection with
the defence of London District, for 1,250 London taxicabs to be requisitioned
for hire on "Action Stations" being ordered for a special London Home
Guard unit. The cabs were to be driven by Home Guard personnel.
proposal to form Home Guard M.T. companies on a large scale was made
in January, 1942, when the raising of emergency companies in the event of
invasion became a doubtful possibility.
then understood to be in a position to form units.
The associated road operators were
commands.
In September that year the scheme was approved after examination in
Personnel were to be found from within the Home Guard
ceiling, and vehicles provided by earmarking suitable
for requisition on " Action Stations".
civilian transport
as possible on the basis of the standard R.A.S.C. company
Units were to be formed as far
or platoon
organization, with a basic platoon lift of 90 tons, preferably in 3-ton lorries.
Companies were to be grouped in transport columns, or otherwise to
affiliated to Home Guard battalions.
The drivers of civilian earmarked
vehicles who were already enrolled in another branch of the Home Guard
126
might be transferred to the Home Guard M.T. unit for which such vehicles
were intended, so as to become the appointed drivers of their vehicles if
called out for an emergency.
Attempts were made to obtain permission for the personnel of these
companies to wear the R.A.S.C. cap badge and flash, but this was not
accorded, on the ground that it would involve a departure from the principle
of the county organization, which was the basis of the Home Guard con-
stitution.
Home Guard Transport Columns
As the result of practical experience, it was
proposed in March, 1943,
that the transport column should be the normal basis of the organization of
these companies, to enable their administration and training to
independently from that of the Home Guard battalions.
proceed
This would involve
the pool of training officers, allotted to commands, being augmented by the
addition of 19 R.A.S.C. officers of home service category, to assist in train-
ing the Home Guard transport units.
It was also represented that an adjutant should be provided for each
transport column,
assisted
Association civilian employees for
quarter-masters' duties.
Permanent staff instructors should be allowed on
a scale of two for each transport column.
These proposals were not authorized until January, 1944, after con-
siderable opposition by the Treasury,
condition that the situation should be reviewed in six months'
time, to
ascertain whether any of the appointments could be filled by trained Home
Guard personnel.
On review, continuance of the allotments was approved
for three months, by which time it was thought that considerable progress
could be made towards substitution by Home Guard personnel.
It was
then allowed to go on as a temporary measure, in view of the impending
" stand down" order for the Home Guard.
The number of Home Guard M.T. units raised totalled 26 Transport
Columns, 133 Companies, and 15 Independent Platoons.
About 12,000
vehicles were earmarked, practically the
whole
complement, and
17.000
drivers out of 20,000 had been enrolled.
A directive was issued on the subject of the operational rôle of the
Home Guard Transport Columns as seen in the light of changes and develop.
ments since the original policy was promulgated.
It was accepted that
Home Guard transport units should be organized and trained under
the
direction of D.Ds.S.T.
of Commands, with the object of carrying
out
operational transport duties in the United Kingdom, similar to those carried
out by R.A.S.C.
transport units of the Regular Army; i.e., to form the
counterpart of Corps and Army transport units under Command control,
and to provide a War Office reserve of transport capacity, to cover breakage
in rail communication, and for maintenance of essential moves
of War
Office reserves of ammunition, supplies, and stores,
between main depots
and the ports.
As far as possible, units would operate under their own transport column
organization, within their own Commands, when mustered; but units would
be liable for independent
allotment elsewhere in the United Kingdom,
according to operational needs.
127
(37471)
K 2
WO 277/21
27
