War Office agreed that the amount of detail and information to be
furnished to the War Office should be restricted,
but yet be sufficient to
enable the War Office to be assured that stock-levels in the areas were being
maintained, and that where for any reason there was a shortage of stocks,
actual or foreseen, action had been taken or was being taken.
Definition of Administrative Control
In a War Office directive issued in August, 1944, it was affirmed that
the Commander, B.A.S., Washington, should be responsible for the admini-
strative control and maintenance of the stations concerned in all "Q"
matters.
In the light of the War Office policy enunciated by S.T.6, the
expression,
held responsible in any way in this connection.
His responsibilities had been
reduced to advice and procurement.
A new directive was therefore issued in June, 1945, in which it was laid
down that the responsibility of the Commander, B.A.S.
general advice and assistance in administrative matters in the Caribbean
Areas and Bermuda, and to arrange provision of such supplies and un-
controlled stores as were required by them.
S.T. and B. Responsibility
The responsibility of D.D.S.T., B.A.S., for S.T. and B Services in the
Caribbean Areas and Bermuda, was, therefore, as follows:
(a) Receipt and screening of all R.A.S.C. Area demands.
R.A.S.C. items procurable in North America.
(c) Transmission to War Office of Area demands for items not pro-
curable in North America.
(d) Lend-Lease accounting for all items procured in U.S.A.
(e) Departmental advice and assistance.
With the diminution of responsibilities
of B.A.S., correspondingly in-
creased responsibilities were placed on the Os.C., R.A.S.C., concerned.
It is of interest to compare the policy
adopted in this case with the
relations of the D.D.S.T. and O.C., R.A.S.C., Malta, as described in Chapter
Future S.T. Policy for the Caribbeans and Bermuda
The view
was expressed,
in the official account of the
activities
of
if Bermuda
and the
Caribbean Areas were not under a sine e command headquarters with its
B.A.S., Washington, that, in any future emergency,
own S.T. staft, then the head of the a single comman A.S, should immediately
undertake the functions of a D.D.S.T.,
command, for those
ensuring the satisfactory co-ordination of the activities of the three Os.C.,
298
Lessons Learnt
If, at any future date, collaboration with the U.S.A. in such a way is
again necessary, then, if lessons are sought
from what has already been
done, it is important that we should consider what the Americans learnt
from the partnership, and what they would expect from us next time.
It is to be expected that very early action would be instituted to co-
ordinate food supply on an inter-governmental basis.
be necessary to include, in any B.A.S.
As a result, it would
organization in America, a S.T.
element, similar to that existing at the end of the Second World War, to deal
with the problem of military food supplies.
Experience gained in that war would probably result in the immediate
introduction of phased production by industrial food concerns in America,
and a close scrutiny and screening of all demands from other countries from
the very outset.
While, in the early days of the Second World War, demands for food-
stuffs had only to be placed and they were met, there is no doubt that, in
any future partnership, we should be expected to give full justification for
our requirements.
It is, therefore, essential that the S.T. Staff of any future B.A.S. organiza-
tion should be very carefully chosen, and should include personnel with
War Office and operational background, fully competent to present the
British cases and argue military necessity for War Office requirements.
299
WO 277/21
27
