"Round the Clock" System
On Ist August, 1943, then, a new system was instituted, for the whole
organization, as the "Round the Clock".
This gave each company 90
lorries, of which it operated 60 on a 24-hour schedule, the other 30 being
in workshops for overhaul.
30 vehicles were exchanged with the latter every
fortnight, or oftener if necessary.
In other words, the company had
50 per cent. spare lorries.
Each company delivered 30 loads a day at
Imphal or Palel, on a two-day turnround for the 150 miles.
The tonnage
delivered worked out at one ton a day for a 3-ton task vehicle on the line.
The workshops no longer attended to any vehicle that came along for
maintenance, but each workshop company was made responsible for carry-
ing out the second line repairs of a group of three transport companies, i.e.,
270 task vehicles, plus of course the domestic vehicles.
The fact that the
lorries were running 24 hours a day was held to justify this generous scale of
provision of workshops, as the capacity of each workshop company was
The result of the restoration of personal interest in the vehicles was evident
at once, and the proportion of runners began to rise, until, in the middle of
August, 1943, it was nearly 80 per cent., and later reached 85 per cent.,
although under the system only 663 per cent. of the total task vehicles were
actually employed at any one time.
Delivery figures of course rose corres-
pondingly, and the system settled down to a successful routine.
for January, 1944, are given in Appendix VIH.
Credit for the improved results achieved must also be given to the fact
that the standard of driving was very high from the middle of 1943 onwards.
The fact that the old and well-tried principle of company responsibility
had been so substantially vindicated, was not however acknowledged, and
it has been generally supposed that the original inspiration, the " L.G.O.C."
system, was the solution of the problem.
It seems, on the contrary, that the
established practice was basically sound, and that it was unable to cope with
its task in the first place largely through lack of the facilities which were
subsequently provided with a lavish hand.
This view received further support
seen in its place.
of C. transport was reorganized in February, 1945, as will be
Arakan, 1942-1943
in Arakan, there were also
administrative
During 1942 and the early part of 1943, the forward troops were
operating at the end of a very tenuous L. of C. over 150 miles from railhead
This was also a fair-sized port, although its facilities had been
much reduced as the result of destruction carried out in
pursuance of the
denial policy when the Japanese threat seemed imminent in 1942.
A road down the Donbaik Peninsula was being made, for want of better
material, of bricks baked in wayside kilns.
For these, the available trans-
port had to carry clay and coal, besides timber for bridges, and other materials.
The work was continually interrupted by rain, which, stopped movement.
Supply by sea from Chittagong or Calcutta was hampered by the lack of
vessels able to enter the small ports of Cox's Bazar and Maungdaw.
The maintenance system in Arakan at the beginning of 1943 was complex.
Supplies were brought by M.T. from Chittagong, and by ponycart transport
from Cox's Bazar, to the head of the Naf Estuary near Bawli Bazar, whence
water in sampans (native boats) to Maungdaw.
One road ran south down the Donbaik Peninsula to Indaw,
from the F.S.D. here the forward troops were maintained by M.T. and pack
There was a very difficult track over the Mayu Range from Indaw
to a brigade between the hills and the Mayu River, but this formation was
maintained by supplies from Htizwe, north of Rathedaung.
supplied by road and water from
Buthidaung, about 15 miles east of
Maungdaw, with which it was connected by the only all-weather road in the
area, which passed under the hills by means of two tunnels.
Htizwe, second line transport was on a pack transport basis.
14 Indian Division had pack first line transport, which was the cause of some
difficulties, as the formation had been trained on a mechanized basis.
supplies were brought from Chittagong to Maungdaw by M.T., 135 miles each
way, one day out, one day rest, and one day back.
Our attacks on Donbaik, with the ultimate objective of capturing Akyab,
all failed, partly owing to the difficulties of communication, which made re-
inforcement and supply very slow; and, in mid-March, the Japanese began a
withdrew to avoid being cut-off.
In accordance with our practice at that time, our troops
Several pack transport companies were lost,
and considerable quantities of supplies had to be destroyed.
14 Division occupied positions astride the Mayu Range from Bawli Bazar to
Goppe Bazar in the Kalapanzin valley, and was then relieved by 26 Indian
Division; but the three Army pack transport companies working in the forward
area got no relief, as there were no others yet ready to take their place.
The
Japanese halted their operations during the monsoon, and the sector was
comparatively quiet until the autumn of 1943, but there was no respite for the
maintenance of the troops
located in the
Kalapanzin valley was particularly exacting, as all supplies had to go over
the Goppe Pass from Bawli Bazar.
The pass was very steep, and although
only five miles long, rose to 1,500 feet.
Steps had to be cut to get the animals
The journey was extremely tiring for them, and many sore backs were
caused by the difficulty of the climb, accentuated by saddles of inferior Indian
Animal transport companies also arrived unfit from India, a
circumstance which is explained in Chapter X.
Coolies were also employed
on this route, being particularly useful for big, awkward loads that could not
be fitted on mules; to manage these, two or more combined to carry the
load slung to bamboo poles.
They were, however, unreliable as to reporting
for duty, and pilfered their loads.
During the monsoon, when even mules
could not negotiate the track, an aerial ropeway was established. probably
the only instance of the use of such an expedient during the war.
Any one
journey in this area normally involved three changes in the method of trans-
port, a permutation of 3-ton lorries, 15-cwt. trucks, jeeps, pack transport.
coolies and sampans.
Much use was made of the Naf river and its subsidiary chaungs, and of
the Kalapanzin river.
Outboard motors fitted to sampans were a boon, and
the effort required to transport them over the mountains was well worth while.
55
WO 277/21
27
