The control of all repair facilities in the theatre by
allowed of a large measure of team work between the workshops and spare
parts stores, and even between units in a formation.
of fluidity of spare stocks was achieved.
" personnel of the vehicles of the R.A.S.C. ensured
that all aspects of repairs and replenishment were related to the best interests
A divided system of maintenance, i.e., the company workshops under the
and the Heavy Repair Shops under the A.O.C.,
beginning of the first war, and definitely failed.
The A.S.C. were obliged
to establish their own H.R.S. in consequence.
Note: -
The R.A.S.C. system of allowing ten per cent. spare vehicles in each unit
was considered to have proved its value beyond doubt.
It was specially
noted in the report of the Commission referred to above, which observed that
" the R.A.S.C.,
who carry their own replacement element, have generally
speaking been able to compete with their own
repairs,
spite of the
difficulties of spares for impressed vehicles and
in spite of the large
numbers of affiliated lorry units in excess of established provision.
Without
the authorized ten per cent., which constitutes their replacement, their task
of providing a fixed number of vehicles continuously in service would have
been impossible ".
The Finch Committee, which reviewed the War Establishments of Field
Force units in November, 1940, agreed that the ten per cent. spare vehicles
in R.A.S.C. transport units were an essential addition.
394
APPENDIX VIC
(See Vol. I, page 88)
REPAIR OF MECHANICAL VEHICLES IN THE FIELD
Copy of letter from G.H.Q., Middle East, to War Office,
dated 22nd December,
1941
1. The question of repair of mechanical vehicles in the field has now
received very close examination at these headquarters.
These investigations
have shown that the centralization of base repair and holding of spare parts
by one Service makes for better workshop organization, economy of per-
sonnel, economy of plant, more ready availability of spare parts, and simpli-
fication of system.
On the above, all mechanical experts are agreed.
That
this is in practice a fact has been demonstrated by the need for the appoint-
ment of a Controller of Mechanical Engineering Resources in the Middle
East, to obtain, as far as is possible under the present system, the best use
of the resources available to the R.A.O.C. and the R.A.S.C
2. The next point to receive consideration was the method by which this
centralization can be carried out.
The alternatives appear to be: —
(a) To divide the responsibility between the R.A.O.C. and R.A.S.C. on
the basis of armament and track vehicle repair for the one, and
wheel vehicle repair for the other.
This, however, would be a
half measure, would still entail double provision of workshops and
spare parts holdings, and would fall short of the achievement of
maximum economy in the use of plant and personnel.
(b) The expediency of forming a new Mechanical Engineering Corps,
who would be responsible for all mechanical engineering repairs,
including armament, tracked and wheeled vehicles,
etc,
and the
holding of the necessary spare parts, was then considered.
The
conclusion reached was that the separation of responsibility for
repair from the responsibility for provision and supply in the
Field would be prejudicial to rapid and efficient turnover
repaired equipment back to the user service.
This system was
tried in the Egyptian Army and was found to suffer from the
defect cited above with resulting delays.
The rapid repair and
return to service of vehicles and equipment damaged in the field
is so vitally necessary that this alternative was rejected.
More-
over the formation of a new corps in the middle of a war would
be fraught with so many difficulties as to be almost impracticable.
(c) The last alternative considered was that all base repair and provision
of all M.T. spare parts should be the responsibility
of the
R.A.O.C., and it is recommended that this be accepted.
This
recommendation is supported by conditions at present occurring
in the Middle East.
In various areas where comparatively small
forces are located, e.g., Cyprus and the Sudan, this procedure is
already working.
Moreover, in pursuit of economy in repair
facilities, the base ordnance workshops and heavy repair shops
395
WO 277/21
27
