DIVISIONAL PETROL COMPANY
Composition
H.Q. and workshop section.
Three transport sections composed as follows :—
"A" and " B" Sections, each
Lorries, 3-ton, 4-wheeled, 6, and 30-cwt., 4-wheeled, 6, for carriage
of petrol.
" C" Section
Lorries, 3-ton, 4-wheeled, for conveyance of blankets in bulk, 17 ;
for reserve clothing and equipment, 2.
The workshop section included facilities for the repair of the affiliated
R.A.S.C. transport referred to below.
Each transport section had 10 per cent. spare vehicles, cooks' lorries, and
a 1-ton lorry for defence detachment.
Function
Second line transport, operating from petrol refilling point to petrol points.
"A" and " B" sections carried petrol for 50 miles (each 25 miles) for
units or of forming three or more petrol points, as required.
all the unit of the dirion, mo were capable o, dis tributing direct to
section carried blankets in bulk for units of the division, except artillery
units, and a reserve for all units in the division of 2½ per cent. of clothing
to be exchanged for gas-contaminated clothing.
The company was
responsible for the technical supervision and maintenance of the affiliated
R.A.S.C.-driven transport of the following units of the division: H.Q.
division ; H.Q. divisional R.A.S.C. ; 3 H.Qs. of infantry brigades ;
3 field ambulances ; field hygiene section.
DIVISIONAL SUPPLY COLUMN
Composition
Headquarters and workshop section.
Two echelons.
Headquarters and four sections.
" A " Section
Four 3-ton lorries, four 30-cwt. lorries, and three 12-cwt. vans, for
the carriage of the supplies of various units of divisional troops;
one 3-ton lorry for R.E. stores, and one for R.A.O.C. stores.
"B", " C" and " D" Sections
Identical, each consisting of three 12-ewt. vans, for the supplies of
Infantry Brigade H.Q., Field Company, R.E., and Field Ambu-
lance, respectively ; and one 3-ton lorry for each of three infantry
battalions, one Field Regiment, R.A., and R.A.O.C. stores.
(i.e., each of these sections served a brigade group.)
Echelons, but not sections, were self-contained and included spare vehicles,
cooks' lorries, and petrol lorries.
defence detachment.
Each section had one I-ton lorry for
302
DIVISIONAL SUPPLY COLUMN-continued
Function
Second and third line transport operating from railhead to supply points,
for the supply of food and stores to the division.
Each echelon carried
one day's supplies (excluding petrol and fuel) for all units of the division.
The two echelons delivered on alternate days, drawing in bulk from rail-
head on intermediate days, and breaking bulk on the way up.
ARMOURED BRIGADE COMPANY
Composition
Headquarters and workshop section.
Three transport sections, composed as follows :—
Ammunition Section
16 3-ton, 4-wheeled, and seven 3-ton, 6-wheeled lorries, one 30-cwt.
4-wheeled lorry.
Petrol Section
26 3-ton lorries for petrol, two 3-ton lorries for anti-gas reserves.
Supply section
Six 3-ton and four 30-cwt. lorries for supplies ; two 3-ton lorries for
R.A.O.C. stores.
10 per cent. spare vehicles throughout.
Function
Second line transport for ammunition, petrol, and anti-gas reserves, and
vehicles for supplies on double echelon system, for units of Armoured
Brigade.
Replenishment of petrol carried was 75 miles for all vehicles
of the brigade, excluding second line transport.
SUPPORT GROUP COMPANY
Composition
Headquarters and workshop section.
Three transport sections, composed as follows :—
Ammunition Section :
14 3-ton, 4-wheeled, six 3-ton, 6-wheeled, two 30-cwt. 4-wheeled lorries.
Petrol Section
12 3-ton and two 30-cwt. lorries for petrol, two 3-ton lorries for anti-
gas reserves.
Supply Section
Eight 3-ton and four 30-cwt. lorries for supplies, two 3-ton lorries for
R.A.O.C. stores.
10 per cent. spare vehicles.
303
37477)
WO 277/21
27
