home of their last available reserves.
In the other branches of R.A.S.C.
work, a process of run-down was initiated, and became progressive.
sane time, attention was now directed to the needs of the campaign in
the Far Bast, which was to be intensified as soon as the enemy in Europe
was disposed of, and preparations to that end were well in hand when the
war in Europe ended on 8th May, 1945.
The arrangements necessary to effect the mobilization of the Army on
the outbreak of war in 1939, from the point of the S.T. Directorate, are
described in Chapter II, Section 3, and the particular aspects of the process
affecting the B.E.F., in Chapter IV.
The process of expanding the supply
and transport services at home, to meet the constantly increasing commit-
ments of a growing army, is described in detail in the relevant
this chapter; but, it is convenient to mention here that the mobilization of
the R.A.S.C. units for the B.E.F. was, in the early months,
under the supervision of the local D.Ds.S.T. of commands and Os.C.,
R.A.S.C., of districts, most of whom had only just taken over their appoint-
ments, and who were themselves wrestling with the manifold difficulties of
keeping the services running with inadequate staff.
They were, therefore,
not in a position to give the necessary assistance and supervision to the
mobilization of units, and it was for this reason that the R.A.S.C. mobiliza-
tion centres were established, where the Headquarters Staff could concentrate
on the problems of preparing units for war.
The S.T. organization in the United Kingdom was called upon to bear
a new and heavy strain due to the evacuation of the B.E.F. from France,
which involved a sudden and unforeseen increase in the feeding strength
and the necessity for the movement of large quantities of stores.
The
action taken by the S.T. Branches at the War Office, in connection with the
evacuation, is described in Chapter IV.
They were involved from two
angles, the general R.A.S.C. services for the returning troops, and the
domestic business of reorganizing the R.A.S.C. units which had come back.
The latter task was effected in the mobilization centres.
In addition, an organization for the maintenance of the forces in the
United Kingdom in the event of an invasion had also to be devised and
established.
Home defence had not been a very serious commitment till
then, but active steps were now taken to improve the organization in this
respect.
quarters were formed.
G.H.O., Home Forces, was reorganized, and two new Corps Head-
The arrangements for maintenance and transport
in connection with home defence were at first improvised, then regularized
importance.
and improved; later, as the threat of invasion receded, they decreased in
Those concerned with the air defence of Great Britain were
in a state of comparative readiness at the outbreak of war, and their sub-
sequent story was mainly one of readjustment in the light of experience,
and to meet new conditions.
During May and June, 1940, the British Expeditionary Force which had
landed in Norway was also evacuated, and its component
to be accommodated, reformed, and re-equipped.
units also had
one
At the same
time,
force was prepared for despatch to Ireland, pped another to the Faroes, and
Units and drafts,
large quantities of stores, were despatched to Middle East and garrisons
additional troops were sent to Northern Ireland.
114
The equipment of all these troops
activity in effecting distribution.
involved intensive road transport
The railways were congested, and delivery
delivery of urgent
was slow by that means, and it was consequently necessary to carry out
Great Britain.
stores, especially
This was a
all parts of
R.A.S.C. transport available.
tremendous strain on the limited amount of
The subsequent developments are described in the various parts of this
chapter.
SECTION 1.-HOME DEFENCE
From the Army point of view, the organization for home defence had
two aspects, the air defence of Great Britain, and defence against invasion
Owing probably to long immunity, and to the national faith in the
Navy's ability to prevent the latter contingency,
was not taken very seriously until it became a very
summer of 1940. Air defence was, however, recognized as being something
that required special measures, and an organization for the purpose had
been set up as long before the war as 1935.
be continued here.
element of A.D.G.B. has been begun in Chapter II, and
arrangements in connection with home defence at the
beginning of the war, and those made to meet the situation which arose
then described, followed by an account of the motor
coach companies and home service M.T. companies which were raised.
These units were inadequate to provide all requirements in the event of
invasion, and arrangements were made to supplement them by
emergency M.T. companies from various R.A.S.C. establishments.
units manned by military personnel, companies were also organized con-
sisting of Home Guard personnel. For these and for other commitments in
case of invasion it would have been necessary to acquire large numbers
of vehicles from civilian
sources, and the procedure laid down in this
Some particular aspects of the employment of
civilian vehicles in emergency are also dealt with.
The supply system designed for the
in active operations in the United Kingdom, including the establishment
of main supply depots, and the arrangements for the feeding of the Home
Guard in the same circumstances, are then recounted.
A.D.G.B., Pre-War
At the time of the Munich crisis in September, 1938, part of the Terri-
torial Army, including the
Defence Artillery and Engineers, and
the Anti-Aircraft Corps, was embodied.
This event brought to light many
weaknesses in the supply and transport arrangements of A.D.G.B.,
a briet description su phat occurred is necessary, in order to provide a
background to later developments.
As described in Section 4 of this chapter, plans had already been made
to set up a complete R.A.S.C.
supply organization for A.D.G.B
problems were beyond the capacity of the peace-time supply depot frame-
work, owing to the wide dispersion of the troops of A.A. Corps and the
WO 277/.
27
