platoons were normally detailed, but supply and workshop personnel were
detailed individually and not in sub-units.
To meet wastage in mobilized
units, men were taken as far as possible from the field ambulances and
composite platoons of the reserve divisions.
Reorganization of Reserve Divisions
In August, 1943, the general cut in Army manpower caused a reduction
in the commitment for drafting personnel overseas,
readjustment in the composition of the reserve divisions.
From the R.A.S.C. point of view, this required the reduction in each
division of the composite companies from two to one, the elimination of the
C.R.A.S.C., and the addition of a D.A.D.S.T. to divisional headquarters
as adviser to the "O" Staff, thus leaving the O.C. company free for training
drafts, preparing them for overseas, etc.
Station Transport Companies
Shortly before the outbreak of war, War Office planned to form Station
Transport Companies in home
commands, in the event of mobilization, to
carry out the following duties: -
(a) General transport services at stations, when the R.A.S.C. transport
companies which had been there in peace-time,
went to take up
their field force rôles.
(b) Transport of ammunition and stores to and from ordnance depots.
(c) Provision of a connecting link of third line transport between anti-
aircraft units of A.A. Command, and the ammunition depots of the
A.D.G.B. organization.
On mobilization being ordered, immediate action was taken to raise
six of these companies, each of 30 vehicles.
The vehicles were provided by
local hiring until W.D. vehicles from impressment sources were available.
The companies were located at Aldershot, London, Woolwich, York, Bulford,
As the war progressed, and field force formations and units were mobilized,
the need became evident for additional transport
Consequently, in February, 1940, the formation
of 17 additional Station Transport Companies was approved. They were
organized on varying establishments of from 20 to 60 vehicles, according to
requirements. The majority of the personnel was to
45 and 50 years of age, specially recruited.
In August, 1940, War Office laid down that Station Transport Companies
were provided solely to carry out duties in the following priority:-
1. To meet army commands' responsibility for third line ammunition,
supplies and petrol services for A.D.G.B.
2. To meet the responsibilities of D.Ds.S.T. of commands for local
transport services when the companies were
not required for the
Station Maintenance Companies
Station Transport Companies had originally no workshop establishment,
though they had taken over the workshop installations of the
regular companies they replaced.
peace-time
When the additional companies were formed in February, 1940, 11
Station Maintenance Companies and six Subsidiary Workshops Sections were
also formed, for the maintenance of R.A.S.C. vehicles in the United King-
dom, other than in field force units and A.D.G.B. The Station Maintenance
Companies were independent units, but the Subsidiary Workshop Sections
formed an integral part of the establishment of the Station Transport Com-
pany which they served.
The establishment of these units was drawn up on a sliding scale by which
additional sub-sections could be provided as the vehicle maintenance load
increased.
Transport Reorganization, 1942
A number of additional Station Transport Companies were raised in
the course of the next two years; some of these were primarily
in the conveyance of ammunition at ammunition sub-depots, and others in
internal duties at, and the distribution of stores from, central ordnance depots.
In addition, there were several other categories of W.D. vehicles employed
on R.A.S.C. transport services at home.
These included the home service ambulance pool, of about 600 vehicles;
the vehicles allotted to, and held on the War Establishment of, various static
miscellaneous establishments; A.T.S. M.T. companies,
which provided A.T.S. drivers for such vehicles as they were allowed to drive
in the categories of the ambulance pool and headquarter transport, as well as
for those of Station Transport and Station Maintenance Companies.
The Station Maintenance Companies maintained all these vehicles, and
also provided technical supervision and relief drivers for the ambulance pool
and headquarter, etc., vehicles.
This was a complicated and unsatisfactory arrangement, and in March,
1942, S.T.3 initiated a reorganization.
There were certain other factors to be taken into consideration.
a minimum saving of five per cent. had to be effected in home establishments.
personnel had to be substituted for soldiers in
or employments where their services could be utilized. Third, the Waterhouse
Committee, which had been investigating static transport services at home,
had strongly recommended that all R.A.S.C. vehicles provided for home
services should be operated on a "pool" basis, and be held within the
War Establishment of a R.A.S.C. transport company, which should be
every respect for the operation, administration, and main-
tenance, of both the vehicles and their drivers. Fourth, M.T. Groups, A. T.S.,
which had previously supervised the A.T.S. M.T. companies, had been
Finally, the medical services at home had been reorganized,
and it was necessary to bring the ambulance pool into line.
WO 277/21
27
