100
Long Forgotten Winters
precedence over individual ability as a criterion for selection. Thus, although
course candidates as a group represented "selected officers specially rec-
ommended for staff training," few of them had even read widely circulated
"Army Training Memoranda" in their units. As Simonds warned, however,
the real danger lay in the "failure to recognize frankly that this situation
exist|ed]. "39
Prior to the termination of the first course, Crerar, then CGS, confirmed
his intention to transfer the CJWSC to the RMC, Kingston. The second
CJWSC with 40 students between the ages of 22 and 35 commenced on 24
July 1941 and lasted for 16 weeks. Four GSOs 2 from Ford Manor, one of
whom became Commandant/GSO 1, returned to Canada to form the nu-
cleus of the instructional staff for the second course. Instead of observing
operational field formation headquarters and demonstrations, however, this
course visited Canadian military installations to observe how training prob-
lems in Canada were being handled. Again, with four failures and nine
provisional passes recorded, the success rate on the course was low. A similar
number failed to meet the standard on the third course attended by 48
officers. Only two candidates failed the fourth course, but the award of 36
"B" gradings within 54 passes attested to a less stringent assessment stan-
dard. Three more courses for 192 students followed in 1942, and on 1
December the CJWSC was redesignated the Canadian War Staff Course
(CWSC). 40
In the same year the British sensibly split the Staff College into three
wings: a 16-week Senior Staff Course at Minley Manor designed to train
officers, including Canadians, for senior staff appointments; a 16-weck In-
termediate Staff Course at Camberley designed to train officers for second-
grade staff appointments in field formations; and a 12-week Junior Staff
Course at Sandhurst designed to train officers to fill second-grade appoint-
ments at headquarters other than those of field forces. In 1943 the CWSC
wisely followed suit, reorganizing along similar lines into an Intermediate
"A" Wing for field staff and a Junior "B" Wing for static headquarters staff,
the first course of which commenced in October 1943. Significantly, the
courses tended to get longer; in the final year of the war, the A Wing course
expanded beyond seven months and the B Wing to four. By 31 December
1945, a total of 772 officers had graduated from the CWSC (Intermediate
Wing) and 238 from the CWSC Junior Wing). 41
While it is difficult at any time to gauge precisely the effectiveness of staff
work let alone staff training, certain observations are possible. The first is
that in aim and content the shortened British and Canadian war courses
sought only to scratch the surface of higher military knowledge. Whatever
woefully little depth the Canadian Army possessed in this area also contin
ued to be eroded as the most successful staff candidates proceeded to assum
few periods to training methodology, moreover, the policy of employing
The Staff Caste
101
better students as instructors tended to yield diminishing returns. In one
instance, a major who received an average grading on the second course
returned as a DS member to instruct on the fifth and sixth courses. 42 Pre-
dictably, British Army staff training suffered a similar erosion, but with
the difference that it was quality of candidate rather than quality of instructor
that caused the deterioration.
In the estimation of General Sir David Fraser, the standard of British DS,
many of whom had generally proven themselves in action, remained high
That this was not the case in Canada is evident from
the August 1942 complaint of the CJWSC Commandant, Lieutenant-Colo-
nel C. Sanford, that by the fourth course none of the GSOs 2 held the
qualification of "psc." According to one battle-experienced and respected
member of the DS, Major P. H. LaBouchere, Canadian instructors often
had "to go through their material many times" as compared with their
Camberley "regular officer" counterparts who "with a very broad training
background... [could frequently gain sufficient additional knowledge of
the subject to instruct... by reading through the latest précis... once.
The requirement to keep up with doctrinal changes also proved more dif-
ficult in Canada. Indeed, one cannot escape the conclusion that the transfer
of the course from Ford Manor to Kingston neither enhanced staff training
nor improved instructional standards.
Rapid changes in appointments brought on by expansion continued to
plague the Canadian Army up to January 1944. Hardly had an officer learned
his job than he was posted, usually with a promotion.
45 A shortage of
trained staff officers delayed the establishment of 2 Corps headquarters,
originally planned for 1 July 1942, until 14 January 1943. The basic nature
of the staff training conducted also meant that the handling of large for-
mations had to be learned on British courses, exercises, or in actual oper-
There were nonetheless
like Major-General B. M.
Hoffmeister, GOC 5th Canadian Armoured Division from 20 March 1944.
who claimed that they commanded better battalions for having had basic
staff training. 46
The harsh reality remained, however,
that the primary
function of war etaff courses wae to impart doctrine rather than consider
the conduct of onerations obiectively. They were no longer capable to
paraphrase Fraser of offering "military education in any but the most shal-
low sense. "47
Recognition of this subtle difference no doubt explains why professional
soldiers have traditionally insisted that a good staff officer cannot be trained
in less than a year. In the opinion of many scholars, the analytical studies
carried out during the three-ver Kriege bademie course lay at the root of
German tactical and operational excellence.
48 This is partly borne out by
the conclusion of others that in the first half of the twentieth century,
"those
who trained most ruthlessly and honestly in peacetime have done best or
the battlefield 49 The link between training and performance having thus
