266
Half-Forgotten Summer
armored division was to capture Hautmesnil itself and the high ground
northwest of Bretteville-le-Rabet; thereafter it was to be prepared to exploit
forward west of the Caen-Falaise road. The infantry division following up
was to protect the right flank by forming a firm base in the area of Brette-
ville-sur-Laize. It was subsequently to form a firm base for the third phase
by relieving the armored division at Hautmesnil and Bretteville-le-Rabet.
During the third phase it was to be prepared to exploit to St. Sylvain. The
second phase, expected to commence at noon the following day, was to be
heavily supported by fighter, medium, and United States Army Air Forces
(USAAF) Fortress heavy day bombers. In the third phase, the already com-
mitted armored division was to exploit beyond Fontaine-le-Pin. The second
armored division was to advance through Quesnay to a position just short
of Falaise. Each armored division was to have one medium artillery regiment
under command and the support of medium and fighter bombers, on call,
to deal with possible threats from the 12th SS Panzer division. Two AGRA
were also to be made available after a pause."
Of key concern to the "Totalize"
plan was how to move the infantry
forward with the tanks at tank speed during the first phase. If the major
threat to the tank was the long-range, hard-hitting 75-mm or 88-mm gun,
the main danger to infantry came from concentrated artillery, mortar, small
arms, and machine-gun fire. Fortunately, about this time the BRA of First
Canadian Army, Brig, H.O.N. Brownfield, had decided to reconvert the
3rd Division artillery, which since D-Day had been equipped with U.S.
105-mm Priest SP guns, to towed 25-pounders. In a flash of inspiration,
Simonds hit upon the idea that if they were stripped of their guns and
reconfigured, they would be sufficiently roomy to afford protection to a
10-man infantry section against bullets and fragments. He accordingly re-
quested and received permission to modify the Priest for this purpose. He
also asked that troops be given a period of training on them so they would
not feel "like a lot of sardines in a tin.
" In the event, many units only
received two days training and the last of 70-odd Kangaroos, as the "un-
frocked Priests"
or "Holy Rollers"
troop locations but 24 hours before the attack?
were subsequently named, arrived at
Simonds later laid formal
claim to having invented the armored personnel carrier (APC), though no
patent was ever for good reason officially granted.®
As for the general concept of "Totalize,
it can hardly be imagined that
Simonds during his observation of the Wadi Akarit battle in April 1943
would not have heard tell of the "Blitz"
of the El Hamma, which, having
just happened on 26 March, would have been on everyone's lips. Here for
the first time the Desert Air Force employed a new technique for ground-
air coordination termed "taxi-cab rank" to support an Eighth Army attack.
Strikes by 16 "Kittybomber"
"top cover"
squadrons with five Spitfire squadrons flying
preceded and accompanied the forward movement of ground
forces. An airborne aircraft and RAF officers with high-frequency wireless
The Amiens Alchemy
267
sets on the ground controlled the operation.
A thin creeping barrage, which
served as a moving bomb line, also preceded the 2nd New Zealand Division
as it successfully attacked out of a setting sun. Most significantly, the tanks
of the leading 8th Armoured Brigade advanced through the dust and smoke
and into the moonlight without losing direction.'
As reported in Current Reports From Overseas in July 1943, the heavy sand
storm that blew up to blind enemy antitank gunners during this action
additionally served to remind that sufficient "consideration ha[d] not always
been given by armoured formations.... to the advantages of smoke.
" "Con-
sider the factors," the article urged, "Defences are planned most carefully
to cover avenues of approach"; with antitank guns sited to cover the fronts
of neighboring positions at various ranges, depending upon penetration
power, the "whole lay-out depends on visibility":
Put down a fog upon it and it is helpless. Introduce into that fog, not a long
straggling line of tanks, striving to see each other and painfully keeping
direction, but a mass, a 'phalanx,' of tanks on a narrow front. What hope
have the defenders got? Those in the path of the charge are overwhelmed
from right, left, and centre. Those on the flanks hear the noise, but cannot
see to interfere. The tanks, followed by (or carrying) their infantry, go through
to their objective, consolidate it during darkness, and wait for pick up in the
morning.'
El Hamma, Montgomery's suggested model for "Epsom," may also have
been the precursor of "Totalize.
On 4 August Montgomery formally directed the First Canadian Army
to "launch a heavy attack from the Caen sector in the direction of Falaise"
no later than 8 August and, if at all possible, the day before.
The main
object of this operation was to "cut off the enemy forces... facing Second
Army." " The magnitude of the moment and historic nature of the date
doubtless increased Crerar's personal enthusiasm for Operation "Totalizer
Isic] 3912
now clearly envisioned as a chance to repeat an attack like that
delivered in 1918 at Amiens, which, spearheaded by the Canadian Corps,
yielded such a decisive victory. Later, he would claim having
laid down
.. the basic plan" himself, "that the tactics, adopted for 'Totalize,' [welre
considerably based on" his tactical directive of 22 July 1944 discussed earlier
in Chapter 8. The "two innovations brought in by Simonds in his detailed
plan," Crerar concluded, were the "employment of Bomber Command on
targets close to .. own troops on each flank of the attacking front" and the
use of APCs. 13
On 5 August in an address to senior officers he submitted that "the
potentially decisive period" of the war had been reached. He further ex-
pressed the "firm"
conviction, if somewhat bumptiously, that "a highly
successful, large scale operation, now carried out by one of the Armies of
