Half-Forgotten Summer
280
respects, the subsequent performance of this force in contrast with that of
Halpenny's illustrated the depth of the tactical schizophrenia that gripped
the armored corps of the British and Canadian armies.
During the early hours of 9 August, both forces set out for their objec-
tives, momentarily passing each other in the dark around Bretteville-le-
Rebat, which "Worthington Force" sought to avoid by skirting to the east.
Once beyond the village its axis led south west across the Falaise road, north
west of Quesnay wood, straight on to Point 195.
"Halpenny Force," in the
meantime, prepared to attack Bretteville, which fell to the Lake Superiors
and Grenadier tanks in a hard-fought action against 89th Division elements
sometime after 0600 hours. It was reported clear at 1400 hours, by which
time 10th Brigade troops were fighting to secure Langannerie and Grain-
ville. Unbelievably, the two Grenadier tank squadrons returned to leaguer
in the "rear rally" near Gaumesnil after the action. They were only sent for-
ward that evening to assume a mobile counterattack role. *7
The fog of war now truly descended upon the battlefield. Just before
0700 hours "Worthington Force" reported that it was on its objective, and
by 0800 hours 2 Corps was informed that the 4th Armoured Brigade was
in possession of Bretteville-le-Rabet and Point 195. Within half an hour,
however, the force requested artillery support as it was under severe panzer
counterattack. When "Worthington Force" was queried around 0900 hours
as to whether the support had been effective, it failed to reply. At 1030
hours the yet uncommitted 21st Canadian Armoured Regiment (The Gov-
ernor General's Foot Guards) was ordered to proceed as quickly as possible
consist "vorchington Force" on Point 195. Supported by the last company
and three-inch mortars of the Algonquins, a troop of antitank guns, flails,
and a platoon of medium machine guns,
this battle group did not get
underway until after 1500 hours. For some reason artillery support was not
immediately available, and the force was soon stopped by fire from the area
of Quesnay Wood. Shortly before last light, having lost 14 tanks, it lea-
guered in Langannerie.
In the meantime suspicions were being confirmed that "Worthington
Force" was not, as it had mistakenly reported, on Point 195. In fact, it had
continued south east instead of south west in the rush to gain its objective
before daybreak. Tragically lost, it had ended up on open ground east of
Estrées-la-Campagne in the area of Point 140 to the Polish front. It was six
kilometers away from its assigned objective.
Soignolles, two kilometers to
the north, still lay in German hands.
Force,"
Unfortunately for
"Worthington
Kampfgruppe Waldmuller had also been ordered to the Point 140
feature. On discovering the presence of the Canadians, the Germans circled
them from the west and east, counterattacking with Tigers and Panthers
from Panzerkampfgruppe Wunsche and Kampfgruppe Krause. Subjected to a
combination of withering tank, artillery, and mortar fire,
Force" was annihilated. 18
"Worthington
photographs taken 10 Aug.
POLISH
ARMOURED
DIVISI
ON
Soignolles
cor
Bretteville-
le-Rabet
Map 11.3
Destruction of "Worthington Force"
Hautmesnil
28TH CANADIAN
ARMOURED REGIMENT
AUGUST
Estrées-la-
Campagne
Langanne
POINT
3 MILES
ía.
GERMAN-
| Panzerkampfgruppe
Wunsche
Saa
S.S. PANZER
DIVISION
LE MILES
St. Germain-
le-Vasson
* 12TH S.S.
