172
Half-Forgotten Summer
arrive on time; when elements finally did appear they were decisively
checked by no more than three 88-mm antitank guns for lack of artillery
suppressive fire. 35
That not all Commonwealth infantry were trained to such high standards
is evident from a 21st Army Group letter dated July 1943, which charged
that "the average soldier is not as skilled in the use of his personal weapons
as the German or American soldier. 36 Tuker had himself observed on "the
many examples [in late 1942] of the limitations of the battle training...
given to infantry and armoured formations and even... individuals in the
United Kingdom." He also noted "the predilection that some infantry com-
manders had for the barrage,
" which to his mind cast away "their most
effective weapon—surprise." Although the barrage proved especially useful
in gapping minefields and when enemy dispositions were not precisely
known, it may have discouraged the detailed search and study of ground,
while encouraging the selection of linear objectives. Another problem with
the barrage was that it sometimes outran the infantry it was shielding,
leaving them vulnerable to enemy pockets of resistance that inevitably sur-
vived. Accordingly, troops had to learn to "lean into" the barrage, which
often assumed the nature of a "crutch" that militated against the ability of
infantry to use its own weapons to fight its way forward. 37
According to Field-Marshal Lord Carver, it was in the attack that the
Germans inevitably proved more effective than the British. Tuker attributed
their capacity to execute swift and concentrated actions directly to all-arms
cooperation, "the outcome of constant training, of the perfecting of a battle
drill which [wals not learnt on the square. 38
Ironically, during Infantry
Training Conference No. 1 at the School of Infantry, Barnard Castle, in
April 1944, most delegates expressed reservations about "Battle Drill gen-
crally." While accepting that *Parade Square Battle Drill [wa]s required in
the initial stages of trlaininlg... [they were afraid that the hard and fast
rules concerning the sequence of orders might| tend to make Platoon]
com|man]d/ers) forget to appreciate ground and think that every situation
calls for only one of three responses, i.e. right Hanking, left fanking or
pincer movement." Drills previously taught for attacking strong points,
woods clearing, tank hunting, attacks off the line of march, and reorgan-
ization were collectively denounced as "too rigid."39
Of associated significance was the conclusion that too much stress had
been placed upon attack technique to the neglect of the defense. The speed
and power of German counterattacks naturally served to reinforce this con-
cern, especially as it pertained to retaining captured ground through rapid
reorganization drills. Since such "firm basing"
consumed proportionally
more time in action than attacking, the consensus was that defense be taught
before attack, rather than afterward as previously. Junior officers were also
to be made aware that "surprisingly few Huns (were killed .... by attacking
them. The big 'killings' [we/re made when they attackledl.. unsuccess-
173
The Imprint of Doctrine
13, Ided, with well-organized and rehearsed fire plans and counter-
i, a efender could even yearn for the Germans to attack. The
images of reverse slope defense, the increased importance of snipers,
at the sability of devoting much more attention to the handling of
a mortars cach of which was supposedly first and best appreciated by
te romans received additional emphasis. Curiously, the school's stated
get with respect to "Battle Discipline" was to "acknowledge and over-
tone the amazing lethargy of the British soldier. "0
The soldier within the fighting section, of course, constituted the guts
ide infantry. In response to a query by First Canadian Army delegates
neming section fighting structure, the school's position was that the war
saliment of two NCOs and eight men was sound. Spokesmen also
gested that, without being dogmatic, the division of this number into
treft and movement groups would yield tactical advantages. With
xion battle strength rarely expected to exceed one NCO and six men,
corer, school representatives advocated a normal deployment organi-
zion of two groups: a "Bren (light machine gun) Group" of two men
controlled by the section commander; and a "Rifle Group" of four men,
anding the second-in-command. For those not infrequent occasions when
bade strength ran to but one NCO and four men, the recommendation
vas one group. As demonstrated in a mock battalion attack through a depth
cT yards from front to rear, leading sections moved in either "two tight
ide groups or blobs of three and four men each." The blob formation
posedly helped "overcome the feeling of loneliness... [of] the individual
soldier," facilitated control, and enabled the blobs "to break out in open
order speedily if they lalme under aimed fire." Not surprisingly, all agreed
that the artillery fire plan had to be made to conform practically to infantry
movement, especially with respect to controlling barrage fire."
Obviously, there existed a conflict between the barrage and battle drill
approach. More often than not, because enemy locations were rarely ever
precisely known, attacking infantry followed a creeping barrage. A battalion
in the assault usually deployed with two companies forward and two in
depth. Its integral six three-inch mortars, 13 Bren gun carriers, and six six-
pounder towed antitank guns provided support; if required, this was but-
tressed by heavier machine guns and mortars from a machine-gun unit.
Since handheld PlATs were only effective against armor at short range, it
was imperative that six-pounders moved forward quickly during consoli-
dation to ward off enemy counterattacks. In contrast, Canadians in North
Africa had already witnessed with some fascination the German
"pepper
potting" method of infiltration attack. This involved light machine-gun
groups of four to five men filtering forward, one supporting another, all
aimed at sowing confusion and getting at least one gun in the rear of their
objective. Liberal automatic weapon and mortar fire intended to attack
morale enhanced the effect of these "confusion tactics."42
