192
Half-Forgotten Summer
consider his specific direction, adding that as GOC he was "not prepared,
personally, to be responsible for carrying it out." As an alternative to at-
tacking on a narrow front, Crocker proposed earmarking 3rd Division to
capture Troarn and Bures as a first priority task, which he estimated would
require a brigade with full air and ground support. On success of this phase,
he saw a division again supported by air advancing on a broad front "to
the line BAVENT-GONNEVILLE-MERVILLE, with exploitation to
VARAVILLE and towards CABOURG. »42
Crerar's same-day reaction was to defensively annotate and forward
Crocker's written objections to Montgomery and "call upon [the latter] for
aid." Whether for personal reasons or
"because of the fact that I am a
Canadian," Crerar whined,
"Crocker gave... the immediate impression
....that he resented being placed under my command and receiving any
directions from me"; he exhibited "no tact, nor desire to understand my
views." The stern Crocker's longer experience in command of a corps in
action may have been the catalyst that pushed Crerar to react this way.
Crocker's recent attempt to fire the favored Keller may also have sowed
resentment. In any event, Crerar admitted to being "quite convinced that
Crocker ... [was] temperamentally unsuited to be one of... [his) Corps
Com|man]der|s" and asked that he be exchanged for either of the com-
manders of 12 or 30 Corps, both of whom Crerar had served with and
claimed to know well. They "will work with me," he wrote.
"Crocker
never will. "43 Tellingly, Lieutenant-General G. C. Bucknall, who had been
Crear's GSO 2 when the latter was Commandant at RMC, was destined
to be relieved as commander of 30 Corps. his tenure there being later
described as a "non-event.
99441
On 25 July Montgomery once more interviewed Crerar on the matter
of an annarently recalcitrant subordina. While allowing that the COr
Corps could be "somewhat difficult," he reproached Crerar for not using
persuasion rather than formal orders to harness Crocker's energy and proven
ability, especially since he had just come under command. Montgomery
also refused to transfer Crocker to another corps on the rather sensible
grounds that such reassignment, besides requiring staff changes during a
difficult period in operations, would only restrict future flexibility as it might
still be necessar inder cortain conditions to sla Cracker's corps under
the First Canadian Army. Crerar in acknowledging that he had "not given
full weight to this prospective situation" goreed to "go more than half way"
toward salvaging the situation. He nonetheless requested Montgomery to
speak with Crocker to "straighten out. thes relationship" and confirm
that "what was urgently wanted was the clearance of OUISTREAM and
the CAEN Canal from close enemy observation and mortar fire at an early
date, along the lines of [Crerar'sl instructions " Montgomery promised to
see Crocker the following morning,
advising Crerar to meet his corps
Cast of Commanders
193
commander later that day to "go over... the tactical problem" once more
"with the air cleared and good prospects of mutual understanding.
">45
The next day Montgomery advised Crerar by letter that he had instructed
Crocker to quit bickering and be "a loyal subordinate," one prepared "to
lead the way... in saying what an honour it [wals to serve in the Canadian
Army." Montgomery similarly counseled Crerar that an "Army Com-
mander should give his Corps Commanders a task, and leave it to them as
to how they do it." While keeping in touch, he "must stand back from the
detailed tactical battle... the province of his Corps Commanders," inter-
vening "only if he thinks it is not going to be a success." To reinforce this
point Montgomery repeated in a postscript that,
in an army of but one
corps, the higher commander "will, if he is not careful, find that he is trying
to command that Corps himself in detail"; with "not enough to do... he
is inclined to become involved in details which are the province of his
subordinates."' In Montgomery's unequivocal view, "John Crocker [wa]s
a very experienced fighting commander,
" who because he knew "his stuff"
had to be led rather than
"driven." Remarking that it
"takes all sorts to
make a good Army," Montgomery went on to stress to Crerar that "once
you can get the confidence and trust of your subordinates, then you have
a pearl of very great price." This was not likely to be attained, however,
without a very great deal of hard work, and very considerable subordi-
nation of self. "4
In the same letter, Montgomery urged Crerar to "cut down paper in the
field." He further suggested, no doubt in direct reference to Crerar's written
instruction to Crocker, that "best results were obtained] by dealing verbally
with... Corps commanders," who could then give their views. That Crerar
also chose to issue a tactical directive to all senior formation commanders
on 22 July seems to have caused Montgomery some additional irritation,
for he insisted "it would be a coad thing to tell Crocker that vou sent his
several copies ... only in case he wanted to send them on to his subordinates,
and that there is no need to send them on unless he so wishes." As Mont-
gomery explained to Crerar,
"in the field it|wals wrong to send tactical
directives to anvone except vour immediate subordinates-as they are re
sponsible to you, and their subordinates are responsible to them." Having
expressed this opinion many times." Montgomery found Crerar's action
in this regard "definitely contrary to .... [his wishes.
Crocker's reaction to the direy ve can only be surmised. It is unlikely,
however, that he was greatly impressed by its content. The first three pages
consisted largely of extracts taken from a translation of a renort by Panzer
Lehr Division (which he may already have read) covering its experiences
during the period 6-22 June. It was useful perhaps for highlighting how
the Germans had taken the measure of certain Ritish tactieal methods, one
of which was the attack on a very narrow front.
But Crerar's assessment
