Long Forgotten Winters
At the lower levels, on the other hand, the Canadian military scene was
not quite the professional wasteland that some have portrayed. A good
glimpse of the level of Canadian military thought during this period can
be gleaned from the CDQ. Published from 1923 at the expense of the
Cavalry, Artillery, and Infantry Associations, this impressive professional
journal endeavored "to reflect military thought, examine critically the di-
rection of military development, and study in some degree the trend of
world movements." By 1928 under the editorship of Lieutenant-Colonel
K. Stuart, it had "hit its stride."38 In a 1929 article that stressed the value
of Fuller's principles of war, Major-General W. A. Griesbach argued that
"since wars cannot be arranged to order merely to train officers, it follows
that, after a long period of peace, the officers of an army must get their
military education from reading and study." Concerned that "observance
of rigid rules of trench warfare had carried.. [many officers] forward to
responsible command without requiring of them any deep knowledge of
the principles, or the history of war," he warned that only "intellectual
leadership"
could be expected to penetrate with any hope of success the
dual conditions of the "fog"
and "friction of war."39
Through a series of prize essay competitions, the CDQ also managed to
inspire topical submissions such as Lieutenant-Colonel H. F. G. Letson's
1933 article,
"The Influence of Mechanization and Motorization on the
Organization and Tactics of the Non Permanent Active Militia.
ommendations, not surprisingly "in accord with the example of the British
Army", were to convert cavalry units in the larger centers into armored
car organizations, encourage the use of motor transport in artillery training,
and motorize a "fair proportion"
of infantry battalions with which the
reserve force was "top-heavy,"
some of them in "comatose" condition.
Since mechanization appeared out of the question due to expense, Major
E. L. M. Burns in 1935 proposed using less costly "motor-cars" in lieu of
unaffordable tanks. Significantly, the editor had earlier advocated the light
two-man Carden-Loyd armored machine-gun carrier, which had been is-
sued to regular force units in small number, as the solution to dealing with
enemy machine guns.
The most interesting tactical polemic vented within the pages of the CDQ
was that sparked by Lieutenant-Colonel Burns's article. "A Division That
Can Attack," which proposed integrating "the medium tank as the principal
engine of assault." Aware that commanders in annual British maneuvers
failed habitually to drive home the attack, Burns advocated replacing one
of the three infantry brigades in the restructured 1936 British "line of battle"
division with a mixed armored brigade of two medium and two light tank
battalions. Maintaining that there was more to the assault than "closing
with the enemy," he argued that fast medium tanks possessed more capacity
for breaking through to a defender's artillery zone than infantry supported
by heavy "infantry tanks"
plodding along at a pedestrian pace.* Almost
The Bellows of Peace
49
immediately, these views came under fire from gunner Captain G. G. Si-
monds who forcefully challenged them in a subsequent CDQ article entitled,
"An Army that Can Attack—A Division that Can Defend."
In Simonds's opinion, Burns in designing his "unwanted brain-child"
had overlooked the practical limitations of British industrial capacity and
the heavy coincident demands made upon it by sister services. Given a likely
paucity of "offensive material," Simonds did not consider it "logical to
design the basic formation of the British Army as a whole for offensive
action." As many "holding tasks" would be required even of a side pos-
sessing the initiative, he determined that the "minimum strength for a basic
formation must be a 'division that…. [could] hold'." The "bulk of...
hitting power," Simonds maintained, "should be at the disposal of the
highest commander who ... [could] control the battle-not arbitrarily di-
resources could be allocated as required. 42
room for compromise as to where the main reserve of offensive power
room for compromise as shot was appropriately fired by Simonds who
enjoined that in an "age of 'totalitarian war' the 'Army'... [had] replaced
che died that in an "age st ly capable of "pinpricks", Burn's "imbalanced
division... [would still be unable to attack" for lack of organic artillery
support. * While too much significance should probably not be accorded
Journal
As graduates of the RMC. "the cornerstone of the Canadian Militia,"
which along with Canadian Officer Training Corps (COTC) contingents
at civilian universities provided mainstream officers for militia service,
Burns and Simonds had both benefited from a solid grounding in their
professional education 45 The four-vear RMC course reinstated after the
war unquestionably furnished the subaltern officer with a sound, if highly
technical, military foundation upon which to build. In addition to academic
instruction, cadets received theoretical and practical training in musketry
and weapon handling, military topography (field sketching and map and
air photo reading), imperial military geography, imperial and international
affairs, campaion military history and military organization, administra-
tion, and law. Equitation, horsemastership, and cavalry drill were also
taught, no doubt the macho equivalent of parachuting today.
A formally established Tactics Department additionally provided detailed
