46
Long Forgotten Winters
and hence could be expected to outperform others on the technological
battlefields he anticipated would mark the next war.
Yet, he was not in
1929 an "advocate of extensive re-equipment," since the
"rate of devel-
opment would make... [such] equipment obsolescent before... [it got]
into the hands of troops. "30
McNaughton's philosophy, exactly like Milne's,
was instead to de-
vote scarce funds to officer, NCO, and specialist training, while urging
all ranks to "think... about the effect of. new weapons of war and pre-
par[e] ... [their] minds for the conception of tactics which they involve.
In his view, if you had a good plan with which everyone was familiar,
"you would usually be able to extemporize the material resources to carry
it out." He was, above all, "an earnest advocate of moral preparation which
.. [was| largely thought and … cost... little." McNaughton further held
that training was mainly a matter of education, which for a "highly scientific
army requir[ing] highly trained personnel.. [could] be best obtained quite
outside the army itself.'31 There were in Canada, he claimed in 1931, ad-
equate numbers of personnel with the required technical qualifications, ex-
cept in aviation and signals, to meet the needs of any force that might
conceivably have to be raised on short notice. 2 In maintaining that scien-
tifically educated civilians and successful businessmen could master the mod-
ern technological battlefield better than military professionals, McNaughton
manifested a not uncommon postwar perception. Ironically, it was also
fundamentally the view of that quintessential militiaman, Sir Sam Hughes.3
Convinced that the next war would be won by the side whose officers
had received the soundest scientific education, and hence understood mod-
ern weapons and techniques, McNaughton substantially increased the tech-
nical emphasis already pronounced within the militia since the Great War.
In the postwar reorganization, for example, officers of artillery, engineer,
and signals affiliations handily outnumbered their infantry and cavalry col-
leagues; by 1922 nearly 50 percent of the general officers came from tech-
nically oriented branches or corps. Under McNaughton this trend was
accelerated, and it became policy to send the technically competent to the
Imperial Defence College (IDC) to broaden their strategic scope. Of 13
senior officers who attended between 1927 and the outbreak of war,
McNaughton being the first, five were artillery, three air force, and three
engineers. Only two were infantry, one before and one after McNaughton's
term as CGS, which appointment approved such selections.
McNaughton further ensured the predominance of engineering and sci-
entific checialization over general education in junior officer training by
appointing a nongraduate, Brigadier H.H. Matthews, commandant of the
Royal Military College (RMC) in Kingston. As the RMC already offered
highly technical training, the implications of this action were considerable.
Significantly, on the appointment list for the overscas force drawn up in
1936, only one of six infantry brigades was slated to be commanded by a
The Bellows of Peace
47
serving regular infantry officer, and out of 19 senior staff positions 14 were
given to engineers and gunners. Of 17 top militia command appointments
in January 1939, the artillery occupied five, the engineers six, the cavalry
two, the infantry three, and the RCAF one. Of these, no less than 12 were
held by RMC graduates, the great majority of them gunners and engineers.
Not everyone, least of all the indomitable Sutherland Brown, was content
with McNaughton's professional philosophy. The "drastic reduction of the
Canadian infantry and Canadian cavalry," wrote the former in 1933, "ap-
pears to ... be an intrigue by the Artillery Association which has been
running the Department, or trying to, for a good many years.'"35 Indeed,
if the aim of the proposed 1931 militia reorganization had been to trim the
fat to save the lean, the infantry and cavalry
"troop leading" arms might
have thought themselves in the first category. The overwhelming predom-
inance of gunners and sappers on the Canadian General Staff by 1932 none-
theless presents the strongest evidence that Sutherland Brown's criticisms
were rooted in some reality at least. McNaughton may have felt that he
was selecting the best and the brightest, but to Sutherland Brown they were
the lackeys of a CGS too inclined to harken to the right political tune with
which to fall in step. As Brown described McNaughton in 1932:
the C.G.S. is a super-engineer and college professor by profession. He is a
gunner in the Canadian Militia and, technically, he is a good one. He is cold,
calculating, touchy, and determined to pursue his own schemes, inclined to
do everything himself, and will not take advice. 36
Given the studied way in which McNaughton ignored infantry and cav-
alry officers there were few eligible for senior commands in 1939. Simply
put, he expected that officers of the technical arms-artillery, engineers,
and signals-would adapt easier to the challenges of high command in
modern war. Yet, McNaughton's principal focus as CGS was not on war
or training for it. The emphasis he placed on the political visibility of the
military and on the IDC as a virtual prerequisite for high command ensured
that peacetime routine in headquarters, maintenance of military properties,
and higher strategic issues eclipsed operations in relative importance. The
senior officers of the militia, those paid well in peace to command during
hostilities, were as a consequence better trained in the
"great issues of peace
and war, not [for] the battlefield." As McNaughton himself was destined
to show, scant attention was devoted to developing higher commanders
capable of managing a battle. Indeed, by tending "to treat military expe-
rience as something to be absorbed along the way like osmosis, 137 Mc-
Naughton essentially denied the existence of a profession of arms that, akin
to an academic discipline, called for the detailed and concentrated study of
what Clausewitz termed "fighting proper."
