164
Half-Forgotten Summer
gun. The easily concealed 50 mm Panzerabwehrkanone (Pak) 38 delivered a
far greater wallop than the short 50 mm on the Mark III and proved to be
one of the most effective weapons in the desert. It was backed up by the
formidable dual-purpose 88 mm Flugzeugabwehrkanone (Flak), though ini-
tially not in large number, and later by the highly effective 75 mm Pak 40.
The often overlooked fact was that the Germans actually preferred to destroy
tanks not with relatively feeble tank armaments, but with antitank guns.
Since British tanks fired no high explosive shells, this gave them a special
edge, the more so because the short 50 mm on the Mark IH and the short
75 mm on the Mark IV were both capable of hurling high explosive to
suppress targets other than armor. In the 75 mm of the Grant, of course,
the British at last acquired the capability to fire a useful high-explosive shell
at enemy antitank guns. Unfortunately, the requirement to engage targets
with this lower sponson-mounted armament, as opposed to the turret-
mounted 37 mm, meant unnecessarily exposing most of the tank to de-
structive enemy fire. '5
Although the two-pounder antitank gun could penetrate enemy armor at
normal battle ranges of about 800 yards, it was easily suppressed by the Mark
IV short 75 mm, which could throw a 14-pound high explosive shell accu-
rately over distances up to 3,000 yards. When mounted "portee" on an un-
armored wheeled vehicle, the two-pounder proved too vulnerable. This
naturally left Eighth Army infantry relatively powerless against enemy ar-
mor. Only after April 1942, when the six-pounder antitank gun arrived in
sufficient quantities, was it able to meet German panzers on something ap-
proaching equal terms. In the meantime, two-pounder limitations in the an-
titank role resulted in artillery 25-pounders almost always being deployed
primarily as tank killers, which meant that they were frequently unavailable
to provide concentrated indirect artillery fire.
The perceived inadequacy of
the two-pounder main armament on Crusader cruiser and Matilda and Val-
entine "I" tanks at the same time led British armor to seek safety in disper-
sion. A vicious circle now developed as the vulnerable infantry,
compensate for the dissipation of artillery support, sought the protection of
armor, which as a consequence often found itself forced to fight when it
should have evaded. Such was the cycle that gave rise to the charge that the
two-pounder was the weapon that almost cost the British the war.
Given such circumstances tie not surprisine that Pritich armor hegai
to look unon tho infantry de a tactical Hability chile he lotsar became
embittered at what they perceived to be the failure of armor to support
them. According to one New Zeland brigadier at a certain stage there
developed "throughout the Eighth Army.. a most intense distrust, almos
hatred. of (friendlyl armour »17 In large part this situation arose because
of doctrinal differences which were no doubt evacerbated bu the distinction
made between "" tanks for infantry support and "cruiser" models intended
to do what their descriptive naval term imolied. At the same time, old-
165
The Imprint of Doctrine
ishioned thinking prevailed. "The British, reckoning that their infantry
should be able to take on anything with the bayonet," charged Major-
General Francis Tuker of the 4th Indian Division,
"kept on setting theirs
out for Rommel's combine harvester."
Brtish cruiser armor meanwhile, unlike the versatile and flexible German
panzers that performed any task demanded of them, tended to believe it
had but one role: that of a free-ranging exploitation force. Again in Tuker's
rew, "armoured commanders were still imbued with the idea of the con-
centrated cavalry charge, the arme blanche, the weapon of physical shock."
During the battle of First Alamein in July 1942, which was won mainly by
six-pounder antitank action and concentrated artillery fire, a New Zealand
division request for tank support was met with the response that the ist
amoured Division "had been trained to act independently and not in close
cooperation with infantry." Despite such superciliousness, however, the
rignt of Materialschlact had already begun to countervail against the idea
of runavay armored victory, which the earlier glittering successes of Blitz-
krig till tended to foster. More and more, battles between roughly equal
and determined opponents assumed the form of hard pounding.
The predilection of British armor for tank versus tank actions naturally
payed into enemy hands, for the basis of German tactics lay in the combined
ation of all arms, including most significantly the aggressive deployment
d camouflaged antitank guns. Whenever German armor encountered strong
rostace, it could retire under their protection, often luring to them in the
process unsuspecting British tanks, which after taking casualties from an-
tink fire could be subjected to counterattack by tanks. Rommel, to be
sure, was quite content to let British tanks run themselves to death against
his gun line. Indeed, it took British tank crews a very long time to realize
hat her tanks were actually being knocked out not by the more obvious
prizers, but by deadly, unseen 50-mm Pak 38s from afar. Their initial
rection was to credit the German tank guns with more firepower and
get range than they possessed. The all tank school and cavalry concept,
in hot, foundered miserably before the theory of all-arms cooperation so
flectively practiced by the Germans."
The overbalanced British armored division of two armored brigades,
each of three tank regiments and a motorized infantry battalion, plus al
piro" support group that included another infantry battalion, antitank
ted aircraft elements, and a 32-gun field regiment, never managed to
high a a single formation. While the armored brigades tended to act in-
expendenty, the support group was more often than not left holding static
positions or strongpoints that by themselves were useless. Even after the
timored division was restructured in 1942 to comprise divisional troops
and an armored and lorried infantry brigade (which reflected a better
infantry-tank ratio of 4:3 in units), the fragmented stule that marked British
caris since the introduction of "Jock Columns"
persisted. Here again the
