242
Half-Forgotten Summer
then to push on to Cintheaux. While considerable air support was allocated
to "Spring," the operation was not deemed dependent upon it."*
For artillery support, the CCRA had 2 Canadian and 8 AGRA in addition
to the divisional artilleries. A total of nine field, nine medium, and two
heavy regiments actually fired in support of "Spring." With the exception
of an initial harassing fire program laid on by corps, however, artillery
support for the operation was planned and controlled mainly at the division
level (presumably in support of divisional maneuver plans). Significantly,
the divisional fire plans supporting the initial assault consisted of a series of
timed and "on call" concentrations instead of the standard creeping barrages
employed in Operations "Windsor," "Charnwood," and "Atlantic." The
latter, it was now felt, not only wasted ammunition and served to warn
the enemy of impending attacks, but also, by indicating start lines, led them
to easily identify and bring fire to bear on forming-up places. On the other
hand creeping barrages had long proven themselves to be a most effective
form of support when enemy dispositions
were not precisely known.
Notwithstanding this consideration, it seems reasonably clear from the ar-
tillery support arrangements for "Spring" that divisional commanders had
some latitude in the planning and execution of this operation.
The attack went in at 0330 hours 25 luly under various diffusions of
artificial moonlight provided by searchlight batteries attempting to shine
their beams on low cloud cover. On Keller's 3rd Division front, Cunning-
ham's strongly supported 9th Brigade acted as spearhead, launching the
North Novas against Tilly-la-Campagne while holding the HLI ready to
pass through to secure Garcelles-Secqueville. The North Novas advanced
across a kilometer of onen fielde from Bourguébus with three companies
up, initially in darkness because the searchlights failed to come on.
they did eventually light up, the reported effect was that the troops were
silhouetted "so that they were good targets to the enemy.
» On reaching
the environs of Tilly, the North Novas discovered that the artillery had not
subdued the soldiers of the Ist SS who "shot and shouted and threw grenades
like wild men » In the fiohting and darkness the situation became terribl
The CO of the North Novas, Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Petch, now
mistakenly reported that two commanies were on their obiectives and th
attack was progressing satis breath time
he had committed all combanies and could see they were being bloodily
repulsed, he requested the assistance of the FGH tank squadron waiting to
support the HIL in the next phase. When that sauadron moved up, however
it was engaged by counterattacking Panthers and concealed antitank guns;
it consequently withdrew to the west of the village and attempted to shoot
the infantry into it. In the process of doing so it lost 11 tanks and was given
permission that afternoon to retire on Bourguébus.
The infantry in the
meantime had been ordered to dig in and hold where they were.
That
Martin-
Мар 10.1
Attack on Tilly, 25 July 1944
CDN
INF
DIV
CDN
Hubert-Folie
NOISIAIG
amesnil:
•ДОХІМАТЕ
Campagne
PANZER
carcelles
Secquevill
a a May sur-
383 NY
NOISIAIG
272 м!
ELEMENTS
MAIN INI
SINEW
193W173
Sie Marmion
S. S. PZ DIV
F2M
TILLY - LA-CAMPAGNE
25 JULY 1944
Ground over 70 matres......
