54
Long Forgotten Winters
knowledge necessary to reach a sound and proper conclusion in the circum-
stance. I made up my mind, that if I was to be a gunner, I would endeavour
to make the science of Gunnery, and all that was related to it, my own. Books
and courses were available for study, and I took every available opportunity
to learn all I could. ... Later I was to be forever grateful for the years given
to me in which to learn. "6
In the 1930s much of his training was accomplished on his own time in an
armory on an improvised miniature artillery range called a "puff" table.
That a good reserve force officer could rise to command of his regiment
without having observed the field operations of other corps® nonetheless
exacerbated the problem of combined-arms training. One is left with the
impression, therefore, that a more sustained operational focus on the part
of the CGS and General Staff would have yielded better training results.
For a force top-heavy in officers, there were simply not enough imaginative
and challenging TEWTs and war games, though the fine canvas model or
sand table demonstrations published by the CDQ, which reflected current
doctrine, were a modest initiative in this direction. 8 The 1937 CDQ pub-
lication of Brigadier Montgomery's enlightened work on "The Problem of
the Encounter Battle as Affected hy Modern British War Establishment'
would have also given the more alert officer a good insight into such higher
level concepts as the "stage management of the battle,
vanced planning to ensure a good "start" in battle, and the notion of local
"dog-fights. "69
Not surprisingly. Simonds contributed the most comprehensive example
of Canadian tactical thought in an article entitled, "The Attack." In it he
addressed the problem of overcoming a first-class enemy once an "intact
front with interlocking fire" had inevitably formed Helogically assumed
the enemy factor, more than time and space or even ground, to be the
"rux of the problem in war" and reiected as "smug and dangerous" the
contention that a volunteer army would necessarily be superior to a conscript
one. To Simonds, any attack against a well-concealed enemy in a prepared
defensive position would necessarily involve assault,
"mopping up,
consolidation phases, the last two in particular being largely the province
of infantry. He also saw that infantry with its unique ability to traverse
almost any type of ground would be required for obstacle-breaching op-
crations. Simonds nonetheless considered it a "useless waste of life" to let
infantry attack without adequate fire support, since conditions of poor vis-
ibility and smoke had a greater degrading effect on antitank guns than
machine guns, which could continue to fire along fixed lines.
That enemy dispositions would never be well enough known to enable
artillery to effectively suppress them before hand convinced Simonds that
"adequate fire support meant a barrage." Since the oncasional "Short shell!"
was more likely to harm infantry than tanks, however, he went on to deduce
The Bellows of Peace
55
that tanks could take better advantage of such covering fire than infantry.
Simonds further reasoned that as it would be impossible for tanks to operate
at high speed against prepared enemy defenses, the fundamental idea of the
slower, heavily armored "I" tank remained tactically sound. Because tanks
could also withstand enemy fire better than infantry, he asserted that where
the ground permitted, they should fill the role of the main assaulting arm.
Given the limited mobility and vulnerability of towed antitank guns, more-
over, tanks would be more readily available to assist infantry in repelling
enemy counterattacks during the consolidation phase. The obvious need
for each arm to support the other led Simonds to conclude that attack "by
infantry and tanks in cooperation should be the normal, not the abnormal,
method." He ruefully noted nevertheless that this had been
"almost an
unexplored field since 1918.*71
On a much higher plane, the reorganization of the reserve force along
the lines proposed by McNaughton had been set in train in 1936, which
year also marked the institution of a Canadian Defence Committee (later
Defence Committee of the Cabinet) and the glimmerings of rearmament.
Although a Canadian Tank School (redesignated the Canadian Armoured
Fighting Vehicles School in 1938) was set up in that year, the recently elected
government of Mackenzie King, like that of Chamberlain, continued to the
last to dodge any possible form of European commitment. To make Defence
Scheme No. 3 more palatable, therefore, the General Staff in March 1937
submitted a variation that provided for the deployment of a two-contingent
"Mobile Force," totaling one cavalry and two infantry divisions, for op-
erations in Canada as well as overseas. Sustained General Staff pressure in
this area, which realistically aligned with the will of the Canadian people,
eventually persuaded the government to mobilize this force on 1 September
1939 in general accordance with the provisions of Defence Scheme No. 3
(which also served as the basis of the 1941-1942 "Army [Expansion] Pro-
gramme"). On 16 September it decided to dispatch a second CEF in the
form of one division, and before the year was out there were almost 16,000
Canadian soldiers in Britain.
Insofar as the primary purpose of a general staff is to prepare for war in
peace, the Canadian General Staff can thus be said to have done its job
reasonably well in a "capital staff'73 sense. That is to say, it had a workable
high-level war plan available for the military contingency at hand. Correctly
anticipating that the Canadian public would so demand, it had for two
decades planned to dispatch an expeditionary force that, after Dunkirk, was
not to be denied. On the other hand, as a general staff in the sense of a
"troop" staff, that is, one charged with training a field army for wartime
operations in peace, it had done much less well. In fact, it had forsaken its
Great War professional legacy and its true raison d'être.
The regular force
that deploved for collective training in the summer of 1938 was but a
skeleton formation that exhibited many of the tactical shortcomings that
