a Bijude
Epron
59TH
Contest
La Folie
GRENADIER
DIVISION
Vieux
Cairon INE. BE. BDE.....
40 771
Cussy
3a8
Cairon
Gru
MAINTANI
Franqueville a
Map 9.7
3rd Division Attack, 8 July 1944
NIaV
- BAYEUX
Carpiquet
aN E
Throes Beyond the Beach
221
Highlanders took Authie-Franqueville. During phase three Brigadier Harry
Foster's 7th Infantry Brigade supported by the 1st Hussars was to pass
through the 9th to seize Cussy and the Abbaye Ardenne. Following this,
Blackader's 8th Brigade supported by the Fort Garry Horse (FGH) was to
capture the control buildings and southern hangars of Carpiquet airfield in
Operation "Trousers.
Keller's operations commenced at 0730 hours 8 July, at which time the
59th Division moved against St. Contest. The Canadian attack, supported
by divisional artillery and guns from 3 and 4 AGRA, produced what was
later reported as an
"unbelievable"
volume of fire. Still the Hitlerjugend
fought on, responding with fixed line machine-gun fire and, as the artillery
lifted, more intense observed indirect and direct shoots. Eventually, a charge
by roughly 15 Bren gun carriers of the 7th Reconnaissance Regiment (17th
Duke of York's Royal Canadian Hussars) assisted the SDG in taking Gru-
chy. Close support by their Sherbrooke armored squadron had not been
forthcoming initially due to communications problems, although by day's
end about a third of its tanks were knocked out. By 0945 hours "B" com-
pany, which had disappeared into the smoke around 0750, reported Gruchy
secured. The company of 25 Panzergrenadier Regiment that had defended
it was completely annihilated. It was not until 1430 hours, however, that
the SDG pushed on to the Chateau de St. Louet. The following day the
battalion had the honor of being the first to enter Caen; by 1330 it had two
companies in the center of the city. After this ordeal, which cost Cunning-
ham's 9th Brigade 616 casualties in two days of fighting, the SDG war
diary recorded: "We are all very tired, having been in flor|w/ard positio]ns,
attacking and fighting and patrolling from D-Day. 31
The battle for Buron by the HLI, which represented its first major action,
had delayed the advance of the SDG from Gruchy. The morale of the HLI
could not have been higher as its four companies, deployed two up and
two back, attacked the village in set-piece fashion, the troops following an
arillery barrage "just like walking out in the rain." Outside of Buron,
however, they encountered an antitank ditch 12 feet wide and 15 feet deep
covered by machine gun, mortar, and artillery defensive fire tasks. Sup-
porting tanks, out of communication, had in the meantime run into mine-
fields and incurred casualties. Eventually the HI fought their way into
But test Artillery 17-pounders
Were able to defeat enemy armored counterattacks. With 262 casualties, the
HLI suffered the greatest loss of any unit on 8 July; the supporting tank
squadron mustered but four out of 15 Shermans.
Followino the reduction of Ruran the North Novas went on to secure
Authie and Franqueville in a series of hotly contested actions. At 1730 hours
the 7th Bricade commenced phase three of "Charnwood" and by 2300
hours afrer much more hard fobting Cussy was firmly in the hands of
the Canadian Scottish. The enemy withdrew from the Abbaye Ardenne
