22
Long Forgotten Winters
to the head of the Canadian forces in 1923, changing military conditions
also militated against the dispatch of another BEF:
As far as an [sic] European war is concerned, there will be absolutely no chance
of an Expeditionary Force leaving Great Britain while intensive air action is
going on. It would hardly be a practical military project to begin with, and
secondly, no politician would allow it to start. There was difficulty enough
in getting the politicians to let the force go in 1914, when there was no danger.
This intensive air action will, therefore, go on until one side has quietened
or softened the others' air action. Then, and then only, will the Army be able
to embark for Europe if that is what is required, and so the Army will definitely
have a good time in which to complete itself.32
"The first principle of defense," Ironside concluded, was "anti-aircraft,"
to which role he saw the Territorial Army entirely committed. He further
advocated increasing the air force, a stance more enthusiastically embraced
by the Canadian Deputy CGS, McNaughton, who saw this service as "the
first line of defense. "33 Indeed, in both Canada and Britain the air force seemed
the one form of rearmament acceptable to the ordinary taxpayer. The bomb-
ing of London in 1917 had left a deep impression on the public, which,
frightened by Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin's 1932 declaration that "the
bomber will always get through" and an anticipated casualty rate of 150,000
souls per week, eagerly embraced the apostles of air power and the highly
delusory strategic bombing doctrine they preached. Based more on political
requirements than experience, and intimately linked to justifying the RAF
as an independent force, this doctrine threatened any potential attacker with
dislocation through retaliatory bomber strikes that also sought
to crush morale. That the RAF was technologically incapable of fulfilling
this role against Germany in 1934 and had no capacity to deliver even in
1938, seems not to have lessened the attractiveness of this "Trenchard (after
Marshal of the RAF Viscount Trenchard) Doctrine." Indeed, uncritica
acceptance of the military value of the Luftwaffe's terror bombings of Guer-
nica and Barcelona in the Spanish Civil War appears to have heightened its
appeal. 34
The 1932 publication of Liddell Hart's seminal work, The British Way in
Warfare, provided an intellectual basis for protagonists of the deterrent ap-
proach and those who yearned for a return to Britain's traditional "blue
water" strategy with its emphasis on blockade and the use of the army as
a "projectile fired by the navy." Mobility and surprise were seen as the
essence of a distinctive British way in warfare that sought to avoid major
military effort on the Continent. To this Liddell Hart applied his strategy
of the indirect approach and, coincidentallv. the doctrine of limited liability
that proposed committing only minimal British land forces to the direct
assistance of European allies. This doctrine had powerful appeal for a variety
of reasons, among them still vivid memories of Great War slaughter, mis-
The Canadian Corps and the British Mold
23
trust of the French, crude interservice rivalry, arrant army unpreparedness
for Continental operations, an accepted military need to buy time, and
perhaps most importantly,
Treasury concern for financial and economic
stability. Ironically, for Liddell Hart was a tank advocate, limited liability
favored mechanization more than armored force development—that is to
say, simply harnessing the internal combustion engine as opposed to uti-
lizing armored fighting vehicles in battle. Imperial policing, to be sure, was
more amenable to the former.
Lacking the traditional esteem of the Royal Navy, the novel appeal of
the RAF, and the perceived deterrent capacity of either, the 200,000-man
British Army soon came to consider itself the "Cinderella" service. As
Michael Howard has suggested, however, government parsimony and elec-
toral pacificism were not the only factors contributing to the general malaise
of what has been described as "a comatose army.'
»36 In his view, the army
was "still as firmly geared to the pace and perspective of regimental sol-
liering as it had been before 1914.»37 Major-General I. F. C. Fuller's caustic
crack that the War Office after the Great War "plunged into a battle for the
red coat,
khaki not being considered military enough for peacetime
soldiering"38
was thus not far off the mark. That the military profession
demanded as much intellectual dedication as the practice of law or engi-
neering does not seem to have been fully appreciated:
Too many... senior officers regarded it as a comfortable sanctuary from
industrial society to welcome even the limited measures of streamlining and
mechanisation which were forced on them after 1937 by Leslie Hore-Belisha,
with Liddell Hart... his unofficial but powerful adviser; and a whole military
generation went to its graves cursing the two men who tried to drag it, kicking
and screaming, into the twentieth century."
Here the central issue remains the British Army's failure to progress
beyond pioneering stages in the field of armored warfare.
While other
explanations besides social interpretations have been offered, none alone
seems entirely convincing. It has been argued by Brian Bond, for example,
that the hitherto touted conservatism of the officer corps was less a detri-
mental factor than the army's lack of a definite European role toward which
to train. In this regard he is supported by Howard and D.C. Watt. At the
same time, others like Shelford Bidwell and Dominick Graham have insisted
that lack of military professionalism more than public antipathy and gov-
ernment economy accounted for British Army shortcomings.
Robert H.
Larson, following in the footsteps of Fuller and Liddell Hart, has further
submitted that the army remained wedded to an attrition doctrine that
denied their concept of inducing strategic paralysis through powerful ar-
mored thrusts deep into an enemy's rear.
Winton in a masterly synthesis more recently concluded that military con-
