130
Long Forgotten Winters
promoted." Of all ranks commented upon, Montgomery seems to have
been least impressed by Canadian company sergeants-major.'5 That this
potential weakness concerned Crerar well into 1943 is evident from his
warning that "a unit with an ignorant or undependable cadre of Non-
Commissioned Officers is unfit to overcome the problems of the battlefield
or withstand any severe strain on its discipline or morale." He accordingly
urged COs to give priority to the development of "reliable, knowledgeable,
self-respecting and loyal" NCOs. As one battle school report stated, how-
ever, the criteria for NCO promotion often placed parade smartness, ad-
ministrative ability, and general peacetime efficiency above other soldierly
virtues.' One suspects, as well, that the best were made into officers to
the detriment of building up a strong NCO corps.
An even more serious shortcoming noted by Montgomery was the ap-
parent inability of most Canadian commanders to conduct proper troop
training. While a "great deal of time... [was spent in teaching people how
to make war and how to fight... little time... [was] spent in teaching
officers how to train troops." The "real trouble,
" according to Montgomery,
was "that officers generally hald] never been taught 'training' as distinct
from fighting in battle" and they did "not really understand it." Company
commanders who had "never been taught how to train companies" thus
employed "old fashioned training methods that were in use 30 years ago,
with the result that "much time was) wasted and many men bored."
Commanders, it appeared to Montgomery, were quite content just to know
that training was happening; there was little supervision, let alone willing-
ness "to investigate exactly how a CO…... (might be] training his officers
or N.C.Os." Suspecting that many Canadian officers did not even under-
stand "skeleton force" exercises (telephone battles and signals exercises re-
quiring minimal manning), he ventured that they would likely welcome
'definite instruction about training principles and methods."
As it was, officer training tended to be conducted in "haphazard" fashion
with lite stention trainit shaking-out battalion and brigade headquarters,
which "seldom seemfed] to go out for a H.Q. exercise." Montgomery
further noted that few battalions since November 1941 had actually exer-
cised for any extended period as a unit, some having not operated as a
battalion in the field which he thought necessary once a month. When
collective training did take place, moreover, it often suffered from improper
organization; again, "much energy was wasted by wrong methods" and in
many instances, unbelievably, there was "no testing of companies in turn
by the C.O, and Brigadier." For the most part, company commanders were
permitted to "direct" their own exercises, which usually saw seconds-in-
command rather than company commanders in the "command" role. This
was clearly anathema to Montgomery who chastised COs for not setting
surprise exercises that would have forced company commanders to wield
command themselves."
131
The Montgomery Measurement
Montgomery also expressed misgivings about the amount of time being
devoted to training, an aspect that apparently disturbed several Canadian
COs as well. Whereas the 1st Division allocated four days per week for
construction of defenses (including antiboat and antitank scaffolding along
beaches), a half-day for recreation, and one day off duty, only one and a
half days were set aside for training.
In Montgomery's view, this system
merely served to dash any hope of serious accomplishment; it was far better,
he suggested, to separate work from training and concentrate on each for
longer periods of time so that more profitable results could be attained. He
additionally prescribed what he termed "piece work," an incentive-oriented
training approach that allowed individuals and groups to be dismissed from
instruction the minute they fully grasped what had been taught.
As for field works, Montgomery disapproved of the 4th Brigade digging
and wiring defensive positions in its "Stand to Area,"
ognizably Fullerian tones that as divisional reserve its purpose was "to deal
blows. not... receive them." He was similarly critical of the 3rd Division
digging in its "Stand to Area" when it was unlikely to fight a defensive battle
there. To start any battle "sitting in prepared trenches, behind barbed wire,"
Montgomery maintained. encouraged a "defensive mentality »18 He could
not "emphasize too strongly that the first requirement in the successful defeat
of invasion... (was| NOT good defences," but rather "a good and well trained
soldiery "' In this respect it is clear that Montgomery reshaped Canadian tacti-
cal thinking: whereas 2nd Division Operation Instruction No. 12 issued 27 No-
vember 1941 was entitled "'Defence of Sussex," it had by 3 January 1942 been
amended to read "Plan to Defeat Invasion. "20 The Montgomery "school"
stressed both training and the offensive spirit.
What is important to highlight in all this, however, is that McNaughton
had presumed his Canadian Corps to be "thoroughly prepared for battle"
by the fall of 1941. In his estimation, "ceaseless training by day and night
in all the intricacies of armoured warfare, through all the phases from
teaching skill at arms to the individual to the combination of units, divisions
and larger formations" had ensured as much." Montgomery, on the other
hand, disagreed- and from almost ever angle and level.
"We live," he
Warned that same fall, "in a sort of peace-time atmosphere... [where] such
things as courts-of-enquiry, traffic accidents, reports and returns, inspec-
tons, work on coast defences, and the paper and routine of peace conditions,
al tend to leave little or noes, an for. study of the things that really matter
in war." "And so it often happens," he continued, "that officers forget
what are the things that really matter."22 This fundamental difference in
approach not only distinguished the professional from the amateur, but
explained much of the Canadian training predicament.
"Ist class"
To Montgomery, the collective training of the Canadian Corps revealed
troops, but a high command found seriously wanting.
training of commanders. such ae Prigadiers. Clommandersl. Royall
