Figures and Maps
10.4 Attack on Tilly, 1 August 1944
10.5
Attack on Tilly, 5 August 1944
11.1
Operation "Totalize"
11.2 The Course of Operation "Totalize"
11.3 Destruction of "Worthington Force"
12.1 Operation "Tractable"
254
255
264
275
281
294
Foreword
Forty-seven years ago this summer allied armies stormed the Normandy
beaches, only to find that after the initial landing phase, progress toward
the D-Day objectives became slow indeed. This, too, was the experience
of the First Canadian Army on the road to Falaise in the summer of 1944.
If the ultimate test of the combat effectiveness of an army is the battlefield,
then the performance of the Canadians, including the many non-Canadian
formations in this army, while brave beyond dispute, was disappointing.
The author, a long-serving infantry and staff officer in the Canadian land
forces, does not question the historical record; he does seek to discover the
"reason why." He challenges the widely accepted explanation that inex-
perienced troops and, on occasion, inadequate regimental officers were no
match for the fanatic, combat-experienced Germans. Instead, he places ul-
timate responsibility
for the operational shortcomings revealed in Nor-
mandy on the Canadian high command. During the lean interwar years,
Canadian senior commanders, overly concerned with keeping a skeleton
army alive in a hostile political environment, neglected the essence of their
profession and forgot the lessons of 1914-1918. But the British high com-
mand and army were in much the same predicament, as were the armies
of Canada's sister dominions. None was adequately prepared, either men-
tally or in materiel, for war in 1939.
Most Canadian formations, however, were not engaged until the summer
of 1944. This provided adequate time for realistic training, and some effort
was made to profit from combat experience gained in Sicily. However, as
the author shows, Canadian senior officers in England, caught up in routine,
all too often failed to make good use of this opportunity. Peacetime habits
and ways of thinking are always hard to shed, and for three years the
