314
Half-Forgotten Summer
complex, its elements so varied, and its operations so esoteric as to demand
years of undiverted attention and study. The best blood of Canada that
poured forth freely on the golden sweep of Verrières Ridge in the Norman
summer of 1944 remains a sad testament to this reality.
NOTES
1. Quoted in Infantry Journal, 6 (Winter 1976/77):1.
2. Marc Bloch,
Strange Defeat: A Statement of Evidence Written in 1940, trans.
Gerard Hopkins (New York: W.W. Norton, 1968), p. 95.
Appendix A
Some General Notes on What to Look
for When Visiting a Unit
1. The underlying object is obviously to find out what the C.O. is worth, and
generally if it is a good or bad unit.
The method adopted, and the length of time
it will take, will depend entirely on the inspecting officer's own military knowledge,
on his own experience in actual command, and generally on whether he can be
"bluffed" by the C.O:
2. Most C.O.'s will want to lay on a tour of the unit area, looking at the training
and so on. This would be quite suitable for later visit. But for the first visit, if you
really want to find out all about the unit there is only one way to do it. And that
is to sit with the C.O. in his orderly room and cross-examine him on certain points
which are "key" points, and which will show at once whether or not he knows his
job. The Brigadier should be present, but no one else. The C.O, is then put through
it. And if he begins to wriggle and to give evasive answers, he is pinned down at
once. The C.O. will welcome such an interview and will learn a great deal from
it. On no account must he be bullied or rattled. The great point is to show him
that you really want to know all about his unit, and that you are all out to find out
his difficulties and worries and to help him. I have found all C.O.'s in the Canadian
Corps most friendly, and very willing to tell me how they run their show. It is
very important that the C.O. should realise early in the proceedings that you really
do know what you are talking about, it is quite casy to show him this by cross-
examining him on some point of detail about which he probably thinks you know
nothing. Once he sees this, he will be perfectly frank and will welcome any ideas
you may give him. Both parties will learn a great deal from the discussion-the
visiting officer and the C.O. And so will the Brigadier. And all the time you are
summing up the C.O. and finding out what he knows. It must all be very friendly
and natural from the beginning; you then get the C.O.'s confidence; this is most
important.
3. An investigation into the following points will show you at once what the
unit is worth, and if the C.O. knows his job.
