68
Long Forgotten Winters
moured Division, 1st Army Tank Brigade, 53rd Light Antiaircraft Regi-
ment, and ancillary units remaining momentarily under command. 2
The Canadian Army Programme for 1941 (which reflected the demise of
militia as a wartime title) anticipated a Canadian Corps of three divisions
plus an independent armored brigade. A Canadian Armoured Corps was
accordingly authorized on 13 August and the 1st Canadian Armoured Bri-
gade formed. Shortly thereafter, the War Office announced its intention to
form five armored divisions plus the equivalent of three more in armored
brigades. At the same time it requested Canada and Australia each to provide
one armored division. Unable to compete with the enemy in manpower,
the British evidently reasoned that compensation might be found in armored
It was agreed
fighting vehicles, which were given the highest priority.
subsequently that the Canadian Corps would by the end of 1941 comprise
in addition to three infantry divisions and ancillary troops, an armored
division equipped with "cruiser"
(cavalry role) tanks and an army tank
brigade of three tank regiments equipped with "I" tanks for infantry
support.
To create the 1st Canadian Armoured Division, personnel were taken
from the 4th Infantry Division which, in the wake of British victories over
the Italians, had been allowed to run down. Following subsequent defeat
in North Africa and Greece at the hand of the Germans, however, the 4th
was reconstituted and plans were made to mobilize a sixth division for
home defense. The Ist Armoured Division was in the meantime formed in
accordance with a war establishment that called for two armored brigades,
each of three tank regiments and a motor battalion of infantry, a field
artillery regiment, an antiaircraft regiment, an antitank regiment, and one
infantry battalion. Two experienced British officers were also taken on
strength to fill the key staff appointments of GSO 1 and Assistant Adjutant
and Quartermaster General (AA&QMG). Redesignated the 5th Canadian
Armoured Division, this formation followed the Ist Canadian Army Tank
Brigade and the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division to the United Kingdom in
November 1011 Rutheend ofthat vege the Canadian A emy overseas totaled
124,472 all ranks 13'
The opinion of the new CIGS, General Sir Alan Brooke, was that further
expansion would leave too large a force for a cords commander to command
and still perform his anerational and trainina role This sion suas shared
by the Commander-in-Chief Home Forces, General Sir Bernard Paget, who
with his superior recommended that consideration be given to creating an
army headquarters.
Significantly, tons Ceration begiS, Major-General
H.D G "Harry" Crerar. had on 11 Auoust 1941 estimated that there existed
sufficient manpower for Canada to field an overseas "army" of two corps,
each of one armored and two infantry divisions, for a war period of over
six years. In the event. the Overseas Army Programme for 1941-49 called
for conversion of the 4th Infantry Division to armor and the creation of an
Shaping an Expeditionary Force
69
overseas field army headquarters to command and administer a Canadian
Corps of three divisions and a Canadian Armoured Corps of two divisions.
Headquarters First Canadian Army thus came into existence on Easter
Monday 6 April 1942, with McNaughton named General Officer Com-
manding-in-Chief (GOC-in-C). The 4th Canadian Armoured Division pro-
ceeded overseas that summer. The 2nd Canadian Army Tank Brigade,
organized the same year, shipped to Britain in June 1943, five months after
the establishment of Headquarters 2 Canadian Corps. Again in the complex
matter of fielding large fighting formations, the major problem encountered
was that of ancillary troops. They actually represented a larger manpower
commitment than the fighting formations. The result was that with an
RCN and RCAF destined to grow to 92,000 and 215,000, respectively, the
First Canadian Army could not, and was never able to, operate entirely as
a Canadian field force. The War Office responded by contributing upwards
of 9,000 men per division as a permanent commitment to complete its
rearward support services. By the end of 1943, the year in which the 1st
Division and the 1st Canadian Army Tank Brigade left for Sicily, the Ca-
nadian Army overseas reached its peak development as a force of over a
quarter of a million men. Though smaller than the first CEF, which from
January 1917 was in excess of 300,000 all ranks, it was still a sizable body. "14
The "days of great expeditionary forces of infantry crossing the oceans,'
which Prime Minister Mackenzie King confidently ventured on 30 March
1939 were unlikely to recur, had thus returned like some unwelcome pre-
monition. To fill the ranks of this growing overseas commitment,
Canadian government from the beginning appealed to the patriotic zeal of
its citizenry. The initial lack of key munitions industries and high unem-
ployment nicely complemented the volunteer spirit in 1939, ' to the extent
that men of the Ist Canadian Infantry Division were uncharitably dubbed
"breadliners" by those who followed. ' Since the Militia Act stipulated that
no soldier could be compelled to serve continuously in the field for more
war on general service (GS) in the newly created Canadian Active Service
Force (CASF), which for legal and administrative reasons also incorporated
activated reserve units alongside those of the smaller regular force.
half of the 58,337 volunteers who joined the CASE in September 1939 were
former or serving members of either the regulars or reserves. In December
1939 repulations were even altered to permit the enlistment of resident
aliens, which enabled U.S. citizens to join.
With the Dunkirk-prompted passage of the National Resources Mobi-
lization Act (NRMA) in June 1940, however, two classes of soldier were
officially embraced within the Canadian land forces. The NRMA imposed
conscription not for GS that included service overseas, but for home defense
duty in Canade only Tritially only unmarried or widowed men without
children between the ages of 21 and 24 were called up for 30-days training,
