50
Long Forgotten Winters
instruction in Field Service Regulations, the chief doctrinal manual for the
conduct of field operations. Subject areas taught included the principles of
war, the characteristics of fighting troops, the intricacies of attack, defense,
pursuit, and retreat operations, reconnaissance, interarm cooperation, and
intercommunication, including the drafting of appreciations, messages, and
orders. Tactical training up to infantry company level was also accomplished
through map studies, the use of sand table models, and more advanced
tactical exercises without troops (TEWTs). In the associated area of military
engineering, the elementary principles of field works, obstacle construction,
advanced demolitions, and bridging were covered. To graduate, cadets had
to pass written examinations in each of the foregoing fields.
Within the all-arms training conducted at the RMC, however, technical
and artillery aspects received special attention. In addition to the Tactics
Department, there existed a separate Artillery Department that provided
advanced gunnery instruction identical to that carried out at the Royal
Military Academy,
Woolwich, with the exception of siege artillery. A
gentleman cadet upon graduation was thus qualified and competent to take
charge of a section of field artillery. He also possessed a good grasp of the
tactics and training of a battery."
47 The observation that the cadet "likes but
to have practical, concrete facts thrown at him, not theories'48 seems to
have stemmed from this period. It was not until 1937 that the "technical
subjects of artillery and military engineering... [were] reduced to an 'all
arms' basis... [with] Cadets taking commissions in... these corps...
(being] given special courses in their final year."49
ingene domination of the military establishment between the wars
and the influence of other stream gunner commanders, it is additionally
likely that militia doctrinal inclination at large was to embrace the artillery
approach. To be sure, comments emanated from some reserve force quarters
in 1931 that claimed "the infantry does not count now... it must be all
artillery. "50 McNaughton, it must further be stated, regularly drew attention
to artillery performance in the Great War. Unlike Burns and Simonds
though, his published articles on Great War artillery, counterbattery, sur-
vey, and DND activities tended to reflect first-hand personal involvement,
not conceptual thinking about tactics and operations. It could be that the
technically proficient McNaughton fell into the trap of believing that the
only experience that counts is one's own. In any event, he continued to
preach the doctrine of shooting the "ultimate round," since " the price paid
in casualties was inversely proportional to the ammunition which was
expended. "51
For the most part, however, Canadian doctrine reflected that promulgated
by the British War Office. At the Colonial Conference of 1907 and sub-
sequent Imperial (Defence) Conference of 1909, uniform standards of or-
ganization, training, equipment, and stores had been agreed and accepted
within the Empire. In keeping with the idea of an Imperial General Staff,
The Bellows of Peace
51
Canadian officers were also nominated to attend the British Army Staff
College at Camberley and the Indian Army Staff College at Quetta. Officer
exchanges between dominion and imperial forces were also instituted. The
Great War, in which the dominions mobilized almost a million of the nearly
six million men raised within the Empire, resulted in an even closer asso-
ciation of Canadian and British forces at the working level. As the key
factor in maintaining uniformity of doctrine following the war was con-
sidered to be staff college training, Canadian militia headquarters "fought
...against setting up separate establishments for the study of higher com-
mand, military affairs and staff duties."52
The Canadian regular officer, in short, was an imperial animal. Following
successful completion of an RMC preparatory course and entrance exam-
inations, he continued to attend Camberley or Quetta as well as the Senior
Officers' School (SOS) at Sheerness. In fact, because "the practical assim-
ilation of the Military Forces of the Empire" was viewed as desirable, the
Canadian regular officer received training identical to that given to his
British Army counterpart. Both were expected to pass the same exami-
nations, which anyone familiar with them would admit were tough and
comprehensive. Candidates had first to pass "practical" portions before
attempting associated written examinations in tactical problems set for com-
pany and battalion commander level. Other subjects covered were military
organization and administration, military law, imperial geography, military
history, military geography and tactics, administration in the field, map
reading, and field works. Promotion examinations were set by the War
Office to ensure uniformity, though allowance was made for Canadian
differences in pay and peacetime administration. Promotion to lieutenant-
colonel in both armies was dependent upon passing out of the SOS."
Admittedly, a serious deficiency in the professional development of the
Canadian regular officer, and NCO for that matter, was the absence of any
worthwhile collective field training.
54 In this respect, however, they were
hardly more handicapped than many British regular officers who often spent
up to six years on isolated overseas garrison duty
"without seeing any of
the latest developments, and ... rarely... [hearing] a lecture on a subject
of first-rate importance." According to Ironside, after three to four years
internal security duty in India which put a premium on turn-out. barrack
inspections, and cookhouse sanitation, a battalion was almost utterly useless
as a military force.» Indeed, peacekeeping then as peacekeeping today in
no way enhanced the capability of a professional army to wage war effec-
tively against a first-class enemy.
On the Canadian scene, scarce funds as well as geographic isolation put
a damper on officially authorized training. While in normal years militiamen
trained for about 12 days at camp or local headquarters, during 1923 and
1924 they trained on average for but eight or nine days. Due to a higher
training priority, officers NCOs and specialiste in 1924 managed 16 days
