214
Half-Forgotten Summer
the month of June was "a complete and costly failure." At 1430 hours 11
June, Wyman's 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade, having been warned at
0800 hours, launched the 6th Armoured Regiment (1st Hussars) and the
Queen's Own Rifles toward Le Mesnil-Patry in an effort to secure the high
ground south of Cheux. Incredibly, a squadron of tanks with a company
of infantry riding on them led the advance. Forced to dismount by mortar
and machine-gun fire, some of these infantrymen managed to accompany
the tanks into Le Mesnil-Patry, which was defended by elements of the 2nd
Battalion, 26 Panzergrenadier Regiment. Unhappily for the attackers, the
2nd (Mark IV) Battalion, 12th Panzer Regiment, had just deployed to the
south of the town. An immediate counterattack by elements of a panzer
company, for the loss of three Mark IVs, resulted in the virtual annihilation
of the leading Hussar squadron. In this disgraceful affair, the infantry com-
pany suffered 96 casualties, more than half of them missing. The action at
Le Mesnil-Patry was the last major operation in June. Total Canadian cas-
ualties to this point amounted to 196 officers and 2,635 other ranks, slightly
more than one-third of whom were dead. 20
Despite continuous shelling, mortaring, and patrolling, the last two weeks
of June were comparatively calm on the Canadian front. During the night
of 16/17 June, the 7th and 8th Brigades even managed to exchange positions
in the face of the enemy. Due to language differences, however, the inter-
change between the Canadian Scottish and the Regiment de la Chaudière
turned out to be a highly dangerous and harrowing affair; the Chaudières,
in fact, prematurely abandoned their position, leaving but a dozen men of
the former regiment's reconnaissance parties holding a battalion frontage
for about five hours.?
Fortunately, this lapse went undetected by the
Hitlerjugend who were also adjusting their dispositions largely in response
to increasing 30 Corps pressure that, with Operation "Epsom,
" eventually
exacted a terrible toll. Two days after "Epsom," however, the "impression
arose at ... [12th SS, which noted increased reconnaissance probing, 1 that
the enemy was planning an attack to capture Carpiquet airfield. "22 In this
the Germans were correct, for 1 British Corps had ordered the 3rd Canadian
Division to take both the airfield and Carpiquet village as a prelude to its
participation in a three-divisional assault directly on Caen.
Operation "Windsor," the attack across open ground upon Carpiquet on
4 July involved Brigadier Ken Blackader's 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade,
augmented by the Royal Winnipeg Rifles and supported by the 10th Ar-
moured Regiment (The Fort Garry Horse). Roughly 760 divisional and
AGRA guns from one heavy, eight medium, and twelve field regiments
provided artillery support. The 16-inch guns of HMS Rodney and a monitor,
Roberts, assisted with preparatory bombardment of the objective area. Ad-
ditional maneuver support provided included the heavy (4.2-inch) mortars
and Vickers medium machine guns of the Cameron Highlanders of Ottawa
(M.G.) and three squadrons of "special armor" (fail tanks for beating paths
Operation "Windsor"
THE
NORTH
I SHORE: REGIMENT
ATTACK ON
CARPIQUET
4 JULY 1944
OR. SHORE R.
QUEEN'S
RIFLES
OF
OWN
MOVEMENT AT 11.00
RÉGIMENT DE LA
CHAUDIERE
NZER Carpiquet
REGIMENT
OBJECTIVE
R. DE CHAUD
HANGARS
INITIALIS
Marcelet™
DONE THE
Q.O.R.
GRENADER REGAMERER.
BUILDINGS
AIRFIELD
HI8
ROYAL WINNIPEG
RIFLES
HANGARS
1/2
( MILE
Ground over 60 metres....]
