Long Forgotten Winters
16
that the Canadian Corps was formed not from traditional units existing
within the Canadian regimental system, but, instead, on the basis of entirely
new composite numbered units. Ironically, whatever informal connection
the CEF did have with the peacetime volunteer militia practically ceased to
exist on the adoption of compulsory service in 1917. Despite the chaos
engendered on initial mobilization, however, the exclusion of the old militia,
indicted by the Governor-General in 1913 as "the worst force in the empire,"
may indeed have been a blessing in disguise."
Some British military historians have attributed superior Canadian op-
erational performance in the Great War to their being "unhindered by such
prejudices" as are often fostered by peacetime military structures that tend
to lay, in the name of regimental spirit, proprietary claim to weapons and
combat functions. The aversion of traditional arms or corps like cavalry
and artillery to the creation of new ones was thus not so strong as to
discourage Canadian pioneering efforts in machine-gun employment. Like-
wise, because he was "not so obsessed with arms institutionalism," the
Canadian soldier more readily embraced new weapons like the mortar than,
say, the British gunner who preferred not to exchange his horse for some-
thing that resembled a drain pipe. Still, as William Stewart has so con-
vincingly demonstrated in his excellent study, the Canadian Corps
essentially adopted and refined British methods. Detailed planning, thor-
ough preparation, and exhaustive training more than any innate superiority
underpinned Canadian fighting efficiency.
Much of the operational effectiveness of the Canadian Corps also sprang
from the skill of its high-quality British staff officers, three of whom rose
to become Chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS). In a highly positional
war that left little room for strategic maneuver, tactical innovation effected
through meticulous staff work was critical. By 1918, moreover, Canadian
divisions had ten more staff officers than their smaller British equivalents.
Of greater import than its oft touted national spirit, the Canadian Corps
additionally possessed the inestimable advantage of having permanently
allocated divisions. This enabled it to develop a military cohesion and op-
crational capacity that can only ever result from soldiers constantly working
together. British corps were not afforded this luxury as the division re-
mained the basic fighting formation, which meant that corps composition
had regularly to be altered as the operational situation demanded.
That there were many outstanding British divisions commanded by ex-
ceptionally able general officers is of course worth recalling. Among thes
must be counted Liddell Hart's patron, the "hard-swearing" Major-General
Ivor Maxse, whose 18th (Eastern) Division on the bloody first day of the
Somme seized its objectives in less than an hour with comparatively light
casualties. Unfortunately, divisions such as the 18th and 30th that escaped
the firestorm that day were ultimately done in anyway, as the reputation
they had gained ensured their use as "stormers" for the remainder of the
The Canadian Corps and the British Mold
17
war. * The inescapable logic that the longer a soldier stays in combat the
more likely he will be killed was accordingly demonstrated, and thus did
Britannia begin to exhaust her manpower. The great advantage of the Ca-
nadian Corps was that it was always kept up to strength. Its spirit through-
out the war was never that of "an army that felt betrayed or let down by
its government."15 Currie insisted on maintaining Canadian divisions of
three brigades each of four battalions, moreover, when the British, partly
due to manpower shortages, were obliged to reduce theirs to three brigades
each of three battalions.
If Morris is to be believed, "most people agreed... that the Canadians
were the best troops on the western front.
»17 An Australian might protest,
however, that this merely reflected a British judgment based less on actual
fighting performance than acute senior officer aversion to an Australian
desertion rate four times the norm. The Canadians, it seems, were much
better disciplined. Yet the Australians comprised only nine percent of British
Empire forces, but accounted for over 20 percent of all prisoners, guns,
and ground captured by all Allied forces, and more than the Americans, in
the offensives launched from April to October 1918.18 Despite the obvious
subjectivity of such assessments, it is nonetheless possible to note certain
characteristics of the Australian and Canadian approaches.
The latter were
quite correctly regarded as the leaders in machine-gun tactics, proving par-
ticularly innovative in massing their heavy variants in batteries and fighting
them as tactical entities to support attacks as well as defenses.'
The Canadian officer most responsible for the foregoing development
appears to have been a French emigrant and engineer, Raymond Brutinel,
who on declaration of war obtained ministerial approval to raise the 1st
Canadian Automobile Brigade, a small armored car unit later named the
1st Canadian Motor Machine Gun Brigade. Eventually, a Canadian Machine
Gun corps was established with Brigadier-General Brutinel in command.
The machine-gun art was subsequently refined to a highly sophisticated
degree that included the use of indirect or "barrage" fire. Given the posi-
tional nature of the Great War, however, it was not until the great German
offensive of March 1918 that Brutinel's motor machine-gun concept based
on armored car mobility proved its worth. Following this experience Gen-
eral Currie approved the formation of an additional motor machine gun
brigade (actually battalion size) that with the 1st Canadian Motors, one field
artillery battery, an engineer company, a cyclist battalion, and a mortar unit
constituted the Canadian Independent Force commanded by Brutinel. This
mobile force, it has been claimed, "was the first mechanized formation in
the Commonwealth armies and the forerunner of the armoured division.
At the other end of the maneuver scale, Canadian artillery officers were
incorporating the advantages of air reconnaissance, flash-spotting, and
sound-ranging into counterbattery work.
Brigadier-General A. G. L.
"Andy" McNaughton, strongly influenced by Lieutenant-Colonel A. G.
