108
Long Forgotten Winters
while training pursuits. If it did, and in effect became a dead end in itself,
high command cannot be absolved of blame.
Since battle drill initially possessed artillery and armored as well as in-
fantry dimensions, it affords an excellent vehicle by which to ascertain the
direction and progress of Canadian combat arms training. As the way an
army trains usually determines the way it will fight, moreover, the state of
Canadian Army troop training in Britain deserves as much scrutiny as the
staff training of officers. To understand an army from the standpoint of
command and staff is one thing, but to discover the essence of its fighting
ability one has to look at the lower levels. Without a conditioned body, the
brain of an army is of little consequence, for battles are in the end fought
and won by small groups of soldiers at the front. Yet how a high command
ensures their training remains of the utmost importance. Fortunately, within
this extremely complex and variegated field, battle drill provides an apposite
avenue that can be profitably explored in this respect. It is, after all, not
how long, but how well an army trains that counts.
That the Canadian volunteer soldier was excellent raw material of un-
matched willingness can hardly be doubted. He simply manifested a burning
desire to get into action. Military authorities in Canada, at the beginning
of December 1941, attributed "the … inferiority complex' suffered by the
soldier in comparison with the Air Force," to the fact that "he [wals not
doing any fighting.
* Barely two days later, however, Canadian soldiers
in the Hong Kong garrison found themselves in the thick of an impossible
struggle. They nonetheless held out with their imperial comrades for 17
days, proving that regardless of their state of training, Canadian troops
were prepared to fight tenaciously and die hard. Of 1,975 soldiers, 557
never saw their homeland again. In no small way, Canada's earlier insistence
on British abrogation of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance had ensured that they,
along with the defenders of Singapore, "paid the final installment on the
Washington Treaty.?"3
In Britain about the same time, their countrymen embraced battle drill
just as Montgomery began to exert his unique professional stamp on Ca-
nadian training. Like their personal acquaintance with Montgomery, how-
ever, Canadians came into contact with battle drill more through accident
than design. During July and August 1941, the 2nd Canadian Infantry
Division relieved the 55th Division within 4 British Corps on the Sussex
coast, thus opening a close association with the 47th (London) Division, a
British Territorial Army formation commanded by Major-General J. E
Utterson-Kelso. Unique among 4 Corps formations, the 47th Division had
a battle drill school in full operation when the fist Canadians to see it, the
Calgary Highlanders, arrived. General Utterson-Kelso had served in the
1st Division REE under Maior-Genel H PT. C Alevander whom, it
would appear, first suggested the idea of battle drill on observing the actions
Battle Drill Die
109
of German troops. Interested in basic tactical problems such as how to
defend a bridge or clear a woods of enemy, Alexander was also supposedly
forever illustrating suggested solutions through field sketches.
Upon Alexander's appointment to command 1 British Corps after Dun-
kirk, his BGS had certain of his annotated infantry training sketches pub-
lished in a pamphlet entitled, "1st Corps Tactical Notes." In the introduction
Alexander likened battle to a "supreme sport" that required previously
worked-out team plays. "Surely," he argued,
"a soldier on the battlefield,
beset by fear and doubt, is far more in need of a guide to action than any
games player at Lord's or Wimbledon." Suggesting that it was preferable
to know instinctively some orthodox line of conduct than ... be paralyzed
by... uncertainty of what to do," he recommended drawing up
"lines of
conduct-simple guides for simple soldiers" so that men when faced with
battlefield problems would have answers to them. In all, about eight to ten
operations such as village clearing and how to attack a strongpoint were
presented. A corps training school was subsequently established through
which every subaltern in the Ist and 2nd British Divisions passed. Thirty
thousand copies of "Tactical Notes"
were produced, of which 5,000 went
to Montgomery's corps.*
After the 1 Corps booklet attracted the attention of the CIGS, General
Sir John Dill, the War Office had parts of it published in February 1941,
though without any reference to "battle drill"
per se. It was subsequently
sued as a supplement to Infantry Training, 1937 under the title "Tactical
Notes for Platoon Commanders, 1941."' Around roughly the same time,
the 47h Division began developine battle drills based on Training in Fieldcraft
and Elementary Tactics, a pamphlet published in March 1940 that advocated
the exercise of greater imagination in teaching tactics.
The divisional ap-
proach was to analvze each "movement and operation of war and... break
it (sic down to ... bare essentials." work out an ideal plan for dealing with
these under ideal conditions and teach that olan as a drill with variations
to ensure the latter did not become an end in itself. It assumed that the
imaginative commander could work out an "adaption" that would "fit"
the tactical circumstance; the unimaginative could "just carry out the drill
woodenly- and still ... [not] do too badly.
The 47th Division insisted on adding to this equation the highest possible
standard of physical fitness. All training was performed at the double with
ruthless application, paying strict attention to weapon handling. The next
step saw the introduction of noise and live fire training. When Montgomery
also became an integral element of battle drill trainine. Later, a series of
granted permission to practice with live ammunition,
"battle inoculation'
lectures and précis were incorporated in a 169-page mimeographed publi-
cation entitled "Pot Dall "S Thie provided the basis for instruction at the
divisional battle school run bu a bricht vound Ouford graduate and officer
