128
Long Forgotten Winters
19-23 January 1942, which was attended by all senior formation com-
manders and staff officers, as well as unit commanders. By means of a large
cloth model the three Canadian infantry divisions, army tank brigade, and
corps headquarters made separate presentations on the division in the ap-
proach march and contact battle, infantry-artillery cooperation, infantry-
tank cooperation, all-arms cooperation in defense, and movement, orga-
nization, and new equipment. After discussion following the end of each
session, Montgomery summed up, emphasizing among other things the
vital importance of concentrated artillery fire in defense and the absolute
necessity of adequate service support."
During February and March the dynamic Scots-Irishman visited all nine
Canadian infantry brigades and 27 infantry battalions, doubtlessly employ-
ing the highly effective approach he had devised, and evidently took pains
to explain to Crerar in his "Some General Notes on What to Look for When
Visiting a Unit" (see Appendix A). Based on these visits and previous and
subsequent observations of Canadian participation on exercises, Montgo-
a whole, present a reasonably good picture of the state of Canadian military
mery rendered a host of constructive and critical comments that, taken as
progress up to this point. What Montgomery principally identified was a
fundamental weakness at the top. A number of brigadiers, in his estimation,
were not fit for brigade command. Indeed, he felt that a certain Brigadier
Archambault, already removed, had done the 8th Infantry Brigade "a very
great deal of harm." It is nonetheless significant that out of eight brigadiers
observed, Montgomery considered four as more than satisfactory.
11 As shall
be seen, however, the modicum of professional competence exhibited at
this level was not necessarily matched either above or below.
Montgomery's comments on battalion commanding officers ranged from
"Commanded a battalion for 4 vears in peace. and is now doing it again"
to, in the case of a French-Canadian,
mands his Battalio]n in his own queer way.
ments were generally free from all but professional bias there can he little
doubt, for he differentiated primarily between those who were "completely
useless" and those who were "teachable » He appears furthermore to have
overlooked the factor of aoe whenever competence was evident as in the
case of the CO who at "age 48... [gavel the impression of being over 50
.. (but who was a strong character.. [who ran] a very good show." For
one "decent chap" he felt nothing but pity, since he was "completely out
of his depth as a battalion commander. and. [knewl practically nothing
about how to command and train a battalion." Of another battalion com-
mander he wrote:
"This is the worst and most ignorant C.O. I have met
in my service in the Army » Thie ease seems the more interesting because
the CO in question, who trained neither his officers nor NCOs, many of
whom were "very intelligent " was so bad at croaniring training that his
men became "bored with it." Yet, there were more COs who were keen
The Montgomery Measurement
129
and able, some even potential brigadiers, though Montgomery clearly rec-
ognized that it did not "necessarily follow that because he is a good
Battalio]n Com[man]d[er], he
will make a good B[riga]de Com-
(man]d[er]." Of 25 COs observed, Montgomery considered seven to be
unacceptable. 12
In respect of battalion seconds-in-command, Montgomery somewhat
more severely named nine out of 16 unsatisfactory. He assessed many com-
pany commanders, nonetheless, as adequate through excellent. While he
considered all but three of 17 adjutants encountered to be in the same
category, Montgomery was struck by the excessive amount of paper in
circulation within Canadian units and formations. Brigades literally foun-
dered under paper, which by making "everyone office bound" had the
effect of "cramping initiative, stifling training"
and generally impairing
"military efficiency." He found adjutants sitting "in their offices all day
long trying to compete with it," when being responsible for unit discipline,
they should have been out with their regimental sergeants-major (RSMs)
every afternoon to "keep in touch with companies], keep their fingers on
the N.C.O. pulse, and generally see that the machine... [was) ticking over
properly." To overcome this problem, Montgomery advocated assembling
a corps headquarters committee chaired by a brigadier to review means by
which paperwork could be reduced and unnecessary returns eliminated. He
estimated that it would be immediately possible to cancel at least 20 of the
latter. In response to this suggestion,
Crerar, an unquestionably greater
producer of ponderous paperwork than Montgomery, wrote:
"The desir-
ability of reducing the large amount of paperwork required of H.Q. was
raised by me shortly after I took over command and an analysis has been
under way for the last week.'»l+ Such a typically modern Canadian response
seems to indicate, however, that the problem was never really solved.
Montgomery also had a lot to say about NCOs. He recommended the
removal of eight RSMs for reasons of age or incompetence, the worst being
described as "age 50, fat and idle." Definitely concerned that the majority
of COs did "not seem to realize the immense importance of having a really
even see ... N.C.O.'s on promotion and talk to them.'
" This was an es-
pecially telling comment and certainly points out the need for further in-
vestigation into the entire area of Canadian NCO training and employment.
One particularly intriguing aspect was that in all but regular hattalions
there also prevailed the
"old peace-time system" of promoting NCOs
within companies, which Crerar admitted "to be inherent in Canadian units
...because in many caces the hattery or company was locally mobilized
from a militia unit."
Montgomery further discovered that within several units, NCO training
Was "handly carried out call" Le particularly noted that there was "no
system for teaching privates how to be N. C.O.'s before they ... [were]
