312
Half-Forgotten Summer
armored and infantry counter attacks. In these circumstances a defending
army, like a losing hockey team, could also look good.
Fortunately, the Anglo-Canadians possessed in their artillery a powerful
means for dealing with prepared enemy defenses. By bringing massive fire
and smoke to bear, it countered Panther and Tiger tank superiority and the
power of German mobile and entrenched antitank guns. Naturally, the
emphasis accorded to the preparation of artillery fire plans often constrained
maneuver, leaving little scope for infantry battle drills. With good reason,
moreover,
Simonds insisted that the infantry not stop to maneuver,
but
follow the barrage directly on to the objective. He unfortunately appeared
to place little faith in infiltrating infantry elements forward on foot at night.
Apart from being difficult to control, of course, infiltration on the open
Caen plain was always a more risky proposition than in the bocage. Then,
too, as Tuker warned, such tactics did not negate the need for detailed and
thorough contingency fire planning. Still, as the Argylls demonstrated at
Point 195, night infiltrations could be accomplished against an enemy that
with serious manpower problems itself could not always prevent them from
succeeding.
Canadian infantry, nonetheless, does not generally appear to have been
as well trained as the German in fighting skills and techniques. The infil-
tration attack by three SS rifle companies at Putot, which drove out three
defending Winnipeg companies, illustrates this point. Patrolling capability
was also woefully inadequate within the 2nd Canadian Division. Here battle
drill mania may have been the culprit, distracting attention from these vital
areas of infantry training. One cannot escape the impression, as well, that
the very nature of battle drill training, in particular its parade square facets,
inculcated a rigidity of thought and action that was not typical of German
troops. Be that as it may, Canadian infantry units when intelligently com-
manded and led were capable, despite their inferior weaponry, of more than
holding their own against the enemy. If not so obviously superior an arm
as the artillery, relative to the German, the infantry nevertheless performed
better than Canadian armor.
Without question, the tank arm remained the weakest link in the Anglo-
Canadian order of battle. It is, of course, true that the limitations of the
Sherman left Allied armor distinctly disadvantaged in Normandy, though
it should not be forgotten that the Firefly enabled the 21st Army Group to
take on a weight of German panzer might that less well-gunned armor on
such open ground could hardly have handled.
Yet, as the North African
experience revealed, the root of the problem concerning armored employ-
ment was as much historical and doctrinal as technological. El Hamma and
"Totalize" both demonstrated that there was no reason why Canadian ar-
mor from the beginning could not have led attacks with special armor
following protective barrages. That it did not, to use a boxer analogy, was
almost like fighting with one arm tied behind. It seems incredible, in short,
Final Casting
313
that the tank arm with a significantly lower casualty rate often remained
behind while forlorn hopes of infantry, torn by enemy and friendly fire
alike, plodded ever onward.
The less than successful performance of Canadian formations in Nor-
mandy can thus be partly explained in terms of doctrine.
It took an able
commander to exploit the peculiar strengths and weaknesses of each of the
foregoing arms and use them in optimum combination to attain battlefield
succes. While Simonds possessed this capacity, which is not to suggest he
made no serious mistakes, his division and brigade commanders, with few
exceptions, did not. Frustration with their tactical shortcomings demonstr-
ably drove Simonds to assume more rigid control, possibly with a view to
showing them how all-arms operations should be conducted.
Unfortu-
nately, Simonds stood alone.
Too little staff or tactical depth existed either
above or below to adequately support him, or even save him from his
foibles, as did Montgomery in Italy. In such circumstances,
he naturally
came to prefer his own counsel. The reason for such lack of depth in the
Canadian system, of course, can be traced back to training in Britain and
before. The ultimate cost of this wasted preparation period was that Ca-
nadian volunteer soldiers incurred notably higher casualties than their con-
scripted British brethern.
Study of the underpinnings and conduct of Canadian Army operations
beyond the Normandy bridgehead to the closure of the Falaise Gap must
take into account the legacy of the Canadian Corps and the state of the
army during the interwar years. The reasons are apparent, for it was from
these bases that the leadership and fighting approach of Canada's first field
army sprung.
There was indeed a direct, if complex, connection between
those long forgotten winters in the Dominion and that now half-forgotten
summer of 1944. A misplaced emphasis during the interwar years haunted
the Canadian Army to the end of 1943. Those who had been payd excessively
high wages to keep the military art alive, adopted instead the bankrupt
policy of searching for other roles.
They shamefully forgot that the main
purpose of a peacetime military establishment is to prepare for the day when
armed force might have to be used against a first-class enemy.
Winston Churchill most eloquently and accurately expressed what should
be the proper reactions of armies during periods of peace and retrenchment.
They should pine and sulk if diverted from fulfilling the principal trust with
which their nation charged them. On reflection, however, the unquestion-
ably significant corrective of money is of far less importance than time. As
study of the Canadian case reveals, rapid expansion and budgetary increases
do not, cannot, and will not compensate for an army's neglect of itself. "Of
what use," as French historian-hero Marc Bloch asked, "is a military ed-
ucation which trains men for everything except war?"? Fortunately in 1939,
certain individual officers remained serious students of their craft and ap-
peared to understand that the workings of a large, modern army are so
