316
Appendix A
(a) The system of selection, promotion, and inspection of N.C.O.'s. This is a very
important point, and its importance is not always realised by
the C.O.'s. The N.C.O.'s are the backbone of the battalion; a
good solid foundation must be built up on the L/Cpl. level, and
the standard of this foundation must be the C.O.'s standard and
NOT five different company standards. The C.O. must interest
himself directly in everything connected with his N.C.O.'s and
W.O.'s.
(b) Organization of individual training, i.e., training of the rank and file. The usual
fault here is that men are not graded before the training begins,
and put into categories in accordance with their knowledge and
efficiency. This must always be done, so as to ensure that men
get instruction in accordance with their needs. The principle of
piece work is also very important.
(c) Training of the N.C.O.'s. The training of the N.C. O.'s in all duties in the
field, tactical and administrative, must be carried out by the
Coy. Comds. The Adjutant and the R.S.M. must take a very
definite hand in keeping the N.C.O.'s up to the mark, in in-
struction in discipline matters, and generally in ensuring that the
non-commissioned ranks are a credit to the battalion, are able
to maintain a high standard in all matters, are not afraid of the
men, and are trained on for promotion.
(d) Training of the Officers. The C.O. must handle this himself, personally.
No one else can do it for him. He must do it himself. The best
results are obtained when the C.O. has an officers day once a
week. Officers have got to be taught the stage-management of
the various operations of war, the technique of movement, the
co-operation of all arms in battle, the technique of reconnais-
sance and deployment, administration in the field, and so on.
(e) Organization and conduct of collective training. Before beginning Coy or Bn.
Training the C.O. must issue instructions as to how it is to be
done. He should assemble his officers and lay down:
1. The object of the training.
2. The principles on which it is to be based.
3. The standard aimed at.
4. The phases of war to be studied.
5. His views on operations by night.
6. How he wishes the time available to be used.
etc..
The great point in collective training is to mix the training.
During platoon training the whole company should go out once
a week. During company training the whole battalion should go
out once every 10 days or so. During Battalion training the whole
Bde. should go out once a fortnight. This is far better than having
long periods devoted separately to each subject.
The next point is that when you embark on unit training every
317
Appendix A
exercise must include the dusk and the dawn. These are the times
when things happen in war.
A small number of exercises lasting 24 hours or more are much
better than a large number of short exercises. The exercise lasting
from after breakfast till tea-time is of little use. A good exercise
is one that tests out the administrative arrangements, and involves
the dusk and the dawn.
During collective training the following operations must be
taught and practised:
(a) The set-piece attack, i.e., the Brigade battle.
(b) Breaking down the Brigade battle and carrying on the ad-
vance by means of resolute fighting in small self-contained
groups of all arms.
(c) The dusk attack.
(d) The night attack.
(e) Forcing the crossing of obstacles.
Re-organization and holding the ground gained.
(g) Disengagement and withdrawal.
(h) Defensive tactics.
(i) Counter-attacks.
Teaching "Training" as Distinct from Teaching "War"
4. It is the exception to find a commander who teaches his subordinates how
to train troops. In the F.S.R. we have laid down the principles of war, categorically.
In no book do we find laid down the principles of training; officers are supposed
to know all about this subject; actually, very few know anything about it and a
great deal of time is wasted in consequence.
Training is a great art; there are principles of training just as there are principles
of war. Training in war time must be carried out somewhat differently to training
in peacetime, as we have to be ready to meet the enemy at any time.
5. In the training of his unit the C.O. has got to consider the following points:
(a) Training of the rank and file.
(b) Training of the N. C.O.'s in their duties as leaders.
(c) Training of the officers.
(d) Organization and conduct of collective training generally.
(e) The best way to run sub-unit training, i.e., platoon and compa
(f) Battalion training.
If he will think it out on these lines he has got a firm basis from w.
6. But he will do no good in his training unless he realises very
importance of the following basic points, and has a good sy
(a) Interior economy and administration, and life gene
the un
(b) The training of the leaders, i.e., the officers and thi
