26
Long Forgotten Winters
one."46
The only military institution capable of reining in a regimental system
general staff. As will be shown, however, the British General Staff was but
one component of an Army Council whose military membership to a degree
reflected corps and regimental affiliations. While these were in the main
infantry and artillery rather than cavalry as often supposed, * General Staff
direction seems to have been inversely proportional to the heat generated
by intercorps rivalry. Milne's vacillation in the area of armored develop-
ment, where Britain for a brief period led the world, was especially un-
fortunate as it produced repercussions that echoed for far too long.
Simply
put, the perceived intransigence of the traditional arms drove the impatient
armored apostles, whose truly reformist message espoused radically differ-
ent approaches toward war, to adopt extreme positions. As so often with
men of high intellect, these "rude mechanicals" unfortunately came to re-
gard all those who did not think like them as
obstructionist and
unprogressive.
A major consequence of this schism was the growth of an "all tank"
approach that considered artillery support redundant, and, in the absence
ofar self-propelled capability, even a brake upon armored mobility. Since
tank supporters also identified artillery with the attrition warfare of 1916
and 1917, which saw l'artillerie conquiert, l'infanterie occupe, they increasingly
come to view it as a rival instead of an ally. At the same time, widespread
gunner indifference to military thought that emphasized armored maneuver
led to the abandonment of pace-setting, self-propelled (SP) gun trials in
1928. The armored school meanwhile promoted the development of a two-
pounder tank main armament, the underlying idea being that small rounds
could be carried in such a quantity that constant resupply would be un-
necessary and hence mobility enhanced. Although a high explosive (HE)
shell was produced, the firing of solid armor-piercing shot received extreme
emphasis in anticipation of tank versus tank battles. One result of this
fixation was that antitank gun development received less than the attention
it deserved; another, that no British tank had any effective (i.e., HE) means
of dealing with enemy antitank guns when hidden or entrenched. Ironically,
when the two-pounder on a wheeled carriage was offered to the infantry
for antitan defense, it was initially rejected. The artillery thus found itself
in 1938 responsible for first-line antitank defense with an inadequate
weapon. In sum, the British Army went to war without an SP artillery
piece or a tank with an adequate gun. Worse yet, it had failed to develop
a common doctrine for the cooperation of tanks and field guns, and, just
as important, tanks and antitank guns.4
British Army hesitancy to embrace new fighting techniques was matched
The Canadian Corps and the British Mold
27
by, and mirrored in, its neglect of higher formation exercises. The first
large-scale maneuvers since before the Great War occurred in September
1925 and involved over 40,000 troops. Significantly, these were observed
by more than a dozen Canadian officers, including their defense chief, who
subsequently published a report of his impressions in the CDQ. 5ยบ Though
world attention during 1927-1928 fixed upon the Experimental Mechanized
Force, not as many personnel were involved. Incredibly, conservative con-
cerns for "safeguarding" the morale and training of the traditional arms led
to Milne's abrupt disbandment of this force in 1928. Given the expense of
tanks, armored machine-gun carriers henceforth came to be increasingly
viewed as the best means of restoring infantry and cavalry offensive ca-
pability. The idea of an armored force using its firepower and shock action
in independent operations gave way to a "cavalry concept" that envisioned
tanks merely replacing horsemen in their traditional mobile role.
The 1929 maneuvers, restricted to small-scale exercises, presaged the nadir
of the army in 1931, which year saw Britain's export trade decline by 30
percent and financial estimates fall to their lowest level. An entirely tracked
and wireless-equipped tank brigade was nonetheless temporarily assembled
under Brigadier Charles Broad, whose 1929 seminal work, Mechanized and
Armoured Formations, had been carefully studied by the Germans. As his
well-drilled brigade's success in tactical maneuver appeared more staged
than radio-directed, however, it caused many onlookers to feel they were
victims of an elaborate hoax. Fortunately, the process he had instigated of
infiltrating tank units to Egypt so as to circumvent political objections
continued unabated.5' At the same time, the complexities of armored de-
velopment, the Cardwell system, and other related facets of modern military
thought in Great Britain received amazingly thorough coverage in the ed-
itorial section of the CDQ. The expressed hope was that while Canada
lacked the means to conduct such experimentation, it could with fewer
actual problems than the British benefit equally as much.
The year 1932 witnessed the reconstitution of the tank brigade and the
rescision of the Ten Year Rule. During the 1933 exercises, tanks performed
solely in the infantry support role within imperial small-war or guerilla
scenarios, assessed by military observers as the dullest maneuvers ever. The
following year saw the 1st Tank Brigade established on a permanent basis
under Brigadier Percy Hobart, who now rejected operations in cooperation
with infantry in favor of semi-independent offensive missions against the
enemy rear. The apparent defeat of Brigadier George Lindsay's armored
force that same year by an infantry-cavalry formation unfortunately dealt
a severe blow to the advocates of an armored theory of war. Montgomery-
Massingberd now made the fateful decision to mechanize the cavalry and
motorize the infantry rather than create an armored striking force around
the Royal Tank Corps at the expense of the traditional arms.
This action underscored the tank as an infantry support weapon rather
