298
Half-Forgotten Summer
particular) might be considered as having some responsibility" insofar as
"First Canadian Army had erred in some degree by not pointing out the
use of yellow smoke and flares" to indicate the positions of troops. Crerar,
on the other hand, disagreed. He noted instead that "it was, if anyone's
fault, that of AEAF [Allied Expeditionary Air Forces], in not drawing
attention of Bomber Command to [the appropriate SHAEF directive].'27
Clearly, however, a commander and staff at any higher headquarters have
an ineluctable responsibility to ensure that all aspects of an operation, es-
pecially those related to the safety of their own troops, are thoroughly
checked and coordinated. It is thus difficult to accept totally the bureaucratic
shifting of blame for bombing errors in
"Tractable." In any event, when
all bombing was ordered stopped at 1520 hours, most of the 769 Lancasters
and Halifaxes had delivered on target. With close to 400 Canadian and
Polish casualties incurred, however, the raid had a devastating effect on
ground force morale. 28
Another incident that affected later assessment of "Tractable" was the
capture by the Germans of an officer of the 8th Reconnaissance Regiment
who had accidentally directed his scout car into their lines on the evening
of 13 August. The officer was shot dead, but a copy of a 2nd Division
instruction outlining the entire corps plan was found on his body. When
Simonds learned what had happened, he was highly angered and quick to
claim that this individual act of "carelessness" had compromised surprise
and "enabled the enemy to make quick adjustments to his dispositions which
undoubtedly resulted in casualties to.. [Canadian] troops the following
day." Simonds also apparently believed that it "delayed the capture of
FALAISE for over twenty-four hours.'2 According to Hubert Meyer,
however, no redeployment of import took place as there was insufficient
time to react. The uncomfortable fact thus remains that roughly 300 tanks
and four brigades of infantry supported by massive artillery and air resources
failed to overcome some 41 tanks, albeit more than half Panthers and Tigers.
and two reinforced infantry regiments many of whose men had not been
under fire before." True, the 88-mm gun line remained formidable, but
Simonds's expectation that the operation should have accomplished what
it set out to do still seems valid. The real seeds of failure, in short, were
less extrinsic than intrinsic to "Tractable" itself.
This was most assuredly the view of the 7th Brigade commander, Brig-
adier Foster, who described "Tractable" as "certainly one of the strangest
attack formations anyone ever dreamed up and without a hope... of suc-
ceeding as planned." In his judgment what "looked good to ... (Simonds's]
precise engineering mind on paper seldom worked in practice once the
human element was added. »3i
To be sure, just to line up formations in
parade square fashion was a complex undertaking that could not possibly
have been attempted without absolute air superiority. On the other hand,
it solved the potentially disastrous movement problem of getting hundreds
299
Case Hardening
damored vehicles to the start line in good order. Not to have expected
huge amounts of dust to generate mass confusion and associated control
problems, however, seems an extraordinary oversight, suggestive even of
an unfamiliarity with basic armored vehicular movement. This, coupled
with a misreading of the Laison, was the fatal flaw of "Tractable," from
which there was simply no time left for recovery.
The operation also suffered from difficulties in getting artillery forward,
Gor Simonds at 1810 hours had to order the CCRA to get guns into the
tally elow Signolles. '' While bombing errors doubtless contributed
to this problem, artillery insistence on having gun areas absolutely cleared
d'enemy may also have been a factor. An additional impediment, of course,
was the tardy transference of command following Booth's incapacitation,
tady he situation that Montgomery had warned Canadians about in 1942
Sne th armored regiments of the 4th Brigade had continued to progress,
an extra hour or two of firm direction from that level would literally have
made al the difference. Though lower echelons are often easier to blame
can higher command for operational failures like "Tractable," it is im-
pose to fault the performance of units like the Canadian Scottish who
anged, without benefit of intimate tank support, to take Point 168 while
bring shelled by their own artillery." The performance of many other
diary and even armored units, incidentally, does not seem to suffer by
comparison.
Aft "Tractable" the initiative that had momentarily resided with the
Fre Camadian Army passed into other hands. It now reacted to higher
tartin in a creasingly fluid situation as four Allied armies converged
So the " Palise Gap." The withdrawal of German forces through the
ap ache fill od on 18 August, the very day Falaise finally fell. Iron-
cly, it was taken by the 2nd Division, which since 13 August had been
not unfrom a bridechead at Chair Tizon; but only after a most
kiet at dich stand by about 60 Hitlerjugend, none of whom surren-
Cord. The 4th and Ist Armoured Divisions had meanwhile been directed
mad tu and Chambois, respectively, to link up with the Americans
Specting from the south. Unlike the region of the Caen plain, the rising
around Trun east of the Dives was characterized by thickly
oh ill intespersed with hamlets, small fields, and numerous or-
Soch, a d by les, trams, and winding sunken lanes. Like the
couNts bocage, t was les than ideal tank country, but it was through
mr a k. cada and Polish armored divisions with their insufficient
Say comes oucht a series of highly disparate offensive and de-
sough in the ne orable crush of Allied forces, the Germans fought back
with determination and skill. On 20 August the Ist Polish Division was
sendwiched in an Ostfront-style operation that caw not only the Sevent
erman Army breaking out of the Falaise pocket past Canadian elements
