132
Long Forgotten Winters
A[rtillery)., [and] unit commanders," he advised Crerar in May 1942, "has
not made the same progress as that of the lower levels; it has been neglected
and. not. tackled properly." In Montgomery's judgment, the "weak
point in the Canadian Corps" was the lack of "knowledge of commanders
in the stage-management of battle operations, and in the technique of battle
fighting generally, on their own level.? He had remarked after observing
Exercise "Flip,"
part of the "Flip, Flap, Flop" series conducted by 2nd
Division in April 1942,2 that none of the operations attempted would have
"succeeded against a good enemy, because commanders did not know their
stuff?"3 During Exercise "Conqueror" he was again "very disturbed at the
lack of knowledge on the part of many Brigalde and unit commanders in
the Canadian Corps of how to lay on the battle 26» But he was clearly most
concerned about generals: "If the[y].. could only learn how to put their
Divisions into battle properly, and how to keep firm control over the ship
in a rough sea," he wrote, "then the corps would be unbeatable."27
Montgomery remained convinced that against "an enemy as good as the
German it... (was] difficult, almost impossible, for a formation or unit to
recover if it.. [was] put into battle badly in the first instance." Initial errors
were " increasingly difficult to rectify... owing to the great fire power
available, speed of movement, use of armoured fighting vehicles, [and) air
power." The days were past when "good troops could save a battle that
had been badly teed-up"; other things being equal, victory would "go to
that side. put into battle properly and which... [could retain control
throughout the fight.?8 Nowhere was this more important than in the
"advance to contact" or "encounter battle." which subject Montgomery
had addressed with great perception in 1937. Stressing that mechanization
increased the significance of ground, he argued that the initial encounter
between opposing forces was likely to develop into endeavours to secure
such ground as... [would enable the subsequent battle to be staged suc-
cessfully." He concluded, therefore, that even when faced with a paucity
of information about the enemy, a commander had to "decide before contact
how he… (would fight" to impose his will and attain his object; the
absence of any plan to do so would inevitably mean "drifting aimlessly into
battle... Dieceman "conformling gradually to the memy's plan »
Recognizing that information on the enemy would become progressively
urgent and from a certain stage obtainable only through fighting, Mont-
gomery turther recommended reinforcing reconnaissance units with farcee
of all arms, including artillery, from the start. Such forward bodies, besides
being strong enough to deal with minor opposition, could additionally hold
any ground secured. He saw the main body, in the meantime,
"directed
towards some area the possession of which... (would give... la com-
mander), the advantage in ... operations... follow|ing] the gaining of con-
tact." In such circumstances commanders had also to "be trained to be in
the right place at the right time"; initially, "'well forward" so as to be able
The Montgomery Measurement
133
to influence the battle on the basis of first-hand information and give orders
to subordinates in proximity to relevant ground, and, after gaining contact,
not so far forward as to become "unduly influenced by local situations" to
the detriment of effective planning ahead.?9
It is revealing that when these concepts were incorporated in Montgo-
mery's "14 points essential to success in battle," a policy
directive pro-
mulgated in December 1941, the stage-management of battle headed the
list. Planning the "contact battle," seizing the tactical initiative, and main-
taining control through correct positioning of command elements consti-
tuted the fourth, fifth, and sixth points or "lessons learnt during the first
two years of war." He also elaborated upon the necessity for the "coop-
cration of all arms," stressing in particular the advantage of using divisional
artillery "as a 72-gun Bty [battery] under the CRA,
" the commander of
the divisional artillery and gunner advisor to the divisional commander,
Lesson eight, while pointing to the decisive influence of "armoured forces,
suggested using them "to create opportunities for the employment of or-
dinary divisions." The stated object of "Anti-Panzer" defense was to strip
enemy tanks of their infantry protection and seek "to destroy as many...
as possible, and not merely... stop them."
The ninth and tenth lessons referred to the crucial importance of com-
manders and staffs thoroughly understanding the technique of "road move-
sniping from the beginning, and NOT vice versa.
the hiding the enemy in the vie vers toe engration and
was to be allowed; any enemy seen was to be shot. Lessons eleven and
twelve covered the requirement for
"protection" against surprise enemy
ground attack and hostile air action. The thirteenth lesson dealt with the
means by which isolated subunits using "concealment" and "deception"
were to continue to "fight the battle on a locality basis, taking under their
command all small and isolated sub-units of other arms in the vicinity"
until such time as reserves came into action. In this regard, the high standards
of physical fitness, endurance, and "fighting spirit" demanded by the third
lesson also applied. The last lesson accented the value of achieving tactical
surprise and urged that it be included as 'an essential part of every plan."
Sionifirantly. Montgomery placed "sub-unit efficiency" immediately after
the stage-management of battle in his order of "lessons learnt." As he saw
his sub-unit..
it, "once battle. wast joined the issue passeld to the junior leader and
the infantry company and its platoons,
the tank squadron
and its troons the grillers hattery and its troops, the field company Rfovall
Elmoineers and its sections" If these groups lacked the requisite skills,
initiative. and leadershin the best higher plan was unlikely to succeed. 30
Montgomery, ever the didaest commander, impressed his tactical ap-
reminded formation commandore afthe importance of directing subordinate
headauarters to move on axes near their own headquarters in order to
