136
Long Forgotten Winters
on the occasion, referring also to the coincident appointment of Lieutenant-
General Ernie Sansom to command the 5th Armoured Division, "I think
these are good appointments and should result in credit to the Commands
as well as to their Commanders."36
Put simply, Montgomery did not think it "possible to produce good
Divisions unless you ... [had] good Divisional Commanders." Without "a
first class professional soldier"
commanding it, the 3rd Division had little
hope of becoming "the very fine division it could become." In respect of
the stage-management of battle he considered it "quite impossible to make
progress... unless Divisional Commanders... [were] themselves compe-
tent to train their subordinates, and... fully conversant with the handling
of a Division in battle." Since men's lives were at stake, Montgomery
insisted that "plain speaking"
commanders
known to be bad... [had] to be told they.. [were] bad," but they also
had to be "taught so that they... (would become good." Significantly, he
believed that most Canadian brigadiers and unit commanders were "ex-
cellent material, and only require[d] to be taught." He also expressed faith
in the "very sound, but. not in any way brilliant" commander of the 2nd
Division, Major-General J. H. "Ham" Roberts.
Clearly, Montgomery's candid assertions cast new light on the interpre-
tation that incompetent regimental officers were a major factor in impeding
Canadian Army training progression in Britain and, subsequently, its op-
erational performance in Normandy. This was certainly Stacey's opinion,
which held that the army overseas "ant rather less than it might haue" from
training because it possessed "a proportion of regimental officers whose
attitude towards training was casual and haphazard rather than urgent and
scientific." Presumably, as better ones rose in rank and responsibility, the
situation worsened. Stacey's analysis of Normandy operations confirmed
his impression, since the inadequacies of poor regimental officers "appeared
in action," often with serious consequences 38 After the war, Crerar rein-
forced this view by agrecing entirely with Stacey's assessment. Yet, as
the Montgomery correspondence has shown, many officers in this category
were "teachable," willing, and of reasonable, if not always outstanding,
caliber. To blame regimental officers, in short, clouds the issue that the
Canadian hislame regimental officers, in short, train them properly and.
but for Montgomery's intervention, would have likely left them to learn
the profession of arms though a process of osmosis.
Crerar himself attempted to imitate much of Montgomery's military
approach. In echoing the latter's cry that the army was not "a mutual
congratulation society," he stressed that good work should be praised and
bad work stamped upon. His speaking notes on "Conqueror" were essen-
tially a regurgitation of Montgomery's confidential memorandum to him
on the same asbian 40 Carar alea record a Montanmary's persona
views on Canadian commanders "very largely indeed, corroborated the
The Montgomery Measurement
137
conclusions... [he] had separately reached."*l No doubt Montgomery's
victory at El Alamein in November 1942 greatly reinforced the influence
of his thinking upon the inexperienced Crerar. In October of the following
year the Canadian corps commander recirculated "to be thoroughly ab-
sorbed" Montgomery's "Some Lessons Learnt during the First Two Years
of War." For whatever reason, he chose to add "one qualification" in his
covering memorandum: "that the title might better read 'Some Lessons
Learnt during Two Thousand Years of War.
9,42
In a previous report upon his visit to the Eighth Army in February 1943,
Crerar had also insisted that "he saw nothing new in General Montgomery's
tactics,"* which begs the question why then Canadian senior officers had
such difficulty in mastering the art of higher field command. True, Mont-
gomery had showered some praise upon Crerar for his handling of the
Canadian Corps during Exercise "Tiger" in May, but it was unquestionably
couched in terms that clearly (and cleverly) recognized the extreme im-
portance of the "Ludendorff behind Hindenburg,
" the staff officer behind
"and you have
good and when I say you did well, I mean it.
,44 There was, of course, a
rather significant difference between Simonds on the one hand and Crerar
and his nominee Price on the other; namely, that the junior had escaped
through his very youth the ravages of unprofessional compromise that
afflicted his seniors. It is truly doubtful that Crerar even with the full benefit
of Montgomery schooling ever really knew as the master knew. There
is little question, however, that McNaughton was but the
"father of the
Canadian Army' in a political sense. Montgomery was its military
NOTES
1. Record Group (RG) 24, Vol. 12,358, Translation of Extract from the German
Army "Manual of the British Army," dated carly April 1942.
2. Carlo D'Este, Decision in Normandy: The Unwritten Story of Montgomery and
The Allied Campaien (London: Pan, 1984), p. 510.
3 Ronald Tein Montamer as Military Commander /New York: Stein and Dav
1971) pp. 2-9. 266-270 and pila Mes a Viscount Montgomery." The War
Lords: Military Commanders of the Twontieth Century ed. Field Marshal Sir Michael
Carver (Boston: Little Brown, 1976), pp. 500-508; Richard Lamb, Montgomery in
Europe 1943-1945: Success or Failure? (London: Buchan and Enrioht. 1984), PP
21, 62-63, 405-406, 417; Gen. Omar N. Bradley, A Soldier's Story (New York:
Henry Holt 1951), po. 208-209. D'Este. Decision in Normandy, pp. 46. 455, 510:
and Russell E. Weidley. Eisenhomer'e Lieutenante. The Camnaion of France and Ger
many, 1944_1945 (Bloominoton Ind • Indiana University Press. 1981), D. 37. Lamb
writes. "Montgomery was brilliant at organization. all his working life was devoted
to studving how to male army caff work mora afficient He understood every
