310
Half-Forgotten Summer
strated, a far less successful one than Hughes's selection, Currie. Although
reputedly a humble man, McNaughton was puffed up by the Canadian,
British, and even American press to dimensions far beyond his actual mil-
itary abilities. Exercise "Spartan" clearly revealed his serious limitations as
a field commander. Judging from the state of Canadian Army training in
1942, after more than two years of his leadership and direction, he was the
wrong man for the job.
While Canadian political authorities, unlike the
British or American, persisted in earmarking their senior soldier for field
command, it is moot to ask whether McNaughton would have been better
employed as CGS in Ottawa. Given his great energy and propensity to
aggrandize and dabble, however, this too would probably have been a
mistake. Perhaps he should simply have been left in retirement from where
he could have just as easily in honorary uniform promoted the war effort
without affecting the army he had compromised before.
The rapid expansion of the Canadian Army overseas to over 50 times its
prewar regular strength, as compared to a 15-fold increase in the British
Army, did not enhance its professional military depth at the lower echelons.
It needed British help. While obviously demanding further investigation,
the system of basic and advanced training for other ranks in Canada generally
seems to have suffered from the standpoint of their morale and motivation.
There also remains the question of just how good were Canadian NCOs?
Did the policy of promoting officers from the ranks skim off the best and
leave the weakest as the
"backbone of the army"? Whatever the answer,
indications are that the officer training conducted at the Brockville OTU
left something to be desired. The Canadian Army had thus eventually to
rely largely upon the battlefield, with all its obvious hit and miss proba-
bilities, to throw up commanders of tactical competence like Rockingham.
As for staff training, evident shortcomings in the quality of instructors
at the CWSC Kingston suggest wider imperfections in the army at large.
During major exercises in Britain and operations in Normandy, even with
air superiority, the intricacies of road movement seem never to have been
adequately solved. Problems associated with the forward movement of the
artillery and armoured divisions on phase two of "Totalize"
were not ex-
ceptional. They should have been anticipated and sorted out by the staff.
Indeed, one senses that had Simonds not lined up his divisions in parade
square fashion initially, similar problems might have arisen during phase
one. Ironically, after being fired by Simonds, Brigadier Cunningham as-
sumed the position of staff college commandant! In a related vein, it also
appears that despite Montgomery's personal advocacy of the COS system,
it was never fully embraced in the spirit of the Germans. Less disposed than
the latter to share command with their COSs, many Anglo-Canadian com-
manders usually opted to remain at headquarters from where they could
neither adequately see nor develop a feel for the battle.
The sad conclusion is that the years of preparation and training in Britain
Final Casting
311
prior to D-Day did not entirely expunge either those weaknesses in the
Canadian military system that existed before 1939 or those attributed to
rapid expansion after war was declared. Unbounded enthusiasm and am-
aleunsm doubtless contributed to the latter category. But so too did the
fact that units and newly formed higher formations were left to their own
devices. From virtually the beginning, serious inadequacies at the high-
command level undermined Canadian training.
Naughton proved incapable of training his division commanders who, in
turn, failed to train their own brigades and units. Incredibly, while Mont-
gomery observed that Canadian commanders did not know how to train
for war or stage-manage battle,
courses that would benefit troops, as military training obviously would not,
after hostilities were over. In all of this, Canadian regimental officers con-
inued to carry on as best they could. When the ground swell of battle drill
arose, they naturally embraced its novelty. The high command, with little
evident appreciation of its less desirable implications, followed suit.
tunately, the personal influence of Montgomery forced many Canadians
back on track.
Late in the day, the dismissal of McNaughton left the First Canadian
Army essentially leaderless and without a spearhead role. This was a critical
point, for training time had hu then boiled down to months instead of years
That left Simonds who took over 2 Corps on 30 January and Crerar who
assumed army command on 20 March little room to identify and correct
training shortcomings. It is significant that within 2 Coros individual rather
than collective training received priority to the end of March 1944. The 3rd
Division and the 2nd Armoured Brigade, which carried out combined op-
crations training from July 1943, may have fared better. But one is at a loss
to explain why Brigadier Wyman, a veteran of Italy, allowed tanks carrying
infantry to lead an attack on Le Mesnil-Patry at the end of June.
Here the
Oueone Ou Diges care cimbly chat off the tanks hu countar attacking
German panzers. If anything, the incident may indicate the limitations of
Italian armored experience on the battlefields of Normandy.
Although the Italian campaign influenced some individual Canadian com-
manders, the army as a whole had in the main trained according to a doctrine
gradually worked out in North Africa. Indeed, the Eighth Army adhered
to this doctrine as it fought its way up Italy. From Alamein onward, of
course, the nature of the fighting had also begun to change. As Fuller had
predicted, mobile operations begat static operations. In Russia and elsewhere
Blitzkrieg foundered before opponents prepared to wage Materialschlacht, an
antidotal slugging match of attrition.
Attacking forces could no longer get
through a prepared position in depth without hard pounding. German fail-
ure to dislodge the RHLI from Verrières amply reaffirmed the substantial
holding power of infantry on suitable ground. Supported by 17-pounders,
massed artillery, and air strikes, such positions withstood even the heaviest
