319
Appendix A
318
Appendix A
Some C.O.'s realise the necessity for training the officers; not a great many, but
only some. Very few bother about the N.C.O?'s; in fact practically none. But the
N.C.O.'s are the backbone of the unit; the whole question of their selection, pro-
motion, insruction, and welfare must be on good and sound lines. Sgts. Messes
are very important.
The R.S.M.
7. The R.S.M. is one of the most important people in the unit. I always ask to
see the R.S.M., treat him like an officer, and shake hands with him. When inspecting
the S. Saskatchewan Regt. I called the R.S.M. Out in front and shook hands with
him in front of the whole Bn; It may seem a small point but in my view it means
a great deal.
The R.S.M. is the senior non-commissioned rank in the unit; his authority over
the N.C.O.'s is supreme, and he must be backed up and given opportunities to pull
his weight. He should frequently assemble the W.O. 's and N.C.O.'s by Coys and
address them, getting across to them various points in the daily life of the unit that
want attention
He and the Adjutant should work together as a team; and they should go out
together round the battalion area whenever they can, keeping an eye on the general
It is very difficult, in fact practically impossible, to have a good cadre of N.C.O?'s
without a good R.S.M.
Visiting Collective Training
8. When visiting a unit or inter-Bde exercise, or a Divisional exercise, you want
to be clear as to what you want to find out. Generally I suggest that this will be as
follows:
(a) What the commander is worth, and whether he is able to handle his ship
when in full sail in a rough sea.
(b) Whether his
machinery
for exercising command is good, and runs
smoothly.
(c) Broadly, how the formation or unit re-acts. Does it answer to the helm,
or is it awkward and unsteady in a rough sea?
As far as the Corps Commander is concerned, or in fact any senior general officer,
the above points are the ones that really matter.
The points of detail such as the
minor tactics, the fieldcraft, and so on, are the province of subordinate commanders.
If you want to get a line on this it can be done by getting a staff officer to watch
the operation in the front line and to keep an eye on such things as:
technique of movement;
deployment;
battle drill;
quick manoeuvre;
outflanking tactics;
sub-unit tactics generally;
cooperation with other arms on the sub-unit level.
9. As regards para 8(a) and 8(b).
The points here are:
(a) What orders did the commander receive?
(b) What did he know about the enemy when he received those orders?
(c) What orders did he then give?
Once you have got this from the commander himself, then you are well on the way
to what you want to find out.
You then go on as follows:
(d) What are his present dispositions?
(e) What is his view as to the general situation, i.e., how does he view the
(t) What are his plans for future action?
A few questions as to the layout of his H.Q., and a quick tour round his H.Q.,
follows. I should then leave him.
10. As regards para 8(c).
You now visit the next commander below, e.g. if para 9 has been done with a
Brigadier you visit one of the forward battalion H.Q.
There you go for the same
points as outlined in para 9.
11. You have now got the answer to what you want to know. But you want to
check up on it, so you must find out from the Director when some important change
or event in the battle is to take place. There may be a moment when a very fast
ball is going to be bowled at the commander of one side.
You want to be in on this, and study the reactions. In particular it is a good thing
if you can be present when the commander is giving out his orders; by listening to
this you will find out a good deal.
12. In general the art lies in being at the right place at the right time, and knowing
The next point is to get all your information from the commander himself. You
want to sum him up; therefore you must deal with him personally. If he is out, you
must chase him till you find him.
The last point is to remember what is the object of your visit; see para 8. You
will not have time to also visit sub-units in the front line; if you want a line on how
they are working, send some other officer to get that information for you.
[signed] B. L. Montgomery
General Officer Commanding-in-Chief.
South Eastern Command.
6. Mar. 42.
