Long Forgotten Winters
40
CGS in 1932, when a doctor, dentist, or lawyer earned but $1,500, the
Canadian public had every right, despite itself, to expect more of its profes-
sional military establishment. As one student of the period put it,
"in the
absence of any governmental direction... the Canadian Militia really had
no idea what to do with itself, other than to keep itself going.
»3 Clearly,
however, electoral blindness can hardly excuse professional military my-
opia; neither is it entirely fair to hold peacetime societies more responsible
than their retained soldiers for failing to remember that the chief purpose
of any army, in the final analysis, is to fight its country's wars and fight
them well.
Understandably after so bloody a conflict as the "war to end all wars,"
neither the people, including the rank and file soldiers, nor the government
of Canada were prepared to take seriously the matter of fielding a force
calling for up to 300,000 men in arms. While the established ceiling of the
regular force was raised to 7,000 all ranks in 1919, it was reduced to 5,000
in 1920. At no time over the next few years did it ever exceed a peak
strength of 4,125 attained in 1920. With the election of Mackenzie King's
Liberal government in 1921, militia expenditure dropped substantially,
though under the powerful direction of J.L. Ralston as Minister of Defence
from 1926, it resurged to 1920 levels. Still, by 1929, the reserve forces
mustered but 4,443 officers and 29,905 other ranks within respectively au-
thorized ceilings of 10,509 and 117,273. Compared to her sister dominions
and other nations, Canada had not given much priority to defense. Whereas
Canadian defense expenditure for the fiscal year 1923-24 amounted to $1.46
per capita, New Zealanders spent an equivalent $2.33, Australians $3.30,
South Africans $4.27, Americans $6.51, Britons $23.04, and Frenchmen
$24.66.* But then, none of the foregoing peoples was so happily shielded
by deterrents like the Royal Navy and Monroe Doctrine.
Here it must be stated that disillusionment, frustration, and uncertainty
largely characterized the Canadian domestic scene in the aftermath of the
Great War. The year 1919 witnessed increasing agrarian unrest and the worst
labor strife ever. An economic slump left over 15 percent of the work force
unemployed by 1921, which year also saw for the first time a Canadian
population divided almost equally between urban and rural dwellers. By
the middle of the decade, however, markets for Canadian goods and staples
reappeared, and the industrial and agricultural sectors of the economy began
to experience rapid growth. Much of this new-found prosperity was un-
doubtedly due to an overflow of wealth from the United States, which now
replaced Britain as Canada's most important trading partner. Unhappily,
the Great Depression that struck in October 1929 shattered the export econ-
omy, which garnered a third of national revenue from abroad, throwing
thousands out of work with no hope of relief, social welfare, or unem-
ployment benefits. By 1933 one-third of the labor force was unemployed.
Mass emigration to the United States and a declining birth rate that reached
The Bellows of Peace
41
a low in 1937 further sapped Canadian confidence; not until 1938 would
national revenue exceed that of 1929. In the eyes of many, it was because
Canada had paid so dearly in the Great War that she had been laid so low
by the Depression.'
In keeping with its policy of retrenchment, the Mackenzie King govern-
ment from 1922 placed all Canadian services under a single Department of
National Defence (DND). This move, strongly supported by the militia,
now precipitated an interservice struggle of shameful dimensions. In what
was clearly a power play, the CGS, Major-General J. H. MacBrien, man-
aged to get himself appointed Chief of Staff (COS) with broad powers of
coordination over air and naval plans and programs. Subsequent resistance
by the RCN so consumed the COS, however, that matters pertaining to
and proer, m
militia preparedness and defense planning were neglected. Indeed, effective
leadership of any kind was lacking from 1924 to 1927 within the land forces.
On MacBrien's resignation in 1927, the position of COS was allowed to
lapse and that of Chief of the Naval Staff created. When Major-General
A. G. L. McNaughton became CGS in January 1929, he strove unsuccess-
fully for reinstitution of the COS position and worked incessantly for a
reduction in naval funding. In McNaughton's view, air power had rendered
traditional concepts of sea power obsolete, especially in the realm of coastal
defense."
What McNaughton thought and advocated was most important, since
he was to remain CGS until 1935 and eventually be called back to command
the expeditionary force in the Second World War. He was unquestionably
the most influential soldier in militia service during the period leading up
to that conflict, for which reason alone he merits special attention. Although
representative of the new professional corporateness spawned by the CEF,
he also epitomized the citizen-soldier. As a member of the Otter Committee,
he concurred in the initial assessment that the "princial peril" to national
security was "the danger of the overthrow of Law and Order" by foreign
or Bolshevik agitators. McNaughton likewise held that the key to dealing
with this threat was "to have immediately available an efficient military
body with which to overawe this unruly element, and secondly, by edu-
cation, to convert them from their perverted ideals to a true conception of
citizenship."
In fact, the regular force, "maintained constantly ready" for such action,
was deployed in aid of the civil power duties once in Quebec City in June
1921 and three times in Sudnev. Nov. Scotia during 1922-1923
"most
spectacularly" on the last occasion when over 1,000 permanent force troops
were involved. During 1932 and 1933 soldiers were also used to quell
disturbances in Oshawa, St. Catherines, and Stratford, Ontario.® Re
of whether the Canadian regular force was even principally struc
internal security duty, however, it is virtually a truism
ment remains ultimately inimical to military profession
