212
Half-Forgotten Summer
dartenfuehrer Kurt Meyer, were to remain the scourge of Canadian arms
throughout the Normandy campaign.
They also became the standard by
which Canadians proudly preferred to measure their battlefield prowess.
Now practically part of Canadian folklore, Meyer and his men continue to
hold an arresting fascination. Like the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division,
the
Hitlerjugend went into battle for the first time in Normandy. Dubbed the
"baby division with the milk bottle badge" by a disparaging Allied press,
the 12th SS Panzer Division had been formed in June 1943 almost entirely
of youths between 16½ and 17 years of age. This was a consequence of a
Hitler Youth Organization scheme, introduced after Stalingrad, to induct
selected young men into a volunteer division, which on passing the test of
war would serve as a model for the incorporation of additional volunteers
into other German divisions. While command cadres of officers and NCOs
came mostly from the experienced 1st SS (Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler) Panzer
Division, organizers quickly grasped that innovative rather than standard
training methods should be employed with these youthful volunteers.
The training philosophy of the Hitlerjugend appears to have been more
boy scout than orthodox military in approach. Great importance attached
to inculcating a sense of responsibility, self-sacrifice, and comradeship. Pa-
rade square drill, hardly countenanced in any form, took very much a back
seat to training under as realistic combat conditions as possible for im-
pending operations. Fielderaft, particularly camouflage techniques learned
from the Russians, received special attention. Marksmanship training fo-
cused on shooting not on formal gallery ranges, but exclusively in the field
using silhouette targets. Physical fitness was attained through sports,
"marching with full equipment... [being] rejected as ... unnecessary and
harmful." Only 18-year-olds were allowed cigarettes, those younger being
issued candy. There was "no dominating system of authority which knows
only orders and unquestioning obedience,
" the relationship between battle-
hardened officers and NCOs and inexperienced youth being likened unto
that of older and younger brothers.
For nine months, despite certain equipment shortages, the division con-
ducted thorough, battle-oriented training.
Formation training, begun in
carly in 1944, consisted of large-scale tank exercises that stressed the co-
operation of arms within the armored battle group (reinforced battalion)
and live fire. By April 1944 the division had already suffered 15 dead,
presumably the result of training accidents. When the 20,540 soldiers of the
12th SS (of two panzergrenadier regiments of three infantry battalions and
one panzer regiment of one Mark IV and one Panther battalion, 141 op-
crational tanks in all) went into action, they were considered "excellently
trained, as well trained as scarcely any other division hald] ever been... so
that their operational employment could be fully justified." And this, more
than simple fanaticism, was surely their great forte.
The last major Canadian operation undertaken against the 12th SS during
Le Mesnil-Patry Action, 11 June 1944
& cairon
Secqueville-en-Bessin
BRI
Bray
Rosel
Le Hamel
Bretteville -
'Orgueilleuse
MIMON), HIOS
Carpiquet
Norrey-en.......••
LE MESNIL - PATRY
2NO BN 26TM
GRENADIER
Le Mesnil-
Patry
FRONTER RES
SON
PANZER
REGIMENT
Pesnel
H169
Cheux
11 JUNE 1944
