126
Long Forgotten Winters
avoiding unnecessary casualties. The almost magical rapport he managed
to establish with the soldiers he commanded further reflected an inspired
leadership only rarely realized. "Even Dwight D. Eisenhower with all his
engaging ease,
" recorded General Omar Bradley,
"could never stir Amer-
ican troops to the rapture with which Monty was welcomed by his." By
1944 dean of Allied field commanders and a living symbol of victory,
Montgomery was by virtue of experience and knowledge the most suitable
general officer in the Anglo-American array to command the cross-Channel
assault. 3
Unlike many others who rose to the top without having studied the art
of war in any depth, Montgomery epitomized the professional in the truest
sense of the word. He attended Camberley Staff College, where Broad was
a member of the DS along with Lindsay and Paget in 1920, the same year
he struck up a lasting if eventually strained intellectual association with
Liddell Hart. Though by no means academic, Montgomery was widely
read, studious, and possessed of sufficient common sense and ideas to have
benefited from such contacts. Gifted with a talent for clear and logical
exposition, he soon became an unsurpassed lecturer on tactics. He returned
to Camberley as an instructor in January 1926, just after the departure of
Fuller, who had been a chief instructor since January 1923. Montgomery
remained on the directing staff of Camberley until 1929, "knowing] enough,
by then to realize that the teacher learns much more than his students.
During this tour he also married Hobart's sister and became a protégé of
then Colonel Alan Brooke, Director of Studies from 1925.
In 1934 Montgomery replaced Paget as chief instructor of the senior
division at the Staff College, Quetta, where he was to direct second-year
students in studying the broader issues of grand and imperial strategy. This
appointment was almost immediately changed, however, and Montgomery
took over as chief instructor of the junior division, which enabled him
instead to teach first-ver students the technique of battle command and
staff duties. Here again he shone as a student of war, learning how to produce
a simple plan from a mass of detail. By the time he left Quetta in May
1937, Montgomery was almost 50, but he went armed with a comprehensive
and definite theory of tactics and training, important aspects of which he
set forth in his articles on the "encounter battle?" His superb handling of
the 3rd Division in France and the conduct of its fighting withdrawal to
Dunkirk generally confirmed the soundness of his methods. It also gained
him the one qualification that Helmuch von Moltke adjudged the critical
measure of a great captain: in the very face of adversity to carry out a
successful retreat.'
At the time Montgomery took over South Eastern Army, the Canadian
field command was anything but in a stable state. According to Crerar,
McNaughton suffered a "breakdown"" in November 1941 that resulted in
his return to Canada for extended leave. The senior divisional commander,
The Montgomery Measurement
127
Major-General Pearkes, assumed temporary command of the Canadian
Corps. Although he had not commanded a battalion in peacetime, Pearkes
had taken the 2nd Brigade overseas in 1939 and been promoted to command
the 1st Division following McNaughton's appointment as 7 Corps com-
mander in the summer of 1940. A graduate of Camberley Staff College,
the SOS, and the IDC, Pearkes enjoyed a considerable reputation as the
most experienced Canadian field commander; one enhanced by his having
won the Victoria Cross in the Great War. When Pearkes took over as Acting
Corps Commander on 14 November, McNaughton expressed the hope
that the appointment would be made permanent upon formation of the
First Canadian Army. Yet, unknown to Pearkes, the former Senior Officer,
Canadian Military Headquarters (CMHQ), London, and from July 1940
Canadian CGS in Ottawa, Major-General Crerar, had his eyes set on the
A protégé of McNaughton, Crerar had taken over from him as Counter-
Battery Staff Officer in the Great War, attended Camberley Staff College
in 1924 and passed through the IDC in 1934.
Though the same age as
Pearkes, who was three months younger than Montgomery, Crerar had
practically no experience in field command. He had nonetheless convinced
the Minister of National Defense in July 1940 that he should and would,
on relinquishment of the appointment of CGS, be permitted to replace the
"somewhat too old and inflexible" Major-General Odlum as GOC 2nd
Division. Crear's subsequent promotion to the corps-level rank of lieu-
tenant-general in the fall of 1941 did not dissuade him from this ambition.
He instend prochimed his willingness to accept a reduction in rank in ex-
change for divisional command. When it appeared that McNaughton would
not be able to return to duty for an extended period, however, Crerar
abandoned this altruistic stance and turned over CGS duties to Major-
General Ken Stuart Arriving in England on 23 December ostensibly to
take over the 2nd Division, he in fact assumed unbroken command of the
Canadian Cords from that date According to Crerar. a "few weeks in
Acting Command of the Corps convinced... [him] that a good many shifts
in Unit and Brigade commanders were necessary if the command element
was to be brought up to an adequately hioh candard" On diccussing this
matter with Montoomery Crerar furthermore readily accepted the latter's
offer to "visit ench of the Canadian formations and give... his personal
Montgomerv, not surprisinoly had a better understanding of Canadian
field capabilities and deficiencies than Crear He had witnessed Canadian
performance on «Rumner" and bad felt obligated to criticize the 2nd Di
vision for being too slow in seizing upon an opportunity presented to attack
an opposing formation in the flank. He further noted that Canadians, as
well as the Britich alcad too much faith in the bricade aroun as a tactica
formation.' Montgomery also promoted the Canadian Corns Study Week
