182
Half-Forgotten Summer
Allied Commander (COSSAC), projected a Canadian army of five divisions
centrally deployed after the assault phase between American and British
armies, respectively comprising seven and six divisions, right and left. As
late as December 1943, the COSSAC plan called for a three-division sea-
borne assault on a thirty mile front by the First U.S. Army, initially com-
posed of 1 British and another American corps.
Once two British corps
were securely ashore, the First Canadian Army was to land and take them
under command; both armies were then to come under the British com-
mander of the 21st Army Group, the British Liberation Army.?
Montgomery discarded the COSSAC plan when he assumed command
of the 21st Army Group in January 1944. He called instead for an initial
assault by five divisions, protected on both flanks by airborne landings, on
a frontage sufficient to accommodate two attacking armies, the First U.S.
a rontage sund Britto acco of two corps. Behind these were to come two
"follow-up" armies, the First Canadian and the Third U.S., also operating
under the 21st Army Groun Montoomery made it abundantly clear as early
as 21 January at the first Supreme Commander's Conference, Norfolk
House, that the task of Anglo-Canadian forces would be to shield American
forces operating against Cherbourg and the Brittany peninsula from the
enemy main body approaching from the east. Ideally, he sought to entice
the Germans to counterattack him on ground of his own choosing as he
hod at Alamein 4 If Crerar is to be believed however. Montgomery did
not originally appreciate that the first shock of armor would fall on the
British sector. In Crerar's words the 21st Army Grouy "assumed that the
east flank of the bridgehead, at Caen, would not be under pressure by
German forces following the landing,"
this assessment in April that Montoomery came to accept the former view.5
and it was only after he disputed
Whatever the derivation of the foregoing strategic scenario, except for
the 3ed Division and the 2nd Armoured Brioade assioned to the assault
landing, the operational and training focus of the First Canadian Army lay
inland beyond the bridgchead uni focus third UrS. Army, however, it
was not to make its onerational debut in spectacular fashion. From a lead-
ership perspective, of course, the contrast between the First Canadian Army
and its sister "follow-up"
army was so striking as to invite comment.
Whereas the former drifted essentially leaderless as a result of its commande
being fired, the thrusting Lieutenant-General Patton, formerly fired as an
army commander for slapping shell-chorted coldiers assumed command
of the Third Army from January 1944. Contrary to popular belief Patton's
accomplishments as Seventh Army contrary on the Sicilian campaign
had earned him the respect and admiration of Montgomery. Unknowingly
perhaps, Montgomery even accepted Patton's appointment to command
the Third Army against the wishes of the latter's erstwhile subordinate,
Lieutenant-General Bradley, who privately nurtured an increasing dislike
of his former superior."
Cast of Commanders
183
A 1915 graduate of West Point and classmate of General Dwight D.
Eisenhower, Bradley received word in September 1943 that he would com-
mand the First U.S. Army. Having previously served as Infantry School
commandant and divisional commander twice over, he had earlier that year
been named Eisenhower's deputy in North Africa. Following the American
defeat at Kasserine Pass in February, he became deputy to Patton, the new
commander of II U.S. Corps. When Patton took over the Seventh Army,
Bradley went on to command II Corps in the final days of the Tunisian
campaign and the battle for Sicily. This made Bradley the most experienced
U.S. corps commander, of whom 34 commanded in battle during the
Second World War. Significantly, all but one were staff college graduates,
while 29 of their number had passed through the war college. Twenty-six,
ranging in ages from 52 to 62 were older than Bradley, who at 51 was
eighth youngest.'
A calm, circumspect,
actually delay the activation of the Third Army for fear the impetuous
and, like Bradley, two divisions; at Montgomery's request he assumed
command of 13 British Corps from December 1942. A former student of
Montgomery's at Camberley 1930-31, the introverted Dempsey comple-
mented his more extroverted master and, absolutely unflappable, possessed
popular among Canadians for having served a year as McNaughton's BGS
in Tch Corps. He was a very good friend of Simonds, whom he considered
the hock of his corns commandar in Normandy 8
Of the four army commanders slated to lead their formations in the
ivasion of Europe, Montgomery placed the least faith in the "prosy and
stodgy" Crerar, who also struck Patton as "not impressive.
Though
neither a student of war the lenoue of the older Patton or Montgomery,
nor as experienced as the vounger Bradley or Demosev. the politically well-
connected Crerar had nonuheless had more of a silver spoon career than
any of them. He graduated from RMC in 1909, the same year Patton left
West Point, and finished the Great War in McNaughton's footsteps as
Counter Lawny staff officer in the Canadian Corns Excent for a brief third
tour 2s a battery commander durino the interer vears Crerar Spent all of
his service on staff He attended Camberley Staff College as a brevet lieu
tenant-colonel during 190204 on the same course as then Maior Georges
Vanier, future diplomat and Governor-General, and Captain A. E. Percival
who would later at Singapore surrender 80.000 troops. After a two-year
exchange at the War Office and a hosting to RMC as a tactics instructor,
