70
Long Forgotten Winters
all that was considered manageable given existing equipment and weapon
shortages. Later, compulsory training for NRMA soldiers was extended to
four months, which from 20 March 1941 was conducted with GS recruits
in accordance with a common program. Following this training, NRMA
men were posted to home defense formations or placed on reserve unit rolls
until required. On 23 April 1941, authority was obtained to have them
replace for the duration of the war GS soldiers on coast or home defense
duty, thereby releasing the latter for service overseas. After Pearl Harbor,
in the face of mounting public pressure, the government announced its
intention on 22 January 1942 of seeking through a national referendum a
release from its commitment to not conscript for service overseas!"
The decision to train NRMA conscripts or "R" recruits together with
GS or "A" recruits naturally simplified the military pedagogical system.
Whereas before, conscripts received instruction at reserve force NAM
Training Centres, both R and A recruits from all arms and branches now
underwent eight weeks basic infantry or "common-to-all-arms" training
at Basic Training Centres (BTC). During 1942 the number of BTs grew
from 28 to 39, which permitted an eventually excessive annual output of
close to 190,000 recruits. After successfully completing the BTC stage,
recruits passed on to Advanced Training Centres (ATC) where they under-
went an additional two to five months training peculiar to their respective
arms or services. Upon conclusion of training at an ATC, which also ran
special courses for officers and NCOs, the soldier was available for rein-
forcing purposes. All told, 33 ATCs were established, among them nine
infantry, five artillery, two engineer, and two armored, including recon-
naissance. In order to lessen administrative overhead and increase training
efficiency, most BTCs and ATCs were linked on a corps or branch basts
in August 1943. This move resulted in the closure of 13 BTs and reductions
in the size of others.
In the meantime, initially because of instructor deficiencies and officer
shortages, the army in England established its own Canadian Training
School (CTS) in August 1941. By mid-1942. the CTS consisted of six
wings responsible for training as follows: Number 1 Wing, officer cadets;
Number 2, driver maintenance and junior NCs: Number 3, range work
and weapons; Number 4, unit tactics; Number 5, battle drill; and Number
6, chemical warfare." Given the proliferation of British Army courses that
were also open to Canadians, it is not surprising that some training overlap
occurred. Indeed, according to one 1942 report, the training
"confusion
and repetition between Canada and England resulted] in a tremendous loss
of time"; the "constant retesting"
that officers and men had to undergo
furthermore produced a corresponding "loss of morale."20
The armored corps had a particular problem in this respect as troops who
received driver and gunnery training on the Can in this resp tank had overseas
to convert to Shermans. Also, complaints about the unsatisfactory training
Shaping an Expeditionary Force
71
state of reinforcements arriving from Canada arose in 1943 and continued
into 1944. Of armored reinforcements, only 30 percent on average were
capable of passing tests on elementary training (TOETs); many had never
fired a rifle or light machine gun. Infantry reinforcements in the fall of 1944
were found to have little "fieldcraft sense" and less training on grenades,
the submachine gun, and PIAT (projector, infantry, antitank). While BTC
and ATC linking was intended to alleviate this problem, the Number 1
Training Brigade Group was also established at Debert, Nova Scotia, in
October 1943. Designed to give reinforcements four weeks of individual
and collective training before proceeding overseas, it unfortunately lacked
armored elements. 21
While detailed treatment of individual training is beyond the scope of
this work, though it begs further research and analysis, a brief word on
officer training is in order. As of April 1941 all candidates for nonspecialist
commissioning in the Canadian Army had first to serve in the ranks, either
with an active or reserve unit, prior to undergoing training as a reinforce-
ment officer. A further stipulation was that 25 percent of junior officer
requirements were to be provided from the ranks of overseas formations,
via the CTS officer cadet wing or training unit (OCTU); the remaining 75
percent were to be provided from Canada. Two Officer Training Centres
(OTC) accordingly opened in 1941, one at Brockville, Ontario, with a
capacity of 1,200 candidates, and one at Gordon Head near Victoria, British
Columbia, with a capacity of 800. At these OTCs, candidates were trained
over three months to infantry platoon commander standard, after which
they were appointed second lieutenants and sent to ATCs for two to five
months corps or branch training before being posted as officer reinforce-
ments. The RMC, its four-year course shortened to two in 1939, graduated
its last officer cadet class in 1942. By September 1943, however, an officer
surplus had been identified and only the Brockville OTC remained open
in Canada 22
The OCTU, except for its basic course, was also briefly closed in 1942,
though loss of time in travel to Canada and the proximity of better training
facilities in Britain soon prompted its reopening in September. Of all the
arms, only the infantry continued to send officer candidates to Canadian
OTC. That the standard of OTCs may have been lower,
however, is
indicated by the report of the CTS Commandant in September 1943 that
"something seemed wrong" with the Brock ville establishment and "cadets
from overseas who were spoken to felt that most of their time... (there)
was wasted. "23 This opinion was corroborated by the Director of Military
Training who admitted that "for some considerable time... the training
itself and direction of training hald) not been up to requirements." The
matter of replacing the Brockville commandant,
he added, was "under
active consideration.
9924
It would appear that similar teething problems were experienced in senior
