292
Half-Forgotten Summer
maneuvering, but with guns blazing to either Falaise or "a glorious finish."
The main body of the 4th Division would have followed at a steady pace
to ensure the success of its spearhead. By attacking during the early morning
hours instead of in darkness, which left the tank a "creeping pill-box" with
reduced "ram-power" for lack of speed, the Red Army would have been
able to strike deeply into the enemy defensive system, leaving the 12th SS
absolutely no chance of reaching the Falaise road area north of Bretteville-
le-Rabet. Strategic bombers, which in the Canadian case represented overkill
anyway, would not have been used, since it would have "transferred the
initiative from... leading combat elements to timetable acrobats of...
Headquarters." Operation "Totalize" would have been accomplished in 24
hours.
In consequence of the failure of "Totalize," however, Montgomery on
11 August issued a new directive that instructed the First Canadian Army
to capture Falaise as "a first priority... [to] be done quickly." Argentan to
the south was also to be secured with strong U.S. armored and mobile
forces. The object of these two moves was to close the gap between the
21st and 12th Army Groups, thereby trapping German forces in the west
now dangerously overextended as a result of operations against the Amer-
icans in the Mortain area. ' This directive officially set in train the short
envelopment, an idea hatched by Bradley, enthusiastically endorsed by Ei-
senhower, but only perfunctorily accepted by Montgomery. His preferred
strategy remained to establish a bridgehead across the Seine in a longer
envelopment. Indeed, he understood that classic encirclement operations
called for a line of circumvallation as well as one of countervallation, which
made the short envelopment an extremely perilous prospect, especially
against Germans well-versed in Keil und Kessel operations on a grand scale.
Without a blocking force at Trun-Chambois or along the Seine, any force
interposed at Falaise ran the risk of being sandwiched between enemy forces
breaking out and those sent to their relief."
In any event, Montgomery was quick to give Bradley permission to move
north of the interarmy group boundary that was established on 5 August
12 miles south of Argentan.
That Bradley developed a similar caution of
carly encirclement was demonstrated on 12 August when he refused Patton
permission to proceed north of Argentan to "drive the British into the sea.
As Bradley later explained, better a "solid shoulder at Argentan to the
possibility of a broken neck at Falaise." He nonetheless went to his grave
blaming Montgomery for his failure to "close the trap by capping the leak
at Falaise.
Yet, both Bradley and Montgomery appear to have believed
at the time that the Canadians, only ten kilometers from Falaise, had to
succeed in their second try. It was only subsequently that Bradley criticized
Montgomery for not reinforcing
the Canadians with the "more battle-
seasoned troops of the Second Army.
Within the First Canadian Army planning commenced almost immedi-
Case Hardening
293
ately to launch another heavily supported attack toward Falaise, this time
east of the road thrusting south from the general line of Estrées-la-Cam-
pagne-Soignolles. At 1000 hours 12 August, Simonds held a conference
with all three Canadian divisional commanders on Operation
"Tallulah,"
curiously named after Alabama actress Tallulah Brockman Bankhead. In
the interests of security, he on 13 August issued only verbal orders for the
operation, now more optimistically designated "Tractable." Following his
orders group, which included brigadiers, he went on to personally brief all
armored commanders down to unit level. Making known his extreme dis-
pleasure with their "Totalize"
performance in no uncertain terms, Simonds
directed that armor was henceforth neither to balk at movement by night
nor expect infantry protection in harboring. He further warned that while
there would probably continue to be "cases of... mis-employment of ar-
mour" in future operations,
"this was to be no excuse for non-success.
Canadian tank units and formations, in short, were to be pushed to the
very limits of their endurance.'4
"Tractable" was essentially "Totalize" in smoke. It also bore an astound-
ing resemblance to the theoretical operation in Current Reports From Overseas
described carlier. The principal object of "Tractable" was to dominate the
northern, eastern, and southern exits from Falaise so that no enemy could
escape. Physical occupation of the town was to be completed by the Second
British Army following the success of "Tractable," after which the First
Canadian Army was to exploit southeast to capture or dominate Trun. In
this attack on Falaise, which aimed to skirt Quesnay Wood and Potigny,
2 Corps was to be assisted by the 2nd Tactical Air Force and Bomber
Command.'5 Again Simonds planned to use massed armor and carrier-
borne infantry to break speedily through the enemy gun screen, only this
time he chose for surprise purposes to cloak their movement with smoke
rather than darkness. Once more, preliminary bombardment was dispensed
with in order to avoid signaling attack frontage, which enabled the enemy
to bring heavy defensive fire to bear on rearward assaulting elements, thus
reducing their capacity to penetrate in depth.
As explained by Simonds, the "first step" was to secure the high ground
northwest of Versainville and then, during a "second," push through to-
ward Falaise. To accomplish the former, the corps was to attack with two
roughly equal divisional groups up: the 4th Division, with the 8th Brigade
under command, on the left; and the remainder of the 3rd Division, with
the 2nd Armoured Brigade (less the Sherbrookes) under command, on the
right. The 2nd Brigade was to capture Point 184 northwest of Epaney while
the 4th Division formed a pivot at Perrières, seized the Versainville high
ground, and exploited to Eraines and Damblainville. One AGRA was placed
in immediate support of each division
until the 2nd Armoured Brigade
attained its objective, after which both AGRA, less one medium regiment,
were to support the 4th Division. The task of the 3rd Division was to clear
