166
Half-Forgotten Summer
vulnerability of infantry played its part. The armor, meanwhile, instead of
calling on supporting artillery and infantry to help clear the way when its
own 75-mm Shermans and self-propelled 105-mm howitzers proved unable
to subdue German antitank guns, continued to engage in fruitless and costly
piecemeal attacks. Ultimately, the defeat of armor caused the entire system
to collapse. 2°
While Montgomery on taking over the Eighth Army expressed reser-
vations about its general state of training,
he harbored particular doubts
about the armor,
which he likened unto
"the cavalry... hunting... the
fox." At Alam Halfa, over the protests of the GOC 7th Armoured Division,
he refused to consider unloosing the armor against Rommel,
who actually
hoped that British armor would indeed attack. Stealing a page from his
adversary, Montgomery instead ordered Lieutenant-General Brian Hor-
rocks, 13 Corps, to dig in his tanks and antitank guns on Alam Halfa ridge
and arrange to lure the Germans onto it in "a case of dog eat rabbit.
Montgomery's growing realization that his armor was not up to the task
being asked of it additionally prompted him to revise his plan of battle for
Second Alamein but two and a half weeks before D-Day. One of the most
striking features of that 12-day slogging match, which was closer run than
commonly supposed, was the lackluster performance of his armor as com-
pared with that of his infantry and artillery.
That Montgomery was able to identify this operational limitation among
his troops stands to his credit as a commander, for it most probably made
the difference between victory and defeat in both battles, notwithstanding
the 2:1 numerical superiority of Common wealth forces. Lack of an armored
element suitably integrated within the army as a whole further explains
why success was not exploited to the extent it perhaps could have been.
Armored shortcomings were almost certainly perpetuated in doctrine, since
Desert War experience, whatever its validity in other theaters continued
to attract the attention of Home Forces. As late as April 1943 in Tunisia,
the armored brigades of the home-trained 6th Armoured and desert-trained
1st Armoured Micione both Lunched attacks unsunsorted hu anillery and
infantry vainly against what was but a last-ditch German gun line defense.
Not surprisingly, such repulses and their associated losses had long before
begun to sap the dash and confidence of many British armored formations,
some of which hu Cocond Alamein were tending to disalau artrama cantion
rather than the romantic élan of a previous military age.
Doctrinally, this change could be seen in the virtual disappearance of the
originally emphasized first echelon in the tank-infantry assault. As explained
in Chapter 5, the first echelon was an all-tank array that, with the support
of artillery, was to precede the infantry onto an objective at best tank speed
and momentarily dominate it until the arrival of the latter arm. The enemy,
as one instruction put it, was to be demoralized by artillery, dominated by
tanks, and killed by infantry. The defeating power of deep minefields and
Map 7.1
The Montgomery Touch
The Battle of Alam Halfa
10
Miles L
Feint
9th
1/21 Aus Div
Feint
EL ALAMEIN
1st SA Div
AEL IMAND
XXXX
EIGHTH
IndI
NZ Div
ALAM NAYIL
5th
Ind Div
RUWEISAT RIDGE
23rd Armd Bde
22nd Armd Bde
21st
Pz Div
44th Div
Armd Bde
15th
Pz Div
90th
Light Div
Armd Div
TAQA PLATEAU
HIMEIMAT
XXXX
AFRIKA
QUATTARAN
