160
Half-Forgotten Summer
to be taught-cannot be overemphasized. Loosely defined as the "funda-
mental principles by which military forces guide their actions in support of
objectives," doctrine has traditionally affected not only training, but army
organization, equipment, and employment as well. Given the rather com-
plex relationship of these elements plus the accident and chance of the
battlefield, however, doctrine has of necessity always tended to be dynamic.
Indeed, it was only through doctrinal change and refinement, thanks largely
to the concerted efforts of Brooke, Montgomery, and Paget, that British
arms were ultimately able to stand up to German forces in the field. From
1940 onward, the War Office published a series of pamphlets, Notes from
Theatres of War and Current Reports From Overseas, that contained tactical
accounts, practical hints, and lessons drawn from actual combat. The Ca-
nadian Army, as it naturally embraced British doctrine, published Canadian
Army Training Memoranda that reproduced material from Current Reports
and British Army Training Memoranda?
Between Dunkirk and the summer of 1944 a particular Commonwealt
style of war fighting emerged. Initially, with the eyes of the non-Germanic
world riveted upon the tank after the Battle of France, the tendency was
to neglect or downgrade the value of artillery and infantry. It is true, of
course, that Allied artillery in 1940 had failed to carry out its role, the vast
array of towed field guns having been rendered impotent by Stuka action
and the fast-moving pace of German panzers. The rapid collapse of the
French front, moreover, seems to have been precipitated by gunners passing
despondent messages over their efficient communication links.* Events in
France also convinced many that fighting by divisions was too unwieldy
and slow. A committee headed by Gen. Sir William H. Bartholomew to
investigate the lessons of operations in Flanders subsequently recommended
basing the tactical handling of the division on a brigade group of all arms,
"the lowest self-contained fighting formation." The problem was that
while this may have vielded a handier. more mobile groubing it involved
"penny packeting"
division.
tanks, engineers, and especially artillery within the
The practice of permanently allotting artillery regiments to brigades un-
fortunately undermined the system for massing artillery fire. The divisiona
artillery adviser, the CRA, now came to be regarded as redundant. A move-
ment also developed to abolish the CCRA Commander Corps, Royal
Artillerv) whose similar function at cords level had also eroded.
before Dunkint to COR A had under him a commander renlete with head
quarters, staff, and communications to effect tactical control of corps me-
dium artillery after 1940 he had to berform all these functions himself This
naturally posed a dilemma as the CCRA was first and foremost responsible
to his corps commander for all artillery matters including air defense. By
leaving the corns headouarters for the medium headquarters to command
guns, however, he lost the necessary contact with the latter to enable him
The Imprint of Doctrine
161
to fulfill his principal task. The result was that in most corps, the medium
and reinforcing heavy artillery was parceled out to divisions whose CRAs,
looked upon as staff officers, continued the process of decentralization down
to brigade. As might be expected in such circumstances, when one brigade
of a division was attacking or defending against attack, none of the guns
of the others could be switched to its support. The unpardonable sin of
letting guns sit idle much of the time was thus committed over and over
again.
In the Home Forces, all of this ceased in 1941 with Exercise "Bumper,'
which saw artillery command and control turn into a shambles.
When
regrouping of divisions between corps took place on one occasion, all the
reserve artillery in one army inadvertently ended up within one corps, and,
unfortunately, in the wrong place. As a result of "Bumper," the artillery
situation was restored. Commanders of reserve artillery formations were
introduced, and the positions of CCRAs and CRAs buttressed within the
artillery chain of command, which remained inviolate. At the same time,
infantry commanders were left in no doubt as to their ultimate responsibility
for fire planning. Significantly, much of this was due to the influence of
Montgomery who, convinced of the correctness of orthodox artillery doc-
trine, had once stated that "the business of Gunner C.O.s was first to train
their regiments, and then to train infantry brigadiers to use them properly. "8
As previously mentioned, he also saw the infantry company commander-
FOO relationship, so important in building up the detailed fire plan, as the
key to quickly overcoming organized enemy resistance encountered during
decentralized offensive mobile operations."
Largely through the efforts of Brigadier H. J. Parham, the Royal Artillery
was, after Dunkirk, technically able to perfect a highly efficient gunfire
control system capable of producing, in a matter of minutes, a massive
blow to del with such emergencies Unlike German dive bombers, it could
also attack roughly the same targets by day or night in all kinds of weather.
As Parbam determined improved radio communications and circumvene
tion of the normal hierarchical chain of command permitted quicker re-
sponses to requests for gunfire. The pursuit of extreme accuracy
was in
these instances forsaken in favor of bringing overwhelming fire rapidly to
bear. Under the Parham. farncle" target system, designated artillery
officers were emnowered to order the fire of all guns within range. To
call prefaced by "Uncle target! Uncle target! Uncle target!," the entire
divisional artillery would respond. Likewise,
"Mike" called for a regimental
shoot, "Victor" corps, "William" army, and "Yoke" AGRA.
When this sustem fully evolved bu mid-1943. gunner commanders were
inteorted at every level and linked tooether by an intricate radio network
Alone the front. junior troob commanders serving as FOOs occupied a
series of OPe Initiall, special OPs manned by maiors or lieutenant-colo
nels. "CRA's representatives" were superimposed upon this layout in crit-
