Map 12.1
Operation "Tractable"
Bretteville-
La Bu sur
Rouvres
Grainville-
Langannerie
Quesnay
START
•Soignolles
Estrees-la-
camozene .
OBJECTIVE
9TH CDN
Montboir
+
Rouvres
POINT 195
taine-le-Pin
POINT 118
3RD CDN INF DN
cres
OBJECTIVE
8TH CDN
NF BDE
POINT 80
ARMD DIV
Sassy
OBJECTIVE
10TH CDN/
INF BDE
• POINT 115
Perrieres
Bons-Tassilly
PLAN FOR
OPERATION
"TRACTABLE"
170•
SOBJECTIVE Epancy
2ND CDN
ARMD BDE
# DOINT 1G9
POINT 159
ATA CON
FALAISE
•versainville
Damblainville
Case Hardening
295
the intervening valley of the Laison River between Montboint and Maizieres
and exploit to form a pivot at Sassy. To assist with this, the 8th Brigade
was to revert to 3rd Division command upon reaching the river."
As in "Totalize," 2 Corps assaulting elements were drawn up in densely
packed formation with armored brigades, including special squadrons, to
the forefront. Simonds appears to have listened to complaints about narrow
frontages, however, for he directed the armored brigades to attack on a
wide front, if possible with three units up,
though he stipulated 15-yard
marshaling intervals between tanks. The armored brigades were to push
straight through to their objectives, advancing at a rate of 12 miles in the
hour, the "proper emp[loyment) of armour... (being] to positio]n it so
that the enemy must drive it out in order to regain his freedom of man-
ocuvre." A carrier-borne infantry brigade charged with dismounting and
dearing the valley of the Laison followed within each divisional column;
the 8th Brigade in the case of the 4th Division and the 9th Brigade in the
3rd. Last in the order of march came the marching infantry brigades,
tOth and 7th respectively, whose task it was to pass through and join the
armor on objectives.
The forward movement of the columns was to be screened by artillery
smoke, of impenetrable density on the flanks and of "mist" density, as
controlled by FOOs with armor, on the front (the attack was to be post-
poned in the event of direct frontal winds). Over and above counterbom-
bardment by all available medium artillery, concentrations on call were
prearranged on known or suspected enemy 88-mm gun positions, the latter
to be engaged during the advance whether they opened fire or not. From
15 minutes prior to the attack for 10 minutes, medium bombers were also
to engage enemy tank, gun, and mortar positions up to the Laison valley.
Two hours after commencement, heavy bombers were slated to strike
one and a half hours.
Quesnay Wood, Potigny, and German defenses astride the Falaise road for
The enemy position to be assaulted was not considered to be posted in
any great depth. It was estimated to comprise a light infantry screen backed
up by a large number of 88-mm guns along the general line of the Laison
and Nebelwerfers behind reverse slopes. While elements of the 271st Division
were believed to be joining the newly arrived 85th Infantry in this area, the
disposition of the 12th SS Division could not be defined. In fact, the division
was but a shadow of its former self, mustering on 12 August seven Panthers
and 17 Panzer IVs, four 88-mm Flak, and six understrength rifle companies
of perhaps 500 men. 18
Not surprisingly, both Simonds and Crerar were
apparently satisfied that they had sufficient force to deal with the situation.
The 1st Polish Division and 33rd Armoured Brigade, for example, were
each directed to form a firm base, the former near the start line at Estrées-
la-Campagne.
When the Canadians attacked at 1200 hours 14 August, then, it was
