Long Forgotten Winters
from a territorial battalion of the Royal Fusiliers, Major L. Wigman. When
queried as to the purpose of battle drill, he invariably replied with wry
"To make every man a general."6
On 31 December 1941, the C-in-C Home Forces announced that a central
GHQ Battle School was in the process of formation at Barnard Castle on
the Durham moor and that battle schools were to be established for each
division. The objects of the latter were: to inculcate "battle discipline" by
translating that of the parade square onto the battlefield; to study battle drill
as a means of interpreting
doctrine in a practical manner, especially in
relation to fire and movement; to accustom officers through "battle inoc-
ulation" to think and act under the noise and strain of battle; to stimulate
new and practical ideas among all ranks; and to train instructors in minor
tactics to meet wastage in units. The purpose of the GHQ Battle School
was to train instructors for divisional battle drill schools and other training
establishments in the tactical handling of the infantry platoon in cooperation
with Bren gun carrier sections, mortar detachments, and other arms?
The first course at the GHQ Battle School commenced on 2 February
1942 and ran for three weeks. Of 102 officers attending, 17 percent were
regular, 24 percent Territorial, and 21 percent had seen active service. Over-
all, their performance was
disappointing.
As
weapon-handling tests
showed, few of them knew how to fire the two-inch mortar, and some
even attempted to put magazines on the Bren gun the wrong way round.
The course further revealed that the majority of officers were quite phys-
ically unfit and largely unversed in basic fieldcraft skills. The widespread
adoption of battle drill training nonetheless continued unabated. Until The
Instructors' Handbook on Fielderaft and Battle Drill was published in October
1942, of course, the 47th Division précis served as the basis for this training.
In the meantime Major-General Utterson-Kelso, described as the
"best
platoon commander in the British army," became Major-General (Infantry)
and Lieutenant-Colonel Wigman the Chief Instructor of the GHQ Battle
School. The first army-wide Battle School Conference was held at the Horse
Guards on 17 and 18 June 1942.8
It seems clear from a reading of the Handbook and précis that battle drill
was a direct attempt to emulate the actions of German soldiers on the
battlefield. In addition to calling attention to the relatively unknown de-
velopment of sturmtruppen tactics and techniques in the Great War,
battle
drill advocates correctly noted that "in spite of the spectacular development
of their Duates or and their Panzer Divisions and the successes which these
achieved, the Germans... owed much to some first-class infantry fight-
ing at the right time and place." The most significant feature of the German
method was also considered to be "the breaking up of the BIG battle into
hundreds of LITTLE battles," in which circumstances small groups of well-
trained energetic infantrymen performed a vital role. The British infantry's
failure to see battle as a series of local actions, in short, had left it "the
Battle Drill Die
111
Unskilled [sic] labour exchange of the rest of the Army... [and the] legit-
imate dumping ground for the lowest forms of military life." To "get on
to higher training" became the ambition of the infantry officer as it "did
not pay to think hard and long about... front-line fighting."
The Germans in contrast had determined that the basis of all infantry
tactics was the rapid employment of fire, —that is, infantrymen using their
own initiative and weapons to fight themselves forward. An infantry bat-
talion supported by mortars, heavy machine guns, plus light and heavy
infantry guns normally attacked on a narrow 600-meter front.
step, niederhalten, involved "pinning down" the enemy and winning the
fire fight (feuerkampf), which gained the attacker freedom to reconnoiter
and maneuver further. The next action, blinden, aimed at stunning or "stupe-
fying" the enemy with additional weight of smoke and explosive, thereby
denying him observation and accurate counterfire, in order to aggressively
deploy assault elements. Finally, during
the niederkampfen or
"beating
down" stage the enemy was destroyed in detail through close combat. In
a "war of little wars,
" such an approach provided substantial advantage to
the Germans who, acting on minimal orders, became masters of small group
fighting, termed "infiltration" by their opponents. As Alexander and
Utterson-Kelso observed at Dunkirk, while some "willing and ignorant"
British infantrymen were "psychologically outdone by the German dive
bomber, screaming shell (or empty bottles) and window dressing," their
coal-scuttle helmeted opposites performed magnificently.?
To say that the Calgary Highlanders seized upon battle drill as a panacea
for the perceived ills of minor tactical practice, the state of which some at
the time considered to be in the doldrums, would be a major understate-
ment. They became its most fanatical disciples, proselytizing others with
the fervor of evangelists. On first seeing a demonstration of battle drill by
the 47th Division on 8 October 1941, the Highlanders's Commanding Of-
ficer, Lieutenant-Colonel 1. F. Scott, arranged for three of his officers to
attend the divisional battle drill school at Chelwood Gate. At the same time,
he opened a battalion battle drill school at Burnt Wood near Bexhill, east
Sussex. On 23 October a demonstration was even performed for the Min-
ister of National Defence Colonel The Honourable IT Ralston, and Gen-
crals McNaughton, Crerar, and V. W. Odlum,
GOC 2nd
Eventually, the entire battalion passed through the school in a series of two-
week courses which were also regularly attended by NCOs from other
2nd Division units. When Is Division personnel attempted to follow suit,
however they were stooped by their divisional headquarters. which chose
instead to send candidates to the 47th Division.
Though War Office opposition temporarily forced the 47th Division to
abandon its battle drill training on 27 November. the Calgary Highlander
Division précis now pronounced the «Partle Drill Bible." were surrepti-
school continued to function and offer support. Stenciled copies of the 47th
