256
Half-Forgotten Summer
of the 152nd Brigade supported by armor. The question thus remains
whether Tilly was ever really a two-company objective.
It is easy to be wise after the fact, especially in the warmth and comfort
of a writer's chair, but to conduct a military study without some degree of
Clausewitzian critical analysis would be to defeat its very purpose. The old
adage that one learns best from mistakes is not without foundation. Looking
at Canadian Army performance in Normandy up to the end of July 1944,
it would seem fair to say that the lives of many soldiers were unnecessarily
cast away. While some, and not a few commanders, have argued that lack
of combat experience related directly to loss of life, this contention cannot
entirely be sustained. As has been shown in the case of the RHLI, and the
12th SS for that matter, inexperienced units did prevail in the face of the
enemy, provided their commanders exhibited the requisite tactical skill and
leadership. Judging from the performance of the 272nd Infantry Division,
neither can the myth of German fanaticism be used to explain excessive
Canadian losses. What then can? In the case of the SSR and the Black Watch
the conclusion is inescapable: surely those who left them exposed in open
wheatfields to be harvested like so many sheaves. As for other units intro-
duced piecemeal to battle, and whose soldiers also gave all that mortals
could, the responsibility must rest with the high command.
NOTES
The chapter title was inspired by the lines: "Cast a cold eye/On life, on death./
Horseman, pass by!" W. B. Yeats, "Under Ben Bulben." Collected Poems (London:
Pan, 1990), p. 401.
1. Record Group (RG) 24, Vol. 12,745, Memo Simonds to COS CMHQ on
Attack by R. H. C.—Operation "Spring," 31 January 1946.
2. RG 24, Vol. 12,745, Memorandum of Interview with Lt.-Gen. G. G. Si-
monds, CB, CBE, DSO, at Canadian Military Headquarters, 19 March 1946 by
Coll C. P. Stacey. Simonds also stated that "the idea of encircling the enemy by a
holding attack on the left and a break-through on the right... was a product of the
situation as it developed after D-day." Apart from the occupation of the Cherbourg
peninsula and Brittany ports, Montgomery was not at this stage interested in the
capture of specific geographical features; according to Martin Blumenson, his main
aim was to retain the intiative while avoiding setbacks and reverses. [Martin Blu-
menson, Breakout and Pursuit, United States Army in World War II, The European
Theatre of Operations (Washington: Department of the Army, 1961), p. 14).
3. Crerar Papers (CP), Vol. 7, Operational Policy -2 Cdn Corps, 17 February
1944. Simonds elaborated at some length what to do in "following up a German
retirement." He cautioned, however, that the Germans, instead of stepping back
"to a position some distance in the rear," might "alternatively ... stabilize the initial
beach-head operations in front of a position on which they are prepared to fight.
He nonetheless intended in every instance to direct divisions on "centres of front-
to-rear and lateral communication as their objectives," the capture of which would
Cold Eye on Death
257
increase friendly force momentum while restricting enemy power of maneuver
(Ibid.).
4. Ibid.
5. Ibid. Simonds insisted that "one medium regiment would] always be either
in support or under command of a forward [leading] division." (Ibid.).
6. Ibid. On 13 July 1944, the Command-in-Chief Panzergruppe West observed
that "the HKL [Hauptkampflinie or forward edge of the battle area] is still too closely
manned. In it should be only about one-third of each company, the other two-
thirds should be in two lines 600 and 1200 meters behind the HKL. Reinforce the
HKL at night if necessary. Whoever puts most of his men into the HKL will have
high casualties without being able to prevent a break-in of the enemy." A week
carlier Panzergruppe West had directed that "counter thrusts with tanks against the
British will yield inexpensive success only if they are made at once. Otherwise the
enemy will have put out mines, and heavy casualties will be inflicted by artillery
and low flying aircraft before reaching the starting point of an attack." The same
document stated that only antitank "positions in depth make sense... land they]
should be in open ground." (RG 24, Vol. 13,712, Enemy Methods, "extracts from
an order of 85 inf Div and three orders of Panzergruppe West... captured 16 August
1944"').
7. CP, Vol. 7, Operational Policy -2 Cdn Corps, 17 February 1944. Simonds
in an earlier directive stressed that as the "Germans move forward heavy tanks firing
shell at close range to support immediate counter-attacks by their infantry... all
infantrymen must be thoroughly trained in manhandling the 6-pdr over all types
of ground and obstacles." Getting these guns forward was the more important
because it was sometimes "impossible to move our tanks close behind our assaulting
infantry owing to delays imposed by minefields and anti-tank obstacles." Mc-
Naughton Papers (MP), Vol. 157, COG/1-0 Operational Training, 15 May 1943.
The Canadian artillery never really solved the tactical problem of countermortar.
8. CP. Vol. 7, Operational Policy-2 Cdn Corps, 17 February 1944.
10. RG 24, Vol. 10,799, Simonds's Draft of Lessons, 1 July 1944. Simonds saw
the primary role of artillery as one of "neutralization" as opposed to old-fashioned
"destruction" (the capability required against Japanese bunkers, for example, and
still sought by Russian artillery today). See Brig. A. L. Pemberton,
The Second
World War, 1939-1945, Army, The Development of Artillery Tactics and Equipment
(London: War Office, 1951) p. 330. Simonds also had views on patrols.
Recon-
naissance patrols, he stated, "should be as small as possible (two or at most, three
men)," selected from among "those who like to play a lone hand or work with one
or two tried companions." He further recommended grouping these men into a
special platoon within units for this kind of work. Simonds additionally thought it
quite wrong to send out a fighting patrol on an undefined mission towards the
enemy to take prisoners." Only after reconnaissance patrols produced a clear picture,
he insisted, should fighting patrols, minor attacks, be contemplated. Badly organized
fighting patrols, he reminded, usually ended in "getting ambushed and giving useful
information to the enemy" (Ibid.).
Nigel Hamilton, Monty, Vol. II: Master of the Battlefield 1942-1944 (Sevenoaks:
Hodder and Stoughton, 1984), pP.
737-738; Crerar Papers (CP), Vol. 2, 21 Army
Group M512 of 21-7-44; Col. C. P. Stacey, Official History of the Canadian Army
