Half-Forgotten Summer
Crerar attended the IDC in 1934. From 1935 he served as Director of
Military Operations and Intelligence in Ottawa and from 1938, on pro-
motion to brigadier, as commandant of RMC. In October 1939 he pro-
ceeded to Britain as the Senior Combatant Officer, returning to Ottawa in
the summer of 1940 to take up the post of CGS. 1°
Since Crerar's preoccupations during the interwar years were similar to
those of McNaughton, he inherited army command by anointment. He did
not, however, immediately fill the void created by the latter's departure.
Lieutenant-General Simonds on appointment to command 2 Canadian
Corps temporarily assumed de facto leadership of the Canadian Army re-
maining in Britain. At this juncture he was Canada's most experienced
general, both from the standpoint of staff employment and of commanding
a large formation in action.
Although only 40, fifteen years younger than
Crerar, his very youth had saved him from professional debilitation as he
progressed along the operational path to competent generalship. A 1925
graduate of RMC, Simonds attended Camberley Staff College during 1936-
37. In 1938 he was promoted temporary major and posted as a tactics
instructor to RMC where Crerar was commandant. The next year he
trooped to Britain as GSO 2 (Operations) with the 1st Canadian Infantry
Division. Following a brief sojourn as CO of the 1st Field Regiment, Royal
Canadian Horse Artillery, Simonds in 1940 established the field staff officer
training course at Ford Manor.
After conducting the first Canadian war staff course, Simonds was ap-
pointed GSO 1 of the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division and, subsequently,
BGS of the Canadian Corps. Early in 1943 he relinquished command of
the 1st Canadian Infantry Brigade and assumed the position of BGS, First
Canadian Army." Shortly after witnessing the Eighth Army victory at
Wadi Akarit in early April 1943 as a staff observer, he took command of
the 2nd Division.
Only two weeks later, on the death of Major-General
H. L. N. Salmon? in a plane crash, he was transferred to command the 1st
Division, then slated to come under the operational direction of the Eighth
Army for Operation "Husky," the invasion of Sicily. During the course
of the campaign in Sicily and southern Italy, Simonds distinguished himself
as a division commander, drawing particular praise from Montgomery. To
gain further experience in handling an armored division,
Simonds was at
the latter's urging transferred to command the 5th Canadian Armoured
the latterS unfortunately, the division received but a trickle of its tank es-
tablishment up to January, 13
acquiring experience in the command of such a formation.
which effectively precluded Simonds from
In fact, the only action undertaken by 5th Division troops while Simonds
was GOC was the so-called "Arielli Show." It is significant because it was
directed by the commander of the 11th Canadian Infantry Brigade, Brigadier
George Kitching, whom Simonds later chose to command the 4th Canadian
Armoured Division in Normandy. Simonds, eager to see his infantry for-
Cast of Commanders
185
mation "get its first experience of contact with the enemy," had arranged
for the 11th Brigade to relieve the 3rd Canadian Infantry Brigade on the
Ist Division's front north of Ortona. At first light on 17 January 1944, it
was launched against a series of enemy strongpoints southeast of the Arielli
River. For some reason the plan called for successive barrage-covered as-
saults across the Riccio River, first by the Perth Regiment on the left, then
by the Cape Breton Highlanders on the right. Opposed by the seasoned
Ist Parachute Division deployed in well-prepared river line defenses, the
piecemeal attack foundered disastrously in spite of overwhelming artillery
support. It cost the brigade almost 200 casualties. Having advanced to within
200 yards of their objectives, many of the soldiers of the assaulting battalions
not only "straggled back," but in several instances threw their Bren guns
and rifles away.
Simonds assumed command of 2 Canadian Corps on 30 January 1944,
finally replacing Sansom who since his dismal performance on
"Spartan"
had been protected from removal by McNaughton, in spite of GHQ Home
Force recommendations to the contrary. Immediately upon his arrival in
London,
Simonds met
personally with Montgomery, newly appointed
ground force commander for the Allied invasion of France, after which he
swept into 2 Corps like a new broom. Reluctant to deal with unknown
quantities and apparently unimpressed by the performance of certain 2
Corps staff officers and commanders, he, like Montgomery, brought in his
own team from Italy. By the end of March he had replaced among the
more important appointments the BGS, the CCRA, and the Chief Engineer;
of seven senior staff officers at 2 Corps headquarters only two retained their
Jobs. Within the 4th Armoured Division veteran officers of the Italian cam-
paign assumed command of the 4th Armoured and 10th Infantry Brigades.
As previously intimated, Simonds's former GSO 1 in Ist Division and
commander of the 11th Brigade, 33-year-old Major-General Kitching, took
over the 4th Armoured Division on 1 March. 15
While it was unquestionably prudent to bring Simonds back to command
2 Corns which traitly confirmed that all was not well in ite ranks, he had
precious little time in which to correct training faults. The new GOC 4th
Division, who lacked armored ernerience in any case never did manage
to exercise his formation as a whole in a field exercise before its eventual
Commitment to battle The Ind Canadian Infantry Division, also newl
commanded by Major-General Charles Foulkes since 11 January 1944, fared
somewhat better; during Exercise "Step".
conducted in early April it prac-
ticed breaking out of a hridgehend on a single thrust line crossing a river
and assaulting an enemy position with live ammunition Anil and May
found the same division with corps and army elements engaged in Exercise
practicing the crossing of a tidal estuary on the River Trent in
Yorkshire. Since it seemed distinctly possible that an assault crossing of the
lower Seine in the face of enemy opposition would be required in any
