Map 9.6
Operation "Charnwood"
/5I (H)INF
DIV
•CUVERVILLE
A59IS) INF DIV SOMAN
BENOUVILL
•ST HONORINE
aI PE DIVe
DIVISiON
LA FOLI
GIBERVILLE
DEMOUVILLE
21 P2 DIV
LEGEND
ALLIED THRUSTS 4 JUL
ALLIED THRUSTS 8-10 JUL
GERMAN COUNTERMOVES
ORCHARDS E WOODS
DE ABDULLES
BRETTEV
1/0
INI (A) St
Throes Beyond the Beach
219
into Caen and toward the line Franqueville-Ardenne; fourth, the final re-
duction of Carpiquet and mopping-up to the River Orne; and fifth, con-
solidation and British divisional thrusts to obtain bridgeheads over the River
Orne. Support laid on for the attack included "special armour" from the
79th Division, the firepower of 3 and 4 AGRA, and naval gunfire from
several warships of the Royal Navy.
"Charnwood" also saw heavy bombers of Bomber Command employed
for the first time in a close support role on the battlefield. Apart from their
reputed salutary effect upon morale, however, these strategic engines of
destruction seem to have yielded little in the way of tactical advantage.
Indeed, because a 6,000 yard troop safety distance was required, the rec-
tangular target area finally chosen (4,000 yards long by 1,500 wide) lay well
behind the German forward ring of fortified villages and contained pitifully
few enemy defensive positions at all. The fact that 467 bombers dropped
2,562 tons of bombs between 2150 and 2230 hours on 7 July and the ground
attack did not commence until 0420 hours the following morning further
degraded their impact and served to alert the enemy of the imminence of
the latter. 28
Notwithstanding this unusually heavy application of technology, the bat-
tle for Caen, by this point a symbol as much as an operational hinge,
degenerated into a brutal and primitive individual test of arms. Adolf Hitler
had decreed that the city be defended unto death. Montgomery, hounded
by detractors, was no less determined to carry it. In practical terms this
meant that the 3rd Canadian Division, along with elements of the 59th
British, had once more to close with the formidable 12th SS, albeit now
reduced to "four punch-drunk battalions" that "held no illusions about the
outcome." Just how much they had suffered on "Epsom" was recorded by
a young lieutenant:
I was lying next to my Divisional Commander when, a few hundred metres
in front of us, the remnants of the reconnaissance company of his former
Panzer Grenadier regiment were run over by British tanks and mowed down
by accompanying infantry. We couldn't even help with artillery fire, since all
our ammunition had been used up. The Divisional Commander knew every
one of these 17-18 year old soldiers, who were now fighting their last battle
in front of us. When I looked toward the General, I saw tears in his eyes."
Basically, there were three phases to Keller's 3rd Division plan of attack.
Phase one was to be executed hu Priondier Ben Cunningham's 9th Brigade
supported by the tanks of the Sharbrooke Fusiliers, with the Stormont,
Dundas and Glenearry Hichlanders (SDG) taking Gruchy and the Highland
Light Infantry of Canada (HLI) capturing Buron. In phase two the SDG
we so hot sto chile the Nor Nova Scotia
Domier
cole
