240
Half-Forgotten Summer
when allotting tasks and giving orders to subordinates. He further suggested
that command arrangements could be simplified if "each distinct phase of
an operation... [could] be carried through to completion without changes
of responsibility in respect to command and changes of commanders of
supporting
arms working with the infantry or armoured commanders
concerned. »8
Every new phase, defined by Simonds as "the transfer of responsibility
between units and formations and their commanders for continuance of
operations," unfortunately involved a pause that gave respite to the enemy.
As the pause became longer "the higher the level at which transfer takes
place," he considered it "advantageous to operate formations and units in
depth on narrow frontages... [which gave] them 'staying power,
' rather
than on wide frontages necessitating early relief by passing through new
formations and units.
" Against prepared defenses protected by thick mine-
fields or antitank obstacles, only the "sledge-hammer" infantry division
possessed the necessary "staying power to carry an attack through in depth.
The armored division, though capable of taking on a rearguard position,
did not possess sufficient infantry to break through an organized defense;
it was primarily a "weapon of opportunity" designed for more fluid
operations.
On 1 July Simonds issued further guidance on the conduct of the attack.
He stressed in particular that while the effect of air and artillery bombard-
ment was "90% moral," and actual casualties inflicted on defenders "always
... very small," sudden and intense pounding served to paralyze an enemy
for a short period. Since good troops recovered quickly, however, he con-
sidered it vital that attacking infantry lean into the barrage, which, though
hazardous wielded fewer casualties. He sten stipulated that they "not stop
lor) open fire until the objective (wals reached," for if troops adopted
fire positions it was "extremely difficult to get them on the move again
At the same time, all the ammunition they carried would be needed to repe
the inevitable counterattack.
The objective, once taken, had first to be
"mopped up" lall defenders killed or capturedl. which called for the "de-
tailed search of the position itself,"
and then prepared for defense.
included pushing out reconnaissance patrols. Simonds insisted. for nothing
was "more dangerous than to sit down in front of the Boche and not know
what he [wals up to."1o
Unfortunately for Simonds, 2 Canadian Corps was not afforded the
chance to conduct follow-up operations. After the debacle on the slopes of
Verrières Ridge, planning continued for a fresh, more deliberate, attack to
be mounted against the prepared German defense.
As Montgomery ex-
plained in a detailed letter to Risenhower on 24 July P Canadian Corps was
to spearhead a sustained offensive by the Second British Army down the
Falaise road commencing the next day. The object of the 2 Corps attack
Was to canture the Fontenau-le-Marmion-Point 122 feature also known
Cold Eye on Death
241
as the "Cramesnil spur." This was to be followed by a 12 Corps attack
west of the Orne on 28 July and a subsequent push by 8 Corps east of the
Orne toward Falaise on 30 July. All three operations, if successful, were to
be preliminary to another "Goodwood" style offensive, the results of which
could not be foretold. If on the other hand they did not go well, it would
still be possible to retire on the 2 Corps firm base and try again in early
August. Though Operation "Cobra," the first full-scale U.S. attack, had
to be aborted and postponed on 24 July because of poor weather, Mont-
gomery informed Eisenhower that Dempsey had been instructed to carry
on regardless. In the event,
"Cobra" and the 2 Canadian Corps attack,
Operation "Spring," were both launched on 25 July 1944."
Planning for Operation
"Spring" had been in progress since before 21
July when Simonds issued his preliminary orders. In his view, the high
ground north of Cintheaux constituted the "key to the German main defence
system south of Caen" and thus the "ultimate objective" and "necessary
stepping stone" to continued advance. He further reasoned that the built-
up areas of St. André-sur-Orne and May-sur-Orne to the west offered the
best cover for an attack in which even a partial success might gain the "very
important VERRIERES ridge." It was clear to him, however, that de-
ployment for such an attack would have to be conducted in darkness and
the crest of Verrières ridge captured before daylight. According to Simonds,
his plan finally "legislated both for success and the lack of it," this aspect
being well-understood by Dempsey who had also been advised it was prob-
ably too much to hope for a breakthrough. ' Bearing in mind that Simonds
was roughly aware of the opposition he faced, this would appear to make
Whereas the dreaded 1st SS Panzer held the front from Verrières
eastward, the 272nd German Infantry Division occupied the area between
there and the Orne. The degree to which the 272nd had been reinforced by
clements of 2nd, 9th SS, and 10th SS panzer divisions does not appear to
have been appreciated, however. 3
On 23 July Simonds briefed all commanders down to brigadier on
"Spring." The next day he held a final conference with Foulkes, Keller,
and the GOCs of the 7th and Guards Armoured Divisions. In outline, the
operation called for four phases, the first of which entailed simultaneous
might attacks by the 2nd and 3rd Canadian Infantry Divisions astride the
Falaise road to capture by first light, respectively, the objectives of May-
sur-Orne-Verrières and Tilly-la-Campagne. In phase two the 2nd Division
was to take Fontenay-le-Marmion and Roquancourt, while the 7th Ar-
moured seized the high ground at Cramesnil-la-Bruyere, prepared to exploit
forward to the area of Cintheaux. On the 7th Armoured reaching its ob-
lective, the 3rd Division, less one brigade, was to secure Garcelles-Secque-
During the last haces which were tentative only the Guards
Armoured was to pass throush 7th Armoured and with the remaining
brigade of 3rd Division capture
Hogue woods; the 7th Armoured was
