Prologue
left (or right) of each other." Obviously, while there appears to be general
agreement that the most accurate impression of what really happened can
only be gained through the circumspect use of first-hand accounts rendered
by participants, lack of personal combat experience, as John Keegan has so
brilliantly shown, need not disqualify the historian.
Colonel C.P. Stacey, the Canadian official historian, rightly suggested
that in the matter of weighing evidence,
"the vital element is that of time,"
the validity of a written account or interview being directly related to the
elapsed
passage of time between the event and its recording.
"The best
historical evidence,
" Stacey declared,
"is evidence recorded at the time."
Allowing that in order to fill gaps it may be necessary to interview partic-
ipants long after an event, he nonetheless counseled,
"it is something that
should be done only when the contemporary written evidence fails"; even
then, it "should be checked with care against such contemporary written
records as are available." Concerning "reminiscences... thirty or forty
years on,
»8 Stacey was much kinder than British historian A. J. P. Taylor
who savagely warned such could "degenerate into old men drooling over
their youth'…... forget|ting] truth and manufacturfing] myth. Stacey
pointedly referred, however, to a study by historians of the European The-
atre of the U.S. Army on "how long it took a soldier's memory of a battle
...to fail." Their conclusion was that this occurred in six days. More
recently, military historian Dominick Graham sounded the alarm that mem-
ory "is particularly unreliable after a subject has talked to other people,
compared notes and repeated his story many times. By then, he may no
longer tell truth from fiction.
">10
Naturally, it makes great sense to exercise the same care in determining
the worth of written evidence, and again the most important factor is elapsed
time. Official correspondence, private letters, and especially personal diaries
written shortly after an action are thus most valuable. War diaries fall into
the same category, except that entries were often made days after events
occurred. According to Stacey, the
as a source of information"
"one document superior to all others
is the operations log maintained at various
headquarters not for "historical purposes, as a unit or formation war diary
is, but as an instrument for fighting the battle." The log is also a preferable
source because it is impersonal" and, though checked, is rarely rewritten;
war diaries, on the other hand, are subject to approval and possible alteration
by those in command. As for regimental histories, quality tends to vary
with authorship, but even when written by trained historians little is gen-
erally said to the detriment of regimental performance. Indeed, the purpose
of a regimental history is not so much to present the unvarnished truth,
which is generally attempted, as to promote pride in achievements, tradi-
tions, and esprit de corps.
The student of Second World War history can take some consolation, of
course, from the knowledge that all shots have been fired, all efforts spent,
Of Ignorant Armies
and all decisions taken. The cumulative nature of history written since the
report of the last round has also provided him with a reasonably firm
foundation upon which to build. In short, many of the facts having already
been established, he can now in Stacey's words,
"go on to the perhaps more
important tasks of establishing why .. [they] happened."13 That events took
the course they did, however, does not mean that they had necessarily to
follow this course; there is, after all, nothing inevitable about history, even
though no replay is ever allowed. To examine with a critical eye those
events that did occur is nevertheless instructive for the academic and military
professional alike.
For a Canadian Army whose reputation relected the illustrious fighting
record of the Canadian Corps in the Great War, the Norman summer of
1944 appears in retrospect disappointingly lackluster. In recent years, more-
over, whereas historical accolades have continued to accrue to the Canadian
Corps, historical aspersions have increasingly been cast upon the combat
performance of the First Canadian Army on the road to Falaise. That the
charges are not insignificant is evident from the conclusion of Eversley
Belfield and Brigadier H. Essame that "the Canadians' advance was frus-
tratingly sluggish and, in retrospect, it was unfortunate that the better
trained British 2nd Army could not have been employed to close the Falaise
Gap."14 American Lieutenant-Colonel Carlo D'Este also noted "the inability
of the Canadians to develop their actions more quickly,'
»15 and repeated
Stacey's admonition in the official history that
It is not difficult to put one's finger upon occasions in the Normandy campaign
when Canadian formations failed to make the most of their opportunities. In
particular, the capture of Falaise was long delayed, and it was necessary to
mount not one but two set-piece operations for the purpose at a time when
an early closing of the Falaise Gap would have inflicted most grievous harm
upon the enemy and might even, conceivably, have enabled us to end the
war some months sooner than actually was the case.
A German force far
smaller than our own, taking advantage of strong ground and prepared po-
sitions, was able to slow our advance to the point where considerable German
forces made their escape. That this was also due in part to errors of judgment
south of the Gap should not blind us to our own shortcomings. '6
British journalist Max Hastings is more critical, claiming that "even
within the Canadians' own ranks, [few] disputed that the principal cause
of the Allied failure [to close the Gap] was the feeble performance of First
Canadian Army"; the British official history, in his view less frank than
the Canadian, pointedly "evades the central fact that the ragged remains of
two German divisions and a handful of tanks held all Crerar's [First Ca-
nadian] army for 13 days, from the opening of [Operation] TOTALIZE to
the crossing of the gap at Chambois, a distance of barely thirty miles. "17
To quote General Charles Foulkes, former commander of the 2nd Division,
