332
A Note on Sources
Sawyer, Elkins, and Vokes papers in the RMC Massey Library also contain some
worthwhile insights into Canadian wartime activities and operations. Although the
archival section is small and rudimentary, it boasts certain other esoteric papers as
well. The Sutherland Brown papers in the Queen's University Archives are much
more complete and, for the interwar period, deserving of attention.
papers, while not extensive, nonetheless reveal something about initial army plan-
ning and expansion. The Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives in King's College
The Imperial War Museum, and the Public Records Office, Kew also
contain considerable information pertinent to Canadian Army training in Britain
and operations in Normandy. While not available to the public, the Canadian Land
Forces Command and Staff College collection of documents on battlefield tours
and military operations proved an additionally useful source.
Given the interpretative nature of this work, it has naturally been necessary to
resort to synthesis.
This is especially true with respect to British military posture
between wars and the evolution of doctrine during hostilities. Authorities in each
field were accordingly cited, but even here it was possible to supplement the dis-
cussion with some primary source material from the Sutherland Brown papers and
RG 24. The Canadian Defence Quarterly, Journal of the Royal United Service Institution,
Current Reports from Overseas, and Canadian Army Training Memoranda provided an
additional wealth of information. For battlefield actions, war diaries and operations
logs were consulted and double-checked against Stacey and Roy, both of whose
research efforts were very thorough and hard to catch out. Ground, as Dominick
Graham has pointed out, is evidence that is "as important as a typed letter, an
operation plan, or a message torn from a signal pad" and was used as such during
four battlefield tours of Normandy.
Select Bibliography
PRIMARY SOURCES, UNPUBLISHED
Government Records, Personal Papers, and Manuscript
Collections
Record Group 24, National Defence 1870-1981, National Archives of Canada
(NAC), Ottawa
Military Documents, Directorate of History, National Defence Headquarters, Ot-
tawa, and Public Records Office (PRO), Kew, U.K.
"The Bartholomew Report,'
" Bartholomew Committee Final Report (1940), Tac-
tical Doctrine Retrieval Cell, Staff College Camberly
Alanbrooke Papers, Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives, King's College,
London (LHC)
Crerar Papers, NAC
de Guingand Papers, LHC and Imperial War Museum (IWM)
Dempsey Papers, LHC and the Public Records Office (PRO), Kew, U.K.
Elkins Papers, Royal Military College (RMC)
McNaughton Papers, NAC
Montgomery Papers, IWM
Odlum Papers, NAC
Rogers Papers, Queen's University Archives (QUA)
Sawyer Papers, RMC
Sutherland Brown Papers, QUA
Vokes Papers, RMC
Warren Papers, IWM
Collected Papers, Canadian Land Forces Command and Staff College, Kingston
Collected Papers, Tactical Doctrine Retrieval Cell, Staff College, Camberley
