226
Half-Forgotten Summer
lombelles; they now had to fight their way to their objective, which took
from noon until 2210 hours to completely secure. The Chaudière advance
on the right had in the interim slowed from 1040 hours as heavy resistance
was encountered from the area of a chateau north of the Colombelle steel
works. Lack of maneuver room, exacerbated by bombing craters on roads,
resulted in a telescoping of forces at this point.
A "scene of indescribable congestion"
now developed in the order of
march as the reserve battalion, the North Shore Regiment, and units of
Cunningham's 9th Brigade closed up on the same axis. The artillery barrage
had "moved uselessly to the south." At 1330, Brigadier Blackader called
on Typhoons to destroy the chateau. When this failed, an "Uncle" target
was brought down upon the place, some shells unfortunately landing among
the SDG, which exacerbated an already confusing situation. Eventually the
Chaudières assisted by the SDG began to make inroads, and the North
Shores were directed to clear the steel works. At 1635 General Keller issued
new orders. Cunningham's 9th Brigade now bypassed Blackader's with the
North Novas moving on Vaucelles and the SDG against Mondeville, for-
merly an objective of 8th Brigade.
When it first became apparent that Cunningham's 9th Brigade would be
delayed in getting into Vaucelles, Simonds had directed Foster's 7th Brigade
to see if it could cross over into the suburb. Evening consequently found
the Regina Rifle Regiment from the 7th Brigade established there before
the North Novas and HLI from the 9th. By noon 19 July the 9th Brigade
had cleared Vaucelles of enemy. Foster's 7th Brigade in the meantime had
been ordered to capture Cormelles, an industrial suburb east of the main
road to Falaise, which now constituted the boundary between the 3rd and
2nd Divisions. Reports that Cormelles was lightly held, but that it might
not remain so, saw the preemptory dispatch of the HLI to that location,
which led to additional confusion between brigades and further complaints
of troops being shelled by friendly artillery. As it turned out, the HLI got
two companies into Cormelles by late afternoon; they were relieved by the
Canadian Scottish and Winnipegs that evening. 36
All the while these actions were being fought, the command situation
within the 3rd Canadian Division reflected certain strained relationships.
On the afternoon of 10 July, Keller had called on his patron, Crerar, who
was unavailable at the time, to discuss the removal of Cunningham from
command of the 9th Brigade.
Choosing to leave a message with the
DA&QMG to be conveyed to Crerar, Keller explained that he was con-
vinced such a change was necessary and had so informed Cunningham. His
stated reasons were the latter's "failure to "get-on' and hesitancy to use
reserves promptly and aggressively, which had resulted in failure to exploit
opportunities and in increased casualties." Keller went on to cite four in-
stances that allegedly confirmed Cunningham's "lack of drive": the 9th
Throes Beyond the Beach
227
at Authie on 8 July; "hesitancy and lack of drive" at Caen the next day;
and a failure to get patrols swiftly forward to the river line on the night 9/
10 July. On receipt of this message Crear had advised Keller to prepare a
submission to Simonds, under whose command the 3rd Division was to
shortly fall. Ironically, Crerar had the same day passed to Simonds the
adverse letters that had been raised on Keller himself by Crocker, Dempsey,
and Montgomery."7
While suggesting that it was "quite possible that Crocker's handling of
Keller ha[d] not brought out the best in the latter," Crerar counseled Si-
monds "that until Keller's good judgement is established in your mind, you
cannot give weight to his views concerning his own immediate subordi-
nate." Oddly, Crerar's reservations about Crocker appear to have been
based on "indications... [of] his tendency... to talk direct to the Briga-
diers, tending to by-pass the Divisional Commander lin whom Crocker
had obviously lost confidence]." Crerar, though he did not tell Simonds,
also seems to have been of the opinion that "Cunningham was the 'white-
haired boy' with Crocker and Dempsey before the assault. "38
As if he did not have enough to worry about before "Atlantic," Simonds
on 13 July reported to Crerar that "in his opinion, while Cunningham had
failed on some occasions to show the speed and determination which might
have been expected, generally, he appeared to have carried out his instruc-
tions intelligently, and well." Simonds expressed concern, however,
Cunningham had not always received that direction and guidance from
above which he was entitled to expect." The GOC 2 Corps further reported
that he had shown Keller the comments made on his performance by
Crocker, Dempsey, and Montgomery. Though Keller "was distinctly upset
on reading... [these] reports,
' Simonds was more surprised by his sub-
sequent response "that ... he did not feel that his health was good enough
to stand the heavy strain and asked that he be medically boarded as he felt
that he would be found to be unfit. "3 In the event, both Keller and Cun-
ningham commanded in "Atlantic."
As Keller's 3rd Division increasingly displayed signs of operational de-
terioration, Foulkes's 2nd Division in "Atlantic" engaged in its first major
action since Dieppe. At 1800 hours 18 July, Lett's 4th Brigade sent a rein-
forced battalion, the Royal Regiment of Canada (RRC), supported by a
squadron of FGH tanks to capture Louvigny under cover of a barrage, this
beino accomplished at and of cantee det flowine morning
In the meantime the Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment of Canada)
from Megill's 5th Brigade, like the Reginas from Foster's 7th, had crossed
the Orao inta Vancall Me 1100 hours 19 Ily the Régiment de Maison-
neuve, spearheading the three-phase 5th Brigade attack south from Vau-
celles, reported that C and D companies had gone through A and B
following un the harrop. the last mentioned had by mistake gone several
hundred vards bevond their start line and were caught in the opening line
