Half-Forgotten Summer
Once the RHLI reported they were firmly in Verrières, orders were issued
to the Royal Regiment to commence phase two. The battalion moved out
toward Roquancourt at 0600 hours, supported by a squadron of the 1st
Hussars and paralleled by the British 1st Royal Tank Regiment to the west.
With fighting still in progress in Verrières, the Royal Regiment CO, Lieu-
tenant-Colonel J. C. H. Anderson, chose to skirt the village and push on,
unfortunately without waiting to arrange artillery support. Once over the
ridge, both units found themselves in the killing zone of an elaborate, and
ingeniously camouflaged, German reverse slope defense that produced an
avalanche of fire from antitank guns, panzers, machine guns, tank destroy-
ers, mortars, artillery, and infantry. Enfiladed from Tilly-la-Campagne and
similarly exposed to fire from the right, the 4th Brigade advance was
abruptly and savagely halted.
To the west where the Germans straddled both sides of the river, Megill's
5th Brigade attack had also run into serious snags from the beginning.
The
task of clearing the enemy from the built-up area of St. Martin proved
simply beyond the capacity of the depleted Camerons, who had been under
constant pressure in St. André since 20 July. The unconfirmed fact that the
one kilometer open stretch between St. Martin and May-sur-Orne was
honeycombed with mineshafts and tunnels, which would have afforded the
Germans covered approaches, portended equally disastrous entanglements
and assaults from the rear. A report by a French civilian on 23 July of the
existence of an iron mine complex in the area went essentially unheeded.
Even as the Calgary Highlanders crossed their start line, the last company
at 0347 hours, the Camerons were struggling in the darkness to secure it.
A grim battle ensued almost immediately as the Highlanders were forced
to clear position after position. Each time they assumed the enemy had been
"blasted away," more Germans seemed to trickle in behind them. Poor
communications and casualties among key personnel aggravated this in-
creasingly nasty and confused situation.
When one company shortly before
0600 hours reportedly did manage to enter May-sur-Orne, it was forced
by heavy mortar and artillery fire to retire 200 yards to the north. A second
company was likewise summarily ejected midmorning. At 0630 hours the
reserve company signaled that, unable to progress, it was digging in but
300 yards beyond the start line. Fifteen minutes later Foulkes personally
signaled it "not to dig in but to go wide and keep going.
" The Maisonneuves
were shortly placed at one hour's notice to move and at 0715 hours the
Black Watch, whose CO had been mortally wounded earlier that morning
in fighting in St. Martin, were ordered to "go ahead."20
Command of the Black Watch now devolved upon a junior company
commander, Major F. P. Griffin.
Taking over just before the originally
slated 0530 H-hour, and realizing that this timing could no longer be met,
he proceeded to recoordinate artillery and tank support essentially along
the lines of the previously planned attack. The report by an officer patrol
Cold Eye on Death
247
Map 10.3
Operation "Spring"
A BASSE
2 CDN INF DIV
T ETAVAUX
3 CON IN DIV
BRAS
•HUBERT - FOLIE
BOURGUEBUS
FARTEVAL
MARTIN- DE- FONTENA
TA CAMPAGNE
AY.CIIP.OPNI
LENMERMION
ROQUANCOURT
A LOAGUICHON
NUMBERS INDICATE ATTACKS AS FOLLOWS:
O FUS MR
(2 CAMERONS OF C
O CALL HI
ĐẾ MÁ CON 1OO HARESE SMORNING 23 JUL)
© RHL|
6) R REGT C
1000
4000 YARDS
EG ENO
• 7 ARMO DIV TANKS
APPROX LINE 06OOHRS 26 JUL
dismatched to reconnoiter May-eur Ore that it anpeared lightly held seems
to have convinced Grifty to adhere to this plan even though contact had
nor been made with forward elements of the Calgary Highlanders. A more
skeptical Brigadier Megill, who actually considered it wiser to go into May-
sur-Orne before attacking Fontenav-le-Marmion reluctantly acquiesced in
this dericion largely because of Cliffin's enthusiasm and the promise it held
for success. Griffin also apparently believed that a Black Watch drive directly
on Fontenay-le-Marmion would ascist the Calgary Hichlanders in gaining
May-sur-Orne (although their obiective had been to secure a start line for
Griffin's unit). What unfolded from this point was a tragedy of Great War
dimensions.
At 0910 hours the Black Watch, with two companies up and two back,
bravely advanced un the onen slope toward Fontenav-le-Marmion from the
factory area south of St. Martin. Due to lack of information as to the
whereabouts of the Caloary Hichlanders near Mav-sur-Orne the battalion.
