112
Long Forgotten Winters
tiously produced in ever increasing quantities for sale as the regiment re-
sponded to a growing grass roots demand. The Toronto Scottish Regiment
(MG) put their machine guns on the shelf to practice battle drill. By De-
cember 1941, all infantry units of the Canadian Corps were enthusiastically
conducting their own battle drill training, which subject henceforth ap-
peared over and over again on infantry training programs. On receipt of
direction from C-in-C Home Forces, approval was given in April 1942 to
form a Battle Drill Wing at the Canadian Training School, which as pre-
viously explained had been established in 1940 to train officers and instruc-
tors for units of the Canadian
Army Overseas.
No. 5 (Battle) Wing
subsequently opened at Rowlands Castle, Hampshire, on 1 May 1942 under
the command of Major J. Campbell, Calgary Highlanders. The first course,
held 1-29 May, was attended by 96 officers and 96 NCOs.'º
That battle drill training was taken seriously is evident from the fact that
in August 1942 a number of Canadian battalion commanders were sent to
attend the GHQ Battle School at Barnard Castle. That it took on an in-
creasingly infantry, single-arm bent is a little less obvious, though no less
true. The GHQ Battle School was eventually redesignated the GHQ In-
fantry School and, by 1943, reorganized as a central School of Infantry
under the War Office. The Canadian Battle Drill School, established on 10
May 1942 under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Scott at Courtenay,
British Columbia, and subsequently moved to Vernon on 20 July, was also
reorganized and incorporated into a Canadian School of Infantry on 31
August 1943. This visibly infantry orientation not only reflected a "new
war," but, as well, confirmed the fact that battle drill was designed primarily
by and for infantrymen. No doubt caught up in the enthusiasm of the
moment, Scott had even seriously, though unsuccessfully, requested the
use of the term "commando" to describe this training.
As any review of the 47th Division précis reproduced by the Calgary
Highlanders and the Canadian Battle Drill School will reveal, battle drill
focus remained principally fixed upon minor tactics at section and platoon
levels Training, conducted under cimulated combat conditions emphasized
specific practical drills related to: fieldcraft; observation; section and platoon
movement; infiltration; embussing and debussing; woods clearing and at-
tacks in large forests; village fighting, including house clearing; attacking
enemy posts and pillboxes; night tank hunting and ambush; night patrolling;
river crossing; antiaircraft; and defense of isolated and mutually supporting
localities, river lines, villages, and houses!? Because platoon battle drills
seemed suitably applicable to company infiltration operations, however,
certain drills dealing with the attack, village and town fighting, and woods
dearing came to he also tanoht at that level In Anoust 1943 the Canadiar
Battle Drill School course expanded from three weeks to 22 training days
for the purpose of introducing such company battle drill, thereby bringing
Battle Drill Die
113
it into line with the CTS Battle Wing 26-day course. 3 The weight of
evidence suggests, nonetheless, that there was never any intention to "teach
...tactical handling on a higher level than that of company."14
It is worthwhile noting, however, that the British reorganization of the
infantry division to include an army tank brigade (replacing one of three
infantry brigades) sparked greater interest in tank-infantry cooperation. To
assist with such training, a Royal Armoured Corps Wing was opened at
the GHQ Battle School in June 1942. Its stated purpose was to "train officers
in a modified form of battle drill for army tanks in cooperation with in-
fantry" and "standardize methods of battle inoculation for the personnel of
Army Tank Brigades. "15 The CTS Battle Wing also conducted an exercise
in which tanks firing blanks worked with infantry.
16 To gain a better un-
derstanding of what was entailed in such interarm cooperation, of course,
it is revealing to review the battle scenarios and drills set forth in the 47th
Division précis and the Handbook on Fieldcraft and Battle Drill, which were
in this and other respects identical in detail. According to this doctrine, in
circumstances where organized resistance was not likely to be overcome by
infiltration, the "key to success [appeared]... to be close cooperation be-
tween... troops of tanks and…... platoons of infantry."
As described, the attack was foreseen as beginning with artillery concen-
trations and air strikes, to be followed immediately by teams of infantry
and assault engineers breaching minefields and antitank ditches. A first
echelon of tanks, massed for maximum effect, would then assault to achieve
a break through by sheer speed and weight of numbers. Next would come
a tank and infantry second echelon, the "Shepherding Wave,
"infantry speed" to reduce pockets of resistance. A third echelon, also
mixed, was slated to exploit success. Significantly, the
"real scope for
infantry-tank cooperation" was considered to lie in "second echelon work."
for which a battle drill had been worked out. According to this drill, infantry
were to move forward making best use of ground, preceding tanks that in
the case of a platoon-troop were to be treated much like a bigger "Br
Group" for purposes of maneuver. On contact with an enemy, the tanks
Were to move forward to a position as nearly as possible right-angled to
the infantry "fire line" to provide fire support for flanking or pincer move-
ments by the latter.'7
As a method for training infantry there was. and still is much to be said
for battle drill. The concept of every soldier having a part to plav and ideas
to impart was unquestionably a progressive pedagogical approach. Its in-
troduction at a time when the war for many Canadians seemed to be "at a
standstill and others had "married and liveld only ... (tol see their Brit-
ish| wives "18 definitely heightened its abdeal and attraction. The old mil
itary truism that the bigger the exercise the less the challenge to the soldiery
at large had also been demonctrated once saain a fact particularly prover
on "Bumper."19 To some officers "the greatest danger" from the summer
