78
Long Forgotten Winters
gressive pace of training. For Canada's lack of "practically all... modern
equipment other than personal equipment of the soldier, including his rifle,
... [and] Vickers machine guns,
»55 the 1st Canadian Infantry Division had
to be "very largely equipped from United Kingdom stocks."56 With Bren
light machine guns in critically short supply, Canadian units overseas were
until early 1940 armed with Great War-vintage Lewis guns; these were
gradually replaced during 1940-41, the first Canadian-manufactured Brens
arriving overseas in November 1940. It was not until the following summer
that the issue of Canadian-made two- and three-inch mortars commenced,
which meant that for its planned raid on the Norwegian coast the 2nd
Brigade had to borrow three-inch mortar stores from the 1st Brigade. The
two-pounder antitank gun remained in short supply as production priority
went to tank armament.
Critical equipment shortages continued to exist throughout 1941. Most
glaringly, 40-mm Bofors were simply unavailable to light antiaircraft reg-
iments. As late as 31 January 1942, there were only 58 Bofors within an
authorized establishment of 280 for the Canadian Army Overseas. The tank
situation, though less serious, was complicated by technological consider-
ations. The Ist Canadian Army Tank Brigade received tanks on a training
scale during July 1941 and by the New Year had taken 157 Churchill "P"
tanks on establishment. The 5th Canadian Armoured Division had to wait
a longer period for its cruiser tanks, only a few U.S. Lees being delivered
before the end of the year, with the result that it did not come under
command of the First Canadian Army until 25 June 1942. By that time it
had received 112 tanks, including light and obsolescent models, of which
only 34 were Rams now coming from Canada. The 4th Canadian Armoured
Division had, in the meantime, commenced training On Poms in Canada!
a development that but for the introduction of the better Sherman would
have eliminated the need for conversion training overseas.
A similarly dismal situation confronted artillery field regiments, which
in December 1939 were initially armed with 18/25-pounder guns (18-poun-
ders rebored to take the improved 25-pounder shell) on a limited scale of
four per regiment. It should be noted, however, that on receiving its full
quota of 72 such weapons in the summer of 1940, the Ist Canadian Division
was the onlv formation in Britain after Dunkirk so equinned The remark-
able 25-pounder gun-howitzer,
"which proved to be among the war-win-
ning weapons of the Second World War," though in production, was not
issued to a Canadian unit until December 1940. It was not until early 1942
that the first field regiment in Canada received 25-pounders; 2nd Division
artillery, for example, could only train on 18-pounders and 4.5-inch howit-
zers before proceeding overseas.
To make matters worse, the 2nd Division's three field regiments were
issued but 28 obsolete 75-mm guns during November 1940; it was not until
September 1941 that they received their full complement of 25-pounders,
Shaping an Expeditionary Force
79
which from July of that year were beginning to be supplied through Ca-
nadian sources. The 3rd Canadian Infantry Division, which arrived in the
United Kingdom much better equipped and trained than the 2nd, received
its complete establishment of 25-pounders by November 1941.5º Fortu-
nately, Canadian gunners from the beginning took fullest advantage of
British facilities at the School of Artillery at Larkhill, to the point that it
was claimed "so far as the school was concerned there were not two armies,
British and Canadian, but one.
">60
It is, of course, a matter of record that McNaughton on 8 June 1940
advised the prime minister of Canada by cable that it was his "privilege to
inform His Majesty today that... [he] now considered the Canadian Force
to be battle worthy."61
By September, having pronounced the troops
"highly trained," he was of the opinion that "further intensive military
training during the winter... would make... [them] stale." Educational
training that would be of benefit upon cessation of hostilities was accord-
ingly introduced to occupy over the winter months minds grown
"blasé
about training.
»62 Such concern for troop welfare no doubt explains why
McNaughton, like General George McClellan of the Union Army during
the U.S. Civil War, never lost the affection of his soldiers. It may also
bespeak a confidence borne of the fact that McNaughton, built up into a
major national figure by a publicity drive from the start of the war, had by
this time begun to enjoy a greater popularity than any other general. Hailed
by the press as a "soldier scientist,
" he even appeared in the darkness of
defeat to be the natural choice to lead the Allied invasion of the Continent.
In his own mind, McNaughton clearly envisioned the Canadian Army
spearheading the assault on Berlin. 63
It seems perfectly clear, however, that McNaughton's force had not yet
mastered the critically important technique of formation road movement.
To maneuver large bodies of troops efficiently by day and night over wind-
ing Enolish lanes most of which were unsigned as an anti-invasion measure,
required good staff work and a high individual standard of driving and map
using. During the first divisional-scale anti-invasion scheme of 1941, Ex-
ercise "Fox" held in February, problems with motor vehicle movement
"managed to tie everyone in knots from a platoon to a corps level." Directed
by McNaughton's own corps headquarters, "Fox" was designed to practice
the Ist Division in a vehicular move to a concentration area, an advance to
contact with a simulated enemy, and battle procedure and deployment for
attack. Unfortunately, poor staff planning at the corps level, inadequate
traffic control, and an excessive number of vehicles all contributed to the
creation of monumental road congestion. This not only prevented artillery
from getting forward to support infantry attacks but turned the entire
exercise itself into a fiasco. At the end, McNaughton remarked that the
exercise had "shaken the complacency of everyone participating, from the
Corps Commander to the lowest private soldier.
