244
Half-Forgotten Summer
afternoon they were also given permission to make their way back under
cover of darkness. With the failure of this battalion to take Tilly, Keller's
3rd Division attack foundered. 16
The attack on Foulkes's 2nd Division front was a more complicated and,
ultimately, even more disastrous affair. As the road between St. André-
sur-Orne and Hubert-Folie had been selected as the start line, the 6th Brigade
was ordered to secure St. Martin-de-Fontenay and the area of Troteval
Farm in a preliminary operation. This action commenced on the evening
of 24 July when the Camerons took on the wretched task of clearing through
St. André toward St. Martin and a composite company from the FMR
successfully attacked Troteval Farm. Tanks of the Sherbrooke Fuliliers as-
sisted both units. The divisional plan from this juncture called for the 4th
and 5th Brigades to pass respectively through the FMR and Camerons,
taking each under command, thus creating a gap through which 7th Ar-
moured Division elements could exploit forward.
Within the 4th Brigade, the Royal Hamilton Light Infantry (RHLI) was
ordered to attack Verrières, after which the Royal Regiment of Canada was
to advance to take Roquancourt. In the 5th Brigade, the Calgary Highlan-
ders were directed to capture the eastern outskirts of May-sur-Orne, from
which secure area at 0530 hours the Black Watch, supported by a squadron
of Ist Hussar tanks and a troop of 17-pounders, would advance to seize
Fontenay-le-Marmion. During this phase the 22nd Armoured Brigade of
the 7th Armoured Division was also to move up from Ifs, prepared to
counter possible panzer counterattacks and exploit forward as opportunities
presented themselves. Those units not involved in the attack —the SSR from
6th Brigade, the Essex from 4th Brigade, and the Maisonneuves from 5th
Brigade- were most curiously grouped as a reserve under the 6th Brigade.
Difficulties in securing the start line delayed the 2nd Division attack on
Verrières by 40 minutes. Reports of enemy tanks east of Troteval Farm,
itself held by the FMR composite company, prompted the gutsy RHLI
CO, Lieutenant-Colonel John Rockingham fresh from Staff College, to
suspend his assault in order to mount a company attack to resecure his start
line. Although this cost the RHLI the benefit of prearranged artillery con-
centrations and hence heavier casualties, the battalion managed under cover
of darkness to fight its way into Verrières by dawn. Thereafter, assisted by
17-pounder fire and "on call" concentrations by field and medium guns, it
wrested control of the hamlet from the Germans. The violent counterattack
that followed was, in turn, repelled through a combination of six- and 17-
pounder fire and PAT tank hunting team action. Supported by a squadron
of the Ist Royal Tanks and Typhoons, the battalion later withstood a sim-
ilarly fierce onslaught launched against Verrières after 1700 hours. Sadly,
this action was to be the only Canadian success that day. It remains notable
in that it was attained by so-called inexperienced, but well led and handled,
Canadian troops.
NOISIAIG
Campagne
PANZER
Secquevill
Map 10.2
Action on Verrières Ridge, 25 July 1944
CDN
-CAMERO
+ TH
CAEN
CDN
Hubert-Folie
R.M.LI
ROYA
NOISING
Orne
272м0
le. Marmyon
Rocquancourt
ELEMENTS
9 S. S.
PL DIV
VERRIÈRES RIDGE
25 JULY 19AA
Ground over 70 motres......
