44
Long Forgotten Winters
lection of suitable material. '21 In short, McNaughton's faith in a citizen
militia still remained strong.
Indeed, he personally considered it a mistake to use regular forces as a
basis for expanding national armies, since
They may have the highest technically trained officers in the world, but they
are trained to handle trained men, and I doubt very much if they would make
as much success in a war of the "Nation in Arms" type as [reserve] officers
....who, while less qualified technically, nevertheless have in general a wider
experience of men and affairs, and are used to getting results from semi-
trained personnel. The competition of private life is a school for training in
initiative through which the regular officer does not pass."
In 1931 McNaughton reiterated the view that "a Citizen Militia... [was]
the proper type of Land Defence Force for Canada," with a small regular
force acting as an "instructional corps." In line with his 1923 statement that
there would be "no large expansion of fighting forces on mobilization," he
expected armies of the future to be smaller, more mobile, harder hitting,
At the root of all such issues, of course, lay the matter of under what
conditions Canadian troops were liable to fight. Sensibly, for it is ultimately
the planner rather than the plan that counts, the General Staff began to
develop certain contingency measures. Fear of the United States, as a tra-
ditional enemy and potential violator of Canadian neutrality in event of an
American-japanese conflict, prompted the first: Defence Scheme No. 1, a
plan for war with America. Circulated for comment in April 1921, it called
for denying the initiative to the Americans and gaining time for imperial
forces to intervene in strength. As British Empire defense had always been
based on a capacity to generate a strategic offensive after a tactical defensive,
this much debated plan was never really quite so ludicrous as it has since
been painted.24
Even after the termination of the Japanese alliance, McNaughton contin-
ued to regard the United States "a [potentiall danger... [as their foreign
policy. consistently Imperalistic, aimed at the hegemony of the Amer-
icas." He nonetheless assumed that "timely aid from other portions of the
Empire" would render "the [Canadian] case far from hopeless.
British Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald announced in 1929 the dis-
mantling of Royal Navy facilities in Halifax and the Caribbean, however,
McNaughton charged that the British action compromised Canada's defense
against the United States and cast the Dominion into the latter's sphere of
influence. At the same time, though he remained concerned that America
might abrogate Canadian neutrality in any war with Japan, McNaughton
recognized it was folly to continue planning for a full-scale war in North
America. MacDonald's initiative had, in a Canadian context, laid Defence
The Bellows of Peace
45
Scheme No. 1 to rest and with it the rationale for maintaining an excessively
large military establishment of 15 divisions.26
Defence Scheme No. 2, which considered war with Japan and, later,
defense of Canadian neutrality in an American war against Japan, figured
less prominently in militia planning than Defence Scheme No. 3, which,
hinted that one cavalry and six infantry divisions, properly manned and
equipped, should now suffice to meet all contingencies. Cleverly, he man-
for the 1932 League of Nations Disarmament Conference in Geneva. It had
been recognized for some time, of course, that reserve force structure was
inflated and unnecessarily costly. It was eventually reduced from 35 to 20
cavalry units, which included four armored car and two mechanized regi-
ments, and from 135 infantry and machine gun units to 91, of which six
were reorganized as armored units sans tanks.
Artillery and engineer units
were at the same time increased, the number of field batteries rising from
67 to 110.
Militarily valid as this decision may have been, because it meant the
demise of many regiments, it took some time to sell to the various corps
associations, the political power of whose part-time soldier representatives
remained formidable. Since the Depression-beset Bennett government lost
its nerve and failed to proceed with restructuring,
McNaughton retired
leaving a militia still organized for home defense, deficient in modern weap-
ons, and, sadly, in worse condition than when he was appointed CGS. On
his departure, he produced an oft-quoted memorandum entitled "The De-
fence of Canada" that warned of severe equipment and weapon shortages;
Canada, it stated, possessed but 25 obsolescent aircraft, not a single anti-
aircraft gun or air bomb, and artillery ammunition sufficient only for "90
minutes' fire at normal rates for... field guns inherited from the Great
War. "27
In the same document, McNaughton acknowledged that the Ten Year
Rule, which "relieved [the British Chiefs of Staff] of responsibility for lack
of preparation in the event of war," had since 1919 been used unofficially
as the basis for preparing estimates for the funding of the militia* Like
most regular officers, McNaughton kept himself abreast of British devel-
opments through the many intelligence, operational, and personal contacts
Militia Headquarters maintained with the War Office," in fact, most of
McNaughton's addresses were little more than informative discourses on
aspects such as the latest divisional organization and experiments with mech-
anization. Broadly convinced of the merits of the latter, he also believed
that the lead Britain had established in this field would "be difficult even
for other civilized powers to make up." McNaughton remained additionally
confident that Canadians were naturals at "handling machinery of all kinds"
