228
Half-Forgotten Summer
of barrage fire. Fleury-sur-Orne, the Maisonneuve objective, was none-
theless attained by 1425 hours.
Later that afternoon the Calgary Highlanders penetrated to Point 67 over-
looking St. André-sur-Orne from the north. The Black Watch in turn seized
the village of Ifs by dusk and successfully held it against counterattack.
Developments to this point now persuaded both Foulkes and Simonds that
the overall favorable situation was ripe for further exploitation. As an an-
ticipatory measure the Queen's Own Rifles and Sherbrooke Fusiliers were
even warned for a possible night attack. Hasty plans were also laid during
the evening 19 July to send Young's hitherto uncommitted 6th Brigade,
reinforced by the Essex Scottish Regiment from the 4th Brigade and sup-
ported by the Sherbrooke tanks, to attack Verrières ridge at 1200 hours the
next day." The effect of "Goodwood," however, had been to draw sub-
stantially greater German strength into the area of Bourgebus ridge. The
Canadians faced more than the German 272nd Division, which had yet to
see action.
Indeed, on the afternoon of 19 July, Dempsey ordered 2 Corps to take
over Bras and Hubert-Folie from 8 Corps which, having lost around 270
tanks, had been severely mauled and was preparing to withdraw. The 3rd
Division, in fact, relieved the nearly destroyed 11th Armoured. The 7th
Armoured Division, ordered to complete the capture of Bourguébus, did
so at first light the next day when both it and Guards Armoured Division
came under Simonds's command. As might be expected, some 7th Ar-
moured tanks advancing from the east had traversed as far as Beauvoir Farm
along the ridge that the 6th Brigade was preparing to attack. While they
momentarily considered taking Verrières, choosing not to for reasons of
relative strength, their presence may have reinforced the presumption by
Simonds that "opposition... was not great and that quick offensive action
should break through readily the enemy screen."*' In any case, the tanks
were eventually withdrawn and Young's 6th Brigade attack on a 4,000-
meter front went in at 1500 hours 20 July supported by artillery fire and
rocket-firing Typhoon strikes.
On the right the Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders of Canada, with
a Sherbrooke tank squadron available for counterattack in support, advanced
in "T" formation (two companies up) through a field of wheat behind a
barrage to secure St. André-sur-Orne. On the left, intimately accompanied
by five tanks, Les Fusiliers Mont-Royal (FMR) attacked behind a barrage
toward Beauvoir and Troteval farms on their way to their objective, Ver-
rières village. Having moved continuously through the night and morning.
the troops had not had a meal since 1700 hours the day before (the Camerons
had not had lunch). Ominously, in the vicinity of Beauvoir and Troteval
farms, where British tanks had previously roamed freely, enemy resistance
began to grow; in attempting to press on after certain obvious locations
had been cleared, leading EMIR clements were attacked from the rear by
Throes Beyond the Beach
229
German infantry issuing from farm cellars. At the same time, enemy an-
titank guns and Panthers came into action. With its artillery FOO dead, its
forward company cut off, and its antitank support not yet having come up,
the battalion hung on grimly throughout the night, unable to move either
ahead or back. 12
A greater disaster by far occurred in the center where the South Sas-
katchewan Regiment (SSR), protected by a troop of tanks on each flank,
assaulted through three kilometers of tall grain fields to the crest of Verrières
Ridge. Tragically, the battalion on reaching its objective area after 1700
hours consolidated on an open slope dominated by a higher feature held by
Germans. The exposed Canadians, under direct observation and subjected
to murderous indirect artillery and mortar fire that could be accurately
corrected, were now attacked by panzers from the left rear flank. Initially
believing that the two flanking tank troops were sufficient to deal with the
half-dozen roving panzers, the Sherbrookes were slow to dispatch their
reserve squadron forward.
Enemy tanks working back and forth along defiladed approaches mean-
while wreaked havoc upon the demoralized and, from 1700 hours when a
thunderstorm burst, rain-soaked troops of the SSR. Easily picking off a
troop of supporting 17-pounders as they raced to rescue the besieged Ca-
nadian infantry, the powerful panzers also managed to hold Canadian tanks
at bay. Around 1800 hours the 6th Brigade lost communication with the
SSR. When information was received, it was to the effect that the acting
commanding officer had been killed and, later, that the battalion was with-
drawing. On learning this at about 2100 hours, Young instructed the SSR
to reorganize immediately behind the Essex, which sleep-deprived battalion
had been ordered forward at 1730 hours to establish a firm base between
Beauvoir Farm and St. André.
On reaching this position, which was also exposed to enemy observation,
the Essey encountered the retrenting soldiery of the SSR streaming back
and, in their wake, the devastating fire of counterattacking German panzers
and infantry supported by mortars and artillery. Unable to consolidate,
taking casualties, and out of touch with battalion, the two forward Essex
company commanders after joint consultation decided to withdraw their
subunits, at least one of which got out of control. Around midnight, by
which time they had been "rounded up," Young personally addressed these
companies and arranged with division the resupply of rifles, Brens, PIATs,
and associated stores which arrived at 0400 While the Essex were dis
Patched back to their lines the SSP remained scattered to the wind 4
Instead of meeting light obbosition. the Canadians bad run into elements
SS Panzer Regiment of the 1st SS (Tilstandarte Adolf Hitler), which mustered
in the neighborhood of 100 tanke On 21 luly they counterattacked By this
time Woman's 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade, which evidently much
