276
Half-Forgotten Summer
and calmly lighting a cigar, he had asked them in a loud voice if they were
going to leave him alone to face the Allied attack. In the meantime, Kampf-
gruppe Waldmuller of two panzergrenadier battalions had been ordered to
the area of Bretteville-le-Rabet and warned for further action. Kampfgruppe
Krause, whose panzer and panzergrenadier battalions had been detached the
very night "Totalize" commenced to assist in wiping out the Second British
Army bridgehead north of Thury-Harcourt, was also directed to disengage
and move 10 kilometers to occupy the heights west of Potigny, from which
position it could defend the bottleneck between the "natural tank obstacles"
of the Laison and Laize rivers. At 1130 hours Kampferuppe Waldmuller rein-
forced by the 1st Panzer Battalion and roughly ten Tigers under Wittmann,
a total of about 20 tanks, counterattacked the heights south of St. Aignan.
The forward movement of Kampfgruppe Waldmuller and reports of coun
terattacks supported by panzers apparently convinced Simonds of the need
to exercise caution and await the second air strike. To be sure, the intelli-
gence picture was by no means clear at this point. The action of Kampfgruppe
Krause in counterattacking the Orne bridgehead north of Thury-Harcourt
seems to have especially confused the situation. The 2 Corps Intelligence
Summary for the 24-hour period ending 2000 hours 8 August stated that:
"With the complete absence of any clue to the identification of the armour
on our front, an assessment of the enemy's immediate capabilities is almost
impossible." While expecting the German "anti-tank line to be a source of
some delay," it nonetheless ventured that "after moving 1 and 12 SS Di-
visions away to meet an immediate threat in the West" the enemy did not
appear to have a "substantial reserve available."35
Notwithstanding the immense advantages conferred by "Ultra," better
reconnaissance and patrolling, which was the main source of tactical infor-
mation about the enemy, could have provided a more accurate picture.
True, the German habit of moving only by night, aggressively closing up
to Canadian-defended localities during
darkness and
pulling back in
depth at dawn,
often made this exceedingly difficult. It is also true, of
course, that the 2nd Division as a "point of training" subsequently con-
cluded patrol reports from 16 through 30 July to have been "most unsat-
isfactory?" For lack of precise information and prisoners, a reasonably
correct impression of cnemy forward dispositions could not be gained.
Significantly, it was only on 30 July that "steps... [were] taken to improve
the standard of
• patrols"; on 4 August a two-day divisional combat in-
telligence course was instituted for brigade intelligence officers.* It is dif-
ficult to believe that such shortcomings
could not have been largely
overcome during training in Britain, where the problem had already been
observed. 37
While Simonds was not well-served by army or corps intelligence, the
movement forward of the Ist Polish Division produced additional problems
of a purely practical nature. Into an area already brimming with matériel
The Amiens Alchemy
277
and dumping activity were now crowded an extra 650 armored and probably
double the number lorried vehicles. The sheer volume of guns, equipment,
and vehicles pouring into such an unusually restricted space created a traffic
congestion that imposed a severe drag upon mobility.
The grinding pace
of mopping-up operations by preventing the forward and lateral dispersion
of hundreds of infantry division vehicles ensured a further telescoping effect.
By 0710 hours, with Fontenay-le-Marmion reported clear, Simonds ordered
both armored divisions to "feed forward."38
Here again difficulties were
encountered as pockets of continuing German resistance threatened the se-
curity of predesignated forward gun deployment areas, many of which were
subjected to machine-gun and mortar fire. Failure to capture Tilly before
0800 and Rocquancourt before 1215 hours seems also to have compromised
the efficient forward deployment of armored division maneuver elements
to their start positions.
In stark contrast, the attack by Kampfgruppe Waldmuller originally pla
for 1230 hours was launched an hour earlier after a heavy bomber
command post" appeared as signaling the start of a major Allied air
eration. Although the German counterattack proved unsuccessful and :
Wittmann die a warrior's death, it served to "spoil" the contin
• advar.
of the Polish Division for most of the day. Equally importan
"hug
ging" action left Meyer's tanks and soldiers well inside the
ine®
behind which heavy bombers were not to strike for fear
ng
Canadian troop concentrations. Ironically, while forward Ger
were spared, the Canadians and Poles were not so lucky.
USAAF bomber groups accidentally unloaded upon them with.
safety limits. 39
The start line for the second phase was the lateral road between i
sur-Laize and St. Aignan. The bomb line running north of Rol
and Gaumesnil and south of the quarry east of Bretteville was fo
it. According to the air plan, Bretteville-sur-Laize on the righi
Sylvain of the left were to be bombed preliminary to the advanc
4th and 1st Divisions at 1400 hours 8 August.
Once the di
noncratering strikes were to be carried out astride the Fa.
Gouvix through Hautmesnil to Cauvicourt.
Fighter bon
engage targets in the areas of Bretteville-le-Rabet, Quesna)
Estrées-la-Campagne. As it happened, weather forecasts on
dicating visual bombing by Fortresses would have to take plac
quired the air attack to be advanced to 1226 hours, ending at
became the final H-hour for ground force movement.
Of the 492 USAAF Eighth Air Force bombers that attacke
nately, one 12-plane group mistakenly engaged troops near Ca
another erroneously dropped short in emulation of its badly hit l
their great shock, elements of the 1st Polish Division were struck
melles. Within the 3rd Division the North Shore Regiment incurr
