148
Long Forgotten Winters
mander-COS responsibility, this was not so pronounced a problem, and
commanders were constantly reminded that "the Knight's Cross is not won
at Battle Headquarters, but forward with the victorious fighters. "18
Barely a year now remained in which to finally prepare the First Canadian
Army for operations on the soil of France. To provide a basis for forward
planning, the army training program directive for April prescribed unit
training for the period 1-31 May and formation training to brigade level
during 1-30 June 1943. Significantly, however, it stipulated that where
facilities were available, combined operations training would "take prece-
dence over all other." While battle drills to produce "a habitual framework
of action to typical situations" continued to be emphasized, special studies
were also called for on how to cross wire, water, and minefield obstacles
by day and by night. Headquarters training likewise stressed the special
study of operations related to expanding and breaking out from a bridgehead
formed by other troops and movement during pursuit. At the same time,
the First Canadian Army directive demanded that close order drill periods
be held once a week and ceremonial parades, to foster morale and esprit de
corps, "from time to time as opportunities and facilities might] permit.
Again, this accorded with the direction after "Spartan" for a definite period
of "smartening up.
In April, largely due to pressure exerted by the Canadian government,
the 1st Canadian Infantry Division and the 1st Army Tank Brigade replaceu
equivalent British formations in the order of battle for the assault on Sicily.
The intention was to have them return to disseminate formation-level battle
experience among Canadian land forces for the invasion of northwest Bu-
rope, but this was clearly not the primary factor underlying their deploy-
ment. Given shipping availability, of course, this would have been a far
better scheme for gaining much needed operational experience than the
policy, begun in January 1943, of attaching for three months at a time
individual Canadian officers and NCOs to the First British Army fighting
in Tunisia Ultimately. however, the latter did prove to be the main source
of battle experience within the First Canadian Army, for in early October
authorities decided to dispatch to Italy the 1 Canadian Corps and 5th Ca-
nadian Armoured Division, which had exercised as a division for the first
time on "Spartan." Again, this was a direct consequence of Canadian gov-
ernmental entreaty, spurred considerably by Mackenzie King's growing
suspicion that casualties in Normandy could he henau and might be avoided
by sending troops to Italy. 20
These decisions naturally put the whole future of the First Canadian Army
in doubt for it was left with but one national corps. Ralston had already
Warned McNauchton in July that conding a corns to the Mediterranear
might conceivably jcopardize the "idea of a Canadian Army." Paget as
commander of the 21st Army Groun now designated for the invasion of
Europe broached the matter of proposed changes in October: he informed
Final Tempering
149
Figure E.1
1 Canadian Corps Ancillary Troops
Ist Armoured Car Regiment (The Royal
Canadian Dragoons)
7th Anti-Tank Regiment
Ist Survey Regiment
Ist Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment
(Lanark and Renfrew Scottish Regiment)
Royal Canadian Engineers
Ith Field Park Company
12th Field Company
13th Field Company
14th Field Company
Ist Corps Signals
Ist Corps Defence Company (The Lome Scots)
Royal Canadian Army Service Corps
1st Headquarters Corps Car Company
1st Corps Transport Company
No. 31 Corps Troops Company
No. 32 Corps Troops Company
No. 1 Corps and Army Troops
Sub-Park (Royal Canadian Ordnance
Corps)
1st Corps Troops Workshop
Ist Canadian Infantry
Division
1st Canadian Army Tank
Brigade
(later Armoured Brigade)
5th Canadian
Armoured Division
McNaughton that for the invasion the 21st Army Group would comprise
"an American Army. the Second British Army. and a combined Anglo-
Canadian Army" based on the First Canadian Army. Both Paget and Brooke
accepted the practicality of maintaining the existing staff structure and an-
