252
Half-Forgotten Summer
He also sensed within the division "a feeling of some resentment" that due
credit had not been given for hard fighting.
The impression was additionally widespread that the 3rd Division should
have been
"withdrawn into reserve to be re-organized" after the initial
assault. While Simonds remarked that he had taken steps to quash such
"erroneous ideas," he recommended against the removal of Keller on the
grounds it
"would have a most adverse effect on... morale... [and] be
regarded as censure on the efforts of the division." In order to develop "the
full fighting efficiency" of the 3rd Division, argued Simonds, it had to "be
given a period out of the line to re-organize and train and absorb reinforce-
ment personnel." Only after a "successful operation," however, did he
"consider that a change in command could be made without affecting the
feeling of the division itself." As for the "individual qualities" of Keller,
Simonds thought them "unimportant. in comparison with the bigger
problem of maintaining the morale of 3 Canadian Division." He had none-
theless "formed the impression that ... Keller had] not appreciated the vital
importance of the moral aspects of higher command and the absolute ne-
cessity for the commander being a stabilizing influence in the give and take
of active operations." Despite this, Simonds "believe[d]... Keller hald]
failed to do his best, mainly through a feeling that it hald] been 'all censure
and no encouragement.' »34
On 27 July, 2 Canadian Corps regrouped, the 7th and Guards Armoured
Divisions reverting from command and the 4th Canadian Armoured Di-
vision and the 4th British Armoured Brigade coming under command. The
general plan announced for the near future was to hold the corps front with
the 2nd Division right and the newly arrived 4th Division left. The 2nd
Canadian Armoured Brigade and the 3rd Division were scheduled at last
to remove to rear areas for reorganization, refitting, training, and assimi-
lation of reinforcements. This accorded with the intentions of Montgo-
mery who the very same day, anxious to further the successful breakout
by American forces to the west, directed the Second British Army to deliver
a strong right wing offensive, Operation "Bluecoat," in the Caumont area
with not less than six divisions. To keep the enemy from transferring forces
across to the western flank, he deemed it essential that the First Canadian
and Second British Armies continue to attack the enemy vigorously in the
east.
As he so colorfully put it: "He must be worried, and shot up, and
attacked, and raided, whenever and wherever possible." Subsidiary objects
of these activities were to gain ground of tactical advantage and "write off"
German manpower and equipment. Within 2 Canadian Corps this translated
into a number of costly and largely unsuccessful battalion attacks on limited
objectives, with Tilly-la-Campagne occupying center stage. 36
As if to illustrate that there was nothing basically wrong with Canadian
troops, a reinforced company of the Essex supported by artillery and the
direct fire of a tank troop captured an enemy-held orchard midway between
253
Cold Eye on Death
Verrières and Tilly in a vicious, costly action on the night of 29 July. The
next day the Calgary Highlanders were warned to be prepared to attack
Tilly from this position in the early hours of 1 August; a company of the
Lincoln and Welland Regiment from the 4th Division was at the same time
carmarked to launch a diversionary feint from Bourguébus. Despite this
assistance and the support of both divisional artilleries plus 2 Canadian
AGRA, the Calgary attack was stalled west of the village by intense German
machine-gun and counterbarrage fire, the last being perceived once more
as Canadian shelling falling short. A second, daylight assault supported by
a troop of the Royal Scots Greys enabled some Canadians to get into Tilly,
but, unable to consolidate, they retired to the area of their original start
lin. A company of the Royal Regiment, pushed forward to assist in piece-
meal fashion, met the Calgary Highlanders coming back. At this juncture
Brigadier Megill ordered the shattered battalion to attack again at 1430 hours
supported by a squadron of the Fort Garry Horse. This effort, with its
attendant aura of the reinforcement of failure,
was similarly repulsed short
of Tilly by a like concentration of enemy fire."
Apparently as a result of Montgomery's personal appeal to Crerar on the
morning of 1 August to keep up the pressure on the 2 Corps front, the
entre Lincoln battalion was now ordered to execute a silent attack that night
aganst Tilly. As planned, two companies were to strike south from Bour-
guébus and occupy blocking positions between Tilly and La Hogue to
torestall an anticipated panzer counterattack from the latter quarter. The
two other companies were then to advance directly on Tilly, the first seizing
an intermediate position through which the second would assault the village.
This actually amounted to a one company attack, albeit supported from
first ight by the fire of a reinforced squadron of the 29th Armoured Re-
connaissance Regiment (The South Alberta Regiment), a troop of 17-poun-
der antitank guns, and the divisional and corps artillery. As events unfolded.
tre intermediate position was secured, but the blocking companies were
Corced back to Bourguébus in some confusion.
Jefferson, ordered the last company to assault Tilly. The Leibstandarte de-
Despite this reverse, the commander of the 10th Brigade, Brigadier Jim
fenders, not surprisingly, stopped it cold. Two days later Jefferson informed
the Lincoln officers "that insufficient determination had been shown in
hacking what should have been a two-company objective." Jefferson had
cd course made the presentation on "Clearing Towns and Villages" during
the 2 Canadian Corps Study Period 13-18 March 1944. A further attempt
to spure Tilly made by the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders of Canada
(Princess Louise's) backed by a South Alberta squadron on 5 August also
failed. The same dav Montgomery remarked to Simonds. "Conoratula-
tons, you ve been kicked out on Tilly again!" The strongly fortified village
finally fell to the 51st Highland Division on 8 August, but only after having
been cut off and following a protracted struggle by two Seaforth battalions
