xii
Foreword
Canadian high command failed to understand and adjust to the new dy-
namics of war and the new operational requirements.
This is a serious charge which undoubtedly will raise some hackles in
Canada and which requires substantial proof. I think that the author, relying
on immediate primary evidence, often as close to "real time"
has made his case. Many brave men needlessly lost their lives in Normandy.
Though the author does not say so outright, some blame must accrue to
the politicians who starved the armed forces far too long, but high-ranking
officers share the blame. For the sake of soldiers who in all probability will
have to face combat somewhere, sometime in the future, I hope that the
wider lesson of this book will be studied and absorbed in command and
staff colleges and in other institutions of higher military learning. Ultimately
the high command is responsible for the preparation of its troops for battle,
and if it fails to do so adequately, it "hath a heavy reckoning to make."
unther E. Rothenbe
irdue Universi
Preface
The First Canadian Army was the only field army ever to fight under
Canadian command and staff direction. It was also the last great British
imperial army. Within a force structure that encompassed "units" —that is,
battalions and regiments, and the progressively higher "formations" of
brigade, division, corps, army, and army group—the First Canadian Army
lay just below group, of which there were but three on the Western Front
in the Second World War.
This was the Canadian army's most recent
experience at the operativ or operational level, that gray zone lying some-
where above tactics and below military strategy once called "Grand Tac-
tics,
" the tactics of large formations.
For a military organization that has
not fought since Korea, when but one Canadian brigade was deployed, it
is didactically important that the operations of Canada's first army continue
to be the subject of serious professional study. As Carl von Clausewitz so
astutely pointed out, despite the essential unity of all military activities,
command at the higher formation level usually calls for a greater measure
of imaginative intellect. Gaining a better understanding of how large field
forces function is thus an important step toward avoiding a repetition of
past mistakes.
This work, presented in two parts, endeavors to explain Canadian Army
operations in Normandy during the Second World War against a backdrop
of organization, training, and fighting style developed before actual battle.
It explores the Great War experience, the British connection,
the interwar
period, force development, equipment, staff structure, and doctrine. More
specifically, it traces the development of the Canadian overseas army, de-
scribes the workings of this roughcast yet complex fighting force,
and
critically appraises the subsequent performance of Canadian formations in
