114
Long Forgotten Winters
of 1941 was "that life was too easy and boredom, lack of discipline, and a
lowering of morale would follow.
»20 Battle drill that aimed to make every
soldier exercise his initiative offered more exciting and challenging training.
To many it seemed the antidote to boredom.
The problem was that when battle drill burst upon the scene it did so
with a vengeance. If physical fitness had been a recognizable British fetish,
battle drill appears to have become a Canadian virtue. By 1943, 2nd Division
platoons practiced "all phases of battle drill... taught, at least once every
three weeks, regardless of duties and leaves. "21 The assumption that German
military performance was somehow attributable to fanaticism seemed fur-
thermore to father the notion of cultivating and harnessing a like breed of
fanatics who could be relied upon to "kill joyfully." Troops undergoing
battle drill training were accordingly encouraged to shout mindless slogans
such as "blood, blood, blood" and "kill, kill, kill.»22 Visits to slaughter
houses to see animals destroyed and "hate" training that involved actual
splashing of blood were consequently included in some of the earlier at-
tempts to "inoculate" men for battle, much to the revulsion of leaders like
Victoria Cross winner Major-General Pearkes, who had experienced first-
hand the carnage of the Great War. In fact, all such measures were eventually
deemed to be counterproductive to good training and were discontinued
by direction of GHQ Home Forces in May 1942.23 The rush of blood
brought on by unbounded zeal and enthusiasm had been mainly to dizzy
the head.
Initially, too, battle inoculation was carried to the extreme. The com-
mendable aim of this training was to prepare soldiers "mentally and psy-
chologically"
to
withstand
the harsh realities of the battlefield; by
"debunking," to attune them to endure the strain of screaming Stuka attack,
artillery barrage, mortaring, assault by tanks, and enemy infiltration around
fanks. In this respect it was different from field firing exercises designed
to practice troops in tactical maneuvers using live fire. In trying to give the
soldier experiences before battle that would sustain his morale in action,
however, unbridled enthusiasm again reared its ugly head. Instead of con-
ditioning men to battle noises and dangers, some school instructors set out
either to impress the troops with exhibitions of their own toughness or
frighten candidates beyond repair. Still others attempted both in what be-
came little else than a test of nerves. Again, this approach was found to be
defective; shocking erstwhile civilians mildly convinced of the horrors of
war merely served to confirm their worst fears. What was required was the
gradual application of battle effects progressing in severity up to battle
conditions as near reality as possible. By such a process the average soldier
could be accustomed to many of the noises and sights of war and persuaded
that his innermost fears were at least manageable. In beleaguered Britain
this was the equivalent of the Great War practice that placed untried troops
in quiet sectors of the line for experience and gradual exposure to danger.
Battle Drill Die
115
To let men discover for themselves that noise was essentially harmless,
they were subjected to two-pound charges exploded without warning from
20 to nine feet away. Tripod-mounted Brens were also used to fire ball and
tracer in single shots and short bursts five feet above heads. More com-
monly, instructors used rifles and Tommy guns, a favorite of the British,
to fire spontaneous, unrehearsed short bursts from 60 and 15 yards, re-
spectively, to impact two to five yards away from troops. The main prin-
ciple observed was that rounds were never put down on the
"gunward
side" between the firer and the man, and at least six feet overhead clearance
was maintained at up to 60 yards. It was considered too impractical and
dangerous to fire over men's heads at longer ranges. Another progressive
feature of such training involved overrunning men in slit-trenches several
times with tanks. For indirect fire effect, two-inch mortar smoke bombs
were dropped 25 yards behind and forward of men; they then gradually
crawled to within 300 yards of the fall of shot of 25-pounders firing overhead
from 500 to 1,200 yards behind at a range of 1,500 yards.25
There remains a lingering suspicion, nonetheless, that battle inoculation
and live fire training were neither as advanced nor as effective as they could
have been in simulating the actual conditions of the battlefield. One is left
to wonder, too, whether the less desirable aspects in the application of battle
inoculation were ever entirely expunged. According to one veteran officer,
better results may also have been obtained had more attention been paid to
teaching soldiers to identify weapons and their locations through listening
and observation. To recognize shells as either "coming" or
"going" was
tremendously important in his view, just as it was to know whether a Bren
or Spandau, a Sten or Schmeisser, was firing. As he so sensibly put it: "I do
not think that the type of battle inoculation in which you are shot at with
the intention of being missed is of much consequence.
It may be, in fact, that more time could have been devoted to such training
had battle drill not been overly tied to the parade square. At some point
the team play concept of Alexander, who was after all a Guardsman, was
translated into "the modern equivalent of close order drill which 150 years
ago was the way the soldier fought.
227 Starting battle "drill" (which the
Hudbook admitted was an "unfortunate" word) on a miniature nontactical
scale of cource did late troons to guickly grasp their relative positions
and duties within a team; it also enabled such training to be conducted in
garrison where the parade square was naturally used. Theoretically, this
was to be but one stage in a dunamic progression from lecture-demonstra-
tions on "wrong" and "right"
ways to the gradual application of the drill
on increasinoly difficult ground. finishing with live fre Insistence that it
was the "phase... most important of all " which "should not be left...
until every student. could execute every movement perfectly. " however,
may have resulted in undue amabasis beino given to whether soldiers were
strictly at attention (simulating firing) or at ease (not firing). 28 Continual
