116
Long Forgotten Winters
turnover of men also seemed to convince many believers of the necessity
for repeating this particular portion.
Agreement was by no means unanimous, nonetheless, as to the worth
of the parade square stage." Some considered the prescribed nontactical
drills too elaborate and stylized, ° akin to teaching tactics by numbers. The
2nd Division in 1943 also noted a tendency in platoon orders "to accept the
jargon laid down (as a guide) in Battle Drill pamphlets for orders, and apply
it each time orders are given, whether it fits the case or not."31 Still others
judged battle drill itself "never really of great value, mainly because inex-
perienced junior commanders tended to regard it as an end in itself, a panacea
for all ills, regardless of the ground or ... other numerous factors which
necessarily influence minor tactics in battle. "32 Here the reference to neglect
of ground is difficult to dispute, for battle drill literature did assert that
"ground must be subordinated to the plan, not the plan to the ground."
Again, this was how the Germans were perceived to operate, 33 though the
interpretation likely derived from their different, much subtler, concept that
ground was something to be fought over, not for.
As there is a unity to tactics and operations that presumes what happens
at the lower levels affects the top, and vice versa, it is instructive to note
at this juncture how Montgomery, a relatively impartial and superlative
trainer, viewed battle drill and the Canadian practice of it. In the first place,
he unquestionably adhered to the view that "if... sub-unit [company, pla-
toon, section] training is not good you fail in battle, however good your
higher training. 34 During a visit to the 2nd Brigade in late February 1941,
however, Montgomery found that with the company training period
"nearly over... no company hald] done more than about two days really
proper companly training, i.e. complete company exercises, as a com-
pany." While a "good deal of Battle Drill training hafd] been done,
" com-
panies had not been "taught the art of war,"
specifically such aspects as
how to fight the contact battle, the set-piece attack, reorganization,
the
counterattack, and the forcing of obstacles.
35 A similar situation obtained
in the Calgary Highlanders where, because they chose to concentrate heavily
upon battle drill during their company training period,
"No proper
compan]y training hald] been done at all." It did "not seem to be under-
stood," Montgomery counseled, "that Battle Drill [wals really [but) a pro-
cedure ...land a company had] still.. to be taught how to carry out the
various operations of war." In his professional judgement, the companies
of the Calgary Highlanders had simply "not been trained to operate as
companies in operations of war. ?36
To Montgomery, battle drill represented a "common line approach to
the sub-unit battle problem" that speeded up deployment and ensured full
cooperation despite casualties. He insisted, however, that it should be "ser-
vant and NOT... master." He further contended that battle drill "must
not be regarded as peculiar to the infantry" (which likely meant it was) "or
Battle Drill Die .
117
as applicable only to the sub-unit." At formation level the composition and
disposition of reconnaissance parties and the like fell into the category of
battle drill. As Montgomery elaborated, "Co-operation between the dif-
ferent arms [wals ensured very largely by good battle drill" and a "well
trained armoured division [wals one where this battle drill, in which the
correct positioning of... [commanders] is the most important factor, has
reached a high standard. Every unit of every arm," Montgomery pro-
claimed, should "develop a battle drill suitable to its own special needs.
In spring of 1942 he nonetheless felt obliged to advise Crerar, acting com-
mander of the Canadian Corps, that "battle drill [was not the whole art of
making war."38
It appears,
then, that battle drill often meant different things to different
people. Montgomery clearly regarded it as pertaining to a higher level than
most use... be made of the South Downs, and other similar training areas,
to carry out Brigade exercises with live ammunition... to practice and
demonstrate the co-operation of all arms in battle together with the co-
operation of air forces. "39 The 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade with an army
tank battalion and 3rd Canadian Division artillery in support conducted
such a "battle shooting" exercise in Training Area No. 4 on the South
Downs between 1-3 July. Apparently, the 3rd Division was the first Ca-
nadian division to do so. Exercise "Crump," as it was termed, called for
an infantry-tank attack on a two-battalion front supported by timed and
"on call" artillery high-explosive concentrations; the third battalion sup-
ported by a squadron of tanks had the task of passing through to maintain
momentum. Impressive as it sounded, however, this live fire exercise was
highly staged, involving a morning "dry" rehearsal by infantry battalions
and a two-hour period of artillery registration of targets thereafter. Though
the exercise aimed to practice infantrymen in fire and movement using live
ammunition under covering fire of sunporting arms. the prescribed infantry
rate of advance of "100 yds in four minutes"* seems not to have offered
much scope for battle drill.
The case of "Crump" reinforces the suspicion that artillery planning at
the formation level usually ran counter to the implementation of battle drill.
Staff college teaching, of course, accorded greater emphasis to the impor-
tance of artillery fire. A brigade held up by enemy action, it suggested,
could justifiably wait up to three hours if it meant doubling the size of
artillery support available. Lack of definite information about an enemy's
dispositions additionally made "the provision of a barrage obligatory.
Yer followine closely behind a barrage left little opportunity for battle drill
or initiative on the part of lower level commanders. Whether Canadian
senior commanders really comprehended the implications of this funda
mental but terribly important dichotomy is questionable. Crerar appears
simal te haun haan overwhelmed by the "tactical and psychological ad
