205
Throes Beyond the Beach
204
Half-Forgotten Summer
contested local actions. Here the Canadian Army incurred its heaviest cas-
ualty days of the war. Indeed, it has been demonstrated that in northwest
Europe 1944-45, the Canadian combat infantryman stood a greater chance
of being killed or injured than his father had in an equivalent period on the
Western Front in the Great War. The restricted battlefield of Normandy,
which reflected a German troop-to-space density two and a half times that
of the Russian front, established this pattern. As Carlo D'Este put it, "De-
spite the vast array of sophisticated and deadly weapons of war available
to both sides, success os failure in Normandy ultimately became the ability
of the foot soldier to take or hold ground. Lightning war had come to be
conducted at a more earthly pace.
In the Canadian sector north and south of Caen, a gently rolling plain of
meadowland and wheatfields, termed corn in British accounts, characterized
the Norman countryside. Running roughly along the line Bayeux-Caen-
Enlaise, it abounded in small woods orchards. and innumerable hamlets of
solidly constructed stone houses and farm buildings. The occasional large
forest marked its southern reaches, while the heights to the east of the River
Dives presented another barrier. To the west of Falaise lay the true bocage,
a patchwork of small fields bounded by ditches and earthen embankments
crowned with virtually impenetrable thickets shose roots had been undis-
turbed for years. Behind these embankments, which were as high as a man,
troops could move concealed from fire and view, even from the air. Inter-
connected by numerous narrow roads and tiny hamlets, the bocage was
anything but ideal for armor; it not only restricted main gun range, but in
climbing banks and crossing roads, tanks invariably heaved up, exposing
their soft undersides to the deadly short-range infantry Panzerfaust. On the
Caen plain, on the other hand, armored attackers faced longer range tank
killers like the 88-and 75-mm Pak 40 deploved within a defensive orid based
on woods and hamlets, backed up by a system of violent panzer
counterattack. 4
The 3rd Canadian Division and the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade,
trained principally as assault forces, were among the first to encounter such
defenses. They also learned the hard lesson that the best tank country was
implicitly that with the fewest antitank weabons. But it was in the bocage
on the early morning of 13 June, after the firm establishment of the bridge-
head, that the Second British Army lost a golden opportunity to envelop
Caen. As a result of Dempsey's personal intervention within Bucknall's 30
Corps, the 7th Armoured Division managed in a bold stroke to penetrate
di far as Villers Bocage. There seemed to be little appreciation within the
division, however, that tanks could not go it alone in this type of terrain,
which called for even more intimate tank-infantry conneration than the
desert. The reluctance of commanders in the absence of orders to disperse
their squadrons or regiments off roads further increased the vulnerability
of the division. Unfortunately, they also encountered the Tiger tank.
Map 9.1
The Bocage
ALLIED FRONT, 2 JULY 1944
BOCAGE
20 mlles
10 20 kllometers
LE HAVRE
FIRST
SECOND
BR
CAEN
O Fougeres
In a series of audacious attacks with four of these behemoths, plus several
other tanks and infantry, Obersturmfuehrer Michael Wittmann, commanding
No. 2 Company, 101st Heavy Tank Battalion, Ist SS Panzer Corps exacted
a heavy price for such faulty local tactics. The quick action of this tank ace,
credited with 119 kills on the Eastern Front, knocked out nearly 30 tanks
and several other vehicles, completely shattering the leading columns of the
22nd Armoured Brigade and throwing the 7th Armoured Division onto
the defensive. The intervening arrival of the 2nd Panzer Division made it
clear that the British lacked sufficient infantry to enable them to hold out.
Having chosen not to reinforce the success of the 7th Armoured initially,
and choosing further not to consult Dempsey, Bucknall now made the
