Preface
XVi
to the success of our Normandy field studies, namely Brigadier-General
"Rad" Radley-Walters, Oberst Helmut Ritgen, Colonel Tom Bond, Lieu-
tenant-Colonels Lockie Fulton and Bob Lucas, Wing Commander "Papa"
Ambrose, Major William Whiteside, and former SS-Sturmbannfuehrer Hans
Siegel. Lieutenant-Colonel Roman Jarymowycz deserves special mention
for unselfishly sharing the results of his veteran interviews and archival
research, which related most particularly to the agony of Verrières Ridge.
For secretarial and graphics support I am much obliged to Captain John
McComber and his staff, especially Sergeant Norm Ramsay, Corporal
Sherry Goundry, Eileen Wood, Mary Ferguson, Linda Gauthier, Louise
Owen, and Chris Heffernan. I owe additional thanks to Lieutenant-Colonels
John A. Macdonald and John A. Selkirk, Major Mitch Kryzanowski, and
Captains Alan Balfour and Hugh Egener for reading chapters and suggesting
fresh ideas and material. To my other colleagues on the Directing Staff who
lent continuous moral support throughout this long ordeal, I also say thanks
and Tam marte quam Minerva. I furthermore wish to express my gratitude
to Mr. Serge Campion, David Willis, Theresa O'Neill, and Glenyss Turner
of the Fort Frontenac Library for their excellent service. Keith Crouch and
Benoit Cameron of the RMC Massey Library, as always, assisted above
and beyond the call of duty. Between them, these two libraries present the
greatest concentration of military books in the Dominion.
Among others who offered valuable assistance were Dr. Bill McAndrew,
who suggested the topic, Ben Greenhous, Owen Cooke, and Carl Christie
whos Directorate of History. Major Bob Caldwell, Major Al Fowler, and
Sharon Babaian gave especially good military and historiographical advice.
Professor Dominick Graham, who has been commissioned to write the
biography of Lieutenant-General Simonds, likewise shared his considerable
experience and knowledge with me. I am additionally most appreciative of
information proffered by Dr. Robert Fraser, Dr. Jane Errington, Dr. Brian
McKercher, and Captain Al English. The late Colonel Stacey, who would
probably not have agreed with many of my conclusions, and Professor
Martin Blumenson, who does, also read parts of my work and offered
encouragement. Colonel Hans von Luck, formerly of the 21st Panzer Di-
vision, and Colonel Hubert Meyer, formerly of the 12th SS Panzer Division,
both provided early information for which I remain thankful.
Across the Channel, the staff of the Public Record Office, Kew, and Miss
Patricia Methven, archivist of the Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives
at King's College, were most helpful with my researches in London. Mr.
Roderick Suddaby, the Keeper of the Department of Documents, and his
able assistants at the Imperial War Museum all went out of their way to
make my visits there especially pleasant and productive. I, of course, remain
grateful to the Montgomery Collections Committee of the Trustees of The
Imperial War Museum and the Trustees of King's College. University of
London, for allowing me access to their respective collections. Viscount
Preface
xvii
Montgomery of Alamein, CBE, kindly gave permission to reproduce ex-
tracts from his father's personal letters. Nearer to home, I received abso-
lutely outstanding service from the staff of the Queen's University Archives
and the National Archives of Canada, both institutions of which Canadians
On a less nationalistic note, however, I would be most remiss if I did
not mention my especial indebtedness to Messrs. Ron Chambers and Dan
Eades of Praeger Publishers, who ever since taking a chance on my first
work have stuck by me like the truly good friends they are to bring this
book to fruition.
Finally, despite all the disruption they have undergone
and the many outings they have forfeited, my family to the last lent unstinted
support. My wife, Valerie, helped on the computer, my mother cut the
lawn, and my daughters, Shannon and Laura, provided light entertainment.
My Irish setter, Cromwell, remained pensive throughout. Princess, the
rabbit, stayed out of my way.
NOTE
1. Foreword by Peter Paret in Harold R. Winton, To Change an Army: General
Sir John Burnett-Stuart and British Armoured Doctrine, 1927-1938 (Lawrence, Kans.:
University Press of Kansas, 1988), p. vii.
