Long Forgotten Winters
14
nascent efforts to preserve the sway of the British Empire actually made
good national sense, was concomitantly caught up in the pull of the quickly
shifting foundations of imperial power within the Anglo-American world.
So would be, in time, more distant Australia and New Zealand. Had Britain
but managed to retain even a portion of the relative power it once enjoyed,
it is doubtful that Canada would have gravitated quite so quickly into the
American orbit. Indeed, the path eventually taken by Canada was less a
conscious national choice than the inevitable consequence of the irresistible
attraction that greater powers have always exerted upon lesser ones. As it
was, Canada fought the Second World War as part of an empire in decline,
and it is against this background that her participation must be viewed.
The shape of Canadian land forces between the wars, while bearing the
double stamp of neglect and Depression,
also manifested both the legacy
of the first Canadian Expeditionary Force (CEF) and the impress of con-
tinued imperial association. If four years of fighting had not produced a
distinctive Canadian way in warfare, they had at least fostered a truly profes-
sional military approach, albeit one characterized by a pronounced reliance
on artillery and a lesser emphasis on maneuver. The heightened sense of
professionalism that became the hallmark of the CEF was nonetheless sub-
stantially eroded by postbellum reorganization that saw the reemergence of
the traditional Canadian Militia in its various regimental guises and ugly
hues of political patronage. Widespread war weariness and Britain's growing
imperial dilemma further complicated Canadian defense posture at this time.
Canadian land forces during the interwar period, in fact, somewhat reflected
the plight of the British Army, especially in respect to expeditionary force
roles, armored warfare theory, regimental structure, interservice rivalry,
and even defense priorities.
Canada emerged from the Great War well on the road toward becoming
a fully autonomous and industrialized state. The feats of the Canadian Corps
in Flanders had gained her Prime Minister a voice in the Imperial War
Cabinet, earned her diplomats enhanced status on the British Empire Del-
egation at Versailles, and firmly laid the cornerstone of nationhood itself.
It is unlikely that any Canadian leader has since enjoyed greater relative
prestige and access to the inner sanctums of world power politics than Prime
Minister Sir Robert Borden who, in the absence of David Lloyd George,
"regularly acted as chairman of the meetings of the British Empire Dele-
gation."* For a Dominion of not yet eight million souls, the cost had been
enormous: more than 60,000 dead, one-third again as many as perished in
all her armed forces in the Second World War.
At the beginning of the Great War, the Canadian Non-Permanent Active
Militia (NPAM) or reserve force fielded 59,000 all ranks, while the Per-
manent Active Militia (PAM) or regular force numbered around 3,000. In
1939, by way of comparison, the reserves numbered about 51,000 and the
regulars somewhat more than 4.000. On balance, it is difficult to refute
The Canadian Corps and the British Mold
15
Stacey's claim that the "creation of the Canadian Corps was the greatest
thing Canada had ever done." Like most great commitments, however,
fielding an armed force of over 600,000 men called forth substantial national
effort that lamentably resulted in the infamous conscription crisis of 1917,
which served to foster similar cleavages in the Second World War. On a
more positive note, Canada had managed to embrace, by accident if not
design, the enviable strategic luxury of waging her wars on the shores of
the enemy.
Ironically, for place of birth has never been a prime determinant of Ca-
nadian nationality, some historians have implied that the mainly British
immigrant composition of the original Canadian Corps demonstrates that
the
"war to end all wars" was not Canada's war. The coincident but dis-
turbing thought that superior battlefield performance could also be a func-
tion of this factor has fortunately not been so avidly suggested. It is
nonetheless fact that most of the soldiers in the first overseas draft of the
CEF were British-born immigrants; of 36,000 troops, less than 30 percent
were born in Canada. By war's end, after heroic recruiting measures and
the imposition of conscription, the percentage of Canadian-born in the entire
CEF had risen to but 51 percent. Magnificently, the province of Manitoba
with a sizable non-British foreign-born population provided the highest
proportional contribution, some 40 to 61 percent of its eligible manpower.
Although the officer corps was never less than 70 percent Canadian-born,
for much of the war most of the key general staff appointments within
Canadian field formations were filled by British officers. At one time a
third of all staff officers were British. In its most celebrated victory, the
Canadian Corps was also commanded by a British general, Sir Julian Byng,
whose leadership was of such sterling quality that Canadian troops long
after the war insisted on calling themselves the "Byng Boys." While less
popular Canadian Lieutenant-General Arthur Currie replaced Byng in June
1917, the former insisted upon retaining British officers in the three senior
staff appointments at his corps headquarters; indeed, he singled out the most
senior, his Brigadier-General, General Staff (BGGS) N. W. Webber, for
particular personal praise. At the divisional level, the first Canadian senior
operations staff officer or General Staff Officer Grade 1 (GSO 1) was not
appointed until November 1917, and, by the Armistice, one of Canada's
four fighting divisions still had a British GSO 1.'
It is true, of course, that Canadian military tradition, rooted in loyalist
mythology dating from the War of 1812, called for part-time soldiering in
a volunteer militia that harbored a resentment, even scorn,
of regulars.
Recognition of the latter's incompetence in the
Boer War allegedly
prompted the Minister of Militia and Defence, Sam Hughes, to reject general
staff mobilization plans in 1914 and to resort to patronage in appointing
officers to senior command in the CEF. This precipitous action by a fanatical
militiaman' had the particularly important, if unintended, effect of ensuring
