216
Half-Forgotten Summer
through minefields, flame-throwing Crocodiles, and Assault Vehicles,
Royal Engineers (AVRE) designed to hurl petards against strong points and
provide armored cover for soldiers engaged on demolition tasks). Two
squadrons of tank-busting Typhoon fighter-bombers were also on call to
the brigade.
As elaborated in a 17-page operation order, the first phase of "Windsor"
called for the concomitant capture of the village of Carpiquet and the hangars
north and south of the airfield. This was to be accomplished by the North
Shore Regiment on the left and the Chaudières on the right, each supported
by a squadron of tanks reinforced by "specials," attacking the village from
south of Villeneuve, while the Winnipegs simultaneously struck out for the
south hangars from Marcelet. The Winnipeg attack was to be supported
by the third tank squadron. A diversionary sally north to Vieux Cairon
was also to be mounted from Villeneuve 15 minutes later by a squadron of
the Sherbrooke Fusiliers. In phase two the Queen's Own Rifles were to
pass through the secured village and seize the control tower and buildings
at the east end of the airfield. In the event, the attack commenced at 0500
hours behind a creeping barrage fired by six field and two medium
regiments. 23
We now know that the 12th SS divined 8th Brigade intentions from
monitoring "tank voice radio traffic" and proceeded to heavily mortar and
shell Canadian attack positions from their time of occupation on 3 July.
Minutes after the opening of the covering barrage on 4 July, the Germans
dropped a counterbarrage just behind it, which not only caused substantial
casualties but gave the impression that Canadian shells were falling short.
The tanks and "specials" rolled on relentlessly toward Carpiquet village
nonetheless, the A VRE and flamethrowers reducing strong points and Ger-
man forward outposts. Armored mobility and effectiveness were reduced
by rubble in the built-up area, however, and a fierce house-to-house infantry
struggle ensued. The intense artillery support program had obviously not
destroyed the essential fabric of a well-camouflaged and dug in defense
orchestrated by barely 50 men from 25 Panzergrenadier Regiment.
Neither did the barrage effectively cover the movement of the Winnipegs,
whose axis from Marcelet took them somewhat south of its protective fire.
The battalion, mortared incessantly, also had to go it alone as the third tank
squadron, earmarked for phase two, stayed back in reserve and only sup-
ported by fire. Although faced by the remnants of the Ist Battalion, 26
Panzergrenadier Regiment, which had been practically wiped out in "Ep-
the Winnipegs appear to have drawn the stiffer opposition; there
were an estimated 17 tanks and SP guns dug in to the east of the airfield.
Yet, in response to a personal appeal bu the COn, the battalion was allocated
onlya reinforced troon of tanks for intimate subport. When the turn leading
Winnipeg companies did finally reach the hangars at 0900 hours, the inten-
sity of enemy fire was so great that it was impossible to hold on. Ordered
Throes Beyond the Beach
217
to withdraw around 1300 hours, they were compelled by the nature of the
open ground to retire half-way to their start line. 24
Phase two was in the meantime set in train and the Queen's Own Rifles
committed to battle. Unfortunately, Carpiquet had not been entirely cleared
of enemy, and it took the battalion some time to reach the far end of the
village.
With the withdrawal of the Winnipegs from the south hangars,
however, any Queen's Own Rifles thrust toward the control buildings
risked exposing them to devastating flanking fire from that quarter. They
were accordingly ordered to wait, while the Winnipegs, their first attack
shattered, were sent in again. At 1600 hours the second attempt got un-
derway with an armored squadron in support attempting a sweeping ma-
neuver through low ground around the enemy left flank.
Once again the
infantry reached the hangars, but the tanks, having lost contact, were stalled
by antitank fire and threatened by panzer counterattack. At 2100 hours
brigade ordered the battalion to return to its start line. During the next two
days the 8th Brigade fought off three German counterattacks to hold what
was gained. The cost had been high: 377 casualties, of whom 117 were
dead. Tank casualties in comparison were relatively light, except for the
squadron supporting the Winnipegs which lost 6 out of 15.35
Obviously, the decision to launch the Winnipegs over two kilometers of
open ground without any intimate direct fire support was highly question-
able. The decision to hurl them in again with the minimum tank support
they should have had in the first place could also be categorized as too little,
too late. Whether or not disproportionate confidence in the capacity of
massive artillery bombardment to overcome enemy resistance contributed
to neglect of sensible maneuver arrangements, it is hard to fault the corps
commander, Crocker, for attributing the "limited success of ... [the Car-
piquet operation.... to a lack of control and leadership from the top." More
divisional guidance should have been given and additional resources com-
mitted when "things started to go not quite right." The army commander
agreed that "the operation was not well handled" and considered that it
proved.
, quite conclusively that.. Keller was not fitted to command
a Division." "At a time when the situation demanded a clear-cut decision
and firm control," Dempsey charged, the divisional commander "failed to
take a grip. "20 In a letter to Brooke, Montgomery wrote: "Keller has not
proved himself to be quite fit to com|man]d a Division]; he is unable to
get the best out of his soldiers--who are grand chaps 227
The dav after the attack on Carpiquet, the order for Operation "Charn-
wood," the capture of Caen, was issued by 1 Bnitish Corps to its partici-
pating three infontry divisions and subporting armored brieades. Planned
for & July. the operation called for a concentric advance in five phases: first,
an assault by the 3rd and 59th British Divisions from the north in a sustained
drive on Caen; second, an attack by the 3rd Canadian Division from the
northwest to secure the ques as for south ae Authie: third. a general bush
