250
Half-Forgotten Summer
General Charles Foulkes." For reasons possibly dating back to "Atlantic"
or even before, Simonds had reached the conclusion that his old staff college
classmate "did not have the right qualities to command...
2nd Division.
On "at least three occasions," recalled Major-General Kitching, "Simonds
confided in me that he was going to get rid of .. Foulkes. "26 But Simonds
never would get rid of Foulkes.
Protected by Crerar, he went on in No-
vember to command 1 Canadian Corps in Italy, succeeding the dismissed
Lieutenant-General E. L. M. Burns whom Keller was once slated to replace.
Indeed, through the continued patronage of Crerar, Foulkes was eventually
chosen to head the Canadian Army before Simonds."
In later years Foulkes disputed Simonds's portrayal of "Spring" as a
"holding action," maintaining that it was represented to him solely "as a
break-through operation with prospects of success." He also expressed re-
sentment at the proclivity of Simonds
"to blame the inefficiency of our
troops for our misfortunes. "28 But here, to refer back to the introduction,
one can argue that Foulkes was even more prone to explain the failure of
Canadian troops in terms of their relative inexperience (which also left him
off the hook). Indeed, he was to be accused of doing exactly this after the
bloody repulse of the Ist Division at the Lamone River in Italy on 4 De-
cember 1944. Yet, the failure of this formation to carry out its assigned task
during Operation "Chuckle," as this "sacrificial holocaust" mounted by 1
Corps was "grotesquely" code-named, appears to have been less the fault
of the fighting troops than an indirect result of Foulkes's unrealistic higher
level planning. One brigadier, a battalion CO, and a second-in-command
being practiced as a CO were nonetheless relieved. "
An equivalent number of heads similarly rolled as a consequence of
"Spring,
" though in the long-suffering 3rd rather than the 2nd Division.
It is doubly difficult, of course, to fathom why but one battalion should
have spearheaded Keller's 3rd Division attack. Notwithstanding Simonds's
expressed preference for operating "formations and units in depth on narrow
frontages" to enhance "staying power,"
one of the major lessons learned
by the 3rd Division after a month of offensive action was to launch attacks
on a broad front. By attacking in this fashion the enemy was forced to
disperse or split his defensive fire effort, which also precluded him from
applying its weight in depth. If, on the other hand, a division "kickled] off
with one or two battalio]ns, the enemy Div Arty and Mortars, and, if
necessary, t/an]k reserves] clould] be concentrated quickly against the at-
tack." Nearby enemy company localities not under attack were also free to
support defenders with enfilade fire. 30
This is what appears to have happened in the attack upon Tilly-la-Cam-
pagne, which action subsequently became tactically contentious. When the
North Novas continued to experience severe difficulty in attempting to
secure their objective, the SDG were placed at notice to move to their
assistance from 1125 hours. Since the latter unit had the day before been
251
Cold Eye on Death
advised that because it had "had no rest" it would not be taking part in
'Spring," this warning came as "a mental blow ... felt by all ranks.
they were ordered to stand down at 1600 hours, seems mainly to have come
about as a result of a heated confrontation in which Cunningham, Petch,
and Lieutenant-Colonel G. H. Christiansen of the SDGs persuaded Keller
of the futility of continuing the attack." The following evening Keller
discussed the matter with Simonds, who subsequently convened a board
of inquiry into the failure of the North Novas to take Tilly.
This board, completed on 29 July, saw Cunningham and Petch both
removed from command, the former to Kingston as commandant of the
staff course.* Christiansen, in a 3 August letter to Keller professed a loss
of confidence "in... leadership and command that kept every unit... in
action continuously in spite of severe casualties, and culminated in the
launching of several worn-out and disorganized men... into the attack on
Tilly La Campagne on 25 Jul 44."' Noting that he "was warned to be ready
to go to their assistance" when "it was apparent that they could be written
of,' he added that "under the above circumstances, or similar ones, I would
have, and will, refuse to put the S.D. & G. Highrs in." On receipt of this
eter Keller raised an adverse report on Christiansen recommending "no
futher employment and repatriation to Canada. Simonds,
Christiansen's "impression that battles can be fought on a 'limited liability'
basis," agreed that he was unfitted to lead Canadian Troops with deter-
mination." Paradoxically, on 23 December Major-General H. W. Foster,
GOC Ist Division and former commander of 7th Brigade during "Spring,
specifically requested Christiansen to command the West Nova Scotia Reg-
ment. He was supported in this request by Foulkes who, perhaps in a
backhanded criticism of either Simonds or Keller, claimed to be "fully aware
of thel circumstances concerning Christiansen['sl removal »›33
It would appear, however, that Simonds was even more aware of the
command situation and critical state of morale that existed within the 3rd
Division. In a 27 July letter to Dempsey reporting on Keller's fitness to
command he pointed out that since D-Day the division had "never been
out of contact" and had incurred some 5. 500 casualties, most of them within
tile companies. This "wastage"
plus "the fact that the division had been
unable to get out of the line and re-organize properly hald] resulted in a
deterioration of its fighting efficiency quite out of proportion to ... actual
losses." As casualties among junior leaders had been heavy. Simonds con-
tinued. within many sections and slatoons "the men hardly kalelw one
another or junior leaders their men and men their leaders " In short
units lackledl the cohesion in battle characteristic of a trained battle team. »
Simonds found as a consequence that "unit commanders and brigadiers
(welre apprehensive about oberations not throuch fear of becoming cass
ualties themselves or of having casualties. but because they felltl their units
(we|re unfitted in their present state of training to put up a good show."
