74
Long Forgotten Winters
stances occupations reported on questionnaires were those "regarded by the
individual as his regular job."
Classified in terms of the "Dictionary of Occupational Titles" and taking
into account some probable inflation due to individual desire for prestige,
the categories below were identified in the percentages indicated:
Professional and managerial
Clerical
Sales Persons
Agricultural
Skilled Industrial
Semi-skilled Industrial
Unskilled Industrial
Other (including service, fishing, and
forestry)
Student
Insufficient/No information
7.4-8.6%
7.4-8.8
4.0-4.9
14.1
19.9-20.2
14.9-16.9
7.2-8.7
4.7
5.0-7.3
9.5-9.736
Pre-enlistment residence as reported on questionnaires provided an ad-
ditional persepctive on the general composition of the Canadian Army:
Farm residents
Rural but not farm
Villages under 5,000
Cities over 5,000
15.2%
6.1
21.8
53.937
Given the importance of agriculture to the war effort, of course, only one-
sixth of farmers as compared to one-fifth of skilled industrial workers were
deemed eligible for service? These statistics suggest that the Canadian
Army was less ruggedly rural in character than has sometimes been assumed.
As the image of the Australians in the Great War as "leathery men from
the Outback" has been shown to be false, so the military perception of
Canadians in the Second World War as hardy frontiersmen must be re-
iected 39 "Tike their fathers before them they shiverad in the damb cold of
the English climate, and, although provisioned with a more generous al-
location of heating coal than British troops, chopped up park and bus stop
benches to gain extra warmth.*40
The formation structure of the Canadian Army, while not "slavishly
following] the model of any other country, however efficient," was
Shaping an Expeditionary Force
75
based on an existing regimental system of units.* Under Defence Scheme
No. 3 the composition of expeditionary force divisions had been prede-
termined so as to give proportional representation to the major territorial
regions of Canada.
Thus,
within the 1st Canadian Infantry Division,
units from Ontario made up the 1st Brigade, units from the West the
2nd, and units from Quebec and the Maritimes the 3rd. Similarly, in the
2nd Division, Ontario units made up the 4th Brigade, Quebec units the
5th, and Western units the 6th. The French-speaking complexion of the
5th Brigade was compromised, however, when the Royal 22nd Regiment
was transferred with other regular force battalions originally earmarked
for the 2nd Division to the overseas bound 1st Division. The dispatch of
Les Fusiliers Mont-Royal to Iceland and their replacement by the Calgary
Highlanders in the summer of 1940 was followed by a recommendation
from the francophone commander of the 5th Brigade that, due to a criti-
cal shortage of qualified staff officers and commanders, it cease to be a
French-speaking formation.
42 Viewing the matter from another perspec-
tive, McNaughton considered it "unwise to re-group [French-speaking
units] .. owing to the political difficulties that might arise if there were a
heavy incidence of casualties in the French-Canadian Battalio]ns due to
their grouping in one formation. "43
While the Canadian Army was if anything more urban than rural in its
regional roots, it was also a virtually untrained citizen force of limited
vitaly thing me
corporate military proficiency. Raw recruits who required individual train-
ing made up more than half the 1st Canadian Infantry Division upon its
arrival in the United Kingdom. As it transpired, the 1st Division had more
than three years in which to overcome this deficiency before being com-
mitted to Sicily in June 1943. The less fortunate 2nd Canadian Infantry
Division passed little more than 22 months in Britain before its decimation
on the beaches of Dieppe in August 1942; thereafter it enjoyed an equivalent
period in which to recover for battle in Normandy. The Ist Canadian Army
Tank Brigade and the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division both had more than
two and a half years in which to prepare. The 5th Canadian Armoured
Division trained for roughly 18 months in England before departure for
the Italian theatre, while the 4th Canadian Armoured Division passed a
similar period in Britain prior to taking part in the Normandy campaign.
The 2nd Canadian Army Tank Brigade arrived overseas but ten months
before its commitment to battle.*
This expansion of the Canadian field force was accompanied by the
growth of a relatively large and elaborate supporting artillery infrastructure.
By autumn 1942, the British had begun to form army-level artillery brigades
or groups that, on rejection of the potentially risible appellation Royal
Artillery Group for its acronvm RAG, were called Army Groups Royal
Artillery (AGRAs). Headquarters Medium Artillery. 1 Canadian Corps
subsequently emerged in October as Headquarters Ist Canadian Army
