270
Half-Forgotten Summer
1,500), 45 Mark IV panzers, and 35 Panthers (actually 37 and 9). The 101st
Heavy Tank Battalion, Ist SS Panzer Corps, with roughly 25 Tigers was
also assumed to be in the area, which it indeed was, attached to the 12th
SS. Simonds was also concerned that the 1st SS had retired to the area of
Bretteville-sur-Laize-St. Sylvain to strengthen the second position fit was
instead headed to participate with the 2nd and 116th Panzer and 2nd SS
(Das Reich) Panzer divisions in the abortive Mortain offensive against
Avranches ordered by Hitler on the night of 2 August]. Reckoning that the
"second 'break-through' might meet stronger resistance than originally an-
ticipated," Simonds consequently decided to combine the second and third
phases by taking "advantage of the ... air effort and maintain the momen-
tum by launching 4 Cdn Armd and 1 Polish Armd Divs... simultaneously
and parallel... directly through to their final objectives in Phase II." As
counterattacks by the 89th and 272nd Divisions would "at best be half-
hearted efforts," the two infantry divisions attacking in the first phase were
expected to "be handled more boldly than... Originally planned. '21
The effect of this decision was so important that it deserves closer ex-
amination. With no change in the first phase, the 2nd Canadian Infantry
Division remained committed on the right of the Caen-Falaise road, with
the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade under command, to capture Caillouet
and Gaumesnil. It was also charged with mopping up St. André, May-sur-
Orne,
Fontenay-le-Marmion,
and Rocquancourt. On the left, the 51st
(Highland) Division with the 33rd British Armoured Brigade under com-
mand was charged with capturing Lourguichon Wood, St. Aignan de
Cramesnil, Cramesnil, Garcelles-Secqueville, and Sequeville-la-Campagne;
in phase two it was to exploit two kilometers to the south. The second
phase portion calling for the 3rd Division to follow the 4th Armoured on
its advance to capture Hautmesnil and the high ground northwest of Brette-
ville-le-Rabet was, however, cancelled. The task of the former in this case
would have been to secure both flanks by forming firm bases in Breteville-
sur-Laize and the woods north of Cavicourt east of the main road, from
where it was to be prepared to exploit to St. Sylvain. Upon being relieved
in phase three by the 2nd Division in Bretteville-sur-Laize and the 51st
Division in St. Sylvain, the 3rd Division would have repositioned its bri-
gades in the areas of Hautmesnil, Bretteville-le-Rabet, and Point 140 east
of Quesnay Wood. The Ist Polish and 4th Armoured Divisions would have
then advanced, left and right of the Caen-Falaise road, southward to their
most distant objectives, Points 159 and 206, respectively.
As amended, however, the plan called for the 2nd and 51st Divisions to
push on more boldly and themselves secure the right and left flanks in the
second phase. The 1 Polish Armoured and 4th Canadian Armoured were
during the same phase to dash to their final objectives. The 3rd Division
following the move forward of 1 Polish Armoured was to remain in reserve
north of Caen, prepared to move on Simonds's order to take over the areas
The Amiens Alchemy
271
of Hautmesnil, Bretteville-le-Rabet, and Point 140.2 In other words, two
armored divisions, of but one armored and one infantry brigade each, were
now expected to breach by daylight a defensive position in depth that was
ostensibly more heavily defended than the foremost zone.
Again, heavy
bombing of the "Goodwood" variety was considered to be the technological
key to success. Only this time, no matter how quickly the more powerful
infantry divisions, each of one armored and three infantry brigades, broke
through the first position, the armored divisions would have to await the
air strike. Unless, that is, it could be cancelled in timely fashion.
The GOCs of the 4th Canadian and 1st Polish Armoured Divisions ex-
pressed serious reservations about being forced to attack on
what they
considered excessively narrow fronts. In a meeting with Simonds on the
morning of 7 August, both Kitching and Major-General Stefan Maczek
pointed out that this would detrimentally limit their ability to maneuver.
The divisional frontage allotted Kitching was only 1,000 yards and at one
point, between Gaumesnil and a quarry to the west, it narrowed to but 800
yards; that allocated to the Ist Polish Armoured Division was roughly the
same, though heavily wooded areas lay to its front and flanks.
23 It is true,
of course, that neither Kitching nor Maczek were experienced armored
commanders, which may well be the reason Simonds refused to accept their
remonstrations. At the same time, Army Training Instruction No.
2 did state
that the maximum frontage for a squadron of tanks attacking in two waves
would "seldom exceed 300 yards." A deliberate attack by a "division...
with two infantry…. and two tank battalions up," according to this doc-
trinal yardstick, would therefore "normally operate on a frontage not ex-
ceeding 1,200 yards. "24
Yet, as we have seen, Simonds could hardly have claimed to have been
an experienced armored division commander either.
His preference for
fighting on narrow frontages,
so clearly set forth in his instruction on
operational policy, appears on the surface to have furthermore typified the
proclivity of an artillerist. Like Crerar,
Simonds was a member of the
powerful gunner faction within the Canadian Army. In later life he would
argue that "the artillery arm provide [d] the best schooling for high com-
mand of any of the arms.
" Being
"technical enough to demand serious
intellectual effort in the spheres of mathematics, mechanics and electronics,"
it also "as a principal supporting arm... required] a thorough knowledge
of the tactics of infantry, armour and other troops... dependent on a sound
'fire plan.' " Whereas other arms veered toward a "more marked special-
ization," declared Simonds, the artillery developed a "balance between tech-
nical and tactical aspects of the military profession. "25 Despite his evident
affection for his corps, however, it would be wrong to conclude that Si-
monds did not realize all arms working in concert produced an effect far
greater than the sum of their parts.
In Italy Simonds had made clear his tactical approach during a 5th Ca-
