188
Half-Forgotten Summer
which "higher... responsibilities of... an independent C[ana]d(ia]n
Com[man]d... he might conduct very disastrously indeed." In a letter
to the COS, CMHQ, Crerar expressed his concern about Simonds's "ego-
centric state of mind," explaining that he had "under most confidential
arrangements"
consulted his medical authorities "to obtain... their tech-
nical advice on the fitness of Simonds continuing in command, or of as-
suming still higher responsibilities,
in view of his mental condition."
According to Crerar, the "medicals" on perusing the correspondence related
to the caravan incident and the removal by Simonds of Morton, determined
that "in spite of marked egocentricity, Simonds... could be relied upon to
function effectively as a Senior Commander though preferably not as an
independent C[ana]d[ia]n force Com[mande]r." His suspicions thus con-
firmed, Crerar committed the information to bureaucratic file as "back-
ground" for "some possible future time when the employment of... [thel
brilliant, and comparatively young, [Simonds came] up for consideration.
He nonetheless confirmed Simonds's selection as "the only present "bet'"
for corps command. 22
Around the same time Crerar was reaching this conclusion about Si-
monds, Montgomery was coming to another about Crerar. From a Com-
monwealth military perspective it contrasted starkly with the assessment
of the New Zealander,
Lieutenant-General Sir Bernard Freyberg,
whom
Montgomery considered the best fighting division commander he had met.
On 23 December 1943,
the very day he learned of his appointment to
command the 21st Army Group and Allied invasion ground forces, Mont-
gomery wrote to Brooke: "The more I think of Harry Crerar the more I
am convinced that he is quite unfit to command an army in the field at
present.... He has already (from Sicily) started to have rows with Canadian
generals under me; he wants a lot of teaching.
123 Crerar's earlier refusal
during the administrative buildup of 1 Canadian Corps to take temporary
command of the 1st Division to gain operational experience, as Montgo-
mery strongly urged him to do, apparently contributed to this assessment.
It is also most probable that the shrewd victor of Alamein heard about
the troop dissatisfaction generated by the excessive paperwork emanating
from 1 Corps headquarters and Crerar's insistence on Canadian soldiers
following dress regulations to the letter. Crerar clearly disapproved of the
Eighth Army's relaxed approach to dress and forbade the practice of drivers
painting pictures and names of girlfriends on vehicles.
When one of his
division commanders protested, he in bloody-minded fashion amended his
orders to permit the painting of a name one inch high on the dashboard
where only the driver could see it Montoomery. on the other hand, was
anthing but strict in such matters and claimed he only once issued an order
on Eighth Army dress. Ironically, this was prompted by the occasion of a
naked Canadian coldier leaning out of his truck and doffing a top hat in
salute as the army commander drove by. After a good laugh, Montgomery
Cast of Commanders
189
decided there were limits and issued the one line order: "Top hats will not
be worn in Eighth Army. "25
It is, of course, true that Montgomery's proposal for Crerar to take over
a division would have left him virtually following in the footsteps of Si-
whose performance in the field had already netted him a recom-
mendation for future corps command. As it was, Crerar had his first meeting
with Montgomery at the end of October and the 1 Canadian Corps took
over a static sector on the Adriatic front 1 February 1944; after a month in
the line Crerar returned to Britain "without having participated in any major
operations in Italy and without any formal report being made on his ca-
pacities as a commander in the field. "26 The battle-experienced Simonds,
on the other hand, was considered by Montgomery at that time to be too
young to command an army; he had, however, already recommended to
Brooke on 23 December 1943 that Simonds "go to UK now to command
the 2nd Canadian Corps. "27 In Kitching's view,
"it was a great mistake on
(Crerar's) part [to not temporarily command the 1st Division] because
it was his one opportunity to establish himself as a real commander. Instead
...he remained just a kindly figurehead." While false pride may have been
a factor here, simple jealously was obviously another. Indeed, Kitching
suspected that the main intent behind Crerar's decision to equip his corps
headquarters with vehicles before the 5th Armoured Division was "to make
Simonds sit idle for some ten weeks and thus not be able to command the
division in operations, 28
In contrast to his attitude toward Simonds, Crerar seems to have main-
rained an almost unshakable faith in the GOC 3rd Division, Major-General
Rod Keller, whom he considered a "first class commander." Keller had
been a year ahead of Simonds at Camberley and on the same course as then
Captain F. W. "Freddy" de Guingand who later became Montgomery's
famous COS. In June 1942. Crerar had placed Keller first in line within 1
Canadian Corps for appointment to command a division. For whatever
, reason, he did not rate Brigadier Salmon, regarded by many as outstanding
and the best qualified officer available to command a division in the field,
quite as high as Keller for promotion ?9 Even when in March 1943 he felt
combelled to counsel Keller on alleged "mishehaviour in the matter of over-
indulgence," as reported by British and Canadian general officers, Crerar
maintained that the had so do centries as a canader.
As late as 16 May 1944 Crerar wrote. "T believe that Keller would make a
two-fisted and competent Corps Command[er] in the field. "3! Apparently,
Keller's assault landina training of lad Distion it 1 Pritish Corps gave
Cierar a certain sense of personal satisfaction.
"The technique... employed
by Second Britishl Army lof which 1 British Corps was part]," he im-
modestly wrote, was "almost in its entirety, that developed by me when
3 Cdn Inf Div was under my com|man]d in 1 Cdn Corps.'
Crerar's confidence in Keller's "two-fisted leadership" would be abruptly
