330
RHQ
RMC
RN
RRC
RTC
RTR
SASO
SC
SDG
SHAEF
SL
SOS
SP
sp
sqn
SS (German)
SSR
tac
TAF
TEWT
tk
TOETS
tp(s)
U.S.
USAAF
yds
Abbreviations
Regimental Headquarters
Royal Military College of Canada
Royal Navy
Royal Regiment of Canada
Royal Tank Corps
Royal Tank Regiment
Senior Air Staff Officer
scout car
The Stormont, Dundas, and Glengarry Highlanders
Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force
start line
Senior Officers' School
self-propelled
support
squadron
Schutzstaffel
The South Saskatchewan Regiment
tactical
Tactical Air Force
tactical exercise without troops
tank
tests on elementary training
troop (s)
United States
United States Army Air Forces
War Diary
yards
A Note on Sources
The Canadian Army and the Normandy Cumpaign: A Study of Failure in High Command
is based principally upon a reading of the records of the Department of National
Defence (RG 24) and the McNaughton and Crerar papers in the National Archives
of Canada. From a military standpoint, the Montgomery correspondence in the
Crerar papers proved particularly revealing about the state of Canadian Army train-
ing in Britain after three years of war. For a staff college directing staff member, it
was also a most humbling and enlightening exposure.
The McNaughton and Crerar papers contain an immense amount of information
of the interwar and wartime army. But they are finite. RG 24, on the other hand,
can be looked upon as either a gold mine or a quagmire. While the war diaries have
captured the interest and attention of most researchers, there also exists a mass of
material that can only be described as army
"bumpfh." It includes, to name but a
few subject areas, material on policy, operations, movement, intelligence, equip-
ment, organization, and training.
After-action reports on exercises and course re-
ports on individuals, which require declassification for access, fall into this category.
The historian's problem on entering this rather pure army world is that, for the
Second World War period, he is attempting to cope with the paper overload pro-
duced by an army of nearly half a million soldiers. One might say it is an impossible
task-unless one understands the army system, asks the right question, and knows
what one is looking for. Fortunately, army correspondence formats and filing meth-
ods have changed little since the war, and those taught as assistant-adjutants to read
document folders from the bottom up can cover a lot of material in a short time.
Much valuable information on tactics, doctrine, enemy fighting methods, equipment
problems, and so forth can be gleaned from these sources, but the supply is endless.
The voluminous records of RG 24, in short, have hardly been tapped.
Other substantial sources of information are available in the NDHQ Directorate
of History, which is an excellent starting point before proceeding to the NAC. The
