76
Long Forgotten Winters
Group R.C.A., a designation later changed to 1 Canadian AGRA. In No-
vember 1942, 2 Canadian AGRA was formed, eventually to comprise three
medium regiments, one field regiment, a heavy antiaircraft regiment, and
a rocket and a radar battery.
Again, as the Canadian Army possessed no
heavy artillery, these formations usually had British regiments attached. *5
The magnitude of the training problem naturally increased with the rapid
growth of the army. As Clausewitz so wisely pointed out, "the nature of
military activity in general should not be taken as applying equally at all
levels"; indeed, the lower the level the more physical the activity, the higher
the level the more intellectual the activity.
6 It was one thing to train an
infantry division, another to synchronize the fighting functions of three
infantry and two armored divisions, two independent tank brigades, and
two AGRA. The customary approach toward this end was to conduct
training in three sequential stages: individual, unit (single-arm) collective,
and formation (all-arms) collective. In the case of the inadequately trained
1st Division, for example, it was intended to complete individual training
by the end of February 1940. After this, unit training was to commence
until completed by April, when brigade and divisional collective exercises
were to be undertaken.
Even before being upset by the exigencies of war, this ambitious program
had to be extended somewhat due to an exceedingly bitter winter, lack of
transport and clothing (a second pair of boots and a second set of battle
dress were not issued until February and March), and the invidious pull of
ceremonial parades. On 18 April, the rile strengths of two battalions of
the 2nd Brigade, approximately 1,300 men, were deployed to Scotland for
a proposed raid on Trondheim.
Norway. In response to the Blitzkrieg of
May 1940, a small divisional headquarters and reinforced 1st Brigade were
also placed on standby for possible action in support of the Dunkirk perim-
eter. Fortunately, neither operation was carried out, though the 1st Brigade
was eventually dispatched to Brest on 13 June in an abortive last-minute
attempt to shore up a rapidly collapsing French army. *7
It is most evident that up to this point many Canadian as well as British
senior commanders expected to fight a protracted struggle marked by an
initial trench warfare phase, which would have permitted the gradual de-
velopment of an offensive capacity. McNaughton even studied the possi
bility of retaking Maginot Line defenses by employing Canadian Tunnelling
Company diamond drillers in countermining operations.
48 From the be-
ginning of April 1940, Ist Canadian Infantry Division units each spent an
overnight period in a model trench system especially constructed at pir-
bright for training in trench relief, routine, patrolling, and raiding:
Canadian Division Training Instruction No. 3 of 27 April 1940 further
warned infantry brigade groups for attendance at the Trench Warfare Train-
ing and Experimental Centre (TWTEC). Imber. As detailed in an instruc-
Shaping an Expeditionary Force
77
tion of 2 May 1940, they were each to undergo training in trench warfare
for eight to ten days between 11 May and 2 June. 50
The comprehensive program called for units to entrench opposite one
another and practice, in addition to trench routine and repair, mounting
patrols, night raids, and dawn assaults against one another.
Tanks, when
available, participated in attacks on trench lines. Trials were also conducted
to assess the effect of supporting smoke on direct and indirect friendly fire.
Efforts were additionally made to determine practical procedures for laying
minefields and clearing gaps in them for the passage of tracked vehicles.
The army trained, in short, for a repetition of the middle years of the Great
War. Ironically, on the very day units of the 1st Canadian Infantry Brigade
Group were patrolling and practicing dawn trench attacks supported by
smoke, Panzergruppe Kleist slashed through the French front west of the
River Meuse and set out on its drive to the English Channel. 5
Reaction to the invasion scare in the summer of 1940 did little to further
the collective training of the Ist Division, though it was by then, compar-
atively, one of the best equipped and manned formations in the British
order of battle. With the reconstitution of Canadian Force in June, emphasis
was again placed upon training battalion mobile columns in rapid motor
transport movement by day and night for possible action against German
diversionary or paratroop assaults. British coastal forces were also to be
rapidly reinforced in event of a major enemy seaborne landing. As in the
previous month, McNaughton split the division into nine battalion groups,
which involved allotting field as well as antitank artillery troops
command of Battalions."
All units subsequently completed "dawn attack
exercises" with limited armored and air cooperation, but there was scant
opportunity for divisional exercises. Indeed, it was not until late September
that decentralized artillery reriments reverted to divisional command."
The impression is nonetheless gained that during this period of much
fervent dashing about. unbounded enthusiasm and misdirected energy often
substituted for calm and collected reason. Instead of taking pains to devise
and conduct worthwhile tactical training, the tendency was to shoot off at
high speed, occasionally into orbit. Not for its role alone does Canadian
Force seem to have earned the sobriquet "McNaughton's Flying Circus.
Neither did the creation of 7 Corps solve the higher level collective training
problem to any substantial degree. The new GOC 1st Division, Major-
Gener George Perkes noting that one regiment had fired its two-inch
mortars for the first time in June, considered his formation still only partially
trained. He also found it difficult to train beyond battalion, let alone brigade
level, with tank-infantry exercises in conjunction with the lst British Ar-
moured Division simply out of the question. At the same time, he detected
"too much of the militia man getted towned training
Unquestionably, equipment shortages also continued to retard the pro-
