152
Long Forgotten Winters
March 1944 was given to individual training as it was the "last opportunity
to make the men of... units fighting fit, and fit to fight." Collective training
received secondary priority, up to platoon and equivalent slated to be con-
ducted in January, up to company in February, and up to battalion in March.
Within the 2nd Division, collective unit training continued from 24 April,
with infantry battalions being exercised to attack following close behind a
moving barrage often simulated simply, and unrealistically, by pyrotech-
nics. At the same time, most training programs stressed the need for battle
drill and initiative on the part of junior leaders 25 While commanders were
expected to have their units ready for action in all respects by the end of
this training period, however, it should be noted that problems were still
being experienced with battalion three-inch mortar platoons in February?
The intent here is not to compile a litany of training shortcomings,
but to
put to rest the myth that Canadian soldiers overtrained for four years in
Britain. As can be seen, the standards attained varied between units and
formations. But ready or not, by May all field firing ceased as they moved
to their final D-Day deployment positions.
At this point it is worth recalling that when McNaughton relinquished
his command in December 1943, an army that was but months before
earmarked for maior assault and exploitation operations on the Continent,
was now left almost entirely without effectual field leadership at the very
top. On 21 December, the Chief of the General Staff, Lieutenant-General
Stuart, assumed the newly created post of COS at Canadian Military Head-
quarters (CMHQ), and took over as Acting Commander of the First Ca-
nadian Army. Stuart was neither in the best of health," nor inclined to get
involved in field army matters Citing security reasons. he advised the army
COS (formerly BGS) that he did not wish to be made aware of details of
tactical olans. His primary responsibility in Britain as he saw it. was not
to deal with training, but with "questions of policy" that had previously
gravitated to McNaughton. Although intended as but a temporary measure
pending the arrival of the more favored Crerar, Stuart's incumbency as
acting army commander lasted until 20 March 1944, when the former took
over on return from italy. Ironically, Crear arrived having not participated
as a corps commander in any major operations.?
It was only at this critical juncture, little more than two months before
the Normandy invasion, that command of the First Canadian Army became
characterized by a singular dedication to the conduct of operations. CMHQ
now assumed responsibility for policy and administrative matters that, pre-
viously, occupied the eclectic attention of McNaughton and skewed his
focus away from army command Alwavs a too willing workhorse he was
also an insatiable dabbler, one who ince had to have a finger in every pie
The effect. as has been seen. was disastrous. To Cret "McNaughton was
primarily an administrator prognizer and torbaician. but lonel aot to
get immersed in detail.. unable to stand back and view the whole picture
Final Tempering
153
as a senior operational commander must." Though "extremely competent
at mobilizing, equipping, and preparing an army, he could not give it, or
its senior commanders the higher training that was essential. 30 From his
Royal Twenty Centres of prewar days to his Canadian Army in Britain,
McNaughton's interests do not seem to have lain with the real profession
of arms. He clearly did not regard the operational field as a discipline
requiring equally intense study as, say, medicine or engineering, with which
he displayed his pronounced affinity.
This, essentially a problem of high-command application and vocation,
more than any "casual and haphazard" attitude on the part of regimental
officers was the underlying reason that the Canadian Army got "rather less
than it might have" from its training period in Britain." Again, the perennial
problem of too frequent changes in command and staff appointments, which
in itself reflected the greater malaise, exacerbated the situation. As late as
January and February 1944, the 2nd and 4th Divisions suffered changes in
commanders; the first for reasons of operational expediency, the second
due to the age of the incumbent.* In such circumstances proper training
focus and effective command and staff cohesion could hardly be maintained.
The grass roots projection of battle drill, on the other hand, was sympto-
matic of an overall dearth of higher training direction. The long winters of
Canadian institutional neglect of the essential elements of the profession of
arms could not be easily or quickly overcome.
NOTES
1. Record Group (RG) 24, Vol. 13,750, WD GS 2CID Trg Instr No 24, 22
April 1944.
2. Col. C. P. Stacey, Official History of the Canadian Army in the Second World War,
Vol. 1: Six Years of War: The Army in Canada, Britain and the Pacific (Ottawa: Queen's
Printer, 1966), Pp. 222-223 and Col. C. P. Stacey, Official History of the Canadian
Army in the Second World War, Vol. Ill: The Victory Campaign: The Operations in North-
Wes Fire, 1944- World War, V. Queen's Printer, 1966), Pp. 30-32.
3. McNaughton Papers (MP), Vol. 157, GOC/1-0 memo to All Comds and
COs 1 Cản Div from GS CP Can Diy, 15 May 1943; and Stacey, Six Years,
Pp. 245-248, 387. The 4th Canadian Armoured Division arrived in Britain in a
somewhat more advanced state than the 5th Armoured as it had trained on tanks
in Canada. Both formations had to wait to be kitted out in the United Kingdom.
4. RG 24, Vol. 9792, Exercise "Spartan" Instructions; John Swettenham,
McNaughton (Toronto: Ryerson, 1968), Vol. II. pp. 271-286; and Stacey, Six Years.
5p0A VolC Are Frercise «Tiger" Final Conference, 4 June
1942. Remarks of Army Commander, 4 June 1942.
6. RG 24, Vol. 9793 and Man doi. 159, GHQ Exercise ""Spartan" March 1943
Comments by Commander-in-Chief GHO Home Forces March 1943. By the cal-
culations of the GOC 2 Coros, the length of an armored division, less its "B echelon"
Maintenance element was 74 miles ot 30 vehicles to the mile and 56 miles at 40
