274
Half-Forgotten Summer
one SP and the other 17-pounder Ram towed. The 5th Brigade with the
FGH less one squadron, an SP antitank battery, a company of medium
machine guns, and a platoon of heavy mortars followed behind prepared
to restore momentum, if lost, by assaulting 2nd Armoured Brigade objec-
tives. It was also to move on orders of the divisional commander to capture
Bretteville-sur-Laize. The 6th Brigade with a squadron of Crocodiles, two
antitank batteries, three heavy mortar platoons, and a company of medium
machine guns was to commence "mopping up" operations at H-hour." In
spite of the slow rate of advance, a dense cloud of dust arose. Thickened
by a ground mist and smoke, which the enemy quickly brought down, it
proved impenetrable to searchlights.
After 15 minutes, because drivers could not see vehicles immediately
ahead, taillights were turned on. In the ensuing confusion, heightened by
German mortar and antitank fire, some tanks actually turned around to
collide with oncoming APC's; others went missing for up to 36 hours. Not
surprisingly, it became progressively difficult to keep direction; the Royal
Regiment, for example, passed east rather than west of Rocquancourt, the
RHLI ran straight through it, and the Essex went wildly astray. Nonethe-
less, by 0700 hours many columns of the 2nd and 51st Divisions were
fighting in the vicinities of their first objectives and beginning to clear them.
While more bitterly contested and casualty producing mopping-up opera-
tions were not completed until around 1700 hours, the first phase of "To-
ralize" was deemed to have been successfully completed by 0800 hours 8
August. The road to Falaise also lay open. 32
From this juncture onward, however,
"Totalize" assumed the character
of a lesser "Goodwood," though without benefit of surprise, and the in-
trinsic risk associated with delay. At the same time that Kitching and Maczek
had requested Simonds to broaden their attack frontages, they had men-
tioned the potential danger of "the long pause of about eight hours between
Phase I and Phase II."
Simonds, under the erroneous perception that the
second zone was defended by the Ist SS, was nonetheless insistent that the
armored divisions await the support of heavy bombers.33 Given the re-
nowned capacity of the Germans to react and the bitter experiences of
"Atlantic"
and "Spring," however, it is casy to appreciate Simonds's cau-
tion. That he should have been overruled is quite clear, but equally clearly
it would have taken an army commander with the Fingerspitzengefuehl (fin-
gertip feel) and stature of a Dempsey or Patton to do it. Crerar simply did
not know as much as Simonds, which in effect left the 2 Corps commander
without any of the usual counsel, help, and coercion that he might have
received from an army headquarters. He could not have been more alone.
Unfortunately, the tactically clever Oberfuehrer Meyer reacted with more
than customary German vigor.
On the morning of 8 August he drove
forward to assess the situation himself, personally rallying in the area of
Cintheaux fleeing 89th Division soldiers. Standing in the middle of the road
Map 11.2
The Course of Operation "Totalize"
51st (H) Inf Div
with
33rd Armd Bd
2nd Cdn Inf Div
with
2nd Cdn Armd Bde
sur-Ome . _ Trotevalm.
8 Can Rocco Regt
Rocquancou
Bourguebus
es ,53rd Bde
Crame
AHL
SO AUG
Bretteville
Calg
SECOND BRITISH ARMO
BRIDGEHEAD OVER
ORNE RIVER AT
GRIMBOSQ
6 AUG
vassal
OPERATION
"TOTALIZE"
7-10 AUGUST 1944
MILE
Canadian forces
British or other forces - - -
point
Tuần to Ming n To Ha
Fontaine to Pil
Hill 206
2 CDN
Bde
gAUg ,
3rd cdn
Estrees-ta- Maizieres
nt Div-
Campagne
North Shore
Quesnay
Point 140
Ostian)
