162
Half-Forgotten Summer
ical areas and authorized to fire the full weight of divisional artillery. These
gradually withered away, however, as troop and battery commanders (as
"CO's representatives") proved equally capable of controlling massed gun
fire. Eventually, artillery batteries, each of two four-gun troops, were in-
timately affiliated with armored regiments and infantry battalions. Artillery
regiments in their turn were affiliated with brigades, the gunner CO acting
as artillery adviser to the brigade commander from whom he was insepa-
mble Athicherlevels the CRA and CCRA. ever wrestling with the thorny
problem of forward displacement, commanded the movement and allot-
ment of guns, for it was a tenet of the Parham system that every gun within
range be laid, loaded and ready to respond to a request for fire.
Behind the divisional and corps artilleries stood the AGRA. These were
reinforcing army artillery brigades, the handling of which was practiced for
the first time on "Spartan." Of no fixed composition, they usually consisted
of three medium and one or two field and heavy regiments in proportions
considered most suitable to the mission assigned. To gain maximum effect
from the longer range and greater throw weight of medium and heavy
guns. they were best emploved as single-fire entities and not in "penny
packets" along a front In theory. AGRA were organized "for the purpose
of giving an army commander a wide measure of flexibility in the rapid
allotment of artillery resources to the right place at the right time"; in
bractice they were almost invariably used de affliated corns troone to rein-
force divicional artilleries With COD Ac ench retaining a basic element that
included an antitank regiment, a light antiaircraft regiment, and a survey
regiment, a cords could expect to be strengthened by one or more AGRAs
for bombardment or counter battery tasks. In anticipation that the require-
ment for reinforcing artillery would increase directly as the enemy attempted
to stabilize the battle, an AGRA or one of its medium regiments might
further be placed in support of a division during Auid operations. Always,
however, the guiding principle was that " decentralization of resources...
not preclude their concentration in the greatest possible strength when
required. "11
The allotment and movement of AGRA, so important in smashing un-
expected resistance or repelling counterattacks, warranted careful consid-
cration. As the overriding factor was that gunfire be concentrated at the
right place at the right time, premature deployment had to be avoided
Filling up roads with a large number of guns for which an amble suppl
of ammunition might not be immediately forthcoming had also to be bal-
anced against leaving forward formations room to maneuver. On the other
hand, it was desirable to get guns well forward to minimize movement
later during battle, Here the role of the BRA was important, for CCRAS
had to be early advised of how many AGRA they would have at their
disposal so that they, in turn, could warn CRAs of the number of AGRA
regiments that would have to be accommodated within their respective
The Imprint of Doctrine
163
divisional areas. Obviously, because of the potential for confusion, advance
planning that incorporated simple and straightforward moves was vital. In
situations of uncertainty, AGRA that were not decentralized were as a rule
held well back; when conditions were better known, AGRA reconnaissance
parties were thrown well forward, often with leading divisions. In the event
that divisions were no longer able to make headway, the CCRA resumed
responsibility for counterbattery and bombardment operations, the divi-
sional battle merging into a more centralized corps effort.
Turning now from a mainly artillery perspective, it is instructive to
examine briefly the impact of the war in the Western Desert where an
associated doctrinal saga involving all arms was played out. Here the jejune
nature of the arena, plus the perception that German actions in France had
validated the precepts of the radical all-tank school, tended to give armored
forces center stage. This was most pronounced in the British case where a
tactical division reflecting social stratification further characterized armored
doctrine. The 1930s decision to mechanize the cavalry had, in fact, left the
Royal Tank Regiment (RTR, formerly the Royal Tank Corps) exclusively
responsible for infantry support. The more numerous cavalry regiments,
on the other hand, continued in the traditional reconnaissance and inde-
pendent mobile role In general, most of the RTP units were grouped in
army tank brigades of slower, heavily armored "I" tanks, while the cavalry,
equipped with lighter, faster "cruisers," were assigned to armored divisions.
Unfortunately, for reasons related to tank design, training, suspicion of
misemployment, and even snobbery, armored brigades often viewed the
infantry support role with a degree of distaste. '3
The spectacular victory by Lieutenant-General Richard O'Connor over
the Italiane at Beda Romm in early 1941 ceemed nonetheless to confirm the
soundness of the foregoing doctrine. The economy of force practice of
employing "Jock" (after Lieutenant-Colonel J. C. Campbell, VC) columns
of a batter of field artillery, occasionally some tanks, and a company of
motorized infantry a'so appeared valid. With the advent of what became
the Deutsches Afrika Korps under Lieutenant-General Erwin Rommel, how-
ever, reverses and doubts began to plague British arms.
Confidence in
equipment eroded, even though German tanks possessed no appreciable
technological advantage over British variants at the time. In fact,
and Valentine "T" tanks could withstand all enemy tank guns at but the
shortest ranges The two-pounder gun with which all British tanks were
equipped and the 37 mm op the U.S. Stuart were both, moreover, slightly
superior in penetrating power to the short-barrelled 50 mm on the Mark
Ill panzer and the low-velocity 75 mm on the Mark IV.
The Grant tank,
which arrived in May 1942, could with its 75 mm sponson gun also penetrate
the thickened front plate of the Mark III and IV at 650 yards, while its own
frontal armor could stand up to the long-barreled 50 mm at 1.000 vards. 14
The real secret of German success in armored warfare was the antitank
