Half-Forgotten Summer
that night. The following day the 8th Brigade occupied Carpiquet airfield.
On 10 July a ceremonial parade was held in Caen. "Charnwood" had cost
1,194 casualties, 330 fatal, which was heavier than the loss on D-Day.
Obviously, many lessons had by this point also been learned, not least
among them the discovery that "street fighting" training had been taught
as too much of a drill. The limited effectiveness of prolonged artillery
bombardment was additionally noted, as was the doctrinal tendency of
armor to hang too far back. 32 More serious were the tensions that seem to
have arisen among the Canadian field command.
On 11 July at 1500 hours Simonds's 2 Canadian Corps assumed respon-
sibility within the Second British Army for roughly 8,000 yards of frontage
along the River Orne through Caen. It had under command Foulkes's 2nd
Canadian Infantry Division and Suttie's 2 AGRA, both recently arrived, as
well as Keller's 3rd Division, and Wyman's 2nd Canadian Armoured Bri-
gade, which formations were ordered to rotate regiments for rest and refit.
The immediate task given to 2 Corps was "to hold the sector and by active
patrolling to study the problem of gaining a bridge]head over the River]
ORNE, SOUTH of CAEN." The last was the planning basis for Operation
"Atlantic," the Canadian portion of Operation "Goodwood," a major at-
tack to be executed 18 July by 8 Corps, of three armored divisions, striking
east and south of Caen with the object of "writing down" German armored
"Atlantic" called for the 3rd Canadian Division to clear the east bank of
the Orne, thereby protecting the 8 Corps right flank, from Ste. Honorine
into Fauberge de Vaucelles. Specifically, Blackader's 8th Brigade was to
lead the advance east of the river, capturing Colombelles, Giberville, and
Mondeville. Cunningham's 9th was then to pass through and clear Vau-
celles, while Foster's Tth, in reserve west of the Orne in Caen, remained
ready to cross over. Foulkes's 2nd Division was to advance southwards
from Caen to seize, in succession, the high ground north of St. André-
sur-Orne and the village of Verrières, which commanded the road to Falaise.
To effect this, Brigadier Sherwood Lett's 4th Brigade was to capture Lou-
vigny on the Orne and, if practicable, cross over to seize the high ground
north of St. André. Brigadier Bill Megill's 5th Brigade was to cross at Caen
and take the latter feature if it had not been secured by the 4th Brigade.
Subsequent advance southward was to be undertaken by Let's 4th or Brig-
adier Hugh Young's 6th Brigade as circumstances dictated. 33
The main attack, Operation "Goodwood,"
was the largest yet mounted
against the Germans in Normandy. As D'Este has demonstrated, it was the
"brainchild" of Dempsey who managed to sell the idea of an all-armored
stroke to a skeptical Montgomery. The latter, aware of the serious limi-
tations of British armor since North Africa, had actually stated in January
that he would never employ an armored corps. In Dempsey's concept,
some 1,600 heavy bombers and 400 lighter aircraft striking from first light
Throes Beyond the Beach
223
Figure 9.1
2 Canadian Corps Ancillary Troops
18th Armoured Car Regiment
(12th Manitoba Dragoons)
6th Anti-Tank Regiment
2nd Survey Regiment
6th Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment
Royal Canadian Engincers
8th Field Park Company
29th Field Company
30th Field Company
31st Field Company
2nd Corps Signals
2nd Corps Defence Company
(The Prince Edward Island Light Horse)
Royal Canadian Army Service Corps
No. 2 Headquarters Corps Car
Company
2nd Corps Transport Company
No. 33 Corps Troops Company
No. 34 Corps Troops Company
No. 2 Corps and Army Troops Sub-Pari
Royal Canadian Ordnance Corps)
2nd Corps Troops Workshop
2nd Canadian
Infantry
Division
3rd Canadian
Infantry
Division
4th Canadian
Armoured
Division
2nd Canadian
Armoured
Brigade
1st Polish
Armoured
Division
(from 05 Aug 44)
on 18 July were expected to cut a craterless swathe over which the armored
assault could erneditiously pass. Excellent enemy observation over the con-
gested "nichorns" bridochend enct of the Orne which compelled the ar-
Mored divisions to cross one after another instead of simultaneously, made
it an extremely difficult ground oberation to launch, however. As it un-
folded, "Goodwood" was to a large degree an armored-air experiment that
succeeded on a grander plan 34 but failed on a lower one for lack of infantry,
