144
Long Forgotten Winters
to revert during the process of reconstitution to individual and platoon level!
training. The 4th Canadian Armoured Division, which had in the meantime
arrived, anticipated reaching squadron (tank company) level in collective
training by 15 February 1943. The 5th Canadian Armoured Division, having
in 1942 extended squadron training to late December, was not much more
advanced. Combined operations training, with its highly specialized am-
phibious overtones and inherent interservice complexity, had also since the
autumn offered a change of training pace to the Ist and 3rd Divisions. The
dangers that such specialized training posed to land operations proper seems
to have been appreciated by Simonds,
however, for as GOC 1st Division
he warned: "In an assault landing troops tend to become obsessed with the
idea of the 'battle for the beaches'
and, unless actively combatted during
training, inertia is likely to set in."? The more time spent on combined
operations training, moreover, the less there was available to practice for
open warfare.
During the famous GHQ Exercise "Spartan" 4-12 March 1943, the First
Canadian Army, less the Ist and 4th Divisions, had ample opportunity to
demonstrate its operational capacity for open warfare. The object of this
largest troop maneuver since "Bumper" in the fall of 1941 was to practice
breaking out of a secure bridgehead, the very role assigned to the First
for the full-scale invasion of the Continent." In brief. it called for the First
Canadian Army. As described by McNaughton, it was " a dress rehearsal
Canadian Army (notionallv, and ironically. the "British Second Army")
supported by 19 air squadrons to attack and seize Huntingdon, the capital
of a fictitious "Eastland" lying north of the River Thames.
The task of the
"German Sixth Army,'
ported by
" represented by 8 and 11 British Corps also sup-
air, was to defend Huntingdon. As finally organized, Mc-
Naughton's force included 1 Canadian Corps (2nd and 3rd Divisions), 2
Canadian Corps (5th Canadian and Guards Armoured Divisions, each of
one armored and one infantry brigade), 12 British Corps (43rd and 53rd
Divisions), and the 1st Canadian
Army Tank Brigade. Oddly, while the
4th Canadian Armoured Division had been excused "Spartan" for lack of
advanced training. Headquarters 2 Coros had since 19 January been included
at McNaughton's insistence.
In the event, 2 Corps not only suffered deficiencies in signals capability.
but was up to the last minute issued new equipment with which its operators
were unfamiliar.
Without the benefit of a preliminary command-post ex-
ercise + the training value of this corps's particination was clearly auestion.
able. Even more difficult to understand was the decision to assion hat
armored divisions to the most inexperienced corns commander. One of the
key lessons of "Tiger,"
a year earlier in May 1942, had been that a corps
of one armored and two infantry divisions was a well-balanced formation
for all normal operations. It had been prescribed that any corns headquarters
should be able "to handle efficiently up so three infantry divisions, or three
Final Tempering
145
armoured divisions, or any combination of the two types." Although armored
divisions were obviously new and had to be handled differently, there was
no requirement for special armored corps headquarters per se; the best results
came from
employing them in combination with infantry divisions and
other arms.'
The enemy received a day's head start in deployment on commencement
of "Spartan." McNaughton in the interim decided to forsake the better
"going" round the western reach of the Thames for a direct, surprise attack
on Huntingdon. This involved not only crossing a major water obstacle
but also traversing difficult country following the establishment of a bridge-
head. It meant additionally that he could not bring his considerable armored
superiority to bear. The enemy reacted to this initiative by initially com-
mencing bridge demolitions and, ultimately, contesting the successful ad-
vance of 1 and 12 Corps across the Thames. When it became clear that the
enemy was in fact reinforcing his center from the western reaches, Mc-
Naughton decided to swing 2 Corps over to the better "going" in a west-
ward pincer movement.
Unfortunately, McNaughton's newly formed 2 Corps advanced slowly
due to traffic snarl-ups and problems of gasoline resupply, obvious indi-
cators of a low standard of staff work. Signals shortcomings further ensured
the loss of wireless contact between corps and army headquarters for 15
hours. Also in a highly dubious move, the commander of 2 Corps, Lieu-
tenant-General E. Sansom, ordered his armored divisions divided, placing
the infantry brigades designed to support tanks under the 5th Armoured
Division and the two armored brigades under Guards Armoured. Although
McNaughton quite correctly countermanded this order, his action came
too late to prevent the regrouping from taking place. The Guards Armoured
Brigade subsequently, for lack of infantry support, suffered umpire-sim-
ulated destruction by antitank action. Again, one of the lessons stressed
since "Tiger" was not to split the armored division, which had been spe-
cifically structured to ensure all
arms and
especially tank-infantry
cooperation.
McNaughton's handling of his command also reflected a lack of profes-
sional knowledge that could have been acquired through study. Evidently,
he actually contemplated passing 2 Corps through 1 Corps on the night 7/
& March, a maneuver that would have bordered on the impossible. That
McNaughton had no idea a corps required a minimum of 24 hours warning
in order to execute a major task is borne out by the following timings: at
2335 hours on 6 March, Ore directed 2 Corps to advance east across the
Thames throuch 1 Corps: at 1615 hours, the next day he gave counte
orders to effect the western envelopment that night; at 2130 hours on 10
March, he issued orders for operations the following day; and at 2259 hours
11 March. he pave orders for operations on 12 March 6 When faced with
bridoing difficulties on 7 March hic reaction was to oo immediately to the
