278
Half-Forgotten Summer
100 casualties when attacked in Vaucelles. The main headquarters of the
2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade and the 3rd Division were also hit, as
were 2 Canadian AGRA and 9 AGRA. Around 1330 hours 2 Corps re-
quested the First Canadian Army to stop all bombing. In all, 65 soldiers
were killed and another 250 wounded, one of whom was Keller, who had
to be evacuated. * Though the attack inflicted far greater damage upon the
enemy, it was not as effective as expected. At the same time, its incorpo-
ration within the second phase, more than any other factor, promoted a
degree of inflexibility that by allowing the Germans to recover foreordained
defeat.
As previously indicated, the 1st Polish Armoured Division was counter
attacked in the area of its start line by Kampfgruppe Waldmuller just before
H-hour. The advance of this now twice-stricken formation, whose traffic
control capability had once been described as "quite efficient though there
did not seem to be any definite system,
»* was thus stopped almost before
it started. On the right flank little better headway was made by the 4th
Canadian Armoured Division. As intended, the 4th Armoured Brigade was
to by-pass Cintheaux and Hautmesnil, capture Bretteville-le-Rabet, and
push on to secure Points 195 and 206. The 10th Brigade was to take Cin-
theaux and Hautmesnil and relieve and mop up after the 4th Brigade in
Bretteville-le-Rabet. A battle group comprising the 22nd Canadian Ar-
moured Regiment (The Canadian Grenadier Guards), The Lake Superior
Regiment (Motor), an antitank battery, and a squadron of engineers led the
4th Brigade advance.
Apparently in imitation of German practice it was called "Halpenny
Force" after its commander, Lieutenant-Colonel Bill Halpenny. Apart from
one distinguished troop action, however, "Halpenny Force" made no faster
progress on crossing the start line than it had in closing up to it. Instead of
having the Lake Superiors deal smartly with the small hamlet of Gaumesnil,
which lay south of the bomb line and was originally to have been taken by
the 2nd Division, it waited until the Royal Regiment secured it at 1530
hours. By 1800 hours "Halpenny Force" had only advanced beyond Cin-
theaux, but a kilometer away, at which time two companies of Argyll and
Sutherland Highlanders from the 10ch Brigade seized the village, while
another two pushed south to take Hautmesnil. Shortly after this Halpenny
decided in good doctrinal fashion to leaguer two of his tank squadrons in
a "rear rally"
near Gaumesnil to refuel and refit, an action that was com-
pleted around 2000 hours.
Simonds maintained after the war that he had "stressed to the armoured
divisional commanders that they .... [were| not (tol get involved in probing
out
positions] before they called down fire or... fighter bombers.
This presumably was why he had decentralized two AGRA, each of five
medium regiments, one in support of each division. 13 To have made best
use of such huge fire resources, however, called for more artillery staff
The Amiens Alchemy
279
planning expertise than units like the Grenadiers possessed. In short, the
formation of battle groups like "Halpenny Force" saddled a single-arm
commander with all-arms coordination problems that Canadian brigade
staf organization was better equipped to handle. As Montgomery had
warned, it was also an abrogation of tactical responsibility. The battle group
idea appears nonetheless to have been embraced by the commander of the
4th Armoured Brigade, Brigadier Leslie Booth, who correctly reasoned that
the tank had "little chance of success" against the German use of mixed
groups of all arms.
To combat such groups successfully, Booth asserted,
one had to learn to "use "battle groups' designed to beat the enemy" in
numbers, equipment, offensive spirit, initiative, and close cooperation be-
As so often with imitation though, certain important facets were over-
looked: that the German Kampfgruppe system was rooted in a regimental
structure that bore greater resemblance to the Canadian brigade than unit,
and which included integral "infantry" guns of artillery caliber,
45 was one
of these. According to Major-General "Pip" Roberts, moreover, when 11th
Armoured Division finally did get its battle organization right it formed
two mixed brigades, each of two armored regiments and two infantry
battalions backed up by artillery as required. While all units were completely
interchangeable with regimental-battalion groups organized and com-
manded according to assigned task, the most significant aspect of this struc-
ture was that the brigades themselves lost their separate armored and
infantry character. Both brigadiers and their headquarters had to be equally
competent at executing all-arms operations, which Montgomery held were
best ensured at this level. Since artillery was still from a planning standpoint
less closely integrated at the unit level than brigade, the suspicion thus lingers
that "Halpenny Force" could have used some formation fire planning as-
sistance. It is of course doubly significant that when Kitching, irritated over
the delay of "Halpenny Force,"
was finally able to contact Booth "he was
nearly two miles away from the battle and fast asleep in his tank. "16
The opening of the second phase of "Totalize," while not a complete
disaster, had clearly not gone well. A concerned Simonds now directed
Kitching to press on through the night to secure Bretteville-le-Rabet and
Point 195, the highest point before Falaise. Kitching, in turn, ordered the
4th Armoured Brigade to capture both objectives; the 10th Infantry Brigade
was to follow up the armour and, after the seizure of Bretteville, occupy
the villages of Langannerie and Grainville astride the Falaise road. The task
of taking Bretteville still fell to "Halpenny Force," but was to be executed
by two Grenadier tank squadrons and two infantry companies of the Lake
Superiors at first light 9 August. The mission of capturing Point 195 was
"Worthington Force," after the CO of the 28th Canadian Ar-
moured Regiment (The British Columbia Regiment), which was accom-
panied by three infantry companies of the Algonquin Regiment. In many
