Long Forgotten Winters
42
prepares an army for war. Ironically, the very specter of Bolshevism related
indirectly to the incipient disintegration and degradation of professionalism
that occurred in the Czarist army while it was engaged in internal security
duties during the critical years 1905-07.'
Preoccupation with aid to the civil power was not the only unprofessional
focus of the militia in the few years between wars moreover. During a
nationwide tour in the summer and fall of 1932, McNaughton became
convinced of the pressing need to address the plight of some 70,000 single,
transient, unemployed men who were last in priority for relief. On his
return to Ottawa, he approached the Minister of Labour with an outline
plan of action that, in reasonably short order, the Cabinet charged DND
to administer on behalf of the Department of Labour. Within days, the
energetic McNaughton had a crash program of relief camps in operation.
Under its terms, fit and eligible unemployed men were housed, fed, clothed,
and paid 20 cents a day in return for their labor on projects such as road
and airfield construction, forestry work, historical building maintenance,
new barracks erection, and rifle range and military training area develop-
ment. Between 1932 and 1936 more than 170,000 men, and up to 20,000
10 Though
at one time, were gainfully employed on 144 various projects.
debate is unlikely to subside over the success or failure of this scheme and
the actual reasons for its institution, DND seems to have paid a price for
involvement. As a public relations venture it was a disastrous failure, for
in the words of McNaughton's biographer, "Rarely ... has any scheme been
so criticized and from so many sides. "11
The "Royal Twenty Centres," as they were disparagingly called in ref-
erence to the daily allowance, quickly drew the fire of opposition parties,
labor unions, capitalists, and inmates alike. The camps themselves acted as
magnets for agitators, with the result that major disturbances rocked many
of them between 1933 and 1935. They became, in short, a liability to the
government. Although DND was in the end officially praised for the "non-
political and non-military fashion," in which it administered the camps, the
Canadian public remained largely of the opinion that they were but a form
of militarism that aimed at dragooning slave labour. A comparable U.S.
program administered by the Civilian Conservation Corps with limited
input from the War Department proved during the same period more readily
acceptable to the American public. Certainly it ranked among President
Franklin D. Roosevelt's most popular initiatives.
While the Canadian military undoubtedly acquired some useful infra-
structure from this venture, and possibly certain training benefits for its
administrative and engineer branches, it gained more public enmity than
practice in the art of war. The combat arms benefited little, and for the
militia at large it consumed an excessive amount of time.2 The personal
involvement of the CGS in this affair was such, moreover, that he barely
had time to see his Director of Military Training, who headed one of the
The Bellows of Peace
43
few DND directorates not involved in unemployment relief. A more savage
indictment by Brigadier James Sutherland Brown, who personally consid-
ered the complaints of relief camp workers justified, held that McNaughton
deliberately manipulated the situation as a ploy to ingratiate himself with
political leaders and draw attention away from the poor state of the militia
for which he was responsible. 13
It has been suggested that because McNaughton's personal interests were
so extensive, he may not have been "able to give all of his time to the main
function of his office."14 To be sure, the unemployment relief scheme had
been his idea, his concept alone, which he defended to the last. Described
as "a forceful dynamic thruster" with "a tornado-like intellect,"15 he re-
putedly "dominated his colleagues in the military establishment as a great
oak dominates a scrub forest.
" Such a leader, James Eayrs has argued, could
obviously not have been expected "to remain within the compound of
conventional military wisdom."16 On the other hand, McNaughton has
also been called "a master military bureaucratic politician" and one "preoc-
cupied by military problems of a scientific nature such as air burst rang-
gadgets."18
west Territories and Yukon Radio System, which had the beneficial side
effect of garnering additional civil appropriations for Royal Canadian Corps
of Signals training. The attraction of northern development further enabled
McNaughton to obtain similar funding for RCAF operations in the North,
especially in the field of aerial survey and mapping. Evidently fascinated
by the potentialities of aviation, he as well played a key role in the for-
mulation of an agreement on a Commonwealth transatlantic air route. In
1933 he chaired the deliberations of the Inter-Departmental Committee on
Trans-Canada Airways that led to the air bridging of the Dominion. It is
also a matter of record that McNaughton, a close personal friend of Prime
Minister R.B. Bennett, revised drafts of the latter's 1930 campaign speeches
and reviewed his 1935 radio addresses."9
According to Eayrs, the "military field then [existing in Canada] offer[ed]
little scope for.... [McNaughton's] talents... [so hel employed them in
non-military affairs" to become the most powerful civil servant in the
nation.
20 While this does not say much for McNaughton's recognition of
the art of war as a field for serious study, it does say something about the
Canadian military scene. A prevailing attitude expressed by McNaughton
was that the "foundations of military efficiency" rested on the education
of citizens in their respective privileges and responsibilities related to defense
and the "creation of a national spirit." Given such circumstances,
"technical
efficiency in the various arms and services... [would] readily follow, lit
being] ... merely a matter of drill and training combined with careful se-
