170
Half-Forgotten Summer
all were to be prepared to work with infantry and to be employed as main
battle tanks in any role.? The armored division also had to be prepared to
fight its way forward, even to the extent of making its own penetrations
in breakthrough operations as infantry-created gaps, often incomplete, in-
vited counterattack. The division's infantry brigade was to follow-up the
armored brigade,
"taking over and holding, as a series of pivots, ground
won by the armoured brigade.
The "pivot"
as practiced within the 4th Canadian Armoured Division
amounted to an all-round defensive position or stongpoint, usually assumed
on ground vital to the enemy, around which armored elements could ma-
neuver or, if need be, within which they could retire for protection. An
infantry brigade pivot bristling with antitank guns backed up by artillery
defensive fire could expect to occupy an equilateral triangular area roughly
1,800 to 2,400 yards." Maintaining and restoring mobility to the tanks was
also an infantry task. If armor was held up by antitank fire or difficult terrain
and its maneuver restricted, infantry was to forge ahead, making up for
lack of sustained fighting capability through speed of action. When ad-
vancing in open country where it was generally held that armor would lead
by day and infantry by night, most attacks by the latter were foreseen as
taking place in "half-light" (before last light) or at night. Obviously, the
intent was to advance round the clock. The key areas that received emphasss
in the training of infantry brigades in armored divisions were thus "first
speed, and secondly night work.
3,30
Canadian armor, though removed from the vagaries of British military
social strictures, trained in accordance with the foregoing doctrinal devel-
opments. The 4th Canadian Armoured Division in the months most im-
mediately preceding D-Day drew attention to
"The Cooperation of Tanks
with Infantry Divisions in Offensive Operations " describing it as "recent"
and making it the subject of study. Army Training Instruction No. 2, "The
Co-operation of Infantry and Tanke " bad in the meantime also been pub
lished as a Special Supplement to Canadian Army
Training Memorandum
Number 28 of July 1943. The message implicit in all these post-Alamein
documents, however, was that "against prepared defenses the tank cannot
normally lead the attack and put the grateful infantryman on the ground.
The mine and the obstacle dictate the order of events.
»31 The 2 Canadian
Corps Training Instruction No. 12 for the period ending 31 March 1944,
while urging the study of "The Cooperation of Tanks with Infantry Di-
visions in Offensive Operations," further directed that "the clear distinction
between... SHERMAN equipped... and... CHURCHILL equipped...
[armoured brigades] be stressed. "32
The significance of this direction was that, despite Montgomery's decree,
Sherman and Churchill brigades trained differently in infantry-tank coop-
cration. Indeed, as stated in "The Cooperation of Tanks with Infantry
The Imprint of Doctrine
171
Divisions in Offensive Operations," the characteristics of the lighter ar-
mored Sherman, easy prey to the 50-mm Pak,
could) not carry out the infantry tank role in the deliberate attack.
doctrine writers recommended accordingly that Sherman brigades remain
"backers-up to the assaulting troops and not, as infantry tanks, partners in
the assault." Shermans could best support infantrymen on foot by sitting
"back in hull or turret down positions" using "their very effective high
explosive guns and, to a limited extent,
through a defensive position. While admitting that "gnawing [wa]s a slow
methodical process,"
opinion," the best way of handling Shermans in the infantry support role.
This meant, of course, that the hapless infantryman was once again left
setting the pace in the face of organized resistance.
Fortunately, the introduction of the six-pounder, a weapon superior to
the 50-mm Pak 38, enabled the infantry division not only to stand its ground
against panzers, but to defeat strong attacks inflicting heavy losses.
Medenine, Tunisia, on 6 March 1943 the tremendous power of a concealed
antitank defense disposed in depth was demonstrated by three divisions of
30 Corps. Here the British held their fire until the last moment to entice
the Germans into a "killing zone," and the latter uncharacteristically obliged
by attackine frontally with 100 tanks supported by infantry, artillery, and
aircraft. The carefully coordinated defensive fire of over 200 field and me-
dium guns, including new and powerful 17-pounders, broke up numerous
German assaults causing heavy infantry casualties. Of52 German tanks lost,
no less than 43 were destroyed by infantry six-pounders that were dug in
but unprotected by minefalde or wire Afrer the Battle of Medenine, the
"Valmy of the antitank gunner," infantry morale was described as "being
absolutely top of the line."34
Within a month the offensive capability of infantry was also spectacularly
demonstrated by a remarkable feat of arms at Wadi Akarit.
This battle
Simonde bad the opportunity to observe. During the moonless night of 5
April 1943, the 4th Indian Division under the superb tactical command of
Maior Geneml Tuker cantured the Touai-Fatnassa massif in a silent attack.
Painstkingly rehearsed on sand models. with artillery support planned in
detail but on a contingency basis only, the operation was a classic example
of an infileration battle, the sucessful outcome of which depended upon
the training and skill of individual slatoon and section commanders.
effect of this action, which cost the 4th Indian Division relatively modest
casualties, was to turn an Axis force of some 38 battalions and 200 guns
out of an exceedingly strong defensive position.
Unfortunately, the Battle
of Wadi Alarit that had been won sinole-handed several hours before the
formal attack began" was now compromised.
The armored exploitation
force for reasons related to command and control arrangements failed to
