64
Long Forgotten Winters
on 6 September 1939, the British government outlined its requirements,
requesting Canada to consider providing a token expeditionary force and
technical units and personnel for attachment to British formations. Sixteen
days after Canada declared war, however, Prime Minister Chamberlain
made an additional appeal for Canada to participate in the British Com-
monwealth Air Training Plan (BCATP), a grand air training scheme in-
tended to annually qualify 20,000 British, Canadian, Australian, and New
Zealand air crews for service with the RAF. Though Prime Minister Mack-
enzie King expressed regret that this overture had not been made earlier
"so that (Canadian).. war effort would have been framed on these lines
instead of having to head so strongly into expeditionary forces at the start,"
he cabled his approval in principle two days later.
That Mackenzie King personally favored such a limited liability air con-
tribution is undoubted; indeed, RCAF prewar appropriations for 1939-1940
constituted nearly half the total allocation for all three services and exceeded
those of the militia by eight million dollars. The prime minister pressed,
moreover, for public British acknowledgment that Canadian participation
in the BCATP "would provide for more effective assistance toward ultimate
victory than any other form of military cooperation which Canada...
(could] give."* His parsimonious refusal to provide Canadian ground crews,
of course, complicated the matter of the formation of Canadian squadrons
and virtually ensured that for the rest of the war the RCAF would fight as
much less a national entity than the army. Originally, Mackenzie King had
also intended to proclaim the signing of the BCATP before announcing the
landing of the 1st Canadian Infantry Division in Britain. Much to his cha-
grin, however, an ebullient Winston Churchill immediately broadcast the
division's safe arrival thereby confirming continued British interest in a
Canadian expeditionary force.
Ironically, when the BCATP was signed on 17 December 1939, Mack-
enzie King's birthday, the leading elements of the Ist Division disembarked
in Scotland. The division was commanded by Major-General McNaughton
who, though retired and President the National Research Council from
1935, had been personally called back by the politically astute prime minister
to head the querseas army. The 1st Division was to remain in Britain until
it sailed for the Mediterranean theater in July 1943. In the meantime, the
second CEF swelled in strength beyond division, beyond corps, to army
formation size. By the end of the war, the First Canadian Army comprised
two national corps composed of three infantry divisions (each of three
infantry brigades), two armored divisions each of an armored and an in-
fantry brigade), two independent armored brigades, and ancillary troops.
Expressed another way, in terms of combat arms, it fielded six reconnais-
sance regiments, 12 armored regiments, 42 infantry battalions, 45 field
batteries, 12 medium batteries 29 antitan batteries and 21 antiaircraft.-
Shaping an Expeditionary Force
65
batteries. Although not the largest of armies, it was the first and last such
formation that Canada fielded.
Despite the government's initial decision on 16 September not to dispatch
an expeditionary force larger than one division, it was almost a foregone
conclusion that a corps would ultimately be required. The reason was an-
cillary troops. As previously mentioned, Defence Scheme No. 3 had called
for raising a two-division corps with supporting or ancillary troops. The
CGS naturally recommended precisely this size of force as the minimum
Canada should aim to field, with the possibility of later increasing it to one
cavalry and six infantry divisions plus ancillary units. On 19 September the
government announced that a second division would be formed as an ad-
ditional measure of preparedness. Ten days later it signaled its further will-
ingness to send up to 6,000 all ranks in technical units (signals, engineers,
ordnance, transportation, medical, and others) to be selected from a list
provided by the British and equipped at their expense. The reasonable
chance of the second division joining the first overseas, however, prompted
Canadian authorities to advocate revision of this list so that such "non-
divisional" units could eventually be used as ancillary troops within a Ca-
nadian corps.
The British accordingly promulgated a new list that included a require-
ment for a regiment of medium artillery and two army field artillery reg-
iments.?
McNaughton had judged this to be
"the minimum additional
artillery support required by the 1st Canadian Division in ordinary oper-
ations" and "a most important nucleus upon which to build up further
artillery support provided from British resources. "* While the British agreed
that Canadian ancillary units would normally be employed in support of
the Ist Division, the very nature of higher formation organization militated
against such inefficient dedication of corps and army support resources to
a single division. This was particularly true of artillery, the fire of which
though planned in detail and controlled at the grass roots, is best commanded
and coordinated at the highest level to ensure the most effective distribution
of concentrated fire in time.
During the seven-month lull or "phoney war" that characterized the
Western Front after the destruction of Poland in September 1939, the matter
of equipping and financing ancillary troops for a "war lasting ... three
developed into a contentious issue.
While Canada maintained that
Britain should continue to finance ancillary units until such time as they
came under Canadian higher command, the War Office countered that
persistent Canadian involvement in their selection and administration al-
ready placed them under Canadian command, thus relieving Britain of
further responsibility This issue probably accelerated the formation of a
Canadian Corps, for "it was fully recognized that negotiations with the
United Kingdom... respecting the financial arrangements for... Ancillary
