296
Half-Forgotten Summer
generally with the rekindled hope that they would secure Falaise the second
time round. Again, save for some clear patches in the smoke, everything
went well from the beginning and leading elements were on the Laison
within an hour. As might be expected on a hot summer's day, however,
the kilometer-wide tank phalanxes threw up huge dust clouds that combined
with high-explosive concentrations and "vision limiting smoke" to plunge
columns into incredible disorder. In "charge of the light brigade" fashion,
tanks, carriers, and half-tracks steering only by the sun all vied for the lead
as control became virtually impossible to maintain. When they arrived on
the river, most units were widely dispersed and in need of reorganization.
As if this self-inflicted wound were not enough, the Laison was now found
not to be, as Simonds reportedly said, "fordable by tanks at almost all
points. "19
Ironically, a major observation made by Simonds after Exercise "Spartan"
was that a corps plan could not await engineer ground reconnaissance, for
it would then be unable "to keep up with operations." The best that could
be done was to "demand [air] photographic reconnaissance of obstacles well
in advance" and through a study of these and the map prepare flexibly "for
the worst."20 Given that corps planning had to look several days ahead,
Simonds was essentially correct, but to have misjudged the Laison with its
muddy bottom and steep banks was an error of major consequence. The
2nd Armoured Brigade in an after-action report categorized the river as a
"definite tank obstacle" and recommended that, in future, tank commanders
rather than engineers determine whether an obstacle was a tank obstacle or
not." Fortunately, AVREs carrying fascines (bundles of poles for filling
ditches and streams) were eventually able to bridge the Laison's six-foot
breadth for tanks that had neither bogged nor crossed by improvised fords
and demolition-free bridges.
On the 4th Division front the search for crossings forced the armor
northeast along the river beyond Ernes "where tanks were lined up for two
hours amid scenes of great confusion."22 Since this formation had the far-
thest to go to secure its final objective, delay here was critical. Although
Foot Guard tanks were over the river by 1430 hours, they like other units
required some reorganization before pushing onward. About this time the
brigade commander,
Booth, was also mortally wounded and his entire
tactical headquarters effectively put out of action. Obviously, no succession
of command had been detailed within the brigade, and it was not until after
1900 hours that the CO of the Foot Guards, Lieutenant-Colonel Murray
Scott, received notification from Kitching to take over. Suffering from a
broken ankle and considering it too late for armor to cover the remaining
five kilometers to Versainville, he suspended operations for the day.
First light of 15 August found the 4th Armoured Brigade beyond Olen-
don, which had been secured by the 10th Brigade. On the 3rd Division
front, the 2nd Armoured and 7th Brigades were in possession of the greater
Case Hardening
297
part of the Point 184 objective northeast of Souligny; the 8th Brigade, to
the east, held Sassy. By the time operations were resumed, however, the
First Canadian Army had been directed to capture Falaise as well as close
off its eastern exits. * It was thus even more imperative that the 4th Division
capture its final objective as soon as possible.
The 4th Armoured brigade
under the wounded Scott, who was in some pain, accordingly renewed its
advance toward Versainville, but not until 0930 hours due to a decision to
refuel and replenish. Brigade tactical headquarters only resumed functioning
in the early afternoon. Progress was also slowed initially by fierce German
resistance from Epaney, which was eventually reduced mainly by the Al-
gonquins of the 10th Brigade and partly by the Lake Superiors.
It was not until midafternoon that the Grenadier Guards and the recon-
stituted BCR of the 4th Armoured Brigade, now grown cautious for lack
ofinfantry and artillery support, approached the final objective above Ver-
sanville. Unfortunately, the more distant Foot Guards at 1650 hours er-
roneously reported that the two units had taken it, a message that was
joyfully and prematurely passed on to Simonds. Kitching shortly thereafter
relieved the injured Scott at his own request, replacing him with Halpenny.
It was only after having dined with the jubilant Simonds at corps head-
quarters that Kitching learned that the objective had not been captured. He
in turn informed Simonds, much to the latter's understandable disappoint-
ment and annoyance. News from the 3rd Division was likewise discon-
ceting, for after having advanced to Point 168 in a costly action that
aliernoon, assaulting 7th Brigade troops were thrown out of Souligny be-
fore dark? As in "Totalize," the Germans had managed to deny Canadian
arms the planned goal they sought.
The ultimate failure of "Tractable" was largely obscured by a contretemps
of considerable magnitude, though it had little impact on the battle. In a
performance reminiscent of "Totalize," 77 bombers, 44 of them from No.
6 (RCAF) Bomber Group, mistakenly unloaded short on Canadian rearward
units, especially 2 Canadian AGRA, and elements of the 1st Polish Ar-
moured Division. Troop attempts to remedy this blunder by setting out
yellow markers and letting off vellow flares and smoke, a procedure re
hearsed just for such an eventuality only brought more bombs as a similar
target indicator color was employed by the air force that day. Regrettably,
Bomber Command had never been informed of a Supreme Headquarters
Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) directive that authorized the use of
this color for indicating positions of forward ground troops. 26 While in a
strict sense SHAEF should have so advised Bomber Command, the fact
that all communication with the latter funneled through Headquarters First
Canadian Army suggests, in a practical sense a degree of accountability on
This was at least the way the COS Brigadier Mann, initially saw it. In
a first draft memorandum to Crerar he "suggested that we (and myself in
