Figure 3.1
First Canadian Army'
25th Armoured Delivery Regiment (The Elgin
Regiment)
1st Armoured Personnel Carrier Regiment?
1st Army Group, Royal Canadian Artillery
(1 Canadian AGRA):
11th Army Field Regiment
1st Medium Regiment
2nd Medium Regiment
5th Medium Regiment
2nd Army Group, Royal Canadian Artillery
(2 Canadian AGRA):
Ith Amy Field Kegiment
3rd Medium Regiment
4th Medium Regiment
In medium reament
2nd Heavy Anti-Aircraft Regiment (Mobile)
Ist Kocket batey
1st Radar Battery
1st Canadian Army Troops Engineers
10th Field Park Company
5th Field Company
20th Field Company
23гd Field Company
2nd Canadian Army Troops Engineers
11th Field Park Company
32nd Field Company
33гd Field Company
34th Field Company
No. 1 Workshop and Park Company
1st Field (Air) Survey Company
2nd Field Survey Company
3rd Field (Reproduction) Survey Company
First Army Signals
First Canadian Army Headquarters
Defence Battalion (Royal Montreal Regiment)
No. 1 Army Headquarters Car Company
No. 35 Army Troops Composite Company
No. 36 Army Troops Composite Company
No. 81 Artillery Company
No. 82 Artillery Company
No. 41 Army Transport Company
No. 45 Army Transport Company
No. 47 Army Transport Company
No. 63 Army Transport Company
No. 64 Army Transport Company
No. 1 Motor Ambulance Convoy
No. 2 Motor Ambulance Convoy
No. 2 Casualty Clearing Station
No. 3 Casualty Clearing Station
No. 4 Casualty Clearing Station
No. 5 Casualty Clearing Station
No. 6 Casualty Clearing Station
1 Canadian Corps
2 Canadian Corps
1 British Corps
(from 23 Jul 44)
NOTES:
I No listed are elements of the Canadian Dental Corps, Royal Canadian Ordnance Corps, Royal Canadian
Electrical and Mechanical Engineers, Canadian Postal CS, Royal Canadian Ordinance Comp.
2. Ist Armoured Personnel Carrier Regiment operated under 79th British Armoured Division
Including from 13 August 1944 the Royal Netherlands Brigade (Princess Irene s) and the 1st Belgian Infanury
Brigade. On 9 Oclober the ist Cochoslovak Indcpendent Armoured Brigade Group also came under First
Canadian Army.
Shaping an Expeditionary Force
67
troops... would be facilitated by an understanding... that a Canadian
Corps would be formed at some future date." On 19 April 1940, the Ca-
nadian Minister of National Defence, Norman Rogers, in a meeting with
British Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs, Anthony Eden, expressed
the opinion that "Canadian higher command" in respect of ancillary troops
"meant the formation of a Canadian Corps.'")
The next day Rogers and McNaughton considered the conditions under
which ancillary troops would either be combined with the 1st Division in
a self-contained formation under British General Headquarters (GHQ) or,
with British support, be included with 1st and 2nd Divisions in a Canadian
Corps in France. In McNaughton's view, placing Canadian nondivisional
troops under British command risked unnecessary administrative compli-
cations and the undesired dispersal of Canadian overseas land forces. As he
saw it, "a corps was probably the smallest organization through which the
Canadian forces in the field could be effectively administered and fought."
The minister, while pointing out that financial obligations assumed under
the BCATP had "aggravated this aspect of the situation,
" suggested that
if "a Canadian corps could be formed with very little additional cost to
present military commitments, this might be acceptable" to the Cabinet."
The key was whether arrangements could be worked out "with the War
Office under which the United Kingdom would provide as many as possible
of the units required for a completion of the Corps over and above two
Canadian Divisions and the Ancillary troops... in England." The first "rule
.. [to] be observed" suggested by Rogers was that "in general, Canadian
organization should conform to the British."l1
The British, not surprisingly, encouraged the formation of a Canadian
Corps. They had already agreed not to send the 1st Division to France as
part of 4 British Corps, but instead to employ it with Canadian ancillary
units as an independent reserve formation styled "Canadian Force" under
direct control of GHQ. It took the cataclysmic fall of France and the near
destruction of the BEF, however, to shake Canada free from her Depression-
driven preoccupation with finances. On 17 May, the War Committee of
the Canadian Cabinet decided to form a Canadian Corps overseas and to
raise a third division. On the day of the Dunkirk evacuation, the government
announced that a fourth division would also be recruited. In July 1940, at
War Office instigation, Canadian Force was augmented with British and
New Zealand formations to form 7 Corps, commanded by Lieutenant-
General McNaughton with Brigadier M. C. Dempsey as BGS (Operations).
Canada now accepted financial responsibility for Canadian ancillary troops
from 1 September. With the arrival of the bulk of the 2nd Canadian Infantry
Division, by way of Iceland occupation duties, 7 Corps began to take on
an even more pronounced Canadian character. On Christmas Day 1940, it
was officially redesignated the Canadian Corps with the British Ist Ar-
