208
Half-Forgotten Summer
conspicuous Sherman, leaving the troop sergeant back in the Firefly to cover
troop movement.
Yet, despite serious technological disadvantages in tanks, it was additional
infantry not armor that Montgomery really needed. On 24 June he informed
Crerar that Guards Armoured and the 4th Canadian Armoured Divisions
were being "phased back.. [to] come in at the end of the 'build-up'".
The congested state of the bridgehead, which figured prominently in this
decision, seems also to have presented Montgomery with an opportune
excuse for keeping Crear "out of the party" as long as possible. Until the
Second British Army had gained sufficient "elbow room" to the northeast,
east, and southeast of Caen, he asserted, there was neither sufficient frontage
nor depth to employ or deploy another army. The battle area could handle
another corps, but not all the ancillary army troops that would perforce
accompany the First Canadian Army headquarters. There also remains the
distinct possibility, of course, that Montgomery at this critical juncture was
simply unwilling to take a chance on Crerar.
Montgomery proposed instead to build up 12 British Corps with the
53rd and 59th Infantry Divisions, and then introduce the 2nd Canadian
Infantry Division and Headquarters 2 Canadian Corps with its corps troops.
Dempsey had in the meantime been requested to place the 3rd Canadian
Infantry Division under Simonds as soon as he could assume operational
responsibility. Following the arrival of 2 Canadian Corps, Crerar's Head-
quarters First Canadian
Army with army troops would be brought in,
prepared to take over the eastern sector of the 21st Army Group with initially
1 British and later 2 Canadian Corps under command. But until Caen and
the line of the River Dives were secured, Montgomery preferred to have
Dempsey in charge, even it meant his having to command five corps."
This also ensured that Simonds commanded "all Canadians in France,
" for
he was "far and away the[ir] best general... the equal of any British Corps
Commander, and
.. far better than Crerar."12
As outlined earlier in March 1944, the task set for the First Canadian
Army had been envisioned as that of taking over the eastern sector and
advancing to capture Le Havre and Rouen in an operation code-named
"Axehead." On 7 May, however, 21st Army Group had cautioned that as
the "type of country immediately South of the initial bridgehead did] not
favour a rapid advance... and a period may supervene round about D + 14,
when there will be a grave risk of operations stabilising on a line which
gives the Germans advantages in defence." It had also warned that once
through the bocage when greater scope for armored maneuver would exist,
• would be to contain the maximum enemy forces facing the
Eastern flank of the bridgehead. "* On 18 May Crerar produced Operation
"Pintail."
an appreciation of the "problem of the defence of the Eastern
sector of the Allied bridgehead against heavy and determined German at-
tacks" by two to three panzer plus seven to eight infantry divisions.
The appreciation assumed that the First Canadian Army would take over
Throes Beyond the Beach
209
the eastern sector on or after D + 25 (1 July) and that it would extend as far
south as the Argentan-Evreux road. In concluding that he should base his
coastal flank on the River Touques and broaden his frontage to include the
Argentan-Falaise road, Crerar identified a requirement for three corps. From
detailed topographical and intelligence studies, the Argentan-Falaise axis
was selected for its "minimum of transverse obstacles" to be the most likely
enemy thrust line. Should the enemy "penetrate to the high ground between
ARGENTAN and FALAISE," recorded Crerar, he would dominate the
valley of the River Dives south of Mezidon and "gravely imperil the main-
tenance of any of our forces East of R DIVES and NORTH of the road
LISIEUX-CAEN."14
As actual operations developed, Crerar's army did not become operational
until 23 July, seven weeks after D-Day and 12 days after 2 Canadian Corps
took over a sector of the Second British Army front. By this time the 3rd
Canadian Infantry Division supported by the 2nd Canadian Armoured Bri-
gade had been in action for 48 days. On Juno beach on D-Day, the 3rd
Division had taken heavier casualties than its sister British formations, but
it had also advanced farther inland than any other Allied division. In striving
the following day to attain its D-Day objective, the general line of Putot-
en-Bessin and Carpiquet, it had run into what its commander feared most:
panzer counterattack. During the afternoon of 7 June, in what may have
been an ambush, 25 Panzergrenadier Regiment of the 12th SS (Hiterjugend)
Division launched three infantry battalions supported by artillery and a
battalion of Mark IVs against the left flank of the leading tank and infantry
elements of the 3rd Division. This reverse, which saw the Canadians thrown
out of Buron and Authie, may have been avoided had the 3rd Division's
SP guns been within range as they should have been. ' The next morning,
Dempsey visited Keller and "impressed on him the importance of getting
his artillery and armour properly under control »16
On the morning of 8 June the 2nd Battalion, 26 Panzergrenadier Regiment
also counterattacked the Royal Winnipeg Rifles occupying Putot-en-Bessin.
Believing themselves surrounded by panzers and superior enemy forces,
three companies of the Winnipegs attempted to withdraw under cover of
smoke, losing heavily in the process. In reality, no German tanks partici-
pated in the attack, though it does appear that British tanks of the 24th
Lancers did counterattack from the northwest. The Germans attacked with
but three panzergrenadier companies of the 2nd Battalion/26 Panzergren-
adier Regiment infiltrating between the Winnipeg companies. Significantly,
each SS company possessed on average two to three MG 42 general-purpose
machine guns per section as compared to one Bren in each Canadian equiv-
alent. That evening, however, the Canadian Scottish Regiment supported
by a squadron of tanks and two field artillery regiments counterattacked
behind a creeping barrage to retrieve the situation, which ultimately cost
the Canadians nearly 400 casualties."
The 12th SS Panzer Division and its Siegfriedesque commander, Stan-
