190
Half-Forgotten Summer
shattered within a few weeks after the invasion of Normandy. On 5 July
1944 the GOC 1 British Corps, Lieutenant-General John Crocker, advised
Dempsey that Keller was "not really fit temperamentally and perhaps phys-
ically (he is a man who has the appearance of having lived pretty well) for
such a responsible command." According to Crocker, the 3rd Canadian
Division had "lapsed into a very nervy state" after "the excitement of the
initial [assault] phase had passed". Except for the 7th Brigade, which "stood
considerable enemy pressure with great fortitude," the division "became
jumpy and... far too quick on the trigger,
" submitting "exaggerated re-
ports of enemy activity and... its] own difficulties." Again, to paraphrase
Crocker, the "steadying hand" required to combat this "general attitude of
despondency" was not forthcoming;
"indeed the state of the Division] was
a reflection of the state of its Commander" who "was obviously not standing
up to the strain and showed signs of fatigue and nervousness (one might
almost say fright) which were patent for all to see."33 Crocker's assessment
was corroborated by Dempsey who also observed the division's
"highly
strung state in ... the first three or four days ashore" and its loss of offensive
spirit thereafter. Blaming Keller for failure to properly control and inspire
his formation, Dempsey remarked that had it been a British division he
would have recommended his removal at once. 34 Montgomery in a letter
to Crerar concurred, giving his opinion that Keller "was not good enough
to command a Canadian division.
As heir apparent to McNaughton, of course, Crerar had long been able
to play a kingmaker role in the appointment of Canadian officers to senior
command. In October 1939 he even indicated that he felt "very strongly
that R. M.C. [graduates) should have first claim on all P.F. (C.A.S.F.)
commissions, " He was instrumental, moreover, in selecting Lieutenant-
Colonels C. Foulkes and C. C. Mann, respectively GSOs 1 of 3rd and 2nd
Divisions, for promotion to brigadier and possible assignment to either
command or staff posts.
The latter was subsequently appointed BGS, 1
Canadian Corns on 13 July 1940 and the former ceplaced Simonds as BGS
First Canadian Army. By the time Crerar belatedly took over the First
Canadian Army on 20 March 1944, Foulkes had been GOC 2nd Division
since 11 January and Mann BGS/COS, First Canadian Army from 28 Jan-
uary. The even later return from Italy of newly promoted Brigadier E. R.
Suttie in February to command 2 Canadian AGRA and Brigadier R. A.
Wyman in April to command 2nd Armoured Brigade rounded out the slate
of key Canadian staff officers and commanders for the Normandy
invasion. 37
Ironically, Simonds and Foulkes, who both attended Camberley in 1937
as senior and junior division candidates respectively, were also destined to
have a serious falling out. The source of this antagonism may even have
been the Staff College where Simonds reportedly graduated at or very near
the top of his class. The more pedestrian Foulkes, a regular force infantry
Cast of Commanders
191
officer, appears to have been exceedingly ambitious and as unpopular with
his fellows as he was humorless. He was a cold fish. Simonds, on the other
hand, was intolerant, hot tempered, and headstrong, which admitted short-
comings he attempted to hold in check, occasionally vainly, by maintaining
a glacial-like composure. Though totally unable to inspire their soldiers like
Montgomery, Simonds and Foulkes both evinced a similar ruthlessness of
character. Together with Crerar, who possessed a nasty streak of his own??
and was obviously prepared to cajole and intimidate through "old age and
treachery," they constituted the pithy kernel of the Canadian high command
in Normandy. The more personable Kitching and Keller were in another
category. Behind them all, of course, stood a largely unsung array of
gunners and a weight of artillery doctrine.
Significantly, when the First Canadian Army became operational on 23
July 1944, Crerar almost immediately got into a quarrel with his sole corps
commander.
With Simonds's 2 Corps astride the Caen-Falaise road re-
maining under command of Dempsey, the First Canadian Army initially
assumed responsibility only for the eastern sector of the front held by
Crocker's 1 British Corps. Crerar's assigned task was "to advance [First
Canadian Army's] left flank eastwards so that OUISTREHAM would]
cease to be under direct enemy observation and fire... [in order that] use
could) then be made of the port of Caen." To achieve this, Montgomery
suggested, it would be "necessary to push the enemy back to the east side
of the R. DIVES, and to occupy such positions as will ensure that all territory
to the west of the river is dominated by our troops."10 On 22 July Crerar
dispatched a written instruction to Crocker repeating this general direction
and ordering him to draw up the necessary plan, which Crerar indicated
he wished to discuss on the morning of 24 July. In the same instruction
Crear stipulated that the "immediate task" would be "to gain possession
of the general line of the road which runs from BREVILLE 135745 through
At the 24 July meeting, however, Crocker voiced strong obiections to such
IF MAD AIS 161777 to the road junction LE PETIT HOMME 170792.
detailed tactical direction and at Crerr's request. but them in writing the
In Crocker's judgment, the operation ordered by Crear would have
involved "an attack on a narrow front through close and difficult country
where the enemy wals well posted in some strength and would, in its later
stages, [have| involveld] clearing an extensive build-up [sic] area." Instead
ofachieving the "object... enabling] the OUISTREHAM-CAEN Canal
to be bronchr into use » Crocker aroued "the probosed advance to "BRE-
VILLE-LEPT HOMME roald, would ... merely result... to purposeless
losses and an extended front which could only be held with dispropor
tionate daily casualties from the enemy artillery FAST of R DIVES and the
undisturbed mortars and short range weapons in the GONNEVILLE 1676-
VARAVILIE-RAVENT area" He accordingly requested Crerar to "re
