Figure E.2
1 Canadian Corps
5th Canadian Armoured Division
Th Covered Peera store dames
17th Field Regiment
8th Field Regiment (Self-Propelled)
4th Anti-Tank Regiment
5th Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment
4th Field Park Squadron
Ist Field Squadron
10th Field Squadron
5th Armoured Divisional Signals
1st Canadian Armoured Brigade
1st Armoured Brigade Signals
11th Armoured Regiment
(The Ontario Regiment)
12th Armoured Regiment
(Three Rivers Regiment)
14th Armoured Regiment
(The Calgary Regiment)
Royal Canadian Army Service Corps
5th Armoured Divisional Troops Company
5th Armoured Divisional Transport Company
5th Armoured Brigade Company
11th Infantry Brigade Company
No. 7 Light Field Ambulance
No. 24 Field Ambulance
5th Armoured Brigade
2nd Armoured Regiment
(Lord Strathcona's Horse (Royal Canadians))
5th Armoured Regiment
8th Princess Louise's (New Brunswick) Hussars
The Brind Di bia Dragoons)
The Westminster Regiment (Motor)
11th Infantry Brigade
11th Independent Machine Gun Company
The Princess Louise Fusiliers)
The Perth Regiment
The CartetNova SCotia Regiment
Sth Highlanders of Canada
Vote: Canadian Dental Corps, Royal Canadian O
dnanc
: Corps, Royal Canadian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers, and Canadian Provost Corps not shown.
Final Tempering
151
cillary troops, though the latter intimated that a change of army number
might be required. The possibility of 12 British Corps being placed under
First Canadian Army command brought forth the suggestion to add ap-
propriate British staff officer representation. A War Office proposal that
this proportion not exceed 50 percent was subsequently accepted by Ca-
nadian authorities. What was also clear, however, was that neither Brooke
nor Paget was prepared to accept the generalship of McNaughton.
Unfor-
tunately, Montgomery's abrupt refusal to let McNaughton visit the 1st
Canadian Division in Sicily in July 1943 raised a nationalist furor that over
the years has clouded the central issue of his lack of command ability.?
In the meantime the 3rd Canadian Division and the 2nd Canadian Ar-
moured Brigade, newly arrived from June, had also been selected in July
for assault landing training with 1 British Corps; neither were to revert to
Canadian command until 11 July 1944. This left the First Canadian Army
with the 2nd Infantry and 4th Armoured Divisions preparing for Normandy
exploitation operations up to and across the River Seine. It was not until
October 1943 during Exercise "Grizzly II," however, that the latter operated
for the first time as a division with all arms and services functioning. Here
again problems in traffic control and infantry-artillery coordination sur-
faced. Poorly briefed patrols that invariably got lost confirmed the low
standard of training of its infantry brigade.
A better showing reputedly
occurred in the following month when the 4th Division opposed the 9th
British Armoured Division in Exercise "Bridoon." Headquarters 2 Cana-
dian Corps for its part directed "Grizzly Il" and practiced controlling the
Ist Polish Armoured and 61st British Infantry divisions in Exercise "Link"
during September.
From "Spartan" onward, Canadian formations and headquarters re-
maining in Britain continued to suffer from various training shortcomings.
The unproductive habit of commanders appointing themselves exercise
"firectors" rather than actively practicing their own function seems to have
persisted at the higher level. During both exercises "Elm" in February and
"Pickaxe" in August, Brigadier G. V. Whitehead acted in the role of di-
vision commander, while the latter "directed. "23 At a lower level, the 4th
Canadian Armoured Divicion having "gone through... many upheavals"
did not reach sauadron level training until August 1943. Only in mid
September did it embark upon regimental (baration) level training. The
2nd Armoured Prigade at about the same time. carried out training up to
unit level between 15 September and 31 October. It is not surprising, there-
fore that autumn formation-level training revealed imperfections in pa-
trolling, traffic control artillery movement and fire coordination. Even
he "drill of firing and thas moving the postitialn of the tanlk ... Idid
JOT seem to be known" in one unit of the 4th Armoured Brigade
Thus it was that only a few monthe before D-Dav. Canadian units
continued to emphasize the basica Priority during the perind 1 January-31
