Preface
xiv
Normandy. Major attention with respect to the last focuses on land oper-
ations after the consolidation of the bridgehead, since Canada's second great
expeditionary force trained principally for action expected to follow the
amphibious landings on the Continent. While these operations naturally
relate to the controversial closure of the Falaise Gap, it must be stressed
that this aspect in itself is of but collateral concern to the present study.
The scenario nonetheless remains highly significant, for had the First Ca-
nadian Army achieved its objectives along the road to Falaise, it would
undoubtedly have attained a military renown equal to Lieutenant-General
George Patton's more famous Third U.S. Army. It might even have spear-
headed the subsequent advance of Field Marshal Sir Bernard Montgomery's
21st Army Group instead of being left to plug along the difficult and es-
sential, but plainly unglamorous, northern seaboard through Holland.
What happened to Canadian arms in the Norman summer of 1944 cannot,
of course,
rationalizations, which have attributed battlefield reverses to German fa-
naticism, inferior tanks, or the greenness of Canadian troops and the in-
adequacies
of their regimental
officers,
approach. By delving deeper into the past and looking further afield, es-
pecially to the experience of the British Army with which the Canadian
was so closely integrated, one is driven to conclusions of a different order.
Indeed, as Peter Paret has so convincingly stated:
The ... operations of any war can be understood only in the light of conditions
of the ten or twenty years before its beginning. Technology, organization,
doctrine, training, command and staff appointments—all the essentials of
action in war—are put in place and developed in peacetime.
The testing
experience of combat will bring about change, but prewar elements continue
to affect many events throughout even the longest of conflicts.
In the course of establishing the connection between the summer of 1944
and the preceding winters of Canadian Army development and growth, it
will be demonstrated that high command shortcomings seriously impaired
Canadian fighting performance. The Canadian field force was from its
inception compromised by a military leadership that had for too long con-
centrated on bureaucratic, political, stratego-diplomatic, and technical pur-
suits to the neglect of its operational and tactical quintessence. Having
forsaken its Great War professional legacy and military raison d'être during
the interwar years, the Canadian high command proved incapable of con-
ducting worthwhile training in Britain. The overseas army thus largely
wasted its time and had to be retaught by others the business of war, which
truly professional armies had long recognized was more profitably studied
in peace. The frenzied rhythm that characterized Canadian training activity
from the start unfortunately continued to de-emphasize the need for all arms
Preface
XV
cooperation, with the result that some higher commanders in Normandy
unknowingly and unnecessarily cast the lives of their soldiers away.
Obviously, given the exceedingly complex and multifaceted nature of
the foregoing subject area, there existed a practical need to limit the scope
of this study. For this reason, only the combat arms—armor, artillery, and
infantry-and the command and staff function have been considered in any
depth. The intent was not to discount the importance of engineers, signals,
tactical air, maintenance, logistics, or other support services, but merely to
suggest that they require separate specialist analyses. In short, this work
does not pretend to be definitive either from the standpoint of scope or
primary evidence, the full depths of which have by no means been plumbed
by scholars. The study does,
however, break new ground on staff and
tactical training through a reading of archival records, particularly Mont-
gomery's personal correspondence with Lieutenant-General H.D. G. Crerar
on the state of Canadian training three years into the war. In one sense The
Canadian Army and the Normandy Campaign illustrates the cumulative nature
of history, for its argument could not have been raised up without the firm
foundations provided by Colonel C. P. Stacey's official and unofficial his-
tories and Professor R. H. Roy's indispensable 1944: The Canadians in Nor-
mandy. The more one reads Stacey, the more one is struck by the sheer
magnitude of his scholarly achievement.
Undoubtedly, his dominance of
the field will grow stronger with the years as other formerly more fash-
ionable Canadian historians continue to fade. Having toiled through war
diaries and operations logs, I can also appreciate better than most the value
of Professor Roy's painstaking research.
As always in the production of a book, there are many whose help and
assistance must be publicly acknowledged. First, to Professor James Prit-
chard of Queen's University I owe a special thanks for his great patience
in reading my manuscript and offering wise and friendly advice. I shall
remain ever grateful to him for introducing me to the Braudelian perspective
of the longue durée, the broad sweep of history, which influenced my in-
vestigative approach. I am similarly indebted to Professor Barry Hunt of
the Royal Military College for reviewing chapters and providing many
constructive criticisms. I might add that ever since studying under Dr. Hunt
on the RMC War Studies course, I have heavily relied upon him as a mentor.
A man of unparalleled naval and military knowledge, he has been the best
possible friend a serving officer could ever hope to have.
It has also been my good fortune to have had the opportunity to conduct
the 1989 and 1990 battlefield tours of Normandy for the Canadian Land
Forces Command and Staff College. For this I sincerely thank my former
commandant, Major-General Clive Milner, who had a fine vision of what
a staff college should be, and my current commandant, Brigadier-General
T. F. de Faye, who enthusiastically promoted the study of military history.
I am furthermore beholden to the hero-veterans who contributed so much
