268
Half-Forgotten Summer
the Allied Expeditionary Force, favourably placed for that purpose [author's
emphasis], will result in the crushing conviction to Germans, even of the
S.S. variety, that general defeat of the German Armies on all fronts has
become an inescapable fact." Expecting that a quick termination of the war
would follow, Crerar obviously hoped that the results of "Totalize" would
be decisive and historical. He purported to have "no doubt" about the First
Canadian Army making 8 August 1944, the anniversary of the decisive
Battle of Amiens,
"an even blacker day for the German Armies than...
(what was| recorded against that same date twenty-six years ago."14
If 8 August 1944 was to be made another historic date, however, Crerar
felt that "certain basic things" had to "be firmly grasped by all ranks."
Among these he accented the need to maintain the momentum, which in
his understanding meant the early provision by commanders "of the di-
rection and orders required to keep the movement, and fire support, alive
and nourished." While underscoring the importance of initiative and con-
demning the general tendency among all ranks "to consider objectives on
the ground as an end-rather than as a means to an end," (i.e., killing
enemy), he nonetheless cautioned that on "reaching a 'pause' objective,
prepare at top speed for the almost invariable quick, but determined, enemy
infantry-cum-tank, small scale, counter-attack." Warning that "to surrender
to German SS Troops is to invite death," he exhorted the infantry to "be
seized with intention to drive on... by the use of their own weapons..
in the absence of "laid on' support." Clearly, in Crerar's view, the "idea
...(was] far too prevalent that, without a colossal scale of artillery, or air
support, continued advance of the infantry [was impossible."ls
Yet, as Montgomery was to report, the "desperately anxious" Crerar,
worried about "fighting his first battle" at the head of the first Canadian
field army, had himself "seemed to have gained the idea that all you want
is a good initial fire plan, and then the Germans all run away!" He still had
not realized, Montgomery continued, that
as planned. "16
"battles seldom go completely
Again, despite his occasional utterances to the contrary, it
would appear that Crerar essentially harbored a trench warfare mentality.
His performance as a corps commander in Italy at least convinced Major-
General Vokes that his
"whole outlook on tactics was influenced by his
experience as a junior officer of artillery in the 1914-18 war." At one point
Crerar even suggested bringing "tactical methods of attack... in line with
those used in France and Flanders in World War I. When, according to
Vokes, he expounded his views to general officers of the Eighth Army at
a study period, he was "heard in stony silence by that battle-experienced
galaxy.
talize"
As might be expected, difficulties in coordinating air support for "To-
ensued from the start. The Commander-in-Chief of Bomber Com-
mand, Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Harris, was, due to genuine concern
about troop safety, relatively lukewarm to the idea of close support heavy
The Amiens Alchemy
269
bombing by night. He agreed, however, that if it were "proved to the
satisfaction of the 'Master Bombers' concerned that 'RED' or 'GREEN'
coloured concentrations, fired by 25-p[ounde]rs could be clearly identified
at night, then Bomber Command was prepared to carry out the task.
Otherwise it would commence twilight heavy bombing in accordance with
the program at 2130 hours for 40 minutes, an alternative reluctantly accepted
by Simonds at the time. Following a trial whereby one-minute bursts of
green 25-pounder shells were put down on two selected points
opposite the 1 British Corps front on the night of 6 August, the
"master
bombers" concluded that targets indicated by marker shells could be sat-
isfactorily identified by night.
The H-hour for the commencement of the first phase of "Totalize" thus
continued to be 2300 hours 7 August,
from which time both flanks of 2
Corps armored-infantry thrusts would be protected by heavy bombing.
Air support for the second phase estimated to start at 1400 hours 8 August
was more comprehensive and largely the responsibility of the USAAF
Eighth Air Force. Significantly, in the course of discussion, the effect of
"dust, smoke, and corruption"
was recognized as a problem in the accurate
bombing of successive targets. Forward troops and vehicles were accord-
ingly warned to carry yellow smoke and yellow Celanese triangle strips for
identification to friendly aircraft. Most important of all, however, all land
force action was now locked into heavy bomber strike timings, which could
not be altered without 24 hours warning.
The only link with Bomber
Command, moreover, was through First Canadian Army headquarters.'"'
New intelligence on changes in German dispositions prompted Simonds
on the morning of 6 August to make a major modification to his original
plan, for which orders had been issued the previous day. The 89th Infantry
Division, believed to have left Norway on 12 June, had relieved the Ist SS
Panzer in the line on the night of 5 August. As the 9th SS Panzer had already
left for the Caumont area on 1 August to counter the threat from the Second
British Army, the 89th in fact took over the entire forward defensive front-
age between the Orne and La Hogue previously held by both SS panzer
divisions. With an established structure of two regiments of three battalions
cach, the division fielded roughly 3,000 front line troops, many of whom
were of non-German extraction. It nonetheless fielded 78 mortars and was
backed up by two heavy artillery battalions, numerous Nebelwerfer multi-
barrelled mortars, two SP antitank units, and about sixty 88-mm guns.
The
89th had never been in action before and was not thought to be capable of
offering great resistance in the face of heavy bombardment or deep pene-
tration by an enemy. The 272nd Infantry Division had in the meantime
sidestepped east and south of Cagny where on the night of 4 August it
relieved the still formidable 12th SS Panzer, which took up a reserve position
on the River Laison. 20
The 12th SS was estimated to have about 2,500 front line troops (actually
