248
Half-Forgotten Summer
now dangerously exposed on the right flank, may have gone without full
artillery support. Only one of three allocated FOOs accompanied the ad-
vance, and his wireless set was soon put out of action. The squadron of the
1st Hussars specifically assigned to support the Black Watch somehow also
ended up assisting the Highlanders around May-sur-Orne. On failing to
properly
"marry up"
with the infantry it was supposed to support, the
entire squadron sought to provide covering fire from that vicinity, but here
its tanks were drawn into desperate battle with enemy antitank guns and
panzers. The doomed Black Watch, under intense mortaring and raked by
machine-gun cross fire, thus pressed on alone in the very face of counter-
attacking Panthers coming into action, struggling as Simonds had urged
them but days before to "uphold... [their] good name by ... [their] con-
duct and... fighting." An estimated 60 all ranks led by Major Griffin
reached the top of the ridge where the enemy was dug in and posted in
even greater strength. Of 300 officers and men committed to this action
not more than 15 made it back, the acting CO falling with the mass of his
soldiers."
During the Black Watch trial by fire, the enemy increased the pressure
on the Calgary Highlanders from May-sur-Orne.
Unfortunately, through
a misunderstanding the battalion pulled back to St. André-sur-Orne rather
than the prescribed factory area south of St. Martin, which was quickly
reoccupied by the enemy. The Germans were thus able to deal with the
Maisonneuves from the rear, exactly as they had the Calgary Highlanders,
when the former battalion attacked May-sur-Orne at 1900 hours in a futile
attempt to retrieve the situation. In the meantime, Foulkes had ordered
Young's 6th Brigade to be prepared to attack Fontenay-le-Marmion from
the general area of May-sur-Orne the following morning. In the course of
planning this operation, however, Young became convinced that until the
Germans were cleared from Hill 112 to the west of the Orne, further op-
erations immediately east of the river were unlikely to achieve success. At
2000 hours he expressed these reservations to Foulkes, stating that he con-
sidered irs his expres ch these resedatos command" to do so. Foulkes, on
his part, agreed and set out to make similar representations to Simonds."
Simonds, as it turned out, had already seen Dempsey and received per-
mission to suspend Operation "Spring," which, except for Dieppe, was
the bloodiest day of the war for Canadian arms. When he precisely deter-
mined that events were not unfolding as they should have is not entirely
clear. The erroneous report from the North Novas and confused com-
munications emanating from the 5th Brigade, likely prompted by German
counter movements, apparently led him to believe that Tilly and May-sur-
Orne were in Canadian hands. Indeed, the perception that Tilly was being
held against counterattack persisted within 2 Corps headquarters as late as
1625 hours. In any case, after having personally monitored the attack of
the Black Watch and visited Dempsey, Simonds at 1500 hours ordered
Cold Eye on Death
249
Foulkes's 2nd Division to capture Rocquancourt with the corps artillery in
support at 1830 hours, attack May-sur-Orne again at 2100 hours, and take
Fontenay-le-Marmion the next morning. He also expected Cunningham's
9th Brigade to consolidate Tilly during the night. The strong German
counterattack against Verrières around 1800 hours, however, appears to
have finally convinced him otherwise. 23
By any measurement "Spring" was an unmitigated tactical debacle and
Simonds was obviously deeply upset about it. In postwar correspondence
he maintained that despite the overall strength of German dispositions, "the
objectives of MAY-SUR-ORNE, VERRIERES, and TILLY-LA-CAM-
PAGNE could and should have been taken and held without heavy cas-
ualties." That they were not he attributed to faulty minor tactics, especially
those points he elaborated upon at the beginning of July: neglecting to
secure start lines properly; failing to keep close to supporting artillery fire;
overlooking the need to search ground thoroughly when mopping up; and
not consolidating quickly enough to meet counterattack. In his view, dis-
regard of these basic tactical measures and "errors of judgement in minor
tactics" largely accounted for the "failure to secure initial objectives" and
the excessive and unnecessary casualties in operation
In light of the rather complicated and disconnected tactical plan of the
2nd Division, which must be attributed to Foulkes, these observations surely
have some validity. The Camerons clearly pursued a task beyond their
capacity, and without the entire 6th Brigade behind them to help out it
remained difficult to attain within the required timeframe. Indeed, the clear-
ance of St. André and St. Martin might better have been left to the 6th
Brigade complete. A proper attack by the 5th Brigade supported by armor
would likely have secured May-sur-Orne and,
in turn, Fontenay-le-
Marmion One would have exnected, as well that Maior Griffin, having
just assumed command of the Black Watch, should have been directed, as
Rockingham of the RUTI more wisely insisted. to alter his plan to fit
obviously changed circumstances. Since there was a CRA's representative
at Sth Brigade headquarters, one would also have thought that better ar-
tillery fire control and bombardment arrangements could have been made
for the Watch attack In chort it is difficult to escape the conclusion that
both Foulkes and Megill could have done more to ensure that the fighting
battalions of the 2nd Division were correctly launched into battle. 25®
The lot of 2nd Division units might have been made easier, of course,
had 2 Corps taken greater mains in coordinating with 12 British Corps the
masking or suppression of Carman daylight activity across the Orne to the
West Srill major responsibility for the disaster appears to lie at the divisional
level of planning and easilicy Orhat Simonds was highly dissatisfied with
the performance of the 2nd Division, with whom he passed most of the
morning from 0800 hours, is evident from the disclosure that one of the
things... uppermost in This mind on that day.. was tol get rid of
