98
Long Forgotten Winters
its own Staff College." If the dominions were to "march in step," he
concluded, they "must absorb the same doctrine-the same learning."33
The year 1922 witnessed, nonetheless, the revival of the venerable Militia
Staff Course designed to qualify "selected officers of the [reserve] Non-
Permanent Active Militia for appointment to the staff of formations in the
field." Also a qualification for field rank (major), it again comprised the-
oretical and practical portions. The first,
conducted at convenient centers
within military districts or by correspondence during the winter months
from October to April, terminated with an examination. Subject material
covered included two précis on strategy, seven on combatant arms, six on
tactics, two on map reading and field sketching, and, respectively, nine,
eight, and five on G, A, and Q staff duties. The practical portion, usually
held during two weeks in July at a central camp, kicked off with a two-
hour equitation course for candidates on their allocated horses. Thereafter
they tackled tactical problems based on the theoretical portion in both com-
mand and staff dimensions, from section to brigade level in the former case,
and from staff captain to divisional staff in the latter.
Though a brave attempt to conduct training for war, the Militia Staff
Course suffered from obvious limitations. The question of how to maintain
the proficiency of successful candidates posed an additional problem. The
inauguration of the Advanced Militia Course in 1935 consequently aimed
at giving further training to graduates under age 45. By the time the Militia
Staff Course terminated in 1939, over 400 officers possessed the "msc"
qualification and another 29 the advanced MSC certificate. On the surface
"psc" by virtue of having passed through either Camberley or Quetta. As
most Militia Staff Course graduates could not handle more than garrison
staff appointments 34 however, they actually added little depth to the Ca-
nadian staff situation on the outbreak of war.
By April 1940 the provision of competent trained staff officers had become
a matter of serious concern to the Canadian field force overseas. Though
the British Army had started conducting 17-week junior war staff courses
at Camberley for more than 100 students at a time from 15 September 1939,
only a few Canadian vacancies were allocated on each. While of great value,
these were clearly not enough to satisfy the growing demand for staff officers
bought on by increased diversity in weapons, equipment. and techniques
of war. The British brigade staff, for example, had expanded threefold over
what it was in the Great War. As a first step toward meetino this short-
coming. MeNauohton establiched the Canadian Junior War Staff Course
(CJWSC) at Ford Manor, Lingfield. Surrey, in the fall of 1940. Sixty-one
officers attended the first course conducted from 2 January to 12 April
1941 The directing staff consisted of a Commandant CSO 1 Lieutenant-
Colonel Simonds, and tea GSO 2 instructors of the latter, three were British
combat arms officers with recent battle experience, nine were staff qualified
The Staff Caste
and another
nine had held staff appointments with field formation
headquarters.
As Simonds reported, organizing a training program in the space of four
weeks did not give rise to the "question of what a war staff course should
include in absolute terms." Determining the scope of the course became
principally a matter of deciding what could be covered with reasonable
thoroughness in a period of about three months. The syllabus, restricted
to "staff work in the field, mainly on the Grade 3 and Grade 2 level," largely
reflected that of the Junior War Staff Course conducted at Camberley. Some
modifications proved necessary, however, since Canadian officers attending
CWSC had on average little more than a year's service with their units
and practically no experience with arms other than their own. The great
majority of British candidates at Camberley, on the other hand, were reg-
ulars "with ten or more years continuous regimental experience... [many
of whom] had qualified for entrance to the Staff College before the outbreak
of War." Special emphasis was thus accorded to giving less experienced
Canadian candidates thorough grounding in the organization and char-
acteristics of the arms and services and in elementary staff duties. "36
Naturally, the CJWSC benefitted from its near proximity to Camberley
and large-field formations like the Ist Canadian and 1st Armoured divisions,
which were capable of staging outdoor demonstrations of actual troop de-
ployments on selected ground. This was particularly fortunate, since in
Simonds's view the tactical knowledge of Canadian candidates joining the
course appeared "definitely below what the average should [have] be/en]
for officers training for the General Staff."37 Progress was often retarded,
moreover, by the frequent requirement during exercises to deal with details
of minor tactics with which officers should have been familiar. Another
very pronounced and general failing, deemed by Simonds to be the result
of a flaw in the Canadian educational system was the "inability... of most
sudent officers to express themselves clearly and concisely on paper." Much
instruction during the first month consequently concentrated on writing
orders and preparing correspondence. Each student during the course had
also to submit three written papers.
Significantly, of the 59 students who completed the first course, only 36
received a clear staff qualification (SC). Of the remainder, seven obtained
for staff employment in any capacity. Simonds bluntly depicted this un-
satisfactory performance any capinevitable result of the rapid expansion of
a force in which a mender peacetime trainine lonended solely nnon good
will." Ranid officer turnover, unit focus on administrative problems, and
frequent interruntion of training since mobilization had in his estimation.
further ensured a genemlly "low standard of individual tactical training in
the corps of officers " Simonds also expressed concern that the proportional
representation of the varinus arms and cervices had been given too much
