Prologue
truths to actual events. The former being determined by "inquiry... the
most essential part of any theory... the task of... [which is] to study the
nature of ends and means,
" the resultant "arch of truth" may even produce
certain principles and rules. Yet, cautions Clausewitz, "these are less likely
to yield an algebraic formula for the battlefield" than to "provide a thinking
man with a frame of reference for the movements he has been trained to
carry out; it is highly improbable that they could serve as a guide which at
the moment of action lays down precisely the path he must take."28 In this
Clausewitzian view, theory is neither "a positive doctrine, [nor] a sort of
manual for action"; instead, it "exists so that one need not start afresh each
time." Intended to "educate the mind of the future commander... to guide
him in his self-education," it is not meant "to accompany him to the bat-
tlefield; just as the wise teacher guides and stimulates.a young man's intel-
lectual development, but is careful not to lead him by the hand for the rest
of his life."
Theory, according to Clausewitz, "becomes a guide to anyone who wants
to learn about war from books." In the critical, as opposed to plain narrative,
approach toward historical events, "which merely arranges facts one after
another," he recommends three intellectual steps. The first, historical re-
search proper, involves discovering and interpreting the "equivocal facts"
and has little to do with theory. The second, "critical analysis proper," is to
attempt to trace effects back to their causes, of which there are usually more
then one. The third and final step, which for the military professional is
most important, remains "the investigation and evaluation of the means
employed"
using theoretical measurements as appropriate, which is de-
scribed as "criticism proper, involving praise and censure... [and] the les-
sons to be drawn from history." In war, as Clausewitz warns, however,
"the facts are seldom fully known and the underlying motives even less
so," which is "why critical narrative must usually go hand in hand with
historical research."
As previously indicated, it is not proposed in this work to examine Ca-
nadian Army operations in their totality, but to study the second phase of
the Battle of Normandy in light of Canadian preparations for land warfare
on the Continent. Not surprisingly, these preparations cover more winters
of peace than a summer's fighting. Indeed, what happened in Normandy,
though it remains our focus, can only be explained in terms of what went
on before. It is of course realized, as Keegan reasoned, that
Action is essentially destructive of all institutional studies; just as it compro-
mises the purity of doctrines... War, the good quartermaster's opportunity,
the bad quartermaster's bane, is the institutional military historian's irritant.
It forces him... to combine analysis with narrative-the most difficult of all
the historian's arts. Hence his preference... for the study of armed forces in
peacetime 29
Of Ignorant Armies
In examining high command, force structure, equipment,
doctrine, and
battle and staff training in Book One, however, it is expected that appro-
priate connections to operations can be drawn.
No apologies are offered for this essentially "drum and trumpet" ap-
proach, for military history "must in the last resort be about battle."30
Indeed, as the distinguished American military historian, Russell Weigley,
reminds,
"it is to prepare for and to wage war that armies primarily exist,
and for the military historian to fail to carry his studies... to the test of
war is to leave his work grotesquely incomplete." This is neither to deride
the acknowledged impact that political, social, and economic forces work
upon the exercise of arms, nor to decry the moral and psychological aspects
of military history. In fact, where apposite, efforts will be made to consider
these dimensions. In the main, however, the intent will not be to "avoid
venturing into the heat of battle," for as Weigley contends: "A day's trial
by battle often reveals more of the essential nature of an army than a
generation of peace. "31 It is to be hoped that dispassionate analysis of Ca-
nadian operational performance in the Caen-Falaise battles will bear this
out.
NOTES
1. Richard Holmes, Firing Line (London: Jonathan Cape, 1986), p. 9; and also
John Keegan in Introduction to Paddy Griffith, Forward into Battle (Chichester:
Antony Bird, 1981).
2. Count Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace, trans. Constance Garnett (New York:
Modern Library, undated), pp. 1118-1131.
3. Matthew Arnold,
Songs & Lyrical Poems in the English Language, selected by Francis Turner Palgrave,
5th ed. (Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press, 1990), p. 365.
4. Holmes, Firing Line, p. 9; and W.H. A. Groom, Poor Bloody Infantry: A Memoir
of the First World War (London: William Kimber, 1976), p. 22.
5. Griffith,
Forward into Battle, p. 8.
Arthur Swinson,
Kohima (London: Cassell, 1966), pp. xiv-xv.
7. Holmes, Firing Line, pp.
8, 15.
8. Col. C.P. Stacey, A Date With History (Ottawa: Deneau, 1983), pp. 229-230.
9. Holmes, Firing Line, p. 10.
10. Stacey, Date, p. 229; and Dominick Graham,
"The First World War on
Land," British Military History. A Supplement to Robin Higham's Guide to Sources, ed.
Gerald Jordan (New York: Garland, 1988), p. 279.
11.
Stacey, Date, p. 230. The log is a minute-by-minute record of all information
and orders sent out and received by a headquarters. The purpose of the war diary
"is to furnish a historical record of operations and to provide data upon which to
base future improvements in army training, equipment, organization and admin-
istration." Stacey noted that war diaries often contained irrelevant "chitchat" and
"errors of fact,
" commonly the result of their being written up after the event; he
found roughly one-third of all war diary map references to be inaccurate. C.P.
