272
Half-Forgotten Summer
nadian Armoured Division TEWT in which the armored brigade was de-
picted as having reached its objective and was now contemplating further
action in the face of a disorganized enemy. When the commander of the
5th Armoured Brigade, Brigadier "Brad" Bradbrook, queried the need to
wait "for another 24 guns" as he had "over 150 of them on... tanks,"
Simonds insisted that the correct course was to pause, reorganize, and wait
for the artillery to catch up. The brigadier, possibly unaware of the African
experience, was subsequently fired. 2 Significantly, a 1941 CJWSC exercise
alluded to in Chapter 5 had placed similar emphasis upon the importance
of artillery. Its scenario postulated a brigade attack supported by three
regiments of artillery and the question was whether to delay it for an hour,
despite the urgent need to take an objective, in order to obtain the support
of a fourth regiment.
The "suggested solution,"
which to some degree
illustrated the depth of the tactical dilemma facing those who would com-
mand all arms, was to "wait for it, as the slight additional delay so caused
will be more than made up for by the doubling [sic] of... gun support.
Obviously, it is not possible to be categorical about the relative merits
of fire power as opposed to maneuver, when, in theory, the former should
complement the latter. So often in practical application, however, the ar-
tillery fire plan for sheer coordination problems related to gun and am-
munition allotment, not to mention logistical considerations, may have
dictated the limits of maneuver.
28 At the same time, infantry and armored
ignorance of artillery planning methods and procedures often ensured the
unpardonable loss of firepower advantage within whatever maneuver room
existed. The key was knowing how to maneuver within the constraints of
artillery requirements, trading one off against the other as the situation
permitted. Sustained heavy emphasis upon artillery and air support may
nonetheless have inculcated among some armored and infantry elements
the mental attitude that they could do little on their own. In other words,
the relationship fanned its own imbalance, bombing and especially indirect
fire becoming a "crutch" that fostered an increasing maneuver arm de-
pendence. The armored brigadier in Italy, though he may have been tac-
tically naive, did display the requisite willingness, some might say
recklessness, to fight his way forward using his own means.
As it was, doctrine as well as inferior weaponry determined the bounds
of maneuver arm performance. Perhaps this naturally resulted from the
artillery becoming, from the moment it is dealt the first shattering blows
to enemy armor, the most battle-worthy and reliable corps in the Canadian
and British armies. The essential dichotomy in tactical approach materialized
in the argument over narrow frontages: simply put, attacking on a narrow
front permitted the concentration of a greater weight of artillery offensive
fire; on the other hand, it also allowed a mobile enemy to concentrate troops
and dafensive fire to defeat the thrust Obviously, employing barrages o
timed concentrations to put infantry on an objective, firing more concen-
The Amiens Alchemy
273
trations on enemy locations that could possibly interfere, and using artillery
on call thereafter, was best done on a narrow front. Against a skilled and
almost invisible German defense in depth, however, the problem was not
how to get the infantry there, but how to keep them there under intense
mortaring and flanking counterattacks. One solution was to isolate the
objective area by boxing it in with barrages, the other, to attack on a broad
front." Yet, as Simonds so correctly argued, to overcome a defense in depth
one had to attack in depth, the conundrum of the broad front approach.
in the oppressive heat and dust of 7 August, Simonds
ensured that his maneuver elements formed up in concentrated formation.
An armored and infantry brigade in both the 2nd and 51st Divisions con-
stituted the main assaulting force. In each case they were organized in
columns and given two "lines of advance" or axes. Within the 2nd Division,
four columns were deployed with four vehicles abreast on a 16-yard front-
age, which was roughly the width that could be cleared by four flail tanks.
Every 10 feet along the length of a column there was another group of four
vehicles Fach column was headed by two tank troops, followed by two
mine-clearing fail troops and one lane-marking AVRE troop; marshaled
behind these came an infantry battalion or, in one instance, a reconnaissance
regiment mounted in Kangaroos or M3 White half-tracks. Further back in
each column travelled the remainder of a tank squadron, two antitank
troops, a machine-gun platoon, and an engineer section. The rear of all four
columns was covered by a "fortress force" of one armored regiment less a
squadron. Columnar deployment within the 51st Division, though similar,
was limited to a left and right split, each based on an armored regiment
and infantry battalion, roughly 200 vehicles strong, and including specially
designated navigating tanks.
After dark all coltan rolled closer to the start line, and punctually af
230 hours 1,020 Lancaster and Halifax bombers commenced to drop a total
of 3, 462 tons of bombs on fank targets identified by artillery red and green
marker shells. At 2330 hours both divisions crossed the start line in their
respective formations picking un a rolling barrage fired by nine field and
nine medium regiments, advancing 100 yards a minute in 200-yard lifts to
a depth of 6. 000 vards In all. 720 guns with up to 650 rounds each were
available to support the attack. To assist the phalanx in keeping direction,
a Bofors tracer barrage, coordinated bu the CCRA was fired over divisiona
thrust lines. Artificial moonlight and wireless directional beams, two per
divisional front, were also employed. 30
On the 2nd Division front, the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade led off
with the APC-borne 4th Brigade and Sth Reconnaissance Regiment (14th
Canadian Hussars) under command. In addition to flails and AVRE, it was
further bolstered by a company of medium machine guns. a platoon of
heavy 4.2 inch mortars, a platoon of engineers, and two antitank batteries,
