290
Half-Forgotten Summer
Simonds had also expressly urged his armored commanders not to wait for
infantry divisions to take out final objectives or "get involved in probing
..before they called down fire or.. fighter bombers." If he had given
them narrow frontages, he had also allotted each division an AGRA of five
medium regiments specifically to assist them in getting on quickly. Kitch-
ing's reaction, however, was to attack with two brigades up, instead of in
depth as per Simonds's operational policy, leaving them pretty much to
their own devices. Booth, in turn, delegated tactical responsibility down
to battle groups with the result that artillery was never effectively brought
to bear against pockets of resistance like that initially, and critically, en-
countered at Gaumesnil.
That Canadian armor in "Totalize" exhibited both the dashing reckless-
ness and excessive caution of their British brethren is, of course, striking.
Such bifurcation no doubt reflected the doctrinal contradictions that grew
out of Africa, and which battle experience in the static Italian campaign
could hardly have been expected to resolve. Even the failure to employ
available artillery resources approximated the British armored pattern, and
one could well say that the operation foundered for not making better use
of guns. At the same time, it might have been better had Simonds committed
the 3rd Division supported by the 2nd Armoured Brigade to the "second
break in" rather than the Poles. This would have at least alleviated com-
munications difficulties due to language and seen two additional infantry
brigades in action. It would appear, however, that the El Hamma model
appealed more to Simonds than the lesson of Wadi Akarit, so convincingly
demonstrated by the Argylls in taking Point 195.
Crerar simply blamed the Poles. The "bog-down" of the 2 Corps attack,
as he saw it, was mainly due to the "dog fight" that developed between
the Ist Polish Armoured Division and German elements in Quesnay Wood.
Had the Poles smoked off and contained the enemy there and pushed on
with the bulk of their strength, they would have widened the front and
increased the depth for a tactically decisive advance. As it was, when dark
came, they had advanced "not more than a few hundred yards."* It is worth
noting, of course, the later criticism of Hubert Meyer, former first oper-
ations officer of the 12th SS, that it would have been wiser to have outflanked
the Hitlerjugend to the cast, an action that conceivably could have been
initiated by Crerar himself much as Dempsey had in personally redirecting
the 7th Armoured onto Villers Bocage on 12 June. Whether Simonds would
have intervened in this manner had he been army commander is an intrigu-
ing matter of conjecture.
The commander of the 12th SS, Kurt Meyer, considered "Totalize" an
example of "inflexible, time wasting method," whereby staff planning and
preparation "succeeded in burying the enemy under several thousand tons
of explosives." Never once did speed, "the most powerful weapon of Ar-
moured Warfare."
appear to have been a paramount concern. In Meyer's
Case Hardening
291
view, the road to Falaise had been open and basically undefended from
midnight 7 August to noon 8 August. Kampfgruppe Krause, for example,
did not arrive from the west until shortly before midnight on 8 August.
He attributed Canadian inaction after the initial breakthrough to be "the
result of too much planning by the 2nd Corps" related to the employment
of bombers. The development of the battle also convinced him that divi-
sional commanders had not placed themselves "in the leading combat group,
to see for ... (themselves) to save precious time, and to make lightning
decisions" to exploit "given opportunities."
It seems clear that the failure of "Totalize" was less a product of troop
inexperience, for Canadian soldiers had performed well when correctly
employed, than the result of a flawed concept. Waiting for
the second
bomber strike guaranteed a loss of momentum. Had the strike been waived
and high-command attention turned to the staff problem of getting troops
and artillery forward, the tempo could have been sustained.
But the strike
could only have been cancelled through the First Canadian Army, which
had expended so much effort in arranging strategic bomber support that it
had become almost bureaucratically entrenched. Notwithstanding the re-
quirement for 24 hours notification, it is highly unlikely that Crerar would
have even felt disposed to request a cancellation of "Bomber" Harris, with
whom he angere to have crack una cather ingratiating relationshin 7
Besides, it was the one area in "Totalize" planning that because of its
strategic overtones would have remained the sole prerogative of the First
Canadian Army headquarters: Crerar no less than Simonds was also at-
tracted to the technological expedient, which the Allied bomber barons at
the strategic level had so mistakenly yet skillfully proselytized.
That another more tactical approach was feasible is evident from Meyer's
postwar postulation of a "Red Totalize.
" After three years of combat ex-
perience in Russia, he was convinced the Soviets would not have permitted
a "battle of phases"
with a "first objective only three miles behind the
enemy Front Line." The tasks of the 2nd and 51st Divisions would have
been to advance behind a concentrated artillery attack "to smash the enemy
defence on both sides. and open the road to Falaise." The armored bri-
gades and carrier-borne infantry which accomplished this would have then
"automatically taken over the task of advance force for the two attacking
divisions," one brigade pushing toward St. Sylvain while the other seized
Bretteville-sur-Laize. At the "first sign" that the road was open, the advance
force of the 4th Armoured a tank battalion with two companies of infan-
try, a battery of SP howitzers, a reconnaissance company, and an air force
controller-would have "plungled] onward to the south towards their ob-
jective, Falaise."8
He went on to suggest that the advance force, commanded by a "young
fanatical Communist and assisted by ground support aircraft, would have
stopped at nothing before Falaise. It would have advanced not by tactical
