28
Long Forgotten Winters
than the core of an offensive force capable of all arms operations. In its
lighter version it was seen as a means of assisting a rejuvenated cavalry in
traditional reconnaissance, raiding, and security screening roles. The 1935
maneuvers, the largest since 1925, focused on the employment of infantry
divisions in preparation for a possible European conflict. Tank battalions
mainly provided close support as "Infantry" or "I" tanks, a "new idea in
tactics" that was not, significantly, applauded by the editor of the CDQ,
who much preferred the machine-gun carrier for such purposes. 53 The tank
brigade again assumed infantry support tasks in the 1936 maneuvers, and
military training generally became less rather than more realistic with the
approach of war. In November 1937 the commander of Southern Command
remarked that none of his formations was fit to take the field against a first-
rate military power. The 1937 creation of the Mobile Division (later re-
designated the 1st Armoured Division) reinforced the "cavalry concept" of
armored operations insofar as its role, like the Cavalry Division in 1914,
was to cover the advance of a field force. The decisive blow was still to be
struck by the infantry supported by heavy tanks. 54
The War Office, faced with the reorganization of the army, decided in
December 1937 to adopt a two-year training cycle intended to address, in
turn, techniques for controlling units and higher direction in war. The first
cycle, completed in 1938, concentrated on brigade and unit training, leaving
the more senior officers to participate in a series of limited map exercises.
The year 1939, which was to have seen maneuvers on the scale of 1925 and
1935 in which none of the senior officers of 1939 had participated in key
appointments, was instead taken up with adjustment problems associated
with conscription and equipment acquisition. Thus, though the Second BEF
that arrived in France may well have been, as often stated, the most mech-
anized of all belligerent field armies, it critically lacked the all-arms punch
of the largely horse-drawn German army. Mustering but 196 light tanks,
50 infantry tanks, and some 38 armored cars in operational units on the
outbreak of war, the British Army was, as might be expected, better suited
for imperial policing than warfare on a continental scale. 55
That this situation should have developed is hardly surprising, for on 22
December 1937 the government of Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain
formally adopted a limited liability defense policy that established four
strategic priorities: first, defense of Britain; second, protection of sea routes;
third, defense of overseas territories; and fourth, cooperation with allies in
defense of their territories. Largely because of its perceived deterrent value,
the RAf received first priority in rearmament, with the navy and army
following second and last in order. Within two years the RAF would receive
41 percent of the defense budget and more than 20 percent of total gov-
ernment expenditures. Fear of a devastating "knockout blow" from the air,
however, prompted Sir Warren Fisher of the Treasury wisely to insist.
despite Air Staff opposition, upon the creation oraighter Command and
The Canadian Corps and the British Mold
29
the award of production priority to fighters over heavy bombers. The
army's responsibilities were now decreed to be in descending order of prior-
ity: the Air Defence of Great Britain (ADGB); imperial garrison duty;
provision of a field force for general purposes; and, last of all, commitment
to the Continent. As the Territorial Army inherited the air defense role, no
reserve army was available to undertake field force duty. The ADGB role,
in fact, absorbed most of the Army's funds and negated the need for heavier
tanks.
At this point, British military strategy essentially consisted of a combi-
nation of defensive isolationism and imperial commitments in which service
Chiefs of Staff actually acted as strategic appeasers trying to buy time. As
late as October 1938 Chamberlain repeated that his government would not
introduce conscription in peacetime. The persistent aggressions of Adolf
Hitler put an end to this brief euphoria, however, and by February 1939
the British government officially abandoned the policy of limited liability
and once again accepted a Continental commitment.
Conscription, hur-
riedly enacted in May 1939, was less militarily significant than a symbol of
this renewed, albeit belated, undertaking. If anything, the sudden extensive
changes forced by calling up masses of "militiamen" for 32 divisions "cre-
ated conditions of near chaos" in the British Army. By the summer of 1939
Tim the Brinth A
it was in a "profound state of disarray."56
Canadian defense posture about this time reflected, somewhat in the
manner of men's fashion, the stance assumed by Great Britain. Although
the Ten Year Rule was never formally adopted by Canada, it served in fact
as the basis for preparation of financial estimates by the Department of
National Defence (DND) to 1935. While the British commenced limited
rearmament in that year, Canada followed suit only in 1937. As late as
April 1939, but two months after the British had reluctantly accepted a
Continental commitment, the government of Prime Minister W. L. Mack-
enzie King established an order of defense service priorities that closely
resembled that associated with Chamberlain's limited liability policy of
December 1937. The development of the Royal Canadian Air Force (RAF)
was accorded primacy over the Royal Canadian Navy (RCN), which service
was given priority "so far as possible" over the Militia, as the army was
The suspicion that Mackenzie King may have himself decided upon these
priorities®?
is not without foundation for he manifested an abiding aversion
to conscription as counterproductive to the Canadian war effort and an
apparently unshakable conviction in the efficacy of appeasement. With some
good reason he regarded European war with Great Britain a belligerent as
the ultimate catastrophe. Coercive collective security action was thus simply
too high a price to pay for curbing Italian violation of the Covenant of the
Leaoue of Nations or Carman abrogation of the terms of Versailles or
Locarno. In Mackenzie King's view, it was "sometimes well to leave sleep-
