308
Half-Forgotten Summer
German, British, and U.S. armies (Patton was 60), remained knowledge
of how to conduct military operations effectively in war. The fact that
Canadian commanders were young merely reflected a dearth of such knowl-
edge amongst their seniors and, indirectly, a misplaced emphasis on other
determinants of career advancement during the inter war years. If anything,
youth without knowledge compromised the operations of the 4th Canadian
Armoured Division during "Totalize" and "Tractable." On the other hand,
in the case of Simonds, youth precluded him from being seriously consid-
ered for army command, even though he manifestly possessed more op-
erational ability than Crerar. Lamentably, a temporary major in 1939 proved
the best that the Canadian military system, despite all its expenditures during
the interwar years, could put forth. The McNaughton interregnum had
resulted, in short, in a lost half-generation of Canadian commanders.
The Canadian army was the direct heir of a professional tradition de-
veloped during four years of fighting in the Great War. By any standard,
the Canadian Corps was one of the finest fighting formations in the forces
of the British Empire. Its battlefield excellence derived not from any innate
superiority born of the North American frontier, however, but primarily
from British tutelage and the hard crucible of war. In its refinement of
artillery methods the Canadian Corps manifested an even more pronounced
affinity for firepower as a battle winner than British Army formations.
Brutinel's employment of motor machine guns or armored cars was the
only first-hand experience of Canadians with a mobile arm. Regrettably,
the professional tradition established by the CEF was largely usurped during
the post war years by an older entrenched militia tradition that perpetuated
the illusion of citizen-soldier superiority and the game of political patronage.
Lack of operational focus further hastened the eclipse of Canadian military
professionalism between the wars. Instead of retrenching anywhere near
realistically as had the Reichsheer of von Seeckt, which stressed theoretical
training for war, the Canadian regular force under McNaughton catered to
politicians who, as blind as their electorates, could not envision another
conflict. In actively seeking and assuming politically attractive nonmilitary
roles ostensibly to ensure the survival of the militia as a fighting force,
McNaughton virtually guaranteed the opposite: the continued erosion of
whatever operational capability remained. Institutionally, there was no pro-
vision for keeping the art of war fighting alive. Least pardonable was
McNaughton's assumption that military knowledge was mainly a matter
of technical efficiency that any scientifically educated person could master
probably better than a regular officer. These views, scarcely unique to
McNaughton, were attractive and popular with civilian and academic au-
diences who, in turn, showered honors upon him.
The close connection between Canadian and imperial forces fortunately
ensured that at least some officers were exposed to modern military thought.
The 200,000-man British Army, though scattered throughout the Empire,
Final Casting
309
did offer a grander horizon than a 55,000-man militia. Indeed, it spurred
keener intellects such as Burns and Simonds to contemplate the higher realm
of division and corps. Bearing in mind that Britain during the late 1920s
led the world in mechanization,
which the Germans studied, the potential
benefits of such an association to the Canadian militia might have been even
greater. The system of regular officer training was also satisfactory up to
the level of staff college. It was, after all, at such institutions that com-
manders like Slim and Montgomery first learned and later refined their
trade. The Canadian regular officer who successfully completed his pro-
motion and staff college entrance examinations and subsequently passed
through Camberley or Quetta during the 1930s was probably better trained
and blessed with wider experience than his equivalent in the Canadian army
today.
It is true, of course, that lack of equipment and collective training op-
portunities hampered officer development generally and the training of
higher commanders in particular. What must not be lost sight of, however,
is that most armies endured similar shortcomings to greater and lesser
degrees. Lack of resources forced the German army, for example, to use
mock tanks and dummy antitank guns in their maneuvers, which were also
restricted in the early stages. Many successful higher commanders also
developed their operational theories and war fighting approaches at schools
and staff colleges on cloth models, by individual study, or through the
medium of war games. That this was true of Montgomery and even Si-
monds sets them apart. Both had developed reasonably comprehensive
tactical theories before they ever went to war. McNaughton, in contrast,
seems never to have surmounted his counter battery experience of the Great
War.
The problem was one of individual focus. McNaughton's emphasis on
technical training and insistence on the IDC as a prerequisite for advance-
ment ensured the general neglect of the operational level of education. After
the IDC, the Canadian career officer was better prepared for diplomatic or
capital staff duty at NDHQ than service in the field. This is not to imply
that the IDC experience was not worthwhile.
For a great oceanic empire,
it was an excellent institutional means by which to encourage the three
services and other branches of government to work together and to coor-
dinate their respective actions. Yet the IDC was never intended as a training
ground for field army command or troop staff appointments. In this sense
it steered senior Canadian officers toward the politico-strategic arena, which
created a leadership void at the operational level that left regimental officers
clinging to their colors. Montgomery never went to the IDC. McNaughton
and Crear did.
McNaughton, it should also be remembered, was hand-picked by Mack-
enzie King to head Canada's overseas contingent. Recalled from military
retirement, his was thus a political appointment, but, as events demon-
