52
Long Forgotten Winters
chiefly at camp schools; the reserve force artillery in the same year conducted
no firing practices. Lack of top leadership between 1924 and 1927 appears
to have exacerbated the situation. Due to an inadequate performance the
year before, field training exercises for 1927 were cancelled. Increased
funds plus volunteer contributions briefly rejuvenated central camp training
between 1928 and 1930. As reported by several observers, however, regular
force collective training in 1928 merely demonstrated that the maneuvers
attempted had been too ambitious.
Attention in 1929 accordingly fixed on "fundamentals" in order to prepare
regular officers and NCOs for their primary purpose: the instruction of
reserve force personnel. Emphasis in tactical exercises focused upon "a small
force of all arms" acting on advanced, rear, and flank guard duties, outpost
duty, and defense in mobile warfare, including counterattack 57 Training
policy for the year 1930-31 stressed unit and subunit (section, platoon, and
company) tactics and individual weapon handling. Two regular force units
also concentrated at Camp Sarcee in Alberta. During the financial year 1931-
32, however, the impact of the Great Depression practically eliminated
reserve force training at camp; although in British Columbia in July 1932,
a low-level "combined operations" exercise was conducted for the fourth
time by the redoubtable Sutherland Brown. No regular force collective
training in central camps was authorized for 1934-1935, the heyday of Royal
Twenty Centres and the period in which the Canadian militia reached its
nadir of neglect. One could almost say, moreover, that with respect to
training, it was a case of the blind leading the blind.
Although the "Memorandum on Training of the Militia (1934)" decreed
the normal scope of training was limited to the infantry brigade with at-
tached troops, the shortness and irregularity of summer concentrations pre-
cluded even the conduct of satisfactory reserve unit training. Some argued,
in fact,
that it was not advisable to attempt more than company level
training. Still others, less visionary, maintained the widespread perception
that it was "useless to... teach men... tactics. and ... better to spend
... time on close order drill." It was further contended that, in general,
neither reserve force soldiers nor their officers were trained to the required
standard, and certainly not to that of trainer, that would have enabled them
to deriva «unus commencurate with effort" armanded on larger scale exe
ercises A vicious circle thus develoned as brigade and battalion schemes
arrogated precious time from important subunit training, in many basic
respects so necessary to the success of the former.5"
One reserve officer even questioned in 1934 "whether the younger officers
of the... [regular force], let alone the personnel of the ... [reserves), have
any accurate conception of what a full strength squadron, battery, or com-
pany looks like on parade, on the line of march or in action.
160 Though
there were persistent cries from reserve force personnel for closer super-
vision that included demands for the attachment of regular force unit ad-
The Bellows of Peace
53
jutants as in the British Territorial Army, the role of the regulars remained
primarily to administer, guide, advise, and assist. Inevitably, the effect of
such an approach was to permit the unproductive exercise of understrength,
untrained units on far too many occasions solely for the purpose of letting
less than qualified reserve force officers practice "their command." In light
of the monotony and repetitiveness such training often entailed,
one re-
serve officer proposed as late as 1938 that summer camps be discontinued
and replaced by major concentrations of all available regular and reserve
force troops "for more extensive field training" every two or three years.
Given such debilitating circumstances, it is perhaps not surprising that
many militia officers began to cling ever more tightly to their colors, as if
regimental loyalty and enthusiasm could compensate for lack of all-arms
training. That this was an undesirable direction in which to advance had
already in 1927 been noted by one Colonel T. A. Hunter who, in urging
the cultivation of a brigade spirit, exhorted officers to
divest yourselves of that parochial lone-wolfish jealousy that makes it so
difficult to get Canadian battalions to fraternize. Also divest yourselves of
that chronic hatred of staff officers..... Suspicion of other units and sullen
dislike of the staff amount in the Canadian Militia to something like paranoia.
Get cured. 63
The Canadian militia, like the assortment of regiments known as the British
Army, also tended to train but a collection of battalions.
While it is true that there were numerous officers and NCOs in the
reserves who did not take their professional duties seriously and only at-
tended courses of instruction as a means to retain their regimental sinecures,
there were others who worked diligently toward higher training. Specialist
and qualifying courses for reserve officers and NCOs
were conducted
through an elaborate system of Royal and Permanent Schools of Military
Instruction, Camp Schools held during summer months, and Provisional
Schools held during the winter months. Promotion to the rank of major
was attained through a series of theoretical and practical courses of instruc-
tion and successful completion of promotion examinations in subjects sim-
ilar to those studied by their regular force colleagues.
64 The most advanced
course of instruction open to officers of the reserves was the Militia Staff
Course, which required candidates to hold a captain's appointment and was
reputedly "the finest investment... ever... made with training funds. "65
Given the opportunities available then, it was possible for determined
reserve officers to attain, on the individual level, a degree of professional
excellence. As one RMC graduate and Great War veteran who served with
distinction at a high level in the Second World War put it:
there is no fear in battle equal to the fear of a commander-of whatever rank-
who has the responsibility to make decisions, but is ignorant of the technical
