134
Long Forgotten Winters
facilitate control. He also accorded special emphasis to the vital infantry
company commander-artillery forward observation officer (FOO) relation-
ship in formulating the details of simple artillery, mortar, and machine-gun
fire plans. As Montgomery rightly put it, "in whatever way... used, the
fire plan... restore(d] impetus... lost, and... [gave] a good "kick-off'."
He clearly did not like the Canadian practice of assigning a task to a battalion,
stating it would be supported by a field regiment, and leaving the battalion
CO, who possessed fewer artillery coordination means, to execute it alone.
In all such cases he found no proper fire plan "laid on" and precious artillery
resources wasted. To Montgomery, it was the duty of the higher head-
quarters to assist the lower.
Providing brigade staff organized the fire plan, a reserve battalion near
to its "start line"
with a supporting battery already deployed could mount
a fresh attack supported by a field regiment in one and a half hours. In
Montgomery's estimation, a brigade attack supported by three field regi-
ments could be "teed-up" in three to four hours if participating units were
in reasonable proximity along the line of march. To speed up the execution
of fire plans, he insisted that all artillery reconnaissance parties include one
"pistol" gun; in this way anticipated battery targets could be registered
before the arrival of the bulk of the guns, which often occurred after dark.
Again, Montgomery underscored the need for "thinking ahead" at all levels,
warning that "hurrying units into battle without giving them time to make
their preparations... merely added] to... casualties." Again, the "theory
of how to.... [stage-manage the] tactical battle" was viewed as the best
method of ensuring as much. 31
On exercises "Conqueror," "Beaver III," and "Beaver IV," which ended
13 May 1942, Montgomery repeatedly noted the inability of Canadian di-
visional commanders to seize the initiative in battle. Citing the "offensive
use of reserves"
as the best means by which to achieve this, he did not
reason that vague and imprecise information on the enemy precluded quick
and aggressive reaction by a division in reserve. The main thing was to
start reconnoitering,
"and at the same time... set the division in motion to
meet the threat" from a position favorable to launching offensive operations.
Again, there remained a requirement for a simble but definite olan aimed
largely at securing su requirement for a soull assist ... further opera-
tions.
" The enemy. if met. was to be hit and subiected to fresh blows "as
a result of the first clash. " In advancing to contact, he recommended the
employment of "forward bodies, or advanced guards, moving in rear of
Rec/onaissan|ce Troops... prepared to act offensively as soon as the flatter
were] … held up."
Montgomery's emphasis on "forward bodies," which resembled the cur-
rent Soviet concept, was pronounced, innovative, and based on the as-
sumption that there would always "come a time when further and more
detailed information... [could not be obtained without fighting.
" "It does
The Montgomery Measurement
135
not seem to be understood," he complained, that "complete information
about the enemy [will never be gained] by the use of rec[onaissan]ce troops
and air alone.
" To "attack the enemy and make him dance to your tune,
you have first got to gain contact with him and obtain by fighting the further
and more detailed information which will enable you to plan the offensive
battle successfully." In "Beaver III" and "Beaver IV" such a system, which
also called for divisional commanders to be forward, was not employed by
Canadian formations in the advance; consequently, when reconnaissance
elements were held up, divisional headquarters tended to wait for infor-
mation, which was slow in coming, while brigades "consolidated"
"settled in."33
The 1st Canadian Infantry Division was in Montgomery's judgment es-
pecially "badly handled" on Exercise "Beaver III." Neither did its peacetime
"stunt" of changing battalions between brigades particularly impress him;
to hazard the loss of good formation teamwork on the possible chance of
"misleading the enemy" was considered unsound practice in war. To Mont-
gomery, it "was not the fault of... regimental officers and men that i [sic]
Division failed badly. It was the fault of the Divisional commander." To
fight bravely was not enough, "for the braver the men, the more.. (would]
be the casualties." If the "fine material" of Ist Division were to perform
well in battle, Montgomery concluded, it had to have a commander other
than Major-General Pearkes who seemed "unable to appreciate the essentials
of a military problem and... formulate a sound plan." A "gallant soldier
without. brains," Pearkes "would fight his Division bravely till the last
man was killed" and, Montgomery added, "the last man would be killed
all too soon." Stating that there was "good material to hand," he recom-
mended relieving, in addition to the divisional commander, two of his
brigade commanders, Brigadiers A. E. Potts and H. N. Ganong (the latter
assessed earlier as a "
but no great trainer good Brigadier, hard and tough... a grand fighter"
Montgomery formed a similar opinion of the 3rd Division during "Beav-
crIV," 10-13 May 1942, for which he held the divisional commander clearly
responsibl. The performance nut on by Maior-General Basil Price was
simply "lamentable" and "completely ineffective." He did not, Montgo-
mer continued, "possess that military ability and professional knowledge,
that forceful determination and that give to get things done which are
eSsential qualities in a coom, ander in war." On the contrary, he failed to
inspire, instilled no confidence, and generally forfeited his grip on the ac-
tivities of the division in the field. Though "a very delightful person,
was a "complete amateur. one totally unable to train his Division," which
was behind the othere in readinese for war Montgomery. having first
expressed doubts about Price in February concluded that he "was unfit to
command a Division in a field army.
235 Paradoxically, for he had appointed
Price while CCs Crerar goreed Indeed, he had written to McNaughton
