Long Forgotten Winters
18
Haig of 5 (British) Corps and a cousin to Field-Marshal Sir Douglas Haig,
exploited these developments to create a matchless counterbattery organi-
zation within the Canadian Corps. McNaughton, it should be stressed, also
held that the solution to difficulties associated with the attack in the Great
War lay "in a preponderance of artillery sufficient to crush out of existence
a wide section of the enemy's defensive system, entrenchments and de-
fenders alike, thus creating a gap through which troops could be thrown
to work around the exposed flanks." Significantly, because he later became
Canadian Chief of the General Staff (CGS), he had serious reservations
about Brutinel, especially the latter's advocacy of machine-gun indirect fire
and quite possibly his penchant for maneuver. The failure of Brutinel's
innovative, but unfortunately careless, motor machine-gun attack down the
Arras-Cambrai road to seize a bridgehead over the Canal du Nord in Sep-
tember 1918, served to confirm the principle "to pay the price of victory
in shells and not the lives of men." The Canadian Corps fired about one-
quarter of the shells used by the BEF in the "Hundred Days.
>>21
A Canadian proclivity for intense preparatory fire and heavy barrage
cover for assaulting infantry stood somewhat in contrast to the "peaceful
penetration" tactics that saw Australian troops "glide about in the night
like cats." Essentially a process of aggressive defense characterized by op-
portunistic large and small group patrolling that gained ground gradually,
"peaceful penetration" negated the need to undertake the hateful, formal
raids so reminiscent of the nightmare of trench warfare. Instead of relying
on lengthy artillery bombardments that often compromised surprise, the
Australians infiltrated forward in speedy, stealthy fashion, winkling Ger-
mans out of position and nibbling away at their lines. When considered
necessary, artillery support usually took the form of short, sharp engage-
ments designed either to suppress or distract the enemy and drown out the
noise of patrols. These tactics were so successful, in fact, that when it came
time to prepare a full-scale attack on the Villers-Bretonneux plateau in July,
over one-quarter of the objective had already been taken by "peaceful pen-
etration.
The Australians were later to claim that "it was by the Peaceful
Penetration of the four months, April to July, ... that the Battle of Amiens
was decided. »22
If a more pronounced artillerist bent did distinguish Canadian Corps
operations, it was also indicative of an increased professionalism. Having
suffered Hughes's impulsive and often ill-considered interventions, the great
majority of CEF senior officers, regular and reserve. had become convinced
of the value of a nonpartisan approach toward the conduct of war. Four
years of trial by fire had seen fighting ability and knowledge displace political
patronage as the basis for selecting leaders and commanders. The Canadian
Corps had of necessity become the most militarily professional ever of
Canadian forces, which previously had tended to be highly political. On
repatriation, a strong case was advanced to have the CEF serve as the
The Canadian Corps and the British Mold
19
foundation of a restructured land force based on an equitable, if politically
unrealistic, system of universal military training. It was "better that a dozen
Peace [militia] Regiments should go to the wall," declared one veteran
commander,
"than the C.E.F. units be lost.
,23 A committee headed by
septuagenarian Major-General Sir William Otter was accordingly consti-
tuted in 1919 to make recommendations as to the incorporation of CEF
units into the militia "so as to perpetuate them and make sure that none of
the traditions which were gained at so much cost overseas were not lost to
the future.
>>24
This proved to be a rather complicated, tedious, and controversial un-
dertaking, since it involved the award of coveted battle honours won by
CEF numbered battalions to those militia units that had furnished them
with wartime drafts of soldiers. The original idea of fusing the CEF and
militia that would have led to the reform as well as reorganization of the
latter was quickly effaced during interviews and meetings that revealed the
"parochial nature of Canadian militia officers and their obsessive interest
in their own regiments and units." The lessons of the Great War with respect
to large armies,
the role of cavalry, machine guns, tanks, and the need for
mechanization were in the throes of demobilization hardly discussed. Little
concern was expressed about the purpose and object of military forces or
their future role in the defense of Canada. Despite various public calls for
a force "designed for war purposes, not as a social edifice to be kicked over
as soon as real soldiering [wa]s demanded," the Otter Committee accom-
plished little more through its deliberations than a return to the prewar
situation, wherein the militia was less a war machine than a social orga-
nization. In this respect, it reflected the opposition to reform among older
veterans of the militia, many of whom had not served overseas and feared
that traditional volunteer service would be supplanted by something akin
to a continental standing army. 25
No final written report was tendered by the Otter Committee,
but it
generated through a series of decisions and memoranda a reversionary,
largely notional, land force establishment. Essentially, it was a patchwork
effort in which the discordant relationship of widely dispersed militia cen-
ters, constituent political support, and government spending figured prom-
inently. Within the infantry, the battle honors and traditions of 50 fighting
and some 260 reinforcement battalions of the CEF were scattered among
112 authorized units. Those of the four Canadian Mounted Rifle (CMR)
battalions that had actually taken the field were perpetuated by seven CMR
units added to a cavalry establishment that included 26 prewar regiments.
Only in the artillery did CEF units supersede traditional organizations, with
the bulk of prewar batteries being redesignated with CEF numbers. Con-
spicuously, two of the four most influential officers appointed to the Otter
Committee were CEF gunners, one of them the ubiquitous McNaughton.
All told, the Otter Committee in 1920 called for a paper force of eleven
