94
Long Forgotten Winters
the Great War. Examining 84 witnesses representing every grade and
branch, it asserted that the system was essentially sound. The "keynote of
... Staff organization"
was determined to be "the unity of the Staff, a-
though its work... divided into three main branches." The committee
accordingly recommended the interchange of staff officers among branches
and proscribed the maintenance of separate G, Q, and A messes. Not every-
one agreed, however, that the inherent weakness of the British staff system
could be so easily overcome; the very idea of separate branches controlling
their own appointments seemed fundamentally faulty. Administrative
branch heads, who were often senior, invariably resented General Staff
primacy, which they perceived as emanating from the sunnier side of an
artificial barrier. The British General Staff was neither in theory nor practice
a "staff in general."16
Whereas German staff branches were headed by General Staff officers
and unified under the direction of a single COS or operations officer at
every level, British branches were separately expected to cooperate. The
greater efficiency of the German staff structure, it is worth interjecting, was
fully recognized by Montgomery as early as 1918, and he thereafter regularly
employed what he termed the " 'COS' Principle" within all his commands.
Formally introduced in the staff organizations of corps and armies operating
under the 21st Army Group, which included the First Canadian Army, the
COS principle was described an a ration from FSR [Field Service Res:
ulations) VolI." Also touted as "in effect, analogous to the continental staff
system," its stated purpose was to relieve the commander from the necessity
of coordinating the work of the staff so that he could devote his full attention
to prosecution of operations. The staff coordinating function became instead
the province of the COS who had "to have the necessary authority and
confidence to make all decisions" implementing a commander's policy.
Between the wars, however, the Britich staff sustem remained essentially
unchanged, apart, that is from restricting wear of scarlet gorget patches
and red-banded hats to officers of the rank o colonel and above. Camberley
reopened in 1919, the first two postwar courses conducted each being a
year long. In 1921 the reintroduction of competitive entry examinations,
which ushered in a two-year curriculum required prospective candidates
to master the compulsory fields of training for war, including military
history; organization and administration, including military law and im-
perial organization, which covered systems of government, geography, and
foreign affairs. Passes were also expected in three optional subjects, one of
which had to be a language (French German or Russian) selected from a
list that embraced historv. chemistry. physics mathematics business
administration. political econom, and movement At the discretion of the
Army Counal however an officer could be datestad to attend staf
college provided he had good service in the field, served as an adjutant for
three years, and performed well on staff or a field, seructor for two years.
The Staff Caste
95
Up until 1938 Camberley annually graduated 60 staff-trained British and
imperial officers, usually captains or junior majors of about 33 years of age.
When Fuller went there as a chief instructor in 1923, he introduced a new
approach to learning based on students and instructors teaching each other.
19
Essentially Socratic, the staff college method incorporated a tutorial system
of ten-man "syndicate"
round table discussions and exercises, each "di-
rected" by a member of the Directing Staff (DS). Prior to participation,
students read the pertinent précis and manuals and listened to the relevant
lecture-demonstrations.
Indoor demonstrations on cloth or sand models
were followed as appropriate by outdoor demonstrations of equipment,
troops, and field organizations. As training progressed, students assumed
staff and command roles in signals exercises, telephone battles, and TEWTs
on the ground. Every six to eight weeks, syndicates were reshuffled, in
theory for greater exposure to the knowledge of others,
but also for as-
sessment purposes.
Significantly, this feature was absent in German staff
training, which saw students tutored throughout by one dedicated DS who
took full responsibility for them. 20
The Camberley curriculum in the first year or junior division primarily
covered staff duties within a division, which encompassed among other
things preparing written correspondence, organizing headquarters to run
efficiently, and disseminating information and direction.
Techniques se-
lected for their universal applicability and effectiveness also received em-
phasis as they facilitated the ease with which operations could be coordinated
among different headquarters and formations, especially during periods of
strain or great pressure. Naturally, both discussion and written work
stressed extreme thoroughness and attention to detail, since the broad brush
approach was of small worth in arranging the ordered deployment, move-
ment, and administration of such a large formation. Command and staff
outdoor exercises or "tours" that called for drafting orders and instructions
in the field also consumed a great deal of time. During the second year or
senior division, candidates studied corps and army formations as well as
interservice combined operations, industrial mobilization, imperial defense,
and grand strategy. Significantly, many considered second year work to be
the "more interesting.
1211
Why this should be so, while not exactly surprising, is the more intriguing
for it was thorough mastery of junior division subject matter that made
Montoomery so exceptionally field competent To Briondier C.N. Barclay,
who entered Camberley in 1930, "the work in ... [thel second year was on
too hich a leval » with cantains learning «a ha higher commanders...
some twelve years before even a select few could possibly attain such
heights. "22 As explained by former commandant Major-General Ironside,
however, "the Staft College existed) for giving an officer, firstly, training
in the higher art of war, and secondly, in the duties of the Staff-in that
order " The shiect was not to produce a "special breed of Staff Officer"
