Long Forgotten Winters
24
servatism, political and social indifference, and the imperial mission were
the primary factors that impeded continued British armored development.
Canadians, as British subjects, found neither the British military scene
nor that of the Empire at large entirely foreign. From the Imperial Defence
Conference of 1909 up to 1937, a direct channel for exchanging military
information existed between the CIGS in London and the CGS in Ottawa.
By the 1920s the Canadian General Staff received on a regular basis a ver-
itable flood of documents from the War Office, Army Headquarters in
ar Office, Army,
India, British South China and Malaya commands, Australia, New Zealand,
and South Africa. As much of this correspondence related to technical
matters and training, Canadian officers of the interwar period did not have
to look far to determine what thoughts preoccupied their colleagues over-
seas. In addition, the practice of attaching Canadian officers to the War
Office recommenced in 1925. Further dissemination of information related
to British military developments occurred in the editorial pages of the Ca-
nadian Defence Quarterly (CDQ). Specific British exercises received compre-
hensive coverage in the "Service Notes" section, while "Notes on Service
Journals" impressively highlighted selected excerpts from the Army Quar-
terly, the Journal of the Royal United Service Institute, the Cavalry Journal, and
the R.A.F. Quarterly."
The Canadian military establishment thus learned firsthand from Gen.
Sir George Milne, CIGS 1926-1933, that although he had supported the
mechanized experiment in 1927, it had unfortunately diverted attention from
"actualities." For this reason he urged officers not to think too much about
mobility or the pace of maneuver. Milne also expressed concern in 1932
that "tactical conceptions still tended unduly in the direction of those which
were acquired in the later stages of the Great War." He therefore made it
abundantly clear that the British Army at home had "no single predominant
objective towards which its training clould] be categorically directed." In-
stead, its assigned roles embraced in order of probability the four broad
categories of imperial policing, minor expeditions and guerilla warfare,
major expeditions, and a national war. Milne accordingly concluded that
troop training would normally be most profitably focused on "wars of
different degrees against a second class enemy." To ensure against the "re-
mote" contingency of a national war, he advocated "special studies" and
the development of a "military mentality" based on "minds open to sci-
entific possibilities,
men as is possible."42
and as wide a knowledge of all sorts and conditions of
Remarkably, the British Army did not initiate any study of the lessons
of the Great War until the 1931-32 Kirke (after Lieutenant-General Sir
Walter Kirke) Committee. Though hastily assembled, partly in response to
Liddell Hart's prodding, it produced a farsighted report highly critical of
the British conduct of the Great War. Unfortunately, the committee findings
were judged too progressive and potentially embarrassing by General Sir
The Canadian Corps and the British Mold
25
Archibald Montgomery-Massingberd, CIGS 1933-1936, who insisted that
the army role was not to fight in a major war but to defend and police the
Empire. Like many other top army officers, he was unwilling in light of
the politico-economic climate to face the issue of a possible Continental
commitment. As a proponent of the notion that the next conflict would be
an updated version of the Great War, he also took steps to suppress the
Kirke Report, which advocated armored expansion in preparation for mo-
bile warfare. Limiting distribution to only the most senior officers, he
subsequently had produced an expurgated, and distorted, version for wider
circulation within the army for discussion purposes.
The result was that
the lessons of the combined arms operations conducted so impressively
during the "Hundred Days" were largely forgotten.
Although Montgomery-Massingberd was not the criminally incompetent
reactionary depicted by his bitterest critics, his imposition of a rigid cen-
tralization stifled progressive development. He adamantly refused to accept
armored warfare theory and clung to the belief that cavalry still had a limited
role in war, perhaps for reasons related to preserving the social fabric of
the army. Like Montgomery-Massingberd, Field-Marshal Sir Cyril Dev-
erell, CIGS 1936-1937, appears to have placed excessive emphasis upon
loyalty as a determinant of an officer's worth, when in fact it was actually
but a useful tool for the suppression of unwelcome criticism.
"The army
must stand together" was the cry, even as Deverell, who strongly supported
a Continental commitment, disastrously hindered the development of ar-
mored forces. According to Brian Bond, "When everything possible has
been said in mitigation of the Army's inefficiency in the inter-war period,
it is still difficult to deny the essential truth... [that its]... higher direction
.. between the two wars was on the whole deplorable."44
Bond additionally considered the regimental system the very "root of
the malaise" afflicting the army during the interwar years. Despite its evident
worth in promoting unit esprit de corps and cohesion, the system intrinsically
fostered an extreme parochialism and narrowness of view that stultified
professional thought and ultimately obstructed reform. The British Army
remained what it was in Sir John Fortescue's day,
"not an army at all, but
only a collection of regiments." According to Howard, the real benefit of
the regimental system was more political than military in any case; though
an "obstacle to full professional efficiency," it served to tame the soldier,
"fixing... [his eyes on minutiae, limiting.. [his] ambitions, teaching ...
a ... gentle, parochial loyalty difficult to pervert to more dangerous ends.
To Fuller, the regimental system throttled good officers, making them "no
more than members of social clubs,'
" rather than part of a greater army.
Likening it unto the "Hindu caste system," he saw its "totemic ritual of
life" that had "nothing to do with war or peace," usurping intelligence and
professional knowledge as the universal military catalyst.
"Once a black-
button man," he charged, "you cannot become a brass-button man, you
