96
Long Forgotten Winters
but to take the best regimental officers and staff train them to "the highest
point." Camberley and Quetta were thus "not really Staff College[s) but
... War Colleges]," which trained not only "higher Staff officers [but]...
also Commanders." This, in his view, made them "rather different from
Staff Colleges which exist|ed] on the Continent."23
It was simply untrue to imply, of course, that German General Staff
officers did only staff work. Like their British counterparts, they also rotated
through line command appointments and trained to assume positions one
or two ranks higher on mobilization. Actually, the greatest difference in
approach appears to have had less to do with command per se than the fact
that the German staff course,
cut from three to two years between 1933
and 1937, concentrated more heavily upon purely military subjects. Pri-
marily aimed at training general staff officers as advisers and assistants to
field commanders or members of the central command cell of the Ober-
kommando des Heeres (Army High Command), the course was not designed
to train future senior commanders or staff officers for ministerial appoint-
ments. General Ludwig Beck, Chief of the General Staff 1933-1938, further
restricted training to the framework of the division.
Since this prevented
students from studying "operational" in supradistinction to "tactical" or
divisional level deployments,
Beck's decision drew criticism from many
German officers. In his defense, however, he appears to have been especially
anxious to establish basic formations on a firm tactical footing within a
rapidly expanding army. In any case, the reinstitution of the third year of
staff training in 1937 allayed this operational concern.24
While British doctrine did not recognize the operativ level between tactics
and strategy, it did possess an imperial dimension that was truly unique.
Indeed, one might say that British military thought skipped the operational
level, proceeding directly from the tactical to the grand strategical realm of
the Empire. Evidence of this can be found not only in the senior division
curriculum of the Staff College, but in the 1926 establishment of the IDC.
The original purpose of this "Joint College," placed under the supervision
of the Chiefs of Staff Sub-Committee of the CID, was "to create a common
doctrine in regard to defence policy and to produce... officers trained to
look at the problem of war as a whole." As viewed by its first commandant
and founder, Admiral Richmond, the IDC was not merely a joint version
of a single service staff college, but a "combined War College" and "centre
of higher studies" superimposed on existing staff training systems. Politico-
military in both focus and student body its function was described a
of Imperial Strategy.
1925 Tualuable as it was for the oceanic empire it served
however the DC was delu not deared to produce battlefield commanders
capable of handling sizable formations in combat.
It is nonetheless equally clear that many army officers considered the IDC
the most desirable defense college to attend for career and "professional"
The Staff Caste
97
advancement. McNaughton, for example, attended the first course in Jan-
uary 1927, Crerar the eighth in 1934, and Pearkes the one in 1937. Yet,
while the IDC became a stepping stone to high command and produced
students more or less expert in imperial defence and constitutional issues,
it hardly enhanced their field generalship. The attraction of the grand
strategic sphere, in short, led many senior officers of the British and Ca-
nadian armies, most especially McNaughton, to neglect the operational
field. The "initial division of staff duties"
into "two classes" —the "first [in
the field]…. with troops, and the second... at the War Office" _2 further
exacerbated the situation as, once again, it proved more career-beneficial
to serve with "the Staff not in the field." Activities associated with "prep-
aration" for war, like equipment and weapons procurement, thus received
greater attention than those more directly related to "fighting proper." The
"art of using... given means in combat," to quote Clausewitz, suffered
No institution like the U.S. Army War College, which educated officers
specifically for higher field command, existed for redressing this imbalance
in focus. Only a few dedicated individuals like Montgomery, who was
considered eccentric and consequently passed over, seem even to have at-
tempted it. At Quetta, against a "background of polo-playing... regimental
parties.. and abundant drink," he nonetheless warned his students that
they would "neglect the study of ... [their) profession at ... (their) peril. "30
remained the principal avenues by which regular army officers could expand
their knowledge of land operations, to most they represented but lesser
steps in their career progression. Despite the charge that the "staff colleges
in the 1920s taught... [trench warfare] and nothing else,
,31 it is clear that
they were the only institutions concerned with fighting large-scale war on
land Tike the Kriegsabademie they may also have comnensated for back-
wardness in tactical teaching by producing officers skilled in map reading
and terrain appreciation, both vital to the application of tactics, and capable
of producing clear, concise orders and correct responses in rapid, accurate
fashion. 32
Canada recumed sendino two officers per vear to Camberlev in 1920 and
one annually to Quetta from 1924. A five-month Staff College Preparatory
Course through which all candidates had to pass was also reinstituted at
the PMC in 1001 These actions were in keeping with the view that staff
college training remained a key factor in maintaining uniformity of doctrine
which ever since the Colonial Conference of 1907 and subsequent Imperial
(Defence) Confarence af 1000 haLesflasted that promulanted by the British
War Office. There was never any serious attempt between wars to establish
an army staff college in Canad. Indeed Crerar had even stated that he
could "nersonally. imagine no worse blow to the practical assimilation
of the Military Forces of the Empire than that each Dominion should have
