238
Half-Forgotten Summer
policy enunciated by Simonds reflected originality, clarity, and complete-
ness. Pointing out that corps were always of variable composition and could
comprise several types of divisions, independent brigades, and AGRA de-
pending upon assigned tasks and allotted frontages, he considered it "im-
practicable to lay down a clear-cut doctrine for... [its] employment.
Simply put, a corps essentially operated "in a 'territorial corridor, covering
the communications along which it moved] and [was maintained." As
Simonds saw it, once a firm beachhead had been established in Normandy,
the probable role of 2 Corps would be to pass through and either follow
up retiring enemy forces or mount attacks against organized defensive po-
sitions. In the follow-up role, the aim would be to overcome delaying
detachments through "Determined infiltration, with quick artillery support
controlled by forward observing officers [FOOs]." To deal with enemy
rearguard positions established to prevent such attempts at infiltration, well-
prepared and coordinated brigade attacks by leading divisions would be
required.
Depending upon whether the ground was open or close, either armored
or infantry divisions could lead in follow-up operations, the latter division
being given in such case an armored regiment under command. They were
to "advance on a sinole thrust line, disposed in depth on a one-brigade
front, opening a two-way maintenance route as they advance(d]." The one-
brigade front was deemed necessary because the divisional artillery, even
when reinforced by a proportion of corps medium and field guns, was
considered "only sufficient to support attack by one brigade." If the enemy
employed demolitions extensively. the divisional engineers were "only sut
ficient to open and maintain one all-weather two-way route.
" The leading
brigades were to be preceded across the divisional front by strong combat
and enoineer reconnaissance. Within infantry divisions. briandes could he
passed through one another, the leading brigade always being directed onto
the ground of tactical importance where a firm base could be established
to facilitate the passage through of the next. In this manner a division would
be "disposed in depth with successive brigades established on firm bases
covering centres of communication.
In the armored division, a similar deployment procedure applied, though,
again, whichever brigade led depended upon the suitability of the country
for the employment of infantry or armor.
In either instance, the second
brigade was to provide a firm base for the forward movement of the first,
which meant that in case of sudden German counterattack there always
existed a basis for recovery.
Leading brigades operating from such firm
bases, which served as anchors and protected against deep flanking attack,
were consequently expected to "act with great boldness." This system also
ensured that whenever the enemy identified and concentrated strength
against a thrust line, it could be advantageously countered by simply moving
"a reserve brigade wide to a flank to force the enemy to dissipate his strength
Cold Eye on Death
239
on a wider frontage." Simonds cautioned, however, that while it might be
possible under such circumstances to site the divisional artillery to support
either brigade,
"the weight of artillery support must NOT be divided.
Should the German ever choose to stand and fight a deliberate or properly
prepared defensive battle, emphasized Simonds,
"attack without adequate re-
connaissance and preparation will not succeed." The attack had to be "carefully
organized"
and its "frontage. limited to that on which really heavy [ar-
tillery] support may be given." Since the essence of the German system of
defense was counterattack, forward localities tended to be held mainly in
terms of fewer men with more automatic weapons, backed up by mortars
capable of delivering a heavy weight of fire from positions 3,000 to 4,000
yards in the rear. The "well planned infantry attack, with ample fire sup-
port," warned Simonds, may
"penetrate such a position with comparative
case, but the first penetration will stir up a hornet's nest." So long as German
reserves were available, they could be expected to counterattack continu-
ously, employing tanks and SP guns in support of infantry frighteningly
close to objectives with considerable death-dealing and demoralizing effect.
To Simonds it was quite clear that the "success of the offensive battle hingeld]
on the defeat of the German counter-attacks" and having
"sufficient... reserves
in hand to launch a new phase as soon as the enemy strength has spent itself." It
was also obvious to him that the "defeat of... counter-attacks... [had to) form
part of the original plan of attack." This meant deciding beforehand the forward
movement of antitank guns, tanks, and medium artillery to "stand off'
counterattacking German armor. Initial objectives had also to be selected
to a depth of not less than 4,000 yards to ensure that German mortars were
silenced; otherwise, they would be used to support counterattacks and
impede consolidation. The alternative, to deal with them by prearranged
counterbattery fire, had not generally proven effective due to the German
practice of siting mortars behind very steep cover, then shooting and scoot-
ing. Since the "forward displacement of the bulk of the artillery,
" addi-
tionally meant that there was "bound to be a pause" when forward-attacking
troops would be without full artillery support, Simonds recommended the
employment of all available air resources at this point?
In planning an attack on a prepared position, Simonds stressed the im-
portance of correctly allocating troops to tasks and simplifying command
arrangements. To best ensure the former he recommended that every com-
mander "think two below his own command" —that is, a divisional com-
mander keeping unit tasks in mind and a brigade commander possible
company or squadron undertakings. By grouping these so that each
"group
of tasks" came "within the power of achievement of each of his immediately
subordinate formations or units, each commander... [could] arrive at a
correct allocation of troops without breaking up existing organization..
always a bad practice in battle where team work counts for so much." Not
surprisingly, Simonds urged commanders to explain their thought processes
