72
Long Forgotten Winters
officer training. One RMC Company Commanders Course reported a fail-
ure rate of 37 percent, which "as in the case of the first" was attributed to
a low standard of professional and educational knowledge. According to a
CTS report on a 1942 Senior Officers Course, "A short run of some 200
to 300 yards completely winded the majority [of candidates], and in some
cases was not even attempted." In 1943 the Company Commanders Course
and Senior Officers Course were merged into one 11-week Field Officers
Course.
This course, after being conducted twice, was discontinued in
December to make room at the RMC for the Canadian Civil Affairs Staff
Course. The purpose of the last course was to train officers in the civil
administration of areas liberated by the Canadian Army overseas.?5
Within the army at large meanwhile, unit morale reports for June 1943
indicated that "NRMA personnel and policy" in 31 percent of cases rep-
resented, after "training difficulties" at 34 percent, the second principal
factor detrimental to army morale.2 Though "mixed in huts and sharling)
... duties and pleasures,
" the very existence of two official factions invited
comparison and criticism that inevitably translated into outright antago-
For every unit that described improvement in relations between
NRMA and GS soldiers, there were two that described deterioration. Ex-
horting "R"' recruits to "go active" through cajolery and sustained pressure
doubtless contributed to this military schism, as most certainly did the
waxing tempo of the land war with its dual implications of heavy casualties
and a quick end to fighting. The perception of NRMA men as a privileged
class had some basis, in fact, since many tended to use their status to bargain
for occupational leave to work as wage earners on farms and construction
projects.
As GS NCOs proceeding overseas usually had to revert in rank, more-
over, NRMA men often leapt at the chance to fill such vacancies.
naturally further aggravated the situation as GS soldiers intensely disliked
serving under NRMA NCOs who, in turn, experienced great difficulty in
deling with GS subordinata. 27 The percention that the nublic did not
distinguish between GS volunteers and NRMA "zombies,"
plus the edu-
cation campaign this prompted, served to accentuate differences that were
now made visible on the uniform of the soldier?* An Adjutant-General
Branch survey of 1,300 NRMA and 1,800 GS soldiers, conducted in August
1944, concluded that it was more difficult to recruit volunteers within the
army than without.» By March 1945 the NRMA reinforcement situation
was reported overwhelmingly by units to be "the most widespread morale
obstacle in Canada" and "the foremost cause of lowered morale" in Corps
Training Centres.
30 Aside from the debilitation wrought by poor morale,
the sheer administration of problems related to NRMA could not but have
dissipated the effectiveness of training.
Given that training centers are the heart of any army, moreover, it is
difficult to believe that discordance within them would not have echoed
Shaping an Expeditionary Force
73
overseas. The problem would not have arisen before 20 March 1941, by
which time both the 1st and 2nd Divisions were already overseas, but it
most certainly would have affected following formations and individual
reinforcements. Indeed, this may even explain why in the national plebiscite
(of 27 April 1942), 72 percent of military voters abroad agreed to release
the government from its original pledge not to introduce compulsory over-
seas service. True, the 84 percent military approval vote at home was 12
percent higher, a discrepancy long interpreted by some as an indication that
the all-volunteer army in Britain preferred to remain that way." Compared
to the Canadian national approval vote of 64 percent,
percent overseas approval stands as an overwhelmingly positive statement.
It also remains to be seen whether the "de-Canadianization" phenomenon,
the outright antagonism of many troops toward Canadian policy and Ca-
nadians at home, can be linked to the 12 percent difference. If interest in
the NRMA question was later found to have been slight overseas, it should
further be noted that the "only consistent and pervasive object of Canadian
interest to the maiority of... personnel... overseas was their families.
Recognition of the depth to which such concern could run no doubt
prompted Keegan to observe in his masterly work The Face of Battle that
"one of the most insidious cruelties that the Second World War inflicted"
on society was that of not granting home leave to soldiers. While he was
specifically referring to the impact of Red Army policy between 1941 and
1945 on the Russian people, " it is sobering to reflect that until the autumn
of 1944 there was no system of rotational leave for the Canadian soldier
overseas. When it did come into effect, eligibility was restricted to those
with "five years satisfactory continuous service overseas.
»34 There is also
good reason to believe that thrice-wounded soldiers were sent back into
the line. On the home front, in the meantime, NRMA men engaged to
"save the tobacco crop" earned six to seven dollars over and above their
$1.25 daily soldier's pay.35
While a rood sociological treatment of Canada's army in the Second
World War needs yet to be done, an occupational profile can be discerned
from several extensive surveys conducted by the Adjutant-General's Branch
in late 1944 and the autumn of 1945. Special Report No. 180 prepared bv
the Research and Information Section was based on a rehabili
Cam
of some 12,000 army personnel who constituted a 2.4 perce
of the Canadian Army as a whole. Similar surveys consider
representative and statistically valid were conducted during
of August, Seane starsand October 1945 among 3,629 oft.
awaiting discharge in depots. A high degree of internal con.
noted among the August, September, and October se
was further considered to be consistent with the findin
Report No. 180. Of those asked to describe their r
employment, between 82 and 87 percent responded
