262
Half-Forgotten Summer
failure to provide a secure start line, failed miserably [G. F. G. Stanley, In the Face
of Danger: The History of the Lake Superior Regiment (Port Arthur: Lake Superior
Scottish Regiment, 1960), pp. 147-150; and RG 24, Vol. 15,098, WD Lake Supe-
riors, 5 August 1944].
Chapter 11
The Amiens Alchemy
While I would not wish to take any credit away from General Simonds,
the basic plan for Operation
"Totalize" was laid down by me, the
fundamental tactics I required was that the forward movement should
commence with the initiation of the fire support and not be delayed
until long after the bombardment had started.
General H. D. G Crerar, 1952'
One suspects that if Operation "Spring" taught Simonds anything, it was
that he could not trust the tactical acumen of either of his infantry division
commanders too far. While they may have been better than the Sansoms
and Prices that the Canadian military system first threw up, they had hardly
been prepared by the McNaughton approach to training for higher oper-
ational command. Being relatively junior at the beginning of the war, they
had fortunately been less exposed to the enervating influence of nonprofes-
sional concerns, but it is doubtful that they in their military thought had
kept pace with Simonds. Predictably, he was to retain a much tighter rein
over the planning and execution of forthcoming operations ordered by
Crerar. On 30 July, the day bofore 2 Corps reverted to being under the
command of the First Canadian Army, the latter had advised Simonds to
commence planning a thrust down the Caen-Falaise road "in about ten days
time" coincide with the suwen th of the First U.S. and Second British
Army operations. Deeply embarrassed and exasperated by the appalling
performance of his subordinate formations in "Atlanti"" and "Spring," he
looked upon this as an opportunity to redeem a tarnished reputation?
On 1 August, Simonds produced a remarkable written appreciation and
outline plan for mounting an operation, code-named "Totalize,'
" to break
