92
Long Forgotten Winters
nomenclature of designated G appointments had in the meantime been
changed from the traditional administrative titling to reflect General Staff
Officer (GSO) grades 1, 2, and 3. Thus, at the divisional level in 1909, the
senior G staff officer was a GSO 1 in the rank of lieutenant-colonel, with
his assistants graded GSO 2 and GSO 3 in the ranks of major and captain,
respectively. The senior AQ officer was the Assistant-Adjutant and Quar-
termaster-General (AA&QMG).
The divisional AA&QMG had as assistants a Deputy Assistant Quarter-
master-General (DAQMG) and a Deputy Assistant Adjutant and Quarter-
master-General (DAA&QMG).
eventually to identify the senior AQ officer at the brigade level, the divi-
sional appointment changed to Deputy
(DAAG). The chief operations officer at brigade retained the title of Brigade
Major (BM) rather than GSO 2 and, from 1914, was assisted by a Staff
Captain. At corps headquarters, the senior G appointment was the Briga-
dier-General, General Staff (BGGS) who had as his chief assistant a GSO
1; the senior AQ officer was the Deputy Adjutant and Quartermaster-
General (DA&QMG), also in the rank of brigadier, who was assisted by
administrative staff officers exclusively responsible for A and Q matters.
By virtue of its coordinating responsibility, the G Branch at all command
levels tended to predominate."
The Canadian government embraced the British staff system in Novem-
ber 1904 with the institution of an advisory Militia Council. Like the Army
Council, it was presided over by the Minister of Militia and Defence and
composed of the Deputy Minister as civil member, a financial member,
and four military members: CGS, AG, QMG, and MGO. From 1903,
selected Canadian regular officers also began to attend the Staff College,
Camberley. When war broke out in August 1914, a total of 12 had graduated
from the two-year course and three were undergoing training. The failure
of two candidates to pass entrance examinations for the 1906-07 course and
the continued difficulties initially experienced by those selected had in the
meantime prompted the introduction of a short preparatory staff course at
the Royal Military College of Canada. In 1908 a Militia Staff Course con-
sisting of theoretical and practical portions, each punctuated by examina-
tions, was also reinstituted to train members of the reserves in administrative
and general staff duties. By 1914 there were 124 successful graduates of this
course, which, though inadequate by Camberley standards, served to al-
leviate the shortage of staff officers within the Canadian General Staff."
In keeping with British General Staff practice, however, only staff college
graduates were considered truly qualified to fill field staff positions during
war. Not even graduates of the independent Canadian staff course estab
liched in Pritain hu defense minister Sam Huches, whose mistrust of "staff
college paternalism" was legendary, were to wear the scarlet gorget patche
of the staff officer. Indeed, the course was closed down in December 1916.
The Staff Caste
93
those officers who completed it being judged unfit for either staff employ-
ment or appointment to the position of second-in-command of an infantry
battalion.
12 Fortunately, the Canadians continued to be supported by high-
caliber British regular staff officers who "in some cases were reputed to be
the real commanders." Three rose to become CIGS. Because these officers
were understudied by Canadians in the same grades, a double staff estab-
lishment also developed within the Canadian Corps; in other words, when
the British staff officer was eventually replaced by a competent Canadian
understudy, the latter's position was not deleted. Thus, while in a British
divisional headquarters the GSO 1 had under him one GSO 2 and one GSO
3, Canadian divisions had two each. At brigade level the story was the
same; whereas only one staff captain was on British establishment, Canadian
brigades had two, one for A&Q and one for intelligence.'3
Staff officer deficiencies that afflicted the CEF were little less pronounced
within the British Army at large. The Staff College was simply too small
to have produced more than a portion of the trained staff officers required
when the army expanded beyond its initial six division size. Out of the 447
British officers in 1914 who were graduates of Camberley or Quetta, more-
over, a fraction less than 50 percent were killed during the war. The Staff
College was nonetheless closed shortly after the outbreak of hostilities on
the erroneous assumption that they would be "over by Christmas." To
replace staff casualties, British and Canadian commanders resorted to at-
taching officers as "learners" to their headquarters where they could un-
derstudy key staff appointments. Later, General Headquarters and army-
level schools were established, and, in what marked the first comprehensive
attemot to train ctoff offare in France junior and senior staff schools were
established at Hesdin. It was not until April 1916, however, that the War
Office set up staff schools in Britain and introduced a uniform system for
staff training.
By 1917 satisfactory attachment as a "learner" qualified an officer for a
GSO 3 appointment; for GSO 1 and GSO 2 positions, respective qualifi-
cation at a Senior and Junior Staff Course at Camberley, Cambridge, or
elsewhere was required. In resorting to such expedients, of course, it was
implicitly admitted that a first-class staff officer could not be hurriedly
trained in a matter of a few weeks. One can only surmise that the hasty
improvisation of formation staffs necessarily wrought by shortages of qual-
tied staff officers must have adversely affected the outcome of certain op-
erations. In any event, possibly for this reason among others, the red tabs
of the staff officer came to have the same effect upon front-line soldiers as
the proverbial red flag before a bull 14 Oddly, this does not seem to have
been the case with the elitist German General Staff, which apparently re-
tained the respect of the frontschwein to the very end. '5
In bruary 1919 a checial committee canvaned undor Lieutenant Cenera
Sir Walter Braithwaite to report on British field staff organization during
