Prologue
"When we went into battle at Falaise and Caen we found that when we
bumped into battle-experienced German troops we were no match for them.
We would not have been successful had it not been for our air and artillery
support."18 Even Major-General Harry Foster, who rarely saw eye to eye
with Foulkes, agreed that Canadians
were no match for Germans once they were dug in. It could be argued that
everything being equal, defenders always hold an advantage over attackers.
But in Normandy everything wasn't equal. We held the advantage; in the air,
at sea and on the ground. Yet every time our troops got beyond the range
of supporting artillery or sour weather grounded our fighter-bomber cover,
the Germans stopped us cold."
It has been claimed, moreover, that never once during operations in
northwest Europe did Anglo-American forces ever succeed in decisively
breaking through organized German defences. The enemy seemed always
able to fall back, regroup, and reestablish a cohesive defensive posture. By
way of comparison, the Red Army from the summer solstice of 1944 at-
tained its greatest triumph on the Eastern Front: the destruction of Army
Group Center. While Canadian land forces ground their way toward Falaise,
Russian troops swept to the banks of the Vistula, covering some 450 miles
in four weeks. The Soviets purposefully delayed this mighty offensive, aptly
called Operation "Bagration," until 22 June, the anniversary of the Hitlerian
and Napoleonic invasions of Russia. Masters of the art of encirclement by
this time, the Russians refused to dissipate their armor in the marshy,
forested terrain of the "Byelorussian Balcony"; the subsequent objectives
of the First Baltic and Second Byelorussian Fronts (equivalent to Anglo-
American army groups) were also defined in terms of lines of advance rather
than specific limited objectives.
The Soviet high command "deliberately
took the risk of not immediately giving the troops set objectives for the
whole depth of the strategic operation because... [it] would have inevitably
meant the relatively rigid use of men and material on the selected line of
advance, whereas the situation demanded just the reverse-—the preservation
of all opportunities for flexible and rapid manoeuvre.
120 In the words of
Major-General F. W. von Mellenthin, former Chief of Staff of 48 Panzer
Corps,
"Army Group Center... broke to pieces before the onslaught...
Twenty-five German divisions simply disappeared. '21
Despite obvious limitations, the foregoing comparison does lend a certain
perspective to Canadian operational participation in northwest Europe. It
has often been voiced by the more nationalistic, for example, that Canada
by the end of the war possessed the fourth-ranking army in the world.
While this may be true, one should again try to keep this claim in per-
spective. In terms of divisions deployed against the Third Reich, which
mustered more than 300, the Soviet Union fielded around 450 on the Eastern
Of Ignorant Armies
Front. Of the roughly 90 Allied divisions that fought their way across
Western Europe, the Americans provided 61,
the British 14, the French
eight, the Canadians five, and the Poles one.
22 If, as Basil Liddell Hart
estimated, the British contributed "barely 6 percent of the forces arrayed
against Hitler in the final campaign,'
">23
the Canadian contribution must
appear even smaller. Given the nature of the Anglo-American direction of
the war, moreover, Canadians served in northwest Europe under a theater
headquarters composed mainly of Americans and Britons in turn subor-
dinate to an exclusive Anglo-American Combined Chiefs of Staff. Had
Canada fielded "ten divisions instead of five," ventured Stacey,
"she would
probably not have been welcomed [to membership] at that board, but she
might have fought her way in.
»24 As it was, Canada was effectively excluded
from participation in any higher strategic direction of the war.
In real terms, her influence came largely to depend, as it had in the Great
War and might well again, upon the operational and tactical prowess of her
expeditionary forces.
Indeed, the decision to dispatch the 1st Canadian
Infantry Division and the 1st Canadian Army Tank Brigade to the Medi-
terranean in June 1943 was made partly out of concern that Canadian in-
fluence in the postwar world might suffer "if no demonstrable contribution
to victory" were made. The questionable decision to have the 5th Canadian
Armoured Division and 1 Canadian Corps join them in Italy, of course,
ensured the greater polygot composition of the First Canadian Army when
it undertook operations in northwest Europe. With 1 British Corps and the
1st Polish Armoured Division under command, as well as 14 percent of its
headquarters officer establishment British, it remained less than half Ca-
nadian until 1 Corps rejoined it from Italy but a month before the German
surrender.
Being the most international of all such formations that fought in north-
west Europe, the First Canadian Army has often been compared to the
more famous British Eighth.2 That there were Canadian corps in both,
however, is probably less significant in this respect than the fact that
within the empire that spawned them they were the last of an imperial line.
Indeed, until the last two months of the war, there were more British troops
in the First Canadian Army than in the Eighth at Alamein. During the early
stages of the Battle of the Rhineland in February 1945, nine British divisions
fought under the command of the First Canadian Army. With an aggregate
strength of nearly 400,000 men, this was the largest field force ever led by
a Canadian.
27 Yet, size alone has not historically proven to be a major
determinant of Canadian battlefield success; at Vimy and Amiens it was the
relatively superior tactical skill of Canadian arms that won the admiration
of the world.
The intention in Book Two of this work is neither to attack nor defend
the Canadian record, but to subject it to critical analysis, which, to employ
the wisdom of Carl von Clausewitz, involves the application of theoretical
