90
Long Forgotten Winters
Here of course the conduct of training at the staff college level remains
central, for just as in other armies it was unquestionably the most important
thread in the operational fabric of field forces. While the Canadian Army
grew to almost half a million during the Second World War, it could boast
at the outbreak only 45 regular staff officers who had passed through Quetta
or Camberley, described by Winston Churchill as "the most exclusive in-
stitution in the world."* By way of comparison, the 1939 German army,
which swelled to over six million in the course of the war, fielded 415 fully
trained staff officers, 93 recalled or transferred to the General Staff, and 303
candidates undergoing training, for a grand total of 811.'
Ever since the reforms of Prussian General Gerhard von Scharnhorst, it
was accepted that a good staff could often save even the most incompetent
commander, but given the increased complexity of modern warfare, a com-
mander was no longer likely to prevail without a competent staff. Indeed,
Scharnhorst's greatest contribution was to introduce the concept of the
"general staff with troops," by which means he and his fellow reformers
sought to compensate for the absence of military ability among aristocratic
commanders. Specifically, the system sought to institutionalize military
effectiveness by ensuring through a common doctrine that different officers
would in most situations react roughly similarly, making the best use of
available resources. In 1821 the Truppen Generalstab (Troop General Staff)
combined with what became the Grosser Generalstah (Great General Staff),
the central military organ of the state or "capital staff" from which it was
distinguished, to attract the best and brightest military minds. This powerful
caste of nonregimental officers, later identifiable by their distinctive carmine
trouser stripes, constituted the corporate brain of the German army. Within
the Truppen Generalstab, formally up to 1938 and informally thereafter, it
was accepted practice for chiefs of staff to share responsibility for operational
decision making with their respective formation commanders. This notion
of havino a junior partner in command apparently first proved its worth
in the Waterloo campaign.®
Naturally, as battlefield success increasingly came to depend upon mass
troop movements by rail and road, heavy ammunition dumping programs,
and longer lines of communication within wider denloyments. the greater
requirement there was for detailed staff calculation. To ensure that enough
officers were capable of performing the staff functions of planning, coor-
dination, and supervision, the Prussians established a special school for
officers called from 1859 the Kriegsakademie. Entrance to this "nursery" of
the elite general staff was by comnetitive examination and the course was
of three vears duation Gone were the dave when a commander astride a
white horse on a hill could pretend to control forces within his purview
through the dispatch of gallopers. War had become professionalized and,
in a large sense,
"an art to be pursued upon a map.
Staff colleges thus
The Staff Caste
91
replaced cadet academies like West Point, whose graduates dominated the
Civil War, as the principal institutions of military learning.
In 1890 Spenser Wilkinson published a popular and influential account of
the German General Staff entitled The Brain of an Army, which called upon
Britain to adopt a similar organization. Only after the British Army's lack-
luster performance in the South African War, however, was concrete action
taken in this direction. In 1904 the War Office (Reconstitution) Committee
headed by Viscount Reginald Esher recommended the abolition of the tra-
ditional post of Commander-in-Chief and the institution of an Army Coun
cil in its place. Arguing that the British Empire was preeminently a naval,
Indian, and colonial power, it further proposed the creation of a civil-
military cabinet Committee of Imperial Defence (CID) to ensure in peace
that national effort would be correctly coordinated in war. In order to
maintain military focus on war preparation as opposed to peacetime admin-
istration, the committee additionally advocated the institution of an elitist
"blue ribbon" general staff to be recruited mainly from the Staff College,
Camberley,
which had been in existence since 1857. The hope was that,
given a permanent nucleus, the CID could become the "Great General Staff"
of Empire providing advice on broad military policy. In the event, the CID
received but a small secretariat and the army General Staff, established on
a firm basis 12 September 1906, bore small resemblance to the German
Chaired by the Secretary of State for War, the Army Council comprised
civil, financial, and four military members, each responsible for their own
staff branch.
The first military member was the CGS, from 1909 CIGS,
who as primus inter pares assumed responsibility for staff coordination as
well as "G"
or operational matters including intelligence,
training, and
doctrine; the second, the Adiutant-General (AG), looked after
"A" or ad-
ministrative matters concerning individual persons,
which included mo-
bilization and army schools; the third, the Quartermaster-General (QMG),
took care of "Q" facets pertaining to material needs such as supply, quart-
ering, and movement; and the fourth, the Master-General of Ordnance
(MGO), was responsible for armament, fortification, and procurement &
As Maior-General Fuller so correctly pointed out, the CIGS was neither
nor "imperial," for he headed little more than an operational
staff? The British General Staff, unlike the German, was but one part of
the whole.
Staff representation on the Army Council projected throughout the field
army, with the exception of the MGO Branch, whose responsibilities were
discharged by Q. By 1913, however, staff officers were appointed to A and
O branches coniointly, rather than separately thus enabling senior admin-
istrative or AQ appointments to supervise the work of both,
"distributing
it among the several 'AQ' staff officers as was most convenient." The
