264
Map 11.1
Operation "Totalize"
Half-Forgotten Summer
FIRST CANADIAN ARMY OPERATIONS
ASTRIDE THE CAEN-FALAISE ROAD
7-8 AUGUST
CAGN
ST AIGMAN-OF-CRAMESMIL
POUSSY-LA-CAMPA
POL. ARMD DIV
CAUVICOURT
BRETTEVILLE- LE-RABET
through the German defense. Noting that the enemy position was manned
by the Ist SS right and the 9th SS left, each disposed with one infantry
regiment back and one forward with all tanks and SP guns in support, he
expected very heavy fighting.
The presence of the 12th SS in close reserve
also meant that a counterattack was likely on the eastern flank. Simonds
thus envisioned one "break in" operation to penetrate the foremost prepared
defensive zone along May-sur-Orne-Tilly-la-Campagne-La Hogue and a
The Amiens Alchemy
265
second to pierce the rearward partially prepared position along Hautmesnil-
St. Sylvain. Given the open nature of the ground, which ideally suited the
characteristics of German weaponry, he deduced that the defense would
"be most handicapped in bad visibility-smoke, fog or darkness, when the
advantage of long range[wa|s minimized."3
While Simonds recognized the impossibility of achieving tactical surprise
"in respect to objectives or direction of attack," he believed it could still
be attained "in respect to time and method." The essential problem was
"how to get the armour through the enemy gun screen to sufficient depth
to disrupt the German anti-tank gun and mortar defence, in country highly
suited to tactics of the latter combination." Like Montgomery, Simonds
seized upon the employment of heavy bombers as part of the solution. Yet,
he reasoned, if all available air support were used for the first "break in,"
there would be little left for the second, which would also suffer from
diminished gun support unless a "pause" were incorporated to move ar-
tillery and ammunition forward. On the other hand, if the initial "break
could be accomplished by "infiltrating through the screen in bad visi-
bility" with limited air support, say heavy night bombers, then heavy and
medium day bombers would be available to deal with the next zone at the
very moment artillery support was expected to slacken.
Through this "nov-
city of method," which involved transporting infantry in armored carriers
closely behind leading tanks, Simonds hoped to avoid a slackening pause
and "maintain a high tempo to ... operations.
What Simonds proposed was a properly coordinated corps attack by three
infantry and two armored divisions, two armored brigades, two complete
AGRA plus the support of two additional ones, a searchlight battery for
movement lighting in event of low cloud cover, four squadrons of special
armor with famethrowing Crocodiles, and the "whole of the available air
effort." As originally conceived, the operation comprised three phases, the
first of which inunived a nicht nock on the Fontenav-le-Marmion-La
Hooue position with two infantry divisions, each with an armored brigade
under command. The task of the right division operating west of the Caen-
Flaise road was to secure the line Caillouet-Gaumesnil and "mop up" its
sector; cast of the road, the left division was to capture the areas of Lour-
guichon, St. Aignan de Cramesnil, SCramesnil, Garcelles-Secqueville, and
Secqueville-la-Campagne. There was to be no preliminary bombardment
during the first phase, though commencing at H-hour RAF Lancaster bomb-
ers were to "obliterate" the areas of May-sur-Orne, Fontenay-le-Marmion,
and La Hogue-Secqueville. At the same time, tanks and carrier-borne in-
fantry of leading brigades were to assault under cover of a quick medium
artillery barrage advancing 100 vande in each minute, straight for their first
In the second phase, one armored division and a fresh infantry division
were to break into the Hautmesnil-St. Sylvain position.
The task of the
