Long Forgotten Winters
20
infantry and four cavalry divisions with an appropriate number of ancillary
or supporting troops. This was considered the minimum strength required
to hold hostile American forces at bay, in event of war with the United
States, while awaiting the arrival of imperial reinforcements. As for the
politically unpopular question of dispatching an expeditionary force to de-
liver other imperilled areas of the Empire, the committee advocated a struc-
ture strikingly similar to that of the legendary British Expeditionary Force:
one cavalry and six infantry divisions.
Yet the imperial sands were shifting for Canada, the ebb of Britannic
power being nowhere better illustrated than in the case of the Anglo-
Japanese Alliance of 1902, which year also marked the withdrawal of Royal
Navy squadrons from North America. In its time this pact saw Japanese
troops considered for employment on India's Northwest Frontier, and,
during the Great War, units of the Imperial Japanese Navy supporting Royal
Navy minesweeping operations in the Mediterranean and Canadian coastal
defenses on the Pacific. Its renewal in 1911 was hailed by then Prime Minister
Sir Wilfrid Laurier as a "happy event." By 1921, however,
despite Ad-
miralty and vehement Australian objection, Prime Minister Arthur Meighen
was urging abrogation of the alliance to assuage growing American hostility
toward it. According to Correlli Barnett, Meighen's "resolute opposition"
finally sunk the agreement, which amounted to Canada exercising "a de-
cisive influence" in "one of the most crucial national-strategic decisions
England had ever to reach in her history." At the Washington Naval Dis-
armament Conference of 1921-1922, the Anglo-Japanese Alliance was fi-
nally terminated, superseded by a nebulous four-power treaty.
27
At the same conference Britain accepted naval parity with the United
States, giving up with respect to the Republic all pretensions of maintaining
her traditional two-power standard. The Washington Treaties, inasmuch
as they forbade the fortification of Hong Kong and the Philippines, also
had the effect of leaving Japan the dominant Pacific power. Britain and her
Antipodean dominions were thus left facing a spurned. resentful, and now
unconstrained Nippon; in effect, for U.S. goodwill, an ally had been con-
verted into an enemy. Bereft of alternate allies in the Far East and with
American strength confined to Hawaii, the British Empire turned its at-
tention to Singapore on which hung the imperial lifeline to Australia and
New Zealand. This focus on a "Singapore strategy" to safeguard the British
Far Eastern Empire, it has been argued, spawned a policy of strategic ap-
peasement essentially based on bluff, since British power alone could not
deal simultaneously with Japan in the Far East, a resurgent Germany in
Europe, and Italy in the Mediterranean. Not since the American Revolution
had Britain faced such a potentially overwhelming array of enemies.
Canadian defense policy, though far less grim and complicated, exhibited
certain characteristics of the wider imperial predicament. Just as public
revulsion at the perceived loss of a generation of finest manhood led, in
The Canadian Corps and the British Mold
21
Britain, to bitter condemnation of the expeditionary force commitment to
the Continent, so it did in Canada. While British generals were pilloried as
incompetent, sanguinary fools, the Canadian government meted out a dis-
gracefully shabby welcome to returning General Currie; he was later accused
on the floor of the House of Commons of cowardice and wasting the lives
of Canadian soldiers. Likewise, pressures to repatriate troops from Allied
intervention in the Russian Civil War and reduce military forces to prewar
levels proved similarly irresistible in Canada and Britain. As if to reinforce
this point, demobilization mutinies occurred in both armies. An isolationist
trend also developed in Britain, though it was not considered by most to
be a realistic option in light of British national involvement in the League
of Nations, and, by 1925, the umbrella Treaty of Locarno that principally
guaranteed the Franco-Belgian-German frontier established by the Treaty
of Versailles. Indeed, Britain maintained an army in the Rhineland until
1930.29
With German power eliminated, however, only Bolshevik Russia and
Japan were regarded as major threats for most of the 1920s. The potential
danger of air attack by France was for a brief period between 1921-1923,
not entirely for service reasons, taken seriously by the Royal Air Force
(RAF). It had been assumed from August 1919, nonetheless, that for pur-
poses of framing service financial estimates, "the British Empire. [would]
not be engaged in any great war during the next ten years, and... no
Expeditionary Force. [would bel required." In July 1928 this so-called
Ten Year Rule, essentially a Treasury control measure that sparked intense
inter-service rivalry for funds, was put on a "moving day-by-day basis.
>>30
The military thus once again assumed the traditional role of garrisoning
India and protecting the Empire. In essence this represented a reversion to
the 1872 Cardwell system that placed the regiment, a "linked" battalion at
home feeding drafts to another one abroad, in the central position. It also
meant gelding the Home Army mainly to sustain the autonomous Army
in India, which with its focus on the Northwest Frontier and internal security
was less receptive to mechanization. To Barnett, this relegated the British
Army to little more than "a colonial gendarmerie with no major role to
play or plan for."31
While the complexities of British defense policy between the wars will
not be examined in any depth, as many of the scholars consulted have done
in admirable detail, certain aspects for their influence upon Canadian military
thinking should be considered. Foremost among these must be the recog-
nition that the British people, with the slogan
"never again" upon their
lips, actively searched through successive governments for alternate means
of waging or, preferably, avoiding war to enhance their security. To much
of the war-weary British electorate, mechanization merely equated to an-
other continental commitment of land forces. According to the Comman-
dant of the British Staff College, Major-General Edmund Ironside, writing
