146
Long Forgotten Winters
local scene, a rather extraordinary step for an army commander who should
always be looking well beyond operations in current progress. In sum,
McNaughton failed to demonstrate that critical capacity of a higher com-
mander to plan sensibly and order not hours, but days ahead.
Sir James Grigg, British Secretary of State for War, observed the Canadian
GOC-in-C's performance on "Spartan." He reported that he was "appalled
at McNaughton's indecision" as "he stood in front of his situation map
hesitating as to what to do and what orders to issue?"* General Alan Brooke
also called on McNaughton on 7 March, which visit Stacey implies may
have been the catalyst that caused McNaughton to countermand his 6 March
order to pass 2 Corps through 1 Corps at night. Whatever the case, Brooke
recorded in his daily diary that the visit went a long way toward "proving
my worse fear that .. (McNaughton] is quite incompetent to command
an army!" He added that: "He gaton is kite how to begin the job and
was tying up his force into the most awful muddle." It was "Quite clear,
Brooke finally noted, "that Paget was incapable of realizing how bad Andy
McNaughton is!" Years later, even Crerar recalled "that it became patently
obvious to all"' during Exercise "Spartan" that McNaughton
"was totally
unsuitable for high operational command." According to him, both Grigg
and Ralton witnessed McNaughton's "inability to sum up the situation
and issue precise clear cut orders.
In a post-exercise memorandum to McNaughton based on a review of
all "Spartan" reports, Major-General Simonds, his former B.G.S., wrote:
"the main conclusions [of the C-in-C Home Forces indicating weaknesses
in organization and training... (were substantiated by events during the
exercise." Most noticeable, he added, "forward brigades... acted with less
energy than they did in exercise TIGER"
in "getting to grips with the
enemy." Road movement also remained a serious problem, particularly at
bridgeheads and other defiles where special traffic control and routing ar-
rangements had to be made to avoid congestion." Revealingly, 2 Corps
recommended that night movement of armored formations be kept to a
minimum, and then be executed only with full lights! Simonds dismissed
this on the grounds that the Eighth Army had conducted such moves highly
successfully without lights. He likewise dismissed another 2 Corps sug-
gestion, to collocate Advanced and Rear components of corps headquarters
so that supply, transportation, and maintenance heads could be kept better
informed, because it was "useless for Heads of Services normally at Rear)
to be in the tactical picture if they ... (were not in a position to control
their units and give an up to date state' and forecast of requirements to the
A/Q Staff." If there had to "be a gap somewhere,"
should be between Advanced HQ and the Heads of Services rather than
between the Heads of Services and their units."12
argued Simonds,
Crerar corroborated most of these points in his reports on "Spartan" and
"Trojan," a formation headquarters signals exercise held on 31 May and 1
Final Tempering
147
June to train replacement officers in their operational responsibilities. Apart
from mentioning the perennial bogey of failure to pass on vital information,
he commented upon the necessity
"to appreciate the time required between
the ordering of a Brigade or Divisional attack and the launching
of its
battalions supported by co-ordinated fire power." A commander once de-
cided on a general plan of action had to look ahead, "to think out... the
course he... [would] pursue after the immediate battle ha[d] been fought";
this could not be done were he "required to check on the detailed imple-
mentation by his staff, of the plan already decided upon." In this respect
Crerar was especially hard on the 2nd Division, which had been censured
by C-in-C Home Forces for inadequate coordination of infantry and artillery
action and not digging-in after attack. Indeed, it was his failures during
"Spartan," rather than at Dieppe, that cost the GOC, Major-General Rob-
erts, his command. '3
The most striking aspect of Crerar's commentary, however, was how
much it actually parroted Montgomery. From stressing the need to fight
for information in the establishment of contact and the advantageous use
of ground, through the stage-management of battle and the correct location
of the commander, he reflected the master's language and approach. At the
same time, judging from its acceptable performance on "Spartan," 1 Corps
was evidently the better for it. The same day that Brooke reported so
adversely upon McNaughton he also visited Crerar and his headquarters
where he saw "a real good show." The latter, in Brooke's words, had
"improved that Corps out of all recognition.
»14 Still, the extensive changes
in command and staff appointments that followed "Spartan" left Crerar
convinced that his corps had "lost some ground... in respect of functional
efficiency."
At the end of Exercise "Trojan," he asked commanders to
concentrate on three things: training themselves and their staffs in their
respective operational roles; developing a dependable NCO cadre; and train-
ing all ranks to the highest standard in weapon and equipment handling
Brief mention should, of course, be made of two aspects that continued
to characterize Anolo-Canadian operations One related to the two sides of
road movement. First, restricting movement to roads to avoid damage to
crops and civilian property inculcated in many troops a general reluctance
to leave roads at all. Second, road movement congestion itself signaled an
overabundance of vehicles, a problem identified on Exercise "Tiger" by
accompanie[d] fighting units into battle.
»16 The other aspect related to
the "fetish"
leaving
of commanders going forward from their headquarters and
"confusion" in their wake. After Exercise
"Spartan,
" doctrine
stressed that commanders "on the higher levels clould fight their battles
only from their HQ where they... |were) fully in the picture and hald] their
full signals facilities. *17 Notably, in the German system of shared com-
