174
Half-Forgotten Summer
On a much higher plane, Crerar had, during his February 1943 visit to
North Africa, already been advised by Montgomery that infantry divisions
"should comprise at least one half the force of any Army?" To overcome
prepared enemy positions protected by minefields up to 4,000 yards deep,
which process encompassed "break-in," "crumbling," "breakthrough,"
and pursuit stages, the "solid killing" had perforce to be done by infantry
in strength. Once broken into, defensive systems could only be reduced by
infantry, most efficiently operating in a series of thrusts along different axes.
Ideally, armored divisions then passed through "gaps" to hold panzer di-
visions at bay, not attack them, while this process continued. "Throughout
all attacks,"
emphasized Montgomery,
Inflantry]." In his view, the "new model" division of one armored and
two infantry brigades, which was introduced in October 1942 for the pur-
pose of making infantry division commanders familiar with armor, was
not operationally satisfactory. In the decisive "fight to kill," there was no
substitute for the "power of the well-trained Inflantry] Division!" of three
infantry brigades. To Montgomery, as Crerar duly noted,
of attack" was the infantry and artillery program, with the latter the "secret
of success.'*43
Given the time lag that invariably prevailed between battlefield action
and the adoption of doctrine, it is clear that Canadian fighting style in
Normandy largely reflected the experiences of the Desert and Tunisia. The
lessons of Italy, though disseminated, do not appear to have been as deeply
embedded or, for that matter, always relevant. If independent armored
maneuver had become suspect before, it was hardly resuscitated in the
struggle up the boot of Italy, which became a wearisome trial of "one more
river, one more mountain."' Described as a "dreadful... bloody affair, a
war of attrition,
" the Italian campaign assumed an infantry-artillery char-
acter faintly reminiscent of the Western Front in the Great War. Unceasing
rain during the winter months turned the countryside into a quagmire,
making it tricky or impossible for tanks to maneuver off roads. Difficulty
in spotting antitank guns over the next rise, moreover, often forced tank
commanders to get out on foot and lead their armored charges safely onto
new fire positions. As Canadians discovered, even unsolicited armored di-
visions like their 5th were not wanted, there "already... [being] as much
armour in the Mediterranean as couldl usefully thel employedl in It-
aly." Tactical demand for more infantry was so great, in fact, that British
armored divisions, and later the 5th Canadian Armoured, were restructured
on the hacis of one armored and two infantry brigades 44.
Of course the undiminished importance of infantry had been amply dem-
onstrated in fighting in Russia and Asia as well as in North Africa and
Italy 45 Unfortunately, this was not to the advantage of either the British
or Canadian armies both of clich shared an abiding fear of not being able
to sustain sufficient foot soldiers in the field. The third attempt by the
The Imprint of Doctrine
175
British Army to rescue France was likely to be its last, a critical factor never
lost sight of by Montgomery in his approach to the conduct of operations
in Normandy. Indeed, as Russell Weigley so perceptively suggested, the
very existence of the First Canadian Army with its mixed composition of
Canadians, Britons, and Poles was a clear indication that the bottom of
Britain's manpower barrel had been reached. After it, there would be no
more British armies. 46
NOTES
1. Robert Allan Doughty, The Seeds of Disaster: The Development of French Army
Doctrine 1919-1939 (Hamden: Archon, 1985), pp. x-x1.
2. Supplement 3, Army Glossary. See also Doughty's The Evolution of US Army
Tactical Doctrine, 1946-76 (Fort Leavenworth: Combat Studies Institute, 1979),
Pp. 1-2, 49. Doctrine has also been described as "the definition of the aim of military
operations; the study of weapons and other resources and the lessons of history,
leading to the deductions of the correct strategic and tactical principles on which to
base both training and the conduct of war—Sans doctrine les textes ne sont rien"
Shelford Bidwell and Dominick Graham, Fire-Power: British Army Weapons and
Theories of War, 1904-1945 (London: Allen and Unwin, 1982), p. 2). Another put
it more simply: "Military doctrine is guidance for conduct of battle approved by
the highest military authority" [Timothy T. Lupfer, The Dynamics of Doctrine: The
Changes in German Tactical Doctrine During the First World War (Fort Leavenworth:
Combat Studies Institute, 1981), p. viil.
3. For insight into the evolution of British doctrine, see Bidwell and Graham,
Pire.Power, pp. 227-240. Canadian Army Training Memoranda (CATM) were widely
read. DHist 113.3R4003 (D1) Research and Information Section, Vol. III, "Special
Reports," Special Report Number 167, 9 January 1945, "C.A. T.M." Whether doc-
trine should drive or merely reflects technological development remains a much
debated point. As in the opinion of this writer the latter is probably the reality,
Chusewitz's stress upon theorv as study. because a positive doctrine is unattainable.
makes great sense (Carl von Clausewitz, On War, ed. /trans. Michael Howard and
Peter Paret (Princeton, N. Princewn University Press, 1976), Pp. 140-141.):
4. Shelford Bidwell, Gunners at War: A Tactical Study of the Royal Artillery in the
Twentieth Century (Tondon: Arms and Armour 1970). Do 132-133. and John A.
English, On Infantry (New York: Praeger, 1984), pp. 80, 124.
5. Tactical Doctrine Retrieval Cell, Scaff College Camberly, "The Bartholomew
Report," Bartholomew Committee Final Report (1940). The Bartholomew Com-
mittee included besides the chairman, Major-Generals C. C. Malden and N. M. S
Irwin and Brioadiers D. G Watson and W. C. Holden (three infantrymen and two
gunners). It also recommended that divisions have their own armored reconnaissance
units and battalions their own antitank platoons. It further called for all troops when
outfanked or surrounded won antiane to hold out from alternate positions.
6. Ronald Lewin, Man of Armour: A Study of Lieut. -General Vyvyan Pope and the
Development of Armoured Warfare (London: Leo Cooper. 1976). pD. 127-128. 143-
144; and Bidwell, Gunners, p. 133.
7. Biduall Cunners an 122 136. Brio A I Demberton The Second World
