306
Half-Forgotten Summer
Regrettably, Simonds could not be persuaded to throw caution to the
wind and change the air bombardment plan. Crerar, principally concerned
that movement not be delayed until long after bombardment, may not even
have sensed the opportunity. In any case, residual tensions between the two
commanders plus a marked disparity in their operational abilities were
hardly conducive to Crerar offering Simonds any constructive military ad-
vice. The decision to await the bomber strike was an unlucky one, but in
light of Simond's determination to avoid repeat performances of "Atlantic"
and "Spring" it remains understandable. Less forgivable was the failure of
his armored divisional commanders to employ their assigned AGRAs to
blast their way forward. More aggressive injection of these heavier resources
into the fighting could have redeemed a deteriorating situation.
Against any other but the German army, buttressed as it was by the
formidable soldiery of the SS, the Canadian attack on Der Schwarze Tag
should have succeeded. Given his personal doubts about his division com-
manders, Simonds's plan was essentially sound, and save for the rapid
response of Meyer and his first staff officer it could hardly have been stayed.
Since the plan involved attacking prepared rather than hasty German de-
fensive positions, Simonds was unquestionably correct to centralize artillery
and use its firepower in mass.
Another factor often overlooked, which
Brooke appreciated, was that enemy troop-to-space density in this area ran
to two and a half times that of the Eastern Front.
Though the point has
been made by many analysts that the open Caen plain, unlike the bocage,
favored armored offensive operations, few seem to have understood that it
also offered ideal fields of fire for concealed long-range German antitank
guns and tanks. But perhaps the most disturbing aspect of this action, as
with most others from Carpiquet through "Tractable,
" is how few German
soldiers actually defended against the number of Canadians who attacked.
In very large measure, responsibility for the relatively lackluster showing
of Canadian arms in Normandy must be laid at the feet of division com-
manders. Clearly, neither Keller nor Foulkes were as tactically competent
as Simonds. The available evidence plainly suggests that the "hard-fisted"
Keller experienced serious personal and command failings in leading the
3rd Division. At Carpiquet he should probably have personally coordinated
the efforts of his two brigades rather than assigning one an adjacent, yet
removed, battalion of the other to carry out the divisional task. The confused
and congested combat for Caen further revealed a growing lack of trust
and confidence, among both superiors and subordinates, in Keller's lead-
ership of the 3rd Division. His subsequent confession to Simonds that his
health was not good enough to stand the strain was tantamount to admitting
his inability to command. It was only for the sake of divisional morale that
Simonds chose not to remove him.
Foulkes's contention that Canadian troops without air and artillery were
no match for battle-experienced Germans has had the effect of camouflaging
Final Casting
for years his own tactical shortcomings. The 12th SS, 85th, 89th, and 272nd
German Divisions had not been in action as formations before Normandy.
At the same time, Canadian troops when not poorly deployed gave good
accounts of themselves. The action of the Canadian Scottish in taking Point
168 while being shelled by their own artillery is a case in point. It was
something else, however, to have permitted the SSR and the Black Watch
to advance up the open slopes of Verrières Ridge without adequate tank or
artillery support. Much responsibility for this must be borne by Foulkes.
It was his overly complex plan and insistence on breaking up brigades, a
practice Montgomery disdained as they were trained to work together, that
aggravated the situation in "Spring."
Regardless of whether "Spring'
" was intended as a holding attack or not,
Simonds's assertion that all objectives should have been taken on 25 July
cannot be lightly dismissed. The piecemeal attack by one battalion of the
3rd Division on Tilly recalled earlier British tendencies in North Africa that
had confirmed the old rule of thumb,
risk to lose."
"the fewer you use, the more you
A full-scale brigade attack against the town, on the other
hand, may have saved lives in the long run.
Tilly was decidedly never the
two-company objective of Brigadier Jefferson's imagination. On the west-
ern flank, the redirection of the Black Watch into the built-up area of May-
sur-Orne would have at least threatened the German position at Fontenay-
le-Marmion. However one looks at the attack of the Black Watch, com-
manded at the last minute by a junior major, Brigadier Megill should have
assumed more direct control. There can be little doubt that any similar
action by the 12th SS would have felt the steadying grip of Meyer.
At best, Simonds's immediate subordinates were mediocre performers.
Even at brigade level, with the possible exception of Foster, a lack of tactical
judgement was often evident. Within the Canadian military system Simonds
was, and remains, almost sui generis. Though by no means perfect, he was,
as Montgomery so clearly perceived, the best of the lot. It is a sad com-
mentary that had Crerar had his way in Italy, Simonds probably would
have been sacked and his considerable talent lost. To a degree, the personal
conflict between these two officers symbolized a deeper professional defi-
ciency in the prewar Canadian military establishment,
which had rarely
displayed any interest in or appreciation of the requirements for senior field
command. Simonds at 41 was one of the youngest corps commanders in
any army, largely because he had ascended in a vacuum.
Fifteen years, or
half a generation, separated Simonds and Crerar.
Yet within that bracket
Simonds had no equals. In comparison, no such void existed in the U.S.
Army where the youngest corps commander was seven years older than
Simonds. In the German army less than two percent of corps commanders
were under 45.
There was thus no natural connection between youth and superior mil-
itary performance in the Canadian Army. The critical factor,
as in the
