206
Half-Forgotten Summer
fateful decision to order the division to withdraw." More than a month's
hard fighting would be required before the British returned.
A New Zealander, Brigadier James Hargest, observed the 7th Armoured
during this period and noted that on 11 June outside Tilly-sur-Seulles, north
of Villers Bocage, the infantry of the 131st Brigade were three miles behind
the tanks, whose junior officers complained to him about lack of infantry.
On mentioning this to the division commander, Hargest apparently received
the reply that the "pace was too hot for infantry" and that the latter "pre-
ferred to go on alone [with tanks]." Hargest concluded that "our tanks are
badly led and fought. Only our superior numbers and our magnificent
artillery support keeps them in the field at all." He attributed "a great deal
of their failure... to the retention of the absurd Regimental system.
Because
there is no work for cavalry, the Cavalry Regts were given tanks.
The
officers are trained in armour not because they like armour, but because
they are cavalry men.
They are in armour because they like horses in other
units." He went on to state that the Royal Tank Regiment was "sound and
every unit in armour should belong to ... [it]. At the moment we suffer
because of the incompatibility and lack of the "will to fight" in the Ar-
moured Corps."6
The fight back to Villers Bocage took until 4 August. In the meantime
the perimeter of the narrow but contiguous Normandy bridgehead that had
been established on 10 June looked, even to the less faint-hearted, precar-
iously near becoming permanent. The arrival of the 2nd Panzer in the Villers
Bocage area, which ominously represented the commitment of German
reserves, caused Montgomery on 14 June to suspend all offensive operations
for 48 hours in order to regain his balance. Within the Second British Army,
1 Corps received orders to adopt an aggressive defensive posture in the
Caen sector, while 30 Corps was warned for offensive action against the
Villers Bocage-Caumont area to arrest the movement westward of the 2nd
Panzer. Lieutenant-General Bradley, charged with the reduction of Cher-
bourg and breaking-out, successfully argued at the same time he would
have to postpone the latter task as the First U.S. Army could not do both.
While Montgomery momentarily revived the idea of a double envelopment
of Caen, he eventually dropped it for lack of deployment space within the
Orne bridgehead.
Montgomery instead finally directed the Second Army to launch 8 Corps
of upward of three divisions in a major thrust between Carpiquet and Rauray
striking southeast to the Orne. Operation "Epsom" as this 25-29 June attack
was
called, intentionally resembled Montgomery's blitz attack at El
Hamma, which had seen 10 Corps supported by the Desert Air Force
successfully flank the Mareth Line in late March 1943. Indeed, El Hamma,
which witnessed the first recorded use of forward air controllers (FACs) in
battle, confirmed that the problem of air support for the army had been
satisfactorily worked out. There is reason to believe, however, that Mont-
Throes Beyond the Beach
207
gomery himself did not fully appreciate the difficulties of fighting through
the bocage. In the course of establishing a bridgehead over the Odon,
Corps precipitated a battle of attrition that approached Great War dimen-
sions. Casualties in the infantry ran well in excess of 50 percent, losses that
could ill be afforded, but which nonetheless attested to the nature of the
fighting.
While "Epsom" did not attain its territorial objectives, the Germans had
been forced to use all available reserves to stem its onslaught. The 2nd SS
Panzer Corps of the 9th SS (Hohenstauffen) and 10th SS (Frundsberg) Panzer
Divisions, which had been ordered back to France on 12 June after having
blunted the Red Army spring offensive at Tarnopol, was prematurely com-
mitted in a costly countermove that succeeded in pushing back,
eliminating, the Odon bridgehead. Indeed, from "Epsom" up to the break-
out on 25 July, between 560 and 725 panzers continuously deployed against
the British sector, whereas during this same period the Americans rarely
faced more than 190. Four of the seven divisions opposing the British and
Canadians were also SS, which each fielded two more infantry battalions
than normal army panzer divisions.® In the Panther battalion of their panzer
regiments, of course, the Germans evinced an overall qualitative superiority
in armament that issued from the Eastern Front. The Sherman 75 mm could
not pierce the frontal armor of a Panther and could only deal with a Tiger
from the rear or point-blank from enfilade. Ironically, Anglo-American
field armies were also being made to suffer for the technologically advanced
military state of their Russian allies.
Significantly, Montgomery from 25 June ordered the suppression of re-
ports that commented adversely upon the inadequacies of Allied tanks and
equipment as compared with the German.
While concern for morale
prompted him to take such action, he also seems to have been convinced
that when Allied weapons and equipment were intelligently used the Ger-
man could be handled. Heavy 45-ton Panthers and clumsy 56-ton Tigers
with their respective 75-mm and 88-mm high-velocity guns had, after all,
been encountered in Tunisia and were found to be vulnerable to six- pounder
fire on their sides and rear. Then, too, they could be stopped as were the
go t can cive tellery fire from medium and
heavy guns. The 17-pounder was also more than a match for the 100-mm
frontal armor of the Tiger, as it could penetrate 111 mm at 2,000 yards. In
mounting this gun into some of their Shermans, the British ensured that
the Allies had at least one tank, renamed the Firefly, which could take on
German models? Unforunately, the Firely, which initially lacked a good
bich-explosive round was only issued on a limited scale and naturall
becime a prime enemy target. As a result of experience gained the 2nd
Canadian Armoured Bricade organized its squadrons on a four troop basis,
with one Firefly per troop. While the position of the troop leader was left
for sita to decide de de couche prudent to have him lend in a less
