186
Half-Forgotten Summer
breakout from a bridgehead, 4th Armoured Divison infantry and engineers
practiced similar operations on a lesser scale on the River Medway in Kent.
Unfortunately, First Canadian Army operations did not actually follow this
pattern in the event.
That Simonds found 2 Corps training deficient is evident from his corps
commander's conference of 4 March 1944. Here he observed that not enough
had been accomplished with respect to all-arms cooperation. Stressing that
too much training was ill-organized and poorly prepared, he directed bri-
gades to run unit tactical tests monthly using permanent umpire teams. He
additionally insisted that training be carried out on the basis of not operating
at war establishment. At a higher level, Exercise "Studiedum" conducted
in mid-January aimed at effecting closer liaison between corps and division
staffs. In February, Exercises "Jing" and "Jang" saw formation and artillery
commanders and staffs of the 4th and 2nd Divisions, respectively, practicing
the allotment of artillery fire during an advance and the preparation of
divisional fire plans. In Exercise "Last" held mid-April, Simonds managed
to practice all commanders and headquarters down to unit level in operations
immediately following a breakout from a bridgehead.' Simonds had also,
in the meantime, issued comprehensive personal instructions on 2 Corps
operational policy and efficiency in command. Significantly, both docu-
ments were sent to Montgomery and Dempsey who gave them their un-
qualified blessing.!'
That Simonds was a disciple of Montgomery is obvious, and they both
owed their fortune to plane crashes. What is less evident is that Simonds's
very competence may nearly have cost him his career. Indeed, it is highly
unlikely that professional ability alone would have saved him from the
malevolence of Crerar who increasingly envied the rising fortune of his
once quite junior subordinate. The depth of his rancor was most balefully
demonstrated in Italy, sparked by what can only be described as an ex-
ceedingly bizarre, picayune incident. During a visit to 5th Canadian Ar-
moured division headquarters in Cassoria in late 1943, Crerar expressed a
rather puerile interest in the construction of Simonds's caravan, a three-ton
lorry office cum sleeping quarter, which Crerar referred to as a "home from
home." Crerar was so impressed with its layout, in fact, that he subsequently
dispatched a maintenance captain to obtain its exact measurements.
When
the officer eventually appeared unannounced at 5th Division headquarters,
which had moved, he obtained the permission of a staff captain to enter
the GOC's caravan. As might be expected, Simonds returned to what was
essentially his private quarter only to find it apparently commandeered by
a stranger hent on gettino its mencurements and taking notee Inderstand-
the incident
ably he out the run on the hapless captain who, much put out, reported
Crerar's reaction to this "personal discourtesy," which he admitted he
could have chosen to ignore, was to remind Simonds "of a good many
Cast of Commanders
187
reasons, extending over a number of years, which should induce in you
felings, for me, of loyalty and appreciation." One suspects, however, that
this pathetic expression of hurt feelings was merely symptomatic of a deeper
underlying concern. More ominous was the veiled threat that because the
episode indicated Simonds's "nerves... [were] over-stretched and that im-
pulse, rather then considered judgement, [might] ... begin to affect... [his]
decisions," Crerar should be "extremely worried." Warning Simonds that
he was "reaching a position in the Army when balance... [was] becoming
even more important to ... [his] future than brilliance," Crerar, incredibly,
asked him "to undertake a self-examination, and... diagnosis of... [his]
mental and physical condition. "18
Not content to let the matter drop, the more so because of Simonds's
arbitrary 11 December removal of Brigadier R. O. G. Morton, CRA of
the 5ch Division, Crerar went on to advise Montgomery that he had "serious
cause to doubt... [the] suitability [of Simonds] for higher command." In
Cera's judgment, though Simonds possessed "all the military brilliance
for higher command in the field with his tense mentality, under further
strin through increased rank and responsibilities, he might go 'off the deep
end' very disastrously indeed." To reinforce this point Crerar confided that
Simonds had "always been high strung... with a tendency to be intro-
spective, rather than objective, when faced with acute problems." Crerar's
main concern, however, appears to have been Simonds's lack of deference
to him. Despite the brave claim that, "till now, I have always been able to
handle Simonds successfully." Crerar seems himself to have become highly
unsettled by the perception that his erstwhile subordinate would "resent
..any control or direction on... [his] part.
Montgomery's response to Crerar was characteristically straightforward:
he continued to entertain the "highest opinion of Simonds". thoush he had
iried to go off the rails once or twice when he first went into action with
his Division]. he had been "pulled. back... and taught... his stuff."
Here, of course, Montgomery may have been referring to Simonds's poor
handling in July of his ist Brigade commander, Brigadier Howard Graham
Recognizine immediately that both were good commanders, Montgomer,
wisely intervened to save the junior and counsel the senior. 20 In like manner,
he also bluntly sainted cut to Crerar that Simands would "be, very valuable
office]r in the Canadian Forces as you have no one else with his experience."
The commander of the Biahth Army went on in markedly astute fashion
to suggest that Simonds "must therefore be handled carefully and trained
on." By way of comparison, he rated Simonds's replacement as GOC 1st
Division, Major-General Chris Vokes,
"not even in the same parish." "I
am trying hard to teach him." lamented Montgomery, "but he will never
be anything more than a good plain cool ,
Discounting Montgomery's "primary interest in field command," Crerar
now impuened Simonds in the area of "Canadian policies and business,"
