NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
TON OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
!
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
36), and personal
s representatives.
ar diaries will be
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
Out, Or et to tou a entered up act in the order ( in thy me it be tho time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
(1) cal of ch maratie ad opt on rating dro yo by tortinte omation
or. References
ot other person shout he made diet, that the oficer detai as the entries is the commander
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PArA. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
- Krep e Satredond
(i) Importist os ters, instructions, reports, messages of despatches received and issued,
!
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
larch tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
(i The dyiet copy dead mind posed to cont to the ta / an diaber
OELO
Left Dundee Staging Camp & arrived destination at Dunphail House, Morayshire at 17.00hrs.
C., RASC visited un
bin poty at to are tho
sept a has out Aman:
Inoculation of entire company with the new typhus inoculation carried out.
0890
00° TT
O8 TT
4277
2812.
17LT
15th
Ja+T
170T
476
47L
479
3ra
sepant
Capt. Briggs proceeded on leave.
Party of NCO's & OR's att.to RASC School for Mines Course.
Capt .S.A. Griffiths returned from leave.
Party of NGO's & OR's attached to RASC Trg School for Mines Course.
1 OR Discharged on medical grounds. Sten M.C.firing practice at the runges.
Annan
nOTI
Unit 172 Infantry Brigado Gory F.5m C. 2118
Commanding Officer Major L.A. Cardy
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required)
or ful
ument:
in your Bulk Order are g
ve requested, or they
your documer
enquire at the
Shing
