INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
..S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 174.
PARA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
creation of the particular command or appointment by :—
(i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
and area or sub-area of the L. of C.
(i) Unit commanders.
(iii) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
staff.
(v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
(vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
NoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
kept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
VoTE C.—Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data
upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
A.F. C.2118.
It will be entered up notey that
each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
traction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official
Secrets Acts.
ToTI.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary:-
i) Important orders, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
ind decisions taken.
fi) Daily locations.
Movements during the past twenty-four hours and present dispositions.
March tables in the case of large units or of formations are of assistance.
ji) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
and the number of other ranks or
followers and of animals should be noted.
in addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
ccur or come to nouce.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
outine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(i) coy, if each neat set report ma prating drate o by a sument the oration
supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above).
Appendices will be
numbered. and each will have a brief descriptive heading namine the author. Keterences
o appendices will be made in the last column of A.r. C.2110.
(See PA.S.., Vol diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :-
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
ve forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c 2nd Echelon
or transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a cavalry or infantry brigade or higher
orauon will be lorwarere wilun a perrod or two monuns to the onicer 1/c nd Hcheloni
or transmission to the Under-secretary of state. The War Otee.
The duplicate copie
I the dames of units will be sent within a period of three months to the officer i/c
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to record offices at home for safe custody.
SPECIAL NOTE
—The time entered should be the time the information or order
ne unit concerned.
Ine ume of une event recorded saould aiso de given in the text, if
Army Form
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY.
(Erase heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
nd the Staff
ual respectively.
will be prepared in manuscript.
lace
Date
1944
JAN
Cour
14-16
references to
Appendices
15
29
AF W3008 rendered (copy att)
ADAM
Exercise IX0wK held.
The Exercise was designed to practice the lOVEMINT,
HARBOURING and DEF'ENCE of
the Adm Gp.
During the Exercise the establishment of APS, FPs, and AWDs was practiced.
Troops taking part:-
Det HQ Div & Div Sigs representing 'Q' Control.
HQ Adm Gp (1 Manch)
Div RASC
26 FDS
Det Ord Office
REME 53 Div
One See Pro under coma OC Adm
Three secs Pro under cond 'Q' Control.
Det 53 Recce Regt
GERMAN
AF W3008 rendered (copy att)
AF W3008 rendered (copy att)
AF W3008 rendered (copy att)
Limon Ma
COMMANDEI
53rd Division.
WO 171/566
14622854
Return by (19/11/2025 07
doris spl-203207 (Albert Du
Closure status: Open
08/10/2025 07:00:01
AR Duar
