Oner or Sarvage and his representatives.
A. —In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war duties will be
the first day of embodiment.
B.—See also A.C.I. 2044 of 1941, paras. 1, 3, and 7.
E C.— Any question of doubt whether or not a war
diary should be kept by :
unit
nit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State
(S.D:1),
ar Office, London, S.W.1.
ARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
• provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
isation and administration.
To effect this commanders of all grades are encouraged to include in the war diaries of
formations or units any ideas, opinions and recommendations, based on factual experience
gard to weapons, equipment, tactics, organisation and inter-service co-operation which
y be of benefit for short-term research in the Army, as well as material likely to be of value
er for the History of the War.
I war diary will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it,
a A.F. C. 2118.
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
rom a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.-It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
(1) Tand tattoo, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
to pay at in a nata dirt lorenty dour hour and precan dispositions.
LATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
of mobilisation or
important phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
bordinate command
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
ments (Sec.
38), and
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above, but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(li) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para, 4, iv above);
Appendices will be
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
(iv) Copies or important and relevant aemi-official letters by commanders of formations,
including any which may have been marked "personal" (provided the writer considers
they should be included).
(Sce PR. Vol diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
be forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c G.H Q.
2nd Echelon for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices
are attached.
ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a brigade or higher formation
Thei
insmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.
lo be trilo sent to record oldes at home for sato the die 1/63
the SPECTAT. NOT he The tia
the time antered should be the time the fon it on torter.
WAR DIARY
rmy Forb
Unit... AQ Branob, HR 53 (W) Division
(Erase heading not required).
Summary of Events and Information
Commanding Officer
-Gen.
coma, 53 (W) DE Bion.
References to Appendices
Appx 'A'
Appx 'B'
Appx 'C'
B.W.E.F.
Month and reur..
June 1944
Place
Dale
our
APO,..
ENGLAND
AF W3008 rendered
10
AF W3008 rendered
17.
AF W3008 rendered
18.0920B
HO 53 Div left area BEARSTED, Kent to proceed overseas.
18
K9XKO88 1600B Arrived Marshalling Area 'S'.
19 & 20
Final stages waterproofing vehs & loading on vessels at TILBURY DOCKS.
21.
am
HQ 53 Div embarked in Merchant Navy SSs at TILBURY DOCKS, sailed and hove
to pm
same day in THAMES Eaty. off SOUTHEND.
22
Brig IG WHISTLER, DSO relinquished coma 160 Bde. It-Col C.F.C. COLEMAN
relinquished cond 4 Welch and assumed cond 160 Inf Bde vice Brig. WHISTLER.
24
25
26.
27
1930B
AF W3008 not rendered on board ship.
HQ 53 Div sailed in convoy for coast of NORMANDY.
Adm Order No. 3 issued.
pm
Hove to off coast of NORMANDY,
Disembarked at ARROMANCHES-LES-BAINS. Proceeded to, and est Div HQ at
784744 between St.
AMATOR and St. ANDRE.
Wt.41080/1000 600,000 12/41 W.H.& S. 51-4070
rving.)
19827971
999/LLL OM
ds suop
