ESTRICTED
Command ordnance depots were under the control of Chief Ordnance
Officers, with the rank of Lieut.-Colonel, who were directly responsible to
D.Ds.O.S. Commands.
Although considerable numbers of R.A.O.C. personnel were attached
to the headquarters of formations,
the majority were employed in the
numerous R.A.O.C. units and installations at home and overseas which
varied in size from central ordnance depots and base ordnance depots
(B.O.Ds.) each employing several thousands of R.A.O.C. and civilians, to
small field units and detachments.
Within the R.A.O.C. it was fully appreciated, long before war was declared
in 1939, that a major war would impose on the Corps an immense, swiftly
increasing commitment far beyond the capacity of its pre-war resources in
man-power and installations.
Although unreadiness for war was the state
of the Army as a whole, it was acutely so as regards the R.A.O.C., because
the peace establishments were gravely inadequate, the dilution with civilians
of the whole R.A.O.C. organization at home and abroad was grossly exces-
sive, there were no R.A.O.C. field units in existence nor any means of
forming and equipping them in peace-time, there were no facilities for carry-
ing out anything beyond the most meagre training for war, and there was
a grave shortage of storage capacity.
Beginning in 1938, several important measures were taken with a view to
mitigating the foreseen
consequences of unreadiness and facilitating the
transition of the R.A.O.C. organization from its inadequate peace-time
nucleus state to an efficient war-time footing.
In order to find personnel, numerous industrial concerns and commercial
firms, such as the engineering and motor and general distributing trades,
were energetically canvassed for volunteers willing to be earmarked for service
in the R.A.O.C: in an emergency:
There was a very ready response, and large
numbers of potential officers and men were selected for their ability, derived
from their commercial knowledge and experience, rapidly to assimilate the
tasks involved in store-keeping and supplying the large modern range of
They included many able business executives and specialists,
who later came in to staff and organize the new ordnance base installations
in the United Kingdom and subsequently to take their places in numerous
R.A.O.C. field units in the war theatres.
In regard to war training, a drive was made in 1938 and 1939, notwith-
standing the non-existence of R.A.O.C. field units, to improvise
training exercises in the movement and deployment of ordnance field parks
and in the reconaissance, siting and planning of ordnance depots in the field
and to study the ordnance field tasks in a war of movement by mechanized
In these training activities all available R.A.O.C. officers of the
As a solution of the enormous storage problem which loomed ahead, one
new central ordnance depot was opened in 1938, and in the same year another
was planned and approved for construction, the building of new mobiliza-
tion stores and ammunition depots for A.A. Command was undertaken and
extensive requisitioning of storage premises began.
The outbreak of war in September, 1939, came at a critical moment for
the R.A.O.C. as at that time the department of the Master General of
Ordnance was in process of dissolution, the Ministry of Supply had just been
formed and the R.A.O.C. was taking over the full responsibility, under the
Q.M.G., for the provision of all ordnance stores. The resultant re-organization
of the War Office ordnance branches which thereupon took place, and their
subsequent development, are fully outlined in Part I, which describes also
the war development of the R.A.O.C. organization in home commands and
the evolution of the great central ordnance depots in the United Kingdom,
with their network of shadow depots and sub-depots in every part of the
These depots occupied many millions of square feet of storage
space, provided with the most modern labour-saving equipment and devices
in storehouses and offices, and were designed to ensure that the Army's
innumerable equipment requirements could be met efficiently and in accord-
As the war progressed, important changes and developments were effected
in the organization and methods of R.A.O.C. field units.
These also are
described in Part I.
The way in which the great war-time supply of army equipment was
harnessed and controlled is described in Part II.
manufacturing capacity were gradually switched from peace-time needs to
war production, the supply increased and developed into full spate as the
It constituted throughout all the stages of war
a constant, complex provision problem to gear the enormous new production
capacity to the right kind of equipment and stores to ensure that the depots
were constantly replenished with balanced stocks of the equipment needed
to comply with the expansion and mobilization of the Army and with
Eventually, home production was vastly supplemented
by American equipment and other overseas supplies, to regulate which, the
R.A.O.C. set up its branch provision offices overseas.
step in the solution of the overall provision problem which, despite its vast
complexity, was never out of hand.
Part II also outlines the evolution of the war organization, both at the
War Office and at the depots specially set up in the United Kingdom, for the
supply of ammunition to the Army. As in the case of stores and equipment,
the details of the overseas organization are given in later chapters which
describe the R.A.O.C. activities in the various war theatres.
ordnance ammunition branch existed at the War Office on the outbreak of
war, one was very rapidly planned and created.
needed to handle, during the war period in the United Kingdom, no less
than 14 million tons of ammunition, of which about 12 million tons were sent
The period of most intensive activity for the R.A.O.C. ammunition
was during the first 60 days after the invasion of
Normandy, when 578,000 tons were handled.
The subsequent chapters of this volume record R.A.O.C. war activities in
the various theatres of operations.
In Part III is the history of the ordnance
services for the B.E.F. in France and for the expeditions to Norway and
Iceland. There follows, in Part IV, the record of the immense R.A.O.C.
organization set up in the Middle East and of ordnance activities in the
Mediterranean war theatres.
wo 277/21
