VICES
ROUS
As soon as Meiktila was cleared, 4 Corps advanced down the railway
eventually reaching
advanced down the Irrawaddy to Prome.
The depot at Alon was now moved to Myingyan, and dumps were opened
at Toungoo and Magwe.
At this juncture, 4 Corps troops reached Pegu
and 15 Corps landed at Rangoon without opposition. Hard fighting con.
tinted in both 4 and 33 Corps areas, espectoss the former, to destroy the
japanese who were trying to escape fast across the Sittang River betwen
Toungoo and Pegu.
The B.A.D. formed at Chittagong to take the increased load (by absorb.
ing two A.A.Ds.) was moved to Rangoon, where a B.A.D. was laid out
in accordance with United Kingdom practice with tarpaulin covers erected
over wooden supports.
The shipping position at this time was critical and the ammunition stock-
ing programme for the B.A.D. had to be modified to allow shipment of
other stores, only essential types and quantities being moved in.
During the whole of the campaign from Imphal onwards, the lack of
suitable ordnance ammunition units for manning forward dumps, especially
at airstrips, was a great handicap.
Forward maintenance sections were
later raised: both 4 and 33 Corps used the mobile ammunition inspection/,
laboratory units for this purpose. It must be remembered that 2nd line
transport never existed: ammunition was dumped on the ground behind
formations and as they moved forward, fresh dumps were established by
air. Rear dumps were moved forward when possible, but many of them
had to be temporarily abandoned and cleared later.
286
CHAPTER XVI -
ORDNANCE SERVICES IN MALAYA, 1939-1942
Situation Before the Outbreak of War with Japan
The chief feature of the Malayan Peninsula is the range of mountains which
runs centrally from north to south.
At the foot of the Peninsula lies the
island of Singapore, which is connected to the mainland by a causeway,
f-mile long, along which runs the road and railway. The mountains and the
coastal strip to the east of them are covered with very thick tropical jungle.
To the west of the mountains, large areas have been cleared for rubber
plantations or rice.
As might be expected in this type of country, communications were
limited, the main ones being a main trunk road along the west coast and
a railway which divides in the south to run both sides of the mountains
joining up again in the north across the Thailand border.
from the Thailand border to Singapore is approximately 500 miles.
The only suitable ports were at Singapore, which was the main base
port, Georgetown on the island of Penang in the north-west and minor ports
at Port Swettenham and Port Dickson in the south-west.
The original ordnance depot for Singapore had been situated on Palau
Brani, a small island in the harbour of Singapore.
In 1937, with a view to
expansion, a new depot which had been constructed at Alexandria was taken
This was within easy reach of the dock area and was also served
by rail. It included bomb-proof magazines to take all types of ammunition
up to 15-inch. At the same time, new magazines had been constructed at
Changi at the south-east corner of the island.
Up to the end of 1940, the arrangements for ordnance supply were com-
paratively simple as all units, with the exception of one brigade (Mersing
defence) had static defensive roles.
Each beach defence sector was allocated
extra armaments, known as approved armaments, and also special beach -
defence reserves of small arms ammunition.
responsible for the defence sectors.
Replenishment of ammunition or replace-
ment of stores was the responsibility of units with their 2nd line transport,
from the magazine or depot. The brigade operating at Mersing was to be-
supplied through a R.A.S.C. supply column, which would hold 2nd echelon
reserves of ammunition on wheels. Until the opening of an A.O.D. in Kuala
Lumpur in 1941, 11th Indian Division was supplied from Singapore.
Although the situation in Europe had resulted in Malaya being given
low priority for reinforcements of men and stores, it was realized that
Singapore might become the base of a theatre of operations and that every
effort had to be made to prepare for the expansion which would result. For
this purpose, in November, 1940, the island of Singapore was formed into
an operational administrative area known as
Singapore Fortress, on the
Headquarter staff of which ordnance services were represented by an A.D.O.S.
The responsibility for the administration of ordnance services for the
whole command was vested in a D.D.O.S.*: during the campaign, there was
also a D.D.O.S. L. of C.
* Brigadier G. C. Evelegh.
287
