since it had been assumed that it would be a simple matter to buy a con-
siderable range of items, including raw materials, " off the peg" on mobiliza-
tion; an assumption which was not borne out in the event.
Fourthly there were the Passive Air Defence (P.A.D.) requirements; these
might have proved vital, but in fact this provision was largely wasted, though
some components, particularly blocks, tackles, and jacks which had been
provided but not used for P.A.D. came in useful later for other purposes.
Finally accommodation stores for half a million men had been provided
and these were most necessary.
Further capital provision was undertaken from time to time as follows :—
(a) Complete unit war equipments based on Field Force Committee
order of battle forecasts.
Such calculations had up to the outbreak
of war been made by hand. By October, 1939 the possibilities of
the Hollerith punch card system for this work was however
appreciated and this method of calculation of war equipment was
introduced in 1940 and continued to develop with
increasing
efficiency throughout the war.
(b) Accommodation stores and climatic stores, on forecasts of theatre
strengths.
(c) Special climatic stores (e.g. anti-malarial equipment) on forecasts of
(d) Engineer stores on theatre forecasts.
(e) Handling equipment for base and L. of C. installations, e.g. fork
lift trucks, gravity runways.
(f) Laundry equipment and industrial gas plants and cylinders.
(g) Specialized equipment-Arctic, jungle, airborne and commando.
(h) Cinematograph and photographic equipment.
It was found that from the aspect of provision of general stores, strength
forecasts obtainable within the War Office were invariably too low, since
theatre liabilities always included large commitments for other Services,
allies, employed civilians, prisoners of war etc.
Project requirements also provided a problem in themselves, since users
can rarely forecast with any accuracy early enough to permit of timely
provision.
These difficulties could only be overcome in time by constant inquisitiveness
on the part of provision officers, by holding an adequate reserve in the first
instance and subsequently by immediate reprovision of any issues, made
from that reserve.
Even so it was found that specific project forecasts
invariably contained some items which involved special hurried provision and
special progress action, which would have been impossible without very close
personal contact and mutual confidence between the War Office provision and
M. of S. production branches concerned.
In the Second World War, project reserves were in the first instance largely
incomplete which resulted in a very unsatisfactory state of affairs in 1939-40
Subsequently the main difficulties
encountered
were owing
to forecasts
waste 17
WO 277/21:
18
arriving too late to enable adequate prior action to be taken in the time
available.
These difficulties were undoubtedly the cause of the retention of a
considerably higher maintenace igure than could have been justified by the
incidence of normal maintenance issues.
PROVISION OF CLOTHING
Until the outbreak of war, central provision of the maintenance require-
ments of clothing and personal equipment had been calculated on the basis
of a maintenance figure assessed from the average normal issues during the
preceding six months. The consumption of clothing and personal equipment
is, however, unlike that of general stores in that it is directly related to man-
power strengths; moreover, since the raw material, industrial man-power and
production capacity involved presented a major problem, the advantages of
using a system whereby the extent of our requirements on production could
be fairly readily checked against the size of the Army were soon manifest.
From 1940 onwards, therefore, maintenance needs of clothing and personal
equipment were calculated by
applying wastage rate factors to
strength
figures.
Subsequently the introduction of a measure of global stock control
enabled stocks in all theatres to be taken as assets in assessing net require-
In 1943 the critical overall man-power shortage, combined with raw
material difficulties, led to ministerial consideration of service clothing pro-
grammes in detail, and very large arbitrary cuts in the United Kingdom
production were imposed without any analysis of assets by sizes or location.
This action automatically threw out of balance the proportion of sizes coming
our behalf in U.S.A. and Commonwealth
countries. The Ministry of Supply found the task of reinstating a proportion
of these cuts to meet our numerous essential needs a few months later a
most formidable one, even though these reinstatements had been approved
by the Ministry of Production.
In fact, for the remainder of the war the
level of production was inadequate and, in spite of the exploitation of
Belgian and French production after the liberation of these countries in
1944, supply difficulties were constant.
Only by the most careful allocation
of stocks as they materialized from production and by continuous pressure
on the Ministry of Supply for specific quantities to meet the most urgent
sizing needs, was it possible to avoid a complete breakdown.
problem of sizes of garments was well known to R.A.O.C. Provision Officers,
it was not properly understood by the Ministry of Supply who did not
appreciate that only those sizes actually required to meet current liabilities
are of any value as assets.
It was often found that, although the overall requirement had been
accurately assessed, local stocks in overseas theatres became unbalanced. In
those circumstance the alteration of stocks of garments, of which there was
a surplus in certain sizes, in order to meet deficiencies in other sizes was often
proposed but never proved practicable.
Capital requirements of clothing (e.g. for intake and increases in theatre
strengths) were provided in the basis of General Staff forecasts as were those
tor allies in the approved order of battle. In the case of clothing however,
these forecasts by no means covered all theatre liabilities and the needs of
