The foregoing problems grew daily, as will be understood from the follow-
ing statistics covering ammunition stored in the United Kingdom.
1940
1945
Storage
216,000 tons
Depots
3 C.A.Ds.
2,000,000 tons
5 C.A.Ds.
21 A.S.Ds.*
R.A.O.C.
2,105
Pioneer Corps Labour
2,400
13,483
16,000
Transport ...
260 tons/lift 2,140 tons/lift
Miles of road storage
116
1,500
* Five of these A.S.Ds. were handed over to the U.S. forces in 1943.
From July, 1940, and through the war, the whole ammunition service was
controlled centrally by the War Office.
NEW DEPOTS FOR STORAGE OF WAR OFFICE STOCKS
An early decision was reached that the small anti-invasion depots which
had been hastily formed after Dunkirk should be handed over to the com-
mands in which they were located, and that a series of larger depots, each
organized on the lines of a base ammunition depot, should be created under
War Office control.
These depots were to be established on a line running
roughly up the centre of England, each depot to hold 20,000 tons.
The
object was to provide reserve holdings for the armies in South-Eastern, Eastern
and Northern Commands.
At the same time, other localities were recon-
noitred-notably in the West, in Wales and in Scotland-
-where more field
depots could be established for the storage of future ammunition production.
A request was made for financial approval to construct at least three
C.A.Ds. which were to be rail-served and designed on modern principles. As
level, flood-free ground was needed, covering 1,000-1,500 acres for each depot,
there was strong objection from the Ministry of Agriculture whenever a suit-
able site was discovered, but eventually one at Nesscliff (Salop) and one at
Kineton (Warwick) were selected and approved. C.A.D. Kineton was built
by military labour and was completed in two years.
The depot at Nesscliff was constructed by the Ministry of Works and Plan-
ning and was completed in three years.
Owing to the difficulty of finding
suitable sites to which there was no Ministry of Agriculture objection, Ness-
cliff was built along 17 miles of the defunct Shropshire and Montgomery
Railway which proved awkward to work from a railwayman's point of view.
It was evident that the two new C.A.Ds. would take some time to con-
struct and, therefore, the formation of field storage depots, which could be
opened quickly, became a matter of the utmost priority.
These new depots
were called " ammunition sub-depots" (A.S.Ds.), which was a mistake, as
they were independent ammunition depots and in no sense sub-depots of
C.A.Ds.
mand staffs.
The error was the cause of much confusion with district and com-
The method of selecting the sites is of interest; it was decided
that ammunition would be stacked on the ves is of interesty roads and on
could also be stored in parks and woods, in shiver roos word be constructed.
30 ft. strips of adjacent fields where the verges were too narrow.
Ammunition
Each stack was to be 400 cubic ft. housed in an iron shelter, constructed
124
of 21 sheets of curved corrugated iron easily bolted together by unskilled
labour.
The number of stacks in a group and the safety distances between
groups were based on calculations made at the War Office after modifying
exisung
safety regulations to suit emergency conditions.
Localities had
to contain two or more railway stations.
Ready-made accommodation for
troops was to be available in the form of houses and estates which could
be requisitioned.
On the basis of these minimum requirements, quarter inch maps of the
United Kingdom were closely studied and this was followed by personal
reconnaissance of promising localities.
If these proved suitable an estate in the centre of the area was chosen
as H.Q. of the A.S.D., the occupants were tactfully informed and within
five days personnel were despatched and ammunition began to arrive.
Six such A.S.Ds. were opened in July, 1940, and eight more during
Two more, which were opened in 1943, took three months before
occupation as various branches, committees and other bodies had first to be
satisfied each in its own way.
Although requisitioned premises
were occupied wherever possible,
great deal of R.E. services were always required, public roads had to be
closed in some cases and roads were built in woods and parks.
lines were laid in some depots, and in every case the construction of extra
railway sidings was planned and carried out.
Expansion of these depots took place as production increased and ex-
penditure remained low, and by 1945 from an initial capacity of 20,000 tons,
the holding of the smallest depot had increased to 50,000 tons and of the
Each occupied 100-120 miles of roads and was
served by three or more railway sidings.
This method of storing ammunition had the following advantages :—
(a) Having selected an area of about 300 square miles, it was only
a matter of a few days before ammunition could arrive, provided
R.A.O.C. ammunition storemen were available to mark out the
stacking roads, and labour was available to prepare the
(b) Once established with two or more railheads and adequate internal
transport, issues could be made with remarkable facility and at
At peak periods, some depots handled more
than 2,000 tons a day.
(c) Expansion could be undertaken at any time and with the minimum
preparation and work.
It should be noted, however, that unless
a site had a concentration of roads in a small area, expansion
beyond 80,000 tons or 100 miles of road frontage involved too
large an area for control and administration by one unit.
(d) The use of existing roads and the small easily erected steel shelters
for storage reduced enormously the cost of building, and permitted
the use of ground which required no work beyond that of spade
Moreover, the ground and landscape were not per-
wer
WO 277/21
18
E*2
