The " teething" troubles of both depots, caused by the unfortunate system
of separating a unit from its essential equipment before embarkation, were
The units were virtually dumped on the countryside without any-
facilities for handling ammunition, and without blankets, cooking apparatus,
and other accommodation stores; their equipment arrived in driblets starting
six days after their arrival and five days after the first receipt of ammunition.
The lack of facilities for sanitation caused much anxiety at No. 2 B.A.D.,
as latrines, sumps, etc., could not be dug owing to lack of tools.
depots, there was much minor illness, owing to the fact that the men,
many of whom were reservists, were not in training to stand up to rough
When orders. were issued for the formation of A.R.Hs. it was agreed
between the Ordnance Directorate and Movement Control that the railheads
should be known by code letters and not by place names, to preserve their
identity as a unit when moved.
A.R.Hs. were formed as G.H.Q. Troops
units to handle ammunition at railhead and to take charge of corps or other
formations' ammunition dumps in the vicinity of railhead, and were placed
under the administration of the formation in whose area they were located.
The R.A.O.C. staff of two officers and 27 O.Rs. at each of the railheads
formed in the beginning were found from the establishment of the B.A.Ds.
The original A.R.Hs. were:-
Code Name
OX.
OY.
OZ.
Serving
... Evron 30 miles W.N.W. Assembly Area.
of Le Mans.
Noyen 16 miles S.W. of Assembly Area.
Le Mans.
Germaine 10 miles S. of Advanced Air Striking
Rheims.
Force (A.A.S.F.) Area.
OY. was moved very shortly after forming to Meslay-du-Maine 35 miles
W. of Le Mans.
Labour Company.
Labour at OX. and OY. was provided from No. 1 Ordnance
The R.A.F. was responsible for supplying the labour required for unloading
R.A.F. ammunition at OZ.
The A.R.H. staff at OZ. had a difficult start, as it was unavoidably sent
forward without equipment or accommodation stores, the mobilization equip-
ment of the B.A.D. not having arrived from England.
before blankets were obtained from the R.A.F.
A week passed
in a cafe for the first three weeks, for the first ten days because rations
were not available, and for the rest of the time as there was no means of
The first trainload of bombs reached railhead the day after the arrival
of the A.R.H. staff.
The R.A.F
were unable to provide the labour and
the lorries to unload and remove the bombs and the French stationmaster
objected to the loaded
trucks standing in his station.
eventually unloaded and the bombs moved by French soldiers and lorries,
The A.A.S.F. was
around Rheims.
stationed in part of the French Zone des Armies
A number of army units were stationed in the area, principally works
labour companies, engaged on airfield construction, and
an A.A. brigade
The total army strength ultimately exceeded
command and administration of all British forces in the area was a function
No organization was included in the maintenance project
or war establishments for dealing with the ordnance services for the army
The Army was responsible for certain administrative
services for the R.A.F. including, so far as concerned ordnance services, the
decontamination of clothing and the provision of the A.R.H. staff.
At the beginning of the campaign, ist line ammunition, except smoke
shell, was brought out by units.
lst line smoke, and 2nd and 3rd line
ammunition (including demolition explosives) was sent in early shipments
to Brest, whence it was to be despatched direct from ship's side to Á.R.Hs.
The maintenance project laid down that No. 2 B.A.D. was to send a party
to assist the Docks Group at Brest to sort this ammunition for despatch
It was quickly realized, however, that this scheme would
entail the formation at railheads, before the arrival of units, of ammunition
dumps too large for the sites chosen and beyond the handling capacity
Orders were given, therefore, that units should obtain their 2nd and
3rd line ammunition at B.A.Ds. on their way to the Assembly Area and
that only 1st line smoke and explosives were to be issued at A.R.Hs.
This arrangement did not work quite satisfactorily, as some units arrived
at B.A.Ds. with their ammunition lorries already so loaded with unit equip-
ment that they could not take their full quota of ammunition.
The stock authorized to be held at each B.A.D. was 15 days' reserve,
plus 77 days working stock for army units, i.e. a total stock of 45 days'
estimated expenditure.
R.A.F. ammunition for the Air Component was sent to No. 2 B.A.D. and
for the A.A.S.F. to No. 1 B.A.D.
The Army stocks were based on the following estimated
rates of
ammunition expenditure: —
25-pdr.-35 r.p.g. a day.
60-pdr.-30 r.p.g. a day.
6-in. How.-28 r.p.g. a day.
3-in. (20 cwt.)-50 r.p.g. a day.
40-mm. A.A.-40 r.p.g. a day.
2-pdr. A.T.K-5 r.p.g. a day.
3-in. mortar—13 r.p.g. a day.
2-in. mortar-10 r.p.g. a day.
S.A.A. 6 million a division each month.
A.T.K. mines-1,500 a division each month.
Towards the end of September, the establishment of an advanced ammuni-
tion depot (A.A.D.) was considered, but the French authorities objected,
preferring forward reserves to be mobile.
The French view was accepted
and the "G" Staff laid down the quantities to be held on rail, each train
to be a standard pack of all natures.
WO 277/21:
