of frequent and rapid moves, and of being withdrawn to the main base and
ater sent forward again as the situation demanovins
Before the battle of
El Alamein a certain range of operationally fast movinanced oras preaded
on to vehicles as advanced mobile echelons of the advanced ordnance depot
u order to get a stock of urgently needed stores as far forward as possible in
he early stages of the rapid advance anticipated.
They worked most suc-
es early stages ole and were subsequently adopted in the North-West Europe
ampaign, under the designation Forward Trailer Section.
The high figure of dilution with local man-power which obtained in the
Middle East entailed special war establishments in many cases for base
nstallations, in order to provide an adequate number of supervisory military
The B.O.Ds. and B.A.Ds. were re-organized on the standard organi-
ation of specialized store companies as soon as possible after in tantroduction
f the latter by the War Office, and although the system worked fairly well so
at as the B.O.D. itself was concerned, it proved somewhat inflexible when it
ecame necessary, as it frequently did, to improvise Advanced Ordnance
Depots (A.O.Ds.) for location at various ports along the Mediterranean coast-
ne.
Base laundries of considerable size consisting of British supervision and
cal labour were used particularly for the bi-annual exchange of clothing.
For reasons of flexibility and to relieve base installations of the commit-
ent, separate port ordnance and ammunition detachments were formed at
very early stage and allotted to ports according to the ordnance load at any
These detachments were under the control of D.D.O.S., L. of C.,
t were never moved without the agreement of Q(Mov). and Ordnance at
H.Q.
Owing to lack of water, there was little opportunity for the employment
mobile laundries and bath units in the Western Desert.
The few
units
this type that Middle East possessed were more often than not employed
the Delta or in Syria/Palestine to augment base laundries.
"B" vehicles and certain "A" vehicles were handled by vehicle com-
nies and ordnance sub-parks in a fairly orthodox manner.
Owing, how-
er, to the special requirements of modern warfare, a departure from hitherto
cepted methods was made in the case of most "A" vehicles, which with
me modification was subsequently adopted as standard by the War Office.
le organization took the form of a Royal Armoured Corps tank reinforce-
nt group, with R.A.O.C. and R.E.M.E. elements, the forerunner of the
noured replacement group.
In general, by the end of the fighting in the Middle East, the R.A.O.C.
Id organization and system which had been developed proved entirely suit-
le for that theatre and, in some respects, for any other war theatre.
Period of Reconstruction and Planning 1940-44
Following the collapse of France in June, 1940, and the total elimination
British forces from the continent of Europe, it immediately became obvious
t, except in the Middle East, any future operations against the enemy
ald involve opposed landings.
It was equally obvious that the British
ny would be unable to undertake an attack on the enemy in force for
le considerable time to come.
Although, therefore, the primary object
56
during the period which followed was to evolve an efficient field organization
for the ordnance services in a major European campaign, plans were con-
tinually being devised for small scale attacks on enemy controlled territory.
each of which amounted to a miniature combined operation.
The planning
of these, together with the lessons learnt from the Middle East campaigns and
from the attacks on Madagascar, North Africa, Sicily, Salerno and Anzio.
provided the War Office stafi with exceptionally useful experience towards
the development of the final organization and method of maintenance used
in the Normandy landings in June,
Certain defects in the organization of base depots have already been
described in the paragraphs dealing with the campaign in France 1939-40.
The planning of small scale combined operations produced a continual
requirement for base depots to maintain forces of no more than one or two
divisions; since the standard B.O.D.
was designed to support a force of
up to 12 divisions, this entailed working out each time an ad hoc war
establishment to suit the size of the
operation.
When
revising
une
standard B.O.D., therefore, it was decided to attempt to design a war
establishment for a depot which would suit all eventualities.
Thus the new
organization included the following features: —
(a) A headquarters and four, instead of three, homogeneous ordnance
store companies, each having a completely distinct function, namely,
an M.T. stores company, a technical stores company, a general
stores company and a returned stores company.
Since each com-
pany would be employed in toto to provide the staff for one of
the sub-depots, this arrangement eliminated the need for splitting
up the companies once the depot was deployed.
(b) Each sub-unit of the depot was divided into two component parts,
the advanced component and the main component.
The whole
advanced component was designed to maintain a force of from one
to three divisions, and it could be used as a complete depot required
for an operation involving a small force.
It was also intended for
use as the standard A.O.D. when circumstances necessitated the
establishment of this type of unit.
If a large force was involved,
the advanced component would be employed in the initial stages
while the base depot was being established, being joined later by
the main component to form a depot capable of maintaining up
to 12 divisions.
Should the force exceed 12 divisions, the war-
establishment included " increments"
each one of which
provide the personnel necessary for the depot to expand to the
extent of maintaining an additional four divisions.
Although this conception of the organization of a B.O.D. remained
in force until the end of the war, it did not prove to be entirely
satisfactory,
particularly in regard to the
use of
the advanced
component as an A.O.D.
(c) All mention of railhead detachments was omitted from the war
establishment, these sub-units being included in a completely sepa-
rate organization known as the Ordnance Maintenance Company.
In the very early days of the war, practically all vehicles coming off
production were required to comp war, practe aly all vehicles coming ont
57
747/17
WO 277/21
18
