Southern and Eastern
Commands.
As defence plans expanded the other
Commands also formed small depots and in all some 53 operational depots
were established under command control by the end of 1940.
There were three types,
"B", "C" and "D", storing from 1,500 tons
to 7,500 tons and each had a standard appropriate war establishment.
The location of these depots was a matter for commands who placed
them in accordance with their anti-invasion plans.
Their stocks were
based on the fighting formations in their areas and some were under corps
control and others directly under H.Q. of commands.
The depots were
stocked by the War Office on receipt of orders of battle. Incidentally, their
stocks were extremely unorthodox in that not only were out-of-date weapons
(such as 13 and 18 pounders) being dragged out to repel the expected in-
vasion, but 12-bore shot-guns were being issued to the Home Guard and a
mass of amateurish and highly dangerous designs of non-weapon ammunition
was being introduced into the Service.
Such things as the "Molotov cock-
tails" (white phosphorus and petrol in commercial soda-water bottles) were
an ever-present and heavy source of anxiety to depot commanders.
Administrative responsibility for these depots devolved on D.Ds.O.S. of
commands, and though an overall technical control was exercised by the
War Office, each command was given six to eight I.O.Os. and ten to sixteen
A.Es.
Local inspections of stocks both in depots and in the hands of units
formed the main duty of these technical staffs.
The volume of their work was very considerable and was further increased
when accidents began to increase during the training of troops, much time
being taken up by investigations and attendances at Courts of Enquiry.
In addition, they were responsible for instructing Home Guard Ammunition
Officers and periodical courses were held in all commands.
As the threat of invasion lessened, the district and command ammunition
depots were given the task of holding and making detailed training issues,
and on this account they handled some 250,000 tons of ammunition during
the war
To cope with the repair and modification of this considerable tonnage,
Mobile Ammunition Repair Units were formed and allotted to commands
according
to their need.
Thus a great deal of work was done in situ.
saving the movement of large tonnages to C.A.D. repair factories.
By 1945 the operational role of the depots had completely disappeared
except in one or two commands, and some 30 depots were closed down.
It was foreseen, however, that on the cessation of hostilities a very large
amount of ammunition would be returned by units, much of it in a dangerous
state and most of it beyond repair.
Certain depots were therefore retained
and commands were made responsible for receiving, inspecting and disposing
of this ammunition.
frequently attended by great risk.
It was an extremely arduous and unpleasant job and
ANTICIPATION OF WAR AFTERMATH TASKS
In order to be prepared for the anticipated task of disposing of great
quantities of ammunition and explosives on the cessation of hostilities, a
special R.A.O.C. unit was formed in 1944. it was called the Explosives
Disposal Unit, R.A.O.C., and consisted of demolitions and dumping sections,
128
located respectively at Trawsfynnyd in Wales and at the port of Silloth in
Cumberland.
Trials with various types of craft for dumping at sea were
staged with the help of the Royal Navy and experiments were carried out
in the demolition of large quantities of H.E.
These trials and experiments were attended by selected officers and men,
including some from the U.S. Forces.
They then received further instruction
on enemy ammunition and were formed into units called Enemy Ammunition
Depot Control Units.
were sent to Germany immediately after the
surrender and were thus able to start their task without delay and with full
knowledge of the explosives with which they were to deal.
Disposal Unit (E.D.Ü.) at home disposed of 80,000 tons during the war and
was thus sufficiently trained and experienced to start on large scale disposal
of surplus British ammunition immediately after V.J. day.
General Conditions Applying Overseas
The organization of the ammunition services in war proceeded on lines
very different from those which had been adopted in peace.
conditions presented many problems which did not arise in peace, and the
ammunition itself was subject to considerably
more exposure and rough
handling.
The R.A.O.C. was responsible for the serviceability of ammunition from
the time it was received in home depots from factories in the United Kingdom
or other producing countries, up to the time it was issued by R.A.O.C. to
units or to R.A.S.C. transport for delivery to units.
The ammunition was
not, however, in direct R.A.O.C. charge at all stages during the long journey
from factory to gun, and it was at these times that ammunition was often
exposed to conditions causing damage and deterioration.
LOADING AT PORTS IN UNITED KINGDOM
At ammunition depots, unduly rough handling of ammunition during
loading into lorries and railway wagons was rare, owing to close R.A.O.C.
supervision.
At ports, however, (Movements) frequently failed properly to employ
Port Ammunition Detachments, the correct functions of which were to check
ammunition into the holds of ships and to supervise actual stowage.
result, damage was caused ; in one case A.F.Vs. were loaded on a flooring of
ammunition packages.
Some types of ammunition, in particular loose shell and certain American
varieties in
containers of unwieldy size, were among the most
stores that working parties and stevedores had to handle and no amount of
supervision by (Movements) or R.A.O.C. could entirely prevent some rough
handling.
However robust may be the design of the ammunition itself, deterioration
is bound to occur at a later stage if rough treatment damages the packages.
In future, therefore, there should be the greatest attention
supervision of loading by port detachments to reduce, to a minimum, damage
to ammunition packages and to the driving bands of shells.
1117
WO 277/21
18
