Except for one skeleton and unorthodox ordnance field park and one
R.A.O.C. decontamination unit, no arrangements or assets existed for the
formation in the Middle East of R.A.O.C. field units.
It is interesting to note, in the light of future events, that in 1939 gas
warfare was considered such a strong possibility that a decontamination unit
took priority among the units required on mobilization, no provision being
made for mobile or other launaries.
Shortage of K.A.U.C.
Personnel and Reserves
There were no active operations in the Middle East until Italy entered
the war in June,
3440)
The operations in France had retarded
serousiv
the building up of army equipment reserves and the equipping of the forces
in the Middle East.
The B.E.F.
naturally received priority for available
weapons and equipments, and the allotments to Middle East Command were
in consequence extremely small.
For the same reason reinforcements of
personnel were
small.
In September, 1939, only 145 reinforcements were
added to the R.A.O.C. strength in Egypt of 850 all ranks ; although in 1938
an establishment of 2,000 had been recommended.
The R.A.O.C. organization in the Middle East continued on its peace-
time basis for the first six months of the war.
The only, R.A.O.C. field units
organized or formed were the ordnance field park to serve 7th Armoured
Division and the decontamination unit.
Both were only partially mobilized.
Complete mobilization of the decontamination unit was prevented by the lack
of the most essential parts of its equipment, the burners, which were still
due from the United Kingdom.
Plans to Expand R.A.O.C. Organization
In February, 1940, an Ordnance Directorate was opened at G.H.Q., Middle
East, and a D.O.S. was appointed with the rank of brigadier.
M.E. was Brigadier W. W. Richards.
The first D.O.S.
The Directorate expanded gradually
and on the Ist June, 1940, it assimilated the majority of the ord arce stat
of H.Q., British Troops Egypt (B.T.E.).
The most pressing and important task of the newly appointed D.O.S. was
the reorganization of ordnance services in Egypt in order to place existing
ordnance installations on a war footing, and to plan new R.A.O.C. installa-
tions and units to meet anticipated operational needs.
In making these plans consideration had to be paid to the local factors
and peculiarities of the theatre, the principal of which were:
(a) the great distance between the theatre and the countries of supply,
Britain and India.
The supply
route through the Mediterranean
had become too precarious and the 12,000-mile journey round the
Cape entailed a transit period of six months between the date stores
were prepared in the United Kingdom for shipment and the date
they became available for issue in Middle East.
(b) The great length of the lines of communication in the theatre.
British force
on the frontier was operating
The
Tailhead at Mersa Matruh which
miles from the
Alexandrin
was over
200 miles west of
166.
(c) The absence of covered storage accommodation.
(d) The limited port facilities with no capacity for heavy lifts.
(e) The limited rail and road communications.
() Shortage of water.
(8) Sand laden atmosphere.
Beginning of Active Operations-June, 1940
In anticipation of the declaration of war by Italy, the incomplete 7th
Armoured Division had been sent to the western frontier of Egypt.
This
tormation
comprised two armoured brigades each of two regiments, only
partly equipped.
On 11th June, 1940, this division, less one armoured
brigade, began offensive action against Italian frontier posts.
Several success-
ful actions were fought during the next three months, but the Italian forces
were greatly superior in numbers and our forces gradually withdrew towards
Sidi Barrani.
By the end of July all vehicles of the armoured division were
showing signs of considerable wear.
There were at this time practically no
armoured vehicle spares available in Egypt, and the small reserve of tanks
was inadequate to meet war wastage; consequently the armoured brigade
was withdrawn from action, with orders for all tracked vehicles to be over-
hauled and refitted
Development of R.A.O.C. Base and Field Organization
During this period, May to September, 1940, the base ordnance organiza-
tion consisted of No. 4 B.O.D., No. 8 B.A.D. and No. 4 B.O.W.
three units emerged from the re-organization of the command ordnance depot
and workshops at Abbassia.
The ordnance dump at El Daba had been converted into an A.O.D.
At Tel-el-Kebir, N.E. of Cairo, work had begun on the construction of
a second B.O.D. and B.O.W., which eventually became No. 5 B.O.D. and
No. 2 B.O.W.
At Abu Sultan on the Suez Canal, south of Ismailia, No. 9
B.A.D. was under construction and began to operate at the end of 1940.
The base and advanced ordnance installations were administered by the
D.D.O.S., L. of C., Egypt, oh ance ans restonsible for the administration
of port ordnance services comprisins an Ordnance Officer (O.0.) docks and
port workshop detachments at Suez, Port Said and Alexandria.
Ordnance services within the Western Desert Force were administered by
an A.D.O.S. and a C.O.M.E. at the headquarters of the Force and a
D.A.D.O.S. and S.O.M.E. at each formation H.O
A small ordnance field park, having only half a dozen store lories, had
been formed and placed a park, having only Western Desert Force for the
issue of stores to placed under control of the West cases of urgency!
field park also had a vehicle section, holding reserve carriers,
"B" vehicles
field
some tanks.
Replacement vehicles were collected from the ordnance
Matruh, the forward troops and worlahans at that time being 190-170 miles
park under unit arrangements.
Initially the park was sited at Mersa
167
wes 947/17
WO 277/21
28
