Programme.
Other interim requirements were normally met by amend-
ment to the Supply Control.
Assignments of U.S.
made by four
committees
of the
Munitions
production were
Assignment
(Washington).
The M.A.C. (Ground) met
monthly
Board
Army production forecasts for the
following
month,
assign U.S.
and
weekly
to deal with urgent requirements.
A. & R. Branch, B.A.S., advised War Office what material had
been assigned against
British bids,
and from this information
War Office subsequently
issued
distribution
the
instructions ;
sibility for action on these instructions fell to
respon-
B.A.S. (Ordnance).
(b) Release Procedure
Assignments approved by (M.A.C.) (Ground) were advised to the
Chief of the appropriate U.S. Supply Corps by
"Transfer Directives"
instructing him to make available the material covered by specified
assignments.
Copies of these
directives
were received by
B.A.S.
(Ordnance).
The Chief of the U.S. Supply Corps then sent a " letter
of Authorization" and a "Government Shipping Order" to the Com-
manding Officer of the selected depot ordering him to prepare the
stores for export in accordance with packing and marking instruc-
tions to be supplied by B.A.S. (Ordnance).
(c) War Office Distribution Instructions and Theatres Shipping Pro-
grammes
The
War Office distribution
instructions received by B.A.S.
(Ordnance) were in the form of priority serials.
In practice varying
shipping opportunities made it difficult to meet War Office distribution
instructions and it became necessary to introduce a system of theatre
shipping priority programmes.
B.A.S. (Ordnance) prepared monthly
forecasts of stores likely to be available.
These forecasts were for-
warded to the War Office and theatres of war through "Q." Move-
ments channels and formed a basis on which theatres could sub-allot
their anticipated receipts.
(d) Packing and Marking
The packing and marking instructions were issued by B.A.S.
(Ordnance) either directly to the U.S. Depot or, in some instances,
through the Headquarters of the particular U.S. Supply Corps.
B.A.S.
(Ordnance) then progressed the subsequent action taken by the U.S.
depot.
Considerable responsibility
in this connection was thrown
on the British ordnance officers stationed at the various U.S. depots
and arsenals.
Letters of authorization
were based on theoretical
availability but this frequently applied only to main equipments and
not to essential auxiliaries.
Deficiencies had, therefore, to be checked
and action taken to obtain maximum availability.
Attention had to
be given to the modification of stores, to tropical and other special
packing requirements.
(e) Notification of Availability
ability
On completion of packing and marking, " Notifications of Avail-
" were issued by the U.S. depot authorities.
These notifica-
tions were intended to give complete packing data,
e.g.,
weights,
100
wester
WO 277/21
18
number of cases,
dimensions, etc.
In
practice, however, the U.S.
authorities often issued the documents before packing was complete,
owing to extreme shortage of bulk storage for packed stores.
fications were thus frequently based on
estimates.
Noti-
Supplementary
information had to be obtained from British ordnance officers at the
issuing depots.
(f) Issue of Ocean Shipping Orders
On receipt of notifications of availability, ocean shipping orders
were prepared by B.A.S.
(Ordnance).
These orders
specified the
type, weight and location of the stores and were passed through "O"
Movements to the British Ministry of War Transport.
(g) Calling Forward of Stores
The B.M.W.T. then allocated freight and informed the " War
Forwarding Corporation" (W.F.C.), a U.S. Government body con-
trolling all inland movements
of stores.
The W.F.C. then
"Calling Forward Instructions" to the depot concerned.
issued
(h) U.S. War Department Shipping Documents
U.S. War Department shipping documents and packing notes
did not normally specify the quantities not available and to follow.
Consequently, B.A.S. (Ordnance) had difficulty in calculating deficien-
cies for the information of the theatres concerned.
(i) Progress of Shipment
During the whole movement of the stores from depot to final
export, progress was watched by B.A.S. (Ordnance). Records showing
the complete history of each assignment were maintained.
Procurement and Export Procedure (Canada)
Orders for Canadian equipments were originally placed with D.M. & S.
by M. of S., National Defence Headquarters (N.D.H.Q.), Dominion and
Allied Governments and other users.
Shortly after the establishment of B.A.S., it became evident that current
production must be allocated to the various purchasers in accordance with
strategic requirements rather than as formerly, in accordance with the magni-
tude of the original orders.
A committee was formed, at B.A.S. instiga-
tion, comprising representatives of the Canadian Production Board, the
Canadian Department of National Defence and B.A.S. (Q. Staff), Ottawa.
The Committee met monthly, and, on the basis of forecasts covering the
ensuing month's production, authorized assignments to the various purchasers
in accordance with any known strategic needs.
Advice of United Kingdom
assignments were cabled to the War Office and formed the basis of subse-
quent distribution instructions.
Before June, 1942, consignment and marking instructions for Canadian
stores had been sent by the War Office and M. of S., direct to D.M. & S.
Canada.
After that date, in order to obviate confusion which had arisen,
distribution and marking instructions were cabled by War Office to B.A.S.
101
