in special packages each restricted in weight to 80 lb. for ease in handling,
and each package serially numbered in accordance with a location index.
One set of landing reserves was designed to maintain a brigade group for 30
days.
North Africa, November, 1942—May, 1943
When the First Army landed in North Africa in November, 1942, the
re-organization previously described had not been fully applied to the
R.A.O.C. units in the force and it was therefore carried out later while the
campaign proceeded.
For this reason, it was not possible at this time to
test the new organization adequately.
However, lessons of great value
vere learned from the actual landings in North Africa, which, for the first
ime, gave real experience of beach maintenance in the early stages of a
ombined operation.
It should be explained that, owing to the suddenness of the decision to
avade North Africa, the base reserves of army equipment which had been
caled and packed for another projected operation had to be utilized for
le initial stocking of the two advanced B.O.Ds. For this reason the main-
nance from these depots did not work smoothly during the first few months
the campaign.
Other reasons for this state of affairs were that an admini-
rative error was made in deciding to commit both depots before the result
the initial operations had become clear instead of keeping one in reserve,
d that, as in France in 1939, both depots were called upon to begin the
ue of stores while they were still being stocked.
This experience con-
ned the lesson that a B.O.D. established in a new theatre must be allowed
veriod of from 60 to 90 days before it can be expected to assume respon-
ility for the maintenance of the force.
In order to minimize the B.O.D.'s
iculties it was decided to extend the period of maintenance through the
Landing reserves had proved a success, although certain altera-
as in the scale and nature of the stores provided were made as a result
the First Army's recommendations.
Landing reserves, however, were
designed for use over long periods and a new form of pack, called a
ch maintenance pack (B.M.P.), was therefore introduced early in 1943
1 follow-up to the landing reserves. Beach maintenance packs, scaled on
asis of one month's maintenance for one division, contained a slightly
er range of stores than the landing reserves, and it was intended that
should be issued from temporary field depots in the rear maintenance
The principles of special packing adopted for landing reserves were
Another improvement was the introduction of depot scalings for the
al stocking up of base depots, stores being packed and packages marked in
a way as to facilitate identification and rapid transfer to storehouse
he landings by 15 Army Group in Sicily, although providing further
1 experience in combined operations, led to no major changes in the
organization of the R.A.O.C. Both here and later, as a result of the
tions at Salerno and Anzio, it was found necessary to make slight altera-
to the composition of landing reserves and beach maintenance packs,
n the whole the system of temporary maintenance by means of these
1 packs proved successful.
The Italian Campaign (October, 1943—May, 1945)
Since the British element of 15 Army Group was drawn in almost equal
oroportions from the forces previously engaged in North Africa and in the
Viddle East, the R.A.O.C. field units provided in the force comprised both
those of the latest pattern evolved by the War Office and of the somewhat
extemporized organization which had grown up in the Middle East. The
lack of standardized organization was most evident in the composition of the
ordnance field parks and in the system of maintenance within the army areas.
The following paragraphs describe the moulding of this hybrid organization
into an efficient working machine.
The R.A.O.C. field park organization of 15 Army Group originally con-
sisted of "divisional ordnance field parks" on the basis of one a division,
and "corps and army ordnance field parks"
on the basis of one a corps.
These parks, although corps troops, contained sub-parks to service army
At the end of 1943, a revision was carried out and the organization
comprised the following types of field parks: —
(a) Divisional ordnance field parks composed of a headquarters and three
brigade sub-parks.
These units held spare parts for warlike stores
(including M.T.) and a small reserve of tyres, tubes and industrial
gases. Brigade sections normally operated forward with brigades
but joined the headquarters of the park when the division came into
(b) Corps troops ordnance field parks allocated on a basis of one for
each corps.
These units were divided into a headquarters, a spares
section and a vehicle section.
The spares section held spare parts
for warlike stores (including M.T.) for corps troops and the vehicle
section held the corps reserve of vehicles and of complete artillery,
engineer and signal equipments.
(c) Army troops ordnance field parks.
This unit held spares for army
troops and the army reserve of artillery, engineer and signal
equipments.
Each of these field parks replenished its stocks direct from the base or
aland arago, aliena a test corps ord interchan at spares be acen
was located at rear corps headquarters and the lieutenant-colonel in command
was responsible for the general supervision of all ordnance field parks in the
The separate components of the ordnance maintenance company had been
used extensively in the Western Desert, but the campaign in Italy provided
the first real test of operating the unit as a complete company.
ordnance maintenance company which was formed while fighting was still in
progress in North Africa came into being too late to be employed there in its
Centralized control of railhead sub-sections and forward maintenance
sub-sections was completely vindicated in Italy, although, at times, the number
of sub-units and the vast distances over which they were spread created
dificulties in administration. It was thought that the remedy for this lay
either in the formation of two separate units, a stores maintenance company
67612
C*2:
WO 277/22
