In dealing with the French authorities who naturally wanted a firm esti-
mate of storage requirements, the C.O.O. was hampered by lack of knowledge
of his commitments.
Early in September, some 300,000 sq. ft. of covered
accommodation was given as the requirement, a peace-time estimate based
on theory, but the extent of the consignments of stores already arriving from
England soon indicated that the covered storage requirement would greatly
exceed the estimate.
At the end of September, a break in the fine weather caused damage to
stocks which had necessarily been placed in buildings with bad roofs and
floors, and accelerated deterioration of various depot approach roads.
Road
repairs were hastily improvised by R.A.O.C. in order to ensure the continu-
ance of receipts and issues of stores.
By the end of October, the B.O.D. had obtained possession of 566,000
sq. It. of covered accommodation in 28 buildings and store tents, and
2,100,000 sq. ft. of uncovered storage space, scattered over an area of some
20 square miles.
Many of the buildings were in a bad state of repair and
lacked proper facilities for transport.
The storage congestion had by this
time become so acute that barges were used for storage space at Nantes
and 200 barges were allocated for the same purpose at Rouen.
These, how-
ever, were never used.
Consignments of stores from England had to be
temporarily curtailed.
A revised estimate of 900,000 sq. ft. of covered accom-
modation for the B.O.D., was given to the French authorities.
Ultimately, in December, 1939, a firm estimate of about 1,050,000 sq. ft.
of covered accommodation was computed as the requirement for the main-
tenance of a force of 12 divisions.
This was about 60 per cent. above the
pre-war estimate for a force of the same size. The main reasons for this
increase in the covered storage requirement were the large quantities of bulky
stocks which had to be held for defence against gas, such as reserves of
uniform clothing, reserves of special anti-gas clothing and respirators, and
the large stocks of searchlight, electric light and battery equipments, Mechani-
cal Transport (M.T.) components and assemblies.
Another appreciable
factor was that the storage buildings allotted in Nantes were in many instances
small scattered buildings in which working space was disproportionately high
and available height for stacking lower than normal.
Apart from the serious difficulty of forming a new base depot in accom-
modation which was inadequate, unsuitable and scattered, No. 1 B.O.D. was
confronted also with the problems of trying to make an unsuitable war
establishment work, of installing and organizing a large depot with untrained
personnel, and of dealing with both receipts from home and issues to the
troops, before the receipt of essential depot equipment and before being
given any chance to organize and arrange stocks.
The C.O.0. of the B.O.D. re distributed the unit personnel, so as to unify
regimental command and technical control by sub-depots, a measure referred
to in more detail in Chapter IV: so far as resources allowed, the nucleus of
trained personnel was blended as evenly as possible with the untrained.
The depot equipment-the racking,
storehouse trucks, mobile cranes,
tools for opening packages, office equipment- all essential for the methodical
and speedy setting-up of a store depot, did not arrive until two weeks after
the opening of the depot.
During
those two weeks,
shiploads of stores
136
arrived and, despite the lack of depot equipment, had to be cleared and the
stores housed under cover.
possible measure of local improvisation.
Work accordingly proceeded by resort to every
In the absence of store accounting
documents the C.O.O. was obliged to improvise the depot's opening stock
record by adapting locally purchased stationery.
Hardship to depot person-
nel was caused by the lack of accommodation stores, cooking utensils, etc.
Most units of the B.E.F. were sent overseas with considerable deficiencies
in their war equipments and the B.O.D. was consequently called upon from
the outset, not only to maintain the force, its legitimate role, but to make the
many initial issues required by units to complete their
equipment to war
scales.
This placed a heavy issues burden on the B.O.D. before it was
properly established.
The depot staff was augmented by personnel of the A.O.D., the role of
which had not yet been decided.
The A.O.D. consisted of a H.Q. and one
ordnance store company. Many of its personnel were allotted to key positions
in the B.O.D., a policy which the state of activity dictated but which caused
dislocation later when the personnel were withdrawn for the advanced depot
to assume its forward role.
Ammunition
The organization provided in the maintenance project for the supply of
ammunition consisted of two B.A.Ds., each staffed by a H.Q. and three
each depot.
attached.
Each depot H.Q. included the staff for two ammunition railheads (A.R.Hs.)
and the labour at railheads was to be found from the ordnance labour
companies.
The selected locations for the B.A.Ds. were: —
No. 1 B.A.D.-Foret de Gavre—25 miles N.W. of Nantes.
No. 2 B.A.D.—Near Plouaret 50 miles E. of Brest.
and the ammunition ports allotted were St. Nazaire and Brest.
had bad features such as the damp nature of the soil, weak and insufficient
roads, and in the case of Foret de Gavre a considerable fire risk.
No in and rect, pot it
Much importance was attached to minimizing the risk of serious losses
from enemy air attack and, in consequence, the approved policy was to store
ammunition in woods in order to afford concealment from the air.
For this
reason it was intended to make only temporary use of the Plouaret depot
and to move it to the Foret de Rennes as soon as suitable construction had
been completed there.
The policy of forest locations created considerable difficulties, as forest
roads were normally unfit for prolonged heavy traffic and needed constant
repair, while the stacking spaces required levelling and frequently entailed
long " carries" from lorry to stack.
These factors increased the work load
and slowed down the rate of handling.
Each depot was organized into three
identical sub-depots, each to hold 7,000 tons, a returned empties depot, and
a laboratory.
137
-7
WO 277/21
