CHAPTER XIII
ORDNANCE SERVICES IN SICILY, ITALY AND GREECE, 1943-1945
Sicily and the Heel of Italy, July to September, 1943
The allied invasion of Sicily began on 9th July, 1943, with the airborne
landing of British and American troops, followed
swiftly
sea-borne
landings.
Within six weeks, by 17th August, 1943, the whole of the island
of Sicily was in allied occupation.
The plan to invade southern Europe through Sicily and Italy had been
prepared jointly by Middle East and North Africa Commands and the
administrative arrangements, so far as concerned ordnance services, envisaged
maintenance of the Force from M.E. base in the early stages of the campaign.
It was decided that the supply of ordnance stores, excluding ammunition
and vehicles,
would be by the system subsequently
called the " short sea
voyage" system, which meant, in essentials, establishing advanced ordnance
depots (A.O.Ds.) in the theatre instead of base ordnance depots B.O.Ds.,
stocking the (A.O.Ds.) with only a selected and limited range of ordnance
stores and obtaining supply from the B.O.Ds. in Egypt of all the require-
ments of the Force in the wider range of items not stocked in the A.O.Ds.
L.Rs. and B.M.Ps. were packed in readiness, by Middle East and
N. Africa Commands respectively for the formations which each command
mounted for the operation.
Initial stocks for an A.O.D. in Sicily were
prepared by Middle East Command and sent to 32 B.O.D. (Bone) for
despatch; 557 A.O.D. (Tripoli) was held in readiness to land in Sicily on
about "D" + 21.
Initial enemy opposition was slight and the L.Rs. and B.M.Ps. were
put ashore without much difficulty except that they became mixed and
consequently were not landed intact on their allotted beaches.
consequent Were not lande insa BiDs i lotie be sor. This gave
which was, however, rapidly solved.
Following the O.B.Ds. with their L.Rs.
and B.M.Ps., ordnance field parks, mobile laundry and bath units and port
detachments for ammunition and stores went ashore and took up their roles
and, lastly, 25 A.A.D. and 557 A.O.D. landed to reinforce the O.B.Ds.
The campaign in Sicily was so short and the distances so small that
formation ordnance officers were able to draw their requirements direct from
the A.O.D. and A.A.D., and full development of the planned system of
supply of stores and ammunition therefore did not become necessary.
Meanwhile,
preparations were in hand for the landing of Eighth Army
at Reggio, on the
¿Toe of Italy and for the possible simultaneous landing
of a Force at Taranto,
on the "Heel"
As 25 A.A.D. and 557 A.O.D.
of a Force at Taranto, involved in their tasks in Sicily, it was decided not
to use them in support of these initial landings in Italy.
Instead 3 A.A.D.
and 500 A.O.D. were detailed for the "Heel" operation and the O.B.Ds. in
sid 500 A. OD. were deta improvised unit, later known as " Eighth Army
Ordnance Field Stores " to provide initial maintenance for the Reggio landing.
The first landings in Italy were made by 13th Corps on 3rd September,
1012 n the heaches hetwear Daggin and Catang • hu 10th September 1943.
allied forces had occupied Salerno on the west coast and Taranto and
Brindisi in the " Heel"®
Owing to
the rapid
initial progress of these landing operations the
improvised
"Ordnance Field Stores" unit was able to establish itself in
Taranto, stocked with all the unused L.Rs. and B.M.Ps. from Sicily, and to
provide a stop-gap supply of ordnance stores.
At the same time ammunition
supply was effected by 3 A.A.D. which landed at Reggio, moving thence to
Taranto and later to Bari.
The
next developments in the ordnance build-up were the arrival at
Bari of 500 A.O.D., the establishment of 3 A.A.D. near Bari and the arrival
of 10 Vehicle Company R.A.O.C. which set up a transit vehicle park (T.V.P.)
at Monopoli, south of Bari, and began the formation of reserve vehicle parks
northwards.
From the outset 3 A.A.D. handled very large tonnages of
ammunition and 500 A.O.D. lost no time in taking over the supply of ordnance
stores.
That, briefly, was the situation as regards ordnance services in south
Italy at the time of 10 Corps landing at Salerno.
Salerno to Cassino-September, 1943, to May, 1944
The Salerno landing was mounted direct from North Africa, not from
Sicily.
Beach maintenance of ordnance stores and ammunition was carried
out by 2 and 4 O.B.Ds.
Divisional ordnance field parks landed with the
corps troops and advanced with their formations.
Later, 511 A.O.D.
and
501 A.A.D. reinforced the O.B.Ds. and 574 Vehicle Company R.A.O.C.
arrived to handle the supply of replacement vehicles.
In October, 1943, after the capture of Naples, three major decisions were
taken, of special importance to ordnance services.
Firstly, an advanced administrative echelon of Allied Forces Headquarters
(A.F.H.Q.) (Major-General Robertson)* was formed in Naples to take up the
administrative load and to work in harness with H.Q. 15 Army Group
(General Alexander) † which at that time was operational only.
A miniature
Ordnance Directorate, under a D.D.O.S., was included.
At a later date, the
two organizations were fuzed into H.Q. Allied Armies in Italy (A.A.I.) but
until July, 1944, A.F.H.Q., including the Ordnance Directorate, remained in
Algiers, 800 miles away in another continent, a very remote control not
conducive to efficient practical working.
Secondly, it was decided to open an advanced base in the Naples area
and to instal a full range of advanced depots.
The third decision was to centralize under one head (the D.D.O.S. (Pro-
vision) Mediterranean) the whole of ordnance provision work for all Forces
in the Mediterranean, including the Central Mediterranean Force (C.M.F.)
and North Africa as well as Middle East Force.
The main object was to
save setting up a duplicate provision organization in Italy so as to achieve
economy
of resources; the
throughout the campaign.
arrangement operated with marked success
This organization was later designated Central
Ordnance Provision Office (Middle East) C.O.P.O. (M.E.).‡
MiCater General Sir Brian H. Robertson, Bt., K.C.M.G., K.C.V.O., C.B., C.B.E., D.S.O.,
195
wesqut/I7
WO 277/21
