to get equipment supplies from the base to the fighting troops necessitated
the the gui employment of every available means of e situatioation by land,
sea and air, in proportions varying according to the situation.
When tiching began in the Middle. East the available supplies of army
equipmen fire seriously inadequate and the R.A.ess, ersonnel allotted
to the theatre were far too few.
These shortages persisted in some degree
right up to, and even beyond, the battle of El Alamein.
In such circumstances it was inevitable that the evolution of R.A.O.C.
field organization and methods was hampered and that sound principles
had to give way, in many cases, to improvisation.
It was recognized there-
fore that not all the ordnance units evolved, and the maintenance systems
used, for the Western Desert campaigns would emerge as part of the standard
organization and procedure.
The following paragraphs describe the main lessons learnt and their
application to the subsequent organization of R.A.O.C. in the field.
In the case of ordnance field parks, the lack of flexibility noted during
he short campaign in France was fully confirmed by experience in the Middle
East.
It was remedied by development of the following organization, which
vas virtually complete by the date of the battle of El Alamein and remained
perative into the early part of 1943.
In the 1939 organization, no divisional ordnance field park as such
sisted, but the needs of brigades and divisional troops were met by field
ark sections attached to brigade workshops (functioning in the dual capacity
i field parks and workshops stores sections for economy in man-power), and
divisional section, located forward from the ordnance sub-park concerned,
hich replenished the brigade field park sections and made most of the
sues to divisional troops.
A proper divisional ordnance field park plus
orkshop stores sections would have been preferred, but could not at that
me be afforded.
Corps and army troops sub-parks were allotted on a basis of one a corps
supply non-divisional units.
Corps ordnance sub-parks (infantry and armoured troops) were pro-
ded as corps troops on the basis of one a division and designed to hold
mplete weapons, equipments, wheeled vehicles and carriers in addition to
are parts.
Headquarters corps ordnance field parks were small headquarters found
cessary for general co-ordination and control of all sub-parks in the corps.
Brigade field park sections normally drew their requirements from the
inance sub-parks, which were in turn replenished from the advanced base
base.
The ordnance sub-parks were smaller than those subsequently
opted as standard, the reasons for this being threefold.
First, many stores
quired for stocking field parks were in very short supply and the total
Idings on wheels had, therefore, to be limited; secondly, the lack of
ndardization of army equipment, particularly M.T. and the resultant large
ge of spares required by modern armies made it impossible, in any case, for
complete selection to be held forward.
Thirdly, there was an extreme
rtage of personnel. In view of the difficulty in getting transport from
mal sources for the forward delivery of ordnance stores and in order to
54
compensate for the smaller forward holdings on wheels, R.A.O.C. stores
convoy units were organized to effect rapid delivery of operationally vital
and urgent stores from, accent static holdings to the sub-parks.
to man-power shortage, accentuated by withdrawals of personnel from the
But owing
Medieranean for the be made in tampaign in North-West Europe, a further
re-organization had to be made in the case of the R.A.O.C. field units subse.
quently nominated by Middle Fast for the Sicily and Italy operations.
consisted of the establishment of more or less normal divisional ordnance Ticid
parks and workshop stores sections at the expense of corps ordinance sele
parks, which were dispensed with, the result being that even greater reliance
had to be placed on the stores convoy units for rapid delivery from static
stocks.
The introduction of R.A.O.C. stores convoy units proved in actual präctice
to be eminently successful, notwithstanding the fact that it usurped a R.A.S.C.
function and departed from the sound administrative principle that all avail-
able transport facilities should be pooled and alloted by the Stafi according
to priorities. Experience amply and repeatedly proved that in active opera-
tions vital and immediate requirements of army equipment very frequently
arise with unexpected suddenness.
Requirements of such commodities as
petrol, rations and ammunition could generally be calculated in advance with
assured accuracy, whereas the maintenance of complex equipments such as
tanks, self-propelled mountings and other artillery equipments, wireless and
signal stores inevitably gave rise to urgent demands for spare parts and acces-
sories which, in a range of items running into hundreds of thousands, could
not possibly be foreseen.
Thus arose the need to provide a transport agency
which could be swiftly allotted to the urgent delivery from central stocks of
fighting equipment just as vital to the battle as petrol or ammunition.
It was in the Western Desert that extensive use was made for the first
time of air supply for the carriage of many commodities, but particularly so
for vital items of clothing, warlike stores, ammunition,
etc., in short supply.
This entailed an organization for loading at base airfields and for receipt at
forward landing grounds.
For administrative
convenience,
the R.A.O.C.
detachments required formed part of the establishment of the stores convoy
units, with whom they worked in close contact, as the stores were more often
than not lifted forward by the corps stores convoy unit from forward landing
grounds, and at the base were loaded in conjunction with the base section of
the L. of C. convoy unit.
As soon as availability of personnel permitted, workshops stores sections
were formed as part of third line R.E.M.E. workshops subsequent to El
Alamein, but, as mentioned above, their place in second line workshops was
taken by brigade field park sections until the re-organization took place betons
the Sicily invasion.
In the Middle East, detachments for rail and road-heads and field main-
tenance centres were formed on special war establishments, as owing to the
dall number of railheads in use at any one riese, aid on ts, as oing toreat
distance which often separatse at any one time, and o
the standard ordnance maintenance
maintenance centres.
employed
company could not be
economically
On account of the nature of the campaigns, both east and west of the
Suez Canal, advanced ordnance and ammunition depots had to be capable
55
WO 277/21
18
