The British Purchasing Commission, later known as the British Ministry
of Supply Mission (B.S.M.), was mainly responsible,
under the British Supply
Council, for the negotiation of British contracts and spot purchases in U.S.A.
Following the introduction of Lend-Lease, the Mission assumed responsibility
for the preparation of Lend-Lease requisitions.
During this period B.S.M.
was responsible for submitting all B.A.S. (Ordnance) requirements of replace-
ment spart parts.
Eventually certain B.S.M. Supply Directorates were merged
with the corresponding B.A.S. (Ordnance) Sections.
The Mission continued
to be the principal procurement agency in close liaison with the M. of S. as
distinct from the War Office.
Following introduction of the assignment system, the Assignments and
Requirements (A. & R.) Branch, B.A.S. became one of the principal procure-
ment agencies for military stores.
The branch provided British representation
on the Munitions Assignment Committee (M.A.C.) (Ground).
The latter,
under U.S. chairmanship, was composed of U.S. and Allied Nations repre-
sentatives and was responsible for the assignment of U.S. production
of
military equipment.
The branch also
provided
representation
on
the
Canadian Mutual Aid Board which carried out a similar function in respect
of Canadian military production.
The principal contact with these procurement agencies was in connection
with the provision of maintenance spare parts.
The A. & R. branch was
responsible for scaling until that function was transferred to
R.E.M.E.
on War Office instructions in 1943.
It was also responsible for developing
a system of automatic maintenance and for dealing with theatre spare part
demands.
After negotiation with the appropriate U.S. Supply Corps the
branch furnished details to enable B.S.M. to lodge formal spare part requi-
sitions.
Similarly,
after introduction of the
assignment
system,
B.A.S.
(Ordnance) supplied all necessary briefing to A. & R. Branch, B.A.S., regard-
ing spare part requirements for which M.A.C. issue authority was necessary.
In the case of Canada, B.A.S. (Ordnance) were authorized by the M. of S.
and War Office to deal directly with D.M. & S.
regarding procurement
of spare parts of Canadian origin.
Control and Progress of Exports
Lack of clear terms of reference caused prolonged negotiations with the
original B.P.C. on the question of the respective responsibilities of the
Commission and B.A.S.
B.A.S. did not become responsible for ordering
the movement of ordnance stores from U.S.A. until December, 1941, when
the B.P.C. Shipping Sections, which had previously controlled the movement
of Ordnance stores, were absorbed by the corresponding ordnance sections.
Export records were transferred and the branch was authorized to issue all
shipping orders for ordnance stores, whether of Lend-Lease or British contract
origin in U.S.A.
Time-lag and duplication of effort were thus curtailed.
The transfer of authority assisted the correct linking of spares
and
accessories.
It permitted detail supervision of packing and marking
by
Outstation Representatives.
It also made possible the development
of
adequate records covering the provision and distribution of maintenance
spare parts.
Initial maintenance had been recorded only in terms of boxes
of unspecified contents under general
terms,
such
as
" spares", or even
~02947
WO 277/21
"parts".
There were no records showing the distribution of maintenance
in relation to theatre holdings and no records showing the provision and
distribution of subsequent maintenance.
Another advantage of the transfer of responsibility was the development
of a regular exchange of information with War Office and theatres regarding
availabilities and exports; previously the main channel of communication
had been with M. of S.
Existing statistical reports were limited to informa-
tion required by the M. of S.; B.A.S. Ordnance branch, when it assumed
control, provided the War Office and theatres with all necessary up-to-date
information and statistics regarding the supply position of ordnance stores
in North America.
A system of control of availabilities and exports was also built up in
Canada.
The Production Forecasts submitted by the D.M. & S. to M.
of S. which formed the basis of War Office distribution instructions were
found to be generally over-optimistic,
and the effect of this on operational
planning was serious.
This difficulty took some time to overcome.
A problem arose in Canada in that War Office distribution cables included
marking instructions.
D.M. & S. were accustomed to taking direct action
on these cables and, since they had insufficient knowledge of ordnance store
markings,
errors in distribution occurred.
In November, 1941, it was
agreed that B.A.S. Ordnance branch would in future issue detailed marking
instructions to D.M. & S. and a considerable improvement in the accuracy
of marking and distribution resulted.
Before 1942, in Canada, stores were sent direct from plant to seaboard,
and shipping arrangements were left in the hands of the manufacturers.
The stores had to be marked as they came off the line, without reference
to available shipping opportunities.
If no shipping opportunity was avail-
able, the stores had to be left in the open, frequently without adequate
preservation.
Progress and control was impossible.
This difficulty was not
overcome until the Longue Pointe Ordnance Depot was opened in 1942.
At this depot packing and marking were supervised by resident British
ordnance officers and stores were consigned on the sole authority of the
Ordnance sub-branch in Ottawa.
• .
Procedure for the Procurement and Export of Main Equipments and
Stores of U.S. Origin
The following is a brief description of the method of procurement and
export of main equipments and stores of U.S. origin under the assignment
procedure which was the normal method.
(a) Assignment Procedure
British requirements were calculated
every six months.
co-
ordinated by the Director General of Army Requirements (D.G.A.R.),
War Office, and passed to the M. of S.
That portion which could
not be met from British Empire production, including Canada, was
then notified to B.A.S./B.S.M., who submitted these requirements to
the International Division, U.S. War Department.
When approved,
the requirements were incorporated in the U.S. War Department
Supply Control, or, as at one time known, the U.S. Army Supply
99
