SERVICES
nous
were forced back to the hill regions which form a natural boundary between
Burma and Assem the " Northern Line" of which was in the region o
Manipur State, and the
"Southern Line" down Arakan. on the
Burma-
Bengal frontier.
Between the two lines the hills running north/south are
of an average height of 6,500 feet with peaks of over 10,000 feet and form
part of a range extending from Assam-Bengal to a point below the island
of Ramree.
Very few tracks cross this range, and mule transport was the
only means of ground communication.
on the west by the range of hills previously described
Burma is virtually a basin, bounded
by the hills running into Thailand and Indo-China.
and on the east
In Burma itself, the
Irrawaddy runs through the middle of the plains, but road communications
between Manipur and a point on the river where water transport was
feasible were not possible on a large scale until reconstruction had been
carried out and, even then, not during the monsoon,
which breaks in
April and continues until the end of September.
The railway system from
Mandalay to Rangoon had become unserviceable through R.A.F. bombing
and, therefore, in order to maintain our advance, it was necessary to depend
almost entirely on air supply.
The first instance of organized air supply occurred in March, 1944, when
the Japanese cut in behind 7 Division in the area of the Ngagyekadauk Pass.
It immediately became obvious that the only way to keep the division supplied
was by air drop, and the O.F.D. at Comilla was organized into an air
supply O.F.D.
Stores and ammunition were supplied in
bulk from the
A.O.D./A.A.D. at Chittagong to O.F.D. Comilla and issued thence in detail
against formation demands
to the Royal Indian Army
Service Corps
(R.IA.S.C.) air supply companies at Comilla and Agartala, who packed
them into parachute containers which were loaded into Dakotas for dropping.
In April-May, 1944, our troops had been forced back to Imphal and
Kohima, and surrounded by the Japanese: ground communications were cut.
The Japanese apparently intended to besiege these two areas and starve them
out, thus leaving them free to consolidate their forces and advance into the
plains of Bengal.
It was decided that no further withdrawal of our forces would take place,
and that-in General Wingate's words-" Supply
would
be "down the
chimney'".
Transport aircraft were concentrated at Agartala, local air
supremancy was ensured by our fighter aircraft and the supply of food,
petrol, stores, ammunition and fresh troops began.
Non-combatant troops
and casualties were evacuated by aircraft on their return journeys.
The system was so successful that when our troops broke out of the
"boxes it was decided to maintain our forces by air supply to the utmost
in future operations.
Three main air strips were operated in the Imphal
Plain for this purpose, and our forces in Arakan were similarly supplied
from the Chittagong airfield.
In January, 1945, the C. in C., A.L.F.S.E.A., conducted an investigation
into air supply, with the result that the Army Air Transport Organization
(AA.T.O.) was formed, including Service advisers and staffs in what pre-
viously had been a purely "Q" organization.
An A.D.O.S.
was included
n the Too the et the rear airfield.
maintenance organizations (R.A.M.O.). A pool of ordnance personnel wa
278
formed from which allocations were made to R.A.M.Os. according to their
varyms comminents.
Each forward
airfield maintenance organization (F.A.M.O.) was under
command of the formation which it served and was mobile, moving from
strid to sulp as the advance contnued.
nutcratt.
Its function was to unload the
check stores with aircraft manifest, segregate stores according to
type,
and notify the services depot concerned for collection.
When the
strip was unserviceable for any reason, dropping was resorted to (as most
strips were earth), and the stores were recovered and disposed of as above.
Formation or unit dropping zones were used for parachute drops and
free drops when no airstrip was available. Personnel for collection of stores
were found from formation or unit resources, with personnel of the service
concerned to supervise sorting and disposal.
SYSTEM OF SUPPLY BY AIR
Before February, 1945, several systems were in operation; they were
all similar in that units submitted, weekly, typed sheets of normal require-
ments of all ordnance stores, less ammunition, and, daily, signals for urgently
required stores, spares and controlled stores.
Ammunition was replenished
by daily signal based on usage.
It was the practice to route all demands
through Army H.Q. ; this created an unnecessary time lag and was unfortu-
nate in that formations did not know which depot they were dependent on.
Ordnance detachments were not intended to hold stocks of stores.
There
was a tendency for these detachments to accumulate stocks, to issue from
these stocks and to replenish them by demanding on the base.
This practice
caused failures because stores which should have been in depots were locked
up in detachments for the benefit of formations which might not require
the quantities thus held.
were fixed.
of the speed with which replenishment had to be made.
R.A.M.Os. were
replenished daily from the base.
concerned,
and that
no stocks would be held.
drill uniforms and tentage.
trolled stores were also held at R.A.M.O. so that urgently required controlled
stores could be immediately supplied.
After investigating the problems in all R.A.M.Os., D.O.S. A.L.F.S.E.A
issued an instruction requiring adherence to the normal system of demand
and supply of ordon requiring and making it clear that the substitution of
aircraft for road, rail or water as a means of transportation in no
affected the ordnance system of supply.
fully, and stores not available on one "line"
from the other.
279
~e2947
117
WO 277/21
18
