SERVICES
ROUS
MAP 11
8--
INDIA.
SHEWING
LOCATIONS OF STORAGE INSTALLATIONS... MID 1945.
REFERENCE:
BOUNDARY
INSTALLED
SINCE
1939 THUS +
SCALE IN MILES
f T
NEPAL
To face Page 299
Subsequently, when Allied command of the Bay of Bengal was re-estah.
lished and the decision was taken that India should become a major adminis-
trative spring board for the re-conquest of South-Fast Asia, it was decided
that large bases should be constructed near Calcutta, Madras and Vizaga-
patam.
Thus, in the span of a few years, the momentum swung first from
the northwest to the north-east of India (to feed the 1942 operations to
counter the Japanese offensive and for the first Allied offensive in that area.
and then to the East coast for building up of bases to supply by sea the
coming Allied combined operations. It was the B.O.Ds. established on the
east coast at Panagarh near Calcutta and Avadi near Madras which were
destined to bear the main load in the maintenance of South East Asia Com-
mand (S.E.A.C.).
It had always been the experience in India that sanction for depot con-
struction could only be obtained after its necessity had become a physical
reality.
Apart from the difficulties of obtaining the necessary approval,
material, labour and transport in an undeveloped country nearly twenty times
bigger than
Great Britain, ordnance construction was never given high
priority.
It had to give way to airfield and other urgent expansion, and the
delay in giving stocks the cover they required could be measured in years
rather than weeks.
The expansion of the central and command depots was also much impeded
because the railways could not undertake the movement of stores, and there-
fore stocks produced in India had to be stored in the manufacturing areas.
These areas were situated all over India and separated by vast distances.
This led to the introduction of numerous scattered
"holding depots"
and
further delayed the construction programme, quite apart from the difficulty
of stock control.
Thus, in the year immediately preceding the decision to form the India
Base, and when already the expansion of the Ordnance organization was
being planned in line with the other services, depot construction had reached
a highly critical stage.
The year itself was marked by a series of disasters
which made the position even worse.
The collapse of the Far East front
caused diverted cargoes to pour into India, thus introducing another claim
on the sorely overtaxed accommodation.
There was no longer any outlet
for a large part of the Central Provision Office (C.P.O.) stocks which were
materializing. Internal troubles during the year aggravated railway transport
and this, in turn, still further delayed depot construction and the movement
of stores.
A heavy monsoon crippled large portions of the transportation
system, caused serious damage to stocks (of which enormous quantities were
perforce held in the open), flooded the completed depots and caused the
collapse of whole buildings.
One effect of these misfortunes was that train-loads of stores began to
arrive at certain depots which were still scarcely more than a mark on the
ground, and stores had to be dumped on the site to the subsequent detriment
of depot administration and stocks.
The internal organization of depots,
although imnroved considerably when compared with pre-war etandards. com.
Kingdom.
ared unfavourably with the organization of similar installations in the United
There was always an acute shortage of ordnance personnel, and
depot commanders were forced to fall hack on the expedient of engaging
more and more temporary civilian labour.
This labour was generally of low
