RICTED
uneconomic, had to be urgently improvised in requisitioned premises such as
garages, cinemas, skating rinks, shops and even private houses.
Command ammunition depots were established throughout the country,
of which more is written in Chapter VIII.
The handling and repair of stores returned by units had become a serious
problem.
Returned stores depots (R.S.Ds.) were therefore established to
relieve issuing depots of this work.
A new procedure for the issue and accounting for stores was introduced
by which storeholders were relieved of a great deal of paper work and the
responsibility for initiating provision action.
The grouping of stores in depots
was standardized to conform to the grouping laid down for base ordnance
depots.
Enemy air attack and the pressure of naval authorities forced the evacua-
tion of the command ordnance depot at Devonport and a new depot was built
at Coypool a few miles out of Plymouth.
In 1942 a fresh re-organization of home commands was effected in which
the commands were divided into Corps Districts, Districts, Sub-Districts,
Areas, Sub-areas and Garrisons.
Corps Districts were administered by the H.Q. of a corps in the field force,
the D.D.O.S. of the corps becoming D.D.O.S., Corps District.
Ordnance representation which did not go below Sub-Areas, was : -
Command H.Qs.-D.D.O.S.
Corps District H.Qs.—D.D.O.S.
Sub-District and Area and Sub-Area H.Qs.—D.A.D.O.S.
At this time a new command was formed. This was S.E. Command, later
known as S.E. Army. The command was formed as an anti-invasion measure
and was composed almost entirely of operational troops.
mand disappeared as such, being absorbed partly by S.E. Command and
The risk of invasion rendered the small
ordnance depots on the coast of Kent and Sussex unfit for use as normal
depots and stocks were dispersed throughout the command.
The arrival of American forces in 1942 resulted in the handing over
of much ordnance accommodation, in some instances installations complete
Chief among these were the command depots at
Hilsea, Tidworth and Coypool in the Southern Command. Alternative accom-
modation had to be found which was usually inferior to that handed over
In 1943 a re-organization of the regimental establishments of the R.A.O.C.
The R.A.O.C. sections in commands were absorbed into
battalions-one battalion in each command furnished the R.A.O.C. personnel
for all the command ordnance depots in the command. Training was arranged
centrally by battalion H.Q. but each C.O.O. retained certain regimental
responsibilities for the troops serving under him.
As the threat of a German invasion became less pronounced, the smaller
sub-depots and storehouses were closed and stocks concentrated into the
larger depots with a resultant saving of personnel. This process of integration
During 1943 and 1944 the force for the invasion of Europe was being
built up, at first under the direction of G.H.Q. Home Forces and later under
21 Army Group.
The. command organization remained unchanged during
this period except for some changes in area boundaries and the disappearance
Units of 21 Army Group were widely dispersed all over the country.
In addition to equipping these units while they were completing their mobiliza-
tion and training, commands set up and equipped special tented and hutted
camps in the marshalling and concentration areas in anticipation of the
A special organization was formed to undertake the
ordnance administration of units of 21 Army Group while their concentra-
tion and embarkation was proceeding, thus leaving formation ordnance
officers free to perform their operational duties.
With the successful launching of the attack on Europe came a marked
decrease in the activities of home commands and a speeding up in the
process of integrating command depots.
As the war came to its end an integration of districts and areas within
commands also took place causing a considerable reduction in their number.
In Southern Command, for example, the districts and sub-districts were
reduced from twelve to five.
Command Depot Procedures Before the War
At the outbreak of war all command ordnance depots were working to
a standard system for the provision, receipt, issue and accounting for stores.
This system, of which a brief description follows, was entirely different
from that laid down for supply in the Field and at B.O.Ds.
Command ordnance depots obtained stocks in bulk from C.O.Ds. and
issued in detail to units. Units notified their requirements by the submission
of indents to D.A.D.O.S. Area, who was also responsible for the command
At the depot, indents were passed to the storeholder responsible
for the particular type of store shown on the indent. The storeholder prepared
issue vouchers for those items that were available and issued them to the
He notified the provision office of the depot whenever his stock of
an item fell to a pre-determined level and also when he received an indent
for an item he was unable to meet from stock.
replenishment of stock by submitting a demand on the appropriate C.O.D.
It was the storeholder's responsibility to ensure that any indents which he
could not meet at the time he received them, were met later as soon as
A record of issues and receipts (storehouse
tally) was kept in the
storehouse, also a record of stores due in against ordnance demands and
Vouchers were posted in the storehouse tally and then passed to the depot
office where they were again posted in the ordnance store account (ledger).
Issue vouchers were sent to the units after they had been posted in the
This system had stood the test of many years and in a modified form
was used in the war theatres during the 1914-18 war.
Its keystone was
the storeholder who, to be successful, had to know his stocks thoroughly
WO 277/21
