The main base stores transit depot provided the local point for the
lection of all detailed unit issues made by the C.O.Ds.
The depot con-
sted of a headquarters, an outwards traffic sub-depot and an inwards traffic
The outwards traffic sub-depot received all stores issued by the central
pots, whence, after being sorted into formation containers, they were
patched to the port for shipment via the dally ordnance ship.
vards traffic sub-depot received all repairable assemblies evacuated from
theatre and, with the assistance of R.E.M.E. and Ministry of Supply
achments, sorted these assemblies and distributed them for repair to
E.M.E. and M. of S. workshops throughout the country.
The depot was originally located at Micheldever on the main London-
chester-Southampton railway, in order that it should be easily accessible
outhampton, which was the main port of embarkation for the operation.
I, when 21 Army Group had advanced through France into Belgium
Germany, Tilbury was operated as the main port of embarkation, and
main base stores transit depot was accordingly moved to Stratford,
At both locations, special accommodation had been constructed.
in the main, consisted of two rail- and road-served sheds, with plat-
s running down the centre on which the sorting of packages received
carried out.
preparation for the N.W. Europe campaign, the following further
es in R.A.O.C. field organization were implemented during 1943, in
to conform to the basic principles laid down for the maintenance project
apply the lessons learned from study and discussion of the way existing
zations had functioned in the Middle East and N. African campaigns
range of items to be stocked by the A.O.Ds. was limited to stores
uent demand, items of operational importance, M.T. assemblies and
parts appropriate to the R.E.M.E. policy of limited repairs in the field.
decided to include in the A.O.D. a stores transit sub-depot with the
ns of ensuring the rapid delivery to the troops of the detailed issues
y the main base depots and the swift return of repairable assemblies
main. base.
sub-unit called the forward trailer section.
be stocked with a selected reserve of fast moving items, spare parts,
ents and assemblies most likely to be urgently required during opera-
d the unit was designed to go forward and operate as the advance
E an A.O.D. with a nucleus stock or, in emergency, to re-equip a
n after battle, or to supplement ordnance field parks should the
come dangerously depleted.
rding ammunition supply, it was decided that no change was required
3.A.D.
organization, except to create an independant ammunition
capable of operating a small depot separately.
This was effected
rizing a small increment, including some ammunition examiners, to
establishment of a standard company.
At the same time, in order
e for field repairs, a new W.E. for an ammunition repair factory
eed for large supplies of industrial gases, oxygen and acetylene, for
and for R.E.M.E. workshops had hitherto been met from local
resources in war theatres.
As it was considered that static industrial gas
plants in N.W. Europe would probably be destroyed and that supply from
ine main base would be impracticable because of the immense amount of
shipping space needed by gas cylinders, it was decided to make the army
in the field self-supporting by the provision of R.A.O.C. industrial gas units.
Steps were accordingly taken to form a mobile unit, army industrial gas
unit (A.I.G.U,), equipped with gas producing plant mounted on trailers and
a base industrial gas unit (B.I.G.U.) equipped with
A.I.G.U. and B.I.G.U, was organized into a headquarters, an oxygen seotion
and an acetylene section; later, to provide nitrogen for flame throwers, an
inert gas section was added to the A.I.G.U.
The R.A.O.C. field organization for laundry services at bases overseas
had been found to lack flexibility.
Both in base laundries and base hospital
laundries the plant was designed for use in concrete foundations in per-
manent accommodation, with the result that a change in location dictated
by the progress of operations entailed long delay.
The laundry equipment
was therefore changed, new designs mounted on trailers were introduced
and the units enabled to change location at short notice with minimum loss
As the latest standard ordnance field park organization had not yet been
fully implemented and tried in any war theatre, and with the contingency
in mind that, in the forthcoming operations on the Continent, temporary
stoppages might occur in the forward flow of stores from the advanced
base, it was decided to increase the mobile reserves allotted to field parks.
Ordnance sub-parks were accordingly expanded from 420 tons to 500 tons,
divisional ordnance field parks from 45 tons to 90 tons with consequential
increases in unit personnel and load carrying vehicles.
Ordnance field parks were formed to serve the following formations,
viz. airborne divisions, independent armoured brigades, tank brigades and
Formation of army troops ordnance field parks was
considered necessary but was precluded
by shortage of man-power.
the event they had later to be improvised in the field by the D.O.S., 21 Army
Group from his own resources.
Mobile ammunition repair units, on the basis of one for each corps, were
formed to ensure efficient maintenance of forward reserves and to deal with
"D"-day stocks of prepacked stores and ammunition
Britain in readiness for maintenance or supply by air
should these methods have to be adopted.
These stocks consisted of five
days' reserve of all commodities for an infantry division, three days' reserve
of all commodities for an armoured or tank brigade and reserves of special
stores for airborne formations.
To assemble these stores, pack them into airborne containers and panniers,
and to issue them as necessary, an air maintenance company R.A.O.C. was
provided. This unit consisted of a headquarters and three
air packing
platoons and worked alongside the air despatch companies R.A.S.C.
Although it was realized that R.A.O.C. stores convoy units would be
required, they were not included in the original order of battle, and D.O.S.
21 Army Group had therefore to provide them as best he could from his
own resources.
WO 277/22
