Army Group was serviced within 48 hours.
Simultaneously, these C.O.Ds.
were engaged on the despatch of L.Rs. and B.M.Ps. to the ports ready for
shipment.
In the maintenance project for 21 Army Group it was provided that the
C.O.Ds. in England would operate as the main base ordnance depots for
the Force, and supply by daily shipments all the units' detailed ordnance
requirements not stocked in the war theatre. It was planned that the initial
maintenance overseas, before even temporary ordnance depots could be
established, would be by means of operationally packed L.Rs. and B.M.Ps.
and that the Advanced Ordnance Depots (A.O.Ds.) in the theatre would then
be stocked with only a pre-determined and restricted range of ordnance
stores, items in every-day demand, fast moving spares and expendable items.
It was therefore clear that the C.O.Ds. would shoulder a very heavy
operational commitment covering the large majority of items in the vast
range (some 750,000 different items) required to maintain the Army's war
equipment.
All C.O.Ds. therefore organized themselves to deal with a daily load of
detailed issues of operational urgency and at C.O.D. Greenford an indent
clearing centre (I.C.C.) was set up, staffed by specially selected personnel
skilled in dealing with indents for all classes of ordnance stores.
The func-
tion of the I.C.C. was to distribute accurately and with utmost speed to the
main base depots concerned, the flood of 21 Army Group indents which,
soon after "D"-day, began to come in daily by air from overseas.
Collec-
tion of the indents from Northolt airfield and delivery to the issuing main
base depots was carried out with great efficiency and speed by a team com-
prising both R.A.O.C. and A.T.S. despatch riders.
The I.C.C. and its
despatch-rider service operated day and night seven days a week.
Through-
out the campaign in N.W. Europe the I.C.C. maintained a remarkably
accurate and swift service in this important task of getting 21 Army Group
indents to the points of supply.
The millionth indent from 21 Army Group
reached the I.C.C. on 5th April, 1945.
The A.T.S. despatch riders averaged
1,000 miles a week. and the R.A.O.C. riders, at the peak of activity, averaged
1,600 miles weekly.
The policy of operational maintenance of ordnance stores from the
C.O.Ds. proved that these depots were well able to meet the commitment.
In addition, their stocks and handling capacity were sufficiently flexible to
take on at short notice added commitments for 21 Army Group when
ordnance services in the theatre were specially hard pressed or temporarily
unable to operate their A.O.Ds. during the swift advance and consequent
re-organization of the local ordnance maintenance arrangements.
It should, however, be noted that at the peak period of activity, for many
weeks before and after "D"-day, the whole C.O.D. organization worked
under pressure, maintained a 24-hour service, and enlisted both part-time
and packing commitments.
workers and voluntary helpers in order to complete the immense cartoning
Immediately after "D"-day the warlike stores C.O.Ds. carried out the
preparation, including waterproofing, and issue of artillery equipments re-
quired by the invasion force for the follow-up phase after the initial assault
36
landings.
The C.O.D: Greenford alone issued approximately 4,000 artillery
equipments to 21 Army Group in the initial and subsequent shipments.
The year 1944 marked the war-time height of achievement and activity in
the C.O.D. organization, a vast, ordered flow of army equipment which con-
tinued into. 1945.
Before the end of 1944, when the C.O.Ds. had accom-
plished their main war task, they began the preparation (including special
tropical packing) of war reserves for anticipated future operations in the Far
East, an activity which continued until the capitulation of Japan.
Evolution of C.O.D. organization for General Stores
At the outbreak of war in 1939, the C.O.D. organization for the supply
of general stores consisted of the central depot, with its provision branch,
at Didcot, originally built during the 1914-18 war and one sub-depot at
Slaithwaite in the
Midlands, established in August, 1939, in a number of
requisitioned mills.
In anticipation of war, the covered storage accommodation at Didcot
had been considerably augmented by the addition of one large storehouse
with 650,000 sq. ft.
of floor space, and a second sub-depot at Thatcham,
consisting of 1,000,000 sq. ft. of covered storage, for the storage and issue
of camp equipment was under construction.
The sub-depot at Thatcham
began to operate in May, 1940.
The depot at-Didcot was rail served and the wide dispersion of many
of its sheds gave a measure of security against air attack, but the general
design and layout were not ideal either for effective supervision or for the
constant rapid handling of large volumes of receipts and issues needed under
war conditions
The principal commitments of the C.O.D. Didcot in 1939 were to stock
the command ordnance depots in the United Kingdom to meet the needs
of mobilizing units, and the B.O.Ds. in France to maintain the B.E.F.
latter involved a huge shipping programme.
The
In 1940 the evacuation of the B.E.F. from France and the immense losses
of B.O.D. stocks threw on Didcot the great and urgent task of supplying
the evacuated troops with essential accommodation stores.
Staging camps
formed in concentration areas needed equipping with the minimum of delay,
and stocks, both in the C.O.D. and in command ordnance depots, were so
badly depleted that all issues had to be strictly controlled on a priority
and rationing basis.
As the result of war experience and increasing commitments,
Didcot
introduced during 1940 various measures of internal re-organization designed
to attain more effective control and greater speed of issue.
One was to split
the traffic branch into three clear-cut divisions, viz., home issues, co-ordinated
issues (priorities) and shipping (overseas issues).
Then followed a division
of the D.C.O.O.'s responsibilities into two main spheres under, respectively,
the 0.0. Administration and the O.O. Stores.
The evolution in packing methods aiming at standardized and economic
packaging of Vote 8 general stores, by utilizing the most suitable motorials
available and by devising packages which gave the contents full protection
against damage in transit, had made rapid progress by 1941, and the volume
37
WO 277/21
18
