to be not altogether satisfactory.
Many of these railway traffic officers were
young and inexperienced and afraid to take the responsibility of imposing
their will upon the railway authorities in case of real urgency.
A suggestion to the effect that Commandants of Central Ordnance Depots,
in view of their senior rank, should be authorized to frank mobilization stores
for despatch by priority means was not agreed to.
It was found to be of the utmost importance that railway traffic officers
should be in possession of clear instructions as to their duties and responsi-
bilities in respect of mobilization stores.
This applied not only in the case
of despatch from depot railheads but also in receipt at unit stations.
On one
occasion when stores arrived at a station for a mobilizing unit, which had been
moved the previous day to another station, the railway traffic officer returned
the stores to the ordnance depot.
These were urgently needed by the unit,
situation demanded quick and decisive
action,
which (e.g. by
telephoning the ordnance depot concerned of the War Office) would have
led to the discovery of the unit's new location.
Vehicles
—The importance of the earliest possible issue of a training scale of
especially newly-forming units, was emphasized at this
Many drivers posted in could only drive one type of vehicle, and
few could drive a heavy lorry.
The period of mobilization was very short in most cases and no time
could be lost in the training of drivers.
B.—The need for a keen and experienced mechanical transport officer in
units was also brought out.
Units in existence, on receipt of orders to
mobilize, were required to prepare a detailed return of vehicles on charge,
showing type, make, number, classification, etc.
It was found that, where
there was a good mechanical transport officer and a sound system of main-
tenance in a unit, the replacement of unserviceable vehicles was a comparatively
simple process. In other cases units which had maintained their vehicles badly
were, perhaps naturally, content to classify them as unserviceable in the hope
of obtaining 100 per cent. replacement.
As such classification was not
justified by age, condition or mileage, this led to objections by Mechanical
Transport representatives,
Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers
officers, etc., and considerable waste of valuable mobilization time.
The responsibility of commanding officers for the care and maintenance
of vehicles on their charge was frequently stressed, but on the whole the
results at this phase had not been satisfactory.
It is in the best interests of the unit that a keen and suitable officer should
be relieved of other duties wherever possible to enable him to devote his
whole time to the care and maintenance of vehicles. In the pre-mobilization
period, this will greatly facilitate the unit's
mobilization, will add to the fighting efficiency of the unit.
mobilization, and, after
C.-Numerous difficulties
checking details of spares, tools, etc.,
were experienced by mobilizing units in
lorries.
especially in the case of machinery
The technical equipment of these vehicles is considerable, and
many items are essential for the full operational efficiency of the workshop.
28
WO217
In many cases vehicles were issued without their A, B, C and D lists, and
checking of equipment became extremely dificult until their receipt.
was then often too late to rectify errors and omissions.
It is of the greatest importance that complete lists of equipment should
accompany vehicles at the time of issue to mobilizing units, so that deficiencies
may be known at once and action taken to complete these through command
headquarters and War Office channels.
Where the number of vehicles to be issued to a unit was large, it was found
most satisfactory to despatch a complete convoy from the issuing depot to
units or alternatively to send a party of unit's drivers under the mechanical
transport officer to the issuing depot.
This greatly simplified the take-over
and enabled all deficiencies to be checked up at the time of issue.
D.—There were instances of variations to Mobilization Urgent Memoranda
being issued by vehicle branches direct to units, Assistant Directors of
Ordnance Services, and Vehicle Reception Depots, instead of through
A.G.5 (Mob.). These variations were found to be necessary owing to
shortages of the correct type.
Nevertheless, the result was a certain amount
of confusion as units found themselves receiving different instructions from
a variety of sources.
This was found to be antagonistic to the smooth working of mobilization
and orders
were issued to ensure
that all
instructions affecting the
mobilization of units should be issued by A.G.5 (Mob.).
