Although units for India/South-Bast Asia Commind were given priority,
important mobilizations for other theatres and garrisons were taking place
simultaneously, e.g. at the end of 1944 a Force 135 was prepared and had to
be maintained until required for the re-occupation of the Channel Islands.
Between February and May some go units were mobilized for the Mediter-
ranean front.
As was to be expected, the most serious shortages in units on the date
ordered for completion of their mobilization were officers (including medical
officers) senior non-commissioned officers and tradesmen.
In July, 1945, 6 Airborne Division was re-mobilized, for the third time,
the period allowed being six weeks.
One paratroop brigade, which preceded
the remainder of the Division overseas, was made up to Establishment.
The
remaining paratroop brigade was found, on the date of completion of its
+o be
deficient of 12 officers, 9I serjeants and 36 corporals.
The Airlanding Brigade was 54 serjeants and corporals deficient.
In the
Divisional Signals there were 29 deficiencies, including four non-commissioned
These details indicate the difficulties of mobilizing personnel for an active
theatre of war from resources which are either already committed in main-
taining (or in " holding down") another theatre, or in the process of dispersal
back to civil life.
The numbers of men still in the United Kingdom who were
both medically fit and also eligible for despatch overseas were comparatively
small.
Equipment
From the equipment angle also this was a difficult phase. The primary
difficulty was in agreeing the new scales of Army Form G1098 equipment
required by Headquarters, South-East Asia Command, with the existing
scales already in being for units of 21 Army Group or in the United Kingdom.
Considerable delay resulted from the discussions at long distances of the
details of scales, types, etc., of equipment and clothing to accompany units
from the United Kingdom.
From the production and training points of
view, it was considered desirable that the scales should approximate as nearly
as possible to those in existence, but it was obvious that the requirements of
terrain and climate would necessitate a number of changes and
The production of new or amended Army Forms GIog8 was a very heavy
task for the branch responsible (Ord. 2), and ordnance depots found them-
selves in the position of handling new sets of equipment and new items at a
time when they were losing many of their skilled and experienced personnel.
Practically every unit sent to India required a new or special Army Form
The assembly of these equipments for new units in the United Kingdom
simultaneously with the collection of reserves for 21 Army Group, and later
out of the special items, in short supply, brought back by units
from 27 Army Group, required very careful panization by War Office
branches concerned in communication with ordnance depots.
A particularly difficult mobilization was that of 6 Airborne Division in
Because of the difference in the type and scales of equipment
WO217
and clothing required, complete lists of scales had to be prepared at short
notice by Ord. 2, and, for speed of distribution, these had to be issued withthe
Mobilization Urgent Memorandum, which reached the record dimension of
135 pages.
Each item had then to be checked in detail by units before lists
of deficiencies could be prepared for submission to the assistant director of
ordnance services.
These included a number of special " jungle" items and
new articles of signalling equipment.
In the case of 5 Paratroop Brigade, which was urgently required in advance,
equipment was assembled in bulk at Donnington for despatch direct to the
Lists of outstanding deficiencies were compiled in bulk, and these had
to be " broken down" into unit deficiencies, and the equipment despatch by
air-mail to India to enable units to be completed on arrival as far as possible.
The difficulties encountered in the provision of equipment and clothing to
mobilizing units at this stage were mainly owing to-
(a) The many calls upon the limited amount of equipment available.
(b) The distance apart of the two main theatres involved and the different
conditions obtaining as regards terrain, climate, etc., in each.
(c) The uncertainty of exactly when and to what extent the articles of
equipment common to both theatres would be available from 21 Army
Group for re-issue to units required for India.
In the circumstances, these difficulties were well controlled, if not entirely
overcome, up to the time of the Armistice with Japan.
Vehicles
From the point of view of unit mobilization the issue of vehicles did not
present the same difficult problem as in the case of units of 21 Army Group.
In most cases, they were despatched to port under separate instructions, and
were issued to units at their destination.
As the stocks of vehicles at the
India/South-East Asia Command Base became
more established, only
special or technical vehicles were despatched from the United Kingdom, the
remainder being provided overseas.
The objection to this system in the case of new units was that drivers,
especially new and inexperienced drivers, had no chance of getting to know
the various types of vehicles to which their units were entitled in their
establishments, until after arrival in the theatre of operations.
A considerable
number of units (and also of personnel in the case of existing units) were new
in this phase of the war.
