E.-A reason given in Mob. I's Report for the shortages in personnel was
that " peace establishments bore little relation to the war requirements of
Whatever the plan to be implemented, peace establish-
ments of existing units should, generally speaking, carry more than the
coma soned uitements, especially i, offices, eatent officers, and non-
Unfortunately, these are the most extravagant to
maintain, but
experience in 1939 showed that heavy demands in these ranks,
firstly for field force units and, secondly, for new headquarters, training
establishments, units, etc., caused a severe drain on serving personnel and
resulted in considerable disorganization in the staffs of commands, etc., at a
time when they were exceptionally busy with mobilization duties.
As regards field force units which do not exist in peace-time, it is most
important that strong cadres be ear-marked, e.g. from Supplementary Reserve
Officers and other supervisory personnel, who must be trained in peace-time
to fill vacancies in War Establishments on mobilization.
This is specially important in the case of Technical Arms, e.g. Royal Army
Service Corps, Royal Army Ordnance Corps, Royal Electrical and Mechanical
Engineers.
It was noted that in the Report on the mobilization of the German Army in
1939, it is shown that nuclei for the purpose of forming new units, training
establishments, etc., were included at certain percentage rates within the
Peace Establishments of existing units, e.g. 22 per cent. in the case of
ist wave divisions.
This is an ideal solution, though to be effective these establishments must
be maintained up to strength in peace-time, which was not the case in the
United Kingdom in 1939.
F.—Similarly, the inclusion of Territorial Army units in the Ist contingent
of a field force can only be justified if their organization and administration
are on the same level of efficiency and in the same state of readiness as
Regular units.
Note.— In order to appreciate fully the difficulties experienced and to apply
the lessons deduced, with a view to avoidance of a repetition in future, it is
necessary to summarize briefly the duties required of the Royal Army
Ordnance Corps immediately on mobilization :-
(a) War equipments and ammunition already assembled on a planned basis
have to be issued.
(b) Vast quantities of accommodation stores and clothing require distribu-
tion to provide accommodation for reservists joining up, Territorial
Army units on embodiment, recruits, etc.
(c) Stocks to accompany the Expeditionary Force have to be packed and
despatched to ports for shipment.
(d) Demands for numerous stores of all kinds for the maintenance of the
Army at home and in the field must be put forward.
WO217
(e) Mobilization of Royal Army Ordnance Corps units required to
accompany the Expeditionary Force must be effected without interfering
with the activities mentioned at (a) to (d) above.
This involves the
absorption and training of labour in replacement of personnel withdrawn
from central and command ordnance depots.
(f) Training centres have to be formed or enlarged for the training of
recruits required for the expansion of the Royal Army Ordnance Corps.
LESSONS (Equipment)
A. —The " grave deficiencies" of certain items of equipment referred to
in the Controller of Ordnance Services's report were mainly owing to the
change of plan shortly before mobilization, which increased the Expeditionary
Force by two divisions and many Army and Corps troops units.
additions included Territorial Army formations and units, for which no
adequate preparation had been made.
With the background given in the
change of plan, especially at the last minute, must seriously disorganize the
functions of ordnance depots on mobilization, all set to work to a previously
prepared plan, which in itself taxed their resources to the utmost capacity.
Such sudden changes of plan must be avoided unless there is every reason
to believe that there is adequate time to rearrange mobilization preparations
B.-War equipments required to be held in peace should preferably be
assembled, ready for issue, in units' charge wherever possible.
C.-Reserves of accommodation stores and clothing should be distributed
about the country ready for issue to the various mobilization centres, places
D. -Stocks for despatch overseas should be suitably packed ready for
despatch.
It is simpler to unpack for periodical inspection and turn-over
than to be faced with a sudden rush packing on mobilization.
E.—A complete plan should exist in peace-time for the placing of orders
for expansion and replenishment of stocks, so that firms know what items they
are required to produce and by what date.
This plan must be constantly
reviewed by an expert staff and revised where necessary.
(Note.—Although the above projects, with the exception of the last, were
approved and in hand when war broke out, sanction for the provision of the
necessary funds and personnel had not been given.)
Vehicles
There were at the outbreak of war two separate sources of supply and
maintenance of Mechanical Transport, viz. Royal Army Service Corps and
Royal Army Ordnance Corps.
" A " Vehicles (tracked and semi-tracked and
other fighting vehicles) were provided and maintained from Royal Army
Ordnance Corps resources.
"B" vehicles (load and passenger carrying and technical wheeled
vehicles) were partly the responsibility of the Royal Army Service Corps and
partly that of the Royal Army Ordnance Corps.
