quickly with the numerous problems which arise, a fully-sta
Mobiliza-
tion Section'
" is required at each command headquarters from the outset.
A nucleus for
section should exist
peace-time
and
maintain
conversance with all phases of mobilization procedure.
(e) Relation between Peace (Lower) Establishments and War (Higher) Establish-
ments
A reason given in Mob. I's Report for the shortages in personnel on general
mobilization was that " peace establishments bore little relation to the war
requirements of the current plan."
Whatever the plan to be implemented,
peace establishments of existing units should, generally speaking, carry more
than the actual war requirements, especially in officers, warrant officers, and
non-commissioned officers. Unfortunately, these are the most extravagant
to maintain, but experience in 1939 showed that heavy demands in these
ranks, firstly for field force units and secondly for new headquarters, training
caused a severe drain on serving personnel and
resulted in considerable disorganization in the staffs of commands at a time
when they were exceptionally busy with mobilization duties.
(f) Units to be raised on mobilization
As regards field force units which do not exist in peace-time, it is most
important that strong cadres be earmarked, e.g. from the Supplementary
Reserve of Officers and other supervisory personnel, who must be trained in
peace-time to fill vacancies in War Establishments on mobilization. This is
specially important in the case of technical arms such as the Royal Army
Service Corps, Royal Army Ordnance Corps, and the Royal Electrical and
Mechanical Engineers.
Similarly, the inclusion of Territorial Army units in the first contingent
of a field force can only be justified if their organization and administration
are on the same level of efficiency and in the same state of readiness as
(g) Co-ordination of action between personnel branches and Mobilization branch
in provision of personnel for mobilizing units
It is important that there should be the closest liaison between personnel
branches and the Mobilization branch to enable clear instructions to be
issued to mobilizing units, and all concerned with their mobilization, in
regard to provision of personnel, medical categories, leave arrangements,
A senior officer of the co-ordinating personnel branch (A.G.I) should
preferably be detailed to deal with immediate mobilization problems in order
to a minimum delays in the issue of Mobilization Urgent
When forces are being prepared for overseas, the various personnel
problems require the full-time attention of one officer in the co-ordinating
branch, who should be changed as seldom as possible.
an advantage for this officer to accompany the Deputy Director of Mobiliza-
tion on his inspection visits to mobilizing units, to clear up outstanding
personnel subjects on the spot.
correspondence and telephoning.
This saved much time and labour in
(h) Embarkation leave
The grant of embarkation leave to units mobilizing for overseas was
essential for morale and family reasons, but it was found to be the greatest
single handicap in the process of mobilization of personnel.
seven days, and later 14 days, were allowed.
At first,
of this leave, after a man knew that he was going overseas,
For security reasons the grant
was risky, and
there was always a chance that the man would absent himself, go sick, or for
some compassionate reason fail to return, necessitating a new posting and
repetition of the leave process.
Moreover, for operational reasons, it was not practicable to send a whole
unit on embarkation leave at once.
the other 50 per cent. mobilized was the usual procedure.
To send 50 per cent. at one time while
This added con-
siderably to the period required for mobilization, with the result that urgent
mobilizations, which often became necessary for operational reasons, suffered
in consequence.
There appear to be two solutions : —
(i) Orders of Battle for units required for overseas to be issued well ahead
of schedule and normal leave to be continued up to the last minute.
(il) Men posted in to mobilizing units to be selected as far as possible from
among those who have recently had leave, in order to avoid further grant
of leave before being despatched overseas, except in very special cases.
(i) Importance of provision of best available personnel for mobilizing units
It was found necessary more than once to impress the importance of
posting always the very best available men upon commanding officers
ordered to supply drafts or individuals to mobilizing units.
Shortage of man-power dictated that every available man should be
utilized, yet the percentage of rejections by receiving units was very high, and
it was impracticable within a limited time (and with the shortage of medical
officers) to arrange for immediate medical boards to be held to resolve each
case in which there was a divergence of opinion between two medical officers.
This resulted in much extra work for all concerned and also considerable
delay in the completion of units.
The lesson derived was that medical categories must be elastic, so as to
be capable of application to the particular duties in which the individual
concerned could be employed, e.g. batmen, drivers, cooks and telephone
orderlies should be classified individually and suitably to their respective tasks.
A common complaint by officers commanding formations ordered to
mobilize was that a large number of officers were changed in their appoint-
ments after receipt of orders to mobilize.
The commander of one division
reported that during the period of his division's mobilization (three weeks),
no less than 27 officers had been taken away for staff or extra-regimental
Such wholesale changes cannot help but disorganize staff work in a
formation which is mobilizing.
