WOLT
Vehicles
"A" Vehicles. —As has been mentioned carlier, the mobilization of
"A" vehicles was an intricate process in view of the member of branches
and vehicle depots
involved, according to the type, armament, waterproofing,
etc., required.
Moreover, certain of these vehicles were of a secret nature,
the existence of which it was very desirable to keep from the enemy's
knowledge.
This we oily pical inhe cano of mothy on pr. The :
The issue
frequently happened that, on the conclusion of a unit's or formation's
mobilization in other respects (particularly in the case of the Royal Armoured
Corps), no final decision as to the type, and sometimes even the scale and
armament, of their "A" vehicles had been reached, or at least made known.
War one re bies Were suben winly relied for ise by the appropriate
under special secret arrangements.
The Mobilization Directorate and the
General Staff were kept informed of progress towards completion.
B.-"B" Vehicles.-This was perhaps the biggest problem in the
mobilization of units of 21 Army Group.
The very large numbers, and the variety of types, of vehicles involved,
together with their spares, tools, first aid outfits, etc., presented a gigantic
task for War Office branches concerned and for Vehicle Issue Depots under the
centralized control of the depot at Chilwell.
The situation was complicated by two factors :—
(i) The difficulty of accommodating, and maintaining in a serviceable
condition, the enormous numbers of vehicles of all types and dimensions
required for issue often at very short notice; and
(ii) The uncertainty of dates, quantities, etc., of arrivals from the United
States (in view of delays in shipping, submarine activities, etc.) in the
form of whole vehicles, tyres and spare parts.
The most outstanding constant deficiency was in jeeps.
By March, 1944,
only 25 per cent. of entitlement were available for issue to the highest priority
By the first week in May, i.e. a month before "D" day, heavy
consignments were arriving from America and units were beginning to
collect their vehicles in large numbers.
Other serious shortages were
3.-tor, scores and breakdown lorries, machinery lorries, t5-cwt, personnel and
These late issues resulted also in considerable delays in the supply of
first-aid M.T. outfits, which are dependent for their composition largely on
the nature of the vehicles being provided.
especially Sherman tanks, and to " B" vehicles.
This applied both to "A" vehicles,
The seriousness of these
delayed issues (and the lesson to be learned) is in their effect upon the
operational training of the units concerned.
veequently commanding officers reported that many of their drivers hac
unit was due to be equipped.
lever seen, or at all events handled, several of the vehicles with which the
This situation was most serious in the case of units and formations ordered
to mobilize in the later stages, whose vehicles were only received very shortly,
in some cases only a few days, before "D" day.
to thing he traction rom the not nho phy a chined!.
Apart from the dislocation within formations and units by the receipt of so
large a number of new vehicles very shortly before "D" day, the loss to
units of these vehicles during their previous training was serious.
