of stores nomenclature) would have been quite beyond the capacity of the
administrative staff of Headquarters, 21 Army Group,
in addition to their
duties directly connected with the concentration of the Force.
(f) Importance of reliable system of reporting mobilization deficiencies
It is important that whatever system is adopted for bringing to notice units'
deficiencies during mobilization, it should be reliable and accepted by all
concerned.
Although no system could be infallible and certain units,
through inefficiency or carelessness, may demand items already in their
possession, a system which ensures that reports
are made through the
Assistant Director of Ordnance
Services responsible for the administration
of the unit's equipment, should be acceptable as trustworthy.
Under the
system worked to in the preparation of 21 Army Group, these reports were
passed through the command headquarters concerned where they were
subjected to further scrutiny by " A
Branch and the deputy director of
ordnance services in order to ensure the maximum reliability.
(a) Need for concentration of effort, resources, personnel, etc., in repair
The system in the British Expeditionary Force in France, by which separate
maintenance and repair organizations existed in the Royal Army Service
Corps and Royal Army Ordnance Corps, was found to be wasteful in men
In consequence it was decided that these separate organizations, together
organization of Royal Engineer Services, should be co-
ordinated under one control at G.H.Q., and that an additional Deputy
Quartermaster-General at G.H.Q. should be appointed with the direct
responsibility for co-ordinating all repairs and stores-holding organizations
in that Force on behalf of the Quartermaster-General.
considerable saving both in repair and maintenance tools and spares and also
in skilled tradesmen, of which there was an acute shortage.
(b) Training of unit drivers
The importance of the earliest possible issue of a training scale of serviceable
vehicles to units, especially newly-forming units, was emphasized.
Many drivers posted in could only drive one type of vehicle and few could
The period of mobilization was very short in most
cases and no time could be lost in the training of drivers.
(c) Importance of an efficient system of vehicle maintenance within units
The need for a keen and experienced mechanical transport officer in units
Units already in existence on receipt of orders to mobilize
were required to prepare a detailed return of vehicles on charge, showing
type, make, number, and classification.
It was found that where there was a
good mechanical transport officer and an efficient system of maintenance in
a unit the replacement of unserviceable vehicles was comparatively simple.
In other cases units which had failed to maintain their vehicles properly,
were, perhaps naturally, content to classify them as unserviceable in the
hope of obtaining 100 per cent. replacement.
WORTT
As such classification was often not justified by age, mileage, or condition,
this led to
mechanical transport
representatives
and Royal
Electrical and Mechanical Engineers officers, and to a considerable waste of
valuable mobilization time.
The responsibility of commanding officers for the care and maintenance of
vehicles on their charge was frequently stressed; nevertheless, on the whole
the results were far from satisfactory.
It was found to be in the best interests of the unit for a keen and suitable
officer to be relieved of other duties wherever possible to enable him to
devote his whole time to the care and maintenance of vehicles.
This greatly
facilitated the unit's mobilization and added to the fighting efficiency of the
(d) Spares, tools, etc., to accompany vehicles with complete lists for unit checking
Difficulties were experienced by mobilizing units in checking details of
spares and tools, especially in the case of machinery lorries.
The technical
equipment of these vehicles was considerable, and many items were essential
for the full operational efficiency of the workshop.
In many cases vehicles were issued without their A, B, C and D lists of tools
and spares, and checking of equipment became extremely difficult until their
receipt.
It was then often too late to rectify errors and omissions.
It was found to be of the greatest importance that complete lists of equip-
ment should accompany vehicles at the time of issue to mobilizing units, so
that deficiencies could be known at once and action taken to complete them
through command headquarters and War Office channels.
Where the number of vehicles to be issued to a unit was large, it was found
most satisfactory to despatch a complete convoy from the issuing depot to
units, or alternatively to send a party of
unit drivers under the mechanical
transport officer to the issuing depot.
This greatly simplified the take-over
and enabled all deficiencies to be checked at the time of issue.
(e) Need for one controlling authority for issue of mobilization orders to avoid
There were instances of variations to Mobilization Urgent Memoranda
being issued by vehicle branches direct to units, Assistant Directors of
Ordnance Services, Vehicle Repair Depots, etc., instead of through the
Mobilization branch (A.G. 5 (Mob.) ).
These variations were considered
necessary at times owing to shortages of the correct type.
resulted in a certain amount of confusion as units found themselves receiving
different instructions from a variety of sources.
This was detrimental to the smooth working of mobilization, and orders
had to be issued to ensure that all instructions affecting the mobilization
of copinat case of tered by rehicle letion branch, except in certain
(f) Issue of "A" vehicles special measures required
The mobilization of "A" vehicles was an intricate process in view of the
numing i it water rod vehicle depo arcove, can i to the tipe,
were of a secret nature, the existence of which it was very desirable to keep
