to oficers commanding supplying units that personnel despatched to mobiliz-
ing units must be fully equipped with all available articles of equipment and
clothing.
D.-Officers : A common complaint by officers commanding formations
ordered to mobilize was that a large number of officers were changed in
their appointments after receipt of orders to mobilize.
The commander of
one division reported that during the period of his division's mobilization
no less than 27 officers had been taken away.
Such wholesale changes cannot but disorganize staff work in a formation
which is mobilizing.
Similarly, in units it became almost a commonplace to find a new com-
mander posted to a unit a few days before the completion of its mobilization.
This was found to be a disadvantage both from the point of the unit and that
of the commanding officer, who knew none of his officers or men and who was
usually required, soon after completion of mobilization, to take his unit on
intensive training.
Where it is known that a commanding officer is not up to the standard
required to lead a unit on service (or a staff officer is not suited to his appoint-
ment) the disadvantages referred to above could be overcome by his replace-
ment before, not after, receipt of orders to mobilize.
The same applies in
cases where it is desired to promote an officer.
E.-Owing to the large number of personnel problems arising in con-
nection with mobilization, it was found to be an advantage for an officer of
the co-ordinating personnel branch (A.G.I) to accompany the Deputy
Director of Mobilization on his inspection visits to mobilizing units, in order
to clear up outstanding points on the spot.
This saved much time and
labour in correspondence and telephoning.
A.—This phase was a very difficult one from the ordnance aspect.
Reorganization of the Army,
changes in " Orders of Battle"
and War
Establishments, advertised sailings, priorities, overseas scales and patterns
of clothing, etc., all threw considerable extra work upon ordnance branches
The immediate effect of some of these changes (especially War Establish-
ments) was the need for a new or revised Army Form Grog8, without which
it was impracticable to mobilize the unit affected. Delays in printing added
further to the difficulties of getting these new equipment scales issued rapidy
to units, ordnance depots and others concerned with units mobilizing.
the case of ordnance depots, they were faced with a heavy and continuous
load of bulk shipments and reserves, in addition to their mobilization pro-
The changes referred to above had the effect of constantly
changing priorities, in some cases when the existing priorities were half
This is bound to cause some temporary disorganization and
delay in a process working at full pressure, and so far as is practicable such
changes of Orders of Battle, War Establishments, etc., should be reduced to
B.- In spite of the difficulties referred to above, no serious breakdown in
the organization or issue of equipment to First Army occurred.
28
However, in view of the exceedingly heavy burden imposed upon Central
Depots during this phase, further consideration was given to the proposal to
transfer some of their duties to Command Ordnance Depots, in order to level
up the load all round.
In November, 1942, orders were therefore issued (D.D.C.S./ 1911/67 of
3ọth November, 1942) by which the responsibility for the equipment of units
with items of Vote 7 and 8 stores became that of the Deputy Director of
Ordnance Services Command through Command Ordnance Depots.
These depots were to hold four months' stocks of maintenance stores from
which they would make issues to mobilizing units, replenishing as early as
possible from Central Depots.
There were points both in favour of and against this system (which have
already been touched on, see page 16, Chapter VI). Its advantages were : —
Dite increased the series in stast taken in mobiliation by Deputy
(i) Distances from units to Command Depots were often considerably less
than to Central Depots, so that time was saved in the issue of Vote 7 and 8
As against these advantages, the following difficulties were encountered :-
(iii) Where items were in short supply (or for some other reason stocks at
Command Depots had not been replenished) the despatch of Unit Deficiency
Lists to Command Depots resulted in a delay
of several days in their
reaching Central Ordnance Depots.
(iv) In cases where the period of mobilization was short, it was impracticable
command headquarters, etc., to follow the history of
items of Vote 7 and 8 stores which were not available at Command Depots and
had to be extracted on Residual Deficiency Lists to Central Depots.
As the latter had to issue their S.I.B. (Inability Lists) four days before
mobilization (D—4), it was found necessary for " Inabilities" from Command
Depots to be received at Central Depots by D-9 or D-8.
always practicable, with the result that " Supplementary" S.I.B. lists had
It can be said that, assuming that there was no critical shortage of any
Vote 7 and 8 stores and that the Deputy Directors of Ordnance Services of
commands acted with speed and foresight in replenishing their stocks, this
considerable periods when
shortages of stocks proved a serious obstacle to its smooth working.
C.-A matter of some importance as affecting the speed with which stores
could reach units was that of the method of their despatch from depots and
notification of their arrival at destination.
Owing to the shortage of vehicles, drivers, petrol, etc., the Quartermaster-
General was unwilling of yeprove the espatch by road of all stores to
In exceptional cases this had to be done, but normally
they were despatched wherever possible by fast passenger train.
The responsibility of the method and route of despatch of these stores was
that of the railway traffic officet at the despatching station.
