WO277/2
78
1 ф
G.— In the case of foreign units, full instructions are necessary to guide the
commandant of the mobilization centre in regard to disciplinary powers,
financial implications (e.g. advances, transport, barrack damages, N.A.A.F.I
rebate, etc.), and similar matters.
H.—During lulls in mobilization, the commandant and staffs of these
centres can be usefully employed (with the concurrence of the Director of
Mobilization) as advisers to command headquarters and to assist mobilizing
units or formations in the neighbourhood.
Their expert knowledge and
experience should be fully exploited in this way.
CHAPTER VIII-ROYAL ARMY ORDNANCE DEPOTS
[Fuller details of the organization and functions of these depots will be found
in the Royal Army Ordnance Corps history, 1939-1945.]
Ordnance Depots may be classified under two heads :-
(a) Central Ordnance Depots under the general administration of the
Quartermaster-General.
(b) Command Ordnance Depots each under the General Administration
of the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief of the Command in which
located.
Before the war there were five Central Ordnance Depots, each dealing with
a particular range of army equipment as under :—
Woolwich
Warlike stores, e.g. artillery, engineer, signals,
Weedon
Small arms, machine guns, etc.
Didcot
General stores.
Chilwell
Branston
Mechanical transport, spare parts, etc.
Clothing.
Approval had been given for the construction of a new Warlike Stores Depot
at Donnington (Salop) and for new M.T. Depots at Derby and Old Dalby,
but work had not begun on any of these at the outbreak of war.
The immediate problem on mobilization, therefore, became that of
storage accommodation for the very great volume of equipment, vehicles,
etc., which began at once to flow from the factories to the Army.
Requisi-
tioning of buildings and premises was resorted to on a large scale (approxi-
mately 14,000,000 square feet), but even so a very large proportion of storage
accommodation had to be found in the open, until new depots could be built
(e.g. Donnington and Bicester) or buildings leased as in the case of Greenford.
An almost equally urgent problem was that of personnel. The staffs of
these depots in peace-time were largely civilian with a number of technical
Many of the civilians were reservists
and personed in certain the time that the vast expansion of the depots was
beginning to take effect.
The result was that new personnel (civilian,
rida in That a Service, coe were drafted in the epe disposa thimical
period in their activities
knowledge required for their duties, it was some time before they were
proficient.
The employment of large numbers of untrained personnel in
these depots at this stage was not calculated to produce the best results, and
this contingency was possibly not foreseen when the conditions of the Reserve
were drawn up.
On the other hand, additional trained personnel to supple-
ment the peace-time staff of ordnance depots were not forthcoming.
The function of the Central Ordnance Depots was to act as the wholesale
storekeepers and distributors of practically the whole range of army equipment,
not only to the Army at home, but also to all overseas garrisons and theatres
of war as they developed.
The only items outside this range were ammunition, which was dealt with
separately by central ammunition depots under Royal Army Ordnance Corps
24
