CHAPTER XIV-MOBILIZATION OF 21 ARMY GROUP-
FEBRUARY, 1943-JUNE, 1944
The transition stage described in the previous chapter became merged
gradually and smoothly into the next major operational phase.
as indicated in Chapter XII, the object had been to build up an Expeditionary
Force capable of carrying out the tasks to be allotted to it by the Planning
As the number of supplementary units for North Africa lessened,
so the reserve of units for other subsequent operations increased, and there
flow of units coming forward for mobilization.
During November, 1942, when the forces for North Africa were despatched
United Kingdom, 138 units were mobilized, of which 120 were
supplementary units for that operation.
In April, 1943, out of 273 units
were destined for North Africa, and in July, out of 471 units
only 24 were bound for that theatre.
reserves of units required for ultimate use in the European
theatre were built up without any specific operation or theatre of war being
Differences of detail, e.g. clothing and weapons, were adjusted
in the mobilization orders as decisions in each case were reached.
Planning and Organization
The comprehensive Memorandum of Instructions issued by the Director
of Staff Duties in June, 1942, to govern the procedure to be adopted in the
mobilization and preparation of units for North Africa was issued in its
revised and up-to-date form in February, 1943.
The importance of strict adherence to a co-ordinated procedure and also
of clear nomination and delegation of responsibility for the various tasks
involved in the preparation of large forces for war within a limited period
had been learned in the early stages of the war.
With each phase this
importance became more and more clearly emphasized.
The instructions issued in February, 1943,
were further revised and
amplified in August, 1943 (20/Gen./602o (S.D.5) of 18th August, 1943). These
left no doubt as to the respective duties of the various authorities and branches
at the War Office concerned with the planning and preparation of an overseas
They also indicated the part to be played by G.H.Q., Home
Forces, Force Headquarters and Headquarters Commands.
A directive was also issued (H.F./4370/14/24G (S.D.) of 28th July, 1943) by
G.H.Q., Home Forces, in July, 1943, defining the relative responsibilities of
G.H.O., Home Forces and Headquarters, z1 Army Group, which became
separate entities with effect from ist July, 1943•
Responsibility for mobilization was to remain in the hands of the War Ofice,
because it would have been impracticable at that stage, owing to shortages,
to delegate the responsibility for the provision sta personnel, equipment,
vehicles, etc., to any authority outside.
WO217
The maintenance up to scale of units, after their mobilization date, was
discussed at a meeting in July, 1943 (S.D.4/D/5B/43), and it was decided that
in this respect also the War Office must retain control until such time as
Army
Group Headquarters was able to maintain its own G.H.Q.,
2nd Echelon, and to demand and distribute stores, vehicles, etc., as in the
case of an overseas force headquarters.
Subsequently it was decided that
units would pass to the control of Headquarters, 21 Army Group, seven days
after the date fixed for completion of their mobilization.
Outstanding
deficiencies in equipment and vehicles remained the responsibility of the
War Office.
The production of a firm " Order of Battle" for a force of this magnitude
comprising some 5,000 units of all types and sizes was a difficult process, and
was built up gradually, as new decisions were reached by the Planning Staff.
An operation known as " OVERLORD" designed for the invasion of
Europe had been under consideration by the Inter-Services Planning Staff
and G.H.Q., Home Forces, for some time, and S.D. branches produced
phased programmes of units " next for mobilization"
It was not until January, 1944, that the Force Commander
(General, afterwards Field-Marshal, Montgomery) was appointed.
During this period of planning there were frequent changes in the com-
position of the Force, in the organization of units and also in many important
War Establishments.
Most of these changes were probably
necessary as a result of lessons learnt from operations.
changes from the mobilization aspect was that in some cases units which
had already been mobilized were no longer required, or were required on
different Establishments, or were differently organized in regard to sub-units,
This was especially the case with units brought home from the
As a result some mobilized units had to be re-mobilized, while others had
to be re-organized and re-mobilized, and in a few cases disbanded.
A number
of new units and formations were also inserted from time to time.
In the Mobilization branch, such changes meant merely additional work,
as its organization was sufficiently flexible to allow rapid change-over from
one type of mobilization to another, irrespective of theatre, etc.
There was,
however, a limit to the number of Urgent Memoranda that could be issued
in one day by the Mobilization staff, and these extra tasks automatically
delayed output of other essential work.
At ordnance
depots, and to a
certain extent at vehicle groups, these changes had a disorganizing effect,
since the machinery was more complicated and commitments other than
mobilization requirements more being handled at the same time, e.g. bulk
issues and reserves.
To stop the machine or throw it into reverse because of
dislocation.
sudden and important shanges of priority inevitably led to delay and
No American ór Canadian formations or units were mobilized by the
War Office for 21 Army Group, but orders for the mobilization of one
Polish Armoread Divicion two French Paratroop Battalions, and one Belgian
Independent Paratroop Company were issued by the Mobilization branch.
