CHAPTER XV-MOBILIZATION OF UNITS FOR
EAST ASIA COMMAND, 1944-1945
General Planning
In July, 1944, one month after "D" day in Europe, the Director of
directive for the preparation and despatch to the
Far East, after the conclusion of the war with Germany, of a force, comprising
in its first echelon five light divisions, one airborne division, three corps
headquarters with corps troops and certain army troops, including two tank
brigades, one special tank brigade and six beach groups.
were to be a number of lines of communications and base units.
The forecast list of units was intended for planning purposes only and the
War Establishments quoted against each unit could not be considered firm.
The estimated requirement for the first echelon was approximately 319,000.
This force was temporarily designated Force 137.
followed a period of intensive planning, mainly by cable and by
officers sent by air between the War Office and G.H.Q.,
India, which was being established as a base for further operations in eastern
In September a number of base units were mobilized for India,
including Headquarters Commander, Royal Engineers, Works Companies,
and Electrical and Mechanical Companies and also some base general hospitals
and a base workshop.
In the existing state of man-power, great difficulty
was experienced in providing the necessary fit personnel for these units, in
addition to the requirements of the European theatre.
The chief cause of delay was the question of firm War Establishments and
War Equipment Tables.
It was desirable that, as many of the units would
have to return to the United Kingdom from Europe for re-mobilization,
medical examination, clothing, etc., they should as far as possible be retained
on the existing establishments and scales.
As regards vehicles, owing to
shortage of shipping it was desirable to start building up reserves in India as
shipping became available. There were, however, two factors to be con-
sidered, (a) the desirability of maintaining homogeneity as regards type,
make, etc., and (b) the general shortage of all types of vehicles.
It was finally agreed in September that, from early in October, 1944, until
early January, 1945, three motor transport convoys a month (approximately
50 ships) should sail from the United Kingdom.
This estimate was fixed on
the basis that 18 ships a convoy was the maximum that India could handle.
In October the title Force 137 was abolished and Force 143 was substituted.
The Director of Staff Duties held a meeting at the end of October, which
was attended by representatives of Itth Army Group,
Command, G.H.Q., India, and the India Office.
Target date for planning
priprises was fixed at ist December, 1945, but a phased programme of
Factors affecting the time required to get ed its ready after their retum
rom Europe were (a) the re-sorting of personnel, which it was considered
WO2T7
would affect roughly two-thirds of the men; (b) leave for 28 days, which
would have to be granted to all men nominated to proceed to India;
(e) training of new personnel (which might alternatively be arranged for after
arrival in India).
Six months was estimated as the period of training required
after completion of re-sorting and re-mobilization.
As regards equipment, it was considered essential that units from Europe
should come to the United Kingdom for re-mobilization, but it would be
an advantage if all special items, e.g. jungle equipment, and also vehicles,
could be shipped in bulk direct to India.
The total force planned for despatch from Europe via the United Kingdom
to India was estimated at-
Base troops
One Airborne Division
Four Infantry Divisions
One S.S. Brigade
One Tank Brigade
15,000
20,000
т 60.000
2,000
5,000
02.000
In addition, it was proposed that a corps of Dutch troops should be sent
to the Far East.
G.H.Q., India, wished the earlier formations to arrive in India five months
before the target date,
Ist December, 1945.
This would, however, depend
upon the situation in Europe.
The question of accelerating movement by air transport and the assumption
that the overland route via Marseilles could be made available were also
Progress (October, 1944-April, 1945)
During the last three months of 1944,
despatched to India for South East Asia Command. These included two
Field Regiments, Royal Artillery; two Electrical and Mechanical Companies;
two Road Construction Companies and a
Tunnelling Company, Royal
Engineers; an Air Formation Signals and other Signal units; two General
Hospitals and a Base Supply Depot.
The difficulties of mobilizing these
units without interfering with the
provision of personnel, equipment or vehicles for other theatres, and in
view of existing shortages, are self-evident.
urgently required in India in most cases, so that the time allowed for mobiliza-
tion was often very short, e.g. 12-13 days.
had to be newly formed, personnel were posted in from wherever they were
available; equipment was assembled in ordnance charge and vehicles were
The speed with which such units could be prepared was dependent largely
upon the speed and efficiency anthe postings of personnel and the amount of
embarkation leave to be seen the pen where original postings required no
subsequent change and where embarkation leave was curtailed to seven days,
the period allowed for mobilization was considered to be short.
