LESSONS
(A) It was found impracticable for the Mobilization branch to work under
the control of a Director who was not in close touch with General Staff
planning, and could not have, and maintain, up-to-date knowledge of
mobilization problems, procedure, etc., as affecting the preparation of units
for war within a given time.
(B) The work of mobilizing units in war demands the attention of a whole-
time Director of Mobilization, who should be charged with the responsibility
for the co-ordination of all detailed mobilization planning, as in peace-time
planning.
(C) It was found essential for the Director of Mobilization and his branches
to be located in the same building as, and work in the closest touch with, the
Director of Staff Duties and his branches.
It would seem to be an advantage
if this close contact could exist in peace-time to avoid dislocation or delays
in the event of general, or even partial, mobilization.
(D) Close daily contact was also found necessary between officers of the
Mobilization Directorate and those of the Personnel and Equipment branches,
none of which were located in the main War Office building.
Considerable delay in the issue of Mobilization orders was caused in
telephoning (especially when the personnel branches were at Cheltenham)
or in sending special despatch riders to collect the necessary data which
usually varied with each mobilization order.
WO277/26
WO 217/02
CHAPTER V-OTHER WAR OFFICE BRANCHES
DIRECTLY CONCERNED
General Staff
For all practical purposes, the Director of Staff Duties controlled mobiliza-
tion during the war.
It was at his request through the relevant S.D. branch
that the Mobilization branch took action, and the establishment, scales of
equipment, clothing, vehicles, etc., at which units were ordered to mobilize,
dates of readiness, etc., were matters for his final decision.
The co-ordination of policy or action of General Staff sponsor branches
was also effected through S.D. branches, direct action between the former and
A. G.5 (Mob.) being taken only in matters of detail.
Later in the war, direct contact had to be made with the Director of Special
Weapons and Vehicles on matters of his concern affecting mobilization.
Adjutant-General
mol pens unil of this epe con armed in the pervision of perinatel or
Co-ordination of
policy and action was effected through D.D. of O. (C) or A.G.1 (B). Medical
branches were also consulted in regard to the mobilization of Royal Army
Medical Corps and Dental units, and the Director of Auxiliary Territorial
Service in the case of Auxiliary Territorial Service units.
The Director of Personal Services and his branches were mainly concerned
with the strict compliance of orders regarding the grant of embarkation leave
to personnel of mobilizing units.
Quartermaster-General
A large proportion of the Quartermaster-General's Department was
involved in the process of mobilization in some form, e. g.-
D. Movements
Moves to and from place of mobilization,
baggage scales.
D. Quartering
Selection or approval of places of mobiliza-
D.S. and T.
Provision of Royal Army Service Corps
transport, Royal Army Service Corps units.
D.W.S. (COS) .. Vote 9
and "B" vehicles ;
Royal Army Ordnance Corps units.
Vote 7 and 8 stores, including clothing.
D.M.E. (from 1942) Electrical and mechanical matters (except
Royal Engineers and Royal Army Service
Corps), Royal
Electrical and Mechanical
Engineers units.
D. Labour
Pioneer units.
Co-ordination of instructions for inclusion in Mobilization Orders affecting
different types of equipment and various Q. branches was ensured through
Q.(O.S.)I (afterwards called Q.(A.E.)i and later Ord. z), who drafted the
