(a) Avoidance of non-essential changes of plan
To bring a modern army into a state of preparedness for war entails a
very complicated process, and a long time is needed to make any material
adjustment to this process.
Plans upon which mobilization calculations and
based should therefore only be changed if absolutely
essential.
Such essential changes should be capable of being implemented
with the minimum of dislocation of existing plans.
should be avoided.
Drastic changes of plans
(b) Prepared plan must be worked to
Success or failure of a mobilization plan should not be dependent upon
the individual efforts of staff and units.
Smooth working to a definite plan
is the only safe assurance of success in mobilization, for the latter inevitably
demands speedy action.
Procedure
(a) Importance of a co-ordinated machinery
Probably the most important lesson learnt as regards procedure was the
paramount importance to the success of any plan for mobilization of a force
of control and co-ordination of the large number of branches and individuals
concerned.
Separate individual action by any one branch, or failure by a branch to
contribute towards the combined effort, may confuse the issue and derange
the mobilization machinery.
It was constantly proved that where mobilization arrangements were worked
to an agreed procedure by all concerned, the machinery ran smoothly.
almost every case where there were difficulties or deficiencies (except where
time was insufficient) these were owing to failure on the part of some
individual or department to work to the agreed procedure.
(b) Need for early issue of a furm " Order of Battle"
final the moe ration of fore for ereas of ations oh harie that
less the likelihood of the delays and complications involved in changes.
(c) Need for early issue of firm War Establishments and War Equipment Table
The importance of deciding upon the War Establishment for each unit at
the earliest moment and of adhering to these in all main essentials was very
It was not sufficiently realized at first by senior commanders (or staff
officers) when demanding that units should be prepared on certain new
establishments, that considerable time and labour were necessary to imple-
ment any new War Establishment which entailed a major reorganization,
change of weapons, etc.
The War Equipment Table (Army Form Grogs)
had to be prepared and issued before any action towards mobilization could
be taken by the ordnance department.
The War Office Branch (Q.(A.E.)r)
WO277/=9
dealing with the preparation of these Equipment Scales was very much
overloaded, and all major changes of establishment, priority, etc., added
during the process of preparation of a new force requires careful consideration.
an orangently, Lads in de a on to go lize it on io
attempt to change these immediately before its mobilization.
Adjustments in organization, etc., can then be made on arrival at its
destination, weapons, stores, etc., being shipped out in bulk for that purpose.
Hasty mobilizations on new War Establishments with a hurriedly prepared
Army Form G1og8, which had never been seen or operated by Central
Ordnance Depots, usually ended in confusion and the despatch of the unit
only semi-organized and deficient of important stores.
Similarly, major changes during the actual period of mobilization could only
be justified in cases of extreme urgency.
such cases to complete mobilization on existing scales and to make the
necessary adjustments later, the date for completion of mobilization being
postponed for this purpose.
men, sience throughout the wa, should that the guerip of ta it a
After a decision had been reached in regard to these,
no change should be authorized, except in very rare cases and for very special
(d) Importance of obtaining " present location" of units from most reliable
source before mobilization
To enable mobilization orders to reach units without delay the actual
" present location" of a unit must be known beyond doubt.
Corroboration
from the local command in each case is a necessary precaution.
Failure by
sponsor branches to take this precaution resulted in numerous amendments
having to be made in the Mobilization Urgent Memoranda, with consequent
avoidable delay in these orders reaching units, and reduction of time available
for mobilization.
(e) War Office control of units until mobilization is complete
The decision proved to be sound whereby the War Office control of units
was retained for purposes of completion of mobilization and for some time
afterwards, i.e. until such time as a Force Headquarters became firmly
established and assumed the status of an organized operational and administra-
tive headquarters.
Losses of equipment, vehicles, etc., on training exercises are inevitable.
Until such time as a Force Headquarters was able to replace these from its
own reserves and to replenish in bulk, mobilized units had to be brought and
maintained up to scale through the normal channels of priority demands by
Assistant Directors of Ordnance Services on Command and Central Depots.
The Field Service system of issue of stores and equipment working on
deficiency lists based upon 100 per cent. mobilization scale (and the knowledge
85
