Medical categories should be broadly defined to allow a certain latitude of
view between various medical officers without resulting in total rejection.
Lower categories should be allowed for less arduous or less dangerous duties.
D.—The formation of new units required very careful thought, especially
when, as at this stage, units were formed immediately or very shortly before
mobilization.
They
should be formed at their place of mobilization and a cadre of
essential personnel, e.g. commanding officer, adjutant.
quartermaster or
company quartermaster-serjeant, senior clerks, typists and mess personnel,
must arrive before the bulk of the personnel are posted.
Typewriters, office
stationery, essential forms and a few vehicles are required at once before any
active organization can take place.
This requires
i close liaison before S.D. branches, the personnel branch
concerned and the Mobilization branch.
Note.—The detailed procedure given below is confined only to that which
relates to the working of the Mobilization branch.
(a) As soon as the results of a Director of Staff Duties' meeting were made
known, or other notification received, in regard to the mobilization of units,
the provision of the authorized A.F. G1og8 scales of equipment for the various
units was planned by W.S. and O.S. branches.
—There was frequently some delay in the preparation of the
A.F. G10g8 scales, which in many cases had to be " special" owing to lack
of essential items required for normal scales.
(b) On receipt of the mobilization pro formas from S.D. branches,
A.G.5 (Mob.) passed these with draft Mobilization Urgent Memorandum to
the co-ordinating equipment branch (Q.(A.E.)I, afterwards Ord.z), who
drafted the appropriate paragraphs for inclusion in the Mobilization Urgent
Memorandum.
(c) The normal procedure was :—
(i) Units already in existence submitted deficiency lists to the Assistant
Director of Ordnance Services concerned, who, after check as to correct-
ness and entitlement, passed them to Command Ordnance Depots for
issue of available articles (non-controlled) and to Central Ordnance
Depots for issue of the remainder of non-controlled stores and all
controlled stores.
(ii) In the case of newly-formed units, personal arms and equipment were
issued on the basis of the War Establishment, and Army Form Gog8
equipment was assembled at one of the Central Ordnance Depots and
issued to the unit in bulk.
(i) In both cases units submitted progress reports, through the Assistant
Director of Ordnance Services concerned, to headquarters, command in
which located, three days before the da, to ordered for completion of
mobilization and again on the completion date, showing outstanding
their completion.
major deficiencies and action taken, or information available, towards
//
WO217
(iv) These progress reports were received and scrutinized in A.G.5 (Mob.)
and relevant extracts passed to War Office Branches concerned, by
telephone in urgent cases, otherwise in writing, to hasten issues.
(v) Where units were still incomplete after the mobilization date, further
progress reports were submitted until the maximum degree of com-
pletion was reached.
LESSONS (Equipment)
A.—At this stage the supply of equipment fell far short of demands.
needs of Home Defence (including reserves) could not be disregarded, and
this resulted in many non-availabilities for mobilizing units, especially in
regard to technical stores, wireless sets, etc.
To enable the Director of Staff Duties to decide whether or not a unit was
operationally fit for service overseas, a full statement of major deficiencies,
in respect of units comprising each convoy, was laid before him by
Deputy Director of Mobilization.
Any unit considered unfit was deleted
from the list and held back for the next convoy.
In view of the speed with which certain of the convoys were prepared, it
was found essential for lists of all " inabilities" to be submitted by Central
Ordnance Depots to the War Office, so that, where necessary, orders could be
issued for essential items to follow (when they became available) by succeeding
These lists came to be known as " S.I.B." lists (Special Issue
B.—Among the most serious shortages at this stage were instruments of
various kinds, e.g. binoculars, compasses, rangefinders, and watches.
Unofficial efforts were made through the Press to obtain these items from
But a very large number were required for Home
Defence, and units going averseas still showed considerable deficiencies of
The lesson is that arrangements should exist in peace-time by which, on
mobilization, the entire stocks and output of manufacturers of these instru-
ments should be reserved for issue only to Service departments.
C.—The effect upon the work at ordnance depots of inadequate provision
in peace-time for expansion of personnel in war was seriously felt also at
this stage.
Central depots were heavily overstrained and measures had to
be initiated for lightening their load and distributing some of it to Command
Depots.
Vehicles
The detailed procedure for the issue of vehicles during this period varied
with the unit or type of unit to be mobilized.
The shortage of vehicles made
it necessary for special scales to be prepared in the majority of cases.
shop and stores lorries were particularly short.
The threat of invasion of
Britain gave high priority to the requirements of G.H.Q., Home Forces.
This reduced considerably the vehicle resources available for issue to units
mobilizine for overseas
The result was often considerable delay in the issue of instructions for the
collection of vehicles, which also affected the readiness of units, since unit
