concerned.
In the majority of cases
This was frequently stressed to headquarters of commands.
Branch staffs were overloaded with other
matters, e.g. discipline, leave, welfare, pay, etc., and this was invariably
iven as the reason for these officers being unable to get out of their offices to
visit and assist units undergoing mobilization.
This was a serious handicap
both to the units themselves and to the Mobilization Directorate of the
War Office, which frequently found considerable difficulty in obtaining
to date information in regard to the state of mobilization of units, cause of
delays in delivery of stores, vehicles, etc.
As the posting of personnel was controlled by the War Office (M.S.,
personnel branches, etc.), headquarters of commands were more or less
post offices in regard to personnel deficiencies.
They were, however, capable of giving considerable assistance in matters
affecting personnel posted to mobilizing units, e.g. in cases of obviously
unsuitable and unfit postings or where drafts or individuals arrived from
depots or other units improperly or inadequately equipped. Immediate action
was necessary in such cases, and the headquarters concerned, in which the
mobilizing unit was located, was the only local authority capable of taking
such matters up urgently with other commands concerned, in order to
rectify irregularities or omissions before the mobilization date.
The War Office could only take subsequent action by calling for reports
from commands concerned with a view to avoiding similar difficulties in future.
The methods by which commands obtained the necessary information in
order to provide the War Office with Progress Reports required by " Unit
Mobilization (War) " were purposely left to the discretion of headquarters of
commands, as conditions in the various commands differed considerably.
Efforts were made to standardize pro formas, etc., but it was found that the
views of commands could not be assimilated.
(A sample pro forma is given
at Appendix " B.")
In the early post-Dunkirk period, owing to the extreme shortage, nearly
Later, as stocks became more plentiful, it became possible to decentralize
articles of Vote 8 stores and clothing from Central Ordnance Depots to
Command Depots, which were then in a position to supply mobilizing units
more rapidly with available items.
Owing to the large number of units
mobilizing, it became necessary for Command Depots to replenish their
stocks immediately, in order to meet mobilization demands.
Vehicles
Issues of vehicles to mobilizing units were controlled by the responsible
War Office branches, according to the type of vehicle concerned.
The responsibility of commands was confined to the carrying out of
inspections of any vehicles already in unit charge, in order to classify them
for purposes of retention or replacement, chase, assfied as i or Il being
Wo 277/26
WO277/77
considered fit for retention.
It was also the duty of headquarters of com-
mands to investigate immediately cases of receipt of vehicles, classified by
Vehicle Depots at the time of issue
as Class I or II, but which unit
representatives considered unserviceable for any good reason.
LESSONS
General Headquarters, Home Forces
(i) So long as any threat of invasion existed, an adequate decentralization of
control of units and movement of personnel, equipment, vehicles, etc., to the
Commander-in-Chief, General Headquarters, Home Forces, was found
essential, in the same way as to a field force commander.
If the preparation and mobilization of expeditionary forces are to continue
at the same time, this control should be re-called to the War Office at the
earliest safe opportunity.
It was found that unless this was done, the state
and whereabouts of personnel, equipment, vehicles, etc., were apt to get out
of hand and take a long time to re-establish.
(ii) There must be constant and close contact between G.H.Q., Home
Forces, and the Mobilization Branch at the War Office to ensure that units
still under G.H. Q.'s control which are being mobilized are not moved, except
for reasons of emergency, from their place of mobilization for more than a
short period (48 hours), and that personnel, equipment, etc., despatched to
the unit for mobilization are not misused for other duties.
In the event of any unit having to be moved from its mobilization station
for operational reasons, it was found essential for a small administrative
headquarters to remain behind to receive personnel, equipment, etc., arriving
for mobilization during the unit's absence.
B.—Headquarters of Commands
(i) The responsibility of headquarters of commands to the War Office for
the supervision of the mobilization of units located within their geographical
areas is an essential and important link in the chain of mobilization procedure.
district of did that the defeation to day lie with the Ces: bendy cours
only be justified in the event of extreme urgency or where considerable
technical details, stores, etc., directly controlled by the War Office, were
involved in a mobilization.
(ii) To enable headquarters of commands to carry out this supervision
efficiently and urgently, an adequate staff should be provided for this purpose.
This is a difficult problem, since at certain periods as many as 50-60 units
may be mobilizing in the same command at one time,
Scottish Command in 1942, while at other times there may be comparatively
few units being mobilized in that command.
Nevertheless, the essence of mobilization is urgency, and unless a unit
receives its personnel, equipment, etc., by the date of mobilization, which in
most cases is swiftly followed by the move of the unit, it will probably not
