Army Form G1098 (War Equipment Table).—A form showing the whole
of the equipment, with which a unit is intended to take the field, based on the
appropriate War Establishment.
Vote 7 Stores. —Clothing and necessaries.
Vote 8 Stores. —General stores.
Vote 9 Stores.-Warlike stores, including ammunition and mechanical
transport stores.
S.I.B. (Inability) List.-A list issued by a central ordnance depot showing
items of equipment for which it is responsible but which, owing to shortages,
it is temporarily unable to issue to mobilizing units.
Items " Extracted to."-Items of equipment which, having been
demanded from an ordnance depot, are extracted from the deficiency list by
that depot owing to its inability to supply, and passed to another ordnance
depot for supply.
" A " Vehicles.-Tracked and semi-tracked, or any fighting vehicle.
"B" Vehicles.—Load- or passenger-carrying, and technical, wheeled
vehicles.
WO277
WO217
CHAPTER II-PRE-WAR ORGANIZATION
Field Service Regulations I, 1930, stated that " the prescribed military
authorities are
responsible that preparations are made in peace-time, in
accordance with these regulations, for either general or partial mobilization,
as may be ordered."
Mobilization was included among the subjects allotted to the Adjutant-
General's Department.
A Mobilization Directorate was created at the War Office in 1939, and at
the outbreak of war its duties included the following :—
(a) Co-ordination of administrative arrangements affecting mobilization.
(b) Co-ordination of Adjutant-General's subjects in connection with
General Staff planning.
(c) General questions affecting mobilization of the field force; War Office
reserve in personnel, equipment, etc.; overseas garrisons.
(d) Field Force Tables.
(e) Annual mobilization report.
(f) Questions relating to man-power and mobilization appointments.
(g) Mobilization Regulations.
(h) Embodiment of the Territorial Army.
(i) Calling out of Anti-Aircraft and Coast Defence units.
(i) Officers' Emergency Reserve.
The Directorate was organized as under :—
Director of Mobilization
Mobilization
planning
Assistant Adjutant-
Ádjutant-General*
Man-power
Anti-Aircraft and
Coastal Defence
Deputy Assistant
Territorial Armv
Adjutant-General
Mobilization Tables
Staff Captain
3 Retired Officers
* Represented Adjutant-General at meetings of the General Staff
Planning Committee
