For H.O. of Formation:
2. PERSONNEL
(i) Units) will be completed to full W.E. including Ist
reinforcements where authorized.
(ii) Miscellaneous Appointments
Serial(s).•
and units
* For all Por. Cous.
in the usual manner.
*(iti) For Serials) ................
of all concerned is directed to War Office Urgent
+ A.T.S. only.
+ See list of code letters.
NOBRAVE- 16606
The dare no bie
Units with A.T.S. only.
U. l overseas Commands,
init(s), and any
Wat Price tons to the rank of corporal At ation is dravn to
wherein authority is given
for fifty per cent, of the vacancies for the rank of Corpora siven
filled by promotions within the unit, under instructions which
will be issued by Os.I.C. Records concerned.
(d) Deficiency Reports.—Ref. " Unit Mobilization (War)."
(i) Para. 26(e), the code letters to be inserted on Personnel
Deficiency Reports are "
or (in the case of Commandos)
(i) Para. 26, deficiency of personnel will be made good under
separate instructions of H.Q., S.S. Bde.
Deficiency reports will
NOT be rendered on A.F. B260gA and A.F. B2609 as instructed
in para. 26.
Unit(s) will continue
to nominate and despatch other ranks on tradesmen's courses.
(f) Embarkation Leave.—Ref. " Unit Mobilization (War)
, para. 29, embarkation leave will be given immediarely
at earliest opportunity.
A high percentage of drivers will be given leave on first
priority, and the remainder immediately the first party returns.
All drivers, whose leave is due to expire after
must be specially warned that they will be subject to immediate
recall if required to take vehicles to port.
Those who have
to taleted enter kation leave will be the finto be ale yo
to take vehicles to port.
Drivers who have not
embarkation leave may complete such leave after delivering the
vehicles to port, if opportunity offers.
(g) Special Inoculation.-Ref.
" Unit Mobilization (War)
fever.
', para. I1, all ranks will be inoculated against typhus
(h) A.T.S. auxiliaries will be X-rayed. D.D.(G)M.S. of
..............Comd.(s) (concerned) will make the necessary
arrangements.
If Mass Miniature
Radiography f
facilities are
not available, small numbers can be examined by full-size X-ray.
WO 217
1
(a) See Appendix "" (or copy from attached instructions
issued by Ord. 2).
(b) Machine Carbines and Rifles.
Sten, 9-mm. and rifles will be Rifles, No. 4.
Machine carbines will be ding her wait iro
*(d) Deficiency lists for items of REt and In(RE) supply for
serial (s) .
1098 is inch. in NOTE 10.
Command(s) concerned.
Bos' will be supplied by parent units).
War Equipment—Personal.-Ref. "Unit Mobilization
Said in fly pricie doting xo he su on
Clothing Regulations,
101 and Scale 3 (plus
second suit of battle dress or service dress where authorized
and a bag, kit, universal. Part-worn second suits in possession
etained and, where necessary, issues
scale will be made from part-worn stocks).
Sen kit-bags
will
not be demanded.
A.T.S. will be clothed in accordance with
kit authorized under War Office.
plus P.T. ANTS WITHATS.
Each auxiliary (wearing slacks) will have one skirt, A.T.S.,
available to wear on voyage when ordered.
KA 7190 Boxes, Barrack, A.T.S., will be taken by personnel
in addition to Bags, Kit.
5. Amn. (and Explosives)§.—Ref. " Unit Mobilization (War),
§Units with explosives only.
para. 41 (a) (i) amn. (and explosives§) will be provided
under Command
arrangements,
accordance with A.C.I.
and
will be despatched
, METHOD " B".
Appendix I, para. 2, is NOT required. Vehicles
issued,
without demand.
Com d, lested, Ordinone Depot, Chilwell.
under instructions from ow's.6(b))
The following
vehicles will be complied with :—
instruction(s) regarding "B"
(a) The return(s) for " B"
vehicles will be prepared imme-
diately on receipt of this mobilization U.M., and des-
Batched at the earliest possible moment to the addresses
Appendix I, para. 2 (b).
Nesnatch
(seven) days of such receipt is ESSENTIAL, as arrange,
Or less i short period of
mcile armor pro cod unir heli) return reaches com
Central Ordnance
Census).
Depot, Chilwell (O.I.C.,
(C27014)
