This was an unsatisfactory state of affairs since these " immatures" (many
of whom were given excellent reports by their commanding officers) were
filling operational or administrative rôles which they would have to vacate in
the event of the hopes at (i) and (ii) above being unfulfilled.
In the cases of " war-weary" men, it naturally took some time for medical
officers to sort these men out into the various categories of " serious," "mild"
and "
malingerers,
with the result that units continued to hold numbers of
these men for varying periods, pending decisions in each case.
B.-Owing to increasing shortages, especially in certain classes of specialist
and technical personnel, and also because of frequent changes in priorities,
it was finally agreed between the Director of Staff Duties and 2x Army Group
that detailed postings to priority units would be made by Officer-in-Charge,
2nd Echelon,
21 Army Group,
and that bulk allotments would be made by
the Director of Man-power Planning to Headquarters 21 Army Group for
this purpose.
This system had the advantage of giving second Echelon staff valuable
practice in the recording and disposal of personnel and in Field Service
documentation generally, which would otherwise only have been gained from
the handling of bulk reinforcements, if and when these became available.
On the other hand, from the mobilization point of view and also from the
unit aspect, the system had certain disadvantages.
Normally, znd Echelon is intended to maintain units up to strength after
they have been made up to War Establishments by the recognized mobiliza-
tion procedure.
The situation which developed was that in certain cases
personnel branches ordered postings, and Record Offices found personnel
from available resources, while in others, where personnel were not available,
2nd Echelon was responsible for finding the balance.
As a result it was rarely possible for the Inspector of Mobilization or for
the headquarters command concerned to report that a unit was complete in
personnel or to fix direct responsibility on the proper channel from which
the balance required would be made good.
It was also difficult to give commanding officers any definite promise or
indication as to when key personnel and non-commissioned officers required
for the proper organization and training of their units, would be available.
A further drawback found was that the completion of personal arms and
equipment, clothing, etc., became a tedious, long-drawn-out business when
men were posted in in small numbers at long intervals.
In the case of 50 Division re-mobilized in January, 1944, Infantry Battalions
were on an average deficient to the extent of eight officers and go other ranks
on their date of completion, 2 Devon Regt, being nine officers and 229 other
ranks short and 2 Cheshire Regt. (support battalion) being 15 officers and
approximately 50 specialists, driver operators, etc., short.
These large deficiencies, with no definite prospect of early replacement,
un doubtedly affected the ability of commandirg officers to bring their unis
to a high standard of efficiency in training and administration as carly as
expected.
WO2TT
C.- The main lesson which became evident as a result of the experience
gained in this phase of the war was the impracticability of providing personnel
for an expeditionary force of the magnitude of z Army Group by means of
ad hoc and day-to-day decisions.
Had the complete picture, presented by the full and final plan (with a
comprehensive Order of Battle for the force, firm War Establishments, etc.),
been available to the man-power planners some months before "D" day,
and no major changes authorized subsequently, a smooth, phased programme
of mobilization by priorities could have been worked out and adhered to.
Much time and wasted effort would have been saved thereby.
The position was, however, that owing to constant changes in establish-
ments and in priorities, it was inevitable that valuable personnel should be
posted to a unit which either subsequently did not require them or when
mobilized was superseded in its priority by another for whom the personnel
already posted to the former unit would have been invaluable.
not enough personnel to go round, the priority basis could only be satisfactorily
planned after the issue of a firm " Order of Battle," in accordance with the
numbers available from within the Army and from those becoming available
from the periodical allotments made by the Director-General of Man-power
in the Ministry of Labour from the annual call-up.
D.—It would also have been an advantage if early decisions could have been
given on a high level on certain important questions affecting man-power,
eg. the minimum age at which young soldiers could be sent overseas.
Uncertainty on this point caused considerable anxiety and extra work in units
E.— The need for bringing the organization of units and formations up to
date, in accordance with lessons learnt from current campaigns, has to be
At the same time, finality has to be reached at some point if organized
planning for further operations is to go ahead.
The earlier this point is fixed,
the less chance there is of constant changes with consequent wasted effort
This is specially important in the case of personnel where technical
units are concerned, since trained personnel for such units cannot be found,
at short notice, beyond existing resources in units.
F. —The special system adopted for the selection of personnel, together
with the broader methods applied to medical classification, made possible a
much wider and more efficient use of every available man than had previously
There was sometimes considerable delay in getting doubtful cases through
the hands of the psychiatrist, during which time no replacement could be
made in the unit.
This delay was mainly owing to a shortage of qualified
psychiatrists, and was irksome to commanding officers.
A. The remarks under " personnel" above in regard to the need for
comprehensive advanced planniersand early decisions on matters of establish-
ments apply also, with special force, to equipment problems.
Owing to the very large numbet and the great variety of items which make
up the war-outit of large numbered they, the hasty equipping of a unit
