day and night; these had to be met, transported, fed, medically inspected and
outfitted with immediate needs.
In addition, unit mobilization was controlled
by this staff, who assisted unit staffs in the interpretation of their mobilization
instructions, and relevant paragraphs of " Unit Mobilization (War) " and also
in the preparation of unit personnel returns, equipment deficiency lists' for
ordnance depots, progress reports, etc.
Finally, after completion of units'
mobilization, the centre staff had to supervise the move of the units to ports
of embarkation, usually at night.
At no time, except during any temporary lull in actual mobilization, was
the staff of these centres really adequate for their purpose, yet more than once
threats were made, owing to man-power difficulties, that they would have
to be abolished.
These centres proved to be invaluable, and mobilizations carried out there
were invariably more thoroughly and more expeditiously executed than in the
case of individual units mobilized elsewhere.
Their value was particularly
felt in the case of newly-forming units.
Apart from the advantages of having an expert and experienced staff, with
full and practical knowledge of all mobilization problems, the commandant
and his staff were in close daily touch with the Mobilization branch at the
War Office, with ordnance depots, vehicle groups, stationery and publications
depots, etc. Thus an efficient system of liaison was established throughout
the mobilization machine, which ensured quick and definite results.
also possible to organize at these centres a certain amount of elementary and
individual training, testing of new weapons, etc., locally.
Corps Centres
In addition to the General Mobilization Centres at Aldershot and Southend-
Leeds, there were a number of " Corps" centres, depots, etc., where units
of the particular corps concerned were mobilized. In most cases recruits
were received and trained at these centres and as and when units were required
to be mobilized, personnel were posted in, clothed, equipped to mobilization
scales, etc., in the same way as at other Mobilization Centres.
The following corps centres came into operation during the war :—
Field Units- No. 4 Wireless Coy., Aldershot, or
R.E. Depot, Halifax.
Railway Units-Training Centre, Longmoor.
R. Signals ... Signal Training Centres at Prestatyn, Hudders-
field, and Catterick,
or at Signal Training
Battalion, Hayes-Chislehurst.
R.A.M.C... No. I Depot and Training Establishment,
Crookham.
Hygiene Units at Mytchett.
R.A.S.C... Four Training and Mobilization Centres at
R.A.O.C. .. .. One
Dewsbury, Blackpool, Weybridge, and Barry.
Training and
Mobilization
Centre at
R.E.M.E. . .. One
Nottingham, afterwards Wellington (Salop).
Training and Mobilization
Centre at
Nottingham.
Salvage One Training and Mobilization Centre at Luton.
28
WO217
In addition, Corps of Military Police units were mobilized at C.M.P. Depot,
Mytchett, and Expeditionary Force Institutes units at E.F.I. Depot at
Upper Norwood.
The practice of mobilizing units of a particular corps or service at a depot
or training centre administered by personnel of their own branch had many
advantages,
especially in respect of
medical inspection and training, in
relation to the particular duties for which they were required in their units.
Unfortunately in most cases, at certain periods of the war, it was found
impossible to accommodate all units in their appropriate centres.
Other
places of mobilization had to be found for them, preferably at one of the
"General" Mobilization Centres, if possible, otherwise by attachment to some
static unit of the same branch of the service.
The decision as to which units should be mobilized at the " General"
Mobilization Centres was made by the War Office (Q.i), upon whom the
responsibility rested for finding accommodation for all units in the country.
At first, the general administration of the centre, including the selecting of
staff and control of its establishment, as in the case of transit camps, was also
in the hands of Q.I.
It was found, however, that the duties of the centre
staff required special qualifications and that the establishment had to be varied
and adjusted in accordance with the requirements of mobilization, which
increased in volume as the war developed.
It was therefore decided in August, I94I, to transfer the control of
"General" Mobilization Centres to the Director of Mobilization (D.R.M.)
under the immediate direction of the Deputy Director (and Inspector) of
Local administration remained a matter for General Officers
Commanding-in-Chief Commands concerned with authority to delegate
control down to district commanders immediately concerned.
In view of the multifarious duties for which the commandants of the centres
and their staffs were responsible, connected with mobilization and the
administration of units located at the centre, orders were issued to commands
which precluded the commandant and staff from being detailed by local
commanders for any duty not directly concerned with the mobilization and
No difficulty was experienced so long as these instructions were complied
with. Efforts were, however, made by local commanders to take officers
away for Courts Martial, Courts of Enquiry, etc., and also to impose other
duties upon the staff, e.g. the administration of local married families, issue
of, and accounting for, petrol supplies to local units, etc.
The control and general administration of "Corps" Mobilization Centres
were in the province of the Directors concerned at the War Office.
The accommodation at " General" Mobilization Centres was gaverned by
two opposite factors :—
(a) The requirements of mobilization, which at times were almost unlimited.
(b) The availability of suitable buildings, huttings, etc.
