at short notice is impracticable without a certain amount of dislocation and
changes in priorities.
At a time when ordnance depots were working consistently over time not
only in meeting the demands of a heavy mobilization programme but also
in the assembly of stores of all kinds, weapons, clothing, ammunition, etc., as
'eserves. a firn
, phased programme of readiness of units, with priorities and
dates, based on a liberal allowance of time (not less than three weeks) for each
mobilization, was required to give the best chance of successful completion
by the date required.
As it was,
the constant changes of priorities and the sudden introduction
of new units into the mobilization programme, requiring in many cases the
urgent production of a new War Establishment and a new Equipment Table
(A.F. Grog8), did much to disorganize the mobilization machinery, both at
the War Office (Q.(A.E.), Ord. 2 and the production branches) and at
ordnance depots.
Unavoidable changes to meet sudden emergencies must be accepted, but
so far as is possible a phased programme should be issued early and priorities
B.—The method of reporting equipment deficiencies during mobilization
came up for reconsideration during this phase, with a view to ensuring urgent
action to complete them at the earliest opportunity.
It was found that certain major items of equipment were constantly
deficient, e.g. wireless sets (various), charging sets, tools, especially workshop
tools and chests of tools for various technicians, mine detectors, and towing
Reports of these deficiencies were forwarded to the War Office
(o.C.5 (Mob.)) through the command headquarters concerned, three days
before completion date and again on the date of completion.
were extracted immediately to the appropriate War Office branches for action.
Nevertheless, these deficiencies persisted and caused considerable anxiety
both in units themselves, who particularly required these items in order to
train their personnel (many of whom were new and only partially trained), •
and also in the Mobilization and S.D. branches, who were responsible for
handing these units over to 21 Army Group in a state of readiness.
Subsequently, as " D" day approached and urgent action became essential
if units were to be operationally ready, pressure was exerted by the Director
of Staff Duties upon equipment branches, and it then appeared that the
reports of units' deficiencies received through Assistant Directors of Ordnance
Services and headquarters of commands concerned were mistrusted by War
Office branches, who were making independent enquiry from ordnance depots.
It was only by the personal attendance of Assistant Directors of Ordnance
Services at the War Office with lists of receipts and deficiencies that War
Office branches were convinced of the actual
deficiencies.
Immediate
and exceptional action was then taken to complete all deficiencies.
It is important that whatever system is adopted for bringing to notice unit'
deficiencies during mobilization, it should be reliable and accepted by all
concerned.
Although no system could be infallible and certain units,
through inficiency or carelessness, may demand items already in their
possession, a system which ensures that reports are made through the
WO217
1 Ф
Assistant Director of Ordnance Services responsible for the administration
of the unit's equipment should be acceptable
Moreover,
under the system worked to in the preparation of 21 Army Group, these
reports were passed through command headquarters concerned, where thee
were subjected to further scrutiny by the Deputy Director of Ordnance
Services and "A" Branch.
C.-The use of S.I.B. lists (showing items not available at issuing ordnance
depots) was found to be of great value both to units and to the Mobilization
branch in cases of non-availability.
Follow-up information was not always
forthcoming and this meant considerable correspondence or telephone con-
versation in order to discover subsequent action taken.
For example, if one
depot was unable to supply a certain item, this might be extracted to (see
definition on page 2) another depot for supply, in which case the number and
date of the action taken might be quoted on the S.I.B. Inability List (or
Residual Deficiency List in the case of command depots) for the information
of all concerned.
No further information was received, however, to show
whether the depot to whom the item had been extracted for issue, had been
able to supply.
Some link was required to complete the chain of what was
otherwise found to be an excellent and useful system.
D.-An important consideration affecting the speed with which new units
or existing units on new establishments could be mobilized was the capacity
of the branch concerned (Q.(A.E.)I, afterwards Ord. 2) to prepare the
appropriate Equipment Scales, without which mobilization could not be
At one period of this phase there were more than
These had to be taken in strict order of priority as laid down by
the Director of Staff Duties in his periodical forecast of units " next for
mobilization" with target dates.
Thus any change of priority delayed the
preparation of scales for those units whose Army Forms G1og8 were awaiting
Other factors which affected the speed of
preparation of new Army Forms Grogs were the limit of staff and the
inadequate allotment of printing facilities.
By way of overcoming the latter
difficulty where there was extreme urgency, copies of the Army Forms Grog8
were cyclostyled and sent out as an appendix to the Mobilization Order.
This method, however, created an additional strain upon the already hard-
pressed staff of the Mobilization branch.
No insuperable difficulties arose in the issue of clothing for this operation,
since units were for the most part equipped to a homogeneous pattern
was mobilized on three
occasions for separate projects, complete Arctic clothing had to be issued.
The estimated number of each size of any
article for stock purposes did
not always work out accurate on sen applied to units, as units varied cone
approximate sizes only
could be
siderably. In certain cases, therefore,
issued.
In the case of the later mobilizations, owing to shortage of time and
also of tailors, there was no opportunity for alteration.
Outsizes, too, were
frequently in short supply.
(C27014)
