(j) Value of S.I.B. (inability to supply) lists
The use of S.I.B. lists (showing items not available at issuing ordnance
depots) was found to be of great value both to units and to the Mobilization
branch in cases of non-availability.
Follow-up information was, however,
not always forthcoming.
This resulted in considerable correspondence or
long telephone conversations in order to discover subsequent action taken.
For example, if one depot was unable to supply a certain item, this might be
extracted to another depot for issue.
When that happened, the number and
date of the action taken might be quoted on the S.I.B. Inability List (or
" Residual Deficiency List" in the case of command depots) for the informa-
tion of all concerned; no further information was received, however, to show
whether the depot, to whom the item had been extracted for issue, had been
able to supply.
Some link was required to complete the chain of what was
otherwise found to be an excellent and useful system.
(k) System of despatch of mobilization stores to units under orders to mobilize
A matter of some importance affecting the urgency with which stores could
reach units was the method of their despatch from depots and notification of
their arrival at their destination.
Owing to shortage of vehicles, drivers, petrol, etc., the Quartermaster-
General was
unwilling to approve the despatch by road of all stores to
mobilizing units.
In exceptional cases this had to be done, but normally
they were despatched wherever possible by fast passenger train.
The responsibility as to the method and route of despatch of these stores
was that of the railway traffic officer at the despatching station.
This was
found to be not altogether satisfactory.
Many of these railway traffic officers
were young and inexperienced and afraid to take the responsibility of imposing
their will upon the railway authorities in cases of real urgency.
A suggestion to the effect that commandants of Central Ordnance Depots,
in view of their senior rank, should be authorized to frank mobilization stores
for despatch by priority means was not agreed to.
It was found to be of the utmost importance that railway traffic officers
should be in possession of clear instructions as to their duties and responsi-
bilities in respect of mobilization stores.
This applied not only in the case of
despatch from depot railheads, but also in receipt at unit stations.
example, if stores arrived at a station for a mobilizing unit which had already
moved to another station, a railway traffic officer should have known that he
should not return the stores to the ordnance depot, but that by telephoning
the ordnance depot concerned or the War Office he could obtain the unit's
(1) No major problem so long as system of mobilization is fluid and adaptable
No insuperable difficulties arose in the issue of clothing since units were
for the most part equipped to a homogeneous pattern and scale.
In a few cases special articles were necessary, e.g. airborne units and, in
the special case of 52 Lowland Divinee swhich, was mobilized on three
occasions for separate projects), complete Arctic clothing had to be issued.
Such special issues were authorized in the Mobilization Urgent Memorandum.
WOZT
The estimated number of each size of any article for stock purposes did
not always work out accurately when applied to units, as units varied con-
siderably.
In certain cases, therefore, approximate sizes only could be issued
and in the case of the later mobilizations, owing to shortage of time and also
of tailors, there was no opportunity for alteration.
Outsizes were frequently
Organization-War Office
(a) Mobilization branch to
work in very close association with General
Staff (S.D.) and be located in same building
It was considered essential for the Mobilization branch to work under the
control of a Director who was in close touch with General Staff planning and
could thus have, and maintain, up-to-date knowledge of mobilization problems
and procedure affecting the preparation of units for war within a given time.
For this reason it was found necessary for the Mobilization branch to be
located in the same building as, and to work in the closest touch with, the
Director of Staff Duties and his branches.
It would be an advantage if this
close contact existed in peace-time to avoid dislocation or delays in the event
of general, or even partial, mobilization.
(b) Personnel and Equipment branches should also be in close touch and urgent
communication with Mobilization branch
Close daily contact was also found necessary between officers of the
Mobilization Directorate and those of the personnel and equipment branches,
none of which was located in the main War Office building.
Considerable delay in the issue of Mobilization orders was caused in
telephoning (especially when the
personnel branches were located at
Cheltenham) or in sending special despatch riders in order to collect the
necessary data, which usually varied with each mobilization order.
Organization- General Headquarters, Home Forces
(a) Relative responsibility and control with War Office
So long as any threat to invasion existed, an adequate decentralization of
control of units, movement of personnel, equipment, vehicles, etc., to the
Commander-in-Chief, G.H.Q., Home Forces,
same way as to a Field Force Commander.
If the preparation and mobiliza-
tion of expeditionary forces are to continue at the same time, this control
should be re-called to the War Office at the earliest safe opportunity.
found that, until this was done, the state and whereabouts of personnel,
equipment, vehicles, etc., were apt to get out of hand and take a long time to
(b) Movements of units during mobilization to be avoided except in emergency
There must be constant and close contact between G.H.Q., Home Forces
and the Mobilization branch at the War Office to ensure that units being
mobilized while under G.H.O.'s control are not moved, except for reasons
of real emergency, troth their a con of mobilization for more than a short
period (18 hours), and that personnel. equipment, etc., despatched to the
