CHAPTER X-DETAILED PROCEDURE PRE-DUNKIRK
PERIOD
(1939 to May, 1940)
The procedure laid down before the war in Mobilization Regulations was
particular part of the mobilization plan.
For example, in August "BYNG" and "ALLENBY" initiated the
call-up of certain key personnel for anti-aircraft and coast defence units and
Territorial Army and National Defence Companies;
" CLIVE"
resulted in the call-up of the main bodies of certain Territorial artillery units.
" ROBERTS" signified executive action for
On ist September, "Precautionary Stage," and General Mobilization was
then ordered by the issue to all concerned of telegram " MOBILIZE."
This was also confirmed and amplified by British Broadcasting Corporation
action taken on these various code-word warnings was in
accordance with the planned system referred to at Part I, Chapter III, except
that before the issue of the " MOBILIZE" telegram, the use of the word
" MOBILIZATION" for call-up of reservists was not allowed to be used.
The data given in the particular Field Force tables to be implemented was
put into effect;
personnel, equipment, vehicles, etc., were allotted, in
accordance with the priority given by S.D. branches.
From reports made at the time in the Mobilization branch and also, as
regards equipment, by the Controller of Ordnance Services, it appears that
the actual procedure as planned worked satisfactorily on the whole, taking into
consideration the changes in plans which had taken place shortly before the
The following extracts from these reports show the main shortcomings,
with reasons, and enable lessons to be drawn therefrom :-
"We were forced to mobilize with inadequate personnel, inadequate
equipment and with insufficient time to make complete arrangements to
ondlement a new plan introduced on the actual day that mobilization was
"There can be no facile mobilization unless assets in personnel are
capable of meeting war requirements.
40,000 short of our minimum needs to meet the current plan.'
"That mobilization has worked as smoothly as it has is due largely to
great individual effort and initiative shown by staffs and unit commanders
Controller of Ordnance Services
"There were grave deficiencies of certain items of equipment and many
Territorial Army units, which were added to the Force at the last moment,
were not in possession of their war equipment."
"Owing to the delay in the decision to equip the Army, there was at the
commencement of the war a great variety of highly technical equipments
WO2T7
on order which had never been seen or handled by Royal Army Ordnance
Corps personnel.
When these equipments, spare parts, etc., came forward,
great difficulty and delay were experienced in identifying many of the
" Hardly a unit went to France completely equipped, and the stocks of
technical stores and spare parts were never anything like sufficient either
to make good the deficiencies or to maintain the equipment of the
Expeditionary Force."
LESSONS
General
The main general lessons to be drawn from this period are—
A.—Drastic changes of plans should be avoided.
Essential changes should
be capable of being carried out with the minimum of dislocation of existing
B.—Success or failure of a mobilization plan should not be dependent upon
the individual efforts of staff and units.
Smooth working to a prepared
plan is the only safe assurance of success in mobilization, which inevitably
demands speedy action.
Personnel
A.—If there is likely to be any scruple about using the word " Mobilization"
in the early stages of call-up of personnel (i.e. before total mobilization is
ordered), all documents held in peace-time for this purpose must be re-worded.
B.—It is very desirable that nominations be made and maintained up to
date in peace-time for certain key appointments on mobilization.
This had
been done in 1939, and many nominees had been accepted for their appoint-
ments some time previously and had learned their duties, but there was an
almost wholesale change-over as soon as mobilization was ordered.
It is important that these nominees for mobilization appointments be
changed as seldom as possible, and not at all except for very special reasons
after mobilization has actually been ordered.
This applies to appointments both inside and outside the War Office, and it
is especially important that the Mobilization Directorate should be brought up
to full War Establishment at the first indication of possible mobilization.
C. —Changes in organization and establishments should not be necessary or
authorized on mobilization. In one instance (G.H.Q. Ist Echelon) an altera-
tion in War Establishment resulted in an increase of five officers and 6o other
Even minor changes in organization and personnel may have far-
reaching repercussions as regards reallotment of personnel, equipment and
vehicles.
D. —Considerable extra work is thrown upon the staffs of commands as
soon as the mobilization procedure begins to operate.
To deal adequately
quickly with the numerous problems which arise, a fully-staffed
" Mobilization Section" is required at each command headquarters from
the outset.
A nucleus for this section should exist in peace-time and
maintain conversance with all phases of mobilization procedure to be
implemented as and when necessary.
C27014)
