control, petrol, oil and lubricants, and certain engineering and transportation
stores, which were the responsibility of other arms of the Service.
In the organization of these depots, the principle adopted was for storage
to be arranged by defined classes of stores according to their grouping for
financial control and forecasts in the Army Store Votes and Vocabularies of
Army Ordnance Stores.
Each main class of stores was therefore allotted to
the sore-keeping control sube" parent central ordance depot which had
As new depots were established, this system of grouping was developed
until the following basic organization was reached :-
C.O.D.
Store Vote.
Class of Stores.
Donnington
*Bicester
Greenford
Vote 9
Old Dalby
Warlike stores (including artillery, engineer,
signals and radar).
Workshop machinery and test equipment.
Vote 8
General stores.
Vote 7
Clothing and necessaries.
Chilwell
Derby .
M.T. vehicles, assemblies and spares.
* Bicester also stocked and issued M.T. stores under the control of Chilwell.
This group system not only simplified control of stocks and was therefore
more economical, but it also had the additional advantage of minimizing the
possible effects of damage from enemy air attack.
As regards the method of control, as the war progressed this varied
according to the stores vote concerned.
All Vote 9 stores were controlled
directly by Central Ordnance Depots, which not only made bulk distributions
to overseas bases and theatres, but also made detailed issues on demand to
mobilizing units and formation H.Q.s in this country.
In the case of Vote 7
and 8 stores, these were wherever possible issued in bulk to Command
Ordnance Depots, which then distributed these on indent to units.
reasons for this distinction were :-
(a) Warlike and M.T. stores (Vote g) being more technical and difficult to
produce in war were in constantly short supply.
It would therefore have been uneconomical to disperse the com-
paratively small stocks to command depots.
(b) Store-keeping personnel dealing with Vote g stores require longer and
more detailed training, and this was impracticable at command depots.
26
WO27775
WO217
(c) The comparatively larger stocks and simplicity of handling in the case
of Vote 7 and 8 stores made it practicable, and also desirable from the
point of view of relieving the pressure of work in Central Ordnance
Depots, to decentralize stocks to Command Ordnance Depots.
(Note.—The relative advantages and disadvantages of this system of
decentralization have been briefly dealt with in Chapter VI under Head-
quarters of Commands.)
As regards mobilization duties within ordnance depots vis-a-vis the
War Office and units, the general practice in the case of units which were in
existence before the receipt of orders, was to submit deficiency lists through
the Assistant Director of Ordnance Stores concerned to the appropriate Central
Ordnance Depots. In the case of units which were formed immediately
before their mobilization, their Army Form Giog8 equipment and vehicles
were assembled without demand on the instructions contained in the
Mobilization Order.
Items of equipment which were not available for issue from the Central
Ordnance Depot (or Command Depot in the case of Vote 7 and 8 stores)
were extracted to other depots for action.
Finally, four days before the date ordered for completion of mobilization,
Inability (S.I.B.) Lists were issued by Central Ordnance Depots (Residual
Deficiency Lists in the case of Command Depots) showing the items in the
Army Form G1og8, which were not available for issue. Copies of these lists
were sent to War Office branches affected, including the Mobilization
Directorate, and also to the Assistant Director Ordnance Stores and unit
concerned.
In cases where units did not proceed overseas shortly after their mobiliza-
tion, it was possible for items becoming available, and marked " to follow"
on unit vouchers, to be progressed and issued to units to complete their
Army Form G10g8 entitlement.
