Similarly, a local dental officer is an invaluable asset, since many units in
war, and also individuals posted in, may not have had the services of a dental
officer for some time before mobilization. It is very important that a dental
overhaul be carried out before personnel go overseas on Active Service.
This is not a simple problem.
By nature of the duties of a mobilization
centre, which have been indicated above, vehicles may be and generally are
required at any time of the day or night.
numbers or, in the case of larger units arriving, in considerable numbers.
Drivers, too, must be available.
The arrival of trains in war-time is always
an uncertain factor, particularly troop trains which have no advertised schedule
The arrival of a unit, or of individuals from all parts of the country,
vehicles to meet them at one of two or three railway stations in the vicinity at
timered to mobilize at a centre, may therefore necessitate a large number of
short notice, e.g. on receipt of an advance telegram, or even a telephone
message after arrival at the station.
Nothing is worse for morale than for
troops at the end of a long and tedious rail journey, especially at night, to
arrive and find no arrangements to meet them. It is obvious therefore that
the commandant of the centre should have an ample number of vehicles and
drivers under his immediate control for this purpose.
Equally important, and sometimes as urgent, was the need for vehicles to
collect stores from ordnance depots, field stores, stationery depots, etc.,
especially where these stores failed to arrive in the earlier and more normal
stages of mobilization and had to be drawn in a hurry just before a unit left
the centre for the port of embarkation.
A number of vehicles are also often
required for welfare purposes, especially in the case of Allied units.
At the same time, the allocation of vehicles to a static unit is admittedly
extravagant in war, if other units are urgently in need of vehicles.
Cuch an
allocation was definitely forbidden from 1942 onwards owing to shortage in
this country and the requirements of units being mobilized for North Africa
and other theatres of war.
A compromise seems to be the best solution.
Some vehicles, at a con-
servative estimate, with drivers who know railway stations, ordnance depots,
etc., in the neighbourhood, should be left under the absolute control of the
commandant, mobilization centre.
He must be trusted to make these
available for general use in the event of a temporary lull in mobilization.
additional vehicles, he should be able to draw upon the nearest vehicle pool
at short notice.
In all such dealings, the urgency of mobilization must be given full
consideration vis-à-vis other demands.
By way of indication of the useful part played by these mobilization centres,
the following figures for the Aldershot Centre, including Easthampstead
Wing, are given: During the five vears from ist January,
1940, to
3Ist December, 1944, 33o units were mobilized at that centre.
. The large
majority of these units were not capable of mobilizing themselves within a
28
In addition, this Mobilization Centre served a useful purpose in receiving
parties of repatriated prisoners of war from Sweden, returned personnel from
Dunkirk, survivors from the ship "Arandora Star," torpedoed off the coast of
Treland, and some 3,000 Indian Army Cadets awaiting despatch to India.
LESSONS
A.—Mobilization centres were found to be a very great asset in war,
especially for the formation and mobilization of new units.
Wherever
practicable, units of a corps or department should be mobilized under the
agis of their appropriate corps or department, at their own mobilization
Other units not mobilizing as part of a formation can best be
located at a general mobilization centre for the period of their mobilization.
B.—Staffs for mobilization centres, within the maximum ceiling, should be
adequate in view of their numerous duties connected with mobilization and
administration and the long hours inherent in the nature of those duties.
They should be carefully selected in relation to their special duties, but,
for reasons of man-power, should be taken from those not fit for more active
duties.'
Individuals should be changed only rarely, consistent with their not
being deprived of promotion thereby.
C.-It was found to be most convenient for the control and general
administration of Corps Mobilization Centres to be vested in the appropriate
War Office Director, and for " General" (i.e. all-arm) Mobilization Centres to
work under the immediate control of the Director of Mobilization.
final decision as to which units are to mobilize at these centres should also
rest with the Director concerned.
Local administration should be left to the local command headquarters,
and, if delegated, should not be passed below district or area headquarters.
Except in an emergency, no duty should be imposed upon the commandant
and staff of the mobilization centre, which is outside their functions connected
with the units located at the centre for mobilization and administration.
D.—A medical officer and a dental officer, with first priority obligations
for duty with the mobilization
centre, are essential requisites. If their
inclusion within the
War Establishment of the centre is found to be
impracticable, they should be available at very short notice on a demand
from the commandant of the centre.
E.—Accommodation at a mobilization centre must be calculated on an
economic scale but large enough to house average-sized units likely to be
accommodated at such a centre.
It should be capable of camouflage from the air and of expansion by
hutted or tented accommodation in emergency.
F.- The importance of the provision of transport on a limited scale at the
disposal of the commandant for his immediate needs was frequently
emphasized.
These should have a cadre of reliable drivers, who should be
changed as rarely as possible, because of the special importance of local
knowledge in urgent mobilizations.
Supplementary vehicles should be made available also on urgent call, as
required by the commandant for mobilization and administrative purposes.
