Recommendations were made by certain General Officers Commanding-in-
Chief of Commands to the effect that the number of mobilization centres
should be increased, so that there would be at least one in each command.
This would have greatly simplified the problem of accommodating
mobilizing units and have ensured their efficient and speedy mobilization.
As it was, limitations of staff and accommodation meant that expansion of
existing centres was only possible by means of pitching camps in the
immediate vicinity.
he mobile, i parto the saty incensed athen fund argui mits
north of Aldershot) was occupied as a wing of the Aldershot Mobilization
Centre. A small increase in the War Establishment was authorized to cover
this extra commitment, which, with the use of considerable enterprise and
local labour, became capable of accommodating an additional 2,500 personnel.
Generally speaking, formed units were sent to the camp and newly-forming
units were catered for at Aldershot.
With the continued expansion of the Army and the influx of Allied troops
from other countries, all available accommodation, including requisitioned
houses, hutted and tented camps, became occupied, and the shortage of
personnel for use on the staff also precluded further extension of mobilization
centres.
Generally speaking the requirements of a "General" Mobilization Centre
should include the following points :—
(a) Accommodation for not less than 150 officers and 2,000 other ranks.
This was found to be an economic figure for the Aldershot Centre.
(b) Located near, but preferably not in, a large town with good rail facilities
and easy access to ordnance and vehicle depots.
(c) Good covered accommodation for storage of equipment, clothing, etc.-
preferably in barracks.
(d) Healthy, well-drained site, in which epidemics of sickness (in mobilizing
units shortly due to proceed overseas) will be avoided.
(e) Dispersal of cook-house accommodation to enable more than one unit
to be in occupation at the same time and also to ensure fuel economy
when accommodation is not fully occupied.
(f) Office accommodation with telephone communications on a unit basis,
apart from the centralized office arrangements of the centre H.Q.
(g) Officers' mess accommodation on a semi-permanent and generous scale,
in view of the need for economy by centralization of fuel, lighting, etc.,
in war, which results in officers when off duty spending a considerable
amount of their time in the mess building and not in private quarters.
For this reason also, telephone communication between mess and office
is important.
(k) Concealment from the air and cover from air-bombing should be
provided.
(i) Ample parking space for vehicles, also with concealment and cover
from the air.
WO277/26
28
1 ф
Establishment
Personnel
It is not practicable to lay down a standard establishment for a mobilization
centre, since each case is governed by divers factors, including limitations of
accommodation.
The War Establishments relative to the Aldershot and Leeds Mobilization
Centres were V/141/C/3 of October, 1943, and V/195/3 of December, 1942,
respectively.
The man-power factor made it necessary both that the establishment should
be kept down to the essential minimum and that personnel should be selected
as far as is possible from among those who are not fit for more active
On the other hand (and partly because the personnel are not 100 per cent.
fit), it is important that the establishment should be capable of handling the
maximum load which might be asked of them.
the machine might break down under the strain.
There were times in the war when these centres were completely filled, with
other units waiting to take the place of those in occupation.
above, the hours of duty for members of the staff of these centres entailed, for
long periods at a stretch, considerable strain.
individuals, stores, etc., on arrival and arrange for their despatch on departure,
in addition to doing their normal day-to-day mobilization and administrative
The fact that there might be occasional lulls in mobilization owing to
changes of plan, difficulties of movements, etc., ought not to be accepted as a
reason for a reduction of staff, which may be required to work at full pressure
and at short notice to carry out any plan suddenly decided upon by the
Individuals posted to the staff of a mobilization centre should be experienced
and adaptable, good mixers, thoroughly reliable and conscientious.
is practicable they should be changed as seldom as possible.
mandant especially should have had experience of command and not be
afraid of responsibility.
Tact and ability in dealing with senior officers
temporarily located under his command are also important qualifications.
Officers of the Quartermaster List are particularly suitable for appointments
as adjutant and quartermaster at these centres in view of their wide experience,
knowledge of unit equipment, barrack stores, etc.
The same principle applies to the other ranks, where warrant officers and
non-commissioned officers with unit experience are invaluable in the assistance
of units with inexperienced N.C.O.s during their mobilization period.
A medical officer with military experience was a constant, urgent need.
If one cannot be allotted for whole time duty at the centre, his services should
be made available at very short notice to carry out urgent inspections without
which a unit's mobilization may be held up.
urgent that time cannot be wasted, and many units have no medical officer
