PART III
MOBILIZATION PROCEDURE
CHAPTER IX-GENERAL
The process by which the mobilization of the peace-time Army is effected
before, or on, the outbreak of war differs in certain important respects from
that by which units or formations are mobilized during war.
This is because only a very small proportion of the man-power of the
country is allotted to military duties in peace-time, and mobilization can,
therefore, only be planned in advance for the formations and units required
immediately on, or shortly after, the outbreak of war.
This planning 1s a
deliberate process over a period of months or years, based upon political needs
to meet the most likely threat or threats in any part of the Empire, Allied
These threats, and consequently the plans, are liable to
fluctuations and change, sometimes at very short notice.
In war a considerably greater portion of the nation's man-power is directed
to military requirements and larger forces are organized as the war progresses.
These forces in terms of units and formations have to be
"mobilized,"
i.e. prepared for war.
In peace-time mobilization is almost entirely a paper process.
Before the
an, pal sia fore inited by the i Batie Wield to keed ups the
Field Force Tables were
prepared and periodical meetings were held at which representatives of
commands were present. Half-yearly returns of personnel available were
submitted by headquarters commands to enable the Mobilization branch to
watch progress of planning towards the completion of units of each arm of
Mobilization schemes were prepared by units under the super-
vision of headquarters commands,
who were also responsible for the
maintenance of schemes for units allotted to them, which did not exist in
Similarly, as regards equipment and vehicles, those which were not held
by units in peace-time were to be provided on mobilization in accordance
with plans initiated by the Quartermaster-General.
mobilizations were held in peace-time for which authority was given for the
issue of mobilization stores and equipment to units. Deficiencies in personnel,
equipment, etc., were reported and action taken where necessary to rectify
weaknesses, delays, etc., in procedure.
On the outbreak of war, plans (either those forecast previously or new ones
to meet fresh situations as they arose) had to be translated into immediate
General mobilization as affecting personnel was
actuated by public proclamation, broadcast and individual call-up.
equipment and vehicles to complete to mobilization scales was effected in
accordance with pre-war planning.
formations was the outcome largely of ad hoc planning, especially in June,
1940, after the withdrawal of the Expeditionary Force from France.
WO2777z
28
1 Ф
The chief factors which affected the situation then were :—
(a) The return to this country of large numbers of personnel in a state of
disorganization and moral and physical deterioration.
(b) The loss of a considerable proportion of equipment of all kinds
(personal, unit, technical and vehicles).
(c) The necessity for returning to essential munitions work (tanks, aero-
planes, etc.) all men in the Services whose practical knowledge was
necessary to their firms for this urgent work.
(d) The threat of imminent invasion which, owing to the fall of France,
at once became the first preoccupation of the Commander-in-Chief and
all available units in this country.
To meet this emergency, meetings were held weekly (or as often as the
situation required) to decide upon the best and most economical distribution
of available resources, taking into consideration the demands of Commander-
in-Chief, Home Forces, General Officers Commanding-in-Chief Overseas
Commands and other Imperial commitments.
These meetings were designated P.P.U. (Priority of Preparation of Units),
and were presided over by Assistant Chief of the Imperial General Staff or
Director of Staff Duties; representatives of G.H.Q., Home Forces, and of
sponsor and provision branches at the War Office were present.
of the decisions arrived at, a list of units to be mobilized was prepared by
Director of Staff Duties, showing establishments; scales of equipment and
vehicles; place of mobilization; date for completion, and any other data
required to carry out their mobilization.
All arrangements necessary to give
effect to these decisions were
co-ordinated by A.G.5 (Mob.) and published by them in the form of
" Mobilization Urgent Memoranda" (see Appendix D).
These necessarily
had a wide distribution, but were secret documents, and no destination was
given or indicated in any way.
Unit Mobilization
The method by which a unit achieved mobilization was set out in the
War Office Manual " Unit Mobilization (War),' compiled and issued by
A. G.5 (Mob.) in 1940 and subsequently revised in 1942, and again in 1944.
Normally the first intimation of its impending mobilization was received
by a unit in the form of a preparatory order (issued by Director of Staff Duties
and addressed to headquarters, command concerned), in which the unit was
placed under War Office control and outline instructions were given regarding
the place of mobilization, moves, leave, etc.
This was followed shortly afterwards by the A.G.5 (Mob.) Urgent
Memorandum, in which full details were given regarding War Establishments,
A.F. G10g8 equipment, vehicles, leave, medical inspection, publications,
home details, etc., everything, in fact, that the unit required to know to
complete mobilization, in accordance with the instructions contained in
"Unit Mobilization (Wat)."
Commands concerned were made responsible
for the supervision of units' mobilization and or the submission of periodical
progress reports.
(C27014)
