Similarly in units, it became almost a commonplace to find a new com-
mander posted
to a unit a few days before the completion of its mobilization.
This was found to be a disadvantage both from the point of the unit and that
of the commanding officer, who knew none of his officers or men and who was
usually required, soon after completion of mobilization, to take his unit on
Where it was known that a commanding officer was not up to the standard
required to lead a unit on service (or a staff officer not suited to his appoint-
ment), the disadvantages referred to above could have been overcome by his
replacement before, not after, receipt of orders to mobilize.
applied in cases where it was desired to promote an officer.
(k) Finality to be reached as early as practicable as regards changes in establish-
The need for bringing the organization of units and formations up to date,
in accordance with lessons learnt from current campaigns, has to be accepted
At the same time, finality has to be reached at some point if organized
planning for further operations is to go ahead.
the less chance there is of constant changes, with consequent wasted effort later
This was found to be specially important in the case of personnel, where
technical units were concerned, since trained personnel for such units could not
be found, at short notice, beyond the existing resources in units.
(L) Careful thought in preparation of new units
The formation of new units required very careful thought, especially when
units were formed immediately, or very shortly, before mobilization.
They should be formed at their place of mobilization and a cadre of
essential personnel (e.g. commanding officer, adjutant, quartermaster or
company quartermaster-serjeant, senior clerks, typists and mess personnel)
should arrive before the bulk of the personnel are posted.
essential forms and a few vehicles are required before any
active organization can take place.
This requires very close liaison between S.D. branches, the personnel
branch concerned, and the Mobilization branch.
(m) Equipment of drafts posted to mobilizing units
The problem of equipping individuals and drafts despatched to mobilizing
units was acute.
Personal equipment was in short supply and many non-active units were
equipped with leather or old pattern accoutrements.
It was a common
occurrence for personnel to arrive at mobilizing units, shortly before the date
ordered for completion of mobilization, deficient of articles of clothing, boots,
etc., and with wrong pattern equipment and rifles.
This threw considerable
extra work upon the Quartermaster's department both in units and in the
offices of the local Assistant Directors of Ordnance Services, who were already
fully employed with their normal mobilization duties.
case should be investigated and where the supplying unit is found
to be at fault, disciplinary action should be taken through the headquarters
of the command concerned.
82
WO217
(n) Special difficulties in provision of personnel for large forces
mobilization yet undertaken.
The numbers involved were very large; new types of units of all kinds had
sprung up requiring more, and in some cases new kinds of, tradesmen;
!
In effect, there were not enough of the right type of individuals to fill all
the vacancies required at once.
Lists of priority units were therefore drawn
up by S.D. branches and given effect to by personnel branches, but for reasons
already indicated, these lists frequently underwent considerable and sudden
specialist and ng ho, in persing chord a, ecial in requent chane, in
priorities, it was finally agreed between the Director of Staff Duties and
21 Army Group that detailed postings to priority units would be made by the
Officer-in-Charge, znd Echelon, 21 Army Group,
and that bulk allotments
would be made by the Director of Man-power Planning to Headquarters,
21 Army Group, for this purpose.
This system had the advantage of giving znd Echelon staff valuable
practice in the recording and disposal of personnel and in Field Service
documentation generally, which would otherwise only have been gained from
the handling of bulk reinforcements, if and when these became available.
On the other hand, from the mobilization point of view, and also from
the unit aspect, the system had certain disadvantages.
Normally, 2nd Echelon
is intended to maintain units up to strength after they have been made up to
War Establishments by the recognized mobilization procedure.
tion which developed was that in certain cases personnel branches ordered the
postings and Record Offices found the personnel from available resources,
while in others, where personnel were not available, znd Echelon was
responsible for finding the balance.
As a result it was rarely possible for the
Inspector of Mobilization or for the headquarters of the command concerned
to report that a unit was complete in personnel or to fix direct responsibility
on the proper channel from which the balance required should be made good.
It was also difficult to give commanding officers any definite promise or
indication as to when key personnel and non-commissioned officers required
for the proper organization and training of their units, would be available.
Large deficiencies, with no definite prospect of early replacement, undoubtedly
affected the ability of commanding officers to bring their units to a high
standard of efficiency in training and administration as early as expected.
The main lesson, which became evident as a result of the experience gained,
was the impracticability of providing personnel for an expeditionary force of
the magnitude of 21 Army Group by means of ad hoc and day-to-day decisions.
complete ple if that, presented by the War finian, ch a
been available to the man-power planners some months before "D" day,
and no major changes authorized subsequently, a smooth, phased programme
of mobilization by priorities could have been worked out and adhered to.
Much time and wasted effort would have thus been saved.
