WO271/2
For reasons of urgency and to give units the maximum time for mobilization
• A.G.5 (Mob.) Urgent Memoranda were sent direct to units affected, in
addition to headquarters commands, ordnance depots, War Office branches
and others concerned.
As the Mobilization Urgent Memoranda were secret
documents, receipts for each copy issued were required and filed for security
(a) Units already in existence
Pre-mobilization action, indicated in Part I of " Unit Mobilization (War),
provided for certain preliminary work to be undertaken before the receipt of
orders to mobilize, e.g; possession and maintenance of certain important
publications; periodical medical and dental inspections; up-to-date mainte-
nance of personal documents; knowledge of relevant War Establishments and
A.F.s GIog8; inspection and maintenance up to date of serviceable weapons,
vehicles, clothing, etc.
On receipt of orders to mobilize, this action had to be amplified at once
and detailed inspection carried out of personnel, equipment, vehicles, etc.
Deficiencies found as a result of these inspections had to be made good in the
form of demands: personnel, to War Office (A.G.I(B) ) on Army Form
(Officers) and Army Form B2609 (Other Ranks); equipment,
through Assistant Director of Ordnance Services concerned on Army Form
W5198, to appropriate Command or Central Ordnance Depot; vehicles,
in the form of a complete return of vehicles on charge, showing up-to-date
classification of each as certified by a local ordnance (M.T.) officer.
In the case of these units, the success or otherwise of their mobilization was
mainly dependent upon the amount of attention paid within the unit to pre-
mobilization action and also upon the keenness shown during actual mobiliza-
tion by commanding officers and staff, "A" and Deputy Director of Ordnance
Services' staff at command headquarters concerned and by Assistant Director
of Ordnance Services responsible for administering the mobilization.
(b) Units newly-formed before mobilization
Generally speaking, no pre-mobilization action was possible. In many cases,
for reasons of urgency, units, were formed and mobilized simultaneously.
The mobilization procedure had to be varied accordingly—no demands to
complete personnel could be made until after the effects (e.g. suitability,
medical fitness, etc.) of the original postings, made in accordance with the
formation letter, had been appreciated within the
Moreover, it
frequently happened that the officer commanding was not posted until late
in the mobilization period.
Personal equipment was normally provided by the units from which
personnel were posted, but this was not always the case, and considerable
delays in mobilization were caused by personnel arriving at newly-forming
units without personal arms and equipment.
Unit equipment was provided in bulk, without demand, being usually
assembled at one Central Ordnance Depot by contributions from other depos
Vehicles were
similarly provided, without demand, under orders of
War Office (W.S.6(b) ) or Central Ordnance Depot, Chilwell.
In the case of these newly-forming units, the importance of a comprehensive
and explicit " formation letter " (issued by personnel branches concerned
cannot be overstressed.
It was found essential that an administrative cadre
should be posted immediately to include at least one of the unit's senior
officers, quartermaster or quartermaster-serjeant, and one or two clerks and
cooks.
Commanding officer and adjutant should also be among the first to
arrive.
(See also Chapter XI, Lesson D (Personnel),.)
It is not practicable to organize the lay-out, accommodation, messing,
stores, leave, etc., of a new unit, unless the essential staff for these purposes
is present very early.
Considerable " fathering" of these units by local staffs is very necessary
but the ideal solution in all cases was found to be to accommodate them. both
for formation and mobilization, at one of the Mobilization Centres, where
all preliminary executive action was taken or initiated by the expert staff of
the centre (see Chapter VII, page 18).
(c) Progress of mobilization
In both (a) and (b) above progress of mobilization was watched by the
War Office (D.D. Mob.) by means of a system of periodical reports submitted
by units, through headquarters, command supervising the mobilization.
Three days before the date for completion of mobilization, a report on the
state of equipment and vehicles was submitted.
This was followed on the
mobilization date ("D" day) by a comprehensive report on all items,
including personnel.
In addition, the Deputy Director of Mobilization visited (on or about
day) all units about whose mobilization there appeared to be any
serious difficulty or likely delay.
Reports on these visits were
immediately to Deputy Adjutant-General (B), to the Director of Staff Duties,
and to other directors concerned, for action to be taken, where necessary, to
complete units' mobilization.
All copies of these Reports were returned to the Deputy Director of
Mobilization in due course showing details of action taken by each branch.
(C27014)
31
