Security
It had often to be emphasized during the war that the fact of mobilization
of a unit or a formation cannot be kept secret.
Too many people are involved,
e.g. the War Office, headquarters of commands, ordnance depots, vehicle
depots, H.M. Stationery Office, and most of all the staff and men of units and
the railway staff at the " place of mobilization."
Details as regards destina-
tion, dates, etc., had, however, to be most zealously guarded and concealed
except from the comparatively few who had to know.
taken to ensure that secrecy was maintained included the
(a) Mobilization Urgent Memoranda (ordering the mobilization of units),
which had an unavoidably wide circulation, were marked Secret and
given index numbers according to units' destination.
numbers was Top Secret and known to very few people,
to whom it was a most valuable "aide-mémoire."
Typing dorian was tist mobily t Director A Statio
the index number allotted to these mobilizations was 5290,
Unspecified destinations."
ations." 1 theatre? U
replaced, which had started with 5554, were changed to 60o5.
No mention was made of destination either in the mobilization order
or in subsequent shipping movement orders.
(b) In the earlier campaigns, where troops were likely to be away from their
homes for long spells, it was necessary both for humanitarian and for
lealical reasons that officers and men should be given embarkation
There was considerable risk of leakage by soldiers, especially
those employed in unit offices and quartermaster's department, for
these were in a position to draw their own conclusions from information
in the office as to destinations and dates of sailing.
In the case of 21 Army Group, it was decided that normal leave would
continue and that special embarkation leave would not be given.
effect of this was that, although everybody knew that inoculations and
vaccinations were becoming the order of the day and that numerous
vehicles and large numbers of cases containing equipment were
arriving, no one could say anything more definite than that something
Details of the Force and its destination remained a secret.
Even the excessive activity which pervaded the S.D., mobilization,
equipment and vehicle branches in May, 1944, indicated only that
units were being prepared by an early date.
c) A very
careful check was maintained on every copy of Mobilization
Urgent Memoranda issued (either by post or by hand) by insistence on
the immediate return of the receipt form annexed to each copy at the
time of issue.
It was realized that, had the enemy succeeded in
obtaining any addressee's copies of these memoranda, they would have
been able to build up a complete " Order of Battle" of the Force.
far as has been ascertained, no such leakage occurred.
WO217
(a) Specially secret equipment required to be carried by units, but the
existence of which it was desirable to conceal from the enemy, was
issued in accordance with a Top Secret Urgent Memorandum, addressed
only to those directly concerned with its issue.
Progress
Periodical progress reports were issued by the Director of Staff Duties to
' show the state of preparation of units for 21 Army Group.
This enabled all
concerned with these mobilizations to be kept informed of progress.
Lists
of units not yet mobilized were similarly brought up to date and included in
subsequent phased programmes of mobilization issued by the Director of
Staff Duties, as information as regards Order of Battle, organization of units,
establishments, etc., became more firm.
apple ate mob orie Command in the Fring, 19, e after the
Ist February, 1943, to the end of that year approximately 2,600 units were
mobilized or re-mobilized for 21 Army Group, an average of 236 units each
month.
In the five months ending 3Ist May, 1944, approximately 2,500 units were
similarly mobilized or re-mobilized, an average of 500 units each month,
rather more than twice the monthly average in 1943.
The effect of this increasing pressure was that, towards the end, although
the mobilization machinery was working at full pressure at the War Office,
in commands, ordnance depots and Headquarters, 21 Army Group, in their
combined efforts to get the remaining units ready by their target dates, with
decreasing resources, considerable difficulty was still being experienced in
completing units and formations whose mobilization dates had passed.
reason for this was that certain items of equipment and types of vehicles,
either wholly or for want of components, were still in short supply and were
awaited from the trade or from the United States.
Many of these were
operationally vital, e.g. wireless sets, charging sets, jeeps, and half-tracks.
Assistant Directors of Ordnance Services of formations already mobilized
naturally pressed their claims to these deficient articles, and units and
formations in course of mobilization also demanded these items with equal
urgency. All these demands were supported by Deputy Directors of Ordnance
Services of commands.
By the end of April, as progress towards completion seemed slow and time
was getting short, the Director of Staff Duties decided that special measures
were necessary to clarify the situation and speed up issues of outstanding
deficiencies.
Weekly meetings were held under his chairmanship with heads
of production and sponsor branches and representatives of Headquarters,
21 Army Group, in order to report progress.
Assistant Directors of Ordnance Services of active formations (and also of
'ertain static formations responsible for mobilizing units) were also called to
special conferences at the War Office.
Finally, the Director of Staff Duties approved a scheme by which all major
deficiencies accepted by War Offce Branches for issue were to be collected
direct from ordnance depots by Assistant Directors of Ordnance Services with
