issue the enemy new ledge, eil in the ee for mom the no That
mobilization procedure.
It frequently happened (particularly in the case of
units of the Royal Armoured Corps) that on the conclusion of a unit's or
formation's mobilization in other respects, no final decision as to the type,
and sometimes even the scale and armament, of its "A" vehicles had been
reached, or at least made known.
These vehicles were subsequently released for issue by the appropriate
War Office controlling branch with the Director of Staff Duties'
under special secret arrangements.
The Mobilization Directorate and the
General Staff were kept informed of progress towards completion.
(g) Effect of late issues of " B" vehicles to units mobilizing as part of large force
(e 9. 21 Army Group)
As the war progressed, the provision of "B" vehicles became perhaps the
biggest problem in the mobilization of units.
This was particularly the case
in 21 Army Group, whose vehicles were still arriving almost up to "D" day.
The very large numbers, and the variety of types of vehicles involved,
together with their spares, tools, and first-aid outfits, presented a gigantic
task for War Office branches concerned and for Vehicle Issue Depots under
the centralized control of the depot at Chilwell.
The situation was complicated by two factors :—
(i) The difficulty of accommodating, and maintaining in a serviceable
condition, the enormous numbers of vehicles of all types and dimensions
required for issue, often at very short notice; and
(ii) The uncertainty of dates, quantities, etc., of arrivals from the United
States (because of delays in shipping and submarine activities) of whole
vehicles, tyres and spare parts.
The seriousness of these delayed issues had a delaying and deleterious
effect upon the operational training of the units concerned.
Frequently commanding officers reported that many of their drivers had
never handled or even seen several of the types of vehicles with which the
unit was to be equipped.
Late issues also resulted in considerable delays in the supply of first-aid
M.T. outfits, which are dependent for their composition on the nature of the
vehicles.
This shortcoming was most serious in the case of units and formations of
21 Army Group ordered to mobilize in the later stages, whose vehicles were
only received very shortly, in some cases only a few days, before "D" day.
During the last week of May, 1944, no less than 6,000 vehicles were issued
to units under instructions from the Central Ordnance Depot at Chilwell.
Apart from the dislocation within formations and units by the receipt of so
large a number of new vehicles very shortly before "D" day, the loss to units
of these vehicles during their previous training was serious.
APPENDIX A
(See page 8)
(110/Staff/1375)
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF MOBILIZATION
1. The Deputy Director of Mobilization is charged with three duties:—
(a) The issue of instructions for the truens he of uncons it she Diaration,
Deputy Directors and the in Branches a may co
necessary in order to
(8) V ensure that Was and unid which in tact
provision of personnel and material, and assist in clearing up difficulties which
units are experiencing.
unit may not complete mobilization by the date ordered ;
He will inform the Doctor of by the det orderers pital thit faiy
!
mobilization on the
date laid down, this fact
will be similarly
renorted.
(c) " Co-ordination of all 'A' matters" in connection with planning by G.S. (P).
Intere Deput Drector Cime the A.G:'s liaison officer with G.S. (P) and
hi it Kill he sudy report do a necessary to the - 10 ChA) and DA. . (B)
formation or unit commanders.
4ở The De by Dire of Mobilization will have under his immediate direction
and Mobilization for all administrative purposes.
The Deputy Ditton Matie pipell be wil the he or fReenering
He will inform the D.R.M.
(Sgd.) P. G. SCARLETT.
D.A.G. (A).
27th August, 1940.
Copies to All Directors.
