During the first three months of 1945, 108 more units were mobilized for
India and South East Asia Command (while at the same time 46o units were
mobilized for North West Europe).
The former included two Electrical and
Mechanical Companies ;
one Army Troops Company;
one Mechanical
Equipment Company, Royal Engineers; one Air Formation Signals; one
Movement Control Group; and an Air Despatch Company, Royal Army
Service Corps.
Once again in view of the situation in North Western Europe, most of
these units had to be raised from the beginning and their equipment assembled
at ordnance depots for despatch direct to port.
Owing to the dated pro-
gramme of motor transport ship convoys, it was generally necessary for unit
vehicles to be shipped separately on motor transport ships, usually before the
despatch of the units.
Detailed Planning
A firm Order of Battle for Force 143 was issued by the Director of Staff
Duties at the end of March and detailed planning on this basis was under-
taken, bearing in mind still nebulous factors arising out of the continuance of
operations in Europe, i.e. what numbers of personnel, equipment, vehicles, etc.,
would be available and when.
Calculations of personnel were instituted with Record Offices and General
Headquarters 2nd Echelon, 21 Army Group, with a view to estimating the
numbers who would be affected in the various age and service groups in the
event of partial demobilization being opened on the conclusion of operations
As regards equipment, a policy conference was called early in April by
the Assistant Chief of Imperial General Staff (Weapons), followed by detailed
discussions under the Director of Liaison and Munitions.
agreed upon was that units returning to this country for re-mobilization before
despatch to the Far East would bring back with them personal arms and
equipment only, but that, because of the shortage of certain items of Army
Form G1og8 equipment (which would not be essential to 21 Army Group
after cessation of hostilities), such items would also be brought back. A list
of these articles would be prepared in good time and notified to all concerned
The balance of Army Form GIog8 equipment would be issued
in the United Kingdom, reserves being shipped in bulk.
As regards vehicles, in order to keep the planning as simple as possible and
to economize in shipping, it was decided to send only the essential minimum
from the United Kingdom, i.e. those types in short supply which could not
be provided in sufficient time or quantities in India.
vehicles would be sent boxed.
Ás a general rule,
Efforts were made at the same time to fix War Establishments on a
standardized basis and to apply the appropriate Army Form G1098 in each
case, in order that calculations might be instituted on an approximately
For planning purposes it was assumed that " D " day (in this case the day
on which German organized resistance would end) would be goth June, 1945,
and calculations were based on this assumption.
termination of hostilities was 4th May, 1945.
Actually the date of
WO217
Progress (May, 1945, onwards)
During the period of intensive planning related above, the maximum
resources
were concentrated on maintaining the forces in the European
theatres.
In April and May 386 units were mobilized for Europe, while
only 35 units were mobilized for India and South East Asia Command.
During June, however,
and a further i40 were prepared before the Armistice with Japan on
15th August, 1945-
The very extensive programme of mobilization envisaged by the Order of
Battle issued in May, 1945, of which the first phase was to be completed by
December, was never put into effect, owing to the sudden collapse of the
Japanese resistance.
Personnel
The provision of personnel during this phase was not a simple matter.
The undesirability of sending to the Far East men who had already done long
periods of service overseas during the war or who, in the event of the war
ending, would be eligible for return to the United Kingdom shortly afterwards
for release, was self-evident, and resulted in the issue of a number of instruc-
tions with a view to avoiding this contingency.
These instructions were
embodied in the Mobilization Urgent Memoranda in agreement with the
Director of Organization.
Men the en of to a parasily war inered in the Mobiri tingene
This precluded
any officer or man who had had two and a half years' service overseas during
the war without an intervening period of six months in the United Kingdom,
from being sent overseas to the Far East.
As the war in Europe drew to a close and the plans for the release of men
from the Service became known, these restrictive instructions became more
numerous and comprehensive, and were issued in pamphlet form in June,
The relevant paragraphs applicable to each theatre of
published in the appropriate Mobilization Urgent Memoranda.
The effect of these restrictions was to curtail considerably the resources
available to posting authorities.
This, in addition to the conflicting demands
between the requirements of 2t Army Group and new units being despatched
to India, added greatly to the difficulties of bringing units up to Establishment
Moreover, the termination of hostilities in Europe was
also the signal for increased demands for the release of men, often the most
These difficulties also made the carly posting of men impracticable, with
the result that it frequently happened that men
moment without an adequate amount of embarkation leave.
numerous complaints from teen and their families, and to a few cases of
absenteeism.
The time taken for the mobilization of personnel was also greater after
May, 1945, since in each case ta numbers available for posting from
2 Army Group had to be acertained trom G.H.Q., 2nd Echelon, and all
men posted from overseas had to be given 28 days' leave.
