for mobilization are not misused for other duties.
In the event of any
such unit having to be moved from its mobilization station for operational
was found essential for a small administrative headquarters to
remain behind to receive personnel, equipment, etc., arriving for mobilization
during the unit's absence, and to report progress.
Organization-Headquarters of Commands
(a) Essential duties
and responsibility connected with units mobilizing in
commands
The responsibility of headquarters of commands to the War Office for the
supervision of the mobilization of units located within their geographical
areas was an essential and important link in the chain of mobilization
procedure.
It was found that the delegation to any lower authority (e.g. headquarters,
district or division) of the power to deal direct with the War Office could only
be justified in the event of extreme urgency or where considerable technical
details, stores,
etc., directly controlled by the War Office, were involved in a
mobilization.
(b) Importance of provision of adequate and static staff for mobilization duties
To enable headquarters of commands to
carry out this supervision
efficiently and urgently, an adequate staff should be provided for this purpose.
It was found necessary for one second grade staff officer to be charged with
ponsibility at all times.
It is specially important that this officer
should be changed as seldom as possible, since personal touch with War
Office branche
ordnance depots and local Royal Army Ordnance Corps and
Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineer officers is a considerable factor in
the smooth working of the mobilization machine.
This second grade staff officer should have " Mobilization" as his priority
subject, to which all other subjects should be subordinated.
He should be
allowed
transport whenever available to enable him to visit important or
difficult units in the command during their mobilization.
A third grade staff officer to assist and understudy the second grade officer
was also found to be essential to cover sickness, leave or officiating periods in
a higher appointment in the absence of the permanent incumbent.
Organization-Mobilization Centres
(a) Important and useful functions in war
Mobilization centres were found to be a very great asset in war, especially
for the formation and mobilization of new units.
Wherever practicable,
units of a corps or department should be mobilized under the aegis of their
appropriate corps or department at their own mobilization centres.
Other
units not mobilizing as part of a formation can best be located at a general
mobilization centre for the period of theit mobilization, in order to beneft
from the advice and assistance of the expert staffs of these centres.
WORTY
(b) Importance of adequate and suitable staff
Stas for mobilization centres, within the maximum ceiling, should be
adequate, in view of their numerous duties connected with mobilization and
administration and the long hours inherent in the nature of these duties.
They should be carefully selected in relation to their special duties, but,
for reasons of man-power, should be taken from those not fit for more active
Individuals should be changed only rarely, so far as is consistent with
their not being deprived of promotion thereby.
(c) Transport
The importance of the provision of transport on a limited scale at the
disposal of the commandant for
his immediate
needs
was frequently
emphasized.
These vehicles should have a cadre of reliable drivers, who
should be changed as rarely as possible, because of the special importance of
local knowledge in urgent mobilizations.
Supplementary vehicles should be
made available also on urgent call, as required by the commandant, for normal
mobilization and administrative purposes.
Personnel
(a) Avoidance of delays on general mobilization
If there is likely to be any scruple about using the word " Mobilization" in
the early stages of call-up of personnel (i.e.
before general mobilization is
ordered), all documents held in peace-time for this purpose must be re-worded
otherwise they will not be available for use and avoidable delays will occur.
(b) Nominations in peace-time for mobilization appointments to be adhered to
It is very desirable that nominations be made and maintained up to date in
peace-time for certain key appointments on mobilization.
This had been
done in 1939, and many of these nominees had been accepted for their
appointments some time previously and had learnt their duties; but there
was an almost wholesale change-over as soon as mobilization was ordered.
It is important that these nominees for mobilization appointments be
changed as seldom as possible, and not at all except for very special reasons
after mobilization has actually been ordered.
This applies to appointments both inside and outside the War Office.
is especially important that the Mobilization Directorate should be brought up
to full War Establishment at the first indication of general mobilization.
(c) No drastic changes in establishments to be made on mobilization
authorized on mobilization.
Changes in organization and establishments should not be necessary or
6o other ranks.
In one instance (G.H.Q.,
Ist Echelon) an
alteration in War Establishment resulted in an increase of five officers and
and vehicles.
Even minor changes in organization and personnel may have
far-reaching repercussions a changed re-allotment of personnel, equipment
(d) Provision of staff for H.Q.s of commands on mobilization
Considerable extra work is thrown upon the stafis of commands as soon as
the mobilization procedure begins to operate.
To deal adequately and
