Royal Army Service Corps maintained in this country a Vehicle Collecting
Centre for the collection, preparation and distribution of non-technical load-
and passenger-carrying vehicles both for overseas and for home units, and
also a Vehicle Reserve Depot at Feltham with similar duties.
Royal Army Service Corps maintained a Vehicle Reception
Depot for reception of vehicles from the Vehicle Collecting Centre and
Royal Army Ordnance Corps maintained in this country a Vehicle Shipment
Depot to repon in War Bia dement of met an A and chained
reserves of Royal Army Ordnance Corps vehicles.
Overseas, Royal Army Ordnance Corps maintained a Vehicle Disembarka-
tion Depot to receive all vehicles and guns of mechanized Royal Artillery
batteries and also non-technical "B" vehicles of Royal Army Service Corps
These vehicle centres and depots did not exist in peace and had to be
formed immediately on mobilization.
Vehicles to bring units up to full scale were issued to units at their place of
mobilization,
unserviceable or training vehicles being withdrawn at the
same time.
Spares for mobilization vehicles held in peace-time accompanied units
overseas-
-if not already held, these were issued overseas.
Spares for
impressed vehicles were issued with the vehicles.
LESSONS (Vehicles)
A.—As a result of the experience of the British Expeditionary Force in
France during this period, the system of dual maintenance and repair was
found to be wasteful both in men and material.
A Committee, consisting of
a senior technical officer (Lt.-Col. afterwards Major-General R. G. Lewis,
R.T.R.) with two civilian members from the London Passenger Transport
Board and Standard Telephones and Cables respectively, investigated this
problem and issued their report in February, 1940.
In this the Committee recommended that these two separate organizations,
together with the repair organization of Royal Engineer Services, should be
co-ordinated under one Control at G.H.Q.
B.— This Report was further considered by a Special Committee formed
at the War Office in April, 1940, under the Deputy Quartermaster-General (B)
(Major-General D. S. Collins) with the Director of Staff Duties (W), Deputy
Director, Mobilization, and M.G.O.F.(A) as members.
Their recommenda-
tions included one to the effect that to enable the Quartermaster-General,
British Expeditionary Force, to co-ordinate all repairs and stores holding
organizations in the British Expeditionary Force, an additional Deputy
Quartermaster-General should be appointed with the direct responsibility
for co-ordinating these activities on behalf of the Quartermaster-General.
C.— The effect of these recommendations foreshadowed a considerable
tradesmen, of which there was an acute shortage.
saving both in repair and maintenance tools and spares, and also in skilled
WO21
CHAPTER XI-POST-DUNKIRK PERIOD (after May, 1940)
Detailed Procedure
The detailed procedure by which a unit was prepared for war was kept as
simple as possible.
Nevertheless, in view of the technical nature of units of
a modern army and the number of departments and branches concerned, it
was inevitable at first that complications should arise and that contrary orders
should at times be issued.
With a view to reducing such complications to a
minimum, it was decided that all executive orders for mobilization should be
issued by A.G.5 (Mob.), based on data provided by S.D. branches after
consultation, or communication, with sponsor or other branches concerned.
These data from S.D. branches were furnished on mobilization pro formas
(specimen at Appendix C) prepared by, or in conjunction with, the branch
sponsoring the unit's mobilization, and had to include the following essential
particulars: War Establishment, A.F. Giog8 scale; whether ist reinforce-
ments were to be included; present location; suggested place of mobiliza-
tion; any special scale or detail of issue of vehicles; any special scale of
clothing; amount of embarkation leave, and date by which mobilization is
required to be completed.
actin order top once the with thor mobilization, born to co ordinate the
the War Office, the Mobilization branch issued in May, 1940, the publication
entitled " Unit Mobilization (War)."
This manual was divided into two
parts, the first part being devoted to pre-mobilization action to be taken by
units already in existence. (In the later editions, 1942 and 1944, Part II was
subdivided into Parts II and III, the latter detailing action to be taken after
the date of mobilization and before the despatch of units overseas.)
The process of mobilization was constantly disturbed in the early stages after
Dunkirk by the threat of invasion, which necessitated the de-centralization of
a considerable measure of control and responsibility over the movements of
units, distribution of weapons and equipment, etc., down to G.H.Q., Home
Forces.
A great deal of improvisation and change of plan became unavoidable, and
it was found necessary to introduce " Standing Orders for Units Mobilizing
for Overseas "
which amplified
modified the permanent instructions
contained in " Unit Mobilization (War) " in order to meet temporary situa-
tions as they arose. Any of these Standing Orders which became of permanent
application was embodied in the next revised edition of " Unit Mobilization
The actual orders for the mobilization of units were conveyed to all
In the preparation of the details of these Urgent Memoranda, numerous
War Office branches were concerned. At the same time, generally speaking,
their issue was a matter of some urgency, for the earlier they were issued the
longer the period allowed for actual mobilization (and for subsequent unit
training when time permitted).
