(6) Insistence upon the invariable use of a pro forma to contain all relevant
data, instead of somewhat vague or voluminous minutes as had often been
the practice in the past, was a great advantage.
(c) The importance of immediate co-ordination between sponsor branches
and Q.(O.S.)i for
the production of an Army Form G098 (Equipment
was emphasized.
In the past, delay in production of Army Form
Grogs had often held up the commencement of mobilization of a unit,
thereby in some cases reducing the length of time allowed for mobilization.
(d) The need for co-ordination between sponsor branches, G.H.Q., Home
Forces, Q.i and A.G.5 (Mob.) in regard to the place of mobilization selected
for each unit and the avoidance of any move of the unit during the period of
mobilization were stressed.
D
These were vital factors, and even this warning
was not sufficiently powerful to avoid its subsequent disregard in many cases.
The reaction
of branches to this Directive was slow, and comparatively
little data had reached A.G.5 (Mob.) by 5th July. A second memorandum
had therefore to be issued by the Deputy Director of Staff Duties with a
view to speeding up action.
The date fixed for completion of mobilization
of the first batch of units was 7th August. This left only just over a month
for completion of these units.
Assuming that the data contained in the pro formas received from branches
the number of Mobilization Urgent Memoranda that could
be issued by Á.G.5 (Mob.) was limited to about five each day, according to
the complexity or otherwise of the contents.
After compilation in draft,
each Urgent Memorandum had to be typed on wax, checked, signed and the
requisite number of copies (strictly limited but nevertheless numerous) run
off by duplicator. Each copy had then to be addressed, with a receipt for
each copy, and despatched.
The time taken between the Deputy Director of Staff Duties' meeting and
the actual receipt by units of their Urgent Memoranda was not infrequently
a matter of several days.
This was generally owing to failure by sponsor branches to check with
headquarters of commands concerned the present locations of units and
whether they were suitable for mobilization purposes, or to notify Q.(O.S.)i
that a new Army Form G1og8 was required to fit the new War Establishment
on which it was desired to mobilize a unit.
All such delays reduced accordingly the period allowed for units'
During 1941 the greatest number of units mobilized in a month was 304,
and the average number monthly was 165.
number monthly was 275•
day, Ist September,
204 units (including 50 units of i1 Armoured Division) were mobilized.
Approximately x,500 units were mobilizentor first Army before ist October,
1942, and a further 120 after that date.
WO217
The average number of days allowed for mobilization of units was 26.
Considering the fact that units for First Army were not authorized to have
embarkation leave, this average number of days was on the whole liberal
except in specially difficult cases.
In a number of cases only 12-15 days were allowed, which was found to
be inadequate for smooth and complete mobilization.
LESSONS
A.—Probably the most important lesson learnt during this comparatively
short but intensive phase was the paramount importance to the success of any
plan for mobilization of a large force of control and co-ordination of the large
number of branches and individuals concerned.
Separate individual action by any one branch or failure by a branch to
contribute towards the combined effort may confuse the issue and derange
It was constantly proved that where mobilization arrangements were
worked to an agreed procedure by all concerned, the machinery ran smoothly.
In almost every case where there were difficulties or deficiencies (except
where time was insufficient), these were owing to failure on the part of some
individual or department to work to the agreed procedure.
The Deputy Director of Staff Duties' directive, if worked to by all con-
cerned, should have given good results and have provided A.G.5 (Mob.) with
the necessary data accurately and without undue delay, on a uniform system.
B.—To enable mobilization orders to reach units without delay, the actual
" present location" of a unit must be known beyond doubt.
from the local command in each case is a necessary precaution. Failure by
sponsor branches to take this precaution resulted in numerous amendments
having to be made by A.G.5 (Mob.) in the Mobilization Urgent Memoranda,
with consequent avoidable delay in these orders reaching units after being
C.- The practice of changing the organization of units and formations
shortly before the launching of an expedition creates a number of difficulties
in the way of completion of its smooth mobilization.
Operational lessons during war must be applied in terms of organization,
establishments, weapons, etc., but the effect of such application during the
process of preparation of a new Force requires careful consideration.
unit was urgently required, it was found to be more satisfactory to mobilize
it on its existing organization, establishment, Army Form Grog8, etc., than
to attempt to change these immediately before its mobilization.
Adjustments in organization, etc., can then be made on arrival at destina-
tion, weapons, stores, etc., being shipped out in bulk for that purpose.
A Hay mobilition on de War Bea bien ees wit perid by eared
Ordnance Depots, usually ended in confusion and the despatch of the unit
only semi-reorganized and deficient of important stores.
