MAIN LESSONS
Equipment
Effect of major changes of plan
grave deficiencies " of certain items of equipment referred to in
the Controller a Ordnance Services s report made at the time were manly
owing to the change of plan shortly before mobilization, which increased the
Expeditionary Force by two divisions and many army and corps troops units.
These additions included Territorial Army formations and units, for which no
adequate preparation had been made.
This major change of plan, especially at the last minute, seriously dis-
organized the functions of ordnance depots on mobilization, ready to work to
a previously prepared plan, which would in itself have taxed their resources
to the utmost capacity.
Such sudden changes of plan should be avoided unless there is good reason
to believe that there is adequate time to re-arrange mobilization equipment
preparations to suit the revised plan.
(b) Storage of mobilization equipment
Equipments required to be held in peace should preferably be
assembled ready for issue, in units' charge wherever possible.
(c) Distribution of war stores
Reserves of accommodation stores and clothing should be distributed about
the country, ready for issue to the various " mobilization centres," " places
of mobilization," etc.
(d) Overseas reserves
Overseas reserves
are most suitably packed ready for despatch. It is
simpler to unpack for periodical inspection and turn-over than to be faced
with a sudden rush-packing on mobilization.
(e) Peace plans for expansion and replenishment in war
A complete plan should exist in peace-time for the placing of orders for
expansion and replenishment of stocks, so that firms know what items they
are required to produce and by what date.
This plan should be constantly
reviewed by an expert staff and revised where necessary.
(P) Need for provision of funds in peace-time to enable mobilization plans to be
It is not sufficient to plan ahead on these lines; such plans should be duly
approved and sanction accorded in peace-time for the provision of the
necessary funds and personnel.
This sanction had not been accorded in 1939.
(g) Stocks and
output of instruments required on mobilization for military
purposes to be " frozen" on mobilization under peace-time arrangements
Among the most serious shortages were instruments of various kinds,
e.g. binoculars, compasses, rangefinders, watches, etc.
Unofficial efforts were made through the Press to obtain these items from
private sources on loan, but a very large number were required for Home
Defence, and units going overseas showed considerable deficiencies of these
WO217
Arrangements should exist in peace-time by which, on mobilization, the
entire stocks and output of manufacturers of these instruments should be
reserved for issue only to Service Departments.
(h) Need for early decision as regards Orders of Battle, War Establishments,
introduction of new weapons, scale of clothing, etc.
The need for comprehensive advanced planning and early decision on
matters of establishments apply with special force to equipment problems.
Owing to the very large number and the great variety of items which go to
make up the war-outfit of a unit of a modern Army, the hasty equipping of a
unit at short notice is impracticable without a certain amount of dislocation,
changes in priorities, etc.
"Orders of Baly preciated that re-organization of units, changes in
War Establishments,
advertised sailings, priorities,
overseas scales and
patterns of clothing, etc., all threw considerable extra
work upon ordnance branches, depots, etc.
The immediate effect of some of these changes (especially War Establish-
ments) was the need for a new or revised Army Form G10g8, without which
it was impracticable to mobilize the unit affected.
Delays in printing added
further to the difficulties of getting these new equipment scales issued
rapidly to units, ordnance depots and others concerned with units mobilizing.
Ordnance depots were faced with a heavy and continuous load of bulk ship-
ments, reserves, etc., in addition to their mobilization programmes.
changes referred to above had the effect of constantly changing priorities, in
some cases when the existing priorities were half completed."
bound to cause some temporary dislocation and delay in a machine working
So far as is practicable, therefore, changes in Orders of
Battle, War Establishments, etc., should be reduced to the essential minimum.
(i) Functions of Command Ordnance Depots in war
The system which was gradually developed during the war of expanding
the work of command ordnance depots to enable them to issue as many
uncontrolled stores as possible to mobilizing units was not altogether
successful, owing to continued shortages of many items.
The effect of this was that after some delay in checking lists with Army
Form Grog8 or other authorization, available items were assembled for issue
to units, and non-availabilities were listed and demanded from central
ordnance depots, sometimes several depots being involved for one unit.
Thus the undoubted advantages of indenting upon and drawing from
command depots, which were in most cases considerably closer to units than
were central ordnance depots, were largely offset by the subsequent delays
which occurred (in command de pots) before deficieney lists of non-availabilities
To be completely successful, such a system demands a full complement of
stores, so that issues made from command depots can be practically roo per
These command depots can be immediately
replenished from central or these depots before stocks at the former are
unduly depleted by further issues to mobilizing units.
careful prevision and the earliest possible notice of forthcoming mobilizations
