Control
Clutch pedal at left, throttle pedal preferably in centre, and brake pedal at
right.
Clutch and brake pedal to be marked "C" and "B"
respectively.
Means of adjusting slope of top of pedals to be provided.
Provision to be
made so that feet can be kept continuously on pedals if desired.
The pressure
and range of travel to permit of easy control by average driver.
Pull-on brake
lever to be at right, and well clear of change-speed lever.
Levers for throttle
and ignition must have movement independent of steering wheel.
Both should
move forward on a rack to increase speed and have index plates.
On releasing
throttle pedal, throttle should return to position set by lever.
All control
connections are to be by rods and not by wires or chains.
Lubrication
Oil lubrication is desired so far as possible, combined with wick-feed,
, lubricators without loose caps.
Capacity of engine lubrication system sufficient
for 200 miles loaded running.
All lubricators for engine and gear-box must
work efficiently with W.D. standard lubricant.
This has a specific gravity of
• 895 at 60 degrees Fahrenheit, a flash temperature not lower than 204•4 degrees
Centigrade (400 degrees Fahrenheit), viscosity for 50 cu. cms., minimum 260 secs.
at 60 degrees Centigrade or 70 secs. at 99 degrees Centigrade.
Cold test, to
be wholly liquid at 10 degrees Centigrade (50 degrees Fahrenheit).
A legible lubrication diagram, also one of the order of ignition, preferably
engraved on metal, should be attached to the inside of dashboard.
Ball and Roller Bearings
These should conform to B.E.S.A. standards : (A) single row ball journal
bearings-Interim Report C.L. 2582, April, 1919 ; (B) ball and roller bearings-
A.8, February, 1919.
Screw Threads
British standard fine screw threads are desired so far as possible, but the
following will be accepted in addition: British Standard Whitworth screw
threads for bolts and nuts, British Standard screw threads for brass and copper
tubes.
Acceptance of any other thread will have to be considered.
It is desired that materials employed should be in accordance with those
specifications of the B.E.S.A. which apply, and that, where high-tensile steels
are employed, parts should be stamped with the letter " T," followed by the
ultimate tensile strength. Manufacturers must satisfy the War Department
that, where materials are not obtained in the country, no appreciable delay in
obtaining exactly suitable materials from British firms will result in case of war.
Repairs and Maintenance
Due consideration to be given to accessibility for inspection, adjustment,
lubrication, replacement and repair.
It is desirable for provision to be made
for second and third replacement standards for parts subject to heavy wear.
Engine, frame, gear-box and back axle must be clearly marked with an assembly
WO 277/26
7-8
part number.
Full sets of cloth or process tracings of dimensioned working
drawings are to be supplied with every type of vehicle.
They must give informa-
ton on such points as number, width and thickness of spring leaves; number,
depth, pitch and shape of pinion teeth, size and threads of screwed parts.
Details of the equipment and standard tool kit are given in appendices to
the schedule.
General Notes
Where the term " approved" is mentioned, full details of the design of the
actual part, if necessary, must be submitted to the Board.
Vehicles are to be reasonably quiet on all gears.
The following tests will be applied to the vehicle, loaded except where
Weights will be ascertained for front and rear axles separately
in respect of the bare chassis without equipment and batteries and of the
complete vehicle empty and fully loaded.
As regards speed, this will be tested from a flying start for a distance of at
least one mile on a level road; next will be the average speed maintained for
two hours on a selected route, which will include gradients of 1 in 15.
hill-climbing the vehicle will be tried for average speed up a gradient of 1 in 10.
Foot and hand brakes will be tested separately, with the gear lever in neutral
position, on a gradient of 1 in 5, from a minimum initial speed of 5 m.p.h. The
distance required to bring the vehicle to rest from the point of application of the
brake, and without assistance from the other brake, will be noted.
continuous application test has already been described.
The fuel consumption tests will be taken during the average road-speed test,
and then on a level road.
Tests over rough ground will be conducted mainly to try the non-skids and
their attachments, overheating of water, and springing.
They will include trials
on soft sand up to 10 in. deep, on an unmetalled lane with soft surface and on
Frame distortion will be tried by jacking up one front wheel until the other
is off the ground.
In this condition it must be possible to operate the steering
wheel, clutch, brakes, change-speed lever, starting handle, etc.
The vehicle will be driven through slow-running water 18 in. deep. This
must not affect the running of the engine.
During the final examination of the chassis it will be liable to any additional
minor tests as may be deemed expedient in the circumstances.
