and further—
" The W.D. may always indicate what it desires, but insistence, in
specifications for ordinary transport vehicles, on the adoption of new ideas
must always be tempered by a clear realization of what is commercially
practicable at the moment."
Both these papers were prepared by responsible staff officers, and were the
public expression of accepted policy in the War Office for some years previously.
There is no doubt that such a policy was a retrograde step from the earlier
principle that the military vehicle must be specially designed, but it was dictated
by the alarming state of the country's finances at that time, and by a lack of
appreciation on the part of the Treasury of the increasing importance of
mechanization of the Army to the country's safety. The principle of the special
military vehicle was not abandoned by the War Office, but the possibility, which
became a certainty in the 1930s, was being foreseen that the production of special
vehicles was not in itself likely to be sufficient for the Army's needs on mobili-
ation.
The War Office officially recognized the problem and attacked it by
encouraging the production of commercial vehicles suitable for military use.
The first step, taken in 1922, was to produce a specification for a 30-cwt. 4 × 2
pneumatic-tyred vehicle, based on the Fiat T.E.R. of the last war.
British
manufacturers were invited to tender for the supply of sample vehicles built to
this specification.
Of the few who did so, none was able to comply completely
with the specification except by producing a specially designed vehicle, the price
of which was prohibitive and the type unattractive to the civil user.
As the
intention was that for every vehicle purchased in peace-time by the Army ten
should be available for purchase on mobilization from the manufacturers, their
agents or the commercial user, it can be seen that the scheme was doomed to
failure unless the specification appealed to the civil user.
The specification was
therefore revised and a concession made to the prejudices of the day by sanction-
ing the use of solid tyres provided that they could be quickly changed over to
In addition, the Main Subsidy Scheme of 1912 was revived and
prepeat in 1923, but the maximum numbers to which it applied were raised
from 650 to 1,000. With these additional inducements the scheme became a
success and the full quota of vehicles was quickly obtained.
In May, 1927,
the " Medium" 6 x 4 vehicle was also subsidized on the same terms, but
proved unpopular with the commercial user.
The subsidy on the 30-cwt.
4 × 2 type was at the same time gradually withdrawn.
Progress in civil design
had by this time been considerable, and in view of taxation? and traffic regulations
much attention had been paid to the light 4 × 2 vehicle with a comparatively
pay-load.
advanced.
The War Office specification, although technically very
, appeared inappropriate to current conditions.
Its insistence on
six wheels and two driven axles was based on the experience in the 1914-18 war
of the difficulties of road and cross-country transport in the shell-torn morasses
of France and Flanders, and was intended to overcome the worst of such
conditions as well as those of the Middle East. For the same reasons the
Appen D is or the subsidy and of the specification of the 30-ewt. vehicle are shown at
and A mi hid sch me mort to at by the in i ce and representatives portion rems
the los which, and i an emporair of any money in subsidy foes owing to the existing
(3) See Part I, Chapter III.
WO27T/26
78
War Office also demanded pneumatic tyres, whose worth had been proved,
especially by the Italians, towards the end of the war. In this, military thought
was some years ahead of the inclinations of manufacturers and civil users, but
as was later admitted,' this insistence on multi-axled pneumatic tyred vehicles
had a far-reaching effect on the development of the motor industry.
The value
of these requirements was, however, obscured by the low pay-load/vehicle weight
ration implied by the specification.
As this rigid specification removed the
attractions of the subsidy, an attempt was made in 1932 to gain commercial
support by substituting a general performance requirement for the detailed
design specification under which vehicles had to be constructed of specified
components and to conform precisely to the limits laid down.
Under the new
scheme any suitable components could be employed, and apart from some
dimensional conditions, the main requirement was that the specified performance
should be achieved.
This performance was tested by practical trial on a road
circuit in the Welsh hills first adopted in 1928. These trials now became an
annual event of some importance.
The new policy was considerably more
successful, but it meant that subsidized vehicles would in future be mainly of
civilian type.
The expectation under the earlier scheme had been that a fair
proportion of vehicles impressed on mobilization would be of the subsidy, or
special type.
Now this source of supply was at an end, and the War Office
was faced with the necessity of securing the 6 x 4 vehicles upon which it still
pinned its faith by direct contract.
As it seemed evident that neither industrial
capacity nor finance would be sufficient for the necessary construction of vehicles
for the expanded war establishments of the 1930's, the Crosland Committee
was formed in 1934 to consider to what extent the 3-ton 6 x 4 military vehicle
could be replaced by civilian type 4 x 2 transport.
Partly as the result of the
findings of this Committee, the subsidy scheme was abandoned in 1935, and
from that time onwards the Army depended for the bulk of its requirements,
other than special vehicles, upon impressment and hiring of commercial types
The Crosland Committee proved to be of considerably more importance
than was suggested by its terms of reference, which were, as has been said, the
consideration of possible reductions in the numbers of 3-ton 6 x 4 vehicles
Soon after its formation the Western Plan was
adopted, and the Committee took the opportunity of relating its investigations
to the implications of this change of policy for military transport in general. The
principles had been stated in 1928 that 4 × 2 lorries were obsolescent for
military purposes, and it has been shown that supply was not equal to the
consequent demand for 6-wheeled vehicles.
50 per cent. of 6-wheeled vehicles should be replaced by 4 x 2 types, the
Committee appeared to be taking a retrograde step.
(*) Ministry of Supply, T.T.2, Bulletin No. 4, Feb., 1944.
compare the
(3) The subsidy was not large-
Froeh subsidy of appoint la €520 20 tid in six half yety in ney es as carly as
1910, vide " The Commercial Motor.'
as the pestion of taxation in die proposion do the that i an at of ioning is diet,
vehicles made a
three-axle vehicle, of no greater carrying capacity, unattractive to the trade.
(4) 57/Vehs/6060.
(5) See Chapter I.
(6) 57/Vehs/6060./
