What was possibly the most far-reaching of the Committee's recommenda-
tions was that the bulk of the new requirement for 3-ton 4-wheelers should be
provided by impressment.
It had already been ascertained by a Committeel
considering war reserves of vehicles that only 1,900 of this type of vehicle were
available for impressment towards the 3,693 required, and the Crosland Com-
mittee suggested that the situation might be improved by the inclusion of
compression ignition vehicles and by a lowering of the standards of performance
required of impressed vehicles.
These recommendations were carried out,
and still further increased the lack of homogeneity of the Army's transport,
against which its more mechanically minded members had been protesting since
the end of the 1914-18 war.
The reduction in the use of 6-wheelers recommended by the Crosland Report
was offset to some extent by the decision in the following year, 1936, to adopt
6-wheelers as tractors for the new A.A. guns and as an alternative to Dragons.
Difficulties in the supply and cost of these vehicles revived interest in the
4 × 4 vehicle, which had been neglected since the early 1920s.
Increasing
German development of this type also pointed to its value. Three firms,
Commer, Guy and Morris-Commercial, produced in 1937 to the specification of
the Mechanization Board experimental 4 x 4 tractors of which those produced
by the latter two firms were approved late in 1938 as field artillery tractors.
The use of 4 x 4 vehicles for load carrying purposes, as distinct from tractors,
was not considered until the early months of the war.
In the re-armament programme of 1936-39, the provision of vehicles had a
It was expected that vehicles in large numbers
could be obtained by impressment, and that the comparatively small requirement
for special vehicles could be easily met by existing industrial capacity.
not until 1939 that any real increase took place.
to increase the armament programme from five to ten divisions? There was,
however, an increase in trailers in 1938 to meet the requirements of A.D.G.B.
44 per cent. of the total quantity of vehicles were acquired in 1939 for imminent
mobilization of an expanded force and not as part of the initial re-armament
Reference has already been made to impressment. Another method of
obtaining commercial vehicles was by hiring, as a temporary measure, during
emergency movements necessary in the first stages of mobilization.
description of these complementary systems is necessary, as from the publication
of the Crosland Report in 1935 until at least 1940 they supplied between them
the bulk of the Army's vehicle requirements.
By January, 1938,3 the War Office
requirement was for some 10,000 vehicles for the field force, to be obtained by
impressment of selected civilian vehicles, and for a similar number to be
These figures later proved to be unduly pessimistic, but the
Sia in The Car Comic the rue ter rar to be vend the ford ranson.
(3) 57/Vehs/6238 Minute from Q.M.G. to S. of S., 21st January, 1938.
Inspector of Supplementary
i legin win the b i, i tent the upen vin a Git
contrasted to hiring. which. within
!
WO 27 1/26
obtained by hiring from civilian sources by agreements pre-arranged in peace-
time.
Mobilization schemes of the various home commands were based on
transport provided by hiring, and local action was taken to ascertain from
suitable haulage contractors their ability and willingness to supply in emergency
the required number of vehicles.
No actual contracts were arranged in advance
of an emergency, but where necessary working agreements were made to ensure
that the vehicles would be forthcoming when required.
This system was
considered satisfactory for many years, up to the time when preparations for
air defence of this country began to receive serious attention. It then became
clear that exploration of availability of transport by Commands for military
purposes was overlapping the activities of local committees of the Air Raids
Precautions Department of the Home Office, the Ministry of Transport, and
other bodies concerned with the needs of the civil population.
The Committee of Imperial Defence, on 23rd March, 1937, decided, in
view of the strong and competing demands for road transport for essential
services, to vest in the Ministry of Transport the responsibility in time of
war for provision, allotment and co-ordination of transport services.
Ministry thereupon made enquiries of all Government Departments in order to
discover the number of road transport vehicles required for essential services,
War Office requirements
included, in first priority, local hire of a considerable number of vehicles for the
Anti-Aircraft Divisions under the scheme of Air Defence of Great Britain.
These services involved, during the first 12 hours of mobilization, the move of
personnel from peace stations to war sites, the transport of ammunition from
magazines to gun sites, and other necessary preliminary arrangements. Further
essential services included the transport of stores of units preparing for embarka-
tion with the overseas field force, and maintenance services of units of the
Territorial Army.
The Ministry of Transport was provided by the War Office
with a statement of vehicles required for these purposes.
In November, 1937, an interdepartmental conference was held at the Ministry
to consider the general question of co-ordination of demands and requirements
for road transport, and the allocation of available civilian vehicles for essential
It was there stated that by the end of the year the Ministry of Transport
hoped to have the result of a special census of goods vehicles which would
provide information about their type, capacity and distribution.
Until this
information was received, no co-ordination was considered possible.
Q.M.G.
commented :—
"Commands are at present unable to prepare plans for their mobiliza-
tion needs, partly because other departments are active in the same field
with competing requirements, and partly because contractors themselves
are at a loss to know how to deal with demands from such a variety of
This state of affairs must continue until the Ministry of Transport
takes charge.
Thus the need for early introduction of this centralization
of control is urgent, and until it comes into operation our plans for transport
on mobilization cannot make any sort of satisfactory progress."]
The situation did, however, remain throughout 1938, in spite of somewhat
heated exchanges between the Secretary of State for War, Mr. Hore-Belisha, and
the Ministry of Transport, Dr. Burgin, and in spite of the threat of impending
(1) 57/Vehs/6238. V
