Austin, Humber and Morris-Commercial Cars.
The only firm which had not
cut production was Vauxhall, and the shortage of spares for Bedford lorries,
which this firm produced, was serious.
The War Office took a considerably less
optimistic view, severely criticising the spares production, not only of Vauxhall,
but also of Ford, Matchless, and B.S.A., and suggesting that there were
reasonable grounds for considering that these firms had made no serious
attempt to effect the reductions ordered by the Ministry of Supply. A con-
tributory cause of this failure was an extension of the call-up to the Services,
as it tended, by causing a further shortage of labour, to destroy the effect of
surrender of vehicles to spares production.
was some evidence that
consequent reductions in staff were being effected by withdrawing labour from
the manufacture of spares rather than by spreading the loss evenly throughout
all departments of factories.
The net result was that the War Office was in the
intolerable position of having given up complete vehicles as a deliberate policy
for the acceleration of spares provision, only to find that neither vehicles nor
spares were forthcoming.?
The situation was also intolerable by virtue of the
fact that, in plain words, industry
was disobeying the instructions of the
Ministry of Supply.
Such disobedience knocked away the very foundations
and raison d'etre of a co-ordinating ministry, and ultimately? the matter had to
be raised to ministerial level in order that effective action should be taken.
situation slowly improved, but the cause of improvement was as much that
requirements for the invasion of Europe had been over-estimated as that
production was increased. 4
A chapter headed " The Demands of War" must necessarily be incomplete
and touch only upon certain salient features.
There is no end to the number of
subjects which deserve a more or a less important place, and it is inevitable that
some of importance have been omitted.
One omission, however, must not be
It is essential to an understanding of the magnitude of the vehicle
equipment problems to convey some impression of the numbers involved,
although it is clearly not possible or desirable in the compass of this book to
produce detailed figures of requirements, production and deficiencies throughout
the whole period of the war.
On the other hand, the constantly changing tempo
of the war and the variations of the kind and quantity of equipment required in
relation to the operations being carried out or contemplated, make it somewhat
dangerous to select any one period in order to provide a general picture.
few figures which follow, together with those in Appendix G to this chapter,
must therefore be regarded as illustrating a momentary situation and not the
general course of events.
With this reservation, some useful purpose may be
describing the requirements of the United Nations during 1943
compared with the productive capacity available to meet them, and by giving
a statement of the world-wide vehicle holdings and deficiencies of the " theatres
of British interest " at a random point during that year.
(*) Minutes, 52nd Meeting, Wheeled Vehicles Committee, 9 May, 1944.
(2) See Chapter IV-The Invasion of Europe.
(*) 14th June, 1944, Minutes, 53rd Meeting, Wheeled Vehicles Committee.
(4) Interview D.G.A.R., 1948 (Maj. Gen. Fisher).
58
W027 7/26
28
The total stated requirements of the United Nations for 1943 were 1,952,236,1
including motor-cycles, light cars and trailers.
self-propelled load carriers.
Of this figure, 1,422,778 were
It was estimated that Canada and Great Britain
could produce 355,709 of these latter, which left a balance of 1,067,069, the only
possible source of production of which was the United States. The total
production allowed for in the U.S. at that time was 913,404 vehicles, including
motor-cycles and trailers, of which the number of load-carriers was 650,596.
The difference between requirement and production of load-carriers was therefore
A comparison of total production facilities by types, accepting first
choice of stated requirements by types, showed a production short capacity of
363,474 vehicles and an over capacity of unwanted types of 335,772. An adjust-
ment of these figures, by the substitution of second and third choices of certain
types where production capacity was short, resulted in cutting down the short
capacity of all types of vehicles to 83,235 including 60,865 trucks, and reducing
the over capacity of unwanted types to 56,533.
If, from the figure of 416,473
representing the additional requirement of trucks, is subtracted the figure of
60,865 representing short capacity for production of trucks, the result is a
figure of 355,608 vehicles required in addition to programmed production.
The United States considered that the original programme could be made good
with existing production capacity provided critical materials and manpower
There was no possibility of achieving the total quantity
required, and the only possible solution was to bring the vehicle requirements
in the current Order of Battle into closer relation to the supplies in fact likely to
Without going into wearisome detail, this summary of the
vehicle provision planning for 1943 may be of some assistance in realizing the
scale on which men's minds were working and the way in which total require-
ments were adjusted to total supply.
At the beginning of 1943 there were in Great Britain approximately 320,000
"B" vehicles in service, representing some 85 per cent. of the vehicle war
establishment of forces based in this country. To complete these forces to full
war establishment plus reserves, and allowing for interim maintenance, meant
a requirement of 300,000 more vehicles by April, 1944. United Kingdom
production in that period was considered capable of providing 190,000 vehicles
only, after satisfying the demands of overseas theatres and allies. There was
therefore a potential deficit of 110,000, mainly non-technical types, involving
shipment from Canada of 15-cwt. and 3-ton vehicles, and from the United
States of heavier vehicles.
The entitlements,
holdings and deficiencies of
vehicles in overseas theatres can be studied more readily in tabular form in
Appendix G to this chapter, and some impression gained of the shortages of
equipment which were the constant background to strategical and tactical
planning.
mens sM on 4, in CP.R. B. Truck Comite, hit Proderinand Require-
(* The problem of shippins capacity still remained even if production were possible.
(3) D.D.V., 25 Dec., 1942.
(C31438)
