expected was approximately 30,000 tons.
It was thought possible to reduce
demands to this extent by two economies, both of which were later found to
be
based on unsound calculations, in
which the United States
seriously
underestimated vehicle requirements.
The current estimate of U.S. Army
ruder requirements- including rubber for International Aid was based on an
Army Supply Programme which allowed for some 15 per cent. more vehicles
than were actually to be provided in the year beginning Ist September, 1942.
By the elimination of this 15 per cent, surplus, the bulk of the necessary saving
was to be achieved.
The balance of the saving was to be effected by a cut in
production of vehicles specifically on British Empire account as such provision
was considered not only in excess of strategic requirement but also in excess of
shipping availability.
Both these estimates of reduced requirement-for total
International Aid and for the British Empire- proved to be wrong, but for the
moment a hypothetical balance between supply and demand was struck in this
Way
The consequences of the miscalculations upon which this hypothesis was
based were serious and might well have been disastrous.
At the same time practical steps were taken to prolong the life of tyres by
economy in use and improvements in maintenance.
It was found that tyres
were being run until it was impossible to repair them owing to damage to the
fabric walls, although much life might remain in the tread.
Very great savings
were made by insistence upon the obvious necessity for correct inflation.
was also laid down that covers were to be removed from vehicles while still in
good condition for re-treading, for which purpose re-treading plants were
established.
This incidentally led to further but minor problems of supply of
the various materials required. In addition to military schemes for economy
and improved maintenance, a campaign was organized by the Ministry of
Supply and British tyre manufacturers for the collection of scrap rubber to be
reclaimed and mixed with raw rubber.
Tyres and rubber for civilian purposes
could be obtained only by special permit.
Nevertheless the shortage for military
purposes was so acute that for a long time vehicles were shipped to theatres of
war without carried spares, which were held in store in the proportion of one
to five vehicles.?
The system of provision within the British Army was adequate only when
supplies were plentiful.
It was clearly impossible for tyre manufacturing
companies to maintain maximum production on a basis of intermittent enquiries
which might or might not be followed at a later date by firm orders.?
In the
carly part of 1943 a system was evolved under which consumer theatres and
countries made yearly forecasts, followed by quarterly demands, on the basis
of which adjustments were made to the anticipated quantities shown in the
yearly forecasts.
Provision and Supply Organizations.
These demands were met by the Western Or Eastern Group
The arrangement proved inadequate
largely as the result of overestimation of tre urament by consumers and the
inability of the Provision Grouns to economize bu settine off surpluses in on
country against deficiencies in another. Later in the same vear a revised system
(*) e.g., carbon black.
(2) In spite of the greatly inanced damand for ture production the labour lost to th
A (°) History of the Eastern Group Mrovision and Supply Orcanization: 1941-1946-
86
WO2777
was introduced, whereby the Groups received a quarterly report from each
theatre or country giving details of stocks, " dues in," monthly maintenance
figures, 12 months' requirements, surplus stocks and surplus " dues in" These
reports made it possible to calculate the net provision requirement, to place
firm orders with manufacturers for 3-monthly periods, and to give estimates of
the following quarter's consumption.
This procedure was in operation until
early in 1944, when tyres and tubes were declared a major "Q" controlled
store, and the holdings of Commands were automatically replenished, when
supplies were available, to a level pre-determined by the War Office. Late in
1944, provision responsibility for tyres and tubes and re-treading materials was
transferred from the Provision Groups to the War Office, bringing these supplies
into line with other ordnance stores.
The War Office was thus enabled to effect
global stock control and global provision for tyres and tubes.
It has been suggested earlier that the forecasts of supply and demand for
rubber produced by C.P.R.B. were somewhat optimistic.
The Board's estimate
of actual and potential assets may have been accurate enough, but the policy
as the result of which the U.S. War Department expected to reduce the deficit
by cutting down production of vehicles and by the employment of low scales
of maintenance and wastage replacements proved thoroughly mistaken.
December, 1944, the Wheeled Vehicles Committee had to record' :—
" The tyre situation had been steadily deteriorating for a considerable
time, particularly as regards those types for which reliance was placed on
the United States for an appreciable proportion of our requirements, and
in the case of four particular sizes, namely, 14.00 × 20, 12.00 × 20,
10.50 × 20 and 825 x 15, the situation had become particularly critical.
For instance, there was no longer a stock of the size 14.00 x 20 and it
had become necessary to remove tyres from new vehicles in order to
maintain 21 Army
Groub....
Out of requirements for the first
quarter of 1945 for 14,400 tyres, size 14.00 x 20, which the U.S. War
Department had accepted, none were, in fact, allotted."
and further:
"The reason for this extremely unsatisfactory state of affairs was not
far to seek.
For months past, the Americans had been cutting down our
allocations on the
grounds that we were over-providing.
They
persistently disregarded all our experience of wastage and, because of this,
had not made adequate provision.'
Not only were American supplies inadequate for British requirements, but
there was very considerable pressure from the U.S. for a reduction in their
favour of the stocks which the United Kingdom was fortunate enough still to
The British were thus for once in the unusual position of being able
to require from the U.S. the same detailed explanation of the reasons for
requirement as were familiar enough on the more usual occasions when the
situation was reversed.
The U.S. admitted the miscalculations, and steps were
taken to increase production,
but there
was no immediate prospect of
improvement,
before June.
nor were deliveries to theatres in greater quantities possible
for makeshift expedients.
The end of the war came in time to forestall any crisis too serious
(*) Minutes : 57th Meeting, Wheeled Vehicles Committee, 12 Dec., 1944.
87
(C31438)
