large order.1
On this point the War Office was in some difficulty, as the Vauxhall
factory was producing Churchill tanks, the priority of which was overriding,
and no interference with their production could be tolerated although the
three-quarter-tracked vehicle itself held a high degree of priority.
A compromise
was reached by agreeing that although there was an immediate requirement in
1943 for this type of tractor, production was in the main a matter of long-term
policy, and by stating a tentative demand for 7,500 in the second half of 1944
and 5,000 in 1945.
When work once began, comparatively little difficulty was
experienced in the construction of prototypes,
but considerable doubt was
expressed regarding the possibility of large scale production, partly on account
of interference with tank production and partly on account of the man-hours
involved in manufacturing the special needle-bearing track.
This led to a
reconsideration of the decision to accept the German vehicle and to the expres-
sion of some doubt as to German confidence in the design.
The Senior Military
Adviser to the Ministry of Supply was able to dispose of an assertion that
Germany was abandoning this type of vehicle,? and further evidence of its
popularity in the German Army was obtained by interrogation of prisoners of
war.
At an earlier stage, in April, 1944, A.C.I.G.S.(W) had expressed his
views :—
"..the time had come to face up to the need for ¾-track vehicles to
give armoured divisions complete cross-country performance for the whole
of their first line.
At present we used over 50 different types and this
number could probably be reduced to 7 or 8 by the introduction of a
suitable range of ¾-track vehicles."3
This opinion carried the day and the Ministry of Supply was instructed to
proceed with its investigations into the problems of production.
In June, 1945, prototypes had been completed, * and comparative trials of the
Traclat, as the new vehicle was named, were held at the R.A.M.T. School with
highly satisfactory results.
Its performance was compared, when towing the
25-pr. gun, with that of representative 4 × 4 and 6 x 6 wheeled tractors, a
half-tracked and a fully-tracked tractor.
The vehicles which took part in the
trials were :-
Vehicle.
Chassis.
Engine.
B.H.P.
Gross Weight.
Traclat ..
3- track
A leclo
G.M.C.
Full-track
6 x 6
M.14
1-track
Morris Quad ..
4 × 4
2 Bedford
Meadows
International
Harvester.
International
Harvester.
Morris
136
158
141
141
70
8 tons 14 cwt.
8 tons.
7 tons.
8 tons 17 cwt.
4 tons 16 cwt.
(2) 38th Meeting : Weapon Development Committee, 23 Aug., 1945.
The S.M.A.
also suggested that difficulties of manufacture had been overstressed, the
Con 0 petrin in at be con in the Coman General su han to hi
not on performance but on the shortcomings of their own repair organization.
10th Armoured Division,
reported that they were eminently satisfactory.
who had inspected these vehicles at oheir place of manufacture,
(3) Ibid.
(3) 57/Vehs A/1246.
(*) The G.S. specification is shown at Appendix B to this chapter.
94
W027
28
9
The Traclat and the Alecto had a far higher performance across country
than any of the other vehicles under all conditions, and were themselves approxi-
mately equal in performance. In the opinion of D.R.A! the three-quarei-
tracked vehicle had definite advantages. Its front wheel stering gave greater
ease of control on roads and hard country, and considerably increased trackle.
The front axle prevented the pitching motion, damaging to the towed gun-
carriage, to which tracked vehicles are subject when travelling across country,
and gave better ditch crossing performance than that of a fully-tracked vehicle
of similar track length.
Eighty-five per cent. of the weight of the vehicle was
carried on the tracks and 15 per cent. on the front axle, which provided nearly
full-tracked performance across country and easy steering on roads.
summed up his views by stating that he considered that the three-quarter-
tracked machine had the performance of a good wheeled vehicle on roads and
of a good tracked vehicle across country-an exceptional combination.
If at this time the war in Europe had still been in progress, there would have
been a strong prima facie case for a demand for immediate production, but as
there was no prospect of placing a new type of tractor in service in the Far East
in reasonable time, it was decided to defer a decision in order to ensure for the
peace-time Army a vehicle suitable not only for artillery traction but also for the
general needs of the Army and capable of large scale production at reasonable
expense.
Apart from this general principle, there was a further advantage in
delaying production in that improvements in design, such as the fluid flywheel
and the self-changing gearbox might be incorporated and greatly improve the
performance of Traclat.
Moreover, in January, 1945, the O.W.P.C. had
recommended the use of a range of standard engines for all post-war vehicles,
among which the Traclat engine was not included, and as D.R.A. pointed out,
it was probably not in the best interests of the Army that the Royal Artillery
should be equipped with a tractor of basically different design from vehicles
employed in other arms.
It was also thought possible that a 16-ton fully tracked
vehicle, at that time being developed by Vickers, might be employed as a tractor,?
and that the apparent disadvantages of full-track as compared with three-quarter-
track might be accepted in the interests of general standardization.
Apart from
purely technical considerations, the most important single question, and the
most difficult to answer, was whether large scale production of the Traclat was a
practicable and economic proposition should the Army expand again.
If the
cost of production in terms of manpower were so high that other programmes
must suffer, the Army would clearly be better advised to accept a different type
in the interests of standardization.3
Further extensive trials of the Traclat
were carried out in Germany after the war and again very favourable reports
(*) 37th Meeting, Weapon Development Committee, 19th July, 1945.
(2) This vehicle the C.T.26, was in fact developed, for R.A. purposes, only as a personnel
and equipment carrier.
It has since been abandoned.
difficulties both before and during the war.
® It is interesting to note that German ingenuity had been able to overcome these labour
be explained by the
tac that by 1940 form and dal aguired the whole on the redle and ball bear from riy of
That this design was approved in pre-war days, before additional labou
which cher reserve stocks would suffice.
be accounted for on the assumption that Germany expected a short war, in
95
