Office is vitally concerned with a successful solution of this problem and has
in fact given much attention to it.
As early as May, 1943, a paper was prepared
by the D.D.W.S.(C)' for the Q.M.G. on the subject of post-war standardization
of vehicles, which included a considerable section dealing with the problems of
manufacture.
This proved to be a very accurate forecast of opinion at the end
of the war.
His views are stated in the following paragraphs.
If, in peace-time, competitive vehicle manufacture is to be preserved, and if a
multitude of different types of vehicle must still be produced to suit special
civilian users, then the only way to prepare for war would appear to be to adopt
some scheme whereby manufacturing capacity can be readily turned over at
the outbreak of war to produce in bulk a different vehicle, and the one which
the Army requires.
The basis of such a scheme would be for the War Office to
decide upon the smallest possible number of categories of vehicles compatible
with efficiency, and that this was done has already been shown.
The next step
was for the War Office to draw up specifications, and, after trial of pilot models,
to decide on the ideal design in each category.
This decision would have to
include approval of drawings in detail because from these would be produced
the whole of the Army's requirements in peace and war.
In peace the Army
would be equipped solely with these special W:D. designed vehicles and no
others.
This would provide opportunity for practical experience of their
capabilities in all parts of the world and data for periodical revision of design-
a period to be of not less than one year's duration.
The requirements of the
Army in peace-time would warrant the placing of contracts with only a limited
number of firms.
In order, however, to prepare for expansion on the outbreak
of war, it would be necessary to purchase and store in time of peace the jigs,
foundry patterns, and an appreciable amount of machinery.
This equipment
would be ready for issue to manufacturers to enable them to switch over their
production from civilian to the approved W.D. design.
Those manufacturers
who were already supplying W.D. vehicles in small numbers would merely
require expansion of plant.
Machinery and patterns for any particular category
of vehicle would not become out of date except over a long period, although
advances in design would necessitate some replacement.
If such a scheme of holding patterns, jigs and machinery in store in readiness
for limon a scuse were to be adopted, there would still be difficulty in moving
from peace to war conditions the moment war broke out.
The minimum period
in whieh the arco. motea vehicle could be produced in any quantities was
estimated as at least five months and probably more.
If an expeditionary force
estimo ed as at least five months and proba military vehicles could be obtained
from manufacturers, there could be two ways of equipping it.
The first, and
ideal, manufacturers, there could be two ways the required pattern in store in
sufficient anantities to meet the lifaranna hetween neace strenath and war
The magnitude of such a prospel was clearly in direct proportion
to the strength of the peace-time standing Army and the size of the projected
expeditionary force, but as a large number of stations abroad were garrisoned
in peace 3 assuming a reasonably large standing Army it was thought that a
(*) Colonel (now Brigadier) H. C. Goodfellow.
sen This system has already been put into practice with ships of the U.S. Navy, which hayc
to avoid deterioration and maintenance expense.
(®) It must be remembered that these proposals were put forward in 1943.
124
WO27
28
complete turnover of such vehicles could be accomplished probably every four
yeals.
The alternative was impressment of vehicles from civil life, a method
which had been adopted twice in the past.!
In 1914 the numbers involved were
not great compared with those of 1939, but in each case the roads on the
Continent on which these vehicles were to be employed did not present any
great difficulties from the performance point of view.
In 1939, however, the
vehicles withdrawn from commercial work were largely of the mass produced
type and their mechanical efficiency was, in general, very poor. In each case,
and especially in 1939, the numbers of different makes, and types within each
make, were so great that the gravity of the repair problem cannot be over-
estimated.
In addition, the spare parts available in the country were held by
manufacturers and agents in quantities which were only sufficient for them to
supply civilian needs under peace-time conditions, and these quantities proved
quite inadequate even during the inactive period up to the middle of 1940.
Further, requisition of civil transport at a moment's notice has very serious
repercussions on essential transport services at home.
At the beginning of this section it was stated that these views presented a
fairly accurate forecast of the trend of opinion at the end of the war.
At the
end of the war, however, there was a certain feeling of optimism in the air which
expressed itself in the conviction that never were the mistakes of the past to
occur again and that the lesson of the crucial importance of effective military
transport had been learnt for all time.
The lesson had indeed been learnt, but
to implement it involved very great expenditure which the Treasury, however
sympathetic in principle, could not tolerate in practice.
Although a subsidiary
and alternative part of these proposals was received favourably-the impress-
ment of vehicles-and has been absorbed into current vehicle policy, the main
body was rejected, and the schemes for storage of tools and patterns, and the
creation of a reserve of completed military vehicles, were rejected as beyond the
bounds of financial possibility and practical achievement.
The makeshifts and expedients adopted in order to keep some semblance of
policy in existence after the end of the war were legion, but do not come within
the compass of this book.
It may perhaps be of some small consolation to those
who spent their energies on a good cause that there was a definite achievement,
for even if a policy thought good by its exponents did not reach execution, it
is no mean thing that at least the policy existed in the minds of men and the
archives of the War Office.
(t) See Chapter VIII.
125
