W027
9
A small tracked vehicle and trailer, with a useful load of 1,554 lb., and a
tare of 927 lb.
Speed, 5-10 m.p.h.
An amphibious 4-wheeled car, weight about 1,550 lb., and capable of
carrying four passengers and their arms.
Maximum speed across country
was about 40 m.p.h. and on water about 8 m.p.h.
None of these machines passed the prototype stage, but large numbers of
airborne motor and pedal cycles were manufactured.
Considerable attention
was also paid to dropping of cars 5-cwt. and motor-cycles from aircraft, either
by means of multiple parachutes or a single parachute with a rocket deceleration
device to ensure a tolerable landing shock.I
The problem of providing larger air-portable vehicles was dealt with
primarily by a short term policy of modifying the design of existing makes.
Comparatively simple modifications were required to adapt 15-cwt. trucks and
consisted chiefly of cutting away part of the cab to allow the vehicle to be
manœuvred from the ramp into the aircraft, and reducing the size of the body.
Canadian
manufacturers
were particularly
co-operative in
incorporating
modifications into their assembly lines.
For example, on an order for 13,000
Dodge trucks, of which 8,000 were ultimately built, the cab modification was
introduced at once and the body alterations after the first 3,000.
These
modifications, although individually of a minor nature and capable, if necessary,
of being undertaken by unit workshops, were in the aggregate considerable, and
a General Staff Specification? was sent to the Ministry of Supply in February,
1944, of a truck, 15-cwt., 4 x 4 G.S. to be air-portable without dismantling or
modification.
These vehicles, manufactured by Austin, reached the prototype
stage at the end of the war.
The light divisions for war in the Far East were designed to have two
separate roles.
In the first® they were to be air-portable, and all equipment,
vehicles and weapons were required to be suitable for carriage by aircraft or
glider.
The vehicles were cars 5-cwt. with trailers and 3-ton, 4 x 4, lorries.
It was at first hoped, for ease of dismantling and re-assembly, that it would be
possible to provide all lorries from one make, but as the size of the projected
force grew this proved impracticable, and it was necessary to carry
out
modifications on all types and the consequent multiplication of effort had to be
accepted.
The Ministry of Supply was not capable of carrying out all the work
required and Army labour had to be provided. Some conception of the man-
hours involved can be obtained from Appendix E to this chapter, which gives
provisional estimates of the work required in modifications, dismantling and
reassembly of three standard lorries.
Concrete results from British efforts to produce airborne and air-portable
vehicles during the war are disappointingly small, but as is often the case with
concrete results they are somewhat misleading unless they are considered in a
true prospective.
It is to be remembered that the demand for this very special
type of equipment came at a time when British resources were fully occupied
with providing for the immediate present and there was little possibility of
21 Ol, a45s by A.C.LG.S(W) for 17th Meeting, Weapon Development Commitice
(2) Ibid.
were to be provided with standard equipment.
In prosecond role, light divisions, having achieved a base and an effective L. of C.,
100
opportunity of making more than drawing board preparations for a war the
full weight of which, by mutual agreement of the Allies, was not to be delivered
until after the defeat of Germany. In any case, as has been pointed out before,
there was the well accepted two-year time-lag between a statement of requirement
of a new type of vehicle and its appearance in the hands of troops.
The first
formal requirement for a 15-cwt. air-portable truck appeared in early 1944.
The vehicle was produced in 1946. It is also to be remembered that the problem
of transport by air from one point to another is not finally solved by producing
equipment of suitable size and weight, either whole or in parts.
There were
in addition minor problems, most of which could be solved only by trial and
error, such as discovering the exact point at which each individual item of
equipment must be lashed to suit the centre of gravity of aircraft of which little
was known in this country.1
It seems improbable that Germany produced any vehicles specifically for
carriage by aircraft, but it is certain that standard types were parachuted or
carried by glider.
Motor-cycle combinations were dropped by parachute into
Crete, air-portable vehicles were carried by powered and towed gliders across
the Mediterranean to North Africa, and there is an uncorroborated report that
two 24-ton Opel trucks were parachuted to General Paulus in the latter stages
of the abortive siege of Stalingrad. There is no information on their condition
upon landing.
The U.S.A. produced no airborne vehicles except the car, 5-cwt., and in
spite of the possession of a gigantic transport aircraft fleet, appeared uninterested
in anything more than ad hoc operations with dismantled standard vehicles.
foman The only information available in the United Kingdom at this time regarding the phre
ince and characteristion a ail be kota related to the fully armed operational type.
performance of this aircraft in manaked triated to the luny sume beans the same.
101
