APPENDIX F
U.S.A. TRACKED AMPHIBIOUS VEHICLES
1. L.V.T.1. - Known as the Alligator. A cargo-carrier powered by an
in-line engine.
2. L.V.T.2. - Known as the Buffalo. This version had a cab at the front
and a radial engine at the rear.
was provided.
It was used in European operations.
Cargo was loaded over the side, as no ramp
3. L.V. T.3.- A load-carrier with a ramp, powered by two V.8 engines.
6,000 lb. payload with integral and pin-up armour.
4. L.V.T.4.-A ramp-type load-carrier with a radial engine at the rear of
the driver's cab.
6,000 lb. payload with integral and pin-up armour.
S. L.V.T.(A)1.—An armoured vehicle with a turret mounting a 37-mm. gun
and machine guns, employing the L.V.T.2 chassis.
6. L.V.T.(A)2.— An armoured version of the L.V.T.2 without a turret, but
provided with fixed machine gun mountings.
7. L.V.T.(A)3.—A fully armoured L.V.T.4 chassis without a turret, fitted
with periscopes and a driver's vision door.
8. L.V.T.(A)4.—A turreted fully armoured vehicle mouting a 75-mm.
howitzer and M.G. mounting. A power traverse and stabilizer were mounted
on later models.
84
W027
28
9
CHAPTER XI
NEW PROBLEMS AND NEW DESIGNS
Section 1.—Tyres and Rubber!
THE ALLIES' RESOURCES IN NATURAL AND SYNTHETIC RUBBER
Before the war the provision of tyres and tubes was effected by the same
methods as were used for other stores of Ordnance supply- by ad hoc orders
placed to meet irregular and varying demands by consumers.
In September,
1939, the Ministry of Supply, in co-operation with tyre manufacturers, arranged
for pooling all knowledge of tyre construction in Great Britain and for the
co-ordination of military and civil requirements.
As tyres were not then in
short supply and the entire world rubber production was still available, such
co-ordination consisted chiefly of assessing appropriate quantities of tyres and
sizes for production.
Provision was therefore a comparatively simple problem.
Tyre repair, so far as the Army was concerned, was confined to the execution
by local workshops of minor repairs to covers and the vulcanizing of tubes.
The ready availability of new covers had made it unnecessary for the Army to
establish plants capable of carrying out retreading and other major repairs.
This satisfactory situation was radically affected by the loss of Malaya and
the Dutch East Indies in the early part of 1942, when nine-tenths of the world's
rubber supplies fell into Japanese hands. A world-wide survey was therefore
made of the existing stocks of natural rubber, the potential production of
synthetic rubber, and probable requirements for new equipment and main-
tenance.
At the same time measures were taken for drastic economies in the
use of rubber and for improvement in the maintenance of tyres.
The broad survey was undertaken on the instruction of the C.P.R.B., and
will be shown later to have proved somewhat optimistic.
The general
conclusion was that the rubber problem was essentially one of timing? Stocks
of crude rubber in North America and the British Empire in July, 1942, were
equivalent to about one year's consumption and new supplies of crude rubber
equivalent to less than one-fifth of current consumption.
Stocks were therefore
expected to reach the minimum compatible with efficient operation by the
middle of 1943.
Synthetic rubber supplies were expected to become available
in the latter half of 1943, but effective use of these supplies depended on the
existence at that time of sufficient stocks of crude rubber to mix with the
synthetic production.
There was thus a critical period in 1943 when crude
stocks would be dangerously reduced and synthetic rubber would not be
produced in sufficient large quantities.
As at that time it was the intention to
secure " maximum impact "
upon the enemy in 1943, it was decided that
military consumption by the Allies must not be restricted by securing what
would normally be regarded as a safe reserve of rubber, and the deficiency
great as Acknowledgment is gratefully made to the Dunlop Rubber Company, Limited, for the
a sisknowledement is completion of this section.
held i, Rov. 102.
Report on Rubber, prepared for first meeting of the Truck Committee of C.P.R.B.,
85
