suitable for production until a series of comparative trials had been carried out
by C.O.X.E.
The Ministry of Supply itself was however apparently in no
doubt about the success of the new design.
Their Senior Military Adviser
reported' :—
"The Terrapin was apt to buck a little on the road if driven fast, and
there was certain criticism from the Admiralty as to stability in the water.
In all other particulars, the Terrapin seemed as good as or better than the
Maintenance was much more simple and the turning circle far
DUKW. he intrapin had experienced no difficulty in clambering out of
the water into a L.C.T. in spite of a strong cross-current."
The report by C.O.X.E. was in direct contrast to this optimism, stating
Mark II, compared most unfavourably with the DUKW with
the exception of its hold capacity, large enough for a 17-pr. A/t. gun, its greater
payload, and the protection of its transmission from salt water corrosion.
engines
were
underpowered for the 16} tons of the laden vehicle, extremely
prone to ignition failure, and subject to overheating.
Stability was inferior to
that of the DUKW. To sum up, C.O.X.E. considered that the bad characteristics
of the vehicle were very similar to those of Terrapin, Mark I, that they could
not be eliminated by minor modifications and that nothing short of re-design of
the hull and the provision of suitable engines would enable it to bear comparison
with the DUKW.
Chief of Combined Operations added that the fundamental
deficiency was in transmission arrangements which on occasions threw the whole
load on one of the two engines. He pointed out that any re-design to overcome
this defect would cause very considerable delays in production, and was therefore
unable to recommend further development.
As the trials indicated that the
present design would make Terrapin, Mark II, subject to severe operational
limitations,
he suggested that any production decided upon as an interim
measure should be restricted to the minimum necessary to meet immediate
requirements.?
At a meeting of War Office, C.O.H.Q. and Ministry of Supply representatives
held in November, 1944, to consider the position, it was recommended by
C.O.H.Q. that if sufficient DUKWs were available, which seemed probable as
the result of the visit of A.C.I.G.S. (W) to the United States, the project should
be dropped in favour of investigation of a more conventional design as a long
term requirement.
As an insurance it was decided that the prototypes should
be re-worked to overcome known defects as far as possible, and that if the
results were satisfactory production of not more than 400 should be authorized.
The re-worked Terrapin received a comparatively favourable report from
C.O.X.E. in April, 1945.
Ignition defects and overheating had been overcome,
and trials indicated that the vehicle could satisfactorily carry out its functions
providing that dumps were accessible over reasonably negotiable approaches
and not more than two or three miles inland.
The principal weakness remained
that, although having adequate power and speed on straight runs, it lacked
power when making sharp turns, as the wople load was then taken on one
This report was considered to be sufficiently satisfactory to warrant
production, but in view of the stage which the war had by this time reached,
the Ministry of Sunnlv's estimate of the rate of production was discouraging
(e) Minutes: 28th meeting, Weapon Development Committee, 21 Sept, 1944.
(2) 57/Vehs A/1499.
74
WO277
Вы
The estimate was that production would start six months after the order was
given,
date.
reaching a peak of 40 vehicles a month two of three months after that
This meant that if an order was given at once it would be the spring of
1946 before even 40 or 50 vehicles would be available for shipment to India,
and a further three months before they could be in the hands of troops, after
which a trickle of 40 a month could be maintained during the remainder of
1946.
The only advantage of going into production of this not entirely satis-
factory amphibian would have been to avoid dependence upon the U.S. for
maintenance of DUKWs in the Far East during the latter half of 1946. It
would still have been necessary to arrange for provision of DUKWs from
America until Terrapins arrived in sufficient quantities, and there would have
been maintenance difficulties in using two types of vehicles, spares for which
were not interchangeable.
Training
of drivers would have been a further
difficulty.
D.S.W.V. considered that there was no reason to suppose that the United
States would not assign sufficient DUKWs to supplement those being withdrawn
from Europe, and advised A.C.I.G.S. (W) that' :—
" considering the problem as a whole the disadvantages of going into
production of a vehicle for which there is no post-war requirement far
out-weigh the advantages."
Production was therefore not authorized, and on this unhappy note ended
the story of Terrapins, Marks I and II.
The history of the development of British tracked amphibious vehicles
followed a painfully similar course, and perhaps its most satisfactory feature
was that it occupied a shorter period than that of the wheeled type.
British
interest in tracked as against wheeled vehicles was encouraged by reports of the
success achieved by various forms of L.V.T. designed in the U.S.A. and operated
by U.S. forces.
As with wheeled amphibians British requirements for U.S.
vehicles were either unobtainable or obtainable in insufficient quantity and the
possibility of British production was investigated as a last resource.
The L.T.V. was specifically designed for the "island hopping" campaign
in the Pacific forced upon the United States by early Japanese successes.
The
special merit of the tracked vehicle was its ability to cross semi-submerged
obstacles such as coral by clambering over them and continuing to swim.
This
feat could not be performed by landing craft, or by wheeled vehicles without
irreparable damage to their tyres.
The L.V.T. also had a good performance in
mud and mangrove swamps, in which wheeled vehicles were useless.
As the
result of American experience the War Office was convinced that a requirement
for L.V.T.
would exist whatever strategic decision was made for the conduct
of war in the East.
It was considered that without them any amphibious
operations in the conditions peculiar to the Far East would at the very least be
severely restricted and that in all probability such operations would be utterly
dependent upon them for success.
On this assumption the implications of the
absence of British production of such vehicles were very considerable.
The
familiar situation would thus reappear that it would be necessary to secure
L.V.T. from the U.S.A.
with all the attendant disadvantages of seeking an
allocation for an approved operation.
(4) 2 June, 1945.
57/ Vehs A/1499.
75
