camel caravans engaged in the illegal narcotic trade.
Tyres having a more
flexible tread pattern were developed and ultimately adopted by the War Office
when equipment requirements came to be based on the Eastern Plan.1
It is worthy of record that all the work of design, development, and con-
struction of prototype tyres carried out to meet War Office requirements was
done at the expense
of the tyre industry.
No financial grants were made for
research, and the only hopes of recompense were from the possibility of obtaining
War Office contracts if results were satisfactory or of utilizing the experience
gained for commercial purposes.?
It is worthy of notice that all the types of tyre which have been described
were designed, had been proved successful, and were in actual production and
use before the 1939-45 war; nor was any change made in their design or con-
struction throughout the war, a fact which is very sound evidence of their general
excellence.
Two further types were developed during the war, neither of which
was properly a pneumatic tyre in the accepted sense, as air cushioning at
atmospheric pressure was employed.
One was known as the Run for Ever
(R.F.E.), and
was
designed in 1940.
It was a logical, development of the
R.F. type, having the same very sturdy construction with particularly heavy
walls, but no tube was used.
Trials were carried out by W.V.E.E., and after
14,000 miles the tyre was still intact.
The Dunlop Company, the designers, con-
fidently expected a life of 30,000 miles, and in 1942 the tyre was approved for
production.
Some 15,000 of these tyres were produced, in one size only, and
their employment was limited to Humber and Daimler Scout Cars.
The reason
for this comparatively small production was that their construction involved the
use of very considerable quantities of natural rubber, for which synthetic rubber
could not be substituted on account of over-heating difficulties.
This type of
tyre was employed throughout the remainder of the war for these specific
vehicles.
The other type, which did not appear until the end of the war and was
intended for Far Eastern operations, was the swamp tyre.
This also ran without
air pressure and possessed a very heavy tread consisting of straight transverse
hars.
It was designed for light vehicles such as motor handcarts and remained
on the wheel until completely worn out, when both were " expendable."
The fall of Malaya and the consequent shortage of natural rubber resulted,
before the situation had been accurately assessed, in many demands for alter-
native types of tyre or wheel.
A very great amount of effort and ingenuity was
spent upon the design of tyres composed of leather, cotton, webbing and other
unsatisfactory materials, and several types of sprung rim were developed.
None
of these substitutes met with success, and fortunately the growth of knowledge
of the uses of synthetic rubber made any dependence upon them unnecessary.
Supplies of synthetic rubber were available by the end of 1943 in sufficient
quantities to balance the losses of natural rubber, but although this production
was unexpectedly rapid, the crisis was by no means passed.
Considerable
dificulties appeared in the construction of synthetic rubber tyres and in their
employment.
The manufacture of natural rubber involved two, or at the most
three, processes, which could be carried out in quick succession; that of
Reconnaissance Order, dated 15 Dec
) he aficiency of this tyre can be judged from an extract from a German Command
desert reconnaissance,
-" For this reconnaissance, as
stick in the sand too often."
only captured english trucks are to be malance, as inted for truery
contract nrice.
(*) Some recognition of the cost of research work was, however, reflected in the fina
90
027 7/26
synthetic rubber required four or five stages with maturing periods of at least
12 hours between each.
This meant that an increase of storage space was
required and that production of the completed article was substantially slower.
In addition, some 25 per cent. more power was required for all milling operations
on synthetic rubber, with the result that plant already worked to the limit of
its capacity had to be slowed down or provided with additional power.
Finally,
the cotton casings used in ordinary tyres did not stand up to the greater heat
generated by synthetic rubber.
Rayon was found to be more satisfactory, and
as a result the percentage of rayon in tyres increased from 0-7 at the beginning
of the war to 34.1 at the end of the war, cotton falling from 99. 3 to 65•91 in
the same period.
As these difficulties were overcome, the proportion of synthetic
to natural rubber used in tyres produced in Great Britain rose from 16 per cent.
at the end of 1943 to no less than 72 per cent. at the end of the war.?
This increase was, however, confined almost entirely to the smaller type of
tyre.
Reasonably
serviceable tyres could be constructed in car sizes
100 per cent. synthetic rubber and in light truck sizes with a 10 per cent.
admixture of natural rubber.
The problem of producing large size tyres was far
more difficult, and up to the end of the war neither in Great Britain, the United
States or Germany had designers succeeded in producing a satisfactory tyre in
the larger sizes containing more than a small proportion of synthetic rubber.
In terms of vehicles, the situation was that synthetic rubber could provide
90 per cent. of the total required for motor-cycles, cars, utility trucks, jeeps,
15-cwt. trucks and light trailers.
It was necessary to rely on the dwindling stock
pile of natural rubber for the tyres of all 3-ton trucks, heavy load carriers,
artillery tractors, breakdown vehicles, tank transporters and heavy trailers.
In
terms of rubber quantities, 51 lb. of rubber were required to tyre a jeep, all of
which could be synthetic; 287 lb. were required for a 3-ton truck, the bulk of
which had to be natural rubber.
The reasons for these limitations upon the
use of synthetic rubber were that it developed too much heat when flexed, and
that it was very susceptible to cracking or cutting.
The heat factor was not
important in comparatively thinly walled tyres, as it could be readily dissipated.
It was an insuperable problem in R.F.s or tank tyres.
The tendency to cutting
and cracking greatly affected the cross-country performance of military vehicles.
Further, although the smaller sizes of tyre constructed of synthetic rubber were
regarded as satisfactory, the term requires qualification.
The general expecta-
tion of life of such tyres was accepted as from 75 per cent. to 90 per cent. of that
of those of normal construction, and this reduced life was only possible by
avoidance of overloading and excessive speed and by meticulous attention to
tyre pressures.
A combination of overloading and excessive speed that would
merely reduce the life' of a natural rubber tyre was capable of causing a
" blow-out " in a synthetic tyre.
It is significant of the drawbacks of synthetic
rubber that Germany, which had produced synthetic rubber for many years,
was unable to design a satisfactory large size tyre entirely of this material, and
after an attempt to do so, reverted to the use of natural rubber for the casing,
and only used synthetic rubber for the tread of these large sizes.
This was in
spite of the fact that her resources were even smaller than those of the Allies.*
(1) " Tyres and the War," published by the Tyre Manufacturers' Conference.
(2) Ibid.
(*) T.T.2 Transport Bulletin, Ministry of Supply, Nov., 1943.
(4) Ibid.
