were issued.
The Ministry of Supply remained firm, however, in its opinion
that the expense of production was out of all proportion to the value of the
vehicle,
and little
work was done, although the type remained a R.A.
requirement.
The United States showed no interest in the development of the three-quarter-
tracked vehicle, but produced a very large number of the half-tracked type.
These were, however, very definitely regarded as a stopgap and a clumsy com-
promise between wheels and full tracks.
British Army Staff, Washington,
reported, in December, 1944' in reply to queries from the War Office, that thẻ
U.S. Army was abandoning the half-track because there was no further require-
ment for it from users, and not on account of any mechanical or engineering
defects.
It was considered that the large gap which had existed between the
performances of wheeled and fully tracked vehicles had been almost entirely
eliminated by the improvement of wheeled vehicles by the employment of
" high flotation" tyres, and also that the life, road speed and reliability of
tracked machines had greatly increased.
The truck, 27-ton, 6 x 6, with chains,
was thought to be capable of fulfilling the load-carrying role for which the half-
track had been introduced, and for reconnaissance purposes, in which the easiest
country could not always be selected, there was a definite swing towards fully
tracked vehicles as the result of experience in Europe.
Section 3.—Tank Transporters
The growth of a tactical requirement for tank transporters and recovery
vehicles has been discussed in Part I, Chapter VI, where it was indicated that the
types of vehicle by which this requirement were met were the tracked A.R.V., the
wheeled tractor and trailer and the semi-articulated wheeled vehicle.
A con-
siderable amount of experimental work was also carried out on tracked trailers,
but although the design was considered functionally efficient, the problems of
wear and tear of tracks, which already faced the A.F.V., were not overcome and
the design was dropped.
Development of the A.R.V. has also been dealt with in Chapter VI, and this
section is concerned only with wheeled prime movers and tracked and wheeled
trailers.
In the early days of the war there was little distinction between trans-
porter and recovery vehicles.
Both types were operated by the same arm of
the Service and physical differences consisted of the presence or absence of
5-part tackle.
The Middle East was constant in stressing that all vehicles should
be equipped for both roles, and it would appear that the War Office supported
this view at least until the formation of R.E.M.E.
The new corps took away
from R.A.S.C. its recovery functions in theory if not always in practice and
from this time onwards, there arose a policy of providing R.E.M.E. with semi-
articulated vehicles for recovery and providing R.A.S.C. With tractors and full
trailers for transport work.
This distinction was not supported by the Middle
East which consistently demanded semi-articulated vehicles for both functions-
a policy which ultimately carried the day and has been confirmed by post-war
development and insisted that all transporters should be capable of recovery
(4) 57/Vehs A/1246.
WO27
28
9
The history of provision of this tvoe of vehicle follows the depressing path
with which readers of this history will be becoming familiar. In essence, the
situation was that the Units a Kingdom could not produce suicient ences of
the power required and was almost entirely dependent upon the US A.
small allotment of the industrial power of the nation allotted to the Army,
first priority in heavy engines went to A.F. V. production, and artillery tractors
and transporters fought for a second place far down the course.
The only British vehicle of efficient design was the 20-ton Scammell, with
which the Army was equipped-
-very inadequately-at the beginning of the
war, and even this design did not keep pace with the increased weight of A.F.V.s.
They were fairly successfully adapted to take a 30-ton load and attempts were
made to increase their capacity to 40 tons, but here complete re-design was
required and no suitable engine was available.
Apart from design problems,
production was negligible, that of 30-ton vehicles being no higher than some 17
a month during the peak year, 1943.
The requirement, as the war progressed,
ran into thousands,' and it was therefore inevitable that the Ministry of Supply
should look to the U.S.A. for salvation.
Salvation was not, however, easy to attain, as will be seen from a study of
the Vital Requirements list prepared weekly before the invasion of Europe.?
In early stages the U.S. War Department, and hence the U.S. manufacturer, was
sceptical of the necessity for such vehicles at all and throughout denied the
necessity for the scale demanded by the British.
When the U.S. somewhat
belatedly realized their essential role, the U.S. Army not unnaturally took first
claim on U.S. production to fill the gaps in its own equipment made obvious by
their Allies' bitter experience.
Further there was very considerable over-order-
ing of light 20-ton transporters by the Ministry of Supply.3 Blame for this was
laid at the door of the General Staff, who were accused of not keeping the
Ministry of Supply fully informed of the increasing weight of new designs of
tanks.
It is, however, difficult to understand how the Ministry could be un-
aware of the position from its own sources of information.
Fortunately, this
type of vehicle had its attractions for the Royal Engineers, who absorbed a con-
siderable proportion of them.
Others were employed as normal load-carriers,
especially on the long lines of communication resulting from the breakthrough
in France. 4
When it was realized that load and bulk capacity must be increased, there
was considerable divergence of opinion between the War Office and the designers
of the Ministry of Supply.5
The War Office clung to the well tried Scammell
design, despite the fact that it was too high from the ground for bridge clearance,
while the Ministry considered that increased loads required the use of tracked
vehicles.
This latter view was doubtless influenced to some extent by the fact
(®) See Part I, Chapter IV, Appendix A, giving vital requirements for invasion of ugape,
(M. of S. BM.257 V 2543, 20 Jan., 1949.)
Si 0. 20 . Army, which had hithero notifed a rigi enter ant i tine.
(t) Minutes: 24th Meeting, Wheeled Vehicles Committee, Oct., 1942
97
