Wickers- A emstrong, and a successful approach was made to the U.S.A. to obtain
War Dese rechirements of Shermans for 1945 complete with their flotation
equipment.
reuiduction of Comet at Metropolitan-Cammell was not affected
by production of Neptune.!
In January, 1945, it was possible to report to the Prime Minister that the
Gret Neptune prototype had carried out limited smooth water and cross-country
trials, that its performance was most promising, and that no major defects had
been disclosed.
Inclining and rough water trials of models had been carried out
independently by the Royal Corps of Naval Constructors and the National
Physical Laboratory with entirely satisfactory results.
Trials by C.O.X.E. had
not yet been completed, but provided these were successful the programme of
production of 1,500 by the end of 1945 would be maintained.
Some suspension defects were,
however, afterwards discovered which
delayed the arrival of a prototype at Westward Ho! for trials until March.
C.O.X.E. was instructed that tests should be carried out on the assumption that
any mechanical or structural defects could be remedied and that only the
functional capabilities of Neptune should be considered.
Nevertheless C.O.X.E.
had to report that owing to a number of mechanical failures it had not been
possible to carry out comparative trials to assess Neptune's operational qualities.
During most of the time intended for trials the vehicle was in workshops under-
going repairs.
The major defects were in the fluid transmission and in the
tracks, which wore out unexpectedly rapidly.
During the trials it was observed
that the unladen weight was some five tons above that laid down in the original
G.S. specification, a fact which clearly had some bearing on track wear and
suspension failure!
This excess in weight was over and above the increase
agreed upon when the clause regarding davit hoisting was deleted in conformity
with U.S. practice. Apart from these troubles, further delays were caused by
a decision to employ applique armour, which reduced the payload to 3½ tons.-
The question of weight appears to have been regarded with some indifference by
the Ministry of Supply, as the only response to War Office criticism was that-
"It is necessary to appreciate the fact that this vehicle was designed
specifically to carry the 17-pr. gun and this has automatically resulted in a
certain shape and size.
It may be that we are up against natural limita-
tions in respect of weight reductions which we will not be able to
overcome. "5'
By this time the war in Europe was over and attention turned even more
sharply to the East.
Enquiries from India® concerning the progress of Neptune
had to be answered by confessions of mechanical failure, and the promise that
L.V.T.4.
Lt Indian requirements would be met from the U.S.A. by L.V.T.3 and
This was in efiet a tacit admission that Neptune was exceedinely
unlikely to be onerationally emploved. a view which was confirmed at the end
of June when the tanta of Sun reported? that further " teething troubles
(*) Minister of Production to Prime Minister, 5 July, 1944. 57/Vehs A/1755.
(2) Minister of Production to Prime Minister, 24 Jan., 1945.
(8) 25 April, 1945.
(*) 5 April, 1945.
57/Vehs A/1755.
57/Vehs A/1755.
(9) 11 May, 1945.
57/Vehs A/1755
57/Vehs A/1755.
(°) C.O.H.Q. C.R. 1510/44, 16 Mar., 1944.
(*) 25 June, 1945, D.D.G.F.V.(F) to D.D.V.
57/Vehs A/1755.
78
W027
Пек
9
remained to be overcome with a consequent dislocation of the production pro-
eramme, already considerably disturbed by the changeover from war to perce
methods by some of the manufacturers concerned.
Japan reversed the situation.
The end of the war with
The problem now was to reduce the original
order for 2,000 vehicles as much as possible, for it was realized that the design
was not sufficiently good to make further development worthwhile, and that a
fresh start must be made in planning the amphibian equipment for the post-war
Army.
On 17th
August,
1945, the War Office and Ministry of Supply
mutually agreed that the requirement should be reduced to 750 and that the rate
of production should be cut down.
The only reason against cancellation of the
entire order was uncertainty about the future of Lend-Lease equipment, and when
it became reasonably clear that the United States would not demand the return
of all L.V.T. in British possession the order was again reduced to 350.
The
only employment now envisaged for Neptune was for experiment and training.
Thus ended the war time history of British amphibians.
APPENDIX A
U.S. AND BRITISH WHEELED AMPHIBIOUS VEHICLES UNDER
DEVELOPMENT, SEPTEMBER, 19421
1. U.S.A.—(a) Aqua-Cheetah.—In appearance very like a touring car but
rather broader in the beam. Propulsion: 4 x 4 and propeller. Speed : 6 knots
Payload : 1,000 lb.
A model was demonstrated and tested in
the U.K., but the type was not accepted by the U.S. or British armies.
(b) Ford 1-ton Amphibious Scout Car.—Similar to (a) in design and appear-
ance, but based on the Jeep.
Its performance on land and water was expected
to be superior to that of (a).
Capable of towing an
Production began in U.S.A. in September, 1942, and a
small order was placed by the War Office.
(c) Alligator.—A fully tracked, non-armoured vehicle, in appearance like
a tank without a turret.
Propulsion in water by tracks.
6 m.p.h.
Payload: about 3 tons. A small number was ordered by the War
Office for use by Motor Boat Companies, R.A.S.C.
(d) 22-ton 6 x 6 Amphibious Truck.—This was the famous DUKW, and
at this time no information about its design or performance had been received
in U.K.
2. United Kingdom.-(a) Opperman.-A product of private enterprise,
designed to be either an A.F.V. or a load-carrier.
The vehicle possessed
8 wheels, all driven, with three normal axles and a single wheel front and rear.
Water propulsion by outboard motor.
The vehicle was not accepted.
b) Argosy. - A tracked vehicle developed privately by Nuffield Mechaniza-
Prototypes were constructed, but after much experimental work the
design was rejected by the War Office.
12th Meeting, General Staff Committee on Weapons and Equipment
5th October, 1942.
