THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE MILITA
The employment of pneumatic tyres for military purposes as a settled policy
began in 1923, in which year the War Office stipulated that all vehicles eligible
for subsidy must be so equipped.
The pneumatic tyre had been used in the
1914-18 war, but only for staff cars and such vehicles as the Crossley tender.
The 1923 decision was based upon the result of work carried out since 1921 by
British tyre manufacturers, of whom the Dunlop Rubber Company- was the
most important, in the development of what were then known as
" giant"
pneumatics.
•Up to 1921 this type of tyre had been somewhat unreliable, but
the Dunlop Company was able to prove to the satisfaction of the War Office
that these years of experiment had produced a satisfactory article.
A very great advance in performance was achieved in 1926, when the Dunlop
Company produced the Trak-Grip tyre in response to War Office requirements
for greater cross-country mobility of military vehicles.
The bar-type tread of
this tyre,
with modifications made over a period of years to improve its
self-cleaning qualities, is still in use in vehicles of all three Services and has been
of immense value for civil vehicles such as agricultural tractors. It is of interest
to note that in 1926 the German Army conducted extensive cross-country trials,
but no comparable tyre was produced in Germany at that time.
This opinion
is supported by the fact that as late as 1936 the Dunlop factory in Germany
asked its British associate for details of this type of tread.
Some information
was supplied, but the latest developments of the tyre were not disclosed.
Work was carried on steadily and an admirable spirit of mutual co-operation
grew up between the War Office and the tyre industry—more especially with the
Dunlop Rubber Company as the largest firm in the country.
This co-operation
appears to have been based upon a well justified mutual respect for the abilities
of the military and commercial organizations responsible.
Work was however
hampered by
the War Office desire to use standard commercial vehicle
components, such as the current standard commercial one-piece wheel.
limitation was a source of great difficulty to tyre designers, but to use existing
fitments and stocks was at the time a logical outlook.
The general trend of
development, largely prompted by
War Office demands for greater tractive
efficiency,
was towards tyres capable of more and more deflection without
structural damage.
This in turn led to larger tyres, and, in consequence, lower
pressures.
The net result was that it was essential that the larger, lower
pressure tyre should be a much tighter fit on the wheel, in order to obviate
" creeping," than its high pressure predecessors.
This was not practicable on
the standard wheel. In 1937 the War Office yielded to persuasion and sanctioned
the use of two-piece divided wheels, on which a far tighter tyre fitting was
possible.
A great amount of ingenuity was expended upon designing a bullet-proof
tyre, and by 1936 the Dunlop Company were producing a tyre of this type
which was fitted to Morris 15-cwt. and 25-cwt. military vehicles.
The design'
was effective for its primary purpose, but involved a fixed deflection not adjustable
to ground conditions, and unsatisfactory if the tyre was overloaded ;
addition fitting operations were complicated and strenuous.
This lack of
deflection made that in tiefactor for orace-country work through lack of
WO27T/
tractive capacity.
As a logical further step, Brigadier (then Major) Blagden of
w.V.E. E. asked the Dunlop imp, ny to consider the possibility of designing
a tyre capable of greater defection, dea bullet proof but sturdy enough to run
in 1937 and in production by 1938.
defated without damage fora considerable distance. Such a tyre was designed
It was known as the Run Flat (R.F.) and
was designed to travel some SO miles deflated without collapse. Many travelled
much greater distances in action.
Adhesion of the tyre, when deflated, to the
wheel was secured by a solid spacer of rubber or metal fitted round the base of
the wheel which forced the tyre beads tightly against the rim flange without the
aid of air pressure.
The spacer or bead lock was also used with normal tyres
when used at exceptionally low pressures as at the Normandy landing,
This
Cars.
tyre was used successfully throughout she an on wheed A F: V.s and Scout
The secrets of design and construction were presented to the United
States upon their entry into the war, and the U.S. " Combat" tyre, about the
excellence of which in contrast to British products so much was heard, was in
fact a copy of the R.F.
Considerable experimental work was done in the Middle East in the years
immediately preceding 1939, and it has become customary to regard this period
as marking the conversion of the War Office to the policy of single-tyred
driving wheels and the introduction of the sand tyre. In fact the experience
gained in the Middle East was the culmination of years of work in India and
Great Britain and confirmed conclusions already reached.
The use of twin
tyres on driving axles was partly an inheritance from commercial practice and
partly the result of unreliability in early days of large section tyres, and the
advantages of the large single tyre, if a satisfactory design could be produced,
had been seen at least as early as 1925, when Colonel Niblett, of the R.A.S.C
School, discussed with the Dunlop Company the possibility of filling in the gap
between twin tyres. The Company produced a very squat tyre of the width
of two normal tyres and of the same gross diameter, alterations in which could
not be tolerated for reasons such as gear ratios and body clearance.
design proved unsatisfactory as the result of wall weakness, and failed on test
after 5,000 miles.
Later developments in construction made larger section
tyres considerably more practicable, and work carried out in India from 1928
by Colonel Evans of the Indian Army proved that the large single tyre could be
made reliable on driving axles and possessed far greater tractive qualities than
twin tyres.
Later experiment in the Middle East and in Great Britain drove
the point home.
The history of the sand tyre also follows the same pattern.
The first tyre of
this kind was designed in 1928 by the Dunlop Company for Colonel Niblett,
who was at that time working for the Overseas Trade Corporation Development
Committee, and this provides
an instance in tyre development of a civil
requirement being in advance of a military demand.
The design of the sand
obviate sinkage.
tyre was based on a low round tyre contact pressure, in an endeavour to
The result was however proved to be not entirely satisfactory
by tests in the Sudan, mainly ows ho to the lack of fexibility in the tread desien,
and another desion was produle los the result of additional information
regarding decert sounditions provided hy Flatton Bay of the Fountian Frontie
Defence Force Lie requirement was for a ture with a ground pressure no
greater than that of a camel's foot, to equip vehicles used for the pursuit o
(C31438)
