78
APPENDIX A
G.S. SPECIFICATION FOR LIGHT ARTILLERY TRACTOR
Equipments.—To provide traction for the following equipments :—17-pr.,
25-pr., 40-mm., Lt. A.A.
Chassis.—Three-quarter-tracked.
Tracks.—To enable vehicles to cross all types of country, including mud and
snow.
Life of tracks to be not less than 1,500 miles.
Links of tracks to be
easily replaceable by crew.
Brakes.—Tractor brake pedal to be capable of operating all types of brakes
(where fitted) of artillery equipment.
Turning Circle.-As small as possible,
maximum 50 ft.
Device to be
incorporated to prevent major turns from damaging trail of gun.
Speed.—Minimum : Roads, 20 m.i.h. ; Cross country, 10 m.i.h.
Winch.—Must be capable of winching front and rear.
Radius of Action.—200 miles.
Height.—As low as possible. Must not exceed 8 ft.
Body.—Universal type to accommodate crews of all equipments which
vehicle is designed to tow.
Lighting.—Standard W.D. lighting but to incorporate arrangements to
enable rear light on gun carriage to be lit from tractor lighting system.
Personnel. —The following to be accommodated. All figures given include
driver :-
17-pr.*
25-pr.
Minimum
Maximum
40-mm.
Kits.-Personal kits, i.e., packs, blankets, greatcoats, etc.
Separate compartments for each man or each two men desirable but not
essential.
Stores. -Gun stores for any type of stated equipments including gun
camouflage nets.
Space for spare wheel (front) or spare gun carriage wheel.
Space for spare track links.
Space for spare 40-mm. barrel.
102
Arms
17-pr.
6 Rifles.
2 Machine Carbines.
1 L.M.G.
25-pr.
4/6 Rifles.
1 Machine Carbine.
40-mm.
4 Rifles.
4 Machine Carbines.
Gun Ammunition.—It is desired to carry as much as possible and the following
are minimums :—
17-pr.
.. 40 rounds
6 rounds of the above to be readily accessible.
..
32 rounds
25-pr.
(24 H.E. 8 A.P.)
If space can be provided to carry 64 rounds (56 H.E.
8 A.P.) the ammunition
trailer usually part of the 25-pr. equipment could be dispensed with.
6 rounds of the above to be readily accessible.
40-mm.
1. •
192 rounds
Readily accessible, 24.
Ammunition Box Attachments.—Special compartments for varying sizes of
ammunition boxes are NOT required but some form of quick release attachment
suitable for any type of box is required to prevent ammunition boxes shifting
while the vehicle is in motion.
Position of Detachments.—The detachment (less N.C.O. in charge) to travel
in the rear of the vehicle if possible with egress to the rear.
The N.C.O. in charge
to travel in front with all-round field of view when standing up.
This will
necessitate an aperture in the canvas cover.
Roof.—The cab and cover for body can be of canvas.
General.—The driver should have a clear view to the rear.
The final silhouette should be as low and inconspicuous as possible and as
near a G.S. body as possible.
Rapid ingress and egress for all personnel.
103
631438)
