possible time.
for future
Superlative quality was not yet important, and all that could be
hoped for both in Great Britain and North America was to lay the foundation.
what was immediately available.
production of a better type of vehicle without disturbing the flow of
To the British temperament it is an unwelcome admission that another
country should possess greater technical and productive ability in any aspect or
industry, and this is especially true of engineering.
The reasons usually put
with varying degrees of conviction, for the mechanical superiority di
U.S. vehicles form an illuminating comment on the restrictive effect of Bitin
legislation and taxation upon the design of the motor vehicle.
war, the
In the 1914-18
American vehicle was said to meet military requirements more
successfully because, by British standards, it was:
" overpowered, expensive in fuel and illegal in axle-weights, and much.
too heavy for the load carried. The vehicle therefore stood up to the
exigencies of military transport on active service, although commercialy
and legally a proposition not to be considered in this country."]
Much the same was true in the 1939 45 war, but the contrast was more
as by this time the U.S. automobile industry was infinitely larger than
Great Britain.
In addition to, or perhaps on account of, her vast
productive capacity in this industry, the U.S. possessed great resources in highly
skilled designers, draughtsmen and production engineers, who were not cramped
by restrictions of weight, horsepower and high cost of petrol.
States had thus been able to build an export trade throughout the world, which
provided unrivalled opportunities for studying performance in, and
creating designs for, all kinds of conditions.
Finally, the United States had
two years of peace in which not only to study the vehicle requirements imposed
by war conditions, but also to begin production of new types based on the
experience thus gained. The Jeep and most other U.S. military vehicles wee
produced in those two years in which the British Army was struggling to ob an
some 340,000 vehicles, of almost any kind, to equip its reformed and additional
Section 3.—Standardization
It has been seen that mass production with its corollary, standardization,
was the only solution to the equipment problem. However,
" standardization is the antithesis of development and both are dist.
It is therefore important to go warily when endeavouring to obtain fil
In other words, it is essential to kit w the target before firing the gun. Then
is a warning note in this observation which is worthy of attention and which los
not always been appreciated, possibly because its truth is too obvious.
long been accepted that standardization is the key to economical and mit
production of. any manufactured article required in large quantities, and lik
Wo " The Requirements of the Military Motor Vehicle," by R. K. Hubard, lon
of Automobile Engineers,
Committee, 9 Nov., 1943.
(*) Paper by D.D.G.Mech., Ministry of Supply, for 43rd Meeting, Wheeled Valice
WO 27 1/2
28
application of this principle to automobile production was an established fact
long before the 1939-45 war.
The products of this standardization were the
result not only of large capital expenditure but also of years of experience and
study of the requirements of the user. In this country, with its negligible
gradients and comparatively short journeys, these requirements were com-
paratively modest. An assessment of the type of vehicle appropriate for such
conditions was therefore not a difficult matter because the conditions to be
fulfilled were permanently and almost tangibly before the designer's eye.
practice, however, restrictive legislation made it difficult to meet even this
requirement.
Imagination was necessary in the design of the military vehicle, whose
functions and conditions of operation were outside practical experience.
was easier therefore to assume that what was suitable for commerce would be
suitable for war, and if this assumption had been correct, the problem of
equipment of the Army would have been greatly reduced. Unfortunately the
assumption was not correct, and merely the result of loose and wishful thinking.
Fortunately for this country, on the other hand, American production was
designed even before 1939 to meet conditions far more akin to those of war.
The road towards standardization of military vehicles was not made easier
by the demands of the Services themselves.
The preceding chapter has
endeavoured to show that in peace-time the system of gradual mechanization of
the Army, arm by arm, tended to production of vehicles admirable for a
specific purpose, but not of a basic design suitable for the Army as a whole.
This very natural tendency persisted throughout the war, in spite of the work of
co-ordination of requirements which formed part of the duties of D.S.W.V.
As late as September, 1944, there were some 55 different types of " B" vehicles
within the Infantry division and some 600 different types, makes and contracts
within the Army as a whole,' and requirements ranged from air-portable trucks
to mobile pigeon lofts and bacteriological laboratories.
multiplicity upon the system of spares and vehicle tools provision can best be
left to the imagination.
When it is realized that the war produced very few
"freak" vehicles such as the amphibian, and that this variety of types and
makes was composed essentially of ordinary load carrying chassis with
specialized bodies of one kind and another, the situation can be seen to be quite
fantastic and so patently impracticable that it is necessary to dig deep for basic
Although the Army cannot be absolved from blame for adding to the
confusion, the inherent trouble is not so simple and must be found among the
complexities of business rivalries and personal feelings, odd though this may
appear during a war to the death. A very good example of the various obstacles
to standardization is afforded by the motor-cycle industry.
The following facts give some necessary background. There were six
manufacturers of army motor-cycles, each producing a separate model.
Each
factory varied in the extent to which it constructed the complete motor-cycle,
but in general, electrical equipment, carburettors, handle-bar controls and
similar components were obtained in a finished condition from specialist firms.
Some manufacturers also obtained gear-boxes in the same way.
Apart from
such equipment as was obtained complete, but including the gear-box, a
O.w.P. CaPa by ACIGS.(W) and D.S.W.V. for 46th Mecting, O.W.P.C., 26 Sept., 1944.
