APPENDIX E
REVISED G.S. SPECIFICATION FOR TRACKED AMPHIBIAN
(NEPTUNE)
1. This specification is for a tracked unarmoured amphibian to be produced
in U.K.
The vehicle is intended for use in rough terrain of all types, swamp
land, inland waters and exposed waters.
It must be capable of propelling
itself in the open sea, landing on a beach through surf and across coral or rock
surfaces and crossing beach or marshes to firm ground.
It must also be capable
of carrying a full load for extended distances inland across country and to return
to exposed waters through surf.
Also to be capable of operating in extremes of
temperature.
It is primarily required for operations in the Far East and in salt
water, for the transportation of stores from ship to shore dump, but the vehicle
must be suitable for use in any of the following secondary roles :—
(a)
Bulk Petrol Vehicle.—For this purpose the bulk petrol tank is not
required as vehicle equipment, but will be designed under War Office
arrangements as a separate demountable item, to conform to the
vehicle.
(b) Recovery of Casualties.—The hold is to be capable of accommodating
the standard 6-stretcher frame.
(c) It is desirable that it shall be capable of accommodating 6-pr.
and
17-pr. anti-tank guns, 25-pr. field artillery equipment, 3•7 howitzer,
95-mm. infantry howitzer, if possible without major redesigning of
Overall dimensions not to exceed :
(a) Length : 30 ft. max.
(b) Height : 8 ft. 6 in. " local " height of 9 ft. 6 in. over driver's cab.
(c) Breadth : 11 ft. 6 in. max.
2. Unladen weight (with full fuel tanks and in all respects ready for service
less payload. —Not to exceed 13} tons including local protection against small
arms fire in the driver's compartment.
3. Payload.4 tons minimum.
4. Cargo Space.—A cargo space of not less than 19 ft. x 8 ft. X 3 ft. 9 in.
including the rear curved portion of the hold floor unobstructed at ramp end
and the floor to be strong enough to carry any of the specified loads.
necessary a " local" concession not exceeding 1} in. will be accepted if essential
for satisfactory sealing of the rear door.
Heat insulation of the engine com-
partment is required to be such that no damage will be caused to the cargo, or
discomfort to passengers.
5. Performance.-(a) On Sea :
(i) Seaworthiness to be equal or superior to that of the DUKW.
(ii) Maximum speed (laden) not less than 5 knots. Importance of speed is
(iii) Special attention to he Daid in desien for operating in surf un to 8 f
W027
Преа
(b) On Land :
(i) Speed (laden) max. 25 m.p.h. on firm sand.
(il) Special attention to be given to track loading in order that vehicle shall
have the optimum performance in swamp.
(ii) To be capable of climbing a short gradient of 30° fully laden.
(c) Fuel capacity 175 gallons giving approximately 12 hours mixed operation.
6. Unloading Facilities. — The stern of the vehicle to be in the form of a ramp.
The ramp to be raised or lowered by means of a rapidly operating winch and
equipment.
giving free entrance and exit to the flour of the hold for vehicles and arilery
Sealing clips to be quick acting.
7. Aids to Navigation.-(a) Vehicle to be provided with a compass, the
details of which are to be agreed with D.C.D., Admiralty.
(b) In addition to W.D. head, side and tail lights, the vehicle is required to
have navigation lights and subdued bulkhead lighting for unloading at night.
8. Special Equipment.—(a) The vehicle must be fitted with lifting eyes and
capable of being hoisted by ship's derrick or L.C.A. davits in an unladen
condition.
(b) Power driven bilge pumps to be fitted with either alternative hand pumps
or the power pumps capable of being operated manually by one man.
(c) Vehicle kit shall include an auxiliary power driven bilge pump of the
"Homelite" type.
(d) A power driven winch is required for loading and unloading heavy
equipments, for self-recovery and recovering artillery equipments, etc.
(e) Bow and stern fenders to be provided.
(f) Normal deck fittings including towing eyes to be supplied.
(g) Vehicle to be screened and suppressed for wireless equipment.
(h) Slings to be supplied with the vehicle.
(i) Arrangements to be made for fitting of armoured kits at the expense of
9. Crew.—To consist of driver and one hand, but the vehicle is to be con-
trollable by one man, either on land or water, without change of position.
10. Life.—To give 60 days working at 12 hours per day before major over-
haul is necessary.
11. General.-Particular attention to be paid to ease of maintenance,
accessibility and standardisation of parts.
