128
SUGGESTED TYPES OF CHASSIS FOR FORMATIONS IN THE POST-WAR ARMY-continued
Infantry Divisions.
Airborne Divisions.
Corps and Army Troops.
Remarks.
Type of Unit.
Armoured Divisions.
Jeeps and 4 × 4.
6 × 6.
R.A.S.C.
R.A.M.C.
R.A.O.C. field park
R.E.M.E. 1st, 2nd and
Tracks and 6 x 6.
6 × 6.
Tracks and Jeeps.
4 × 4.
1 × 4.
10-ton 6 × 6,
Jeeps and 4 × 4.
4 × 4.
Jeeps and 4 x 4.
Corps Tr cent. 3-ton, of
4 × 4.
which—
75 per cent. 4x4.
4 × 4.
25 per cent. 6x6.
As for infantry divisions.
10 per cent. 10-ton
6 × 6.
Army Troops.
Provost ..
Motor-cycles and Jeeps.
Jeeps and 6 x 6.
As for infantry divisions.
As for infantry divisions.
50 per cent. 10-tont x 6-
ton traps.
L. 05 C
cent. 3-ton 4x4
on trailers.
50 per cent. 10-ton 6x6
ton tra per cent,
25 per cent. 20-ton, if
developed.
L. of C. ton
vehicles
can be 4 x
essential, but these
not tow trailers.
(a) Where " tracks" are shown, this means three-quarter or full-tracks, dependent on the ultimate decision made.
Where necessary will accom-
modate specialist bodies.
(b) Where " 6 x 6" alone is shown it means 30-cwt. and/or 3-ton. Where necessary will accommodate specialist bodies.
(c) Motor-cycles will continue to be used by all appropriate units and formations.
(d) In armoured divisions C.T.20s might be replaced by new light tank chassis.
requir a production reasons probe necess to retain the 5-t. dision
thelace of the 30-ewi be replin inty the
Sivorons and formations
APPENDIX A - continued.
2. Co-operation between the War Office and the Industry.—The Panel
attach the greatest importance to the closest and most direct co-operation
between the War Office and the Industry, and consider that the following are
essential to this end :—
(i) That the War Office should set up a department staffed by officers
(and other ranks) who are trained engineers, fully qualified to
interpret to the manufacturers on the military needs and to answer
manufacturers' queries on all problems at every stage.
(ii) That there should be unified control in the War Office dealing with
both fighting and non-fighting vehicles.
(iii) That the Industry should set up an Automotive Industrial Advisory
Panel to advise the War Office on the design, development and
production of future military vehicles and that this Panel should have
direct access at all times to the Head of the Department referred to
above.
3. Design, Development and Production of Prototypes in Peace.—The Panel
appreciate that the designs of modern military and commercial transport
vehicles are becoming increasingly divergent, and lay great emphasis on the
magnitude of the task involved in the design and development of the vehicles
now specified by the War Office.
now spender present operating conditions.
The design and development of these special vehicles, together with other
service
types such as tanks and armoured cars, would absorb a very large
proportion of the engineering staff of the Industry for a considerable time.
The Industry could not, therefore, be expected to take any interest, unless
the Government gave a clear ruling that this development was of primary
importance,
and agreed to finance
the Industry in setting up separate
development establishments.
The Ministry of Supply invited the S.M.M.T. to nominate representatives
of the Industry to form an Advisory Panel to consider these problems.
The following gives the unanimous views of the members of the Panel.
(Note:
The Panel worked on the assumption that the War Office, and not
M: of S., would be responsible for provision.)
(i) The action required to be taken in peace to ensure that sufficient
quantities of these vehicles will be available to equip the Army in the
event of a future war.
1. The War Office requested the Ministry of Supply to obtain the views of
the British Automotive Industry on the following problems :—
(i) The design, development and production of certain types of military
vehicles (shown in the Table at the end of this Appendix) for the
equipment of the Post-war Army in peace.
APPENDIX B
SUMMARY OF REPORT OF THE VIEWS OF THE INDUSTRIAL
ADVISORY PANEL-24TH JANUARY, 1945
21
WO27
