however, based on premises which at that time appeared sound.
First, since
the 1928 principle had been stated, light commercial 4 x 2 vehicles with a high
load capacity had been produced with a performance closely approximating
that of 6-wheeled vehicles of the same capacity.
On roads the lighter vehicle
was inferior to the 6-wheeler only on very steep gradients, and across country
it had a reasonable performance except in deep mud and sand. Its performance
had in fact become far more comparable to that of the 6-wheeler. The 4-wheeler
was cheaper to construct, easier to maintain and more economical in petrol
consumption than the 6-wheeler.
This first premise is unlikely to be disputed.
The validity of the second premise was dependent upon the validity of third,
and both were based upon conjecture.
The second was that it was possible to
draw a line of demarcation between the type of vehicle required for front line
operational transport-6-wheelers, and the type required for service in the rear
of the front-line— 4-wheelers.
Experience in the 1914-18 war suggested that
this was not entirely a practicable distinction, yet the Committee's third premise
was that as the Western Plan had been adopted it could be assumed that the
Army would have the benefit of good roads and railways.
The reasons why
the Committee was able to avoid contemplation of " operations in a country
reduced by warfare to the state of affairs met with, e.g., at Passchendaele in
1917"1 are shrouded in mystery. It may be that as under the Western Plan it
was not possible to rely upon post-mobilization production for the equipment
of the First Contingent, it was regarded as a lesser risk to recommend the com-
paratively inefficient 4-wheeled vehicles, the provision of which could be assured,
than the more efficient 6-wheeler, whose production was uncertain.
The principles by which the Committee was guided (and which the War
Office accepted) in their recommendations for the employment of 4- and
(a) Where good mobility across country is essential (e.g., for first line
transport of fighting units) 3-ton lorries must be retained as 6-wheelers.
Where, however, lorries do not need to leave the road, or, otherwise,
where they can choose their route across country and it is not
absolutely essential for them to reach definite points, they can be
(b) Lorries required to negotiate deep mud must be 6-wheelers.
(c) In some Artillery Brigades and R.A.S.C. Ammunition Companies it is
sufficient for a proportion of certain classes of vehicles carrying
ammunition to be 6-wheelers, to serve any guns which may for a
(d) Lorries which have to tow trailers or disabled vehicles across country
may often have to be 6-wheeler.
(e) 4-wheelers substituted for 6-wheelers should be of a type obtainable
from impressment.
In spite of adhering to these principles, the Committee found itself able to
recommend a reduction of 6-wheelers, including reserves, of 2,118-from 3,702
to 1,584 for the First Contingent under the Western Plan.
It was estimated
that a deficit of some 750 6 x 4 vehicles would still exist, even after allowance
(1) Report of Crosland Committee 57/Vehs /6060.
WO27773
28
had been made for vehicles held in peace or obtainable by impressment, and
that the increased demands of the Western Plan would result in a similar deficit
of some 250 special type 3-ton 4-wheelers.
The solution, which was accepted,
was the acquisition in peace-time over a period of this quantity of vehicles at a
cost of approximately £l million.
The Eastern Plan, if called into action, required different treatment because
of the slower rate of mobilization required, and the nature of the country likely
to be the scene of operations. The Committee considered that no appreciable
reduction in the existing war establishments of 6-wheelers could be made unless
the risk could be taken that, in view of the nature of the country, a force as
dependent upon 4-wheelers as that envisaged for the Western Plan might be
completely immobilized for considerable periods by lack of suitable transport.
This risk was accepted by the War Office.
Under the Eastern Plan it was only
necessary for the purposes of peace-time provision to consider the requirements
of " A" and " B" Contingents, because the other contingents did not embark
until Z + 4 months or later, and it was therefore anticipated that there would
be time for post-mobilization production to provide the needs of the later forces.
The deficit of 6-wheelers for the first two Contingents was assessed at 1,025, of
which some 750 could be provided from the peace holding recommended for the
Western Plan.
The balance was also left to post-mobilization production.
The findings of this Committee have been discussed at some length partly
on account of the strategic considerations involved and their effect on military
vehicle design, and partly because they mark the climax in one sphere of a
retrograde progress between wars which is only too familiar in British military
history.
The end of the 1914-18 war found the Army not only convinced of
the value of mechanized transport, but also convinced that transport must be
specially designed for its military purpose.
The 20 years following saw this
conviction not so much destroyed as abandoned to the force of circumstances in
the form of lack of public interest, lack of Treasury support and finally lack of
industrial capacity.
It was indeed fortunate that development of the com-
mercial vehicle, which in its early days owed so much to War Office foresight,
survived restrictive taxation and reached a state of comparative if not out-
standing efficiency.
Section 4.—Subsidies—Hiring—Impressment
As has already been noted, the value of French and German subsidies was
very considerably higher than that of this country, the French subsidy amounting
to approximately €320 a year. It is therefore interesting to note Q.M.G.'s
comment on the expenditure recommended by the Crosland Committeel :—
"To acquire the necessary 1,015 vehicles will cost €1,087,000, or, spread
over eight years (as recommended), an annual outlay of €136,000.
It has
sometimes been said that the 6-wheeler subsidy would have ' taken' had
we offered a retainer of £120 a year.
In that event our annual bill would
have been 1,000 lorries at £120 = £120,000.'
(3) 57/Vehs/4060.
