efforts were made to encourage their use in civil life both by offering ma.
facturers the free use of a number of War Office patents, including that of the
final drive, and by offering the same subsidy as for the 30-cwt. 4 x 2 vehicle.
The design was sound, if cumbersome, but, as will appear later in this chapter,
proved unpopular in commercial circles.
It was not possible to overcome this
prejudice sufficiently to ensure sufficient production for war, and as the result
of the Crosland Committee Report in 1935, which is discussed in some detail
later, large numbers were replaced on establishments by 3-ton 4 x 2 vehicles,
which by this time had made great strides in efficiency.
As has been said, the mechanization of transport within the Army was a
gradual process and took place to some extent arm by arm.
to consider the individual progress of each specialist user of transport, and it
must suffice to deal in broad outline with two arms-artillery and infantry—
whose problems caused perhaps the greatest difficulties.
already been given in Part I, Chapter VII, of the early use of tracked vehicles-
These were built in two types for medium and
field artillery, and were primarily intended for cross-country work, the standard
6-wheeler being considered suitable for road haulage.
the medium type, proved a most efficient vehicle, but their first cost was high
and their 90-h.p. Armstrong Siddeley air cooled engines were of a non-commercial
Further, production capacity of Dragons was not
considered sufficient to meet the rapid expansion necessary in an emergency.
The alternative was the wheeled tractor for haulage over all but the worst
country, with a reserve of Dragons in each unit. Trials of 4- and 6-wheeled
tractors were carried out in 1934, and the performance of some makes was so
unexpectedly good as to compare very favourably, and at greatly less expense,
For this, recent development of the low pressure tyre with
a special tread for cross-country work was largely responsible.1 At about this
time some experimental work was done in developing the partially tracked
tractor, but results were unsatisfactory, and work was abandoned until late in
the 1939-45 war, when it became clear that the Germans had been extremely
successful in developing a wide variety of vehicles of this type.
tractor had, however, come to stay, not only in the accepted 6 x 4 form, but
also as a 4 x 4 vehicle at long last, and by 1936 the Dragon was abandoned.
In 1938 the Guy and Morris-Commercial 4 × 4 " Quads" became standard
field artillery tractors, and in the following year the A.E.C. 4 × 4 Matador was
proved its worth, it slowly began to appear in the Army.
Thus 20 years after this type of vehicle had first
Mechanization of the infantry, which quantitatively was the most important
part of this programme of reorganization, came comparatively late.
of vehicle which was to replace the G.S. wagon was the major problem, as it
was essential to provide good cross-country performance without unnecessary
As will have been seen in Part I, Chapter VII, very considerable use
was made of tracked carriers, but after lengthy trials it was decided in 1936 that
the infantry should be basically equipped with 15-cwt. 4 x 2 wheeled vehicles,
constructed to a General Staff specification, but making the fullest possible use
of commercial components in normal use.
The chassis was in fact a modified
W027;
commercial type.
The choice of design is interesting in that it was at that time
the only specially designed military vehicle with a single driving axle, and was
in direct contradiction of the principle laid down in 1928 that 4 x 2 vehicles
were obsolescent.
This departure from principlel was largely owing to the
introduction of low pressure tyres, in the development of which the Army had
carried out invaluable pioneer work both in this country and in the Middle
East.?
Section 3.—Dependence on Commercial Value of Army Requirements
It is significant that in the period during which so much experimental work
was being carried out by and on behalf of the War Office in the production of
military vehicles, and even in the 1920s when the necessity of specially designed
vehicles for all military purposes was fairly generally accepted by the Army if
not by the Treasury, military experts were publicly stressing the dependence of
military vehicle design upon commercial requirements.
Ample evidence of the
changing trend of opinion towards an increasing reliance on the commercial
vehicle is contained in two papers prepared for the Institution of Automobile
Engineers and the recorded discussion thereon.
These papers are—
"The Requirements of the Military Motor Vehicle", by Captain R. K.
" Military Transport Vehicles", by Captain C. H. Kuhne (1927).
The earlier paper was forthright in stating that military and civil requirements
There was general agreement to this in discussion, in which the
conclusion was reached that the military specification could be adapted to
commercial needs, but not vice versa. As this paper was published soon after
the appearance of the Subsidy Scheme for the 30-cwt. 4 x 2 vehicle, it is
interesting to note that almost every member of the Institution taking part in
the discussion-all highly qualified automobile engineers and manufacturers-
took the opportunity of praising the persistence of the War Office in the develop-
Recognition of the services rendered by a
Government department is so rare that it merits quotation:-
"I would like, as representing a firm of motor-vehicle manufacturers,
publicly to state that.
. the War Office were in many points far ahead
of the manufacturers.
They saw four years ahead of them in the matter
of the pneumatic tyre, and practically forced it down the throats of the
manufacturers";
"I must say I have found them [the Army] to be very much alive to the
requirements of the up-to-date civilian user as well as the requirements of
In 1927 the emphasis is changing.
Captain Kuhne, who was Secretary of
the Mechanical Transport Advisory Board, stated that—
• the War Department realizes to the full its dependence on com-
mercial resources in respect both of existing vehicles and of the capacity
to produce further large numbers rapidly in emergency
Office [has been guided by one main principle, namely, that the vehicles
must be of types which can be recommended for commercial use" ;
(1) 57/Vehs/6060.
the cap is a be on te prally adi yed try he no or there in strat at he on i Corone
majority of advances in construction and efficiency both for civil and military use.
