meet this requirement, although the difficulty was recognized that it would
entail a great increase in the number of 6 x 6 vehicles.
If industrial capacity
was insufficient to accept this increase, the 15-cwt.l 4 x 4 would have to be
retained.
The need for vehicles to be produced within the British Empire produced
some second thoughts.
Vehicle requirements of ideal types for a small peace-
time army could probably be met from peace-time industrial capacity within the
Empire, but it was doubtful whether production in sufficient quantities would be
possible in the event of war.
It was therefore suggested that it would be more
practical to accept vehicles whose performance
was satisfactory and which
were capable of being produced in the required numbers in the event of war than
to adopt ideal specifications for vehicles likely to be unobtainable in sufficient
quantities.
As an example, it might be necessary in some cases to accept 4 × 4
vehicles in place of the more satisfactory 6 × 6, as the former was of a com-
mercial, or near-commercial, type, and existing manufacturing capacity and
tools could be employed.
A table of comparison of the five main types of chassis at that time in use
was drawn up, using the 4 x 2 chassis as a yardstick :—
Type.
Cross Country
Performance.
Production
Effort.
Maintenance
anel
Capacity for
Consumption. takingArmour.
4 × 2..
6 × 6.
Fully tracked
Poor
Simple
2 p.c. better
25 p.c. greater
5 p.c. better
greater
90 p.c. better
100 p.c. better
Not known
Not known
Simple
Normal
Nil.
Simple
Norila.
Simple
10 p.c. greater
roUl.
Light armour.
50 p.c. greater
75 p.c. greater
p.c. greater
Light armour.
60 p.c. greater
Light armour.
If all formations were to have the highest standard of cross-country performance
—the ideal—the whole Army would have to be provided with fully or three-
quarter tracked vehicles.
This was obviously impossible as it was beyond the
industrial capacity likely to be available in time of war, apart from the very
considerable maintenance problems involved.
It was therefore necessary to
equip formations with the type of chassis most suited to their needs and at the
same time within the Empire's production powers.
The revised proposals
envisaged the distribution? of vehicle classes as follows :—
(a) Armoured Divisions.—As these required the highest standard of cross-
country performance, they should be equipped with fully or three-
quarter tracked chassis, except for " B" echelons and 2nd line units,
which were to be not below a 6 x 6 standard.
(b) Infantry Divisions.— As these did not require the same high standard as
the armoured division, they should be based on 6 x 6 and 4 x 4
chassis.
(c) Airborne Divisions.-These should be based on Jeeps and trailers, with
a limited number of larger 4 x 4 and 6 x 6 vehicles.
upon employment of a 1-ton truck.
° t the time of writing, February, 1949, a compromise has been reached by agreement
in the post-war army.
1° As vat ax to this chapter gives in detail the types of chassis suggested for formations
114
wO 277/26
(d) Corps and Army Troops.—Those required to serve with divisions should
be equipped with the same type of vehicle as the division they are
likely to serve.
All other corps and army troops required to operate
in forward areas should be equipped on infantry division standards.
Army troops not required to operate in forward areas might be
provided with 4 x 2 chassis.
The range of engines was increased by the addition of an intermediate
135 B.H.P. type and their proposed uses were more precisely defined :—
Approximate
Proposed Uses.
135
350
British jeep.
Staff car, 30-cwt. class (or 15-cwt. if retained) and scout car.
3-ton class (other than certain technical vehicles) only required to tow light
loads, and ambulances.
3-ton class (including certain technical vehicles) required to tow heavy
loads.
10-ton class ;
light artillery tractors whether wheeled, {-tracked
Tank transporters; heavy breakdown vehicles; medium artillery tractors
and heavy tractors :
of all types, whether wheeled, f-tracked or fully
tracked.
The need for standardization of bodies, wherever possible, was more strongly
stressed.
In the past it had been normal to design a special body for many
separate special equipments : for the future equipments' should be designed for
use in standard bodies if at all practicable.
In addition bodies should be easily
detachable from their chassis and capable of being fitted to any chassis within
their range, in order to facilitate shipment, repair and overhaul.
It was unlikely that air-portability for armoured divisions would be possible
for some time, but all vehicles in the infantry division and equivalent corps troops
should be capable of being transported by air, future designs of such vehicles
being closely related to the design of transport aircraft.
Insistence on water-
proofing in manufacture was reiterated, with an additional proviso that final
last minute work must be within the capabilities of drivers.
D.D.G.Mech., Ministry of Supply, who saw a draft of the revised policy
paper before it was presented to the O.W.P.C., agreed with its general principles
but made several criticisms of the conclusions drawn.
He saw no inherent
difficulty in the manufacture of a 15-cwt. 90 B.H.P. 6 x 6, which would have a
large number of components in common with the 90 B.H.P. 4 x 4 vehicle, but
he considered that a 90 B.H.P. 6 x 6 unsound in that it would form an individual
type with every component peculiar to it with the exception of the engine.
The
135 B.H.P., 3-ton, 4 x 4 and 6 x 6, and the 180 B.H.P., 3-ton, 6 x 6 would have
a considerable degree of interchangeability of parts, although the first of these
three types might prove uneconomical. Its rear axle, for example, would have
could carted in asle daris ion istence at that time was R.E. bridging equipment, which
115
