WO27T/26
78
CHAPTER X
BRITISH AMPHIBIOUS VEHICLES
The development and production of British amphibious vehicles forms a
singularly unsatisfactory and inconclusive chapter in the history of the pro-
vision of equipment during the war.
Great efforts were made, in a somewhat
unco-ordinated way, to produce both wheeled and tracked machines, but the
material results were negligible, and the story represents a series of frustrations,
failures in design and inadequacy of production.
During the latter half of 1942, discussions of requirements for amphibious
vehicles were proceeding between Home Forces and the War Office, and a ten-
tative demand was stated by D.M.G.A., Home Forces, for an amphibious
vehicle which could land in water of a depth of seven or eight feet.!
At this time,
as no British amphibians were in production and only one had reached the
design stage,? enquiries were made in U.S.A. to discover the capabilities of
vehicles already in production there.
On 8th December, 1942, the War Office
and Ministry of Supply informed the British Truck Mission in Washington of an
urgent requirement for 300 wheeled vehicles of the 2}-ton type, later to be known
as the DUKW, and for 500 tracked vehicles of a type at that time only manu-
factured by the Food Machinery Corporation-the landing vehicle tracked
(L.V.T.).3
The whole of the production of the 22-ton type, some 2,000, had,
however, already been allocated to the U.S. Army, and the U.S. War Department
made it clear that production for British requirements would have to be arranged,
for the time being at least, in Canada or Great Britain.
It was at the same time
suggested that the United Kingdom should re-submit her demands through
the normal channels of Lend-Lease machinery for consideration at a later date.
The War Office had anticipated this reply by some months and had decided
that British forces should not be entirely dependent upon U.S. production and
allocation for amphibians.
In October, 1942, a statement of policy on the
subject was issued, * which described the situation, and declared it unsatisfactory.
"There is a General Staff requirement for an amphibious load carrying
vehicle for the purpose of carrying stores, etc., from ship to shore and from
shore to dump.
Up to date no effort has been made either by the War
Office or by the Ministry of Supply to produce such a vehicle; our policy
has been to obtain for trial any vehicle of these types manufactured in the
intry ond eir avestigate a projects evolved by manufactures in this
(*) Minutes : 27th Meeting, W.V.C., 8 Dec., 1942.
(3) The Argosy, produced by Morris-Commercial Cars, Ltd.
(2) Minutes : 28th Meeting, W.V.C., 22 Dec., 1942.
(O.V.) Paper Z.t, 1942.
12th Meeting, General Staff Committee on Weapons and Equipment
(*) A brief description of early types is given at Appendix A to this chapter.
(9) e.g., the Argosy.
