In July, 1945, the Ministry of Supply informed the War
Office that it
proposed to establish a permanent " B" Vehicle Committee with the following
terms of reference :-
(l) to consider and make recommendations on all major questions in
regard to development and production;
(2) to maintain formal contact between the Supply Department and the
War Office at all stages of design and development ;
(3) to consider and make recommendations for achieving standardization
to the greatest extent possible and thus to reduce the number of
special types to a minimum ;
(4) to advise on the promotion of research in any channels considered
necessary to further the development of " B" vehicles.
The Chairman was to be the Director-General of Armoured Fighting
Vehicles, who, under a reorganization of the Ministry, would be responsible for
design, development and production of both " A" and "B" vehicles, and the
membership proposed was :—
War Office
A.C.I.G.S. (W).
D.S.W.V.
D.Q.M.G. (A.E.).
D.M.E.
Ministry of Supply
D.D.G.Mech.
D. of M. (T.T.2).
Chief Engineer-in-Charge of Design and
Development.
In addition the Air Ministry was invited to provide a representative.
Needless to say, the War Office accepted the proposal, and at the time of
writing, February, 1949, the Committee is still in existence.
The main reason for refusing the Panel's recommendation for the establish-
ment of a research organization within the industry was no doubt a fear that
it would not be sufficiently impartial.
It was also strongly felt that the
S.M.M. & T. did not fully appreciate the full significance of the trend of army
vehicle development away from civilian practice.1
The alternative was a
Government controlled research centre.
This conception was viewed with
some misgivings by the industry, but it was not intended to impose a sealed
design on an unwilling trade, and to meet the criticism that industry was not
consulted at an early enough stage, it was proposed to arrange for the closest
liaison with manufacturers.?
In the early stages of discussion, the functions of
such an establishment were perhaps not very clearly considered and it was not
certain whether these were fundamental or applied research-or both.
question was cleared up during a re-organization of the departments of the
Ministry of Supply dealing with " A" and " B" vehicles.
This was another of
the concurrent happenings of the period which makes the sequence, or rather
the agglomeration, of events difficult to disentangle.
As has already been
hinted, the Ministry of Supply was engaged in setting up a " Fighting Vehicles
Division" with the object of controlling the whole range of provision of Service
vehicles. As the future eristence of the Ministry after the war, was at that time
(*) A.C.I.G.S.(W), 34th Meeting, W.D.C., 26 April, 1945.
(e) This liaison is discussed later in this chapter.
WO27TT2
somewhat problematical, the new " Division" was designed to operate either
as a part of the War Office or as part of an independent Supply Department.
Its basic organization consisted of a headquarters and branches covering
research, design and development, proving and trial, production and inspection.
The Ministry considered that fundamental research could best and most
economically be carried out under a centralized research organization serving
the defence forces as a whole or even the whole nation.
This decision very
effectively defined the limits of research into vehicle problems as far as the
Ministry of Supply was concerned, and as yet no such central research establish-
ment has appeared.? On the other hand, it was accepted as essential that
facilities for applied and ad hoc research should be available to the vehicle
designer to assist him in his day to day problems.
The intimate connection
between research and design was recognized by making both branches responsible
to one head, the Chief Engineer of the design branch, and the terms of reference
of the research branch were intended to cover all aspects of military or fighting
vehicles including armour, armament and the fighting compartments of A.F.V.s,
physiology, and such subjects connected with the automotive side as were
particular to military as distinct from commercial practice.
These subjects
included soil and track research.
The whole of this organization was formed
at Chobham, where it had at hand the Fighting Vehicles Proving Establishment
and the Wheeled Vehicles Experimental Establishment to carry out performance
trials of its designs.
It must be emphasized that the research branch was concerned only with
applied research.
Its function was to discover whether theories evolved by the
design branch, in meeting a War Office requirement, were capable of translation
into practice.
In the absence of a central establishment devoted to basic or
fundamental research, such work was entrusted to the most appropriate external
body.
For example, in October, 1947, work on amphibian load-carriers was
being carried out by the National Physical Laboratory, on servo motors by the
University of Birmingham, on mud by the University of Durham, and on
torsion bars by Morris Motors, Ltd.
In view of the recommendations of the
Industrial Panel it is of some interest to note that very little work was, and is,
carried out by the motor industry for the Fighting Vehicle Design Division.
In fact, the boot has been on the other leg, as the F.V.D.D. has been found to
possess considerably greater resources for applied research than the industry.
Section 4.—Manufacture
In this chapter an attempt has been made to point out the unbridgeable gulf
between military and civil vehicle design, to acquit the War Office of the
frequently repeated charge that it knew not what it wanted, and to outline
the foundations of post-war research.
It remains to be considered how it was
proposed to manufacture the " finalized" designs resulting from the War Office
statement of requirement and the Ministry of Supply's design and research
organization.
This subject
more properly belongs to the history
of the
Ministry, but there are good reasons for some discussion here in that the War
(1) A diagram of the organization is shown at Appendix D to this chapter.
recommendations contained in the report of the important
Land Movemen Che were in 1946
123
