Gear-Box
The vehicle must climb a gradient of 1 in 44 on a hard surface with full load,
and must stop and restart on a gradient of 1 in 5 in both forward and reverse
The lower gear should be about 35 to 1, and the ratio between top and
bottom gears :
about 5 to 1, reverse gear preferably lower than bottom.
Four
speeds forward and a reverse with gate change to be employed.
The gate
preferably of the type illustrated, with diagram of arrangement exhibited on
dashboard.
Reverse safety catch to be fitted on change-speed lever.
Gear-box
should be fitted with test plug to indicate maximum oil level, and arrangements
made for speedometer or mileometer drive from it.
Final Transmission
This is to be of the live axle type, preferably fully enclosed.
Straight tooth,
bevel or worm drive are permitted and a single helical or spiral type may be
accepted after consideration.
Road wheels should be readily detachable from
driving shafts, or the latter capable of being withdrawn to free transmission for
towing purposes.
Laminated fabric or leather universal joints are preferred;
mechanical universal joints must be adequately protected.
Axles and Wheels
The axles must have suitable platforms, preferably at the same height, near
the ends to receive the head of a jack. It is desirable that no tie-rod be employed
for the rear axle.
Wheel bearings preferably of taper roller type.
Plain floating
bushes and ball bearings of approved design will be acceptable. Detachable
steel disc wheels, or with approved detachable rims or flanges, must be provided,
and provision must be made for fitting non-skid devices, which must not increase
the overall dimensions by more than 2 in. in any direction.
Short lengths of
curb chain are preferred.
Hooks to be attached to the wheel rims ; if latter of
beaded edge type, to be as defined by B.E.S.A. Report No. 70, dated 1919.
Tyres to be not less than 36 in. diameter and of same size front and rear.
Large singles are preferred, but twins on the rear may be accepted.
A tyre pump
with efficient oil filter, pressure gauge, cooling and of adequate dimensions,
capable of pumping one tyre to full pressure in 5 minutes, and driven from the
gear box, must be provided.
Speed
Fully loaded and running on level road, it must be capable of 30 m.p.h. for
one mile and 22 m.p.h. for two hours.
1 in 10 at 8 m.p.h.
It must climb an average gradient of
if fitted with a governor, this may be removed for the trials.
Steering
All parts are to be of approved design and well protected from the effects of
water, mud, sand, etc.
The steering box is to be anchored to the
off side of the frame, and front-wheel stops must be provided to prevent the tyres
from fouling the chassis; these stops should be adjustable.
Steering joints
must be adequately protected, and the vehicle must be capable of turning
completely on either lock in a space not exceeding 45 ft. wide.
WO 27726
28
Brakes
Two independent brakes are required, one hand and one foot, capable of
stopping and holding vehicle either way on a 1 in 5 gradient.
The design must
permit of continuous application of one brake for a distance of half a mile on
an average gradient of 1 in 12, and at a minimum speed of 8 m.p.h. with gear lever
in neutral.
The brake operating on drums fixed to the driving wheel must be
compensated.
Chassis Details
Chassis weight must not exceed 29 cwt., exclusive of water, oil and fuel ; it
must carry a useful load of 30 cwt. and a body weighing 10 cwt., in addition to
driver and passenger, together with fuel, water, oil and equipment.
Engine and gear box to be mounted on three-point suspension system.
Fitted and driven bolts are preferred to rivets throughout the chassis ; all
holes should be drilled.
No holes to be drilled in frame flanges at positions
subjected to severe stresses.
Minimum road clearance, 10} in. ; more is desired, particularly under centre.
Maximum overall width, 7 ft.; maximum wheelbase, 12 ft. ; maximum
track, 6 ft. 6 in.; minimum track, 4 ft. 6 in. ; approximate track desired,
The vehicle should be capable of travelling at slow speed through still water
18 in. deep.
Springing to provide normal range of 4 in. up and 3 in. down from
the fully loaded standing position.
Clearance must include non-skid device.
All road springs must stand a repeated deflection of 3 in. beyond the normal
when loaded.
A choice of 12 sections of leaves is permitted, rising by & in.
width from 2z in. to 4 in., and by i6 thickness from ½ to i& in.
Substantial towing hooks must be provided at the front and rear, and pro-
vision made for the fitting of an improved central rear towing eye of the spring
buffer type.
The chassis frame must be braced against horizontal distortion due to a
direct or diagonal pull in any direction up to 20 degrees with the longitudinal
axis of the vehicle.
Bodywork
The driver's seat and canopy to be separate from body, leaving space of at
least 1 in. clear between body and canopy.
Seat to carry two men comfortably
at left of driver.
Minimum width to centre line through steering column,
4 ft. 2 in.
Back to be suitably padded and cushion detachable. The latter to be
leather-covered and fitted with springs.
Dashboard and footboards approxi-
mately same width as driver's seat. Curved dash or extension of same to protect
occupants, and to allow use of apron without fouling steering wheel.
Hood to
be of Cape cart type.
Weight of body and driver's canopy not to exceed 10 cwt.
A locker to carry tools and equipment to be fitted under driver's seat, and
accessible from left side.
Provision must be made for the fitting of a locker,
with bar and padlock, under body, large enough to carry three 2-gallon petrol
tins on each side.
37
