12. Service of Notices.—A notice may be served on the owner either personally, by telegraph, or by sending it through the post
addressed to him at the owner's depot or address mentioned in the signed particulars, and shall be deemed to have been served
on the day of delivery.
The War Department reserves the right of refusing any vehicle without assigning a reason.
of the petrol lorries hereinunder mentioned, hereby enrol the said lorries under and to be subject to the conditions of the Provisional Subsidy
Scheme for the subsidizing of petrol motor lorries for purchase by the War Department, dated 1911.
Date
Date on which
Location
Final type of
transmission
to axle.
Date of
inspec-
Licence
number.
Owner's
ehicl
enrolment.
Price paid by
owner
including
spare parts.
celvercu
owner on ul-
chase by him.
Amount
n1t121
subsidy.
Maker's Name
and Number.
Horse-
power.
Number
cylinders.
depot.
And I, the Director of Transport and Remounts, on behalf of His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the War Department, hereby accept the
enrolment on those terms.
1911.
Director of Transport and Remounts.
Dated.
WO 27772
78
APPENDIX B
DRAFT SPECIFICATION FOR PETROL ENGINED VEHICLES
UNDER THE MAIN SUBSIDY SCHEME, 1912
Note.-Drawings, prints, etc., referred to in this draft specification are not
reproduced in this Historical Monograph.
1. General.-
suitable for War Department purposes.
-General conditions governing the grant of subsidy to vehicles
The two main objects which the War Department has had in view in making
out the following specification have been as follows :—
(a) To make the manipulation and control of all vehicles the same; and
(b) To minimize the number of spare parts which must be carried in the
field,
having regard to the number of different makes of vehicles of
which the transport columns of the Army would be composed.
Only those lorries which comply in every particular with the terms of this
specification and which are entirely to the satisfaction of the War Department
will be eligible for the grant of full subsidy after Ist July, 1912.
2. Pattern.—Lorries must, in addition, be identical in every respect with one
of the types which have been submitted to the War Department for trials, have
successfully passed the prescribed tests laid down for each class of vehicle and
have in addition received the War Department certificate.
The manufacturer's drawing of these vehicles will be deposited at the
War Office and should manufacturers be desirous of making any changes in
design of their subsidized types they are to refer them to the Mechanical Trans-
port Committee for approval.
The list of such drawings is shown below.
3. Carrying Capacity.-
—The lorries are to be of two classes :-
" A."_To carry a useful load of 3 tons.
"B." -To carry a useful load of 30 cwt.
In referring to these hereafter they will be mentioned as Class "A" and
Class " B " respectively.
In both cases in addition to the useful load specified, the vehicles are to be
capable of carrying two men on the driver's left on the front seat, as well as a
fair kit of tools, spare petrol tins, etc.
(Note.—The weight of the body work is not included in the useful load.)
The following table of weights has been drawn out to show the total gross
weights that may have to be carried :-
Class A.
Class B.
tons
Useful load
Three men on driver's seat at 2 cwt. each
Kit, spare petrol tins
Heaviest body likely to be used
Too wealt or vehicles not to exoced
