(b) Vehicle Group Headquarters, each administering two or more Vehicle
Reserve Depôts (V.R.D.s).
(c) A number of Vehicle Reserve Depôts, classified according to their roles
and capacity, and sited for geographical convenience rather than by
Command boundaries.
Headquarters, Tanks and Vehicles, was responsible for the technical and
administrative direction of all units of the organization handling A.F.V.s and
its branch dealing with "B" vehicles being known as "B"
Control, Chilwell. The main functions of Vehicle Group
Headquarters were technical and administrative control of their constituent
on and tea rehaie onto tortive to at / Yehid of instructions
the M.T. Census Records maintained by the R.A.S.C. were absorbed into the
R.A.O.C. census branch known as " Central Census, Chilwell." Thus the new
system formed an example of centralization carried out to the limit and
exhibited some of the advantages and a good many of the disadvantages of
that much publicized and now somewhat discredited aid to efficiency. À
change in procedure which was however of undoubted value was the transfer
of responsibility for allocation of all vehicles to D.S.D. (W), as the current
system whereby the different directorates of the War Office allocated different
types and categories of vehicles had led to considerable and rapidly increasing
Although it had been patent for some time? that the existence of two separate
forms of machinery for the provision of vehicles and their spares was an
extravagance which could no longer be afforded, it was by no means certain
that this amalgamation in fact made the best of the good points of the systems
which it supplanted. Decentralization also has staunch advocates, and formed
the basis of R.A.S.C. practice in the issue and receipt of vehicles. R.A.O.C.
storage and classification methods on the other hand, were considered more
business-like and efficient than those of the R.A.S.C., but it is doubtful if they
were ever really capable of standing the strain to which they were shortly to be
subjected by an ever increasing flow of equipment from the U.S.A. and by
added responsibilities to Dominion and Allied Forces.
A statement of the merits and demerits of the new R.A.O.C. organization,
'as seen through the eyes of the General Staff, which was made in October, 1943,
when preparations for the invasion of France were already reaching a critical
state, did not decry the gigantic effort being made but at the same time provides
some illuminating comments on administrative defects, most of which can be
very fairly blamed on over-centralization.
The General Staff considered that
the system of issue of vehicles to some units and to overseas theatres was very
satisfactory, but that there were serious weaknesses in the administration of
V.R.D.s and of the statistical branch within the War Office.
V.R. Ds frequently did not know what vehicles they held, a situation due in the
first place to the inability of the staff to identify vehicles received and to lack of
any system of storage by groups and types, and due in the second place to a
Enge 100,25 ar, Cond Meeting of "" Committee on the formation of R. M. 20)
hand any part of it over to someone else."
(3) D.D.V., Oct., 1943.
C.I.G.S., 18 Jun., 1941.
WO2777
28
system in which the minimum of accounting was carried out on the spot and the
maximum undertaken by a distant headquarters. Many hundreds of vehicles
appeared to be left standing for months and in some cases, years, and although
unused were in a poor state of mechanical repair. The method of turnover of
stock left much to be desired, as issues were not apparently made of vehicles
longest in stock.
unreasonably long time.
Repairs were slow and evacuation of unfit vehicles took an
The immediate cause for these conditions could be
found in lack of skilled manpower, for which such establishments as V.R.D.s
could hope for little or no priority over the requirements of operational units,
and it was a General Staff opinion that a very great saving would have been
effected if V.R.D.s had been given adequate technical and non-technical staffs
even at the expense of the rest of the Army. It may be relevant to note here
that the report? made to D.W.S. on the possibility of R.A.S.C.-R.A.O.C.
fusion and the difficulties to be overcome admitted the excellence of R.A.S.C.
V.R.D.s, although criticising the extravagant use of officer and other rank
manpower.
Under the new régime the other extreme had evidently been
reached.
Comments on the efficiency of the statistical branch were related to
the difficulties imposed on future planning, and it must be recorded that any
explicit or implied shortcomings were readily recognized as being a result of the
lack of staff to deal with an enormous task and not as due to the weaknesses of
individuals.
The General Staff demanded a great mass of statistical information
and indeed received it, but in general it was fair to say that this information
was not produced regularly and systematically, nor could it be produced quickly.
The type of information required was as follows :-
(a) Theatre vehicle entitlements broken down into :
Unit equipment.
Reserves.
Transit commitment.
One month's average wastage.
One month's intense wastage.
One month's normal wastage.
(b) The holdings of theatres broken down into :
Serviceable vehicles with units.
Vehicles awaiting repair depôt stocks.
(c) Numbers of vehicles in transit to theatres.
(d) Vehicles allocated, broken down into :
Vehicles programmed but not shipped.
Vehicles not programmed.
(e) Tables of the "B" vehicles in the various formations employed in the
(f) A monthly state of readiness of formations in all theatres.
Almost all this information was in fact collected by the statistical branch,
but the General Staff complaint was that it was not collated in a form which
could present a clear picture at short notice.
"What in point of fact happens is that all the information
bits and pieces, and when we want it, a monster calculation has to take
place."2
