available.
The Munich conference made it unnecessary to accept this offer,
but as a mark of appreciation of General Motors' service, Treasury approval
was obtained for the purchase of 500 G.M.C. load-carriers for delivery C.K.D.
to Alexandria.
The weakness of pre-war preparations was that planning was
based on under-estimated requirements.
The immediate effect of this under-
estimation on vehicles was the false assumption that requirements could be
easily met from normal commercial production. Therefore, when an enormously
increased demand for munitions of all kinds arose in 1939 as a result of a more
realistic estimate of requirements, industrial capacity was not sufficient to meet
it, and it was necessary to concentrate upon what appeared to be the most vital
munitions'-among these, vehicles were not included until late in the war.
(*) See Part I, Chapter IV, Section 2, under the heading " The Invasion of N.W. Europe."
Note.—Sources of information on this chapter which are not shown in footnotes :-
History of Supply and Transport in the British Army.-Fortescue & Beadon.
Mechanical Transport Committee. Annual Reports. 1911-1913.
Mechanical Transport Advisory Board, Annual Reports, 1920-1927.
Ministry of Supply, M.T. Narrative.—C. Hornby, Esq.
"The Commercial Motor," 1905-1932 (with grateful acknowledgments to the Editor.
WO27772
APPENDIX A
THE PROVISIONAL SUBSIDY SCHEME FOR PETROL
ENGINED VEHICLES, 1911
Note.-Drawings, prints, etc., referred to in this document are not reproduced
in this Historical Monograph.
Provisional Scheme for the subsidizing of Petrol Motor Lorries already
manufactured and owned by civilians.
Such scheme to come into force pending
the issue of full terms under which the War Department will subsidize vehicles
built to certain specifications.
Schedule of Terms for the Enrolment of Petrol Motor Lorries by the War
Department under the Provisional Subsidy Scheme.
1. Classes of Petrol Lorries.—For the purpose of this schedule, petrol lorries
Class " A." -Those capable of carrying a useful load of 3 tons.
Class " B." -Those capable of carrying a useful load of 30 cwt.
2. Enrolment.—The vehicles will only be purchased in case of national
emergency, and will not be enrolled for hire purposes or manœuvres.
3. Subsidy.—Motor lorries will be subsidized for a period of two years, and
(a) Initial subsidy.
The initial subsidy, in accordance with the following scale, will be paid when
a lorry is first enrolled :—
For live axle lorry
For chain drive If chains are encased
An annual subsidy of €15 per lorry will be paid half-yearly in arrear after
satisfactory inspection, provided the conditions governing the payment are
CONDITIONS GOVERNING GRANT OF INITIAL SUBSIDY, ETC.
4. (A) Lorries must have been built subsequent to ist January, 1910.
(B) Engines.-Engines must be of the internal-combustion type, using
ordinary commercial spirit (petrol) for fuel.
All engines in Class "A" must have four cylinders.
be 110 mm., or 47 in.
Class "B" 30-cwt. lorries : preference will be given to those having four-
cylinder engines with a minimum bore of 90 mm., or 3z in.
two-cylinder engines may be accepted at the discretion of the War Office.
(C) Towing Hooks.—Four towing hooks of War Department pattern must
be fitted to each lorry, two at the rear of the chassis and two in front.
Detail drawings are attached. (See page 75.—ED.)
(D) Bodies. -Platform bodies will not be accepted unless they have sub-
stantial sides and ends of a minimum height of 1 ft. 8 in.
Van bodies and a certain number of box bodies will be accepted.
