Should any owners desire to fit bodies weighing more than the amounts
shown in the above tables, the matter would have to be reported, and if the
weight was considered by the Mechanical Transport Committee to be excessive,
owners would be obliged to keep in addition for mobilization purposes another
body of lighter weight which has been approved by the War Department.
Although it is anticipated that the majority of bodies obtained under the
subsidy scheme will be at least some 7 or 8 cwt. lighter than the maximum
figures shown, and although it is highly desirable that the body weights should be
kept as low as possible, the total weights given above are those that may have to
be carried by subsidized vehicles.
It is therefore necessary that the vehicles
should be capable of carrying them, and in the trials of type vehicles to be
submitted as being suitable to earn the War Department subsidy, they are the
figures that will be worked to.
The weight of the chassis should also be kept as low as possible consistent
with ample strength.
Accessibility.—As the subsidized vehicles when used in the field will have
to be repaired as rapidly as possible without such conveniences as inspection
pits, etc., the greatest care must be taken in the design to ensure thorough
accessibility to all parts.
5. Protection from Dust and Wet.—As vehicles when used in the field will
have to run considerable distances in convoy at close intervals over exceptionally
dusty and muddy roads, and as time and opportunities will not often be available
for cleaning them, all exposed moving parts must be protected as well as possible
by dust shields, and attention must be paid in the design to admit of easy
As full protection as possible must be provided against water splashed up
from below or otherwise finding its way on to any portion of the ignition system
which might be rendered temporarily useless thereby.
Engine.—The engines in both classes are to be of the vertical four-cylinder
internal combustion type, using ordinary commercial petroleum spirit (petrol)
for fuel up to 760 specific gravity.
Class " A"
Minimum cylinder bore to be 110 mm. or 4z in.
Minimum R.A.C. rating 30•0.
Class " B"
Minimum cylinder bore to be 100 mm. or 4 in.
Minimum R.A.C. rating 24•8.
Cylinders to be cast in pairs. All inlet and exhaust valves to be mechanically
Valve stems to be enclosed by dust-tight covers which must be so
designed that they are readily removable, and so that the accessibility of the
valves and cylinder holding-down bolts is not affected.
Inspection doors of
ample size are to be provided in accessible positions at the sides of the crank
chamber, so as to make the big end bearines potions ay accessible for examina-
tion or for the tightening of big end boling thoroughly ag the engine from the
possible to facilitate their removal.
The inspection doors in all cases should be fastened by as few bolts a5
undoing one bolt.
Preferably they should be removable by
The lower portion of the crank chamber to be capable of
W0277/
28
removal without disturbing the main bearings, so as to facilitate examination
of the latter.
In the case of engines whose crank shafts run on ball bearings,
this will not be insisted on so long as side doors are provided of sufficient size
to enable the big end bearings to be examined.
No. 101c.
Engines must be under a bonnet which is entirely removable, vide Drawing
Vehicles with engines under the driver's seat will not be accepted.
7. Engine Control.—All connections for throttle, governor, ignition, etc.; to
be by means of rods, not wire.
8. Governor.—All engines are to be provided with governors, which are to
be set in so as to prevent the engine speed from exceeding 1,000 revolutions per
minute.
9. Ignition.—Ignition to be by high tension magneto. In addition, a second
similar magneto is to be provided as spare and carried suitably enclosed and in
a protected place on the vehicle.
Magnetos to be of waterproof pattern, failing
which an effective cover of waterproof insulating material must be provided on
the working magneto in such a way as not to interfere with its accessibility for
adjustment or cleaning.
To enable the timing of the ignition to be readily set, the flywheel is to be
clearly marked to a fixed pointer with stamped directions, vide Drawing No. 109.
All magnetos to be arranged to fit on to a standard base, vide Drawing No. 108a,
and to have a standard drive so that they may be interchangeable.
Leads to
the different cylinders should be of different colours to facilitate correct con-
nections being made, and to be coloured as follows :-
Cylinder nearest radiator-red, next green, next yellow.
Cylinder nearest dashboard-blue.
Print No. 108a shows the universal type of drive to be used with magnetos.
It will be noted that two types of fastening the magneto are provided for,
namely, strap and set screws.
If a type of magneto is fitted in which the height of the spindle above the base
is less than the 50 mm. shown in the drawing, it must be used with a packing
piece; and should the height be greater than 50 mm., a packing piece must be
provided and carried, so as to enable the standard magneto to be fitted.
If a magneto with automatic advance is fitted, the complete control must be
provided for connecting up to the contact breaker of a standard magneto, should
one have to be fitted as a replacement.
10. Starting Handle.—Cranked portion to be interchangeable by having end
made as per drawing to fit on to shaft 1 in. square.
Length of handle, 9 in. centres. Vide Drawing No. 107.
11. Radiators.—Vide Drawing No. 101c.
Radiators to fit on to universal housing so that they will be interchangeable.
This effected by fixing them by means of trunnions near the lower end, and by
a connection at the top.
In order to avoid fouling the starting handle and to
avoid fixing the dimensions of the frame, radiator must fit entirely above the
frame,
