132
(C21498) 300 1/52
(c) That the volume of wheeled vehicle development work ahead is such that
the combined load of "A" and " B" vehicles ought not to be put on one
Development Head.
(d) That equality of status between " A" and "B" vehicles will be essential
in future and that this provides a further reason against amalgamation at low
levels.
(e) That amalgamation should accordingly be limited to the highest level,
i.e. Director General, who should have a Deputy Director General in charge
of wheeled vehicles,
but that services of a general character and components
usable in common should be drawn from a common source.
4. (a) That the appropriate Government Departments should be advised
that we support the Industrial Panel's representations advocating relaxation of
taxation and of Road Traffic Act restrictions, in the interests of the supply of
future military vehicles.
(b) That a subsidy scheme to encourage commercial use of heavier and more
powerful vehicles cannot be recommended.
(c) That the provision of future military vehicles in peace and for a future
emergency will require the establishment in peace time of special productive
capacity.
5. (a) That the Industrial Panel's proposal that design and development of
vehicles should not be undertaken in any Government Establishment but should
be dealt with by Industry in special development establishments set up at
Government expense is unacceptable.
(b) That a Government Development Centre should be established, capable
of producing prototypes embodying components developed in conjunction
with specialist firms, and working in the closest collaboration with design and
production staffs of selected " parent" firms.
(c) That a redundant operational aerodrome with buildings
would be
suitable and that if possible one should be sought in the Cannock Chase area.
6. That the method of financial provision for research and development
should be reviewed to provide for the total cost of a project or programme of
projects being authorized in the first year.
7. (a) That a Permanent " B" Vehicle Committee should be established.
(b) That Industry's proposal to establish a permanent Industrial Advisory
Panel should be welcomed and that the Panel should be invited to discussions
with a sub-committee of the Permanent Committee, as required.
Tech. Records
Library
Abstracts
Searches
FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION, F.V.D.D., MINISTRY OF SUPPLY. OCTOBER, 1947
Tech. Services
General
Standards
Drawing
Office
Military
Investigation-
Service
Design and Development
Design
Co-ordination
Branches
Tracked
Vehicles
Wheeled
Vehicles
Specialist
Branches
Power Plant
Running Gear
Turrets and
Sighting
Electrical
Research
F.V. Research
Optical
Gen. Physics
Weapon
Performance
and
Tactical Trials
Electrical
Gen. Engineering
Test Bay
Materials
Metallurgy
Welding
Armour
Rallistics
APPENDIX D
W027
