316
The Lifeblood of War
cause resentment amongst public opinion in the West, particularly
among nations with a strong peace lobby; West Germany, Holland,
Belgium and Denmark. The man in the street, however misguided on
defence matters, perceiving disarmament to be on hand, may be
thoroughly dismayed at the sight of what could be portrayed as NATO
attempting to cheat. On the other hand the Soviet Union and the Non-
Warsaw Pact Nations have to take account of the political, social, and
economic consequences of disposing of some 24,000 tanks, 22,000
troop carriers, and 6,000 aircraft and helicopters, in addition to
demobilising
one
third of a million men.
There is, therefore,
considerable potential for upheaval, and hence dangerous instability.
So there is no guarantee that CFE will succeed, and yet there is pressure
from a number of directions, not least economic for further reductions
in the West's readiness.
The Threat
What about intentions? It is hard to believe that the Soviet Union
has any desire at present to go to war with the West. Even the most
hard-line Soviet soldier has far too much to distract him at home.
Unrest and violence in the non-Russian republics abounds. Army
morale is reported as being low. Recent British military visitors have
discerned a ground-swell of resentment among officers of the rank of
Colonel and below against the increasing unpopularity of the Soviet
Army at home, coupled with a perception that their seniors are doing
little about it. Many officers of all ranks would like to see a smaller
Soviet Army of Russian regulars, purged of ethnic minorities. It is also
hard to believe that even if the most hard-line Leninist leader succeeded
Gorbachev (who is an avowed Leninist himself), he would indulge in
an attack on the West as a means of distracting the population from the
growing economic and social problems. He would, after all, have the
example of Lenin himself, surrendering vast tracts of land and
resources to the Germans at the Treaty of Brest Litovsk in 1918, in
exchange for peace, and thereby gaining a breathing space in which to
tackle his country's problems, without the unwelcome burden of a war
with a foreign power. The way in which Gorbachev allowed the Eastern
European nations, that provided the Soviet Union with a 'glacis'
against the West, to slip out from Soviet control is a similarly
pragmatic move. So he, or a successor, is unlikely to attack through the
buffer of neutral states that have replaced the 'glacis'. Provided, that is,
the West maintains a level of deterrence which Gorbachev, or any as
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
317
yet un-named hardline replacement, perceives as sufficiently high to
deter him.
The question of the ability of the Soviet Union to deploy its
capability has partly been covered already. There must also be doubts
that the capability exists at present in terms of training, morale, and the
willingness of the people to support a war. Therefore, despite its
undeniable capability in hardware, the threat from the Soviet Union
has all but disappeared for the moment. At the same time the Soviet
Union is a formidable nuclear power, and will remain so. It will
continue to exert a major geopolitical influence on Europe. It is
unlikely to become a democracy in the Western sense for several years,
if ever. Taking these points into consideration, it will be some time
before the West, or anyone, can have total confidence in the Soviet
Union's peaceful intentions.
We in the West have lived so long, the lifetime of anybody under
50 years old, with the notion of one clearly perceived enemy and a
tailor-made defence solution to face him, that many see this as "normal'.
It is not. We are actually returning to the 'normal' state. Historically,
the enemies of any nation, particularly the British located offshore,
waxed and waned in the scale of the threat they posed; changing places
in the order of menace-
some dropping out, as new ones appeared.
One of the results of the unshackling of Eastern Europe, has been the
re-nationalisation of Eastern European politics, and the emergence of
such unwelcome manifestations as racism and even fascism. In the not
too distant future, Eastern European nations might look to the West
for security guarantees. This could include calling for action in the
event of pressure being exerted by the Soviet Union, perhaps extending
to incursions into the neutral belt; or if there is conflict between two
Eastern European states.
The Response
Because there is so much uncertainty, it is important that NATO
should retain certain characteristics and capabilities. First, adequate
forces and the integrated military structure must be kept. Second,
Germany must remain a full member of the Alliance, including
remaining part of the integrated military structure. Third, NATO must
remain a transatlantic alliance, the involvement of the Americans is
crucial. Any notion of acceding to demands from the Soviet Union for
total withdrawal of United States troops should be resisted. Fourth, it
is necessary to keep the nuclear deterrent. Fifth, as well as United States
