The Lifeblood of War
capacity to provide the transport essential for mobile warfare was one
of the principal reasons for the failure of the German invasion of the
Soviet Union (Operation Barbarossa). Not only did the Panzer
Groups far outstrip their supporting infantry in the initial thrust into
the Russian heartland but, when winter came, something like 1,000
horses a day were lost and had to be replaced. The problems of
providing the necessary forage under such conditions are hard to grasp,
particularly when you consider the enormous distances involved and
the paucity of the available railways. It has not been possible to discuss
Operation Barbarossa in this book, for it is a study in itself, but if ever
there was a campaign in which the logistic factor overshadowed almost
all else, that was it.
In contrast, the British, although possessing a far smaller and less
well prepared army in other respects, sent an expeditionary force to
France in 1939 that was totally mechanised. Unfortunately, almost all
FIG. 3.1 'The British sent an expeditionary force to France that was totally
mechanised'. 1939 photograph of 18 pounder gun and tractor (IWM).
the British vehicles were abandoned after the retreat to the Channel
Ports in May 1940, and those that escaped destruction in battle, or by
the British before they withdrew, fell into the hands of the Germans.
North Africa
A means of augmenting, and in some cases speeding up, movement
by rail was, and still is, the use of a sea flank, to shorten the total
Three Campaigns in a Global War
distance supplies have to be transported by train. This is particularly
valuable if the railway is single line for much of its length, or there are
choke points at intervals along its route. In this context alone it is
interesting to examine the North African campaign in Algeria and
Tunisia. However, the campaign is also of interest for other reasons, all
of which impinge on logistics; it was the first joint operation carried out
by the British and Americans, their first large-scale amphibious
operation, and their first airborne operation at more than company
strength; in all these areas it was to prove a testing ground for later
operations on a considerably vaster scale. When the time came for the
Allied convoys to sail from their respective ports in North America and
Britain, it was significant that since June 1941 (six months before the
United States came into the war), the British had had a movements
organisation in Washington, and since September 1941, branches at
three ports on each coast. This organisation was responsible not only
for shipments of supplies and equipment to the United Kingdom, but
to all other theatres of war in which British or Empire troops were
involved. In 1942, 2,717,733 deadweight tons of freight were shipped
from North America, rising to 3,832,264 deadweight tons in 1943,
peaking at 4,302,154 deadweight tons in 1944, and falling only slightly
to 4,246,196 deadweight tons in 1945.8 So, from the start, the
movements organisation was integrated at the highest level. The Allied
Force Headquarters (AFHQ) came into existence in August 1942,
three months before the landings in North Africa. It was decided that
the integrated staff sections should be headed by the most experienced
officer of either nationality available, and that it should be organised on
the United States staff system. Under AFHQ for the operation were the
1st British Army and the United States II Corps.
At that time, Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia were French colonies,
but were not occupied by the Germans. The terrain in which the
campaign took place consists of a coastal strip, mountainous country
inland, and beyond that, desert. The main roads were metalled but with
soft verges, and very slippery in wet weather. The secondary roads were
little more than dirt tracks. Hundreds of water courses were crossed by
small bridges. In places where these were not strong enough to carry
the heavier vehicles, a detour and ford had to be found.
The Assault
Three assault areas were selected and allocated as follows: Casa-
blanca to be the responsibility of American Forces mounted from the
