264
The Lifeblood of War
logistics as below that category). Some ships' captains were unwilling
to allow anybody into the cargo areas while at sea, frustrating their
embarked Logistic Regiment NCO in his task of compiling an
inventory. In some ships the cargo holds were packed so tightly that
only the top layer could be identified.
A thorough examination of the stores lists and the contents of each
ship in the Amphibious Group, by the logistic staffs of 3rd Commando
Brigade, resulted in a plan being drawn up for the re-stow, to make
better use of hold and deck spaces, and achieve combat loading where
possible. Rigorous questioning of the senior landing force officer on
each ship revealed room for more men in every ship, jealously guarded
in the interests of comfort. Spare corners were ruthlessly filled up, even
if Board of Trade regulations on the maximum number of passengers
on civilian ships, often invoked as a last resort, had to be broken.
Nevertheless, because of lack of shipping space and purpose-built
amphibious ships, not everybody could travel south from Ascension
Island in the ship from which they would be taken ashore by helicopter
or landing craft. Some cross-decking of men and equipment would be
necessary just before the landing, to marry up teams, such as engineer
reconnaissance and artillery forward observation parties, with the
units they were supporting. There were other compromises. It was clear
that the Rapier battery would be required ashore as early as possible.
The only means of lifting the firing posts to their operating sites was by
helicopter. Therefore Rapier equipment should be loaded in the most
accessible place in the LSL in which it was travelling; the upper vehicle
deck. However, the electronics and other sensitive equipment associ-
ated with each Rapier firing post were likely to be badly damaged by
salt spray, so the Battery was stowed in the lower vehicle deck. There
was insufficient space to leave the upper vehicle deck free to speed up
the unloading of Rapiers, and this was occupied by a light gun battery,
which would have to be lifted ashore first, notwithstanding its lower
priority. This would allow the LSL's crane to plumb the hatchway to
the lower vehicle deck, lifting each firing post to the upper vehicle deck.
Helicopters would not be able to approach, however, until the crane
had been stowed. This laborious and time-consuming process is
described in detail to give some idea of the problems facing staffs
planning an amphibious operation with insufficient purpose-built
amphibious ships and ship-shore movement assets. I5
The re-stow at Ascension Island would have been far easier, and
accomplished in less than the twelve days it took, had there been a port
with slipways to accept the roll-on-roll-off (Ro-Ro) ferries and LSLs,
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
and room to unload most of the vehicles and stores; and
265
art
again more or less from scratch. There was no port. The op
conducted at anchor in Georgetown roads, which is sut
ceaseless mid-Atlantic swell, deceptively smooth when viewe
deck of a large ship, but demanding great skill on the pa.
coxswains of landing craft and Mexeflotes heaving up
stern ramps and bow doors of Ro-Ros and LSLs, w
gingerly edged on and off; or alongside while ships
over the side dangling loaded trucks or light tanks. Th
to play a complex puzzle game, the movement of one
equipment, from ship to ship, almost invariably require
'pieces' to be moved first. All over the anchorage, float
vehicles and stores on Mexeflotes could be seen, bobbing
while they awaited their turn to come to the ship, or ships
their loads, and take more.
Helicopters were used for the lighter, and accessible loads,
use was restricted by two considerations. First, the need to
engine hours against the day when helicopters would
the assault landing, and subsequent tactical and logistic
they were in demand for rehearsals and trials. These we
mainly to establish parameters for timings in preparat
eventual landing.
The planning staffs were familiar, thr
practice, with the time needed to fly off a given number of m
purpose-built amphibious ship. But nobody knew how long
take to lift, say, a battalion from the two helicopter decks recen
to the Canberra, each one-spot. 16 Timings, including routes for
and loads to reach flight decks, must be established for each STi
For the same reason, rehearsals with landing craft were necess
particularly as some troops, principally the two parachute battalio
had no experience in landing craft. Logistical requirements tol
priority, however, and rehearsals and trials were reduced to th
minimum; each battalion and commando achieved one by day and on
by night, except for 2 Para, who arrived at Ascension too late for
anything except one daylight practice loading into landing craft. There
was no time for a full scale rehearsal, even a turn-away landing.17
Anyway, there was no beach large enough, and the only landing zone
for helicopters, because of dust ingestion problems everywhere else,
was busy Wideawake. Finally, frustrating the logisticians, by prevent-
ing night working, all the ships weighed anchor and steamed out to sea
as a precaution against attack by Argentine submarines or, more likely
it was thought, frogmen delivered by a merchant ship.
