258
The Lifeblood of War
The Vital Contribution of the RAF
The inherent flexibility of a sea-borne logistic system, alluded to in
an earlier chapter, was amply demonstrated in this war. Of course the
right ships must be available, or suitable substitutes taken up from
trade and converted, and the techniques must be well established and
frequently practised.
However, the Royal Air Force also played a vital part. The first
problem that required their assistance was the storing to war scales of
warships already at sea, and diverted from other tasks. To this end, a
forward logistic base was set up at Ascension Island, over 3,700
nautical miles from the United Kingdom and 3,300 nautical miles from
the Falkland Islands. It was possible to deliver an urgent item to a ship
in 24 hours if she was within helicopter range of Ascension Island, and
or those further south airdrops could be delivered within two days.
This service was carried out by RAF C-130s and VC-10s operating
from the United Kingdom, Royal Navy helicopters from their ships,
and, eventually, RAF Chinooks based on Ascension Island.
Since the end of the 1960s, the Royal Air Force, in common with the
other Services, had reduced its capability for long-range intervention
operations, in accordance with the policies of successive governments,
which had orientated the Nation's defence requirement to NATO, I0
the exclusion of almost everything else. Although a small force of
tanker aircraft had been retained, its task was to prolong the endurance
and range of air defence fighters. There was no NATO requirement to
refuel the large longer-range aircraft. The Vulcan bomber had an Air-
to-Air Refuelling (AAR) capability in the 1960s, but this had not been
maintained when the aircraft's role had been changed from nuclear
strike to low-level delivery of iron bombs some years before 1982. All
Vulcans were within three months of being removed from service. So
when it became apparent that the nearest available airfield to the
Falkland Islands was Wideawake on Ascension Island, the Air Force
was presented with a considerable challenge. It was clear that the RAF
could assist in three ways. First, by flying men and equipment to
Ascension for transfer to ships. This would allow ships to sail from the
United Kingdom without having to wait for last-minute items of
equipment, or a specialist who was not immediately available; the
principle of saving time by maximum concurrent activity. For example
two companies of 45 Commando Royal Marines were flown to
Ascension while an empty Landing Ship Logistic (LSL) was steamed
across the Atlantic from Belize. Second, RAF Harriers and helicopters
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
would be needed to supplement the Naval aircraft. Thi
Victor tankers, Vulcans, Nimrod maritime patrol ai
to bring air power to bear as far South as possib
require the rapid addition of an AAR capability, inc
Harriers."1
259
Ascension Island: The Role of Wideawake
Wideawake was leased by Britain to the Unite
and managed by Pan American Airways. It had
but the usual number of aircraft using it hardly
week, which never put a strain on the island's supp
accommodation, or aircraft parking space. Within al
the airbridge to Ascension, up to fourteen aircraft a di
and departing from Wideawake; and this was only
Between 2 April and 4 June 1982, the average numb
movements per day was 94.8, including helicopters. Tho
reached on 16 April when there were over 300 ai
making Wideawake the busiest airport in the w
Aviation fuel was suddenly needed in huge quantitie.
be permanently anchored offshore to pump fuel thr
pipeline into the bulk fuel farm at Georgetown, the ca
town on Ascension Island. Initially, fuel bowsers
transport the fuel from Georgetown to the airfield, but
could not meet the consumption rate, and eventually
Engineers laid a pipeline from the bulk fuel farm to th
hardstandings.
Chinooks
The Chinook helicopters were employed on logistic tasks from c
in the operation, starting by flying stores from Culdrose in Cornwa.
ships up to 100 miles out at sea. Thus vital stores, that could not
embarked before the deadline for sailing, were delivered to the ship
and the political impact of the immediate sailing of a task force was not
diminished by embarrassing delays in the full glare of publicity.
Perhaps the most striking example was the flying out of a 5-ton
propeller bearing for HMS Invincible. It was a closely guarded secret
that she had a defective bearing on one shaft, reducing her to one
propeller, with a consequent limitation on speed. Repairs were effected
at sea. To have Invincible creep back to port after the euphoric send-off
