The Lifeblood of War
co-ordinated with the rest of the system as a whole. For example, a
developer must design equipment which is easy to support on a logistic
basis. A case of failure to follow this principle was the American M47
tank. When the tank made its first appearance in the field, it was found
to have a number of logistic drawbacks, not least that in order to
change the sparking plugs, the fitters had to remove the engine.
The need for simplicity in planning, in the design of supply systems,
and in the maintenance and operation of equipment,
if not its
technology and functioning, goes without saying. It is a principle that
has been followed more in the breach than the observance on more
than one occasion.
Timeliness demands that logistic support must be provided in the
proper quantity at the right place and time to enable the unit or
formation to carry out the mission. To achieve this, in a fast moving
battle, or when axes are being switched, or there are heavy material
losses through enemy interdiction, the system must be supple and
quickly and easily adaptable to meet the new circumstances. Hence the
British principle: Flexibility. By Impetus the Americans mean the need
to provide support well forward, right into, or close behind the fighting
units' areas. This avoids units engaged in battle looking over their
shoulders for resupply of resources without which
they cannot
continue to fight. The British logistic principle of Co-operation
includes supply forward, but takes it further to mean the need for units
and formations at all levels, right up to Army Groups, to co-operate
logistically to avoid duplication of effort and waste, to maximise
logistic resources such as transport, and to resupply across unit and
formation boundaries.
Which brings us to Cost-effectiveness, or Economy. This can range
from a programme of analysis to provide a systematic approach to the
problem of allocating limited economic resources when procuring
equipment, to decisions on stock levels and logistic priorities.
The British do not include Security as a logistic principle. Perhaps on
the grounds that it is a principle of war, and that the need for rear area
security goes without saying. This may be so, but the emphasis that the
Soviets place on attacking key installations in rear areas, underlines the
need for resources to protect the tail, lest it be cut off. The Soviets
certainly have considerable worries about the vulnerability of their
logistic tail to precision guided weapons. The wider aspect of Security is
also important, that of the need to conceal one's logistic intentions
from the enemy, lest by his interpretation of them he divines the overall
plan. Soviet logistic principles have not been discussed here. They are
Principles: The Disciplines of War
less broad-brush than the British and American logistic principles, and
discussion of them fits more logically in the chapter on Soviet Logistics.
Having briefly discussed the principles, the art of logistics must be
examined by casting back into history, rapidly coming forward to the
Second World War, then looking at case studies of conflict since the
Second World War, discussing logistics in NATO and the Warsaw
Pact; finally a look at logistics in future war.
