296
The Lifeblood of War
collectivised. The second is adhered to by those who agree that the
doctrine of national responsibility for logistics 'has long seemed
inefficient and wasteful in an area like the Central Front in Europe,
where forces of neighbouring countries are due to operate side by side,
and where lines of communication pass through each other's territories
and sometimes cross'14
EUROLOG has now produced Principles of Co-operation in
Logistics', approved by the Ministries of Defence of Belgium, the
United Kingdom, Germany, and The Netherlands. Thus four nations
in Northern Army Group, but not in the Central Region, or the
Alliance as a whole, aim to achieve the closest possible integration of
logistic systems'. But this is the grey area, what does it mean? The
document does admit that progress is dependent upon
lundamental changes
in the arrangements for financing the procurement of
equipment and also on the achievement of a much greater standardisation of
weapons and equipment than exists at present.'
These financial and equipment rearrangements can only be effected
over a long period of time.
'But logistics has traditionally been the Cinderella of military science. Operational
plans remain on paper and do not involve expenditure until the emergency begins,
whereas logistic plans require immediate translation into materials and money?"5
The result is that national corps operate on their own logistic
tramlines. Cross-corps boundary logistics is at best difficult, and at
worst impossible. Routes for cross-corps boundary reinforcements are
already pre-planned and movement control centres will be established.
But,
example: there are three different types of tank-gun
ammunition; some artillery shells are the same, but the fuzing and
charges are different, requiring different tables and computer settings.
Fuel is interoperable, but the methods of resupply are different; the
United States and the British use bulk fuel resupply, whereas the
Belgians use a jerrican pack system. And there are no plans for an
interoperable logistic support system for Airmobile operations, of
which much is being made at present; one detects the hand of the
tacticians with their sweeping moves across country with the stroke of a
chinagraph pencil. Again, taking Northern Army
Group as an
example, there are differences in all Corps in the level to which the
push/pull logistic system operates, i.e. how far forward supplies are
delivered automatically, and how far back units have to go to collect.
There are other differences. 16
Supplying the War That Never Was-Yet
297
All this militates against a cohesive Army Group battle, let alone
Central Front, Northern or Southern Flank battle.
Sustainability
We now come to the third question, sustainability. NATO does not
have an agreed definition of the term, but SACEUR has approved the
following for circulation by the Military Agency for Standardization
(MAS) for comment and approval by nations:
'Sustainability: the ability of forces to maintain the necessary level and duration of
combat activity to achieve their objectives.
This requires having sufficient
personnel, equipment and stocks on hand and also having the ability to resupply
and reinforce on a continuous basis. Sustainability is normally expressed in days.
It then reflects the commander's subjective assessment of the overall capabilities of
his command to sustain military operations."l7
Most nations in the Alliance would agree that sustainability is
important. But the last part of that definition makes it clear, once one
had unravelled the 'NATO-speak' in which it is pronounced,
sustainability in NATO is an educated guess, which of course depends
upon the standard of military education of the commander.
The Soviet Approach to Logistic Planning
How long would the war have lasted and at what intensity would it
have been fought? There are no official NATO pronouncements on this
subject, but, as will become clear later, the levels to which Alliance
members stock, indicates a belief, or perhaps a hope, that the war
would be short. Perhaps an answer will emerge by looking at the other
side. The enemy thinks too! How long does he believe it might have
lasted? There are indicators in Soviet military writing that they have
envisaged a longer war than some in NATO might imagine. Colonel
General Gareyev, in 1985, then the Chief of the General Staff's Military
Science Directorate, criticised earlier Soviet military theory which had
stressed the inevitability of escalation to massive nuclear use. He
asserted that Soviet writers of the 1960s and 1970s had failed to foresee
that the 'accumulation and modernisation' of nuclear arsenals would
reach such proportions that 'a mass use of these weapons in a war
would bring catastrophic consequences for both sides.18 This fact,
coupled with Western and Soviet efforts to spur the development of
high-accuracy conventional weapons systems, led him to the conclu-
sion that the 'possibility of a comparatively long war with the use of
