310
The Lifeblood of War
them all would take too long. In addition, all have different ways of
arriving at such basic data as Daily Ammunition Expenditure Rates
(DAER). So let us take a brief look at the British who do stock to
30 days, or purport to. In common with all the European members of
NATO, they have no plans, at least none that are made public, for
gearing up their industrial base to replace the equipment and stocks
expended in war. Once the thirty days worth has gone, there is no more,
and as will become apparent, at high intensity, stocks will not last thirly
days.
The major item, of course, is gun ammunition, but the
sustainability of the guns themselves, and other equipments such as
AF Vs of all types is also relevant. Studies have been carried out with a
view to arriving at a figure for the ammunition stocks in the War
Maintenance Reserve (WMR), to enable 1st British Corps to fight a six
day battle at intense rates, plus two days at normal rates. At the end of
this they were to assume that a large percentage, in the order of half the
Corps, would not be fit to fight. They were also told to assume that the
rate of intensity of battle, particularly in the Central Region would be
greater than the NATO rate for which the thirty days stocks were
designed to last. This should come as no surprise when it is remembered
that in some Falklands battles the British expended five times the
'conventional' war rate in one day. The latest study indicates that
ammunition stocks need to be even higher. Even though the first study
took account of the attrition of equipment, the new study assumes that
after ten days fighting, an even lower percentage of units will survive;
and though there will consequently be even less guns and tanks to fire
the ammunition, there will be logistic losses caused by attrition of the
logistic chain with some losses perhaps as high as 50 per cent.
The Ammunition Problem
that one
Some idea of the scale of the problem can be seen when it is realised
British armoured division needs nearly 4,000 tons of
ammunition of all types per day, by far the largest proportion being
artillery ammunition. Guns will be expected to move several times a
day to have a chance of surviving counter-battery fire. If they leave
ammunition behind, it must, if possible, be picked up. This compounds
the already huge problem that the transport will have in servicing the
current gun positions and stocking the next, as well as clearing those
just vacated. With 48 batteries in 1st British Corps, there could be up to
940 locations a day to service. Each 155 mm has to be prepared to fire
450 rounds per day. The guns move from ammunition point to
Supplying the War That Never Was-Yet
311
ammunition point, some will fire very little on some days, so the
ammunition situation will become lopsided. 1st British Corps is not
alone in having these testing transport problems.
The False Lessons of Peacetime Training
NATO has a plan to fight an identified enemy in Europe in a certain
manner, but the only way the Alliance can test its plans, including its
logistic preparedness, is on Field Training
Exercises (FTXs) and
Command Post Exercises (CPXs). As noted before, an FTX consists of
plenty of movement, but little firing. Hence the lessons, particularly on
ammunition expenditure, are not necessarily applicable to war. This
unreality probably applies even so on CPXs designed to practise
international procedures and communications. It is easier to co-
operate with one's allies on a CPX than in an actual war situation,
because it is less painful to give away 'paper stocks' than real resources.
NATO's Lack of Standardisation and the Ability to
Inter-Operate Equipments
A long war, or even a relatively short, high intensity war, is likely to
leave the individual members of the Alliance shorn of supply, thus
unable to continue fighting. Lack of interoperability, standardisation,
co-ordination, and a common system will result in the inability of Allies
to support each other. One is led to the conclusion that in common
with armies in the past, the armies of the NATO Alliance, unlike their
potential enemy, have prepared for the likely campaign as best they
could on an ad hoc basis, making great, but unco-ordinated efforts to
gather together the largest possible number of tactical vehicles, trucks
of all descriptions, and other equipment, while giving little, if any
thought to the ideal combination which, in theory, would have carried
them the furthest, or, one might add, enable them to last the longest.
THE OTHER SIDE OF THE HILL
On the other side of the hill, despite the Soviet preparation,
standardisation of equipment, and the seamless garment of a doctrine
with a logistic organisation to match, perhaps they would not have
advanced as far and as fast as they imagine; at least in the initial stages.
However, since their stocks are at least three times those of NATO, the
chances are they would have had something left with which to continue
