162
The Lifeblood of War
75,000 Regional troops, and between 150,000 to 350,000 Local Force
militia, the latter mainly untrained and unequipped men, women and
children.
However,
the Regional troops
and militia were
an
indispensable force multiplier to the Vietminh. They controlled the
majority of the villages in the Tonkin Delta, assisted by independent
Main Force regiments and battalions, some of which operated within
the de Lattre Line. This, and the threat of a Main Force offensive, tied
down about 100,000 French troops to defensive tasks, out of 175,000
in Indo-China. The balance, available for mobile operations was the
equivalent of about three divisions, made up of seven mobile groups
and eight parachute battalions. Giap could discount the Vietnamese
National Army of 150,000 men. Its low morale and lack of motivation
made it totally ineffective; as was shown in May 1953, when the
training school for potential leaders at Nam Dinh was attacked by
three companies of Vietminh. All 600 trainees and the complete
weapons holding of the school were captured, without the loss of a
single Vietminh soldier.
The French Re-Equip
The Vietminh were not alone in getting help from outside. By early
1953, the 137,000 tons of American equipment delivered to the
French included 900 armoured fighting vehicles, 15,000 other
vehicles, 99,000 small arms and automatic weapons, and about 900
radios. The French air force had taken delivery of 160 F-6F and F-8F
fighters, 41 B-26 light bombers, and 28 C-47 (Dakota) transports. The
USMAAG, were at a loss to understand why the French did not use
this equipment to mount an all-out offensive against the Vietminh to
deliver a knock-out blow. They not only failed to appreciate the
military mathematics of comparable strengths imposed on the French
by Giap's strategy and tactics, but still laboured under the delusion
that the French supply was superior to that of the Vietminh. The
USMAAG only saw the large numbers of trucks, aircraft, and craft
available to the French. But their logistic system was largely road-
bound and therefore vulnerable to attack. Whereas the thousands of
porters supplying the Vietminh divisions could move unimpeded by
the need for roads, and usually undetected by the French. Although
the Vietminh logistic system lacked the flexibility conferred on the
French by the use of air power, provided the distance was right,
overall their supply system was more flexible and better suited to the
terrain.
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
Navarre's Search for a Politically Honourable Solution
Navarre found that there had been no plan for operations in Indo-
China since de Lattre's departure eighteen months before. The French
merely reacted to the Vietminh moves. Navarre set about drawing up a
comprehensive plan to achieve what he perceived as his mission, to create
the necessary conditions in Indo-China to gain a politically honourable
solution. Having reviewed the options open to Giap, he assessed that the
one posing the greatest threat would be another invasion of Laos, because
it would be the most difficult to counter; the distance from the Delta and
the consequent logistic problems being the major factor. Space does not
permit a full review of Navarre's plan to fulfil his mission, but in summary,
except for spoiling attacks to disrupt Giap's moves, he aimed to avoid a
major battle with the Vietminh until the 1954-55 campaigning season. He
would launch an offensive in Annam and the Central Highlands where
tactically and logistically conditions were more favourable to the French.
By accelerating the training of the Vietnamese National Army, and
stepping up the pacification programme in the Delta, and provided that
the French Army in Europe could send reinforcements equivalent to two
divisions, he would build up his striking force to a total of six or seven
mobile divisions. With this force, equal or slightly stronger than the
Vietminh force available for offensives, he would seek a major battle in
Northern Vietnam. In his view, victory was on the cards, but if only
stalemate ensued, it would provide the
basis for an honourable
negotiated settlement.
The spoiling attacks which took place between July and September
were tolerably successful; the last of them pre-empting a major
offensive by Giap. The operation in Annam between Hue and Quang
Tri was less so. However, during this period the French carried out a
highly successful withdrawal from Na San. A clever deception plan
took the Vietminh by surprise, and the whole garrison of 12,000 men
were pulled out by air. This was to convince Navarre that fortified
airstrips could be held, and then withdrawn at will.
Meanwhile Navarre had been to Paris in July 1953, to present his
plan to the Government, in the course of which he asked if he was
required to defend Laos, because clearly his task would be immeasur-
ably easier if he could ignore any moves Giap made in that direction.
Cowardice and Duplicity in High Places
Before flying to Paris, Navarre left a contingency plan with his staff
that provided for the reoccupation of Dien Bien Phu to sit astride
