334
The Lifeblood of War
outside the NATO area later. But to continue with the reinforcement
of Europe, the use of helicopters and airborne forces could not only
permit a faster reaction, but a more flexible one. 14 The plan could be
amended to fit the threat as it actually comes to pass, instead of as it is
thought it will; which, of course, it most certainly will not.
The British Expeditionary Force: Stockpiling
The system of logistic support of the British Expeditionary Force
(BEF), no longer BAOR, because it may not be fighting on the Rhine,
or anywhere near it, would partly depend on whether or not stockpiles
of equipment were positioned on the mainland of Europe. In future
cuts under CFE, the matter of stockpiles may be addressed, and if
pressure is brought to bear on the Soviets to withdraw theirs behind
national boundaries, it is reasonable to assume that NATO nations will
be required to follow suit as a quid pro quo. Although it can be argued
that taking supplies forward from Soviet Russia to support an advance
into Germany is less of an undertaking than transporting them across
the Channel, let alone the Atlantic. So there may be room for some give
and take on this matter, and it is worth briefly examining the value, or
otherwise, of stockpiles in the context of what has been discussed so far.
The advantages of pre-positioned stocka, particularly heavy items
such as ammunition, AFVs and fuel, are obvious; provided that they
are in the right places, and are not destroyed by the enemy before they
can be outloaded. Even if they are not exactly in the right place, by
being on the right continent, or area of that continent, much movement
elfort can usually be saved. 'Usually', because in the case of a country
like Norway, with limited communications, a stockpile for use by the
United Kingdom/Netherlands
Amphibious Force, located in the
wrong' place could be more inaccessible than having it, say, in the
United Kingdom. It is therefore a matter of weighing up the balance of
advantage to be gained by pre-positioning stockpiles in the projected
area of operations, against the possibility that the next war will not be
fought in that area at all. For the immediate future, the best answer is to
maintain the stockpiles where they are, while examining the most
favourable deployment for them in the longer term, taking into account
possible international agreements that might in years to come limit, or
even forbid, the positioning of war-like material on another nation's
soil in the continent of Europe. However, it must be realised that
stockpiling is an expensive measure calling for constant care and
inspection of the equipment in the stock piles and for regular activation.
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
335
The consequences of dependence upon defective stockpiles do not bear
thinking about, for it could spell nothing short of disaster.
The Flexibility of Air Supply
If stockpiles in likely deployment areas in Europe are forbidden,
there is a need to ensure, as far as the United Kingdom is concerned, an
adequate number of both ships and tactical and long-range transport
aircraft, to lift supplies to the deployment area. Aircraft of the FLA
tactran type allow far greater loads than is possible at present to be
taken over considerable distances, to positions reasonably adjacent to
the battle area. Once supplies have arrived at the forward airhead, the
problem of moving them nearer the customer arises. The closer that
ammunition and fuel can be located to the consumer, the better. No
commander wants his Main Supply Route (MSR) clogged with, for
example, AFVs, and artillery vehicles driving for miles against the flow
of traffic, seeking ammunition and fuel points. In the initial phase of a
reinforcement operation, both in and outside the NATO area, there is
likely to be a shortage of vehicles to lift loads forward to Distribution
Points (DPs) close up behind the customers. This is where the flexibility
of a rotary-wing force comes to the fore. Because the helicopter can
cover the ground fast, and without clogging up the MSRs, it can come
back some distance to refuel and rearm, possibly all the way to FARPs
located near the forward airhead, or fuel pipe-line outlet. So your
'tank', now an MBAV, your 'SP gun', now a fire support helicopter,
comes back to the 'supermarket', rather than delivery vans having to go
to the customer. Chinooks can lift fuel and ammunition forward to
those units which cannot move back. Chinooks, too big to be lifted by
FLA tactran, can fly considerable distances direct from the UK base
using AAR.
Fuel
One of the biggest requirements for a rotary wing army will be fuel.
All over Europe, stocks of AVCAT on airfields, and fuel tank farms in
likely deployment areas could be earmarked for military use.
If
possible, the existing NATO fuel pipeline should be left in place, despite
its being designed to support a war in Germany, and nowhere else. Fuel
outside Europe can be provided either by requisitioning by the
supported nation on behalf of the intervention force, or alternatively, if
the operation is near the coast, by fleet auxiliary tankers carrying the
