108
The Lifeblood of War
The Terrain
The country in which the Americans and their United Nations allies
were to fight for the next three years was unfamiliar to most Western
armies.
A British soldier described it:
.. it presented a hostile environment for military operations. It was known in
antiquity as "Chosun", which translated means "land of the morning calm', and
quickly became known as "frozen Chosun" by the many Commonwealth gunners
who fought there. The winters were prolonged and very severe. Temperatures
were frequently over 40 degrees F below freezing, and accompanied by Siberian
winds. Torrential monsoon rains, mainly in late June to August, often resulted in
the Imjin river rising 40 feet in a night. In the summer, temperatures crept up to
105 degrees F and more, and the humidity was high.
There were few roads or tracks. The terrain was hilly, many rising
over 1,000 metres, mainly rocky and bare higher up, the lower slopes
were covered with shrubs and small trees. In summer the luxuriant
growth on the steep hillsides impeded the sweating soldiers as they
toiled up, often under heavy load. Paddy fields dotted the wider valleys.
The sides of the narrower defiles were often precipitous. Malarial
mosquitoes and rats, which spread many other diseases abounded.
Locally grown products could not be eaten raw because of the extensive
use of human faeces as a fertiliser. In the shimmering heat of the
summer the whole countryside stank.
The Enemy
The enemy, at first the North Korean People's Army (NKPA), and
later the Chinese Communist Forces (CCF), were tough, fanatically
brave and masters of camouflage and fielderaft. They attacked
relentlessly in human waves, usually at night, screaming and blowing
bugles. In defence, they dug extensive fieldworks, concealing and
providing overhead cover for guns and mortars to an extent which
astonished Western armies fighting in Korea, but would not have
surprised the French in Indochina, faced by equally industrious human
moles.
First Clash: Task Force Smith
The first American soldiers to encounter the North Korean Army
consisted of two rifle companies and part of Headquarters Company,
Ist Battalion, 21st Infantry Regiment, 24th Infantry Division, under
their battalion commander Lieutenant Colonel Smith, reinforced by
two 4.2-in heavy mortars, and two 75 mm RCLs. On 1 July 1950, this
Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
109
understrength battalion, designated. Task Force Smith, flew from
Japan to Pusan; their orders: to advance to contact with the enemy,
and there delay him for as long as possible. The Task Force totalled
about 440 men. Each man had 120 rounds of rifle ammunition, and two
days supply of C rations. One other battalion, and the divisional
headquarters of the 24th Infantry Division, also transported by air,
formed the advanced guard of the remainder of the division which
followed by sea. Major General Dean, the divisional commander,
assumed command of all United States Army Forces in Korea, until
superseded by Lieutenant General Walker, commanding the United
States Eighth Army.
As the Task Force moved forward, by train and truck, they were
treated to the sight of over-enthusiastic Australian and American
aircraft strafing South Korean ammunition and fuel dumps, trains, and
columns of troops, causing enormous damage and killing several
hundred South Koreans, soldiers and civilians alike. On 5 July, the
troops of Task Force Smith started digging in on their positions north
of Osan, a location chosen by Smith himself. They had been joined by a
battery of six 105 mm howitzers, with 73 vehicles and 108 men, under
the command of Lieutenant Colonel Perry. In the battery position,
about one mile in rear of the infantry, there were 1,200 rounds of
ammunition (200 rounds per gun, a meagre supply with which to start a
battle, with no prospect of re-supply). More serious, there were only six
rounds of High Explosive Anti-Tank (HEAT), which represented one
third of all the HEAT ammunition available in Japan. A high explosive
HE shell from a 105 mm gun has a very small chance of stopping a tank
as well armoured as a T-34, even if it scores a direct hit. Anti-tank mines
would have been useful, but there were none.
It had been raining all night. At about 7 a.m., still in rain, North
Korean tanks could clearly be seen advancing along the road towards
the Task Force position. A fire mission was called for from the 105 mm
battery, but the tanks kept
When the leading tanks
approached to within 700 yards of the Americans, they were engaged
by the 75 mm RCLs, but although hits were seen, the tanks did not
stop. As they rumbled on, they came under fire from the 2.36-inch
bazooka anti-tank launcher teams. These did not stop them either. One
officer fired 22 rounds at about 15 yards range against the rear of the
tanks where their armour is weakest, but to no effect. Finally, the two
lead tanks were stopped by a single 105 mm howitzer sited forward of
the battery position, firing HEAT ammunition. However, the six
rounds of HEAT were soon expended, and a third tank knocked out
SONY
