The Lifeblood of War
FiG. 2.5 One of the earliest examples of mechanical handling equipment,
35 years after the American Civil War. Steam road transport used by the
British in the South African War, 1899-1901 (Imperial War Museum).
McClellan's problem can be gauged by the size of his supply trains. In
November 1862, the Army of the Potomac was accompanied by 4,818
wagons and ambulances, 8,693 transport horses and 12,483 mules. The
supply train of each corps took up eight miles of road, the supply trains
of the whole, six corps and one cavalry division, occupied over fifty
miles of road 23 A European general in the same period, faced with this
problem could usually resort to marching his corps on separate routes,
concentrating when required. The pre-1861 United States occupied an
area the size of Europe with a population the size of mid-nineteenth
century England. Roads were few, usually no more than tracks, and,
even in Northern Virginia, the chances of finding a number of roads
running parallel to each other in the desired direction was slight.
In different circumstances, earlier that year, Jackson (like Alexander
and Marius centuries before), was able to speed up his rate of advance
when moving to destroy the Union supply depot at Manassas, by
leaving his baggage and supply wagons behind. Only ammunition and
ambulance wagons accompanied his corps. His men carried three days'
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
cooked rations on them, thus dispensing with the need to light fires and
risk giving away their presence, and spending time and effort gathering
fuel. He marched 62 miles in two days; not for nothing did his men call
themselves 'Jackson's foot cavalry' 24 Hooker, commanding the Army
of the Potomac in April 1863, achieved a very fast move by the
standards of the time on his march to Chancellorsville to place himself
in Lee's rear, in an attempt to bottle him up in Fredericksburg. In three
days, three corps, totalling 70,000 men had marched an average of
46 miles over bad roads, forded two chest deep rivers, and built four
pontoon bridges. He took only a small number of wagons with him.
His soldiers carried sixty rounds of ammunition, and
eight days
rations.25 Some small arms ammunition was carried on pack mules.
However, this move, and others during this war with few or no wagons,
and sometimes cut off from the line of communication, would have
been nugatory if ammunition expenditure had been higher. Even so,
some of Hooker's infantry did run out of ammunition. 26
Frequently, however, the railway layout dictated the axes of advance
and retreat, the siting of defensive positions and the locations of battles
One example must suffice. Johnston's strategy and the tactical manner
in which he carried it out, as he withdrew in front of Sherman's advance
from Chattanooga to Atlanta, was dominated by the railway from
Atlanta, which was his lifeline. Although he fought a series of masterly
withdrawal battles, he was like a diver on the end of a long air line. He
had to react to any threat to cut it. Every time Sherman hooked round
one of his blocking positions, Johnston was forced to withdraw to
counter the move.
Eventually, Hood was brought in to replace
Johnston; much to Sherman's publicly expressed relief. Johnston was a
canny soldier, whereas Hood, although an almost legendary fighting
general, was not overly intelligent and tended towards hot-headedness.
However, once Hood was forced back into Atlanta, hot-head or no, he
had to react to Sherman's attempts to cut his remaining rail link to the
South. When it was cut, Hood abandoned the city.
Whether all those who observed the war, either at first hand, or by
studying reports, articles and books, read these pointers correctly is
another matter. There is evidence that the Europeans, and the
Germans in particular, did not absorb all the evidence. The American
historian Jay Luvaas in two papers27,28 offers some explanations.
According to Captain Scheibert, an observer from the Prussian Army,
European soldiers, unimpressed by the shambles of the first battle of
Bull Run, lost interest in the war quite early on, no doubt imagining
that they had nothing to learn from what they perceived as the
