The Lifeblood of War
ambush. Feeding prisoners, packmules, cavalry horses and soldiers
over the hundred mile round trip would have added yet another logistic
problem to be solved. Over the next two months, three large towers and
a quantity of scaling ladders were constructed. By now it was mid-
summer, and the burning hot Khamsin wind blew, whipping up the
dust and covering everything with grit. The Crusaders had to send
parties as far as the River Jordan for water, but they seldom brought
back enough to meet every need. Animals began to die, and everybody
suffered from thirst.
In early July, information was received that a large Egyptian army
was marching to the relief of the city. The Crusaders were in a desperate
position, weakened by starvation and disease, the small army of about
15,000 men could not hope to defeat the Egyptians, and continue the
siege. The work of finishing the assault towers was speeded up. When
completed, they were rolled out from where they had been built, out of
sight of the defenders of Jerusalem, who were taken completely by
surprise and horrified when they saw them rolling towards them.
As an aside, from the vantage point of 890 years later, the governor
and defenders of Jerusalem appear to have been singularly inept and
supine soldiers. Had an aggressive patrol programme been instituted,
they would not have been so ignorant of events just outside their walls.
Having a superiority in numbers, the governor could have spared men
for sorties which might have succeeded in delaying the work, or
bringing it to a halt completely. The energy and courage displayed by
the Crusaders, perhaps made desperate by their situation, was almost
fanatical. The outer wall of the city had to be breached and a ditch at
the foot of the main wall filled in before the towers could be heaved up
to the main wall at their assault positions. Under a hail of missiles, the
necessary enginering work was done mainly during the night of 13 July
and by the night of the 14th, one tower was in position. An assault was
attempted, but it was thrown back. On the next day, a second tower
was pushed into position and the knights manning it managed to gain a
lodgement on the walls of the city. Reinforcements swarmed up scaling
ladders and the tower. By that night the city was in the hands of the
Crusaders.
The Second Crusade
The Second Crusade, consisting of a German army led by Emperor
Conrad III of Germany and a French army under King Louis VII of
France, was launched to recover Edessa from the Muslims. It was a
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
logistic disaster. At first all went well, until Conrad's army, first to
arrive in Byzantine territory, stirred up the local inhabitants by
pillaging. Louis's army, which followed the same route, behaved
better and had little trouble, except that the Germans had consumed
most of the food and forage and so frightened the peasants that they
hid what little food they had left. Relations between the two armies
was not improved when the French arrived at Constantinople and
found that the Germans refused to sell any of the food that they had
collected. About the only matter on which they agreed was their
dislike and distrust of the Byzantines. The hostility between the
French and German armies led to Conrad making the disastrous
decision to march across Anatolia on a different route from Louis.
Splitting forces was bad enough, but Conrad compounded the error
by dividing his own army in two, planning to take one group through
Central Anatolia, and ordering the other to march along the coast
road. By the time Conrad's group reached Dorylaeum they had
consumed all their food. Here they found a strong Turkish army
waiting for them.
The exhausted, starving German army
destroyed; only Conrad and a few followers escaped. The other
German group progressed well, until they struck inland to cut a
corner off their journey and were routed by the Turks at Laodicea,
most of the survivors dying of starvation on their way south to the
The first part of Louis's march along the coast went without incident.
However, he too turned inland and, like the Germans, also suffered
heavy casualties at the hands of the Turks at Laodicea. Desperately
short of food, Louis and his knights marched south towards the coast
through mountainous terrain and in bitter winter weather. On arrival
at Attalia on the coast, they discovered, to their dismay, that the
inhabitants too were short of food and strongly resented the presence of
the Crusaders, a situation which quickly attracted the Turks, who set
about besieging the city. Louis was forced to leave. He and his cavalry
travelled by sea in two successive lifts, leaving his infantry to make their
own way to Antioch overland. A few exceedingly embittered foot-
soldiers survived this example of crass leadership and administration
and eventually staggered into Antioch, having escaped the ravages of
both the Turks and hunger. The last phase of this Crusade was no
exception to the logistic and tactical ineptitude that had gone before.
Louis, Conrad, who bad joined him, and Baldwin of Jerusalem,
decided, against advice, to beseige Damascus. They not only set their
siege lines opposite the strongest part of the city's defences, but sited
