The Lifeblood of War
French North Africa would have been sabotaged beyond repair. Their
fears were groundless in that respect, but the state of the railways was
far worse in terms of serviceability than the intelligence reports had
suggested. Thanks to keen foresight, the transportation staffs had
taken the precaution of having some coal brought in early to Algiers,
and a further 8,000 tons on each fourteen day convoy which was to
prove invaluable. In the early days of the campaign, German fighters
strafed the trains running on the narrow gauge lines from Bone to La
Calle and Ouled Rahmoun to Tebessa. This led to British Railway
Operating companies of the Royal Engineers taking over the running
of trains on these lines, as well as on some other sectors.
The Impact of Port and Rail Restrictions on Operations
In the first two months of the campaign, the capacities of the ports
and railways were to impose limitations on the conduct of operations
by 1st Army. Algiers had berths for 18 motor-transport or stores ships
available for military use, but its capacity was limited to about
3,500 tons per day because of a shortage of trucks, cranes, and wagons
to clear the port. The port had much greater potential, but there was
little hope of improvement in the near future. Bougie was clearing
1,200 tons a day, but could get little of this forward because of the rail
bottleneck. Philippeville was clearing 1,100 tons a day.
It had a
potential of at least double this figure, but finding enough shipping of
the right draught was the limiting factor. Bone, with half its berths out
of action through bomb damage, and frequent interruptions from air
raids, was handling only 2,500 tons a day. Three months later, it was
clearing between 4,000 and 5,000 tons a day.
Rail capacity east of Algiers during the first two months of the
campaign was limited to seven or eight trains a day. Of these, five with a
load of 250 tons each (1,250 tons total), could be loaded with supplies.
The balance were used for moving troops and tracked vehicles.
Forward of Duvivier the limit was also 1,250 tons a day, and this was,
therefore, the maximum that could be delivered to corps railheads in
Tunisia from Bone and the other ports. The narrow gauge from Ouled
Rahmoun to Tebessa was capable of carrying between 750 and 1,000
tons a day, and could be fed by road and normal gauge railway from
Philippeville. Road, narrow gauge railway, and coastal water trans-
port, such as tank landing craft and local craft, could take another
500 tons a day from Bone to La Calle and beyond. 14 The totals lifted
forward were short of requirement by 250 tons a day, even though the
Three Campaigns in a Global War
II US Corps was well below strength until well into January 1943 and
equivalent to little more than one division. Throughout this period,
and well into 1943, the capacity of the ports far outstripped that of
roads and railways to shift supplies forward, by about a factor of two-
and-a-half times. The shortfall of fuel and artillery ammunition were
acute at times, and the build-up forward, particularly of American
formations, was delayed accordingly.
Problems of Command and Control
The original intention had been that the push into Tunisia should be
an entirely British show, with the American forces garrisoning Algeria.
However, as V Corps became more hard pressed by the Germans, who
attacked aggressively and with great skill, they demanded more units to
hold the wide frontage, and air support to assist. The response was to
move more American ground and air forces into Eastern Algeria and
Tunisia. At first these consisted of individual units, particularly
artillery, but later complete combat teams (the equivalent of British
brigades). The movement and supply of the United States elements,
who came under command of British 1st Army, posed a considerable
problem, which the United States liaison staff at 1st Army were not
organised to solve. An ad hoc arrangement was set up on the orders of
the US Deputy C-in-C to the Supreme Commander, but this was not
up to the task either. The confusion was increased by 1st Army
Headquarters being split three ways, with Main Headquarters at
Constantine, Rear Headquarters at Maison Carrée, ten miles outside
Algiers, and the movements staff remaining in Algiers, where they were
in a better position to supervise the railways and shipping. Ist Army
movement was, therefore, controlled from three places at once, with
Indifferent communications. The situation was aggravated further by
Allied Force Headquarters (AFHQ) being split four ways. The US
Deputy C-in-C was based in Algiers, but not near Rear Headquarters
Ist Army. The command post, including General Eisenhower, the
Supreme Commander, was in Gibraltar. The main body, including the
Chief Administrative Officer, the British Major General Humfrey
Gale, of whom more later, was in London.
The British General
Headquarters contingent for AFHQ was at Maison Carrée with Rear
Headquarters Ist Army. Operations and logistics had now become an
Allied matter, but the Allied headquarters whose responsibility these
were, was in no position to do anything constructive about either,
particularly the latter.
SONY
