192
The Lifeblood of War
infiltrated the hamlets, welcomed by the majority of the inhabitants
who deeply resented being forcibly re-located away from their ancestral
homes. The civil guards either locked themselves away in their watch
tower, were disarmed, or were members of the Viet Cong already.
Apart from the destruction of the hamlets, whose occupants, with Viet
Cong help, promptly moved back to their old areas, the scheme had
another, unforeseen effect. It greatly assisted in the arming of the Viet
Cong.
By January 1963, the Americans had supplied more than
130,000 small arms, machine guns, mortars, and recoilless guns to the
Civil Guards and Self-Defence Corps militia. By mid 1963 this figure
had risen to quarter of a million weapons distributed to strategic
hamlets and outposts. These constituted convenient weapon stocks lor
the Viet Cong, who were not slow to take advantage. By January 1963,
equipped largely at American expense, the regular and provincial Viet
Cong strength had risen to about 23,000, backed by another 100,000
militia; a quantum leap in just three years.
Finally, Diem overreacted to demands by the Buddhist community
for more say in the affairs of South Vietnam, which were largely in the
hands of the Vietnamese Catholics. Eventually, Diem was overthrown
with the connivance of the United States Government, and murdered
by a group of officers. Although the people at first greeted Diem's fall
with enthusiasm, and the ARVN soldiers were feted in the streets of
Saigon; the novelty soon wore off.
American hopes that Diem's fall would signal a turning point in the
war were soon dashed. Within a week the Viet Cong
launched
offensives north of Saigon. In one province alone, twenty-five outposts
fell in one month. Within a few days of Diem's death, President
Kennedy was also dead. There were now 17,000 American servicemen
in South Vietnam. Although, since the start of their involvement, the
Americans had taken only 370 casualties, including 120 dead, enough
blood and treasure had been poured out, and enough rhetoric
expended, to ensure that American prestige was now at stake.
1964 and Crisis
By the end of 1964, the situation in South Vietnam had reached crisis
proportions, the Viet Cong main and province forces, 23,000-strong,
had grown to 56,000. They were beginning to look like an army,
organised into regiments, with combat, engineer and communications
support units. The first Viet Cong division to form, the 9th, dealt a
deadly blow to two élite ARVN units on 31 December 1964. A marine
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
193
battalion lost nearly 200 dead, wounded or captured, out of a strength
of 326, including 29 officers dead out of a total of 35. One of the new
ranger battalions, set up by General Westmoreland, now Commander
USMACV, was completely destroyed.
1965: The Americans Committed in Strength
By mid June 1965, the Viet Cong looked to be poised for the fight to
the finish. But now they were about to take on the armed might of the
United States in direct confrontation. Starting with a marine brigade
landed in March 1965, to defend the enclave of Da Nang, the build-up
of American troops continued with an airborne brigade from Okinawa
to secure Saigon airport, and steadily accelerated to a total of 184,300
by the end of the year. 31
A New Logistic Situation
The logistic system was required to support a force that rose to a
maximum of over half a million at the end of a line of communication
between 9,000 and 11,000 miles long, into a country that lacked many
of the necessary facilities to support such a huge and sudden upsurge in
troop strength. The logistic situation was totally different from that for
which the American forces had trained, and had experienced in the
Second World War and Korea. There were no clear areas in which
logistic installations could be set up, there was no front and no rear in
the conventional sense. There were no advances and withdrawals on
linear axes, along which the sinews of war could flow. Most operations
were mounted from isolated base camps dotted around the country-
side. There were few fixed terrain objectives. The conventional pattern
of a combat zone and a communications zone did not exist.
The reinforcement was imbalanced, so that the troop strength
almost always out-stripped the logistic build-up. Consequently the
plans made by 1st Logistical Command were constantly out of date,
and there was much ad hoc planning. Ist Logistical Command,
activated in April 1965, had responsibility for supplying all the United
States forces in South Vietnam, except the two United States Marine
Divisions and their two air wings, in I Corps, the most northerly corps
area; these were a Marine Corps and Navy responsibility. In 1968, after
the Viet Cong Tet offensive, when substantial Army reinforcements
moved north, lst Logistical Command expanded their responsibilities
to include I Corps area.
