200
The Lifeblood of War
extra burden on the occupying unit. Logistic units, if they are so
trained, can take, and have taken, responsibility for their own defence,
but every hour spent in a trench defending the perimeter, is an hour less
to attend to the tasks for which they are in business; support. It was
better to leave them centralised, or form FSAs for specific operations.
Units which could be based right forward were those whose task it was
to maintain and repair the heavier equipment and helicopters. In many
cases this was done; on the principle that it is usually easier to move
technicians to the heavy equipment than vice versa.
The Strategic and Tactical Background to the Logistic
Requirement
What were the strategy and tactics for which the logistical
arrangements were tailored? The directive given to Westmoreland set
out six tasks:
1. Attrit (sic), by year's end (1966), Viet Cong and North Vietnamese
forces at a rate as high as their capability to put men in the field.
2. Increase the percentage of VC and NVA base areas denied the VC
from 10-20 per cent to 40-50 per cent.
3. Increase the critical (important) roads and railroads open for use
from 30 to 50 per cent.
4. Increase the population in secure areas from 50 per cent to 60 per
5. Pacify the four selected high-priority areas, increasing the pacified
population by 235,000.
6. Ensure the defence of all military bases, political population centres.
and food-producing areas now under government control.*
Whether this was the right strategy is still a subject for argument,
often heated, and is likely to remain so for the foreseeable future. Any
discussion of even the main strands in the reasoning deployed by those
who opposed the strategy, is irrelevant in the context of this book. The
point is that at no time did Westmoreland, or his successor, General
Abrams, find themselves constrained by United
States logistic
weakness, nor is it possible to discern any point at which their strategy
was shaped by considerations of what was
and what was not
logistically feasible. Similarly the strategies put forward by those who
favoured a different approach were also supportable logistically.
Clearly it would be overstating the case to say that the Americans never
had any logistic problems at a tactical level, but in contrast to Round
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
201
One, logistic shortcomings were not the ball and chain that so inhibited
the French, and which were, in the end, the main cause of their military
defeat.
THE BATTLE OF KHE SANH
Clearing Away the Mythology
One of the most impressive examples of the use of the logistic
resources available to the Americans, including the successful use of air
power for strike and supply, was the battle of Khe Sanh. As Davidson
says, 43 more drivel has been written and televised about the siege of
Khe Sanh than about any other episode of Indo-China War II (his
term for Round Three). Most of this drivel eventually homes in on the
following misconceptions: that Khe Sanh was a diversion to draw
American moos aay rom Giap's real objectives, the cities in the the
offensive; or that the siege was a second Dien Bien Phu, and the
defenders were doomed. The first myth can quickly be disposed of by
saying that there has never been any evidence that it was a diversion,
either at the time or in the published statements of the North
Vietnamese since. Indeed, the NVA continued to reinforce their units
round the base, and construct siege works, long after most of the
fighting associated with the Tet offensive was over. If it was a diversion,
it was a very expensive one, tying down four NVA divisions (two
directly involved, and two in support), a total of 40,000 top rate
regulars, to besiege four marine battalions and one ARVN ranger
battalion, a total of 6,000 men.
The second misconception was the outcome of a trait discernible
from time to time in some sections of the media, the journalistic
equivalent of the gibe that generals usually 'fight the last war'; the twist
being that the media write the last war'. In this case, the selective
presentation of evidence to peddle a preconceived notion became so
compelling, that the peddlers were taken in by their own advocacy, and
failed to notice that the differences between the situations at Dien Bien
Phu and Khe Sanh outweighed the similarities. The marines at Khe
Sanh were surrounded by a superior force which could bring artillery
and mortar fire to bear on every part of the base; and the defenders were
totally dependent on air supply. There the similarities ended.
The
French were beaten because they were outgunned, and even given ideal
conditions, i.e.: the ability to land aircraft at Dien Bien Phu, they would
have been unable to keep up the pace of the battle logistically. The
Vietminh merely hastened the end by denying them the use of the strip
