172
The Lifeblood of War
miles. The Vietminh had about 800 Russian and 200 American trucks,
all of two-and-a-half ton capacity. The latter had been captured from
the French, or given by the Chinese who had taken them in Korea. The
Vietminh lines of communication to Dien Bien Phu from China ran
from four crossing points on the Vietnamese/Chinese border, to Tuan
Giao forward base. The primary line of communication ran from Cao
Bang and the Nan Kuan Pass, joined at Tuy en Quang, crossed the Red
River at Yen Bai, and thence to Tuan
Giao.
A secondary line of
FIG.
North Vietnamese women porters.
A propaganda photograph
taken by AFP in 1970. Porters would not be armed. But the use of bicycles by
porters supporting Giap's troops was widespread from the earliest days
(ropper).
communication ran down the Red River from Lao Cai, joining the
primary route at Yen Bai. Another secondary line of communication
crossed the border at Ban Nam Coum, passed through Lai Chau and
on to Tuan Giao. The Vietminh truck companies were each responsible
for a section of road, the length of a particular section was determined
by carefully selected choke-points, such as bridges, or passes which
were likely to be blocked by the French. Loads were always transferred
at these points. If the choke point was blocked, so that trucks could not
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
drive up alongside each other, the porters who were prepositioned to
transfer the load to the collecting truck were on hand already; it was
just more difficult for them. Despite the problems of several transfers of
load at points along the route, there were plenty of coolies, and the
drivers came to know their section of road so well that they could drive
on a dark night without lights. All the roads were rudimentary-by
Western standards, little more than cart tracks.
To improve the mule track, which crossed nearly 100 small and big
streams, and wound up and down steep gradients from Tuan Giao to
Dien Bien Phu, to take trucks, involved a complete rebuild. The task
took 10,000 coolies, two Main Force engineer regiments, one infantry
regiment, and 7,000 army recruits. Once built, this, and all other roads,
had to be kept open in the face of French air interdiction. As soon as the
attacking French aircraft had pulled away from a bomb run, gangs of
peasants equipped with hand tools, and the ubiquitous small wicker
basket of the Asian labourer, would descend on the damaged section to
fill in craters, or create a by-pass. After a while, the Vietminh identified
about forty key points to which the French air force returned time and
again. Coolies were permanently stationed at these places, and the road
was rarely out of service for more than twenty-four hours. The
Vietminh turned the primary line of communication into a flak
corridor by siting anti-aircraft guns along its length, concentrating
them at the key points here, and on the secondary supply routes.
Finally, as much of the road as possible was camouflaged,
by
interlacing the branches of trees overhead, to form a tunnel, so that
detection from the air, either visually or on a photograph, was nigh
impossible, before the days of thermal-image technology. The Viet-
minh logistic system was able to keep a force of 49,000 troops at Dien
Bien Phu supplied, as well as about 40,000 to 50,000 logistic troops
along the lines of communication. It was a triumph of organisation,
discipline and motivation which resisted all the French efforts to
disrupt it.
French Interdiction Fails
The French effort failed for a number of reasons.
First, and
fundamental, as Slessor had pointed out in Italy ten years before, an air
interdiction campaign cannot prevent an enemy moving supplies
forward. Only if he is forced to expend supplies, the vital ones being
ammunition and fuel, faster than he is receiving them, will he become
logistically bankrupt. The French did not have the tactical initiative al
