116
The Lifeblood of War
take the cargo which could not be loaded in aircraft, the rest would go
by air. 14 An Army that has such lavish movement resources, that the
agencies squabble over who shall have the privilege of taking the goods
forward, is lucky indeed!
Reinforcement: The First United Nations Contingents
Arrive
The first United Nations troops, other than Americans, arrived in
Korea on 25 August, the British 27th Infantry Brigade from Hong
Kong. The British 27th Infantry Brigade was short of administrative
backing throughout its time in Korea, particularly critical was second
line transport,
which was only intermittently supplied by the
Americans. However, the British 29th Infantry Brigade, which arrived
FiG. 4.1 Korea. Replenishing a British Centurion tank with ammunition-
time-consuming and physical (IWM).
later, was superbly supported and included a tailor-made organisation,
the British Commonwealth Korea Base. The British and Common-
wealth Brigades, and eventually the Commonwealth Division, were to
establish a reputation for steadiness, efficieney and fighting qualities
Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
117
throughout the Korean war. In this respect, it was equalled, but never
surpassed, by only one United States formation,
the 1st Marine
Division.
As South Korea was not a member of the United Nations, the ROK
forces were designated 'allies', a nice distinction. Fortunately, the
Americans were in such overwhelming preponderance, that all United
Nations Forces were put under United States command, thereby
avoiding command by committee, which has since bedevilled all
United Nations operations.
This arrangement also had enormous
logistic benefits. The ROK forces used American equipment exclu-
sively. Eventually, many, although not all, of the United Nations
contingents were provided with United States equipment,
and
weapons. Even those, like the British, who retained their own weapons,
guns and tanks, eventually wore many items of American clothing. The
majority of contingents used the ubiquitous jeep and other American
trucks. This standardisation simplified the supply problem.
MacArthur Intervenes: Inchon
Despite heavy losses, the North Koreans persevered with their
attacks in an attempt to break through to Pusan. In mid September the
Eighth Army and the ROK Army were still heavily engaged at nearly
all points of the perimeter. After two weeks of the heaviest fighting of
the war, the line had held, but only just. However, a dramatic change in
the situation was about to occur.
When the war was barely a week old, General MacArthur instructed
his chief of staff, Major General Almond, to begin planning for an
amphibious operation to hit the North Korean communication centre
at Seoul. For MacArthur to think in terms of an amphibious landing in
rear of the enemy to win the Korean War, was only natural. I5 Most of
his Second World War campaigns in the South-West Pacific had
started with an amphibious hook, by-passing enemy-held islands, or
coastlines.
The Americans possessed two priceless strategic cards;
command of the sea, and the means to project military power from the
sea in the form of amphibious ships and craft. Used correctly, applying
the two great and enduring principles of war, taking advantage of one's
own strengths and the enemy's weaknesses, and surprise, amphibious
operations enable mobility and manoeuvre to be applied at the
operational level of warfare, unlocking stalemate. All through July and
August, despite other distractions, planning and discussion took place
at MacArthur's headquarters on an amphibious landing behind the
