284
The Lifeblood of War
in some quarters that there would actually be a war which had not been
legislated for in some contingency plan.
Apparently,
when the
formation sailed, there were doubts about whether or not it would be
used to fight. It was a view held by some, not by anyone in the original
landing force, that 5th Infantry Brigade would only be employed in a
garrison role. Why this should be so is a mystery, which will only be
explained, when the files are opened to the public, which will not be for
another 22 years at the time of writing. It was made perfectly clear, or
so Thompson thought, at the council of war at Ascension on 17 April,
that the reason that another brigade was required was to reduce the
numerical odds from 2:1 against, to about evens. If the reinforcing
brigade was not to fight, then what? The reluctance to recognise that it
would be used in combat can only be ascribed to a severe case of
cognitive dissonance somewhere.
The upshot of this muddled thinking was that the Commando
Logistic Regiment, originally established to support a brigade of 3,000
plus, and actually supporting a brigade of 5,500 plus, suddenly found
itself supporting a two brigade formation of 9,000, with less movement
assets, and manpower, than it would expect for its task of supplying a
dependency one-third that size.
Fitzroy
Following the orders to 5th Infantry Brigade to move on the
southern axis to Stanley, 3rd Commando Brigade having moved on the
northern route, it was decided to establish another forward BMA at
Fitzroy, and a DP at Bluff Cove, south-west of Port Stanley to support
Sth Infantry Brigade. The supplies for this forward BMA were steamed
round to Fitzroy in two LSLs. They remained there in daylight,
without any air defence, other than the machine-guns of the troops
ashore. Unfortunately, the anchorage was overlooked by high ground
to the North-East, not yet secured by British troops. Reports of activity
in Fitzroy were sent back to Stanley by the Argentine regiment on
Mount Harriet, the high ground referred to earlier. These messages
were intercepted by 3rd Commando Brigade's electronic warfare
troop, but too late to warn Divisional Headquarters, who in any case
could have done little about it, except perhaps warn the LSLs. The
ships were bombed with the loss of 43 dead and over 200 wounded; the
price for lack of air defence, and committing the military sin of
venturing into a valley, in this case a cove, before securing all the
dominating high ground. However, despite the loss of stocks, and 5th
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
285
Brigade's FDS, all was not gloom. The activity at Fitzroy served to
confirm the Argentine assessment that the main thrust for Stanley
would come from the South-West; the easier route. Whereas it would
come from the North-West and West, by 3rd Commando Brigade.
It must be said that the risky operation at Fitzroy was the result of
pressure to conclude the war before the ship sustainability situation
became irreversible, with the Navy having to withdraw ships from the
theatre. 'Backseat driving' from Northwood was a contributory factor
in the losses incurred. They forbade Clapp to send an LPD on a third
trip to the south of Fitzroy to unload by landing craft at night. Had
there been an overall commander nearer the scene of operations, much
of this might have been avoided.
The Final Build-Up: More Problems for 5 Brigade
The logistic build-up for the final battles, aimed, among other things,
at stocking gun positions with 480 to 500 rounds per gun. After the first
night battles, on the night 11/12 June, when 3rd Commando Brigade
seized all their objectives, it was intended that 5th Brigade should
attack the Phase 2 objectives the following night. The Commanding
Officer of the Commando Logistic Regiment attended the orders group
of Commander 5th Brigade. For some reason no Gunners were present
(probably another result of the ad hoc nature of this brigade, which had
no artillery regiment on establishment, and thus no regimental
commander to advise the Brigade Commander). After listening to
orders, the Commanding Officer of the Logistic Regiment stated that
following the attack by 3rd Commando Brigade the previous night, the
gun positions were extremely low on ammunition, and it would take at
least another day to re-stock, and then only to about 250-300 rounds
per gun. After some deliberation, the Commander 5th Brigade asked
the Divisional Commander for a 24 hour postponement, which was
approved. This proved a blessing to his battalion commanders, who
had not had sufficient time to study the ground. In the event, one
battery almost ran out of ammunition during the attack on the night of
13/14 June,
and only some expert flying by the 3rd Commando
Brigade's light helicopter squadron commander, leading in the Sea
Kings with underslung loads of ammunition in darkness and a snow
storm, enabled the battery to come into action again. Before the attacks
started that night, the only bridge over the Murrell River collapsed
under the weight of an armoured recovery vehicle loaded with
ammunition, closing 3rd Commando Brigade's only land main supply
