The Lifeblood of War
the beginning of May, there were only six general transport companies
at Manipur Road, each with 100 task vehicles and 22 spares. The
drivers were inexperienced, the road difficult and dangerous. In the
40 miles from Manipur Road to Kohima, the road climbed 4,000 feet,
round hairpin bends, with a steep cliff up on one side, and another cliff
down on the other. The gradients were heavy, the road edges solt.
From Kohima it climbed another 1,500 feet. One way traffic was
quickly instituted.
FIG. 3.5 Mud-Burma (IWM).
Food was difficult to obtain locally, because the Hindus of Manipur
State objected to the killing of cattle, and drove them away to prevent
them from being taken to feed the army. Eventually, in a reversion to
the logistic methods of earlier wars, sheep and goats were kept at
Imphal, where there was plenty of rice straw available for feedstuff, and
18,000 acres of vegetables were cultivated. Pigs and goats were kept in
locations quite well forward of Imphal.
Despite these self-help measures, which took time to implement, the
difficulties of supply were enormous. In Assam, to maintain a division
1,500 strong deployed forward, required 36,700 men, of whom 5,000
were in the transport and supplies branch. The Arakan was no better,
50 per cent of the tonnage which left Chittagong for the forward areas
Three Campaigns in a Global War
was absorbed by the line of communication personnel and services
before the corps area was reached.
Long Range Penetration
In March 1943 Brigadier Wingate's first long range penetration
operation into Burma, at brigade strength, was a portent of things to
come both tactically and logistically. The force had been fully supplied
by air drop. The operation itself was a costly failure except in the very
important matter of convincing the British that the Japanese could be
defeated in the jungle, and that the jungle itself was not an impenetrable
green hell' to well trained troops.25 However, the boldness of the plan
and use of air supply by the Chindits had so impressed Churchill, and
General Arnold, the Chief of the United States Air Staff, that Wingate
was given vastly greater resources for a second deep penetration by the
Chindits the following year, including a reinforced division of six
infantry brigades and a complete air group of USAAF transport
aircraft, gliders, and fighter bombers. These would not only carry his
division into battle, but supply it as well. The air group also had light
aircraft for casualty evacuation, a great help to morale; in his first
operation, Wingate had had to leave badly wounded men behind. His
second, was to be in support of theatre-wide plans.
The Allied Plan
The Japanese and Allies faced each other in three areas on the
general line of the Indian/Burmese frontier. In the North Stilwell's
Chinese/American Task Force faced the crack 18th Japanese Division.
Slim's 14th Army was deployed with 4 Corps based on the Imphal
plain, faced by the Japanese 15th Army; and, in the Arakan, 15 Corps
faced a Japanese corps. The Allies planned four interrelated operations
for the period up to the start of the monsoon in May 1944. In the North,
Stilwell was to advance to capture Myitkyina and Mogaung, with the
aim of extending the Ledo Road into China. Wingate was to dominate
the area within forty miles of Indaw, thus sitting astride the Japanese
lines of communication to their forces confronting Stilwell. In the
centre, 4 Corps, in contact with the Japanese between the Imphal plain
and the River Chindwin, was to advance to the Chindwin, and cross it if
the opportunity presented itself. In the South, in the Arakan, 15 Corps
was to advance to the Maungdaw-Buthidang Road. Keeping the
SONY
