354
The Lifeblood of War
minute, a total of 400 vehicles were shut out of convoys arriving up to, and
including, the one on D + 18, caused by the limited quantity of commercial ships
capable of carrying a worthwhile load of sizeable trucks. In 1942 there were few of
the specialised ships for moving large quantities of trucks that were available for
later operations. Also, not only were the second line transport companies
operating at light scales, but some units to be supported, such as the commandos
and parachute battalions operating in a conventional infantry role, had practically
no first line transport, let alone second line. (First line transport consists of the
vehicles organic to the unit. Second line transport is sent forward from brigade, or
division, depending on the system being worked in the theatre, to support units for
a specine task):
Added to this was the steadily increasing flow of US combat troops forward,
without an increase in transport at the same rate. So that for example: two infantry
brigade companies designed to maintain 9,000 men, found themselves supporting
17,000 to 20,000 men up to 80 miles in advance of the railhead, with only one tank
transporter company to assist. 78th Division's third line company did not arrive
until early December, and 6th Armoured Division's third line company did not
arrive until well after that.
14. Movements, p. 314, provides a summary as follows:
Tons
per day
500
Eastward from Bone by road, rail and craft
Eastward through Souk Arhas by rail:
a. rrom bone
D. From Algiers
Eastward through Tebessa by metre gauge rail
750
500
750
2,500
Lols
Into the Constantine Area (Airfields and Advance Base)
From Philippeville by road and rail
From Algiers by rail®
500
750
1,250 tons
15. War Diary of Chief Administrative Officer Allied Force Headquarters. (The Liddell
Hart Centre for Military Archives, King's College, London).
• January 1943:
*Generally speaking this HQ is improving, but is still far from being the perfect
running machine it could be.
Merging the American and British Staff
organisation is rather like screwing a metric nut on to a Whitworth bolt-
however we may get the threads sufficiently well crossed to ensure security?
26 February 1943:
*Visits to forward areas have revealed the following indications of the attitude
of our Allies towards Supplies:
(a) Pilfering at OULED RAHMOUN became so bad that a CMP (military
police) raid in force became necessary. Numerous court martials are resulting.
In one instance the US locomotive battalion removed 42 cases of compo
(composite rations packed so that each case provided 14 mens' rations for one
day) at pistol point.
(b) At TEBESSA the 85 QM Company hold 1,000,000 rations. They describe
this as 21 days for 23,000 men-
or two rations per day per man!
(c) Of accounting, in our sense of the word, there is none. To understand this it
is necessary to remember, firstly, that Americans in the USA, have never
Chapter Notes and Bibliography
355
known want, privation or real poverty. There is always "plenty more where
this came from". An appeal to them to consider shipping space or the needs of
others is of no avail because it has never been brought home to them.
Secondly, they regard TEBESSA, in all seriousness, as-being "in the front
line." (Author —perhaps Gale is being a trifle scathing. Although the German
breakthrough at Kasserine, 14-22 February 1943, did not reach Tebessa, it
nearly succeeded in doing so, and the Americans from Eisenhower downwards
were considerably alarmed. 10,000 tons of ammunition and fuel were captured or
destroyed in the retreat of US II Corps). The result of these two principles, if
such they can be called, is that they act on the following maxim. "Our boys are
fighting the battle for the Allied cause. Whatever they want they must have. If
they are hungry then we must give them all the rations that we can. And the
boys sure can eat a hell of a lot." A ration scale to them is meaningless.
In the American Army a supply officer Quartermaster to them is judged
by his ability to amass as great a quantity of supplies and stores as possible by
any means whatsoever. His value as an officer is judged by the magnitude of
his "dump". The following examples may be quoted:
A unit representative came to draw, and presented an indent showing the
unit strength as 84. He was handed 84 cases of compo (i.e. enough to feed
1,176 men). Another unit indented for a quantity of petrol which comprised
five days supply. After two days the unit reported that they had none left. An
inspection of the unit location revealed that men were sleeping in dug-outs
composed of walls of full petrol tins. Expostulations were met with the reply,
"it's OK these boys are non-smokers".
The viciousness of this attitude is too obvious to be enlarged upon. No
wonder we have difficulties with shipping, railways and road transport.
After dinner had a further discussion with General Miller (Major General
Administration 18 Army Group) and Brigadier Philipe on our problems. I
think we shall build up our reserves for the battle but it will be a tight squeeze,
especially on the U.S.
side.
The British, although better disciplined, could also overbid, as demonstrated
from a memo produced by the Major General Administration 18 Army Group on
7 April 1943, one month before the end of the campaign (with Gale Papers):
"(a) First Army demands for "build-up" in Army Area prior to offensive action
were based on 2,500 rounds per 25-pr (pounder) field gun in Army Area over
and above 1st and 2nd line holdings. This was the estimate given by the "G'
staff (operations) to "Q" (logistics) and accepted by the latter, although after
some demur. The battle of Alamein was fought over a period of over 10 days
with an expenditure of well under 1,000 r.p.g. (rounds per gun) 25-pr.
2,500 r.p.g. for an estimated 10 day battle is of course fantastic. (Readers will
no doubt remember from Chapter 2 that, the expenditure which Miller
thought so fantastic, i.e. 250 rounds per day per gun, was greatly exceeded in
the course of battles in the Falklands compaign. But at Alamein, and indeed in
most major battles taking several days and over a great area (at Alamein a
25 mile front), all guns are not firing all the time) ...
(c) The RAF
have been bad offenders in the past
. U.S. Airforce do not
appear to do much more at present than to make a wide safe guess. In one case
in this theatre enough fighter aircraft ammunition was moved to a forward
airfield to last the fighter force squadrons at intensive rates daily for one year!
On another occasion I was asked to provide transport to withdraw 5,000 tons
of 100 octane from a forward airfield when threatened by an enemy advance.
Both these examples [which] show complete lack of appreciation of the
administrative situation in relation to operational requirements and situa-
