The Lifeblood of War
problem of resupplying ammunition to a fast moving army, using a mix
of horse-drawn transport and, for the first time in war, trucks powered
by the internal combustion engine. Before the war, they had calculated
that the consumption of small arms ammunition would be twelve times
that of 1870, whereas artillery ammunition would be fired only four
times as fast. Based on this, they assumed that the reserves carried by
each corps would have to be replenished once only during the
campaign. As the troops advanced, they opened the distance from the
railheads, and although new railheads were opened up in the wake of
the advance, the ammunition had already been dropped off in depots
further back. By the battle of the Marne, in which ammunition was
expended faster than in the advance, the German armies were at the
furthest point from their railheads, and actually beyond the point
where it was possible to support a high rate of consumption not only of
ammunition, but also of spare parts for guns and other equipment.
Although there is no evidence to show that the battle was lost by the
Germans because of logistic failures, had they won on the Marne, it
would have proved impossible to supply their armies, and the advance
would have ground to a halt. 36
Flawed Planning and Ever-Increasing Problems of
Supply
All combatants found that they used their stocks of ammunition
about ten times faster than pre-war estimates; particularly artillery
ammunition. Home production had to be vastly increased to cope. In
the British Army, shortages of ammunition led to the shell scandal of
1915. The blame was laid at the door of the government in power,
although it was, of course, the result of flawed planning well before the
war, which resulted in the British taking part in a campaign on the
mainland of Europe, for which they were not logistically prepared.
As the war in the West became trenchbound, for lack of a means to
break the dead-lock, the armies, still relying on the horse for the
majority of their transport, quickly consumed all the local fodder, and
had to resort to bringing it up over great distances; in the case of the
British Army, across the Channel from Britain, although it has to be
said that the British led the field in the use of mechanical transport and
that their use of horse-drawn wagons decreased as the war progressed.
Added to this were engineer stores, such as barbed wire, pickets on
which to string the wire, sandbags, duckboards, miles of telephone
cable, and timber and girders to revet and roof trenches and dugouts.
The Assyrians 700 BC to the Armistice AD 1918
FIG. 2.7
First World War, Western Front. Taking water pipes up to the
trench system by light railway, near Mametz July 1916, during the Battle of
the Somme (IWM).
Wells had to be dug to provide water for the millions of men and
animals, and piped to distribution points. A ready supply of spares and
complete replacements for guns, small arms, the growing fleets of
vehicles and aircraft, and by 1916, tanks; and equipment of all types
was essential. It was usually no longer possible to make do with
captured weapons and equipment, as was the case fifty years before
when the Confederate Army could supplement its own inadequate
armaments industry at the expense of the Union Army.37 By the
twentieth century, the ammunition and spares used by one side would
rarely fit the weapons and equipment of the other. As weapons became
more complicated, it took longer to train a man to use them. The
sighting arrangements, and fuzing system on artillery pieces could not,
for example, be assimilated quickly by artillerymen on the opposing
side, let alone the infantry who overran the position.
The Cost of an Artillery War
But by far the most important commodity was ammunition,
particularly shells. The mortar and
artillery programmes
which
prepared the way for the assaulting infantryman, supported him on his
objective, and pounded enemy assaults and gun areas, consumed
