262
The Lifeblood of War
Commander Task Force 317
Admiral Fieldhouse at Northwood throughout
Air Commander
Air Marshal Curtiss
Land Deputy
Major General Moore
Commander
Carrier Battle Group
Task Group
CTG 317.8
Rear Admiral
Woodward
Commander
Amphibious Task
Group
CTG 317.0
Commodore Clapp
Commander
Landing Force Task
Group
CTG 317.1
Brigadier Thompson
The missing link in this command chain was a task force commander
of three star rank, near the scene of the action to command and
co-ordinate the task group commanders, and to deal with the
Commander-in-Chief at Northwood, leaving each free to concentrate
on his own task. The lack of such a commander led to some friction and
a lack of control of logistic assets once all tack groups had arrived in the
Falkland Islands area.
Problems of Sorting and Identification of Stores
One immediate logistic problem that emerged concerned the
administrative organisation on Ascension Island; a willing but over-
worked Naval Party, dedicated to ensuring that ships passing through
would lack nothing. Stores for the Commando Brigade started to pour
in, reacting to signalled demands. These piled up and were not
distributed to the units concerned for two reasons. First, if they were
addressed to a particular unit, the Naval Party had no idea on which
ship, or ships, the addressee was embarked (some units were embarked
on several ships). Second, if as often happened, there was only a
demand number on the package, the Naval Party was even more
perplexed. In either case they usually did nothing, or at a pinch,
despatched the item to a ship, any ship. Some ships which had no
landing force units embarked, were surprised to receive equipment and
spare parts whose purpose was a total mystery. There was a need for a
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
263
team of Royal Army Ordnance Corps personnel to recognise' (to use
the army expression) the item, and arrange for helicopter transport to
deliver it to the correct recipient. When an ordnance team was sent out
from the United Kingdom, the Officer Commanding the Naval Party
unfortunately sent them back on the next aircraft, on the grounds that
there was insufficient accommodation and a water shortage on the
island.
Eventually, after strong representations by the
Brigade
Commander, an Ordnance team from the Brigade, who could ill be
spared from the job of re-stowing the ships, was sent ashore, and a
modicum of order was restored. But not before some stores had gone
missing completely, including special ammunition and weapons for the
Brigade, which had been appropriated by an SAS Squadron passing
through Ascension en route to South Georgia, who, seeing them lying
about, had taken a fancy to them. More were sent out, but arrived after
the Amphibious Group had sailed. Chaotic logistical practices lead to a
piratical, devil-take-the-hindmost attitude, which in turn results in
wasted effort. However, among the stores consigned to 3rd Commando
Brigade which happily did arrive, were variable time fuzes for the
105 mm high explosive shells. These (VT) fuzes, that enable the shell to
burst above the ground, were not included in the Artillery Regiment's
first line ammunition, and had to be sent out separately. Only 18 per
cent of the fuses were VT, and bearing in mind the very soft ground in
the Falklands, there was concern that conventional shells bursting even
near the enemy would only cover him in peat, not splinters. It was
decided to send out a large percentage of the 105 mm VT fuzes held by
the British Army of the Rhine. These also caught up with the Brigade at
Ascension.
Ascension: The Re-Stow
A considerable effort was made by the Logistic Regiment NCO
embarked in each stores-carrying ship to locate the supplies in his ship
in the ten days between leaving Britain and arriving at Ascension. A
comprehensive list was eventually produced, but not without difficulty,
and not before arrival at Ascension. The only means of communication
between stores carrying ships was often by signal, the lists were long
and signal traffic was 'minimized' (a technical term meaning that only
essential signal traffic was allowed to be sent from each ship, to avoid
swamping the communications system. The definition of essential' was
left to the judgement of the captain of each ship, and many viewed
