The Lifeblood of War
Burma. There were no rail connections between Burma and India, and
only one under-developed road. Since 1887, plans for improving this
road had been mooted, but nothing was done until the late autumn of
1941. By the time the Japanese invaded, the road from Manipur Road
(Dimapur) to Imphal had been widened to take two-way traffic. The
section from Imphal to Tamur (65 miles) was only a bridle track, and
Tamur to Kalewa (120 miles), only a cart track. In the Arakan, the
railway ran only as far as Chittagong.
Calcutta became the main base for the campaign in Assam and
Burma, but when the British Forces evacuated Rangoon in early 1942,
all sea lines of communication were cut. The only method of entry was
overland through Assam. Furthermore, communications to, and in,
Assam, which hitherto had been a backwater, were rudimentary, and
totally unsuitable for the supply needs of General Slim's British 14th
Army fighting in Assam and Burma, and Stilwell's Chinese/American
Task Force in North Burma.
Although
Calcutta remained the main base for most of the
campaign,?' the west coast ports of Karachi and Bombay played a
major part, particularly for troop movement, and for some stores. To a
lesser extent, the ports of Madras, Cochin, and Vizgapatam were also
used; both as a back-up to Calcutta and because they were the closest
to the extensive training and staging areas in Southern India. However,
the total capacity of all the ports in India was no greater than that of
Southampton 22 The distances involved were enormous. From Delhi
to Myitkyina in North Burma, is the same distance as from London to
Helsinki; Karachi to Calcutta, Leon in Northern Spain to Gdansk;
Karachi to North-West Assam, Leon to Finland. It was commonplace
for troops to take a week to complete a rail journey from one side of
India to the other. The total mileage of railway track in India in 1942
was the same as for the railways in Britain (a country a tenth the size),
but with only one-third the number of freight wagons. The most
important road in India, the Grand Trunk Road (immortalised by
Kipling), ran 1,500 miles from the North West Frontier to Calcutta. It
was joined between Allahabad and Delhi by the road from Bombay.
These roads were open in all but the worst weather. The road from
Madras to Calcutta was a different proposition altogether. It crossed
many large rivers, which in the monsoon were swollen by floodwater,
cutting off substantial sections. Fortunately, it ran parallel and close to
the railway, and the rail bridges were all-weather. To keep the overland
route open to vehicles, a rail link was instituted on each of the most
troublesome sections. Convoys of vehicles were loaded at the nearest
Three Campaigns in a Global War
83
station one side of the flood, ferried across on rail flat cars, and
offloaded at a convenient station on the other side.
As this
was
sometimes necessary several times in one journey, the delays were
There was no road into Assam from Calcutta. Wheeled vehicles had
to be taken by rail 235 miles to Siliguri, before joining the road to
Assam. This road crossed the Brahmaputra at the Jogighopa ferry, and
split at Jorhat. One road ran south-east to Manipur, the base for 14th
Army, and on to Kohima, Imphal and Burma. The other ran north-
east to Ledo, the American base supporting the Chinese. From Ledo,
as we have heard, stores were flown at a height of 25,000 feet over the
of the Himalayan range, known as the 'Hump', a
remarkable feat in unpressurised Dakotas and Liberators, lacking the
power to climb above the often appalling weather.
eventually constructed from Ledo into China, but it took two years to
build, over some of the most inhospitable country in the world.
Road and Rail Links
The railway running north from Calcutta to Siliguri, was broad
gauge (5 foot 6 inches). About 200 miles north of Calcutta it was joined
by a metre gauge system. One branch serving Assam ran north of the
Brahmaputra to Amingaon, where wagons were transported across on
a rail ferry to Pandu. From here, the metre gauge ran to Manipur and
Ledo. Another branch served East Bengal (now Bangla Desh). This
also had to cross the Brahmaputra by wagon ferry, before dividing.
One line ran south-east to Chittagong, the base for the Arakan front;
the other north-east to Manipur. The metre gauge was used not only
for stores and troop movement, but also for vehicles such as tanks and
engineer plant, to reduce their road journey to the minimum. Because
of geography, the routes for most overland journeys from Calcutta to
the road and railheads described at least three sides of a square, and one
major ferry crossing. Trains taken across rivers on ferries had to be
broken up before embarkation, and remarshalled on the far bank. The
ferry from Amingaon was capable of handling only 125 railway wagons
a day. Furthermore, every ounce of stores, bound for any destination
on the metre gauge lines had to be transhipped from broad to metre
gauge wagons, an enormously time-consuming process before the days
of mechanical handling equipment (fork-lift trucks and pallets). Many
of the loads sent forward were heavy and unwieldy: Bailey bridging,
tugs and river craft, boxed locomotives for the Burma railways,
SONY
