342
The Lifeblood of War
largely responsible for sending the wrong political signal' to Saddam
Hussein, precipitating his invasion.
The rapid appearance of two airborne divisions, squadrons of
fighter/bombers and air defence fighters, and the redeployment of
carrier battle groups and amphibious groups showed convincingly the
need for such forces, along with their means of mobility. The activation
of the stockpiles at Diego Garcia during the first days when only ligns
forces were available to deter an Iraqi attack into Saudi Arabia, was
crucial. Heavier weapons and substantial logistic support were
provided infinitely more quickly than a long sea-lift from the United
States would have allowed.
Eventually, the United States moved in enough stocks to last 60 days
of combat; provisioning against the eventuality of what General
Schwarzkopf, the Allied commander-in-chief, called a slug-fest'. In this
area, as in others, he showed himself a worthy successor to the great
captains of the past. The logistics of the great armoured and air-mobile
outflanking thrust were daunting enough. Indeed General Schwarzkopf
is said to have over-ruled doubters on his staff that it could be done. Only
a commander who understands logistics can push the military machine
to the limits without risking total breakdown. Although it must be said
that the expenditure of tank ammunition, and possibly artillery rounds,
was lower than it would have been had the Iraqi army fought hard. But
providing fuel for an armoured corps totalling six divisions, motoring
325 kilometres across the desert in two days, was a notable feat in itself;
let alone the fuelling of the great air-mobile thrust to the west.
The conception and handling of what Simpkin has called the club
sandwich battle' was a classic in itself. It included the seizure of the
forward supply base deep in Iraqi territory by airmobile troops of 101st
Airborne Division. This provided the hinge for the swinging level arm
oi a mix of armour, mechanised and air-mobile forces to plug the Iraqi
withdrawal routes across the Euphrates. Inside this lever, a mass of
armour raced to engage the Iraqi Republican Guard.
The genius of Schwarzkopf's plan was in recognising that Saddam
Hussein had put his army in the Kuwait Theatre of Operations (KTO),
including southern Iraq, in a bag. One side was the sea, the bottom was
the defences they had created to keep the Allies out. The western side
was open. The trick was to feint an amphibious landing, tying down six
Iraqi divisions, and punch hard on the right and centre, to keep him
looking that way.
VIIth Corps zipped up the western side and
squeezed. The way out of the bag lay over the Euphrates bridges,
damaged by airstrikes. The swinging arm closed off the neck.
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
343
Air power was indispensable. It came nearer than at any other time
in history to bringing victory unaided. Despite all the efforts by the
airmen, the logistics of the Iraqi army seem to have continued working.
Until they were brought to battle on the ground, they could have
survived, still in possession of Kuwait. Slessor's words (see Chapter 3),
In short, it (air power) cannot absolutely isolate the battlefield from
enemy supply or reinforcement', are as true in 1991 as they were in
1944.
It was the prospect of a ground offensive that led to Saddam
Hussein's frantic attempts to fudge a cease-fire. It needed the ground
offensive, by 15 Allied divisions to utterly destroy 42 Iraqi divisions in
100 hours. It was a ground offensive that forced Saddam out of Kuwait,
and brought his generals to the table at Safwan airbase, courtesy of the
Big Red One', the Ist United States Infantry Division. Against a
backdrop of the Division's colours, adorned with battle streamers,
signalling the United States Army back in all its power and glory,
General Schwarzkopf announced the unconditional terms he had
dictated to a defeated enemy. The poison had, at last, been drawn from
the wounds inflicted by Vietnam; bringing gladness to the friends of the
United States, and confounding the detractors and whingers-
notably
backward-looking media marshals and amateur generals in the halls of
academe.
The British Ist Armoured Division played a starring role in this
victory on land, thanks to its general, and all under his command. It is
too early to comment in full on all the aspects of the handling of the
British Ist Armoured Division. But two stand out.
First, the imaginative handling of the artillery as a brigade. Thus
General Smith was able to minimise his tactical weakness, only two
armoured brigades, and maximise the crushing power of his artillery,
particularly the Multi-Launched
Rocket
System
(MRS). Iraqi
prisoners are reported as saying that the bombing was bad enough, but
the artillery was devastating.
Second, the logistic expertise
of the Division. At the end of its
advance, it had enough fuel and ammunition to take it to Baghdad.
All the partners in the coalition land force, made up of major
contingents from seven nations, and several minor contributions from
others, played their part in the success of the 100 hour land battle.
It is also too soon to list all the logistic lessons. But one stands out
already. Thanks to British parsimony with military resources over the
previous decade, it took half the logistic resources of 1st British Corps,
and a slice of the Army in the United Kingdom to make the Division
