112
The Lifeblood of War
forces several hundred miles away across the sea of Japan. This state of
affairs lasted for about seven
weeks, until a special Logistical
Command Japan was set up which relieved Walker's Eighth Army
Rear Headquarters of the responsibility. Fortunately Walker was a
tenacious, uncomplaining, and competent soldier, able to make the
best of the less than perfect weapon with which he had to fight the
opening round of the war. This was fortunate because the organisation
of the logistic base through which all his reinforcements and supplies
had to come was far from perfect. The port of Pusan was excellent, but
the railways could not keep pace with the flow of men and supplies
pouring in as fast as they could be outloaded from Japan. Consequently
some troops moved to the front with only their personal weapons and
equipment.
Withdrawal to Pusan
It was during one of the delaying actions, at Taejon, that General
Dean, commanding 24th Infantry Division, led the tank hunting party
mentioned earlier. He had been asked by Walker to impose the
maximum delay on the North Korean advance on the main axis Seoul-
Pusan. Walker had in mind withdrawing to a defensive position behind
the Naktong River, around Pusan; and holding there while he built up
Eighth Army sufficiently to take the offensive. Taejon, the sixth largest
city in South Korea at the time, lay 100 miles south of Seoul and
130 miles north-west of Pusan. Eight days before, the 24th Division
had received the first consignment of the new 3.S-inch anti-tank rocket
launcher. The rockets had been in production only fifteen days before
the war started. It is a measure of the speed with which the Americans
could react that, within five days of MacArthur's request for the new
launchers, the first batch was airlifted to Korea, accompanied by
instructors. On 20 July, the second day of the battle, a number of North
Korean tanks entered the city, without infantry support. The 3.5-inch
bazookas, used in battle for the first time, accounted for 8 tanks; one of
them by General Dean's team. His reason for personally bringing a
tank to bay, was a calculated attempt to persuade his troops, shaken by
reverses and stories of the invulnerability of the T-34 than
"an
unescorted tank in a city defended by infantry with 3.5-inch bazookas
should be a dead duck.' It was a gallant effort. But he might have been
better employed commanding his division, and in particular trying to
find out what was happening in the rest of his divisional area. He did
not know that his infantry, who he thought were still holding the main
Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
113
positions overlooking the river to the west of the city, had been driven,
or drifted, off. Instead of falling back into the city, where they might
have been rallied, and used to assist in the withdrawal, they had
wandered off to the South into the mountains. Poor radio communi-
cations have been blamed for this, but if communications are bad, it is
the job of the commander, and his staff, to find out what the situation is
by personal reconnaissance. But according to some accounts, Dean
was badly served by his staff, and divisional headquarters was in
disarray.' Eventually, the North Koreans cut in behind the division,
and in the chaos of the withdrawal, Dean was cut off and taken
prisoner.
Also chaotic was the withdrawal of 25th Infantry Division in the first
days of August, following a switch in their axis of withdrawal ordered
by Walker to take them from the north-east corner of the evolving
Pusan perimeter, to the south-west corner around Masan. This
involved a 150 mile journey first by single road and then by rail. Both
the road and railway were the main supply artery to the front, and the
route took the division across the route of other formations, also on the
move. The move by road was bad enough, at the railhead it was worse:
'Congestion in the rail yards was almost indescribable. Units seeking transpor-
tation commandeered locomotives, cars [rail wagons] jammed the tracks, native
refugees crowded into cars [rail wagons], and general chaos threatened. The ROK
17th Regiment, moving south-west at this time. further complicated the traffic
problem.'10
The Perimeter Established and the Enemy Halted
By 4 August, US Eighth Army and the ROK Army was back behind
the Naktong River, and had established the Pusan perimeter; a
rectangular area about 100 miles from North to South, and about 50
miles from East to West. Each held about half the line, with Eighth
Army on the left, and the South Koreans on the right. Although the
North Koreans made several attempts to pierce the perimeter and drive
on Pusan, the line held, but not without some close calls. Walker,
during a speech to the staff of the 25th Infantry Division, said that the
Eighth Army would retreat no more, and that in effect every man would
"stand or die'. Stopping the North Koreans was a major milestone in
the war. It was a classic example of how an army withdrawing to a
natural defensive position, shortening its own overland lines of
communication and supply, and falling back on a port through which it
receives stocks supplies, grows stronger. Conversely the advancing
army finds its lines of communication and supply becoming more
