268
The Lifeblood of War
page 272).
These ships
are specifically designed to provide good
command facilities in addition to the carriage of heavy vehicles and
equipment needed in the assault upon a beach. A complement of large
landing craft (Landing Craft Utility (LCU)) is carried in the special
internal dock of the ship from where they are launched, fully laden,
through the ship's stern doors. A number of smaller craft (Landing
Craft Vehicle and Personnel (LCVP)) are carried at davits. For lack of
space, and against the advice of the Air Defence Battery Commander,
the Brigade Commander decided to leave the Rapier optical repair
vehicle and second-line repair fitters at Ascension to follow on as soon
as possible. This was an error, because they were delayed for six weeks.
Closing the Falklands
The main body sailed from Ascension on 7 May, by which time it
was clear that it was highly unlikely that the air battle would be won
before the landing. However, it was too late to change the logistic
concept or the loading of the ships based on a commitment that the air
battle would be won, which was now proving to be false. Although
Admiral Woodward, and his Carrier Battle Group, and the Vulcans,
all did their utmost to reduce the strength of the Argentine Air Force.
The Vulcan raid on Stanley airfield on 1 May, and follow-up by Sea
Harriers (SHARs) the same day, made it impossible for the Argentines
to operate Mirages or Skyhawks from the Falkland Islands, which
would have been feasible after a modest improvement to the airfield.
On this and subsequent days, several Argentine aircraft had been shot
down while attacking ships of the Carrier Battle Group, mainly those
close to the Falklands on bombardment duty in daylight. SHAR and
GR3 attacks, and bombardments continued to harass the airfield.
The Air Threat
However, the Argentine Air Force plainly intended to reserve its
main effort for attacks on the Amphibious Group. This was sensible,
because the Carrier Battle Group could not win the war, although they
could lose it in an afternoon if not properly handled. Unless raids were
mounted against mainland Argentine bases, which was understand-
ably politically unacceptable, the air battle could not be won before the
amphibious operation was carried out. In retrospect, statements about
the air battle being won before landing, were misleading, because there
Amphibious Logistics-Falklands 1982
269
was little prospect of achieving such a situation. It would have been less
confusing if all concerned had been told from the outset that the
landing would go ahead anyway; since this was obviously the
intention. With hindsight, Thompson, who was perfectly capable of
working this out for himself, should also have ensured that the logistic
plans catered for an off-load into the beachhead on arrival, which in the
event is what happened. The operation would have been better served
had there been more frankness from the beginning. This would have
allowed more open discussion of the problem with the Headquarters at
Northwood, in the course of which, among other things, it could have
been made plain that an offload would buy up all ship-shore movement
assets for several days, precluding any tactical moves out of the
beachhead, thus avoiding subsequent acrimonious discussion on the
satellite communication system. Plain speaking would have avoided
misunderstandings about how quickly Rapier firing posts would have
been in action. It was exactly this situation, among others, that called
for a higher level overall commander forward with the three task
groups.
However, at least the naval surface threat to the amphibious group
was nil. The sinking of the Belgrano led to the Argentine Navy
returning to port for the rest of the war.
D-Day: 21 May
Meanwhile the Brigade Commander had given orders on 13 May,
for a landing on three beaches inside San Carlos Water on a day and
time to be confirmed. These orders were repeated to the Commanding
Officer of the Commando Logistic Regiment on 16 May when the main
body of the Amphibious Group made their rendezvous with the LSLs.
Ajax Bay was designated the Brigade Support Area, because there was
more room behind that beach than in rear of any of the others in San
Carlos Water. An added attraction was the disused mutton factory,
which would provide overhead cover from the elements for the FDS,
advanced workshop and ordnance detachments and some technical
stores. On 19 May D-Day was confirmed as 21 May, with an H-hour
of 2.30 am local time.
The Effect of Argentine Air Attacks on Logistics
The landings went well, with some delays. There was no opposition
on the ground and all objectives were secure halfway into the morning.
