150
The Lifeblood of War
a daytime move would have drawn the attention of the French air force.
Giap had planned on procuring rice on the way, but the villagers
refused to supply any, this resulted in yet more porters to carry rice
from the Viet Bac. Then the monsoon broke early, further delaying
logistic preparations, so finally Giap started his offensive on 29 May,
about three weeks into the monsoon period. This worked in Giap's
favour, surprising the French, because until then neither side had
campaigned during the monsoon.
Initially the offensive was a success, but de Lattre reacted with great
speed to move reserves into the battle. The Vietminh found themselves
in flooded, open paddy fields under intense artillery bombardment;
and the Vietnamese Catholic militia slowed up the 320th Division until
the French arrived. The Catholic militia also harassed the moves of the
independent Vietminh regiments. In consequence, they were unable to
operate in conjunction with the assaulting divisions by attacking the
rear of the positions in the de Lattre Line. Giap now found himself
having to supply three divisions across the Day River. French river
craft units (dinassauts, an abbreviation of Division Navale d'Assaut),
assisted by the French air force, cut his line of communication by
sinking the boats. The Vietminh advance ground to a halt for lack of
dimunition and food. By mid June, Giap had withdrawn his battered
divisions back over the Day River. In choosing a plan that resulted in
all his lines of communication crossing a major river, he showed that he
still failed to understand how the use of air and waterborne power
could affect his plans; particularly the ability of the latter to cut off the
fighting men from their supplies.
Giap Tries Again
It has been argued that Giap, instead of mounting a series of attacks
(three in the first five months of 1951), should have put in a strong co-
ordinated offensive by all five divisions simultaneously around the
perimeter of the de Lattre Line. It is likely that the answer lies in the
logistic limitations of the Vietminh. It has been calculated!4 that it took
about one month per attacking Vietminh division to stock its logistic
base. So the earliest that a co-ordinated, five division offensive could
have been launched was early May 1951. Giap did not consider that he
could afford to leave the French to their own devices for that long;
particularly with the dynamic de Lattre in command.
After the monsoon, Giap tried again; this time not against the de
Lattre Line, but against the town of Nghia-Lo, the capital of the T'ai
Insufficiency and Super-Abundance
151
people, strong supporters of the French. The town was sixty-five miles
outside the de Lattre Line. Once again the French dropped parachute
battalions in to reinforce the garrison, that and air attacks caused Giap
to withdraw. However, he learned an important lesson; he could entice
the French out on to ground of his own choosing, by threatening areas,
towns, or French allies.
General de Lattre Takes the Offensive
De Lattre now decided to go on to the offensive, and capitalise on the
high morale engendered by the series of Vietminh defeats. He chose
Hoa Binh as his objective. Besides being the capital of the Muongs,
another people whose loyalties lay with the French, the town lay on the
lines of communication from the region which supplied most of the rice
to the Vietminh army to the Viet Bac. It was also close enough to the de
Lattre Line to be supported and supplied. However, there were
problems with all three lines of communication from the de Lattre Line
to Hoa Binh. The road, Route Coloniale 6, had become a jungle track
over the years, thanks to the efforts of both the Vietminh and the
French Air Force. The bridges were blown, and the road cratered. The
jungle came right down to the roadside-
good ambush country. Th
jungle also grew densely along the barks of the Black River, providi
first-rate sites for Vietminh rocket-launcher and recoilless guns. The a
strip at Hoa Binh could be dominated by artillery, mortars and fla.
guns from two nearby hills.
The offensive started with three parachute battalions dropping on
the Hoa Binh airstrip on 14 November 1951. At first all went well for
the French. Giap took about a month to react. Having decided that
attack was the main effort, not just a diversion, he had to establish
own logistic base, a time-consuming business.
Perhaps following
example of T. E. Lawrence cutting the Turks' supply line, rather tha
assault Medina, Giap decided not to attack the strong French force in
the town, but their lines of communication, the road, the river, and the
airstrip. At the same time, two divisions would infiltrate the Delta from
the north and the south to distract the French command from the
battle at Hoa Binh. By mid January the Vietminh had succeeded in
closing the Black River and the Route Coloniale 6 lines of supply, and
reducing the flow of air supply dramatically, by the use of flak guns
along the aircraft approach and departure routes. Worst of all, from the
French point of view, de Lattre had been invalided back to France
dying of cancer. His deputy General Salan took his place.
