340
The Lifeblood of War
the Mogadishu hi-jack, which failed, the Red Army Faction never again
tried hi-jacking. It requires special weapons, supporters (possibly in
more than one country), and hide-outs; so usually only the bigger
organisations, such as the PLO and other Arab groups attempt hi-
jacking. Sometimes the smaller groups will assist each other logistically.
The French group Action Directe set up a logistic front to provide
weapons, papers, money and safe houses which they not only used
themselves, but provided assistance to the Italian Red Brigades hiding in
France. Before the Belgian group, the Fighting Communist Cells (CCC),
went into action on its own account, it provided arms and explosives for
more active groups. 8 Support for terrorist operations by governmentsis
at the other end of the scale. The leaders in this respect recently, have
been Syria, Iran and Libya. Syria has provided Hizbollah with Soviet
Sagger anti-tank missiles, and Grad missiles and launchers. State
sponsored terrorism is, however, not a new phenomenon; for example,
the assassination of King Alexander of Yugoslavia in Marseilles in 1934
was set up by the Italians, and the murder of Trotsky in Mexico in 1940,
by the Soviet Union. It is likely to continue for the foreseeable future, and
become more, rather than less, violent, if those who practise it belong to
sects who are as careless of their own lives as of their victims.
The drug barons run terrorist organisations for profit. The forces at
their disposal are often far greater than most terrorist groups could
achieve, both in terms of size and quality of equipment; in some areas
somedling large tracts of countryside and operating overtly, which puts
Sane of them into the guerrilla bracket. There is evidence that drug
haveckers, and indeed terrorist groups, in Central and South America,
have been equipped with vast quantities of arms and ammunition by
Cuba, much of this is American equipment abandoned in South-East
Asia, or taken from the ARVN in 1975 and subsequently acquired by
Cuba from the Socialist Republic of Vietnam in return for agricultural
produce and shell-fish. These totalled over 2 million small arms of
different types. In addition, Cuba distributed a wide range of Eastern
Bloc weapons to insurgent groups in Nicaragua, along with Portuguese
weapons abandoned in Mozambique and Angola.lº To crush such
powerful groups is likely to require an armed response, unless the
subtler, and cheaper, approach of legalising all drugs is adopted.
SUMMARY
Although, at the time of writing, the prospect of war with Soviet
Russia seems to be receding, there are no grounds for the West to
Crystal Ball Gazing-Future Wars and Their Support
disarm. From the top end of the threat spectrum, right to the bottom,
there is a need for Western nations to maintain armed forces, and the
means to supply them.
The NATO Alliance will be needed until the
Soviet threat diminishes to an acceptable level. It is difficult to say what
that level is because it will depend on so many factors, including the
nature of the government in the Soviet Union and the correlation of
forces in Europe. Outside NATO, no one can tell where or when the next
conflict will be, the form it will take, and whether or not it will involve the
West. What is certain, is that unless the West remains strong,
with
modern weapons and equipment, with the logistic organisation and
stocks to support its forces, a situation will eventually arise which
involves abandoning something
territorial, economic, a point of
principle, a permutation of any of these which the West would wish to
maintain. Therefore it would be wise for the West, either through the
existing machinery or NATO, or some new European grouping, to
examine means of maintaining collective security against new threats,
however dimly perceived at present. As ever, logistics will play an
important part, and the temptation to set up shop-window forces with
no sustainability will need to be resisted if they are to provide the
necessary deterrence.
It would be advisable for the new grouping, or the old Alliance, to
examine its logistic requirements and organisation in tandem with its
operational targets from the outset; starting at the industrial base, and
working forward to the front-line. In this way the ad-hoc approach that
NATO adopted from its inception could be avoided in future. The
changing patterns of threat, and the shape and size of forces to meet it,
offer an opportunity to provide the logistics that really do cater for the
force levels required. We started by listing logistic principles. The five
principles of administration: foresight, economy, flexibility, simplicity,
and co-operation still provide as good a set of points to march by when
planning the whole matter of logistics for the next few decades, whether
at the level of the Alliance's (or its replacement's) strategic sustain-
ability, or the operational and tactical organisations to cater for a
whole range of situations and force levels.
TAILPIECE
As this book was about to go to press. we have seen a stunning
display of power projection by the United States and its Allies in the
Gulf. The demonstration of readiness by the United States military,
based on years of meticulous planning, contrasted favourably with the
uncertain political direction by the State Department. The latter was
