130
The Lifeblood of War
system, they were still able to stockpile enough in the forward areas to
sustain themselves for thirty to forty-five days.
THE LESSONS
In the last months of the war the Communist forces were stronger
than ever both in numerical and logistic terms. In one ten day period in
July 1953, they expended 197,550 artillery rounds, and in the whole
month fired more shells than in any other month of the war. Even after
the huge losses in June and July, there were over a million well fed and
clothed Chinese and North Korean soldiers in Korea. Throughout the
war the Communist lines of communication had been bombed and
shelled, but the vast pool of human labour, deception, and subterfuge
had enabled enough supplies to arrive at the front to maintain their
forces and to build up reserves. They were considerably aided by the
static nature of the campaign in the last two years, a result of the United
Nations understandable unwillingness to pay the cost in blood and
treasure to mount a major offensive aimed at breakthrough and a war
of maneouvre. Had such an offensive taken place, most of the logistic
cards would have been held by the United Nations, because of their
command of the sea and air. Although, as alluded to earlier, the
inflexible United Nations logistic system, caused mainly by parsimony,
would have been a considerable hindrance.
Two Critical Periods
Logistically, the two critical periods in the war, from an American/
South Korean point of view, were: first, during the retreat to, and battle
Tor, the Pusan Perimeter; and second, during the advance to the Yalu.
In the first period, the situation was saved by the ability of the
Americans to react quickly, using their huge resources of air and sea
transport to move large quantities of supplies to Pusan. Regarding the
second with the advantage of hindsight, had MacArthur not insisted on
the Wonsan landing, thus both delaying Walker's advance north of
Seoul, and limiting it initially to one corps, it is conceivable that Eighth
Army would have been better balanced and able to withstand the
Chinese offensive. However, the operational concept was also at fault.
Instead of a broad-front advance to the Yalu to hold ground of no
significance whatsoever, it would have been better to remain concen-
trated, and thus poised to strike at the Chinese once they had showed
their hand. Indeed by his piecemeal deployment, MacArthur was
Unpreparedness and Speedy Recovery
131
inviting attack. However, this can only be being wise after the event.
What is clear is that had the occupation divisions in Japan been
properly equipped, trained, and logistically supported, they would
have been better able to hold, and even defeat, the invading North
Koreans in the opening phase of the War. Training is only one of the
ingredients that go to make up a state of readiness for war. Logistics
play as important a part, covering a wide range of requirements: the
avalability of modern weapons, equipment, and their state of repair;
readily available spares and efficient repair facilities; adequate stocks of
fuel and ammunition; a well tested supply system; movement resources
capable of operating over a wide variety of terrain, and able to lift the
tonnages needed to sustain the force engaged in battle. It takes longer
to provide all these than to train any army, and involves much
planning, foresight, and expense. Although the United States was
logistically unprepared for the Korean War, its enormous industrial
capacity, energy, and optimism, a legacy of the Second World War,
enabled it to close the gap. The gap would have been closed quicker had
the United States not spent the years between 1945 and 1950 preparing
to fight the last war rather than the next. However, she was not the first
to fall into this trap, and very likely not the last.
Use of the Sea Flank
The Korean War also demonstrated the advantages that accrue to
the side that commands the sea, and has the ability to project its power
ashore by amphibious operations, in a situation where there is a sea
flank, in this case two. Such power not only enables its possesser to
unlock stalemate, and return to manoeuvre warfare, but to use the
greater carrying capacity of ships to shorten land lines of communi-
cation.
Strangulation Rather Than Interdiction
The war in Korea showed yet again, for those who chose to see it,
that sitting astride the enemy's logistic windpipe with a strong force is a
surer way to guarantee denying his supply than bombing or shelling.
This was convincingly demonstrated at Inchon because the Americans
possessed the ability to manoeuvre round the enemy, through the
imaginative use of power projected from the sea. Where the conditions
for such operations do not exist, and in the search for other means, it is
tempting to fall back on the use of air power because it is less expensive,
