Preface
The naval and air force logistician will look in vain for any
substantial discussion on logistics in their operational environments.
Because, as Professor Freedman stated in his submission to the
Leverhulme Foundation, when seeking funds for this project,
[although] it is a practical art that must be mastered by navies and air
forces as well, there is something distinctive about logistics in land
warfare in that it requires territory to be held once taken, over an
extended period'. What is also distinctive, and therefore interesting,
about logistics in land warfare is that they are, to put it crudely, more
difficult. A good example is provided by any amphibious operation.
Shipping stores to the area off the beachhead is relatively simple in pure
transportation terms, although enemy action may make matters more
complicated. The real problems begin when supplies have to be landed,
and transported, sometimes hundreds of miles inland. Even without
enemy interference, the difficulties can be considerable. I hope this Is
illustrated in my short piece on naval logistics in Chapter 2 and the
relevant notes, and in Chapters 3, 4 and 8. Logistics in support of the air
battle have until recently been largely a naval or land problem. Fuel,
ordnance, and spares for air forces were transported on the water by
navies, and overland by courtesy of armies. Because it was in the
interests of soldiers and sailors to have air support, if they were wise,
they allocated the necessary movement resources to the airmen. But the
problem of delivery, including maintaining routes, and protection, was
largely naval or army. Although it might be argued that the air support
of, say, the British in Burma was an air force problem, they were in
effect acting as airborne truck drivers in response to an army
requirement, as indeed are helicopters and fixed-wing transports now.
The transportation of fuel, spares, and ordnance to the theatre of
operations was, and still is primarily a naval or army responsibility.
Even in the Falklands campaign, where the Royal Air Force played
such an important logistic role, it was secondary, and less complicated
than the part played by the other two services. Whether this will always
be so is addressed in the final chapter.
Finally, I have no reason to believe that logistics will ever have much
military sex-appeal, except to serious soldiers, but this book is written
in the hope that I am wrong.
List of Illustrations
Plates
Assyrian infantry and charioteers
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
Roman Army transport animals
Roman infantry crossing a pontoon bridge
Union logistic base. Virginia 1862
British steam road transport-South Africa 1899-1901
As old as antiquity, ox wagon
Near Mametz July 1916. Taking water pipes up to the
trench system by light railway
2.8
First World War. British Royal Engineers on the
Western Front building standard guage railway at
Hesdon
2.9
Smashed German trenches and dugouts near Boesinghe
2.10
and a British working party resting
Potize Farm 1917. Australian mule-drawn transport in
difficulties
2.11 On the Western Front. Manhandling an 18 pounder out
of the mud at Poelcappelle
2.12
The battle of Arras. An 18 pounder and its ammunition
SLOCK
2.13
British transport on the Western Front, without tracked
2.14
2.15
vehicles and unable to operate away from roads
Supply tank at Bucquoy, August 1918
Gun-carrying tank on the Western Front
The price of logistic unpreparedness. British gun teams
reduced from 6 horses to 4 to make up shortages in the
United States Army. Ammunition limbers crossing the
Canal du Nord 1918
7
