pg_0024.pdf:
V10322 (23) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association
www.vickersmg.org,
21
is using armoured cars or light tanks to attack and to delay
the divisional reconnaissance battalion, army tanks may
be used well forward. Reconnaissance cars or carriers must
then be made available to carry out the necessary recon-
naissance.
Road blocks covered by fire may form an effective tank
obstacle, especially if mined; and this may necessitate an
outflanking movement by the A.F.Vs. Reconnaissance cars or
carriers will then be of value in discovering a concealed approach
for the tanks. Enemy light tanks or armoured cars, even if
they are behind cover, will not be able to stop the tank, since
het weapons can pete ate its
enemy, rather than to out-manœuvre him.
An engineer detachment will often be allotted to the
divisional reconnaissance battalion when the latter is preceding
the advance under divisional control.
The leading infantry brigades will find their own advanced
guards, which will be preceded by carrier platoons. Careful
arrangements will be necessary for touch to be maintained
between leading brigades and the divisional reconnaissance
and the
battalion, and for information to be passed back quickly.
This will usually best be secured by wireless, and by motor
cyclist patrols under an officer.
If the division is preceded by an armoured division, the
divisional reconnaissance battalion will usually best be
employed in keeping touch between the armoured and infantry
divisions.
9. ADVANCE WITH THE DIVISIONAL RECON-
NAISSANCE BATTALION DECENTRALIZED TO
LEADING INFANTRY BRIGADES
(see also Sec. 4, para. 4.)
1. General
In mobile operations, and especially on extended fronts,
it has become increasingly necessary to fight in groups of
all arms. The decentralization of supporting arms is rendered
all the more necessary by the increasing domination of the
battlefield by A.F. Vs.
Whenever the front is a broad one-and, in principle, it
will usually be desirable to advance on a broad front-the
divisional reconnaissance battalion is best. employed under
leading brigade groups By this means, early information
will be most readily obtained by commanders who have first
to take action Again, if opposition is expected to be severe,
itme will probably be saved by decentralizing the recon-
naissance companies to the leading brigade groups, who will
V10322 (23) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

