pg_0033.pdf:
V10322 (32) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
30
The third infantry brigade group should be kept well back
and distributed across the divisional front. This will give
greater flexibility in meeting any threat from a flank.
Brigade groups should be administratively self-contained,
particularly with regard to their requirements of ammunition
and petrol.
This will enable them to hold out in tank-proof
localities, without being dependent on communications which
will be very vulnerable and which may well be cut. The
administrative units which have not been decentralized to
brigade groups should not accompany the division forward.
13. RECONNAISSANCE PARTIES
The speed and efficiency with which tactical and administra-
tive action is taken depend on adequate and early reconnais-
sance.
In the advance this can be largely ensured by the
correct positioning of reconnaissance parties in the order of
march. They must be far enough forward to complete their
tasks in time for appropriate action to be taken without
slowing down the advance; on the other hand, they should
be far enough back to ensure that they obtain information and
protection from the leading troops.
Reconnaissance during the advance is of three types :—
i. Reconnaissance for movement.-Emphasis has already
been laid on the importance of reconnaissance for the
reception of units
in concealment areas, even if
halting is considered unlikely, and of continuous
reconnaissance for debussing
areas. This recon-
naissance is the responsibility of unit guide parties,
and is considered in detail in Military Training
Pamphlet No. 47-" Movement by Road."
11.
Reconnaissance for fighting.—It is imperative that
brigade and unit reconnaissance parties of all arms
should be well forward, to reduce to a minimum the
time for deployment and the time before which attacks
These patie he us aliensive in the sap oupied.
the advanced guards and the main body.
Artillery and engineer reconnaissance
parties
should always accompany the foremost troops to
enable their technical reconnaissances to be put in
hand as early as possible.
In an advance, engineer reconnaissance will be of
particular importance, since upon it will often depend
the speed with which obstacles to movement can be
surmounted. All arms must therefore send back
V10322 (32) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

