pg_0014.pdf:
V10322 (13) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.
ickersmg.org
11
The dispersion necessitated by threat of air attack will
enhance the difficulties of control; and it will therefore
be necessary to group troops for control of movement. The
allotment of troops to leading brigades will largely depend on
the object of the division, and on which of the general methods
of advance described in the last paragraph has been selected.
It must, however, be borne in mind, when planning, that
troops which have been decentralized to assist the advance
may later have to be centralized for an attack against organized
resistance. Army tanks, artillery, etc., should therefore be
so placed as to facilitate this reorganization, and tank and
artillery commanders should keep in touch with those of their
units which have been decentralized.
The order of march will depend upon the object, and the
degree of opposition expected. To enable a rapid and hard-
hitting advance to be made, high priority should be given to
mobile troops; and, if considerable opposition is expected
some field artillery must be well forward to support them. On
the other hand, if the role of the division is to occupy a defen-
sive position, most of the infantry and some machine guns
must be quickly available.
Certain factors must be considered before deciding whether
to employ army tanks forward in the advance. Their punch,
the rapidity with which they can go into action, and their
ability to neutralize enemy A.F. Vs., make them of the greatest
value. On the other hand, their speed is low and their radius
of action limited when compared with the wheeled and tracked
vehicles of the division. For a long advance in which no
serious opposition is expected, it may be considered preferable
to go ahead of the tanks rather than to reduce speed in order
to have them well forward.
Gaps should be left in the order of march, so that dangerous
congestion is not caused by the closing up of troops in rear.
If the gap is too small, the troops behind will blunder into
battle before their commander has had time to make his plan.
If, on the other hand, the gap is too large, the troops will not
be available when needed. The size of the gap will be decided
as the result of an appreciation as to when the various parts
of the division will be needed. Gaps should be considered in
terms of time and not of space, since they will vary with the
speed of units and with the nature of the country.
6. Allocation of mechanical transport
An infantry division may be allotted three, two, or one
troop-carrying companies for the conveyance of the un-
mechanized portions of the division-the nine infantry
V10322 (13) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

