pg_0017.pdf:
V10322 (16) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
14
9. Administrative arrangements
The ability of the division to carry out the higher com.
mander's intention effectively and speedily, and to profit fully
from any tactical advantage gained, will depend largely on
administrative foresight and planning. The senior adminis-
trative staff officer should be at advanced divisional head-
quarters in order that he may be given the commander's
outline plan as soon as it has been made, and, subsequently,
any modifications thereto.
Administrative transport most likely to be needed early in
an advance will be that carrying ammunition, petrol, or
bridging equipment. Shortage of road space is likely to limit
the number of administrative vehicles which can be moved
well forward in the column. The distance to be covered and
the degree of opposition expected-or the presence of obstacles
-will decide the order of priority; and this decision must be
made by the commander after appreciating these various
factors. It will frequently happen that considerable demands
for ammunition, petrol, or bridging equipment will have to
be met in the forward areas before an occasion arises for the
employment of the infantry of the reserve brigade.
The next consideration will be the desirability of relieving
the forward troops of unnecessary administrative vehicles
and responsibilities which may hamper them in battle.
When it is calculated that either petrol or ammunition will
be required in addition to the amounts carried by units, it
must be decided how these are to be provided. Alternatives
are :-
i. To provide detachments from the divisional R.A.S.C. to
brigade groups; or,
ii. to keep petrol and ammunition companies under
central control, and so placed in the order of march
that they can move forward when wanted.
The first method has the advantage of speeding up refuel-
ling and refilling; and, for ammunition, may lead to economy
of force and to ease of control, since the efficacy of artillery and
mortars will often depend on the weight of shell dropped on
the enemy rather than on the number of weapons employed.
The addition of a comparatively few ammunition lorries may
well effect economy in road space by reducing the number
of weapons that must be moved well forward.
These ad-
vantages have, however, to be weighed against the increased
administrative responsibilities which are thereby placed on
infantry brigade groups. The second method has the ad-
vantage of affording to forward brigades the maximum relief
from administrative airangements; and, although it nay
V10322 (16) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

