pg_0042.pdf:
V10322 (41) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
39
19. ENGINEERS
1. General
They may be cratered, blocked, mined, and liberally provided
with booby traps; the crossings over or under obstacles are
likely to be demolished; blocks and demolitions may be
contaminated with blister gas; and, finally, the roads will
be bombed. The speed of the advance will then depend
very largely on the foresight of the divisional commander
and his C.R.E.; on the correct positioning of the divisional
engineers and their limited equipment, and their concentration
on one or two main routes as ordered; and on the drive
and determination to get forward displayed by junior officers
of all arms.
2. Engineer reconnaissance
In any advance in hostile territory, whatever the nature
of the country, the speed of the advance will often depend
on the ability of the engineers to keep communications open.
' Engineer reconnaissance parties must, therefore, accompany
the foremost troops on each route forward. (See also Sec. 13.)
3. Control
Owing to the limited resources available, centralized control
of the divisional engineers is usually essential, the forward
field companies being placed in support of the leading brigades
and not under their command. As an exception, detachments
may be placed under command of the leading troops for such
tasks as the destruction of mine-fields and booby traps.
The solution of the many engineering problems in the
advance does not, however, lie in distributing detachments
of engineers throughout the columns, since it is not possible
to distribute their tools particularly power tools and equip-
ment on this basis. Apart from any detachments with the
leading troops, each of which should never be less than one
sub-section, and the reconnaissance parties, the section is the
smallest sub-unit which can usefully be employed.
4. Obstacles
In making his plan, the C.R.E. must foresee the possibility
of delayed action demolitions; and he should credit the enemy
with the destruction of bridges on the line of advance.
Road craters can best be dealt with by energetic action on
the part of the troops on the spot. Bridging equipment will
rarely be available, and its use would anyhow be slow; and,
V10322 (41) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

