pg_0011.pdf:
V10322 (10) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
difficulties of map reading, and generaily tend to confusion
and loss of control. The best solution will often be to select
for the leading brigades two good through-roads well separated
from one another, leaving any intervening routes for diversions
and deployment.
If only two roads are available, it will usually be preferable
to move on a two brigade front, rather than on a one brigade
front in two columns.
6. Method of movement
Speed in the advance is of primary importance as a means
of gaining and retaining the initiative. If mechanical
transport is available for carrying infantry formations, the
time spent on the march can generally be reduced.
Considerations affecting the use of mechanical transport
will be the number of roads available, the distance which
has to be covered, the nature of the
opposition, and
whether it is likely to be encountered early or late in the
march.
A combination of marching and of movement by
mechanical transport can often be used. A most careful
calculation of transport available, and of time and space, is
necessary to discover the most suitable type of movement
to be adopted. Allowance must always be made for the
time required for embussing, debussing, and deploying.
In any advance, infantry must always be prepared to
march long distances and to fight at the end of them.
1. THE DIVISIONAL PLAN
1. The divisional object
The divisional commander must be given by his higher
commander the object of the advance. There must be
no doubt in the mind of the divisional commander about
his object, and it is essential that he should think out what
is likely to be entailed in the attainment of it. All the
implications must be considered in full, and the advance
examined throughout its likely course.
Only in this way
will a proper distribution of the forces be achieved and the
means be at hand to meet situations as they arise.
It is equally essential that the divisional commander
should make his object clear to his subordinates, so that,
without reference to him, they may use every situation to
further the advance in the way he desires. If communica-
tions break down, the subordinate commanders must use
their initiative in
carrying out and developing the cora-
mander's intentions.
V10322 (10) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

