pg_0025.pdf:
V10322 (24) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
22
then be in the best position to apply the additional support
which they will inevitably require.
Further, the danger of the
enemy intervening between advanced mobile elements and
the bulk of the force will thereby be reduced.
Behind the reconnaissance element, each column will be
preceded by its own advanced guard.
The primary function
of these column advanced guards is to deploy rapidly to
engage minor opposition located
by the reconnaissance
clements, thus obviating the necessity for the deployment
of the main bodies. At the same time, a small detachment
must move on every road leading forward for the protection
of the remainder of the division.
The fact that brigade groups are self-contained and are
covered by their own reconnaissance screens will allow them
to push forward regardless of the progress of formations on
their flanks. When stronger opposition is encountered, the
divisional commander will reinforce whichever forward
brigade is making the better progress.
2. The divisional reconnaissance battalion
The primary role of the reconnaissance companies is to
gain information for the column advanced guards, though
this does not in any way absolve them from driving in any
advanced elements of the enemy with which they can deal
unaided.
If, as is probable, the division is advancing on a two brigade
front, the battalionless one company-may be allotted to
one infantry brigade and one company to the other brigade,
the stronger reconnaissance element being given to the
prigade with the better prospects of advancing rapidly. The
single reconnaissance company may then require an allotment
of mortars and anti-tank weapons from the brigade group
under which it is operating.
Companies which have been
decentralized to infantry brigade groups will not be further
decentralized to column advanced guards; nor will they be
further reinforced by supporting arms, since they will be
closely supported by the strong column advanced guards.
The method of movement will be similar to that described
in the last section. Bounds, report lines, and axes of advance
will be detailed by brigade headquarters, and all information
will be passed direct to brigade and advanced guard head-
quarters.
3. Column advanced guards
It is essential that the column advanced guards should be
strong forces of all arms. When the enemy is opposing the
advance with detachments of all arms, and still stiffer oppo-
sition is expected, army tanks should, if available, be allotted
V10322 (24) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

