pg_0009.pdf:
V10322 (8) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
6
Part II.-PLANNING THE ADVANCE
3. CONSIDERATIONS WHICH WILL AFFECT THE
PLAN FOR AN ADVANCE
1. Orders by the higher commander
These have been discussed in Sec. 2, above.
2. Nature of opposition
The resources known to be at the disposal of the enemy, as
well as his general methods, morale, and tactics, must be
taken into account in planning an advance.
A threat of enemy armoured formations will probably make
it necessary to allot strong forces of A.F.Vs. and anti-tank
artillery well forward. Such a threat will, again, be a determin-
ing factor in the bounds allotted and in the handling of the
administrative echelons of the division.
The scale of air attack anticipated will influence the degree
of dispersion laid down, as well as the handling of the anti-
aircraft artillery.
Against an enemy force known to be deficient in A.F.Vs.,
more freedom can be given to light mobile elements, such as
the divisional reconnaissance battalion and carrier platoons.
3. Co-operation of our own troops
The strength and nature of the co-operating troops are
important factors in planning an advance.
If an armoured division is leading, the importance of keeping
close up to it will over-ride most other considerations.
An
armoured division may not be able to search all ground in
detail, and the infantry division will therefore remain respon-
sible for its own local protection. But this responsibility
must not be allowed to retard the advance. Arrangements
should be concentrated, in the first place, on securing the main
lines of advance for the division. Bodies of troops should be
specially detailed for the task of searching intervening areas
if it is suspected that active parties of enemy are still at large
in them.
If the division is advancing en cadre, some flank protection
is automatically provided; but, if advancing with one or both
flanks uncovered, arrangements must be made for flank pro-
tection. The provision of
this protection will, however,
divert troops from the main object, which is to advance.
Troops so employed must, therefore, be kept down to a
minimum.
The nature and strength of the air support which may be
forthcoming will be a most important consideration in framing
V10322 (8) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

