pg_0029.pdf:
V10322 (28) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
26
possible to alter the order of march as the tactical
situation demands.
If there is little or no opposition, the leading troops
will push on as fast as possible, the main bodies
regulating their pace accordingly and moving
continuously.
Reconnaissance for concealment and deployment
areas must be continuous, so that brigades can be
moved off the road and, if necessary, deployed
without delay.
ii. The advance with infantry marching.-The problems of
moving the unmechanized portion of leading infantry
brigades by march route, and in suitable tactical
formation,
are considerable. Except over very
limited distances, it is not practicable to move
infantry by march route closely followed by its
transport, since mechanical transport cannot move
for long at foot pace.
The basis of the movement will be the marching
infantry and their hourly halt, and this will determine
the rate of advance of the mobile force and column
advanced guards:
If two
through-roads are available, the best
method of movement will be two infantry battalions
on one route, and the third battalion, followed by the
supporting arms, on the other. If only one road is
available, the commander must realize that any gap
which is large enough for an appreciable quantity
of mechanical transport imposes a considerable
delay on the infantry in rear.
He must, therefore,
decide whether he requires all three battalions up,
or whether to have two up followed by certain
supporting arms. If he decides to have one
battalion in rear, the transport in the gap must be
the minimum
necessary for getting the forward
units into action, the balance moving behind the
third battalion.
When the order to deploy is given, marching
infantry must clear the road to leave room for
mechanical transport to be rushed forward.
Control of movement of the leading brigade groups will
normally be decentralized to the brigade commanders, whereas
that of the reserve brigade and unallotted divisional troops
will be exercised by divisional headquarters.
V10322 (28) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

