pg_0008.pdf:
V10322 (7) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
5
are properly balanced and will be at hand for the various
tasks which are likely to confront them. Again, the position
of commanders and staffs in the various phases of an advance
will have far-reaching effects upon the rapidity with which
decisions can be taken. The technique of movement must be
clearly understood by all taking part.
2. PLAN OF HIGHER COMMANDER
Before a divisional commander can make a plan for an
advance, the higher commander must give him all available
information of the tactical situation, and will normally issue
instructions on the following :-
i. The object of the higher commander. This is of supreme
importance, and must explain clearly his intentions,
since these influence the whole plan.
If it is the intention of the higher commander to
take the offensive, every opportunity must be seized
to get forward quickly in order to attack the enemy.
This intention will necessitate bold and determined
action, and will justify the taking of exceptional risks.
In deciding the order of march, offensive arms such
as artillery and A.F. Vs. will be required well forward.
If, on the other hand, the higher commander orders
an advance with the intention of standing on the
defensive on the final objective, a larger proportion of
protective weapons- such as machine guns and anti•
tank guns—-may be well forward in the columns.
In either circumstance, the primary role of the
leading troops remains the same, which is to advance
boldly and rapidly to seize the objectives laid down.
ii. Objective of the division, and such intermediate bounds
and report lines as are necessary for co-ordination :
these should be as few as possible.
iii. General direction and boundaries-unless these are
covered by the object.
iv. Zero hour for the advance of the division.
v. Nature of support allotted--including A.F. Vs., artillery,
and R.A.F
vi. Method of movement-by march or bus; limitations of
movement (both the distance troops may be carried
in lorries. and the type of movement, i.e., either by
day, or by night, or continuous) ; traffic control;
co-ordination of timings with flank formations.
vii. Details of the higher administrative plan.
V10322 (7) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

