pg_0026.pdf:
V10322 (25) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
23
to the advanced guards; and infantry and artillery must
then work in co-operation with the tanks.
Careful arrangements must be made for the command of
the advanced guard. Rifle company and equivalent com-
manders are not provided with the machinery to command
mixed forces: it will therefore usually be desirable to detail
an infantry battalion commander, together with his normal
headquarters.
If each leading brigade has a battalion of army tanks,
one squadron might be sub-allotted to each advanced guard.
Alternatively, when the brigade is advancing on one road,
the army tank battalion, reinforced with other arms, might
form the brigade advanced guard, which would then be
commanded by the tank battalion commander.
When army tanks are employed with the advanced guard,
it is particularly important that the infantry brigadier should
place himself well forward so that he can take command
quickly and make a brigade plan.
The commander of the
tank battalion should accompany him.
Army tanks will normally move between the divisional
reconnaissance battalion and the remainder of the advanced
guard, where they will be well placed to support the former
and to receive support from the latter. Arrangements must
be made to keep touch between the divisional reconnaissance
battalion and individual tank squadrons. Reconnaissance
cars of the divisional reconnaissance battalion, or a portion
of a carrier platoon, are best fitted for this task.
4. The remainder of the division
The movement of the remainder of the division is discussed
in Secs. 10 and 11.
5. Action on meeting opposition
As the advanced guard commander has only a compara-
tively weak reconnaissance screen in front of him, he must not
allow himself to be committed by that screen; but must
use the information obtained by it as a basis for a plan of
attack, which, in turn, will enable the brigade commander
to Lane a strong attack tale best proacas of success
commander may decide to send them forward to support
the divisional reconnaissance battalion rather than deploy
his infantry: the decision depends on his information about
the enemy and the nature of the ground. If tanks are
employed, infantry must deploy and follow the tanks in
readiness to mop up; but the tanks must not delay their
attack for infantry support. Carriers should cover the move
forward of the leading infantry. (See Fig. overleaf.)
V10322 (25) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

