pg_0012.pdf:
V10322 (11) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
9
%. Objective, bounds, and report lines
A final objective will be laid down to ensure control and
co-ordination in accordance with the plan of the higher
commander.
The advance may be further controlled by detailing bounds
and report lines. Formations will remain on bounds until
ordered to go forward again; but they will not halt on
report lines even if they are ahead of the troops on their
flanks. Since halting on bounds will have a delaying effect,
bounds will be used sparingly. The divisional commander
can at any time stop formations between bounds if he con-
siders that they may become dangerously isolated.
The only regulation of movement which will be necessary,
in addition to laying down the final objective, bounds, and
report lines, will be an order to the leading troops to cross the
starting line at a fixed time.
3. General direction and boundaries
The divisional commander must lay down the general
direction of the advance either by boundaries to the right
and left of his formations, should the division be en cadre, or
by laying down an axis of advance on which columns.
generally brigades-will deploy if the division is not en
cadre. It will often be convenient to use the outer limits of
the bounds and report lines to denote the boundaries of the
advance when the division is not en cadre.
Touch will be gained automatically between formations
and units on bounds and report lines; but the advance
should not be delayed for this purpose.
4. Method of conducting the advance
In principle, the advance should be carried out on a broad
front to afford room for manœuvre and scope for infiltration.
It is important that it should be so organized that the division
does not blunder into battle, but is disposed to carry out
the object of the commander.
There are two general methods on which. the advance can
be organized, each of which is capable of several variations :
i. The division may advance preceded by a force
operating directly under the divisional commander ;
or,
ii. the division may advance preceded by mobile troops
and advanced guards-both under the controi of
the leading brigades.
V10322 (11) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

