pg_0023.pdf:
V10322 (22) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
20
When an army cank brigade is used in an independent role,
it will require air reconnaissance and air support. It should
therefore be provided with a R.A F. tender and with a tentacle.
S. THE DIVISIONAL RECONNAISSANCE
BATTALION UNDER DIVISIONAL CONTROL
(see also Sec. 4, para. 4.)
It may sometimes be desirable to employ the divisional
reconnaissance battalion ahead of the division, retaining
it under divisional control. The advantage of employing it as
a mobile force under a single commander is that it can deploy
rapidly and can manœuvre; hence, against light opposition,
it may be able to promote a speedy advance, enabling the
remainder of the division to move unchecked
When so employed, the divisional reconnaissance battalion
will move from one tactical feature to another, these features
being referred to in orders as " Report Lines" unless there
is the dennite intention of halting on them, in which case they
will be detailed as " Bounds." (See Sec. 4, para. 2.) The more
open the country, and the more distant the enemy, the greater
the distance between report lines. In open country, there
should be a gap of at least one hour between the tail of the
reconnaissance battalion and the leading infantry. Divisional
headquarters will detail an axis of advance along which the
headquarters of the force will move, and te which all messages
will be sent.
The method of advancing by night will be similar, except
that the distance between bounds and report lines is likely
to be less, and the rate of movement slower.
When the divisional reconnaissance battalion is used as a
whole directly under the orders of division, it is sometimes
desirable to place army tanks under its command. The
decision will largely depend on the nature of opposition ex-
pected. The enemy may attempt to delay the advance with
small mobile rear guards or detachments operating at a con-
siderable distance from his main body. The assistance of army
tanks will enable the divisional reconnaissance battalion
quickly to brush aside such minor opposition, and to assert a
moral superiority over the enemy. To meet a situation of this
nature, a squadron of army tanks may be placed under the
command of the divisional reconnaissance battalion, troops
being
decentralized to reconnaissance companies.
The
advantages to be gained from this decentralization of army
tanks below the squadron, which in other circumstances would
be most unusual, will in these circumstances often outweigh the
disadvantages of dissipating the tank strength. If the enemy
V10322 (22) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

