pg_0045.pdf:
V10322 (44) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
42
The leading troops must be prepared to take risks in order
to maintain contact with the enemy, and must on no account
allow the presence of persistent gas to delay them. Whenever
possible, the troops following in rear should be diverted.
Since gas spray is very effective against unprotected troops
on the march, a high degree of anti-gas discipline must be
maintained.
Failing this, casualties may be heavy.
Armoured and mechanized troops have little to fear from
contaminated ground.
Part V.-ADMINISTRATION
23. ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS (see
also
Sec. 4, para. 9.)
1. General
The speed with which events will develop, and the necessity
for being able to profit fully from any tactical advantage gained,
make careful administrative planning essential. The probable
course of events must be examined, and preparations must be
made to ensure that, as far as can be foreseen, any eventu-
ality can be met.
2. Traffic control
The importance of the traffic control organization has already
been emphasized. Special control, under a staff officer, must
be established to deal with congestion at points liable to air
attack, particularly where deviations will be difficult.
Ordnance recovery vehicles will be needed for breakdowns ;
and working parties and the necessary road mending material
inay have to be provided
Traffic control will be essential not only at each temporary
bridge and at its immediate approach and exit, but also to
feed traffic up it from a concealment area or areas some
distance short of the bridge.
Down traffic will constitute a problem until the main part
of the forward move is completed. Concealed parks must be
established forward under divisional control to hold vehicles
until they can be worked back.
Finally, the whole problem will be assisted if both com-
manders and staffs have an accurate appreciation of what their
various units can, and cannot, be expected to do in terms of
time and space.
V10322 (44) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

