pg_0030.pdf:
V10322 (29) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
27
11. THE ADVANCE OF THE REMAINDER OF
THE DIVISION
1. Composition
The remainder of the division comprises the division and
attached troops; less the leading infantry brigade groups,
and the mobile force and units allotted to it.
When the division is preceded by a mobile force under its
own commander, units allotted to this force will be found
by the reserve infantry brigade group and divisional troops.
2. Order of march
The order of march of the reserve infantry brigade and
unallotted divisional troops will generally be decided by
divisional headquarters. This arrangement will facilitate the
rapid centralization of supporting arms-such as army tanks
and artillery-and will give the divisional commander greater
control over his division.
If, for instance, the advance is a short one and is to be
followed by an attack against organized defence, the unallotted
army tanks might be well forward on one route, and the
artillery and ammunition well forward on the other. Alterna-
tively, bridging resources or the divisional petrol company
may be needed early.
3. Method of movement
The best method of advance will usually be with the reserve
infantry brigade on one route behind one of the leading
brigades, and the unallotted divisional troops on another route
behind the other leading brigade.
The transport of the reserve brigade together with its
supporting armsand the marching infantry should, if
possible, be moved on separate roads, for the comfort of both.
There will normally be sufficient time for the two to join up
before the troops are required for action.
The method of movement of the remainder of the division
will be similar to that of the leading infantry brigades, except
that bounds will be larger, and units will remain in " hides
for longer periods.
Movement between "hides " should be
as rapid as possible.
Every endeavour should be made to give a separate route
to army tanks which have been retained under divisional con-
trol. Alternatively, they should be given a block timing to
allow them to run straight through from one " hide" to the
next, or to the area from which the attack will be staged.
V10322 (29) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

