pg_0037.pdf:
V10322 (36) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
34
16. ARMY TANKS (see also Sec. 4, para. 5,
and Sec. 7.)
1. General
Since an army tank brigade has no reconnoitring com-
ponent, the divisional reconnaissance battalion, or a part of
it, must work with any army tanks which lead the advance.
Army tanks develop their maximum offensive power only
when employed in large numbers. If, therefore, there is likeli-
hood of encountering enemy A.F.Vs. in any strength, or if
a considerable degree of resistance may have to be overcome,
army tanks should not be decentralized below the squadron.
The presence of even a troop of army tanks under its command
may, however, enable a company of the divisional recon-
naissance battalion rapidly to overcome light resistance which
might otherwise have delayed the advance. These conflicting
considerations must be balanced.
2. Tasks
An army tank brigade may be used to seize a tactical feature
and deny it to the enemy, or to seek out and neutralize an
enemy armoured force.
Army tank battalions may be decentralized to the leading
infantry brigades, and may then form the column advanced
guards.
A squadron of army tanks may be decentralized to the
divisional reconnaissance battalion, and troops will probably
be further decentralized to companies.
Alternatively,
squadrons of army tanks may be allotted to the column
advanced guards by leading infantry brigades.
Army tanks have, therefore, a wide variety of tasks in the
advance. Their units and sub-units may have other arms
under command, or they may be under command of other
arms. The closest co-operation with the other arms is there-
fore essential, and particularly with the divisional recon-
naissance battalion.
3. Method of movement
Army tanks, if held well forward, will normally move in
the gap between the reconnaissance battalion and the advanced
guards, irrespective of whether they are under centralized
control or decentralized to leading brigades.
Tanks which are moving farther back under divisional
control should, if possible, be given a separate route, or,
alternatively, a block timing.
V10322 (36) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

