pg_0015.pdf:
V10322 (14) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
12
battalions oi the three brigade groups. Each troop-carrying
company can lift the marching personnel of one infantry
brigade.
In pianning to make the best use of the mechanical transport
available, simplicity is the secret of success :—
i. Three troop-carrying companies availuble.-Each infantry
brigade will have its own company, and the division
will therefore be completely
mechanized.
Full
advantage must be taken of this to push forward as
rapidly as possible, and so release the transport
early for other formations.
It will be possible-and usually advisable-to keep
the third brigade well back, since its mobility will
enable it to move rapidly forward when needed.
ii. Two troop-carrying companies available.—It will be
preferable to allot each of the forward infantry
brigade groups one troop-carrying company for the
complete day's march, the third brigade being given
a lift forward the following day. Any other solution
will complicate the move, and will necessitate moving
a large number of bulky vehicles back against the
stream of forward traffic.
An exception will be when it is imperative to move
the third brigade group up to the same level as the
leading brigades before daybreak the following day—
for example, when the division is moving forward
to occupy rapidly a defensive position. Recourse
will then have to be made to ferrying : this entails
careful co-ordination between the transport moving
back and the troops marching forward to meet it.
iii. One troop-carrying company available.--A detached
force sent forward to seize a tactical feature will
have first claim on the mechanical transport, since
the detachment must be completely mechanized.
In deciding on any other allotment, it will be essential
to keep the plan as simple as possible.
The troop-
carrying company should not be split if a split can
be avoided.
7. Air support
Air support for the advance must be considered under two
heads :-
i. Air reconnaissance.
ii. Army air support
V10322 (14) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

