pg_0032.pdf:
V10322 (31) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
29
The bulk of the anti-tank artillery, and a large proportion
of the field artillery, will move well forward in the columns.
The guns will then be in position within the tank-proof
localities by daybreak.
Strong detachments of engineers
will also move well forward, since the erection of road blocks
and of other rapidly improvised obstacles should be put in
hand as soon as formations reach their objectives for the
night's march. Anti-tank mines will also be carried well
forward. They will be laid by infantry, but will not normally
be dug in, as they will be recovered before the march is
resumed.
On arrival within tank-proof localities, formations will
detail covering forces to occupy defensive positions, to enable
the remainder to obtain some rest.
4. Movement by day
It may sometimes be essential for an infantry division, un-
supported by tanks, to advance by day within striking distance
of enemy armoured units. To protect such a move, the
divisional reconnaissance battalion-reinforced with some anti-
tank artillery-will be sent well ahead under divisional con-
trol. The unit must be handled with the greatest boldness,
its function being to find the enemy and to keep in touch
with his subsequent movements.
This reconnaissance screen will be followed by an advanced
guard, which might comprise anti-tank artillery, engineers,
motorised infantry, and infantry carriers, whose object is to
slow up the enemy in order to give the main body time to
occupy tank-proot localities farther back.
If good tank obstacles exist, the remainder of the division
will advance on a wide front in rapid bounds from one obstacle
to another. As soon as the commander decides that he has a
reasonable chance of reaching the next tank obstacle un-
molested, he will move as fast as possible, relying for protection
on speed of movement. The leading brigades will have detach-
ments on all the roads, and the foremost troops must be strong
in artillery and engineers to enable them rapidly to take up
anti-tank dispositions.
If, however, suitable tank obstacles do not exist, the
leading brigades will be forced to advance in battalion groups
of all arms, strong in artillery, engineers, and anti-tank
devices. On the receipt of warning of the approach of enemy
armoured forces, these groups will block all roads if necessary
Dy means of their own vehicles and will then occupy the
best available tank-proof areas in their immediate vicinity,
from which they will take the most aggressive action against
any enemy A.F.Vs. which infiltrate into their area.
V10322 (31) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

