pg_0010.pdf:
V10322 (9) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
7
the plan. The amount of information which may reasonably
be expected from air reconnaissance, and the nature of air
support, will affect the choice of objectives, the allotment of
troops, and the arrangements for the advance. •
4. Ground
A careful study of the ground should be made from the
map, from air photographs, and—as far as is practicable-
from view points. If the ground is favourable, full use must
be made of A.F.Vs., cross-country vehicles, and mechanized
troops. In rocky, mountainous country, or in thick woods,
it may be necessary to detail infantry as the leading troops.
These should be supported by some A.F.Vs., provided a
track or road is available.
The tactical features, and obstacles which can be foreseen,
will affect the choice of objectives and bounds, and the allot-
ment of troops. Areas providing extensive cover will be
suitable bounds for the main bodies. Woods and villages
are, however, very liable to be bombed unless so numerous
or so extensive that they present an unsatisfactory target.
It will usually be better to rely on dispersion rather than
on the concealment afforded by isolated areas of cover.
5. Roads
The number and nature of roads available will often be a
deciding factor in the dispositions of a division in the advance.
To ensure early information of the extent and strength of
the enemy's position, the advance should be conducted on
as wide a front as possible.
In allotting routes, the divisional commander must weigh
up the advantages and disadvantages of using all available
roads.
The greater the number of roads used, the smaller
will be the road space on each, the more compact the division,
and the speedier the move.
On the other hand, the use of
only a few of the available routes will give greater flexibility
by providing facilities for diversions, alterations in the order
- of march, and deployment; and it will also simplify control.
Furthermore, if the enemy is in a position seriously to hinder
the advance by ground or air action against the roads, the
engineer resources will seldom permit of more than two roads
being opened up and kept open. (See also Sec. 4, para. 8.)
The ideal, perhaps, is for the division to advance on a two
brigade front, each brigade having two main roads. In
practice, however, four through-roads are not likely to be
available without resort to minor roads and tracks, the use
of which will complicate the issue of orders, increase the
V10322 (9) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

