pg_0018.pdf:
V10322 (17) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
15
delay rapid delivery forward, will generally be used when
administrative requirements are considerable.
Bridging equipment is unwieldy, comprises different types
which are often not interchangeable, and is carried only in very
limited quantities within the division. In principle it should,
therefore, be kept well back under centralized control until
required.
On the other hand, the speed of the advance and
the consequent success of the operation may depend on the
rapidity with which obstacles can be crossed; and bridging
equipment may, therefore, have to be given a high priority.
The next consideration will be to ensure the fullest flow of
traffic over the roads allotted. For a move of any length, a
trathc control organization will be required. Its object will be
two-fold: to keep the commander continuously informed of
the progress of the move, and so enable him to modify his plan
to meet changes in the tactical situation; and to keep in touch
with the state of the roads and with the effects of enemy air
attack, so that traffic which has become blocked can be
diverted with the least possible delay. Defiles likely to be
attacked must be foreseen, and arrangements made for their
protection and to ensure that traffic can be rapidly diverted
in emergency.
Administrative arrangements are discussed in greater
detail in Part V.
10. Command and control
In the advance, commanders of groups should be given full
scope to handle their resources with boldness and enterprise
within the framework of the commander's plan for the division
as a whole; but it must be possible to centralize control of
the divisional resources at short notice if need arises.
The points which have already been discussed in this
section will secure some degree of control, since they will
for the most part be included in the preliminary orders for the
advance. Axes for the movement of subordinate headquarters
will usually be laid down. In addition, control will be exercised
in two main ways :—-
i. By communications.
ii. By intelligent anticipation of the times and places at
which commanders and staffs are likely to be required
to take action.
1. During mobile operations, the most appropriate means of
communication are wireless, despatch riders, and motor contact
officers. Their value directly depends on the amount of
training which they—and those who use them-have been
given.
V10322 (17) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

