pg_0039.pdf:
V10322 (38) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
35
within the framework of the corps commander's plai,
ask for certain general targets to be attacked, and state the
objects to be gained by attacking them, and the order of
priority he attaches to them. These demands should be made
to corps headquarters and not direct to the A.A.S.C.
The
A. A.S.C. will then be in a position intelligently to interpret
the demands received from reconnaissance aircraft or from
tentacles, and to apply the support to give full effect to the
wishes of the commander immediately concerned.
The most effective method of delaying the advance of a
rapidly moving enemy is to block his lines of approach by
bombing. But, since such blocks may later delay the advance
of our own troops, attacks of this nature should only be made
deep into enemy territory and on a carefully considered plan.
Army air support will be most effective in the form of
intense bombardment delivered at short notice against centres
of resistance holding up the advance.
This support may be
called for by tentacles with the leading formations, or by
reconnaissance aircraft.
In the initial stages of the battle, selection of targets will
generally be made on reports received from tactical recon-
naissance aircraft. To reduce the time lag when support is
being demanded through tentacles, there must be direct
communication between the tentacle and the subordinate
commander on the ground who actually locates the target
to be attacked. For this purpose, an armoured O.P. from
the reserve field regiment might be allotted to the recon-
naissance battalion, to work back to a rear link located
alongside the tentacle allotted to a leading brigade.
When an operation vital to the success of the advance
e.g., the construction of a bridge, or the passage of a defile
-is being subjected to intensive air attack, the higher com-
mander may call upon the air force to endeavour to secure local
air superiority throughout the critical period.
18. ARTILLERY
1. Field artillery
All field artillery
units allotted for the support of the
forward troops should be placed under their command.
When it is decided to reinforce the divisional reconnaissance
battalion, the width of front will normally necessitate a troop
moving with each reconnaissance company.
A complete battery will usually be allotted to each column
advanced guard, to ensure continuous support once contact
has been gained. The battery commander will accompany
the advanced guard commander.
V10322 (38) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

