pg_0044.pdf:
V10322 (43) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
41
vulnerable on the move and have very poor cross-country
obility. On the other hand, their good road mobility
lows them to be brought up quickly while the forward troops
are debussing and deploying. The division will, therefore,
normally advance with the machine gun battalion well back
under centralized control. If, however, the division is likely
to be on the defensive immediately after the advance, leading
brigades may be allotted one or more machine gun companies.
Some M.M.Gs. will be of value to a mobile force sent ahead
to seize and hold a feature, particularly when the ground has
to be held for some hours or at night. A company is the
smallest sub-unit which should be so employed.
It is essential that M.M.G. reconnaissance parties should
move well forward in the advance, whether or not the early
employment of the M.M.Gs. is anticipated, since arrangements
must be made in daylight for the guns to fire on fixed lines at
night.
22. CHEMICAL WARFARE
1. Offensive use of gas
In an advance, gas will generally be most effective if used
from the air against enemy communications well ahead of
our own troops. Opportunities of spraying enemy marching
columns may also occur.
The use of gas from ground weapons will be restricted to
occasional harassing fire at long ranges against enemy rear
guards. Mustard may be used in very hot weather, when its
persistence will be less and its effect on the enemy more severe.
Chemical warfare troops will not normally be allotted to
a division for an advance unless there is a probability of a
considerable attack at the far end.
When allotted, they
should move well back under divisional control. If it is then
anticipated that the enemy will make a stand, chemical
warfare reconnaissance parties should move farther forward
to fix their targets in daylight, and to select suitable firing
positions and R.Vs.
Since it will rarely be possible to carry out a full survey,
chemical warfare troop: will be able to come into action only
when accurate one inch to one mile maps-or, better still,
1/25,000 maps or air photographs-are available:
2. Use of gas by the enemy
Since gas is a delaying agent, a retreating enemy may be
expected to make extensive use of blister gas to contaminate
communications, obstacles, demolitions, and bridging sites.
When his withdrawal is deliberately planned,
, he may also
contaminate considerable areas of ground, particularly defiles.
V10322 (43) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

