pg_0019.pdf:
V10322 (18) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
16
li. Control in an advance makes intensive demands upon
the energy of commanders and staffs. Headquarters should
be well forward: even so, commanders and their advisers
should not be tied to their headquarters. Forethought, and
a thorough consideration of the operation right up to the
final objective, will probably disclose occasions on which a
commander is likely to require the commanders of supporting
arms and his staif.
Though the exact time and place of such
rendezvous can seldom be laid down beforehand, it should be
made clear that certain commanders are likely to be required
when the leading troops are approaching some obstacle or
other tactical feature. The commanders concerned should
then be close to advanced divisional headquarters, so that
they will be readily available when required by the divisional
commander.
Part III.--THE CONDUCT OF THE ADVANCE
5. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
1. Thrusting forward
Whatever the method and circumstances of the advance,
formation and unit commanders must be imbued with a
determination to get forward. They must thrust relentlessly
on, no matter what is happening to the right, to the left, oi
in rear. Isolated points of resistance must not be allowed to
hold up the impetus of the general advance; they must be
left to be dealt with by troops following up behind.
Brigade commanders are responsible for their own progress:
it is for the divisional commander to slow a brigade up if it is
getting too far ahead.
2. Use of mechanical transport
Since speed is of paramount importance as a means of
gaining and maintaining the initiative, the maximum use
must be made of all available mechanical transport. Its use
has, however, certain
limitations.
Embussed infantry are
vulnerable. If deployment in the early stages of the advance
appears probable, the leading infantry will therefore march.
Embussing and debussing take time, and for a short advance
it will be quicker for infantry to march.
V10322 (18) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

