pg_0061.pdf:
Page No.
Appendices
SECRET.
, Summary of Events
ARADE 'A"
Lottion of Unit Consorship
hit oat will be brought into effect forthrith and will remin in force
Let gertol a21 correspondence will be posted undea Unit errengerents:
Author notice.
wing of copremondence,
à to Headquerters for disciplinary action.
Le are of parate coopondon by personnel seceding en duty or con
arco in Letters:
unit at the hend of all. letters
ten will giro this cuber, To beace mao will be followed by the Pull
is a officially noticied.
-gaph letters will be censored, franked and irpressed vith Unit Censo
they will NOT be bundled with other neil, but will be handed in
reparately to Any Post OfFica ca Givil Post Office, whichever 1e
ep licable.
Green Davelopes (A.2.V. 3075).
in issue of Green Envelopes, not exceeding one per nen per week, will be made au
•es possible.
l envelopes will not be subject to censorship within the unit. They are
lieble to examination by the Base Censo:
thee may be usod by weitors as under: -
| Lo a Singlet on Ordinary Envelope. In this case only one lotter ney be
is a liltiplet Green Invelope.
Up to three letters, each conteined in a
may bé enclosed in the Green Havelone.
The inner covers will
writer and vill bear postage steps at current rates.
The
reen Tavelope will be addressed to the Bese Censor. No postage stamp is
reuired on the Creen envelope itself in this cene.
Attention of Other
service inforation found in Creen invelopes constitutes a serious breach
of Regulations.
Lottors containca in a lultiole Creen invelope mist be writton by the same
cels and Registered Paokeges.
10.g. These will to consored by Unit officers in the presenge of the
Ponted and sanand abored.
They will not be handed back
osting by Post Orderlies.
Arrangements will be made for their
cels will beer on tho outside, a full and true description of contents,
aloorly weitten on the wrapper.
Those will be censored, franked and sealed up in the
They will not be handed
nado for the Post orderly to give
coeipt to the tender which will lutor be relaced by
/ WIl keep a record or oll benders of Rogistered peolages so
recoint may be posted on to then if necessary.

