pg_0066.pdf:
Appendices
SECRET.
Summary of Events
Place
MIXE OF FORSAR DNSERUCIRONS
the writer should be given the op ortunity to re-mite
the viole lettir.
This enables the
though ignorence:
lu caos of doubt whether the subject utter should be allowed to pad!
rauch, the letter uay be fozvended under separate cover to the Deputy Chio
Jit Consorshto will be imposed to boon as these instructions are received.
Go follering reoul tions Will conly to Units and fims subject to Unit
(4) A11 mito ma Pins vill use the siureas ofcicially notifica.
) Tho tooting of mivate correspondence or purcola in Civil Post Boxes os
at orrices is strictly forbidden.
Lettors or packages suiseg iently
Puna in the Civil Post vill be rotumoù to 7Q for severo disciplinry
action.
Telemeng will not be nen i tod to be despatched by persomel oi fin H
Units usin" un Army Post Offico or closed address direct through Civ:
Post' OMices.
They will to Unit censoriod, impros ca with Unit Censor Stup und landed into
Orcerly Room.
Too Pout Oracrly vill collect the appropricte charges from
the vendors and personally tale the telegrans to the Civil Pout Orfice for
despatch.
(i) The use of civil telegrann iccilitica will not be forbidden to fms, units
and esteblialments using an open address.
Such telegrons will be liable
soni ation oftor dospatch and diaciniinary action will be taken in oase
of broach of security.
(o) Tolhones cro being nonitorod, and disciplinnry action will be taken where
necessary.
Mouse of civil telonio es will be forbidden to unite in Marshalling one
Dration Rogulatine Arous dur ng periods when confine ent to caup has
mind or after brierine has cormonoed.
moving overseas, the following rogulations will
l) Moll Service Posterds ney do use?.
together
ditton 1 viting, soretones on other wink ep ering, the postora vill
be destiroyec..
(0) iregiotored givite letters will to souture Pree.
e) Bolomans will to unit censored, impressed with Unit Censor Start 11
ded in to Dield Post Orfices to
tolerapilo services is strictly forbition.
trensmission.
The use of Civil
it spendix 12' eno instanctions suitable for publication in init orders.
it long D' are castionel notes for Unit Censor Oicer-

