pg_0001.pdf:
TION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
f mobilisation or
dinate command
36), and personal
is representatives.
war diaries will be
ust uav oi embodiment.
NoTE B.—See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
NoTE C.-Any question of doubt whether or not a war diary should be kept by a unit
or sub-unit will be referred, through the usual channels, to the Under-Secretary of State (S.D.3),
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
PARA. 2.—A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
and to provide data upon which to base future improvements in army training, equipment,
organisation and administration.
It will be entered up daily, each entry initialled by the officer detailed to keep it, on
A.F. C.2118.
It is to be noted that the extraction and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
from a war diary is an offence under the Official Secrets Acts.
NoTE.-It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.—In so far as they are applicabie, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary
(*) and decisit ordere instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(i aty location he as ents during to of formations ato asid present dispositions.
(iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
(iv) Detailed account of operations.
Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
operations, topographical and climatic.
important phases.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the L. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Meteorological notes.
(viii) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
NoTE.—Events should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008 and A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
routine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
the war diary.
(i) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
(ili) A copy of each narrative or report on operations drawn up by a subordinate formation
or unit, including any sketches or maps relating thereto, to supplement the account of
operations furnished in the text of the diary (para. 4, iv above).
Appendices will be
numbered, and each will have a brief descriptive heading naming the author. References
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C.2118.
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II).
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
(i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
be forwarded on the first day of the succeeding month direct to the officer i/c 2nd Echelon
for transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a cavalry or infanty brigade or higher
formation will be forwarded within a period of two months to the officer i/c 2nd Echelon
for transmission to the Under-Secretary of State, The War Office.
The duplicate copies
of the diaries of units will be sent within a period of three months to the officer i/c
2nd Echelon to be transmitted to record offices at home for safe custody.
SPECIAL NOTE.-The time entered should be the time the information or order reaches
the unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, if known.
vii. Patrol betweon Bde S.P. and Dis P by 8 Inf Bde:
During move all tracked vehs will keep to the tracked vehicles
EAST of main roads.
On arrival all vohicles will be disporsed and camouflaged
immediately and halted prepared to move EAST.
iv.
Route: -
From
Bde s.P. due NORTH on main road to Dis P at ra june
024786.
RIO and Sqn reps will meet party at this point and allot them
into
their respective areas.
be at Dis.P.
1720 hrs.
1735 hrs.
Sqn Al Echelons will form up behind, along
SOUTH WEST from Bde S.P.,
Forming up to be completed by 1645 hrs.
111.
Formin wil Be will for up with head at Bie S.P., facing
Regimental
Speed
Density
NO
halts.
25 m.1.2h.
30
v.t.m.
Bde
S:P.
Head
of
column to cross Regtl S.P.
Bde S.P.
Tail will be clear by 1730 hrs.
-
1712 hrs.
1715 hrs.
junc
027765.
'A' Sqn -
'B! San - R. HQ - 'c:
San - Resce Ip - Al Ech:
11. The Regiment will be ready to move 1645 hrs.
Order of March
RIO and San reps will recce area and allot Sgn and Echelon
areas before arrival.
MECHO De
3.10.E and entration area 1a bounded by & nas 025802, Just WEST Of
034797 to 030794 to 023790.
WEST
b. Phase II
Move
EAST of River ORNE to relieve 6 Airborne Div.
Location later.
Phase I Move to concentration area, SOUTll EAST of DOUVRES.
INTENTION:
1.
The Regiment will be under command 8 Inf Bde for Move I.
The Regiment will be under comd 27 Arnd Bde for move II.
INFORMATION.
OPERATION "GOODWOOD:
Regimontal Operation Order N0. 1.
SECRET.

