doris spl-203207 (Albert Duan)
Return by (19/11/2025 07:00:01)
14622852
WO 171/524
AR Duan
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPILATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174)•
) Detailed account of operations. Exact hour of important occurrences. factors affestir
F.S.R., Vol. 1, Sec. 179.
ARA. 1.—A war diary will be kept in duplicate from the first day of mobilisation or
reation of the particular command or appointment by :-
i) Each branch of the staff in the headquarters of a formation, a subordinate command
nd area or sub-area of the L. of C.
rations, topographical and climatic. Clear sketches showing positions of troods
mportant phases.
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
1) Changes in establishment or strength. As regards casualties the names and ranks of
incers
nd the number of other ranks or followers and of animals chonl
n addition in the case of units on the l. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
11) Unit commanders.
i1) Commanders of detachments of a unit.
(vil) Meteorological notes.
iv) Officer i/c 2nd Echelon, officers holding technical appointments (Sec. 36), and personal
vill) Summary of important information received, whether military or pohtical.
voTb - vents should be entered up, not in the order as given above but at the time they
occur, or come to notice.
At the close of each day, events (vi) and (vii) might be added
v) Base, auxiliary and advanced depot commanders.
vi) Heads of services and their representatives, Controller of Salvage and his representatives.
VoTE A.—In the case of formations and units of the Territorial Army, war diaries will be
ept from the first day of embodiment.
NoTE B.-See also A.C.I. 533 of 1941, paras. 2, 4 and 8.
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :-
(i) A copy of each field return (A.F. W.3008:
nd A.F. W.3009) and of each operation or
utine order or instruction issued during the period covered by the current volume of
ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
Para. 2.-A war diary is Secret.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
nd to provide data upon which to base future improve
ments in army training, equipment,
rganisation and adminisuduon.
wilb entered up daily, hach e cry tatial any the fi or dealed to nep it, on,
com a war diary is an offence under the Umcial secrets auts.
Nomt.-It should be made clear that the officer
or other person menti be mi pe clear that the office who initials the he dies is the commander
ment the account of
numbered, and each wul nave a oner deser puve ne
to appendices will be made in the last column of A.F. C2118. Ot
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
see ts.k Volume 1.
PARA. 7 FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES.
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
i) Unless otherwise ordered, the original copy of a war diary for the preceding month will
ParA. 3.—Omitted.
PARA 4-In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
reparing a diary
() Importantos tens, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
il) Dare tablesin the
Me cements durin the ot treatins hoot ast present dispositions
iii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
or transmission to the War Office, care being taken that all its appendices are attached.
ii) The duplicate copy, clearly marked as such, of a cavalry or infantice brade chelon
or transmission to the Under-Secretary of State. The War Office.
of the diaries of units will be sent within a period of three mont
Ind Echelon to be transmitted to record oinces at home for sale custody.
SPECIAL NOTE. The time entered should be the time the information or order reac
he unit concerned.
The time of the event recorded should also be given in the text, it know
WAR DIARY
INTELLIGENCE SUMM
Month and Year. JANUARY, 1944.
Erase headina not required.
Place
summary of Events and niorn
SUDBURY
1 = 20
Nothing or War Diary" importance to warrant
unit waiting to reorganize to new War Establis
nobilization order yet received.
Training and educational programnes in progress
normally.
complete unit receiving protective inoculations
attending for dental treatment throughout the mor
31
Capt. C.E. Carrington posted to 107 Arnd. Ord. Su
of Jambay an opte ate or final ter Dia norto the ober.
Kindly acknowledge receipt,
Нисилі
O.C., 50th (forthumbrian) Dision Ordnance Field Park, RalLOC.
Subjects War Diary.
н0/20
4th February, 194
622, P.MEA/1-500.000.9/41.
26/W.D./A.
