The Normandy Campaign 1944

Bringing together essays on key aspects of the Normandy campaign from
leading names in military history, this book re-examines the crucial issues
and debates of the D-Day campaign.
Although it was the most important campaign fought by the Western
Allies in World War II and was pivotal in determining the outcome of the
war, there remains much to debate about D-Day and subsequent operations
in Normandy. This volume tackles a range of core topics, placing them
in their current historiographical context, to present new and sometimes
revisionist interpretations of key issues. How effective was the deception
plan used against the Germans? Can it be said that the German army was
superior to the American, British and Canadian forces? Why did the Allied
armies become bogged down for two months and to what extent, if at all,
was the stalemate a product of poor Allied operational technique or German tactical ﬂair? How have we come to see or interpret the Normandy
campaign through the media of cinema and TV?
As World War II is increasingly becoming a ﬁeld of revisionism, this
book sits squarely within growing debates and brings current thinking from
leading military and strategic historians to a wider audience.
This book will be of great interest to students of World War II, and of
military and strategic studies in general.
John Buckley is Reader in Military History at the University of Wolverhampton, UK. He has written widely on various aspects of military studies,
particularly World War II, the interwar era and air power. He has recently
published British Armour in the Normandy Campaign 1944 (2004).

CASS Series: Military history and policy
Series Editors: John Gooch and Brian Holden Reid

This series will publish studies on historical and contemporary aspects of
land power, spanning the period from the eighteenth century to the present
day, and will include national, international and comparative studies. From
time to time, the series will publish edited collections of essays and ‘classics’.
1 Allenby and British Strategy in the Middle East, 1917–1919
Matthew Hughes
2 Alfred von Schlieffen’s Military Writings
Robert Foley, ed. and trans.
3 The British Defence of Egypt, 1935–1940: Conﬂict and Crisis
in the Eastern Mediterranean
Steven Morewood
4 The Japanese and the British Commonwealth Armies at War,
1941–1945
Tim Moreman
5 Training, Tactics and Leadership in the Confederate Army
of Tennessee: Seeds of Failure
Andrew Haughton
6 Military Training in the British Army, 1940–1944: From
Dunkirk to D-Day
Tim Harrison Place
7 The Boer War: Direction, Experience and Image
John Gooch (ed.)
8 Caporetto 1917: Victory or Defeat?
Mario Morselli
9 Post-war Counterinsurgency and the SAS, 1945–1952: A Special
Type of Warfare
Tim Jones

10 The British General Staff: Reform and Innovation, 1890–1939
David French and Brian Holden Reid (eds)
11 Writing the Great War: Sir James Edmonds and the Ofﬁcial
Histories, 1915–1948
Andrew Green
12 Command and Control in Military Crisis: Devious Decisions
Harald Hoiback
13 Lloyd George and the Generals
David Woodward
14 Malta and British Strategic Policy, 1925–1943
Douglas Austin
15 British Armour in the Normandy Campaign 1944
John Buckley
16 Gallipoli: Making History
Jenny Macleod (ed.)
17 British and Japanese Military Leadership in the Far
Eastern War, 1941–1945
Brian Bond and Kyoichi Tachikawa (eds)
18 The Baghdad Pact: Anglo-American Defence Policies
in the Middle East, 1950–59
Behcet Kemal Yesilbursa
19 Fanaticism and Conﬂict in the Modern Age
Matthew Hughes and Gaynor Johnson (eds)
20 The Evolution of Operational Art, 1740–1813: From Frederick
The Great to Napoleon
Claus Telp
21 British Generalship on the Western Front, 1914–18: Defeat
into Victory
Simon Robbins
22 The British Working Class and Enthusiasm for War, 1914–1916
David Silbey
23 Big Wars and Small Wars: The British Army and the Lessons
of War in the 20th Century
Hew Strachan (ed.)
24 The Normandy Campaign 1944: Sixty Years On
John Buckley (ed.)

The Normandy
Campaign 1944
Sixty Years On

Edited by John Buckley

First published 2006
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2006.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa
business
© 2006 John Buckley
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical,
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
The Normandy campaign 1944 : sixty years on / edited by John
Buckley.
p. cm. — (Military history and policy, ISSN 1465-8488)
Includes index.
ISBN 0–415–36931–2 (hardback)
1. World War, 1939–1945—Campaigns—France—Normandy.
2. Allied Forces. 3. Germany—Armed Forces—History—
World War, 1939–1945. 4. Normandy (France)—History, Military.
I. Buckley, John (John D.) II. Series.
D756.5.N6N695 2006
940.54′2142—dc22
2005033264
ISBN-10: 0–415–36931–2 (hbk)
ISBN-10: 0–203–02888–0 (ebk)
ISBN-13: 978–0–415–36931–2 (hbk)
ISBN-13: 978–0–203–02888–9 (ebk)

Contents

Notes on contributors
Acknowledgements

ix
xii

Introduction

1

JOHN BUCKLEY

1 The 21st Army Group in Normandy: towards a new
balance sheet

11

TERRY COPP

2 The German perspective

22

MUNGO MELVIN

3 The German commanders on D-Day

35

MARC HANSEN

4 Culture, controversy, Caen and Cherbourg: the ﬁrst week
of the battle

48

STEPHEN BADSEY

5 American tactical innovation in Normandy, 1944

64

NIGEL DE LEE

6 British armoured operations in Normandy, June–August 1944

74

JOHN BUCKLEY

7 Operation BLUECOAT – a victory ignored?

90

IAN DAGLISH

8 ‘The black day unrealised’: operation TOTALIZE and the
problems of translating tactical success into a decisive breakout
STEPHEN A. HART

104

viii

Contents

9 Dead cows and Tigers: some aspects of the experience
of the British soldier in Normandy, 1944

118

GARY SHEFFIELD

10 The Luftwaffe in Normandy

131

JAMES S. CORUM

11 Arthur Tedder and the transportation plans

147

VINCENT ORANGE

12 Caen – the martyred city

158

PETER GRAY

13 Deception and the planning of D-Day

170

MARY KATHRYN BARBIER

14 Intelligence and OVERLORD: a snapshot from 6 June 1944

185

JOHN FERRIS

15 Reconstructing D-Day: 6 June 1944 and British
documentary ﬁlms

201

MICHAEL PARIS

16 D-Day in Hollywood motion pictures: a brief history
of changing perceptions of war

213

CARSTEN HENNIG

Index

224

Contributors

Stephen Badsey is Senior Lecturer in the Department of War Studies at the
Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, and a Senior Research Associate of
the Centre for Defence Studies, Kings College, London. He is a specialist
on military theory and on media presentations of warfare, and he has also
made particular studies of airborne and amphibious operations. He has
written or contributed to over 60 books and articles about warfare, including
Utah Beach, Omaha Beach, The Battle for Caen, Arnhem 1944, and Normandy
1944. He appears frequently on television as a military and media historian.
Mary Kathryn Barbier is Assistant Professor of American Military History
at Mississippi State University. She received her Ph.D. from the University
of Southern Mississippi in December 1998 and subsequently won a two-year
postdoctoral fellowship from International Security Studies at Yale University. She is the author of Kursk: The Greatest Tank Battle Ever Fought, 1943
(2002, also published in German) and, with Andrew Wiest, Strategy and
Tactics: Infantry Warfare – The Theory and Practice of Infantry Combat in
the 20th Century (2002). She was recently invited to present a paper, ‘When
is the Use of Military Force Acceptable Internationally?’ at the Couchiching
Institute on Public Affairs public policy conference in Canada.
John Buckley is Reader in Military History at the University of Wolverhampton, UK, and has written widely on many aspects of military history.
He is the author of British Armour in the Normandy Campaign 1944 (2004)
and in 2006 will publish Normandy 1944 for Brassey’s Campaigns in Focus
series. He is currently working on the British tank industry in World War II
and an analysis of the Second British Army in Northwest Europe 1944–5.
Terry Copp is Professor Emeritus and Director of the Laurier Centre for
Military Strategic and Disarmament Studies, Wilfrid Laurier University,
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada. He is the author of Fields of Fire: The Canadians
in Normandy (2003) and the soon to be published sequel Cinderella Army:
The Canadians in Northwest Europe.
James S. Corum is a professor at the US Army Command and General Staff
College, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. He previously studied at Brown,

x

Contributors

Oxford and Queen’s University Canada and was a visiting fellow of All
Souls College, Oxford, from January to July 2005. Dr Corum is the author of
four books on military and airpower history – The Roots of Blitzkrieg (1992),
The Luftwaffe: Creating the Operational Air War (1997), The Luftwaffe’s
Way of War (1998) and Airpower and Small Wars (2003) – as well as dozens
of journal articles and book chapters. His most recent book, Quelling the
Beast: A Counterinsurgency Strategy for America will appear in 2006.
Ian Daglish read History at Trinity College, Cambridge, where his thesis was
‘Napoleon Bonaparte and the Invasion of England’. After writing a number
of articles about the Normandy campaign of 1944 and a short history of
the American 82nd ‘All American’ Airborne Division in Normandy, Ian has
focused in recent years on the British sector of the Normandy campaign.
For some years he has been a familiar sight in the Normandy battleﬁelds,
researching and leading groups of both serving and veteran soldiers. He is
the author of Operation BLUECOAT: The British Armoured Breakout (2003),
Operation GOODWOOD: The Great Tank Charge (2004) and GOODWOOD:
Over the Battleﬁeld (2005).
Nigel de Lee read History, War Studies and International Relations at Leeds,
King’s College, London, and Cambridge. He taught War Studies at Sandhurst for 30 years, and is now teaching War and Security Studies at the
University of Hull. He has also taught at the US Naval Academy, Annapolis,
and the Krigsskolen in Oslo, and since 1982 has carried out oral history
interviews for the Imperial War Museum Sound Archive. He has conducted
staff rides of Normandy and other theatres of war for the Army Staff
College, RMA Sandhurst, US 29th Division and other clients, both military
and academic.
John Ferris is Professor of History at the University of Calgary, and has
published widely on military, diplomatic and intelligence history. Among his
works are The Evolution of British Strategic Policy, 1919–1926 (1989), The
British Army and Signals Intelligence During the First World War (1992) and
(with Christon Archer, Holger Herwig and Tim Travers), A World History
of Warfare (2001). His most recent work is Strategy and Intelligence: Selected
Essays (2005).
Peter Gray is a serving Royal Air Force ofﬁcer with extensive operational
and staff experience. He has worked in the Cabinet Ofﬁce, in various MoD
departments and spent three years as the Director of Defence Studies. He is
currently the Director of the Defence Leadership and Management Centre.
He has edited four books and published worldwide on air power topics.
Marc Hansen is a Research Associate and doctoral candidate at the Institut
für Geschichte und ihre Didaktik, University of Flensburg, where he is also
working as a teaching assistant in contemporary history. After completing
his studies in Kiel and London he graduated in 2002 from the University of

Contributors

xi

Kiel with an MA and in his doctoral thesis, ‘FeindBilder – Die Darstellung des
deutschen Militärs in den zentralen Militärmuseen ausgewählter Siegermächte
des Zweiten Weltkrieges’, he provides a comparative analysis of how German
armed forces are displayed in military museums of former enemy states.
Stephen A. Hart is Senior Lecturer in the Department of War Studies, The
Royal Military Academy Sandhurst. Prior to this he lectured in the Department of European Studies at the University of Surrey and the Department
of War Studies, King’s College London. He is the author of Montgomery
and ‘Colossal Cracks’: The 21st Army Group in Northwest Europe 1944–45
(2000), The Road to Falaise (2004), and is co-author of several works on the
German army in World War II.
Carsten Hennig (MA Media Studies) is preparing his dissertation on American war movies after 9/11 at the Institute for Media Research of the Academy of Visual Arts in Braunschweig, Germany. He works freelance as a
consultant for systemic management, is an author on leadership, and a
lecturer on war and the media. He lives with his family in Frankfurt am
Main, Germany.
Mungo Melvin works in the Ministry of Defence as the Director of Operational Capability, responsible to ministers and the chiefs of staff for the
collection and analysis of lessons from joint operations. He is a graduate of
the German Armed Forces Staff College and is a former deputy director of
the British Higher Command and Staff Course. His long-standing interest
in military history, operational art and strategy has taken him to many
battleﬁelds across the world. He is currently writing a biography of Field
Marshal Erich von Manstein.
Vincent Orange is Reader in History (retired), University of Canterbury,
Christchurch, New Zealand. He is the author of seven biographies of airmen, notably Sir Keith Park, ‘Mary’ Coningham and Lord Tedder. His
biography of Sir John Slessor is scheduled to appear in July 2006. As an
Associate Editor for the Oxford Dictionary of Biography he contributed 19
articles and vetted 50 more.
Michael Paris is Professor of Modern History at the University of Central
Lancashire, and a Fellow of the Royal Historical Society. His major research
interest is war and popular culture in twentieth century. Recent publications
include Warrior Nation: Images of War in British Popular Culture (2002),
and Over the Top! The Great War and Juvenile Literature in Britain (2004).
Gary Shefﬁeld is Professor of Modern History at King’s College, London,
based at the Joint Services Command and Staff College, Shrivenham. His
most recent book is Douglas Haig: War Diaries and Letters 1914–1918
(co-edited with John Bourne, 2005), and he is working on a study of the
British soldier in World War II.

Acknowledgements

This volume is the product of two conferences held in 2004 to mark the sixtieth
anniversary of the Normandy campaign: the ﬁrst, ‘Normandy 60 Years On:
Lessons for Contemporary Doctrine’, was a Ministry of Defence seminar
organised by Colonel David Benest and held at Trenchard Lines, Upavon;
the second, ‘The Normandy Campaign 1944: 60 Years On’, was held at the
History and Governance Research Institute at the University of Wolverhampton, and was organised by myself. Both David and I found the experience rewarding and stimulating, and it was a great pleasure to be involved
in bringing together so many leading scholars from all parts of the world.
That such excellent papers were presented demonstrates that the Normandy
campaign and the military history of World War II are now ﬂourishing
academic areas, ripe for further study and research. Hopefully, the two
conferences have gone some way to highlighting some of the issues and
topics for us to focus on in the following years. Indeed, many fascinating
insights and points were raised in the ﬁnal session at Wolverhampton – my
particular thanks to Stephen Hart, Stephen Badsey and Mike Taylor for
leading this discussion. As is often the case with conferences though, we
posed as many if not more questions than we answered.
Grateful thanks are due to my colleagues here at the University of Wolverhampton who made the potentially hazardous and stressful task of organising
an international conference that much easier. I am particularly indebted to
Professor Mark Phythian, Professor Malcolm Wanklyn and Julie Hayward,
and on a more personal note to Dr Julia Speht, who endured more ‘war talk’
than she probably deserved. In putting together this volume I was aided no
end by David Benest, at a time when he was involved in other pressing matters.
I would also like to thank Andrew Humphyrs and Marjorie Francois at
Routledge/Taylor & Francis, who have shown admirable patience as I endeavoured to badger the ﬁnished versions of chapters out of certain individuals.
Finally, I would personally like to thank all those who attended the conferences be they leading academics, professionals, students, researchers, veterans
or interested parties. Ultimately it is they who made this project worthwhile.
John Buckley,
History and Governance Research Institute, University of Wolverhampton

Introduction 1

Introduction
John Buckley

It is now over 60 years since the Allies landed in Normandy in June 1944
and began the process of liberating Western Europe from the clutches of the
Third Reich. It was a campaign that marked the beginning of the end of the
Second World War and was the clearest indication yet that Hitler’s regime
was in the process of crumbling. Indeed, to many German soldiers and
civilians, the greatest military achievement of the Nazi state had been to
overwhelm France in the early summer of 1940, achieving in a few weeks
that which had been denied to their predecessors in the Imperial German
army for four years in the 1914–18 war. Yet, by the end of August 1944
all that had been undone and Allied forces had successfully liberated
Normandy, recovered Paris and were pushing on into the Low Countries.
The scale of the Allied victory was stunning. In the space of some 80 days
they effectively destroyed two German armies to the extent that of seven
armoured divisions only some 24 tanks and 1,300 troops escaped across the
Seine to ﬂee back to Germany.1 Far more than any defeats on the Eastern
Front, even Stalingrad, the loss of France in the summer of 1944 marked
a huge and fatal psychological blow to Germany, one from which she
would not recover. Defeating the Allied invasion that summer arguably had
represented the Third Reich’s last realistic hope of avoiding total defeat
and though the struggle would continue into 1945, the crushing blow suffered
in the Normandy campaign proved beyond serious doubt that the defeat
of Nazi Germany had moved from a case of ‘if ’ to ‘when’.
Looking back after 60 years, on a number of levels the Normandy Campaign represents an excellent case study of how the war was won in the West
and why the Germans were ultimately defeated. Indeed, the planning and
preparation of the OVERLORD invasion, its prosecution, and the ensuing
ﬁghting, all demonstrated the considerable strengths and weaknesses of the
respective belligerents, not only in the summer of 1944 but in the war more
generally. The key factors behind the Allied victory in Normandy emphatically underscored the reasons why they had turned the tide of the war, and
why the supposed attributes of the German war machine were no longer so
relevant nor decisive. Moreover, the successful liberation of France proved
that the Allies were dictating to the Germans the manner in which the

2

John Buckley

war would now be fought, an approach which maximised Allied strengths
and simultaneously minimised any areas of superiority the Germans were
perceived still to retain. This in effect equated to emphasising the Allies’
superiority in production, resources, planning, intelligence and air power,
whilst limiting the impact of the Germans’ greater operational experience and
close-combat capabilities, particularly at the tactical level. Ultimately, the
Normandy campaign starkly represented the total seizure of the strategic initiative by the Allies, which they retained until the war’s end the following year.
Yet despite the scale of the Allied victory, the historical perception of the
Normandy campaign is a battle yet to be resolved. Overwhelming though
Allied success had been in the summer of 1944 it was still a qualiﬁed victory,
one which raised many questions and provoked critical comment and
debate in the ensuing years. Most obviously the Allied armies’ apparently
ponderous and clumsy efforts at dislodging the Germans from Normandy
in the weeks following the initial landings, and their inability to close the
neck of the Falaise Pocket as quickly as they might in August exposed them
to criticism. For many historians and analysts the Allied armies had demonstrated a limited and unimaginative grasp of operational art, even in the
later stages of the war, and had relied excessively on overwhelming strength
in resources, artillery and air power to defeat the Germans; an army with
more ﬂair and skill would have seized battleﬁeld opportunities with greater
alacrity and scored a faster and more complete victory.2
Explanations for this soon began to emerge. Chester Wilmot and Basil
Liddell Hart argued that Allied soldiers were uneasy engaging in heavy close
combat and often sought refuge in cover until artillery and air-based ﬁre
support could be brought to bear to neutralise opposition. This reduced
offensives to sluggish, wary affairs that lacked dynamism and drive. Liddell
Hart even claimed that the ‘lions led by donkeys’ epithet of the 1914–18 conﬂict could be turned on its head in the Second World War, for it was now
the soldiery, not the generals, who lacked vigour and determination. German
accounts also seemed to support the view that the Allied armies did not
demonstrate drive on the battleﬁeld and that a few casualties would prompt
a halt, allowing time for the Germans to improvise a further defensive position, causing yet more delay.3
A further interpretation highlighted the operational and tactical shortcomings of the Allied armies and leadership. Weaknesses in doctrine, particularly in the exploitation phase of a battle, repeatedly caused operations
to bog down and grind to a halt. Structural ﬂaws were in part to blame, but
for many the key factor was primarily the approach of Montgomery and,
to a lesser extent, Bradley: overly cautious, defensive and lacking in ﬂair.
Only George Patton showed the grip and vision necessary to match or outperform the Germans at their own game, it was claimed. Carlo D’Este
developed this view in Decision in Normandy (1983), still probably the most
widely read single volume on the Normandy campaign.4 The lack of operational skill, partly supplemented by tactical shortcomings and inexperience,

Introduction 3
contributed to situations where Allied forces failed to seize opportunities on
the battleﬁeld, thus prolonging the agony and generating further casualties.
In contrast, it was argued that the German army had performed remarkably well in the circumstances. Despite being outgunned, outnumbered,
denuded of air support and lacking strategic direction or support it had hung
on grimly and obdurately, refusing to concede ground without exacting a
heavy toll from the Allies. Eventual defeat had been brought about by the
weight of resources being directed against the Germans, and it was this that
had ultimately overwhelmed them. This was, and indeed still is, a view held
by many. Max Hastings’s Overlord (1984) certainly put forward the case
that the Germans were, unit for unit, masters of the battleﬁeld, while more
recently Russell Hart effectively established a league table of ﬁghting power
in Normandy, with the Americans, British and Canadians trailing, in that
order, behind the Germans. Robin Neillands, although pursuing a different
agenda, also rated the Germans highest in operational and tactical terms in
his popular 2002 history of the campaign.5
Many of the armed forces of the post-1945 Western world have also
subscribed to the principles that supposedly underpinned the Germans’
tactical and operational approach to ﬁghting in the Second World War:
command initiative, mission-based planning, devolved responsibility and
manoeuvre rather than ﬁrepower-based techniques, for example. Much of
this was based on necessity as NATO wrestled with the problems of confronting the numerically superior Warsaw Pact forces in the Cold War. For
many, it appeared to be a similar problem to that confronting the German
armed forces in the Second World War; how to avoid defeat against
numerically larger opposing forces. Though the Germans had lost, it was
contended that this had been a result of strategic mismanagement, and that
the German army had retained its tactical and operational superiority until
the ﬁnal stages of the war. It had certainly shown the way in terms of
manoeuvre-based warfare, a method which eschewed long, attritional ﬁghting,
something the Germans could not afford in the Second World War and
which NATO likewise aimed to avoid in Central Europe. Thus, it was the
German army’s approach in the Second World War that elicited most interest in a professional and historical sense in the post-war world, and it was
this fascination that helped to develop an orthodoxy that leant only grudging acknowledgement to the success of the Allied armies in Normandy.
However, a degree of revisionism has begun to emerge in recent years to
challenge this relatively well-established view. David French’s work, Raising
Churchill’s Army (2000), demonstrated that despite certain limitations, the
British army recovered well and fought effectively in the second half of the
Second World War. He argued that by Normandy the army had a generally
clear view of what it was capable of and how to defeat the more experienced
German forces it was facing. In 2002 Robin Neillands attempted to question the interpretation of many, in his view usually American, historians
who claimed that the Allied armies’ unsophisticated and clumsy showing

4

John Buckley

in Normandy was in part due to the unwillingness of the British and
Canadian armies to ‘get stuck in’ around Caen, principally because they
were overly casualty-conscious. Moreover, Neillands repudiated the claim
that Montgomery’s excessive caution and lack of ﬂair had contributed
to the sluggishness of the front in Normandy for much of June and July in
1944, a view prevalent in the USA, particularly following the success of
D’Este’s book in 1983, and further popularised in the ﬁlm Saving Private
Ryan. Stephen Hart skilfully re-evaluated Montgomery’s command methods
in Montgomery and Colossal Cracks: 21st Army Group in Northwest Europe
1944–5, arguing that Monty’s technique was largely appropriate to the
strategic and operational environment as pertained in 1944–5, and that
more importantly, although there were shortcomings to his approach, it was
still the most effective method available, and was also a highly successful
modus operandi. I have also attempted to salvage the reputation of British
armoured forces in Normandy, arguing that they were a ﬂexible ﬁghting
force that performed successfully during the campaign, and indeed adapted to
the operating environment more effectively than their German counterparts.
However, the most strident revisionist view was offered by Terry Copp in
Fields of Fire: The Canadians in Normandy (2003). Here he argued that the
Canadian army fought very effectively in Normandy and demonstrated tactical and operational ﬂexibility and acumen, to a level previously unrecognised. Moreover, and perhaps most contentiously, he claimed that whilst the
Germans demonstrated obduracy and grim determination, probably born
of desperation and fear of retribution, they in fact displayed no great operational or tactical ﬂair. He was particularly critical of the immediate counterattack, a doctrine repeatedly employed by the German army, even when it
proved ruinously costly in the face of massive Allied ﬁrepower. Far from
being the astute tacticians as widely popularised in Western military history
since 1945, Copp argued that the Germans proved palpably unable to meet
the challenge of the campaign in Normandy, principally because the Allies
did not allow them to; and for this the Allies deserve considerable credit on
strategic, operational and tactical levels.6
Contrasting views on this particular debate are represented in this volume.
Mungo Melvin’s chapter outlines the doctrinal factors behind the success of
the German army at lower command level in the Normandy campaign and
indeed the Second World War as a whole. Quite explicitly Brigadier Melvin
seeks to explain ‘. . . why the Germans did so well in defence and the why
the Allied forces made comparatively slow progress in attack’ and concludes
that superior doctrine and training were the key factors, linked with the
skilful utilisation of helpful terrain and high morale. Terry Copp challenges
this approach directly in his chapter on the performance of the AngloCanadian 21st Army Group in Normandy. Both Copp and Melvin agree
that strategically the Allies proved superior in almost every respect, but they
differ somewhat on the inability of the Germans to impose themselves on
the campaign at the operational level. For this Melvin argues that Allied air

Introduction 5
power was decisive, but Copp rejects this and instead argues that it was the
frontline ﬁghting units – infantry and armour – that shouldered this responsibility. Copp even suggests that powerful and useful though Allied artillery
proved, it was in no way so decisive as has been often believed. Moreover,
he rejects the view that the Allied armies proved doctrinally deﬁcient compared to the Germans; indeed he contends that the Allies had a clear idea of
how to win and prosecuted their plans accordingly, demonstrating tactical
ﬂexibility along the way.
What has also been highlighted by the developing debate over the last few
years is the scarcity of in-depth studies on many aspects of the campaign,
most obviously from the ground-up as well as at higher command levels.
Indeed, in order to assess the relative merits of the conﬂicting views of
Melvin and Copp fully, a great deal of in-depth work is still required. For
example, we still await analytical studies of Allied artillery and logistics in
Normandy and incisive and rigorous investigations into the actual ﬁghting
strengths and abilities of German units in action, studies unfettered by preconceived notions of doctrinal superiority.
A number of key issues are addressed within this volume, however, demonstrating that this process in underway. Marc Hansen identiﬁes many of the
key failings in the German command structure: the compromised chain of
command, the weak logistical support network and the Rommel /Geyr von
Schweppenburg strategic controversy, yet argues that ultimately it was
the failure of the German leaders, including those at the front, to respond
immediately and decisively enough in the ﬁrst hours of OVERLORD that
decided the outcome of the campaign and indeed the nature of the war’s
conclusion. Hansen also underlines the view that German commanders were
simply unwilling to come to terms with the real strategic and political plight
of Germany by the midpoint of the war. In addition, he points out that
many German commanders bemoaned the kampfgruppe system whereby
troops were fed into the battle in an ad hoc fashion merely to maintain the
front, as it ultimately surrendered operational initiative to the Allies. Paradoxically, this ﬂexible system was and is much admired by Western armies,
acclamation which rather obfuscates the point that it was a desperate response
to Allied pressure and viewed as a very limited emergency compromise by
the Germans.
The period immediately following the landings on 6 June, prior to the
larger set-piece battles and operations, is a phase often passed over by historians, but Stephen Badsey challenges this oversight in his chapter. This
was the crucial period in which the nature of the Normandy campaign was
decided. Badsey, like Hansen, argues that German command failed on a
number of counts, with different factions imposing their own ideas on how
to react and defend against the invasion, down to tactical level. Moreover,
Rommel himself and his staff failed to appreciate the importance of the
Mulberry harbours and remained convinced that Cherbourg was the key to
the whole campaign and that this was where the main German effort should

6

John Buckley

focus. They were saved from this strategic blunder when Anglo-Canadian
pressure and Hitler’s orders forced them to commit their greater strength
around Caen rather than in the more difﬁcult terrain in the American sector.
However, the outcome of the battle for Normandy should not be predominantly viewed as a German failure; both Nigel de Lee and myself argue
in our chapters that the Allies made considerable progress in adapting and
developing their ﬁghting techniques to the demands of the campaign. Contrary to some sources, de Lee demonstrates that the American frontline
units devised, developed and adapted appropriate techniques for dealing
with the demands of combat in the bocage (country characterised by small
ﬁelds, high hedgerows and sunken lanes), to a degree hitherto little recognised. Moreover, he shows that this was a dynamic and ﬂuid process, well
suited to the military culture of the US army. It is interesting to note the
nature of the tactical innovation and invention, which often emerged from
the bottom (or hedgerow) up.
This was a pattern mirrored to a signiﬁcant extent in British armoured
units in Normandy. Since the end of the campaign, and perhaps more than
any other arm, Anglo-Canadian mechanised divisions and brigades have
endured a barrage of criticism. This has usually centred on inadequate equipment and inappropriate doctrine. In Chapter 6, I argue that this view is in
need of revision, that in reality Anglo-Canadian armoured units played a
crucial role in defeating the Germans in Normandy, one that ﬁtted the
operational and strategic approach of 21st Army Group. Furthermore, on a
tactical level, British armoured units, like their American cousins, adapted
their ﬁghting techniques to the demands of Normandy, demonstrating considerable ﬂexibility. In both cases, it should be noted that these armies were
made up of largely inexperienced units and troops, and that consequently
their doctrinal development is all the more impressive.
Allied efforts at developing and adapting their operational techniques
during the Normandy campaign, whilst retaining the strategic initiative, are
illustrated in two chapters. Ian Daglish analyses Operation BLUECOAT, a
bitterly contested action fought in late July and early August. The intention
was to pin German strength in the British sector and thus aid the burgeoning American breakout in the west. Daglish contends that BLUECOAT was
a signiﬁcant success, too often skimmed over by historians who prefer to
focus on COBRA. Moreover, Daglish refutes Copp’s claim that BLUECOAT
represented arguably the greatest blunder of Montgomery’s career. He argues
that the British demonstrated the ability to respond quickly to a strategic
need by setting up BLUECOAT at short notice; that Montgomery and
Dempsey proved sufﬁciently ﬂexible to shift the emphasis of their offensive
in response to the ﬂow of battle; and that ultimately the operation achieved
most of its strategic objectives. Furthermore, BLUECOAT demonstrated
that Allied tactical developments, notably in armour-infantry cooperation,
were having a marked impact on the conduct of operations. Tactical reﬁnements were also clearly apparent during Operation TOTALIZE, a dynamic

Introduction 7
and innovative plan principally devised by Guy Simonds, and the subject of
Stephen Hart’s chapter. He shows us that the Allied armies were capable of
thinking through problems and devising solutions; yet, he also demonstrates
that whilst many obstacles could be negotiated ‘in theatre’, there were limitations to what could be achieved. Indeed, the failure to exploit TOTALIZE’s
initial success, Hart argues, was partly attributable to Allied inexperience
and ﬁerce German resistance, but the operational techniques generated by
the careful and cautious military culture of Anglo-Canadian armies also
played a major role. When Simonds threw caution to the wind on the night
of 8/9 August 1944, his forces were doctrinally and culturally ill-equipped to
cope. Moreover, Hart explores the paradox that at times in the campaign,
that at which the Allies excelled – planning, support and ﬁrepower – precipitated an approach and operational technique that actually imposed
limitations on the ability of Allied forces to exploit the situations their
strengths had created.
Whatever the operational and doctrinal debates and issues conducted
at higher levels both then and since, for the soldiers at the front, mostly
conscripts, the ﬁghting in Normandy was a chastening experience. It is still
not widely recognised that the British army endured a higher casualty rate
in Normandy than it did at Passchendaele in 1917, nor that these casualties
fell predominantly (in excess of 70 per cent) on the riﬂe companies alone.
Gary Shefﬁeld places the soldier’s experience of war in the summer of 1944
into this context, demonstrating that despite the privations, the casualty
rates and the increasing levels of battle exhaustion, the citizen soldiery of
the British army reacted with stoicism to their time in Normandy. The widely
held belief prevailed that the liberation of Europe was a job that simply
had to be endured. Shefﬁeld also amply demonstrates that junior leadership
was fundamental to maintaining morale and battleﬁeld effectiveness in
Normandy, and that this job entailed a difﬁcult balancing act of inspiration
and bullying.
Although many historians have hitherto viewed the ﬁghting on the ground
in Normandy as an area in which the Germans had the edge, there has been
less controversy over the superiority in other ﬁelds such as air power and
intelligence. Yet a number of debates surrounding these two aspects of the
campaign are raised in this volume which force us to question our assumptions on these issues. It is generally contended that German air power, all
but snuffed out as an effective ﬁghting force by the summer of 1944, had
little chance of achieving anything meaningful in Normandy. Jim Corum
partly refutes this claim, presenting the case that the Luftwaffe could have
made a better ﬁst of it than they did. He demonstrates that, as in so many
other areas of their conduct of the war, the Germans focused too heavily
upon special weapons and new technology, such as jets and guided bombs.
Perhaps more importantly they also frittered away valuable resources on
bombing England when such aircraft would have been far better employed
deploying aerial mines against the Allied invasion forces. Corum also ﬂags

8

John Buckley

up an area of future research: the role and effectiveness of the ﬂak forces in
the Normandy campaign. Once again we have an area in which we may not
know as much we think.
The role of Allied air power in determining the outcome of the Normandy
campaign has been the centre of some debate in recent years. Although
spectacular and immensely popular with ground forces the actual impact
of tactical air power has been subjected to considerable scrutiny, as indeed
has the part played by the strategic air forces.7 Vincent Orange’s study of
Air Chief Marshal Arthur Tedder and the role he played in developing the
transportation plan demonstrates, however, that this use of air power at
least proved vital in bringing about the Allied victory in Normandy. Moreover, it is clear that Tedder was fundamental to its implementation and
prosecution, and was later to be proved largely correct in his estimation that
a concerted attack upon the German transportation network would yield
rich rewards indeed in the months after Normandy.
However, air power did not always prove so beneﬁcial or effective. Peter
Gray’s chapter on the bombing of Caen shows that a proposal can acquire
an apparently irresistible and logical momentum, especially when propelled
by events, personalities and strategic imperative. Yet, the plan or concept
can fail because practical issues can remain unresolved; clearly the employment of strategic air forces to aid the capture of the pivotal city of Caen
during Operation CHARNWOOD was a good idea per se, but translating
the idea into a practical plan proved far more difﬁcult than imagined, particularly with mounting political pressure demanding rapid results. It should
be noted however, that the employment of strategic air forces improved
considerably as the Northwest European campaign continued, and CHARNWOOD was only the ﬁrst step.
The intelligence war is a further aspect of the campaign in which the
Allies proved successful, both in planning and prosecution. As ever, however,
our orthodox view is in need of some redeﬁnition, as explored in chapters
by Kathryn Barbier and John Ferris. The broad aspects of the FORTITUDE deception are well known, from colourfully code-named doubleagents such as ‘Garbo’ and ‘Tricycle’ to the establishment of the ﬁctitious
First US Army Group in Southeast England. However, as Kathryn Barbier
argues in her chapter, too much attention has been focused on the mechanics of FORTITUDE, not its effects. In examining the impact of FORTITUDE Barbier shows us that although many facets of the Allied deception
plan functioned properly, they did not necessarily drive the German high
command’s decision to maintain 15th Army in Pas de Calais area for some
weeks after D-Day. Perhaps, therefore, we have been beguiled by FORTITUDE’s complexities and ‘cloak and dagger’ activities into attributing to it
greater importance than is merited.
John Ferris analyses the role played by intelligence in the planning and
conduct of the invasion itself and shows us that although there was a good
deal of information available, it was patchy in quality and then interpreted

Introduction 9
in contrasting manners by a host of different analysts, themselves shaped by
national and cultural approaches. Therefore, the effectiveness of winning
the intelligence war was itself uneven and did not translate easily into battleﬁeld successes. Ferris contends, however, that the intelligence gathered was
good enough, and that in any case even if it were better it would have made
little difference; Operation CRUSADER in the western desert had already
demonstrated that superb intelligence meant little if the armed forces themselves could not conduct effective operations. In Normandy, the picture of
the enemy may have been less comprehensive, but by 1944 the Allied armies
had learnt how to ﬁght the Germans and could deal with problems as they
emerged on the battleﬁeld.
Understanding the impact and feel of war – what it was like to be there –
is all but inaccessible to the historian, especially with the passage of six
decades, but sources are available to us to throw light upon the impact of
D-Day and the Normandy campaign on the participants. Michael Paris
argues that ﬁlm can get us closer than any other source to certain aspects of
the campaign in a way that even written testimony cannot. Nevertheless, the
innate scepticism of the historian about the use of ﬁlm as a valid source,
coupled with the excesses of commercial ﬁlm makers, have limited the utilisation of ﬁlm in building our understanding of D-Day and Normandy.
Paris focuses on the range of documentaries produced during the war and
since and concludes that there is indeed much of value, despite the need to
treat some productions with scepticism. It is also worth noting that as we
are unlikely to see the likes of series such The World at War being made
again for major network television, the increasingly popular docudrama
may be the future for presenting and deﬁning history to large audiences.
Undoubtedly the most important event in broadening interest in D-Day,
the Normandy campaign and the Second World War more generally to the
public, has been the relatively recent release of feature ﬁlms such as Saving
Private Ryan and television series such as Band of Brothers. However, the
relationship between the makers of ﬁlm drama and the historian is a difﬁcult
and at times fraught affair. Carsten Hennig’s discussion of the inﬂuences
shaping the progression of ﬁlms portraying some aspects of the Normandy
campaign nevertheless emphasises the point that drama is a potent tool for
aiding our understanding of how we see the past. New forms of communication media have often been the cause of much debate but ultimately, and
indeed because of this, they constitute a valid source.
As we move into an era when veterans’ associations begin to disband and
the living link with the Second World War loosens ever more it is worth
reﬂecting that popular and professional interest in D-Day and the Normandy campaign is enjoying a renaissance. Moreover, perhaps unlike the
fortieth anniversary, the sixtieth sees the subject in a state of thoughtful
reassessment. The military conduct of the Second World War is unlikely
ever to carry the same cultural and emotional baggage as the Great War,
not in Britain at least, but it is clear that much work remains to be done.

10

John Buckley

There are still large gaps in our detailed knowledge of how the campaign
was fought and this volume, and the conferences from which the chapters
were drawn, have contributed in part to a process of re-evaluation. For
future researchers the ﬁeld is, nonetheless, very much open.

Notes
1 Martin Blumenson, ‘General Bradley’s Decision at Argentan (13 August 1944)’,
in Command Decisions, online edition, Center of Military History, Department
of the Army, Washington, 2000 (originally published in 1959) www.army.mil /
cmh-pg / books.
2 John Ellis’ Brute Force: Allied Strategy and Tactics in the Second World War
(London: Andre Deutsch, 1990), pp. 373–88 is an excellent example of this trend.
3 Chester Wilmot, The Struggle for Europe (London: Collins, 1952), pp. 130–1, 427–
8 and 463–5; Basil Liddell Hart’s comments can be found at the Liddell Hart
Centre for Military Archives (LHMCA), Liddell Hart 11/1944/43–52, ‘Lessons
of Normandy’ (1952); a much cited example of German views is Kurt Meyer,
Grenadiers (Winnipeg, Manitoba: j. J. Federowicz, 1994), pp. 280–98.
4 Carlo D’Este, Decision in Normandy (London: HarperCollins, 1983), introduction
and chapter entitled ‘The Price of Caution’.
5 Max Hastings, Overlord: D-Day and the Battle of Normandy (London: Pan, 1984);
Robin Neillands, The Battle of Normandy 1944 (London: Cassell, 2002); and Russell
Hart, Clash of Arms: How the Allies Won in Normandy (Boulder, CL: Lynne
Rienner, 2001).
6 Revisionist style views: Stephen Hart, Montgomery and Colossal Cracks: 21st Army
Group in Northwest Europe 1944–5 (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2000); John Buckley,
British Armour in the Normandy Campaign 1944 (London: Frank Cass, 2004);
Terry Copp, Fields of Fire: The Canadians in Normandy (University of Toronto
Press, 2003).
7 See Ian Gooderson, Air Power at the Battlefront: Allied Close Air Support in
Europe 1943– 45 (London: Frank Cass, 1998), the best single volume on this topic.

1

The 21st Army Group
in Normandy
Towards a new balance sheet
Terry Copp

The purpose of this chapter is to offer further evidence in support of the view
that the combat performance of the Anglo-Canadian armies in Normandy
has been greatly underrated and the effectiveness of the German forces vastly
overrated. This argument informs my study of the Canadians in Normandy,
published under the title Fields of Fire,1 but the intention here is to consider
questions about combat between British and German units in Normandy.
My views on this subject were inﬂuenced by my long association with
the late Robert Vogel and the work we shared in researching and writing a
basic narrative of the campaign in Northwest Europe published in the 1980s.
When we began our decade-long project, I had little knowledge of military
history. Vogel, who was a military historian, introduced me to Clausewitz
and other theoreticians but I soon decided that a social historian escaping a
world dominated by Marxists was entitled to be suspicious of yet another
nineteenth-century authority ﬁgure.
We agreed that history at the battalion, brigade and divisional level might
best be understood by a careful reading of the primary sources and my ﬁrst
visits to Normandy convinced me that one of the most neglected sources
was the actual ground, especially when supplemented by 1944 maps and air
photos.2 The study of the Normandy battleﬁelds suggested to me that the
basic question to answer was how the Allied soldiers overcame a powerful
enemy, defending ground of its own choosing, in just 76 days. Other historians had answered the question by referring to the decisive role of air
power and the application of brute force to the battleﬁeld, but few of them
seemed to know very much about what actually happened at the operational and tactical levels.
When our ﬁve-volume narrative was complete I began to work on three
separate but related subjects: a study of a single infantry brigade; an inquiry
into battle exhaustion; and an analysis of the role played by tactical air
power in Normandy. The later project led to an interest in operational
research in both the air force and army and I was able to interview a
number of the most important operational research specialists.3
By the mid-1990s, I was convinced that the Allied campaign in Normandy required re-examination. It was evident that air power, strategic or

12

Terry Copp

tactical, had not been the decisive factor in Normandy or elsewhere. Evidence from operational research had also demonstrated that the anecdotal
evidence on the vulnerability of Allied armour and the limited effectiveness
of Allied tank gunnery was all too true. It was equally apparent that the
principal Allied weapon systems, ﬁeld and medium artillery, were rarely
able to inﬂict damage on prepared enemy positions and were not always
able to achieve temporary neutralisation.4
These severe limitations in Allied weapons technology helped to explain
why the Battle of Normandy produced so many physical and mental casualties but brought us no closer to understanding why the enemy was so quickly
defeated. The OVERLORD planners prepared for a campaign that would
proceed in a series of managed phases. After the invading troops were
ashore they were to establish and defend a bridgehead, defeating the German
counter-attacks with naval, air, and artillery ﬁre. The bridgehead was, if
possible, to include the city of Caen, the centre of the road and rail network
in Normandy. If Caen could not be captured before German reinforcements
arrived, the city was to be masked until the build-up of Allied forces was
sufﬁcient for a set-piece attack.
South of Caen, the country was open, with good roads leading to the
Seine and Paris. The planners assumed that the enemy would defend this
area in strength, as a breakthrough here would cut off German forces in
the west and bring a quick conclusion to the Battle of Normandy. If the
enemy behaved rationally, there would be a ﬁghting withdrawal to a new
defensive line at the Seine, with the ground south of the Caen sector held as
a pivot.
The OVERLORD plan called for the American army to capture Cherbourg
and then ﬁght its way south, turning west into Brittany to capture Brest and
create a new port at Quiberon Bay. With the Brittany ports and Cherbourg
available, the Allied forces would complete the build-up necessary to liberate France by the autumn of 1944. All of this was the basis of Montgomery’s
‘master plan’, a broad concept that proved to have little operational signiﬁcance except that it focused attention on Brittany.5
If 21 Army Group could be maintained at full strength, there would be
ten infantry and ﬁve armoured divisions available to wage war against the
German forces on the eastern ﬂank. Even with ﬁve additional armoured
brigades available to support the infantry divisions, the prospects of achieving the force ratios necessary to overcome the enemy in this vital sector
were bleak. The presence of three or four German armoured divisions and a
like number of infantry divisions would make it impossible to achieve the
3:1 ratio thought to be necessary for successful attacks on well-defended
positions. The planners hoped to compensate for this weakness by ﬁghting
on Allied, not German, terms. This meant employing the largest possible
amount of artillery in the bridgehead. Each corps was to be supported by an
Army Group Royal Artillery (AGRA) with 4.5- or 5.5-inch medium guns.
Air observation pilots ﬂying light aircraft were to direct this ﬁre, and there

The 21st Army Group in Normandy 13
were to be abundant allotments of ammunition for both the medium and
ﬁeld artillery. Fully 18 per cent of the men in 21 Army Group were gunners;
just 15 per cent were to be wearing infantry ﬂashes. If the allocation of ancillary services is taken into account, fully a third of the army’s manpower was
committed to the artillery.6
This approach to war required commanders to emphasise logistics, elaborate ﬁre plans, and centralised command and control. If shells were to be
substituted for men’s lives, they had to be delivered to the right places at the
right times. Little attention has been paid to the pre-Normandy investment
in survey regiments, air photo interpretation, meteorological reports, sound
ranging, ﬂash spotting and other elements of the gunner’s war, but these
efforts were an essential part of the preparations for victory at a blood price
the Allies could afford. The gunner’s war deserves much more attention
than it has received.7
While the assault divisions prepared for an attack on the beaches of the
Calvados coast, the divisions committed to the follow-up role prepared to
‘attack, wear down and destroy German troops who would ﬁght a series of
defensive battles on ground of their own choosing’.8 There was broad agreement on how this was to be accomplished and when Lieutenant-General
Guy Simonds decided to issue a directive on operational policy to his inexperienced Canadian divisions, he sent copies to Dempsey, the Second British
Army Commander and to Montgomery, both of whom read it with ‘complete agreement’.9 British senior ofﬁcers were a bit puzzled by the Canadian
tendency to prepare written papers outlining the obvious but the Canadians
with their earnest staff ofﬁcers and abundant supply of typewriters, clerk
typists and duplicating machines produced a written record of considerable
value to soldiers and historians.
Simonds’s statement of Allied operational doctrine called for centralised
control of virtually every aspect of the battle. The enemy was to be overcome by attacks that were ‘carefully organised and strongly supported by all
available artillery’. The Germans forward defences ‘are not thickly held in
terms of men, but are strong in automatic weapons and well supported
by mortars sited up to three or four thousand yards’ behind forward lines.
The essence of the German system of defence was the counter-attack, and
‘as long as fresh reserves are available the Germans will counterattack continuously, supported by self-propelled guns brought up to close-range. The
success of the offensive battle hinged on the defeat of the German counterattacks’, and everyone was trained to deal with this reality. The preferred
solution was to stage divisional attacks ‘on a single thrust line, disposed
in depth on a one-brigade front’. Brigades would be passed through one
another to maintain momentum, with the frontage of the attack ‘limited to
that on which really heavy support can be given’. When the enemy concentrated its strength across the thrust line, a reserve brigade could be ‘thrown
wide of the leading brigade’ to dissipate the enemy’s strength. The weight of
artillery support would then be shifted to the reserve brigade.

14

Terry Copp

The infantry division, always and only when supported by the artillery,
was the ‘sledgehammer’ in the Allied arsenal. The armoured division was ‘a
weapon of opportunity’, capable of dealing with enemy rearguard positions
and developing a breakout, but it was too weak in infantry to carry out
an attack in depth. Everything experienced in Italy suggested that Allied
armour could not be used to lead attacks against prepared German positions
given the effective range of their tank and anti-tank guns.
There was no similar doctrine on the tactics to be employed in carrying out Simonds’s ‘operational policy’, partly because such training was
carried out in divisional battle schools and partly because the operational
doctrine left little room for traditional platoon or section tactics. By 1944,
experienced Allied commanders knew that the one certain way of defeating
the Germans was to ﬁnd, ﬁx and then neutralise the enemy with overwhelming ﬁrepower. This would allow the infantry to assault and occupy vital
ground, which the enemy would then counter-attack. This ‘bite and hold’
doctrine depended on the development of centrally controlled, indirect
artillery ﬁre capable of concentrating the guns of a regiment, division or
corps on a speciﬁc area. This technique provided the best possible answer to
the enemy’s doctrinal commitment to immediate and continuous counterattacks and to German technical superiority in infantry weapons and
armoured vehicles.
An artillery-based battle doctrine required the infantry to move forward
at a steady pace, leaning into the barrage, so as to be on the objective before
the enemy could engage the attackers. Riﬂe companies, supported by tanks,
would clear and consolidate, bring the anti-tank guns forward, and dig in to
meet counter-attacks from enemy infantry, who would be advancing behind
tanks or self-propelled assault guns. Success depended largely on the ability
of forward observation ofﬁcers to direct the ﬁre of the ﬁeld and medium
regiments at observed targets. This procedure, rehearsed in countless exercises, did not require the infantry to practise the ﬁre-and-movement skills
learned in battle schools. It did, however, raise questions about other
aspects of infantry training. These issues were widely debated within the
army, and on 20 April 1944 a four-day conference was held at the School of
Infantry to exchange ideas and information.10
One of the most contentious questions was raised by a staff ofﬁcer from
2nd British Army, who noted that present teaching placed too much emphasis
on the use of infantry weapons in the attack, especially the Bren. Experience
had shown that the ammunition problem was acute in the counter-attack
phase. Ammunition ﬁred in the attack was seldom aimed and was therefore
wasted. The same ofﬁcer insisted that though the riﬂeman used his weapon
in defending a position, in the attack he was ‘mostly employed as an ammunition carrier for the Bren’.
This realistic view of the impact of operational doctrine on tactics directly
challenged the traditional emphasis on teaching the infantry to ﬁght their
way forward, with their own weapons, by ﬁre and movement. This approach

The 21st Army Group in Normandy 15
was evident in a discussion of the implications of the decision that all troops
should carry a shovel and a pick into battle. Obviously, the additional weight
would limit the ability of the soldier to ﬁght his way forward; yet without
entrenching tools, no position could be held against enemy counter-attacks
and mortar ﬁre.
The critics of 21 Army Group’s pre-invasion training are quite right when
they argue that the army’s leadership ‘failed to enforce a coherent and effective tactical doctrine’.11 But was this a weakness or a strength? There was agreement on operational doctrine, and a ﬂexible approach to tactical problems
encouraged ofﬁcers to seek solutions based on speciﬁc battleﬁeld conditions,
especially analysis of the terrain using air photographs. A problem-solving
approach to combat has little appeal to military theorists, but it proved to
be an effective method of dealing with the enemy.
The discussions at the Infantry School barely touched on the role of the
armoured regiments assigned to work with infantry battalions. This was
the result of an earlier decision that the armoured commander, at the regimental, squadron or troop level, ‘is the sole arbitrator of how he can best
employ his resources’. This meant that the armoured commander decided
where to employ his tanks in support of an infantry attack, which was itself
largely determined by the artillery ﬁre plan created at division and corps.
Although ‘the primary role’ of tanks cooperating with infantry was ‘to close
with the enemy’, armoured doctrine permitted indirect support ‘on account
of the unsuitability of the ground’ or for other reasons. Armoured ofﬁcers
were also reminded that ‘everyone, and particularly the infantry, should
understand that the tank is designed with the primary object of destroying
or neutralising enemy unarmoured troops’.12
Again, it is clear that those who criticise the Commonwealth forces for
failing to develop the kind of integrated tank-infantry battlegroup doctrine
practiced by the German army are correct. The British approach, as it was
understood in May 1944, allowed everything and forbade nothing. It was
up to individual commanders to develop methods of employing their tanks
effectively, and as we shall see they did so.
The Anglo-Canadian army that fought the Battle of Normandy was well
prepared for the kind of warfare they encountered. The only real surprise
was the enemy’s stubborn, almost mindless persistence in continuing to mount
counter-attacks after it was evident that the Allies were well prepared to
deal with them. Willing soldiers led by courageous leaders were repeatedly
sacriﬁced in obedience to a doctrine that the German army ought to have
abandoned. In Normandy it was the Allies not the Germans who worked
out new ways of carrying out the intent of their orders.
This approach to the Normandy battle was developed during 20 years of
research on the Canadian rather than British army, but the Canadians were
a small part of a larger force so it was necessary to analyse speciﬁc British
operations at corps, divisional and battalion level. Canadians have a special
interest in the British divisions that served in First Canadian Army as well

16

Terry Copp

as 53 Welsh and 59 Staffordshire Divisions, formations that fought alongside the Canadians.
Let us begin with some comments on the performance of 51 Highland
Division in Normandy. The Highland Division’s record in North Africa and
Sicily has won universal praise but there is near-universal agreement that it
failed to function effectively in Normandy. I had the opportunity to present
a contrary view in Edinburgh in 1996.13 The audience included a number
of veterans who had retired holding senior rank but who were platoon or
company commanders in 1944. They were familiar with the negative view of
the division recently highlighted by Carlo D’Este and Max Hastings and
curious to know what a Canadian might have to say.
We reviewed the historiography and then focused on Montgomery’s muchquoted letter to Alanbrooke dated 15 July 1944 in which an exasperated
Monty wrote, ‘Regret to report it is considered opinion of Crocker, Dempsey
and myself that 51st Division is at present not battle worthy . . . and had
failed in every operation it has been given to do’.14 Montgomery’s solution
was to remove Major-General Bullen-Smith and replace him with a veteran
jock, Tom Rennie. Few of the veterans present accepted the idea that
Bullen-Smith had failed and that Rennie transformed the division, but there
was agreement that getting away from Crocker’s I British Corps and being
given an operational-level task in TOTALIZE had a powerful effect on
morale.
The orders given to the division in June and July required the defence
of the vital Orne bridgehead coupled with limited battalion-level actions
to secure additional ground. A difﬁcult and costly business for anyone,
Allied or enemy. Let us focus on two such actions: the battle for Ste. Honorine
la Chardonnerette on 23 June and the attempt to secure Colombelles on
11 July.
The village of Ste. Honorine, or what was left of it, had been attacked,
captured and lost during a bloody encounter in mid-June. 21 Panzer Division had counter-attacked with large forces and Bullen-Smith had wisely
decided to withdraw and allow his artillery to deal with the enemy.15 On 23
June, 152 Brigade (2nd and 5th Seaforths and 5th Camerons) organised
a carefully-staged night attack which won them complete control of the
village.16 The inevitable counter-attacks began with ﬁrst light – companysize battlegroups with tanks and self-propelled guns. This time the 13/18
Hussars provided a squadron of tanks, including Fireﬂy 17-pounders, and
the FOOs never lost contact with the ﬁeld and medium artillery. The
Cameron’s War Diary17 contains a detailed account of their part in this very
successful action which devastated Panzer Group Luck, forcing Luck to
‘rebuild the entire formation’.18 This battle, marked by careful preparation,
limited objectives, close infantry-tank cooperation and a ﬁre plan designed
to inﬂict maximum damage on an enemy whose patterned response was
easy to prepare for, is one of scores of examples of successful brigade-level
actions in Normandy that need to be studied.

The 21st Army Group in Normandy 17
A different fate awaited 153 Brigade (5th Battalion, The Black Watch;
1st and 5th /7th Battalion, The Gordon Highlanders) on the night of 10/11
July when Montgomery ordered Crocker to stage an attack on Colombelles,
one of the industrial suburbs of Caen. The object of the action was to
destroy the tall chimney stacks that provided the enemy with an unobstructed view of the Orne bridgehead. No detailed account of the battle is
possible here but since this was the action that prompted Montgomery’s
letter to Alanbrooke, we need to at least note that both division and
brigade, not to mention the 5th Battalion of The Black Watch, who were to
carry out the ﬁrst phase of the attack, knew that the Germans had reinforced their defences after Operation CHARNWOOD forced a withdrawal
from Caen.19
The limited ﬁre plan laid on by corps and patrol reports of dug-in tanks
and anti-tank guns added to everyone’s concern. Lieutenant-Colonel
Thompson, The Black Watch commanding ofﬁcer wrote an account of
the battle which is appended to the War Diary. He described the efforts to
dig-in on the ﬁrst phase objectives under constant, accurate mortar and
Nebelwerfer ﬁre. The news that The 1st Gordons had been unable to reach
all of their objectives explained the heavy ﬁre coming from the battalion’s
right ﬂank but brigade promised a new attack would begin at ﬁrst light.
Enemy infantry attacks were readily repulsed but German armour, including at least two Tigers, dealt a devastating blow to 148 Regiment RAC
Shermans destroying 10 of their 11 tanks. The available 17-pounders had
either been blinded by enemy defensive ﬁre or destroyed and played no role
in the battle. Thompson concludes:
I spoke to the Brigadier and told him that to hold the positions of my
leading companies would result in their destruction piecemeal as the
anti-tank defence had collapsed and my own 6-pounders could not be
brought to bear. He then ordered me at about 0800 hours to withdraw
to St Honorine and this move was completed under continuous smoke
by 0930 hours.20
Bullen-Smith supported this decision, infuriating Crocker and prompting
Montgomery to claim that the division ‘cannot ﬁght the Germans successfully’. Montgomery was wrong. The Black Watch withdrawal from
Colombelles was not a failure but a rational response to the realities of the
battleﬁeld.
Men in combat continually engage in cost-beneﬁt analysis. Orders are
ignored, amended or renegotiated as decision-makers engage in calculations
of risk versus gain. This reality offends senior commanders whose plans
are not carried out and military historians who seem to believe that actions
that do not go as planned ‘fail’. But the primary responsibility of the commander is to advance the goal of winning the war while the historian’s job
is to explain what happened not to issue pass/fail grades.

18

Terry Copp

The experience of the 53 Welsh Division has attracted little attention
and even less is known about Major-General R.K. Ross who commanded
it throughout the war. My interest was sparked by the close cooperation
between 2 Canadian and 53 Welsh during the advance to Falaise, but the
divisional war diaries offer other insights into other operations in Normandy. The division took up positions west of the Orne in early July and
one of its brigades fought under 15 Scottish during the battle for the Evrecy
spur, but for the rest of the month the Welsh Division fought a series of
battalion-level engagements with elements of 10SS Panzer Division and the
277 Infantry Division.
Ross quickly adapted to this limited role, ordering each battalion to thin
out their forward positions and create large left out of battle (LOB) parties.
Faced with heavy casualties from constant mortar ﬁre, Ross reorganised his
counter-mortar organisation and used his heavy mortar platoons to strike
enemy locations. He also insisted on detailed preparation for company-level
night raids designed to kill the enemy and prevent his own troops from
becoming browned-off by having to sit in slit trenches, being mortared and
shelled without retaliation. The raids appear to have accomplished their
primary purpose and to have provoked the kind of enemy counter-attacks
the divisional artillery and anti-tank regiments planned and prepared for.
One such counter-attack on 22 July resulted in 10SS regaining control of the
Bon Repas-Evrecy road, a clear victory in a win-lose narrative but a typical
German defeat in any cost-beneﬁt analysis. The Welsh division losses in July
(over 250 killed and close to 2,500 wounded) speak of the character of the
Normandy battle even when no major offensive operations were underway.21
Let us turn to the curious case of 49 (West Riding) Division. The 49th
was part of First Canadian Army for most of the campaign and their commitment to the long left ﬂank meant that the division experienced prolonged
periods of limited action. Patrick Delaforce’s recent history The Polar Bears 22
has helped to rescue the division from obscurity but many questions about
its performance in combat remain. Brigadier Trevor Hart Dyke, the author
of one of the very best memoirs of the campaign in Northwest Europe,
Normandy to Arnhem: A Story of the Infantry,23 provided some answers in a
1982 interview.
Brigadier Hart Dyke found the notion of German battleﬁeld superiority
curious. He had read Hastings and D’Este but was quite certain that the
Hallams and their sister battalions in 146 Brigade had been consistently
effective in combat against well-regarded German formations. He drew particular attention to the success of the Hallams and indeed the brigade at
Fontenay-le-Pesnel and Tessel Woods. These actions, part of 49 Division’s
Operation MARTLET, an attack in support of EPSOM, created a threekilometre deep penetration in the seam between 12SS and Panzer Lehr.24
MARTLET was designed to accomplish two purposes, distraction and
attrition. The division carried it out with considerable skill. Those who insist
that the British army never mastered the art of infantry-tank cooperation

The 21st Army Group in Normandy 19
should examine the role of 24th Lancers (8 Armoured Brigade) at Tessel
Wood. After assisting the assault battalions into Fontenay they reformed
and worked closely with the 1/4 KOYLIs, employing all three squadrons
in a close support role. With darkness falling, one squadron remained on
the western edge of the woods to protect the right ﬂank and later sent a
troop to a threatened sector, forcing three Panthers to withdraw. The next
morning the Lancers ﬂushed snipers from the hedgerows, helping the infantry
to consolidate.25 The later phases of this battle, involving major German
counter-attacks on 70 Brigade’s positions at Rauray are described in detail
in Kevin Baverstock’s superb book Breaking the Panzers.26 This account of
the Tyneside Scottish in action offers a classic description of courage and
skill in defeating powerful enemy counter-attacks. It should serve as a model
for studies of other battles in Normandy and beyond.
Brigadier Hart Dyke’s comments on battalion- and brigade-level operations prompted a discussion of the Hargest Report,27 one of the key documents used by authors critical of the combat effectiveness of the British
soldier. His ﬁrst reaction was to note that Hargest’s one reference to a 49th
Division battalion, the Lincolns, was laudatory. He insisted that there were
no problems of poor morale in his battalion or the brigade and was surprised by the bitter tone of Hargest’s comments on the armoured regiments
which he had thought superb.28 Could 50 Division’s experience have really
been so different?
Hart Dyke was also puzzled by the New Zealander’s stereotype of aggressive self-sufﬁcient Dominion soldiers whom he claimed were very different
from the ‘hesitant Tommies’. Perhaps the report by Brigadier James Hargest,
written by a brave soldier of the Great War, who had made a series of
disastrous command decisions in Crete before his capture and imprisonment
in Italy, was not an entirely dispassionate document. The Hargest Report
along with the propaganda on the inferiority of Allied soldiers routinely
produced by German staff ofﬁcers needs to be examined critically as David
French began to do in Raising Churchill’s Army.29
If we are to revise the balance sheet on the performance of the British
army in Normandy, a great deal of work needs to be done. When Fields of
Fire appeared in 2003 an American colleague asked, ‘When will you Canadians stop endlessly analysing your three division army. No one else,’ he
observed, ‘knows the names and personalities of divisional, brigade and
even battalion commanders. Why don’t you look at the larger picture?’
The answer is that before we can really look at the larger picture in 21
Army Group, we need studies of the British army at corps, divisional and
brigade level so that we have a ﬁrm basis for addressing questions about
leadership, command, morale, combat motivation and combat effectiveness.
Those who do study the campaign from the ground up will almost certainly
come to the conclusion that the ofﬁcers and men serving in 21 Army Group
demonstrated a remarkable ability to apply their doctrine and training to
the battleﬁeld. They also demonstrated an ability to learn and innovate. The

20

Terry Copp

British and Canadian response to casualties from mortar ﬁre, 70 per cent
of total losses, is a case in point. New measures were promptly introduced
and a longer-term initiative to create counter-mortar radar batteries quickly
approved.30 The development and employment of the Kangaroo armoured
personal carrier, the Wasp and Crocodile ﬂame-throwers, the institution
of CABRANK within the tactical air force, the evolution of Fireﬂy tactics
and the forward employment of self-propelled 17-pounder anti-tank guns
all point to an army able to learn from experience. It is time for historians to
follow their example.

Notes
1 Terry Copp, Fields of Fire: The Canadians in Normandy (Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 2003).
2 The Laurier Centre for Military Strategic and Disarmament Studies (LCMSDS),
Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada holds a large collection of wartime air photos and maps providing coverage of most of the areas
of Northwest Europe in which the First Canadian Army operated. (www.
canadianmilitaryhistory.com).
3 Terry Copp and Robert Vogel, Maple Leaf Route, 5 Volumes (Alma: Maple Leaf
Route, 1983–8); Terry Copp, The Brigade: the 5th Canadian Infantry Brigade
(Stoney Creek: Fortress Publications, 1992); Terry Copp and Bill McAndrew,
Battle Exhaustion: Soldiers and Psychiatrists in the Canadian Army 1939–1945
(Montreal: McGill University Press, 1990); Terry Copp (ed.) Montgomery’s
Scientists: Operational Research in 21 Army Group (Waterloo: LCMSDS, 2000).
4 ‘Accuracy of Predicted Fire’, in Copp (ed.) Montgomery’s Scientists, pp. 293–
330.
5 The OVERLORD plan is outlined in L.F. Ellis, Victory in the West, Volume 1
(London: HMSO, 1962).
6 Ibid, p. 536.
7 Shelford Bidwell, Gunners at War (London: Arms & Armour Press, 1970) is a
valuable introduction but a comprehensive study of the development of AngloCanadian artillery is yet to be written. The reports of the Army Operational
Research Group (AORG) PRO WO291 are an indispensable source for such a
project.
8 The full text of Simonds’s Directive on operational policy is reprinted as an
appendix in Copp, Fields of Fire.
9 The letters from Montgomery and Dempsey are in the National Archives of
Canada (NAC), Record Group (RG) 24, Volume 10797.
10 ‘Infantry Training Conference: Record of Discussion’, 15 May 1944, NAC RG
24, Volume 13241, Ottawa; PRO WO 204/1895.
11 Timothy Harrison Place, Military Training in the British Army, 1940–1944 (London: Frank Cass, 2000), p. 169.
12 Great Britain, War Ofﬁce, The Tactical Handling of Armoured Divisions (London:
HMSO, 1943).
13 I wish to thank Colonel Diana Henderson, Ph.D. for inviting me to Edinburgh
on this occasion.
14 Montgomery Papers, Imperial War Museum.
15 War Diary, 51 Highland Division, 16 June 1944, PRO WO 171/527.
16 See report on operations, 23/24 June in 51 Highland Division Intelligence
Summery, 24 June 1944, PRO WO 171/527.

The 21st Army Group in Normandy 21
17 War Diary, 5th Battalion the Queen’s Own Cameron Highlanders, Appendices ‘A’
and ‘B’, PRO WO 171/1270.
18 The quote is from H. von Luck, Panzer Commander: the Memories of Colonel
Hans von Luck (New York: Praeger, 1989).
19 51 Highland Division Intelligence Summaries, 30 June 1944, 10 July 1944, PRO
WO 171/527.
20 War Diary, 5th Black Watch, July 1944 PRO WO 171/1266.
21 War Diary, July 1944, 53rd (Welsh) Division, PRO WO 171/553.
22 Patrick Delaforce, The Polar Bears (Stroud: Alan Sutton, 1995).
23 Trevor Hart Dyke, Normandy to Arnhem: A Story of the Infantry (Shefﬁeld:
Privately Published, 1966).
24 Delaforce, op. cit. pp. 58–102.
25 War Diary, June 1944, 1/4 King’s Own Yorkshire Light Infantry, PRO 171/223;
see also Leonard Willis, None Had Lances: The Story of the 24th Lancers (Old
Coulsdon: 24th Lancers Old Comrades Association, 1985).
26 Kevin Baverstock, Breaking the Panzers (Stroud: Sutton Publishing, 2002).
27 Brigadier James Hargest, ‘Notes’ PRO CAB 106/1060.
28 Letter Brigadier Trevor Hart Dyke to Terry Copp, 1987, author’s archives.
29 David French, Raising Churchill’s Army (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).
30 Terry Copp, ‘Counter-mortar operational research in 21 Army Group,’ Canadian
Military History, 3(2), (1994), pp. 6–21.

22

2

Mungo Melvin

The German perspective
Mungo Melvin

Introduction
In the many studies of the Normandy campaign of 1944 there have been
numerous attempts to explain why the Germans did so well in defence and
why the Allied forces made comparatively slow progress in attack. None of
this critique should mask the undeniable fact, however, that the campaign
was won by the Allies and that the bulk of the German army in the West
was defeated in the process. The best strategic cards, and most of the operational ones, were held and played by the Allies throughout three bitter
months of ﬁghting. Allied air supremacy, in particular, severely restricted
German operational manoeuvre throughout the campaign. Furthermore,
the Allies enjoyed relative logistic ‘plenty’ in comparison with widespread
German deprivation. However, in the realm of combined arms tactics, and
of ﬁghting power at formation level, the Germans often showed themselves
as superior opponents on the battleﬁeld. This chapter aims to indicate
how superior doctrine and training, if linked to appropriate equipment and
organisation, can have a profound effect on the outcome of engagements,
battles and major operations, if not campaigns. If the beneﬁcial effects
of defensive terrain and high morale (ﬁghting spirit) are added, then the
German defeat in Normandy was by no means certain. As the Allied
planners of Normandy had rightly predicted, the campaign was to turn out
(in modern phraseology) ‘no cakewalk’. The British, with perhaps the
honourable exception of Montgomery, had their own doubts as to the success
of the enterprise.

Doctrine
German Army Regulation 300, Truppenführung, the ﬁrst part of which
was published in 1933, is arguably one of the most signiﬁcant pieces of
doctrinal writing in military history.1 It set the intellectual framework and
provided the detailed guidance for the manner in which the German army
planned and conducted war at the tactical level. But it would be inaccurate
to describe the document in simple terms as ‘Field Service Regulations’ or

The German perspective 23
‘Formation Tactics’. It was a more forward-looking document. The introduction, for example, stands today as enduring testimony to the far-sightedness
of its authors, its sentiments as relevant to 2006 as to 1933:
1 War is an art, a free and creative activity founded on scientiﬁc principles. It makes the very highest demands on the human personality.
2 The conduct of war is subject to continual development. New weapons dictate ever-changing forms. Their appearance must be anticipated
and their inﬂuence evaluated. Then they must be placed into service
quickly.
3 Combat situations are of unlimited variety. They change frequently
and suddenly and can seldom be assessed in advance. Incalculable
elements often have a decisive inﬂuence. One’s own will is pitted
against the independent will of the enemy. Friction and errors are daily
occurrences.2
Most signiﬁcantly, the concluding sentence of Truppenführung’s short introduction contains an important clue as to the remarkable powers of the
German Army to regain the initiative:
15 . . . The ﬁrst criterion in war remains decisive action. Everyone, from
the highest commander down to the youngest soldier, must constantly be
aware that inaction and neglect incriminate him more severely than any
error in the choice of means.3
Of course doctrine alone does not provide ﬁghting power in battle. To the
conceptual component must be added the moral component of leadership
and morale, and not least the physical means to conduct the ﬁghting –
combat power. Further, doctrine has to be learnt and practised through
training. As we shall see, inconsistencies in doctrine and training within the
British army reduced its ﬁghting power in Normandy and hence its operational effectiveness. However, the fact remains that whatever the differences
of training standards among German units – and there was a very wide
range within the German army by June 1944 – the doctrine was at least
uniform and applied fairly uniformly.

Doctrine under test
In Normandy, the German army was placed on the defensive, strategically,
operationally, and for the most part, tactically. German defensive tactics
had been developed from practical experience of the First World War, particularly in facing British and French offensives on the Western Front. By
1944, moreover, the German doctrine of 1933 had been supplemented by
much further practical experience, and particularly that hard-won over three
years on the Eastern Front against the Soviet army. So in the face of Allied

24

Mungo Melvin

air power, naval ﬁre support and ﬁeld artillery, how did the Germans resist
for three months? Again, a few short extracts from Truppenführung indicate
the German approach:
427 The defensive [Abwehr] is based primarily on ﬁrepower. The
defender, therefore, must try to produce the maximum ﬁre effect. Accomplishing this requires a detailed knowledge of the battle area, which
in turn facilitates the use of terrain by means of ﬁeld fortiﬁcations.
Such positions provide better cover and make possible superiority of
ﬁre against the moving attackers.
Apart from obvious signiﬁcance of ﬁrepower and ﬁre effect, the use of
terrain to best advantage is given particular emphasis:
429 The defensive terrain itself dictates the position of the forward elements. Good observation for the artillery and the infantry heavy weapons
is usually the most important consideration for effective ﬁres. Terrain
that provides concealment for the infantry from enemy observation may
be an overriding requirement.4
More interestingly, the enemy’s perspective is also considered, noting
that ‘when the situation permits’, terrain should be reconnoitred from the
enemy’s point of view. Speciﬁcally:
430 When the natural strength of the ground is used skilfully and
the positions are well camouﬂaged, the natural terrain picture can be
preserved. This in turn will hinder the enemy’s reconnaissance efforts.
In certain situations, less favourable terrain can be more advantageous
than stronger terrain from which the enemy can easily determine the
organization and intent of the defender.5
So when one wonders how the Germans managed to block VIII (Br) Corps’
armoured phalanx attack during Operation GOODWOOD (18–20 July
1944), part of the reason surely rests in the skilled application of a wellconsidered defensive tactical doctrine to a piece of well-selected terrain. A
bitter foretaste of German defensive prowess had already been given during
Operation EPSOM (25 June–1 July 1944) in which 15th Scottish Division
had received a bloody nose at the skilled hands of 12th SS Panzer Division.
German planning for the expected British break-out in the Caen sector
had anticipated a tank-heavy assault and had designed a deeply echeloned
defence accordingly. With a depth of over 15km, this was twice the ﬁgure
that British intelligence had estimated before the battle. Even Major
General Feuchtinger, the commander of 21st Panzer Division who was
better known in the German army for his loyal organisation of Hitler’s
prewar rallies (Parteitage) than for his tactical abilities, had recognised the

The German perspective 25
defensive potential of the area and, prompted by Rommel, had developed it
into a very carefully prepared ‘tank-killing zone’.
Truppenführung Part I (1933) devoted no less than 17 pages of detail in its
Chapter VIII on the planning and conduct of the defence. The preparation
of a ‘main battle area’ was based on the careful identiﬁcation and setting
out of a ‘main line of resistance’ (Hauptkampﬂinie (HKL)), which was protected by the ‘main outpost line’. In turn, this line (a set of interlocked
positions) was protected by a series of ‘advanced positions’ that denied the
enemy close reconnaissance of the main defence. Additional lines to the rear
of the HKL could provide further depth to the defence. Additional detail
on defence against enemy armoured vehicles was added in the ﬁrst chapter
of Truppenführung Part II (1934). While tactical situations such as those
prevailing in Operation GOODWOOD ten years later could not have been
fully predicted, the doctrinal guidance of Truppenführung held good, stressing the integrated roles of artillery and anti-tank guns in particular:
756 In combat the enemy normally will deploy his armoured vehicles
in great numbers and with the advantage of surprise. Defences, therefore, must be prepared as strongly as possible at all points where enemy
attack is probable.
757 Artillery must engage enemy armoured vehicles when they are preparing for attack, approaching, or in the process of attacking. The ﬁre
of multiple batteries should be massed whenever possible. Artillery ﬁre
should be registered-in to cover the zones where enemy armoured attack
is most likely . . . When infantry antitank guns are committed, their function is to destroy enemy armoured vehicles before they succeed in
breaking through to the main infantry positions. Anti-tank guns should
be deployed in concealed ﬁring positions that provide mutual supporting ﬁre.
758 Enemy tanks that break through are engaged by anti-tank guns
deployed in depth and by the reserve. The preparation of a defence
against such an attack is the responsibility of the divisional anti-tank
battalion commander, based on the guidance of the division commander.6
In 1933/4 this doctrine was written largely from the perspective of an
infantry division conducting defence. Regimental anti-tank companies protected their respective regiments, while the divisional commander retained
control of the anti-tank battalion as a mobile reserve. When greater numbers of tanks and self-propelled guns became available during the course
of the Second World War, defensive tactics were modiﬁed accordingly to
exploit their hitting power, protection and mobility.
German equipment was also well suited to the defensive battle, which was
designed around ‘support weapons’. From the infamous 8.8cm dual purpose

26

Mungo Melvin

anti-aircraft and anti-tank gun to the heavy Tiger tanks; to the ubiquitous
Schuh and Teller mines; to the numerous 50mm and 81mm mortars; to the
Nebelwerfer multi-barrelled rocket launchers; and not least to the superb
MG42 general purpose machine-guns (with over twice the ﬁrepower of the
British Bren light machine-gun, and issued at twice the scale), the German
army was well equipped if not well manned. In terms of unit ﬁrepower, a
German infantry battalion had heavier weapons than its British or American counterparts.
In German doctrine, particular emphasis was given to the counter-attack
in the conduct of the defensive battle. The relevant paragraphs from
Truppenführung are well worth quoting in full:
463 Should a portion of the main battle area be penetrated and taken
by the enemy, all efforts should ﬁrst be made to eliminate them with
ﬁres. Friendly infantry elements and supporting weapons in the immediate area of the penetration [should] attempt to eject the enemy through
hasty counter attacks before he can establish himself. These elements
can be supported effectively by artillery ﬁre laid in the rear of the enemy.
These elements, however, should not be dependent upon artillery support.
Should these measures fail, or should the enemy make a major penetration, the senior commander decides whether a deliberate counter
attack will be made to restore the position or whether the main battle
area is to be reestablished farther to the rear. Whenever possible, the
counter attack is launched against an enemy ﬂank. The counter attack
requires thorough preparation, especially when launched by strong forces.
A single commander must control the assembly areas, timing, objectives,
boundaries, artillery support, and the commitment of armoured vehicles
and air units. Too much haste leads to failure.
Reserves intended for the counter attack must be so assembled, or
during the course of the attack so shifted, that they are readily available.7
Of special signiﬁcance was the German distinction between an immediate
or hasty counter-stroke (Gegenstoss) and a planned or deliberate counterattack (Gegenangriff ). Broadly speaking, the former was a sub-unit or unit
responsibility, whereas the latter was a formation one.8 As an example of
German command responsibilities, Major Hans von Luck – on the main
effort of 21st Panzer Division’s defence during Operation GOODWOOD –
was able to direct his defensive battle, including calling on all available
divisional and corps reserves, without having to refer to his divisional commander for advice or authority.
German doctrine was very clear about the committal of reserves in both
offensive and defensive operations:
47 During the course of a battle the commander inﬂuences the action
most directly by the increase and concentration of ﬁre and the commit-

The German perspective 27
ment of his reserve . . . Assessing the strength of the reserve, constituting
the reserve, and committing the reserve requires careful consideration.
Mobility increases the opportunities for its commitment . . . By committing his reserve, the commander plays his last card regarding the shock
elements at his disposal. He must not be led into doing this too early.
On the other hand, he must not hesitate if committing the reserve means
achieving a decision or if the battleﬁeld situation requires it. Once the
reserve is committed, the rapid formation of a new reserve is critically
important.9
So in viewing the German army’s performance in defence during the
Normandy campaign, a number of factors stand out from a consideration
of its doctrine:

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

the careful selection and adaption of terrain to best advantage;
through active security measures (screening) and passive ones (such as
camouﬂage), to deny (and if necessary destroy) enemy reconnaissance
efforts;
an emphasis on delivering effective ﬁre throughout the depth of the
defensive battle zone, to break up the momentum of the enemy’s assault;
a clear responsibility to counter-attack, either on a hasty or deliberate
basis;
despite the skilled use of terrain, a focus on the enemy throughout and
his defeat;
ﬂexible tactical command and combined arms cooperation throughout
– despite signiﬁcant operational- and strategic-level shortcomings;
pragmatic decision in battle – based on thorough application of doctrine,
good leadership, training and grip.

For all its many shortcomings, not least in its very generous treatment of
Montgomery and British tactics, the British ofﬁcial history gave due (if not
grudging) praise to the German defence:
Apart from the fatal defects in their command, German operations
were fought under the insuperable handicap of the Allies’ mastery in the
air. No single factor did so much to assist the Allied armies’ victory as
the sustained air attack which seldom ceased and which rose at times to
almost unbearable intensity. In this branch of warfare the German air
force could neither hit back with comparable blows nor defend itself
effectively. Yet in spite of this appalling handicap and others that have
been recognized, the German armies in Normandy deserve credit for
the tenacity and discipline with which they fought and the manner in
which they held up the Allies’ progress. That their ﬁght ended in defeat
was partly due to factors which soldiers in the ﬁeld could not control. It
is true that a signiﬁcant number surrendered or were taken prisoner but

28

Mungo Melvin
many fought their way back and were to ﬁght another day. The battle
of Normandy was not only lost by the German Army’s heavy defeat in
the ﬁeld but by Hitler’s way of ﬁghting it.10

The German inﬂuence on British theory and practice
It remains one of the ironies of British tactical method since the Second
World War that the ﬂexibility inherent in German combined arms battle
groups (Kampfgruppen) was institutionalised in a rather inﬂexible manner.
Today we still think in terms of ﬁxed battalion-sized groupings rather
than the variable groupings and command level required for the mission at
hand. Von Luck’s ‘battlegroup’ of the 21st Panzer Division, for example,
was a reinforced Panzergrenadier regiment which contained at least four
infantry and armoured battalion equivalents, with additional artillery and
armoured support. Whilst this was an example of predetermined task organisation, a German Kampfgruppe could also be thrown together in combat
as a hasty ad hoc grouping in the face of the enemy’s (Anglo-American
or Soviet) numerical superiority, particularly in ﬂuid situations. For the
Germans to make a virtue out of tactical necessity is one thing; for the
British to apply it rigidly thereafter as an organisational principle is quite
another matter.
Yet inculcating a combined-arms mentality within a formation is not just
a matter of providing the appropriate training and operational experience.
If the basic doctrine is ill-founded in the ﬁrst place, or misapplied in action
against a determined enemy, then the results can be disastrous. The combat performance of the battle-hardened 7th Armoured Division, which
had fought well in North Africa and Italy, was poor in Normandy. Its oftquoted ﬁrst offensive action in 1944 at Villers-Bocage warrants only brief
re-examination. Sufﬁce it to say, the 22nd Armoured Brigade’s advance
guard of the 4th County of London Yeomanry (Sharpshooters) was hit very
hard on 13 June 1944 by Obersturmführer Michael Wittman, a company
commander of 101st SS Heavy Tank Battalion. The infamous action took
place in the vicinity of Point 213, a high point north-east of Villers-Bocage
on the road to Caen. However, what is remarkable about this one-sided
engagement in which one German Tiger tank commander managed to
destroy a squadron’s worth of British Cromwells bunched-up non-tactically,
is the higher-level confusion surrounding the employment of 7th Armoured
Division as a whole.
In fact, the ‘Desert Rats’ had adopted a ﬂexible combined arms structure
of tanks and infantry which the 11th and Guards Armoured Divisions were
only to adopt after Operation GOODWOOD. The problem was greater:
demonstrable indecision in command. After the initial rebuff, 22nd Armoured
Brigade did manage to defeat the determined German counter-attacks from
elements of the Panzer Lehr and 2nd Panzer Divisions, but neither the 131st
Lorried Infantry Brigade nor the balanced divisional reserve (an armoured

The German perspective 29
regiment and an infantry battalion) was effectively employed. Furthermore,
the divisional commander, Erskine, withdrew 22nd Armoured Brigade
prematurely, blaming the commander of XXX Corps, Bucknall, for failing
to provide adequate reinforcements. And the army commander, Dempsey,
hardly covered himself in glory at this critical early stage of the campaign.
Coherent command was not in evidence, and the ﬁne theory of FSR III
(Field Service Regulations) was not applied in practice:
In dealing with his subordinates, a commander will allot them deﬁnite
tasks, clearly explaining his intentions, and will allow them liberty of
action in arranging the methods by which they will carry out these
tasks. Undue centralization and interference with subordinates is harmful, since they are apt either to chafe at excessive control or to become
afraid of taking responsibility.11
Some weeks after the battle both Erskine and Bucknall were sacked by
Montgomery (and rightly so in the opinion of many writers). The whole
very confused affair at Villers-Bocage and its set of associated bitterly
contested engagements is now treated by many historians as a damning
indictment of British tactical incompetence – demonstrated by a particularly
disappointing performance of a veteran division ‘living on its reputation’.
Further, the corps (XXX) and army (Second British) levels of command
had displayed weaknesses in handling their subordinate formations that
were to take many weeks of ﬁghting and bitter experience to resolve. The
principles of ‘freedom of action’, and ‘unity of effort’, understood today as
fundamental to mission command, were not applied.
What is even more remarkable about the Normandy campaign from a
British perspective is that Montgomery only issued Some Notes on the
Conduct of War and the Infantry Division in Battle in November 1944.12 This
useful pamphlet, which drew heavily on the experiences of the Normandy
campaign, together with its sequels Some Notes on the Use of Air Power in
Support of Land Operations and Direct Air Support and The Armoured Division in Battle, would perhaps have saved many lives had 21st Army Group
as a whole trained on something similar before the campaign.13 However, at
no time was sufﬁcient doctrinal emphasis placed on the planning and conduct of corps-level and army operations at the interface of the tactical and
operational levels of war. What was emphasised throughout was a focus
on capturing ground, and not on defeating the enemy. Yet Montgomery’s
doctrine did rely on some German terms to make up for the paucity in British
military thought. Montgomery was remarkably open-minded in this respect.
The Armoured Division in Battle, for example, in describing ‘basic points
of any operation’ directed: ‘In all offensive operations endeavour to hit
hard on a narrow front and keep on hitting, penetrate deeply, and then turn
outwards, i.e. the Schwerpunkt and the Aufrollen. The momentum of the
attack must be kept up at all costs’.14 But if one thinks of all the fuss

30

Mungo Melvin

doctrine writers face today in introducing new terms for new concepts, one
wonders whether we would get away with lifting expressions directly from
other military languages!
Signiﬁcantly, neither the British nor the Americans (unlike the Germans
and Russians) recognised in 1944 the crucial role of operational art in linking
and sequencing tactical actions to strategic objectives. The Anglo-American
inability to plan and to execute encirclement operations was a signiﬁcant
failure of doctrine and practice, and the battle of the Falaise Pocket compares badly with equivalent Soviet operations. The German ability to extricate forces out of the Pocket reﬂected their experiences on the Eastern Front,
both in victory and in defeat. German doctrine stressed the importance of
envelopment, reﬂecting Moltke the Elder’s dictum of envelop, encircle and
destroy (Umfassen, Einschliessen, Vernichten).
FSR III, however, contains guidance on envelopment, penetration and
pursuit in the context of the offensive battle but does not once mention
encirclement. Rather, a typically ‘phased’ approach is emphasised, which
despite the authors’ warning note, became the hallmark of Montgomery’s
way of war:
No ﬁxed rules for battle can be laid down, but generally the offensive
battle will have the following phases: the preparatory stage; the main
attack on the enemy’s position, carefully organized and prepared; the
period of exploitation by the reserves after initial success or of reconstruction after failure; and pursuit, when the enemy is driven from the
battleﬁeld. Though these phases are treated separately in this manual in
order to show the differences in methods that each demands, they will
seldom be as clear-cut and distinct in actual practice, and will often tend
to merge into each other, without any marked interval.15
In any broad analysis of British doctrine and tactical performance in
Normandy, in comparison with the German, a number of common threads
can be identiﬁed:
1

2

3

In the Second World War, British army doctrine and training methods
were confused by a multiplicity of steadily-revised sources. Lessons
were not systematically incorporated: they were identiﬁed but certainly
not learnt!
Lacking a single, coherent and authoritative taught and understood
doctrine, units and formations adopted different methods in battle.
Drills for combined arms groupings at battlegroup level did not become
standardised until the latter stages of the Normandy campaign.
In practice, manoeuvre was often conducted on a piecemeal basis: battalions were given brigade tasks, brigades given divisional tasks and
so in – an enduring fault identiﬁed in North Africa, Sicily and mainland Italy.

The German perspective 31
4

5

Local tactical successes were rarely exploited with sufﬁcient resolve and
vigour. Undue brave risks were often taken at the lower tactical levels
whereas divisional and corps operations were predominantly conducted
in a risk-averse manner. Mission command was the exception, not the
rule. Too little freedom of action was given at all levels of command.
That said, British ‘bite and hold’ tactics, combined with heavy and
largely very effective air, naval and land-based artillery ﬁre support did
wear down and defeat the majority of German formations opposing
21st Army Group.

The German inﬂuence on American doctrine
The US army in Normandy started the campaign as a junior partner but by
its end had become the senior one. Facing even worse terrain than the
majority of British formations, the Americans adapted to the particular
demands of close combat in the bocage. From the ‘battle for the hedgerows’,
they then demonstrated a ﬂair for deep armoured manoeuvre in breakingout from the western ﬂank (Operation COBRA) and exploiting deep into
northern and eastern France. Critics of the American approach point to an
over-dependence on ﬁrepower and logistics. This view was not shared by the
German formations facing them, however! Yet the foundation for this
ﬂexibility in an army that had grown at a faster rate than the British was a
combination of pragmatism, doctrine and training method. Although slow
to adopt specialist armour in the preparation of the campaign (and this
failure contributed to their heavy losses at Omaha Beach), the Americans
were quick to incorporate hedge-busting rams to their tanks in the bocage.
Doctrinally, it is a gross but nonetheless fair interpretation to set the US
army as somewhere between the German and British armies. This is hardly
surprising as the Field Manual 100-5 Operations (FM 100-5) was largely
based on the German Truppenführung. Furthermore, the US army had paid
close attention to the reports sent by its students attending the German War
College (Kriegsakademie) before the Second World War. As an aside, one of
the American students, Albert C. Wedemeyer, wrote a very detailed analysis
of German doctrine and training before the war and then went on to plan
from his ofﬁce in the Pentagon War Plans Division the massive expansion
of the US army based on the imperative of raising a continental army to
ﬁght a decisive campaign in Europe against the German army.
According to the editors of the recently published English edition of
Truppenführung, the German doctrine was translated into English by US
Army Intelligence in the late 1930s, and ‘greatly inﬂuenced the 1940 and
1944 editions of FM 100-5’. Indeed, the 1940 version of FM 100-5 ‘was
organized in a very similar manner’ and even more remarkably, ‘its writers
even lifted entire sentences from Truppenführung’.16 The US army’s links
to German doctrinal thought were developed further after the Second
World War. Captured German general staff ofﬁcers under the leadership of

32

Mungo Melvin

Generaloberst Halder reviewed the 1944 edition of FM 100-5 and published
a report on it in April 1953.
So rather than analysing extracts from FM 100-5, the German view on
US army doctrine is perhaps more illuminating, as the following extract
from Halder’s report illustrates:
Uniformity of doctrine is a prerequisite of independent action within
the overall operational framework. If, however, doctrine is uniform and
a subordinate commander has, accordingly, been given freedom to act
in the spirit of his mission, then any additional instructions hamper
his initiative. The manual [FM 100-5] frequently attempts to foresee
or forestall possible developments in a combat situation by the use of
an order and to arrange details in advance. This tendency cramps the
initiative of a commander who, being on the spot, has a better chance
of assessing the situation. Thus, it robs the troops of one of the major
prerequisites of success. For instance, to make every single decision to
withdraw from a sector of the front dependent on permission from the
immediate superior is unjustiﬁable and conducive to irresolution . . .
According to our [German] experience, the method of assigning broad
missions is the best, provided a trained ofﬁcer corps is available. According to this method, clear and unambiguous missions are assigned, but
their execution is the responsibility of the subordinate commander. As a
result it may be said that ‘Orders should conﬁne themselves to what is
necessary to achieve their objective’.17
Surely this view holds true today – even in an increasingly digitized era.
The Halder report also stressed the need for clarity in tactical expression.
It is a fact that military English is not as rich as military German, and thus
it is more difﬁcult for the English speaker to be as precise and succinct in
oral or written orders as his German counterpart. As we have seen, even
Montgomery had to resort to German terms in the Armoured Division in
Battle. Few Germans would need to debate Schwerpunkt in the way that
‘main effort’ is discussed in British military circles – and often in a confused
manner whether at a staff college course or in a formation headquarters.

Conclusions
This chapter has not attempted to provide a comprehensive survey of
German and Allied doctrine in 1944. Rather, it has suggested a number of
dominating themes discerned from German and British theory and practice.
Lack of space has precluded an equivalent or balanced perspective of US
army doctrine, except to indicate its surprising German origins. However,
there are several broad enduring issues that warrant more detailed reﬂection, discussion and debate. It is suggested that the following matters be
discussed further:

The German perspective 33

•
•
•
•
•
•

What is the purpose of doctrine – to educate or to train? At what level
should it be pitched?
How general should doctrine be – ‘broad brush’ or speciﬁc in terms of
detailed tactics, techniques and procedures? What emphasis should be
given to clarity of expression?
When should one discard existing doctrine and issue new material? What
are the risks involved in having too much or too ‘fresh’ doctrine, and of
having too many bodies involved in its production and dissemination?
How can a ‘lessons identiﬁed’ process best be linked to the production
of doctrine?
What have we to learn from the different approaches adopted by the
German and Allied armies in the Second World War, particularly in
terms of combined arms tactics and command styles?
What can we learn from the need to exploit ?

Finally
The ﬁnal question is surely to consider the broader lessons of a study of
the Normandy campaign to the development of contemporary joint and
multinational doctrine. Whilst the Allies excelled at joint operations, in ﬁre
support and in logistics, the Germans often more than held their own at the
tactical level. Part of the reason for this German asymmetric success surely
rested on their sound combined arms doctrine, usually interpreted ﬂexibly
as the situation and terrain dictated. But no amount of tactical- (or even
operational-) level virtuosity could make up for signiﬁcant strategic deﬁciencies, not only in material and personnel resources, but also in terms of high
command. It is against this background that the Normandy campaign of
1944 remains a rich treasure trove of relevant and stimulating issues for an
examination of contemporary warfare and the study of high command. To
dismiss it in the modern context of ‘effects-based operations’ and ‘networkcentric warfare’ is to ignore the enduring aspects of war, including human
factors, friction and chance. Any doctrine that denies these essential truths
is surely ﬂawed. Regardless of the scale of effort, enemy or terrain, military
success depends on the appropriate blending of the conceptual, moral and
physical components of ﬁghting power. Over 60 years on, all this doctrinal
bedrock surely endures!

Notes
1 Truppenführung, Heeresdienstvorschrift (German Army Regulations) 300 Part I
(1933). Translations of both Part I and II (1934) are contained in Bruce Condell
and David T. Zabecki (eds) On the German Art of War: Truppenführung (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2001). All page references refer to the 2001 translation;
all paragraph numbers refer to the German original editions. Truppenführung
is best translated – if not somewhat clumsily – as ‘Unit /Formation Command
and Tactics’.

34

Mungo Melvin

2 Ibid., p. 17.
3 Ibid., p. 19. Emphasis as in the original.
4 Ibid., p. 119.
5 Ibid., p. 120.
6 Ibid., p. 196.
7 Ibid., p. 128.
8 German, British and American terminologies differed in 1944 and continue to
cause some confusion today. In military German, the unit (Einheit) refers to
company equivalents. Formations (Verbände) included battalions and regiments;
divisions and larger formations were termed Grossverbände. The Germans
employed ‘brigades’ at the beginning and at the end of the Second World War,
but fought as regiments and divisions for the most part. The British ‘unit’ is the
battalion equivalent, the ‘formation’ is a brigade or larger organisation. Only the
British army continues to interchange ‘battalion’ and ‘regiment’ depending on
cap badge. The US army of 1944 did not have brigades: infantry divisions were
composed of three regiments; armoured divisions normally fought as two mixed
armour and infantry ‘Combat Commands’. In current US army terminology, a
‘unit’ may be used to describe a battalion, brigade or division. The Second World
War term Regimental Combat Team (RCT) survives today in the US Marine
Corps usage.
9 Truppenführung, op. cit., p. 26.
10 L.F. Ellis, Victory in the West – Volume I (London: HMSO, 1962), p. 490.
11 Field Service Regulations Vol. III. (FSR III ) Operations – Higher Formations,
1935 (London: HMSO, 1936), p. 9.
12 Some Notes on the Conduct of War and the Infantry Division in Battle (Bernard
Montgomery, 1944).
13 Some Notes on the Use of Air Power in Support of Land Operations and Direct Air
Support (Bernard Montgomery, 1944).
14 The Armoured Division in Battle (Holland: 21st Army Group, December 1944),
p. 11, Sub-paragraph 22 (c). The original text was set in capital letters for emphasis.
15 FSR III, p. 37.
16 Bruce Condell and David T. Zabecki (eds) On the German Art of War:
Truppenführung (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2001), p. 10.
17 Ibid., p. 282. Annex E of the Condell and Zabecki edition contains the ﬁrst three
chapters of Halder’s report, highlighting the key differences between German
and American military thinking.

3

The German commanders
on D-Day
Marc Hansen

Most D-Day 1944 publications intended for a wider general audience
focus largely on the Allied Forces. But, since a historical event such as
‘Normandy 1944’ demands an analysis from a multinational perspective, it
is rather important to take speciﬁc aspects of both sides into consideration
or, to put it in the words of Field Marshal Sir Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of
Wellington: ‘to look at the other side of the hill’. In recent years there has
been a vivid discussion within the community of German military historians
as to whether the German public, the military and the political elite of the
Third Reich saw the Allied landings and the Battle for Normandy as the
decisive battle of the Second World War.1 Of course, we historians know
by now that the turning point in the European theatre came in 1941. The
strategic concept of a global blitzkrieg 2 – that is, a series of successive tactical operational successes featuring rapid armoured formations – has to be
seen as a failure by the end of 1941 at the latest, when the German Operation BARBAROSSA was brought to a standstill shortly before Moscow.
This signiﬁed the loss of the Third Reich’s only chance to decide the war in
its favour, though of course it must be kept in mind that such conclusions
always represent a retrospective analysis. Nevertheless, the prevailing opinion now held by the majority of today’s military historians in Germany is
that the turn of the war was indeed in 1941. But in 1944, this perception did
not loom large in the experiences of the majority of Germans, or of many
representatives of the military and political elite. We have to consider the
possibility, indeed probability, that they simply did not believe that the
outcome of the war was decided by June 1944.3
Continuing this train of thought, a key question arises regarding the
Allied landings in Normandy in June 1944. If, for the majority of the leading elite, the war was not decided at the time of D-Day, then one should
consider if the invasion was viewed as the decisive battle in a Clausewitzian
sense.4 Speciﬁcally, this thesis asks us to consider whether senior military
leaders privy to the true war situation viewed the invasion as the decisive
battle of the war because of true inner conviction or for other reasons.
Maybe they did it as ‘l’art pour l’art’, maybe to prevent a recurrence of a
‘November 1918’, or maybe they found themselves hopelessly obliged to the

36

Marc Hansen

oath of allegiance they swore to their Führer. In order to assess this thesis
it is therefore crucial to examine the speciﬁc opinions and views of these
German general ofﬁcers, most obviously those who deployed in France on
the most likely invasion front. Therefore it is the aim of this chapter to
present a critical discussion of the differing personal attitudes of German
commanding ofﬁcers to the Allied invasion who were deployed in France in
June 1944.
Due to space constraints, it is not possible to deal with all German commanding ofﬁcers in Western Europe. This analysis will therefore concentrate on the main decision-makers in Oberbefehlshaber West (OB West),
Army Group B, Seventh Army headquarters and the divisional commanders
of the infantry and tank divisions stationed directly on the invasion front.
The most important sources are the unpublished ﬁles from the Bundesarchiv/
Militärarchiv at Freiburg, Germany. In addition, the compilation Foreign
Military Studies, kept in the BA/MA has been accessed, with due regard to
its possibly questionable historical authenticity.5
As early as November 1940, the OB West6 Generalfeldmarschall Gerd
von Rundstedt determined that any defence against enemy attempts at landing on the Western European coast had become considerably more difﬁcult
due to lack of organisation among the senior and lower ranking leadership
in situ. Commands given from the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW),7
especially the Führer’s orders No. 40 and No. 51,8 were intended to facilitate a uniﬁed execution of command in the West; indeed, they were to
regulate the orientation of all armed force activities for defence against an
Allied landing attempt. But for reasons inherent within the inadequate
internal leadership structure of the German armed forces, they never worked
properly regarding the preparation to repulse an Allied invasion of Western
Europe.
The OB West was responsible for preparing and implementing the defence
of the coast of the occupied western region, but to this end only army troops
were under its direct control, which proved a clear disadvantage for preparation of defence. All air force and navy units deployed in France
were under OB West control only as far as they were intended for operative
war activities, otherwise they were exclusively subject to the orders of the SS
Führungshauptamt Oberkommando der Luftwaffe9 or the Oberkommando
der Marine.10 Indeed, those navy and air force units stationed at the Atlantic
and channel coast sectors of France (Luftﬂotte 3 and Marinegruppenkommando
West) did everything to retain an independent status.
Within this organisational chaos – described in the literature as Befehlschaos
(confusion of command) – von Rundstedt and his chief of staff, General der
Infanterie Günther Blumentritt, recognised the impossibility of mounting
a successful defence against any landing attempt by Allied forces. That this
landing attempt would take place and that it would be ‘successful on every
front’,11 as Blumentritt remarked, was never substantially doubted at any

The German commanders on D-Day 37
time by either of these commanders. However, they were also both clearly
convinced that defeating this invasion would be the deciding point of the
war. The OB West and Blumentritt’s chief of staff held this view of an
Allied landing based on two reasons, one political and one strategic. A
failure to open a second European front would represent a massive loss in
credibility for the Western Allies vis-a-vis the Soviet Union, who already had
a very fragile and complicated relationship with each other. The possibility
of a separate peace with the Western powers – albeit perhaps disadvantageous for the Third Reich – was a distinct possibility if a second front failed.
On a strategic level, the entire staff at OB West saw an opportunity for the
Allies by way of landing in Northern France – as long as the landing occurred at the Pas de Calais – to open the route to the Rhine and Ruhr areas
essential to Germany’s war economy. According to Blumentritt, the entire
hinterland behind the lines of the 15th Army to the Rhine was ‘practically
free from troops capable of ﬁghting’.12 In the view of OB West, a landing at
the Pas de Calais – which according to Blumentritt would be successful
particularly due to Allied air superiority even against the relatively strong
15th Army – was potentially the decisive strategic option for the Allied
forces. The erroneous belief that the Allies would not actually make use of
this ‘golden opportunity’ was the main reason for the OB West’s decision to
retain 15th Army forces at the Pas de Calais for defence against the anticipated main strike. Naturally, with the beneﬁt of hindsight, it is easy to
criticise von Rundstedt and Blumentritt for adhering to that decision for
too long a time.
However, the deciding error of the staff at OB West was the complete
misidentiﬁcation of the size of Allied force concentrations in and around
the beaches on D-Day itself. The lack of information relayed from the
landing area prevented most higher commanders from identifying where
enemy concentrations were located and whether the action was a major
landing or a diversionary manoeuvre. The window of opportunity for a
successful defence against the invasion – at least as it still appeared in theory
– closed on the evening of D + 3 at the latest. From this date onwards, the
plans of OB West and all other German commanders in the West did not
correspond with the reality of the situation. Their plans and their actions
once more conﬁrmed Napoleon’s hypothesis that land could always be
regained, but never time.
Regarding the famous Panzerkontroverse (tank controversy),13 which carried on long after the war had ended, both von Rundstedt and Blumentritt
in principle considered Geyr von Schweppenburg’s view as the correct
defence strategy. The issue was whether defending against the invasion
could have been better achieved had all tank reserves been stationed directly
in potentially endangered landing sections – a proponent of this position
being Generalfeldmarschall Erwin Rommel, Commander-in-Chief of the
Heeresgruppe B (HG B) – or whether it would have been more effective

38

Marc Hansen

to position tanks centrally at a distance from the coastal regions and then
apply them in a concentrated manner once enemy intentions were identiﬁed. The main proponent of this position was the commander in chief
of the Panzergruppe West (PzGr West), General der Panzertruppen Leo
Reichsfreiherr Geyr von Schweppenburg.
Correctly, they all considered the so-called Atlantic Wall to be a comforting Potemkin village put forth as part of the lies of propaganda for both the
German population and ordinary soldiers. In particular, they also considered Frederick the Great’s central military theorem highly important: ‘He
who defends everything, defends nothing’. In all these points, the views of
these commanders were diametrically opposed to those of the supreme commander in chief of the Wehrmacht, Adolf Hitler, and the OKW.14 An analysis of the conception and implementation of the defence against an Allied
invasion in the OB West region demonstrates that both the principles of the
strategy and the direction of its tactical implementation was inﬂuenced
far more by outside factors, i.e. a direct inﬂuence of the ongoing battle
by Hitler himself or by Generalfeldmarschall Keitel and Generaloberst
Jodl at the OKW. This interference hampered any free operational-tactical
decision-making by the military leaders in charge of command in the western areas considerably. Von Rundstedt and his staff certainly did not receive
the necessary authority for taking appropriate action in defending France
against a concentrated, air supported landing by enemy amphibious craft
and paratroopers. In addition, the OB West was faced with the pressing considerable problem of Allied troops moving quickly inland protected by a
screen of artillery provided by the invasion ﬂeet, which would require immediate response and action on the part of the defending Germans. Following
the successful landing, the OB West would be forced to move from a mixed
static-mobile forward defence on the coast to conducting a moving battle
from deep inland. However, this elastic defence, which would require the
operative use of tank reserves, was likely to be made untenable by the
undisputed Allied air superiority. Nevertheless, von Rundstedt is open to
criticism for not extending the scope of authority of his command more
substantially.
At ﬁrst glance, the overall concept of Generalfeldmarschall Rommel
appears to have been the only possible defence strategy to combat the overwhelming superiority held by the Allies.15 In his April 1944 dictum to his
adjutant, Hauptmann Hellmuth Lang, Rommel stated: ‘Wir haben nur eine
Möglichkeit, den Gegner zum Stehen zu bringen: wir müssen ihn fassen, solange
er noch im Wasser ist und sich an Land vorkämpft. Ersatz wird sich niemals
bis an die Kampﬂinie herankommen; es ist Unsinn überhaupt damit zu rechnen’
(‘The war will be won or lost here on the beach. We have only one possibility, to bring the enemy to a stop: we must get him as long as he is in the
water and is ﬁghting to get to land. Reinforcement troops will never be able
to get to the battle line; it is foolish to even count on this’).16 This reveals

The German commanders on D-Day 39
two things. Rommel correctly recognised that the initial 24 hours – the
famous ‘longest day’ – was the window of opportunity during which the
Allied landing troops were most vulnerable. If it were at all possible to
defeat the invasion, it could only be achieved before they could establish an
operating base in the invasion area that they could hold and defend. However, this concept of a ﬁxed forward defence required setting up insurmountable barriers for the enemy, comprising of pre-beach obstacles, bunkers
and so forth, which must be attacked frontally without sufﬁcient cover. One
could say that Rommel – who is meanwhile internationally presented as an
admirable proponent of modern military strategy, featuring tactical operational use of rapid tank groups – here fell back on strategic concepts from
1915–17. It is clear that for Rommel, the Allied landing was essentially a
decision par excellence. Winfried Mönch expressed Rommel’s thoughts:
An einem Tag, an einem bestimmten Ort, zu einer bestimmten Stunde,
fällt die militärische Entscheidung, ohne daß irgend welche abstrakten
Potentiale zu dieser Zeit an diesem konkreten Ort zum Tragen kommen
können. Dazu kommt noch eine dezisionistische Unerbittlichkeit . . . wenn
es nicht gelänge, den gelandetet Feind innerhalb einer kurzen Frist wieder
ins Meer zu werfen, ist nicht allein ein Gefecht, eine Schlacht, ein Feldzug,
sondern der ganze Krieg verloren. (On one day, at one speciﬁc location,
at one speciﬁc hour, a military decision is made without any abstract
potential coming into play at this time at this particular place. An inevitable outcome is also added to this . . . if the landed enemy fails to be
thrown back into the sea within a short period, not only is a skirmish, a
battle, a campaign lost, but an entire war.)17
There has been much speculation about Rommel’s absence on the day of
the invasion.18 In theory, it should have played no signiﬁcant role, since all
alarm and mission plans conceived by Rommel were already in place at
headquarters of HG B. In reality, however, with the absence of Rommel,
the active command was temporarily transferred to the chief of staff of
HG B Generalleutnant Dr Hans Speidel. The basic tone of his reaction to
the landing operation once underway is summarised effectively by the
Kriegstagebuch (war diary) of the HG B: ‘Chef des Stabes Heeresgruppe B
der Ansicht, daß von größerem Unternehmen vorerst keine Rede sein kann’
(Chief of Staff Army Group B is of the opinion that for the time being no
larger undertakings will take place).19 Speidel’s actions on D-Day were largely
characterised by orders to wait, clarify and analyse. In the initial hours of
Operation OVERLORD, the HG B headquarters could have used a real
troop commander instead of a general staff ofﬁcer.
Geyr von Schweppenburg disagreed with Rommel’s opinion as to the best
strategy to defend against invasion; most obviously he was also diametrically opposed to Rommel on the issue of moving tank reserves.20 However,

40

Marc Hansen

he did agree about the decisive character of invasion defence with respect
to how the war would end. Von Schweppenburg stated: ‘The invasion must
result in a decision’, thus implying that he believed it possible to have a
successful battle serving the ability of the German Reich to further engage
in war.21 He was strongly convinced that the battle could be won – if he
were given free hand and could concentrate his forces in ready-to-use assembly areas, but not on the coast itself, and could use these tanks as part of
an elastic-style combat. Among all German generals, von Schweppenburg
felt most strongly that he was restricted operationally by Hitler’s strategy
of ‘holding out at any cost and to ﬁght until the last bullet’. He stated
that Hitler, as a World War I lance corporal and now a supreme army commander, was characterised by an ‘obsession with a closed front’.22 When von
Schweppenburg was asked after the war what effects and consequences this
conﬂict of opinions had, he merely answered by quoting Horace: ‘Quidquid
delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi’ (Whatever madness their kings commit, the
Greeks take the beating).
After analysing the unfolding of the Allied attack on D-Day, Geyr was
convinced that the reserves on hand would be able to lead an operational
level counter-attack. He therefore planned to launch a full-scale counterattack that would drive the British and Canadians back into the sea, but on
10 June (the original intended date of the offensive), Geyr’s headquarters
were attacked and destroyed by Allied ﬁghter-bombers. Geyr himself was
wounded and many of his staff ofﬁcers were killed, forcing the cancellation
of the attack. It remains a question of counterfactual history whether an
offensive by Panzergruppe West would have been successful. Given the
Allies’ overwhelming aerial superiority, it is highly doubtful that such powerful German forces could have been assembled for the proposed offensive.
‘Es unteriegt keinem Zweifel, daß die anglo-amerikanische Invasion des
europäischen Festlandes die militärische und politische Entscheidung im Zweiten
Weltkrieg gebracht hat’ (There is no doubt that the Anglo-American invasion of the European mainland was militarily and politically decisive in the
Second World War), said Generalmajor Rudolf Freiherr von Gersdorff, the
successor of Generalmajor Pemsel as the chief of staff of Seventh Army.23
Gersdorff ’s statement is a prime example of the general view of the
Armeeoberkommando 724 (AOK 7) that the invasion, should it take place
mainly against Seventh Army, would unavoidably lead to the defeat of the
Wehrmacht in the West. With the forces made available to him, the commander of Seventh Army, Generaloberst Friedrich Dollmann, believed it
impossible to stop an invasion. Seventh Army was signiﬁcantly reinforced
in the spring of 1944 but consisted on D-Day mainly of units of poor to
indifferent quality. Its preparations against the airborne landings were ineffective, its state of training was poor, and its overall reaction to the invasion
was sluggish. In addition, Dollmann believed, as Rommel did, that reserves
could not be brought up to the main line of resistance during the initial
critical battle phases.

The German commanders on D-Day 41
In any case, one can accuse the AOK 7 of holding on to the notion for
too long that an invasion at the Pas de Calais could still be launched,
despite receiving strong indications that the major landings had indeed
already occurred. In the case of AOK 7, the cause of this misinterpretation
was an analysis by the Marinegruppenkommando West, who claimed that a
landing in the Seine Bay area appeared ‘as good as ruled out’ due to coastal
conditions. In addition, there appeared to be no operational deep-water
harbour for shipping and heavy equipment. These factors demonstrate that
the Allied Mulberry harbour concept was a great success and surprised the
operations and planning staff of AOK 7 completely.25
In contrast to memoir literature and earlier historical depictions Erich
Marcks, the commanding general of Seventh Army’s LXXXIV Corps, General der Artilleri, based in St. Lô, was the only commander to recognise the
full implications of the incoming messages regarding the air and sea landings on 6 June. Marcks’s prophetic foresight subsequently gained him some
fame in the international literature of OVERLORD. In February, he had
conducted war games with the AOK 7, and in the role of the attacker, had
played through scenarios of large-scale landing operations on the Normandy
and Calvados coasts. A result of these ﬁctitious operations was the annihilation of Seventh Army. There is no doubt that General Marcks had exceptional strategic and tactical operational abilities, and only his past as one
of the most prominent and committed political and military ﬁgures of the
Weimar Republic prevented him from attaining a higher position within
Hitler’s army.26 Marcks also regarded the invasion as a decisive battle of
the war and he was also convinced that the armed forces would only have a
real chance of defeating a landing attempt in north-west France if the political leaders were prepared to give up southern France and clear it of German troops. In addition, Marcks – entirely in line with Rommel – revealed
himself to be a keen supporter of the forward defensive system.
On D-Day itself, LXXXIV Corps was the highest German command
structure directly affected by the actions on and around the beaches. Following the Allied landing, it was quickly apparent that the coastal troops could
not fend off the invasion for very long: the landing of enemy troops was
not being continuously hindered by German sea and air forces, and the
pre-beach barriers and shore-based resistance nests did not create the insurmountable barrier as conceived by Rommel in his defence plans. Nevertheless, Marcks demonstrated that he was the most active and capable
commander in the entire invasion area, and as the initiator and organiser of
21 Panzer Division’s counter-attack north of Caen, he came extremely close
to establishing a stable right defensive wing on D-Day. Since General Marcks
fell in battle on 12 June in an Allied ﬁghter attack on his vehicle column,
one can only surmise that he would have had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the
subsequent battle for Normandy.
When we analyse the mindset of the German divisional commanders
directly at the invasion front, we gain the impression that we are dealing

42

Marc Hansen

with professional soldiers who dedicated themselves to a task where difﬁculty and complexity were acknowledged, but not further reﬂected upon.
In contrast to the views of almost all other German commanders in the
West, Generalleutnant Josef Reichert, commander of 711 Infantry Division
(attached to Fifteenth Army) was ‘. . . persönlich durchaus nicht überzeugt, daß
überhaupt eine Invasion über den Kanal erfolgen würde’ ( . . . personally not
convinced that an invasion via the Channel would occur at all).27 Reichert
even believed that: ‘Bis etwa Mai lag der Küstenabschnitt in voreilligem
Frieden. Aber die Invasionspsychose – ich hielt sie damals dafür – hielt an . . . Ich
war persönlich mehr geneigt, alles für einen Riesenbluff zu halten . . . mit dem
Zweck, dem russischen Verbündeten durch die Fesselung starker deutscher
Kräfte zu helfen’ (until around May the coastal sections were in a state of
expectancy. But the invasion psychosis – which I thought it was at the time
– continued . . . I was personally more inclined to consider everything a
huge bluff . . . with the aim of helping Russian forces by containing stronger
German forces).28
However, on the morning of 6 June he was forced to revise his opinion
based on what he witnessed: British paratroopers landed only a few metres
from his own headquarters. Like Marcks in particular, Reichert saw that
the only possibility to inﬂuence and then defeat the invasion would be to
lead a rapid, concentrated armoured counter-attack on both sides of the
Orne on the day of the landing. At the same time, Reichert was enough of a
realist to recognise that ‘der der Küstenverteidigung gestellte Auftrag, eine
feindliche Anlandung zu verhinden hieß: . . . das unmögliche Verlangen um
Mögliches zu erreichen’ (the order to coastal defence forces to prevent an
enemy landing meant: . . . the impossible desire to achieve the possible).29
Reichert considered himself as abandoned in terms of his defence efforts,
after his division was forced to give up troops and material successively to
ad hoc formed battle groups on D-Day and over the weeks that followed.
Reichert laid the primary blame with the navy and the Luftwaffe since these
partial forces did not succeed in interfering with the invasion ﬂeet in a
lasting manner.
On D-Day, 709 Infantry Division under the command of Generalleutnant
Karl-Wilhelm von Schlieben formed the left-most wing on the German
invasion front. The task of this division was to secure the right half of the
Cotentin peninsula with the major harbour of Cherbourg. Von Schlieben,
formerly commander of 18 Panzer Division on the Eastern Front, was
extremely unhappy with his new command duties. He regarded the transfer
from a strong ﬁghting tank division to an aged, static infantry division only
used for coastal protection as a demotion in his military career. In addition,
von Schlieben found it very hard to accept that due to a lack of high quality
reserve units, OB West was forced to reinforce 709 Infantry Division in
large part through elements of the ‘Ost Battalions’. Von Schlieben’s well
known comment, ‘we are asking rather a lot if we expect Russians to ﬁght in

The German commanders on D-Day 43
France for Germany against Americans’, reveals his inner conﬂict.30 There is
no doubt that von Schlieben’s strength lay at the operational-tactical level
of war and although he did not command tanks in the battle for Normandy,
his personal leadership in the counterstrike on St-Mère-Église reveals exceptional bravery and courage under ﬁre in addition to his ability to lead
infantry formations into battle. However, of crucial importance in determining the poor performance of 709 Infantry Division on D-Day itself
was von Schlieben’s absence in Rennes on the night of the Allied landing.
The lack of determined leadership in the ﬁrst, crucial hours of the invasion
contributed greatly to the outstanding success of 1 US Infantry Division
landing at Utah Beach.
709 Infantry Division also failed to prevent the fall of Cherbourg.31 The
organisation of the defence of the Cherbourg citadel – a command given to
von Schlieben directly by Hitler on June 17 – was condemned to failure
right from the start; indeed, lacking sufﬁcient logistical support the losses
suffered by Kampfgruppe ‘von Schlieben’ could not be immediately replaced,
thus jeopardising the defence. The well-known controversy on the retreat to
the actual Cherbourg fortiﬁcation area ‘in one move’ (v. Schlieben /OB West)
or ‘through slow surrender of wide ranging closed all-around defence’
(Hitler/OKW) played only a secondary role in the failure. The role of
von Schlieben in defending Cherbourg has, however, remained in dispute;
since the war, he has been accused of not ﬁghting for the city with complete determination. However, along with Dieter Ose, it can asked whether:
‘der General aber, ohne Aussicht auf Verstärkung und mit dem noch zur
Verfügung stehendem Personal anders hätte handeln können . . . immerhin war
ja der Hafen, der Hauptzweck der Festung, nachhaltig zerstört worden’ (the
General could have acted differently, without hope of reinforcements and
with the personnel he had available . . . after all the harbour, the main target
of the citadel, was completely destroyed’.32
716 Infantry Division was practically destroyed on D-Day, and there was
virtually nothing Generalleutnant Wilhelm Richter, the commander of the
division, could have done to prevent this fate. The division was struck by
the full weight of the attack of British Second Army. As it was, on 6 June
elements of 716 Division were involved in the ﬁghting on Omaha, Gold,
Juno and Sword Beaches. On the latter three, 716 Division alone provided
the sole defence until units from 21 Panzer Division entered combat later
that day. Richter’s division, made up of replacement units, was designated
a static division whose primary purpose was to build and occupy ﬁxed
defensive positions in its assigned sector. Its ﬁghting value has to be
estimated as very low.
In March 1944, Richter completed a risk analysis for 716 Infantry
Division, in which he highlighted a series of concerns: the overstretched area
it had to cover (the 34km long coastal sector north of Caen), especially the
insufﬁcient depth of defence positions in coastal areas; the lack of any aerial

44

Marc Hansen

reconnaissance; the lack of air support; and an insufﬁcient or incorrectly
applied artillery plan. Richter especially referred to the increasing conﬂict
between the Seekriegsleitung and the army commanders in arranging the
ﬁreplans for the many German coastal batteries which were under the command of the navy. The navy preferred an alignment only against sea targets
whereas the army wanted to use the heavy guns also against targets inland.
Despite the fact that Richter’s leadership was very important in delaying
the British advance on Caen in the ﬁrst hours and days of OVERLORD,
his performance as a divisional commander had obviously been judged as
inadequate and he was relieved of his command in September.33
Organisationally, 352 Infantry Division was better off than most German
divisions in 1944. At that time, as a result of severe personnel losses, German infantry divisions were generally reduced by one infantry battalion per
regiment, yet 352 Division retained its full complement of nine battalions.
However, just two days after the invasion, Generalleutnant Dietrich Kraiss,
the Commander of 352 Division, must have recognised the futility of his
efforts. Almost half of 352 Division was ﬁghting whilst heavily outnumbered against the British at Bayeux; several other sections of the division
were involved in heavy skirmishes with American paratroopers near the
Vire and with Rangers at Pointe du Hoc. The remainder of the 352 was practically annihilated at Omaha Beach. Kraiss acknowledged that his situation
was becoming worse by the hour. Enemy reinforcements of troops and
materiel were delivered to the invasion coast en masse, while few German
reinforcements arrived and then only intermittently. In addition, reinforcements were immediately used in mixed battle groups in an ad hoc manner.
In Kraiss’s opinion, this approach would lead to a real weakening of the
effectiveness of all ﬁghting groups as a whole. Like Marcks, Kraiss, who
had served as a company commander during World War I and led 169
Infantry Division during the June 1941 invasion of the Soviet Union, was
also one of the typical ‘ﬁghting generals’. Like others he believed D-Day
to be the decisive battle of World War II and put his life on the line for it.
He displayed both personal bravery and a clear sense of what the situation
required.34 Kraiss was mortally wounded on 2 August at his command post
near St Lô and this represented a major loss of military experience and
leadership ability for further German armed forces operations in the West.
Neither Kraiss nor Generalleutnant Wilhelm Falley, the commanding
ofﬁcer of 91 Airlanding Division, survived the initial stages of the Battle of
Normandy. Falley had been killed by paratroopers of US 82 Airborne on
his return from the planned wargame at Rennes. There has been much
speculation about the performance of the 91 Airlanding Division which was
specially trained to intervene against enemy airborne troops. One could
argue that if Falley, who was described as an excellent tactical commander,
had been present until D+3 the 91 Airlanding Division might have taken
more energetic action against the American airborne troops and therefore
might have hampered the landings on Utah more effectively.

The German commanders on D-Day 45
After being destroyed in North Africa, 21 Panzer Division was reformed
in June of 1943 at Rennes and remained stationed in France for the next
year, being deemed unﬁt for service on the Eastern Front. On 6 June 1944,
it was the only German armoured division in the immediate vicinity of the
Allied landing beaches in Normandy. Confusion reigned as Generalleutnant
Edgar Feuchtinger, the commander of the 21 Panzer Division, was not at
divisional headquarters, but in Paris. The lack of ﬁrm leadership, along with
total Allied air and sea superiority, all contributed to the 21 Panzer Division
making a sluggish and ultimately unsuccessful counter-attack against the
Anglo-Canadian beachheads on D-Day. Samuel W. Mitcham provides an
excellent characterisation of Feuchtinger: ‘There is nothing in Feuchtinger’s
record to suggest that he was remotely qualiﬁed to command a Panzer
division, he owed his promotion solely to political considerations . . . By any
measure, he had been one of the least qualiﬁed and least successful of the
German tank commanders’.35 Oberst Hans von Luck described his superior
ofﬁcer in his memoirs: ‘General Edgar Feuchtinger, an artilleryman, had no
combat experience [in World War II], and none at all of Panzer units. He
had become known in Germany as the organiser of the military part of the
so-called Reichsparteitage, the national party rallies, and through that was
very familiar with Hitler and the party apparatus’.36
Assuming the theory is correct that the only chance to beat the Allies
was in the ﬁrst 72 hours after the initial landings, it becomes clear that
21 Panzer Division – the only reserve capable of ﬁghting back on D-Day –
was led by the most unsuitable man for this task. Feuchtinger ‘lost the day
for the Germans’ and was quickly made responsible for the disaster. One
can argue this especially since the counter-thrust of 21 Panzer Division
requested in confusion by Generalleutnant Richter (716 Infantry Division)
on D-Day was not arranged through the initiative of its commanding ofﬁcer
Feuchtinger, but on the orders of General Marcks. Feuchtinger was a live
and let live person. He was fond of all the good things of life, for which
Paris was a natural attraction. Knowing that he had no combat experience
or knowledge of tank warfare, Feuchtinger had to delegate most things;
that is, leave the execution of orders to his experienced commanders. The
question whether Feuchtinger saw the invasion as the decisive battle of the
war is purely hypothetical, for he simply did not seem to care. His primary
motivation as a commander of a ﬁghting unit was to survive the war in a
prestigious and comparatively secure position.

Conclusion
After overrunning the German beach defences, the Allies rapidly expanded
the individual beachheads, and were able to reinforce the lodgement with
extra troops, ammunition and supplies. The window of opportunity to
defeat the invasion deﬁnitively closed on D+3 and most of the commanders,
all of them professional soldiers for many years, were well aware of this

46

Marc Hansen

situation. Many of those D-Day commanders believed that the war was still
not lost in June 1944, though they accepted that it would not end in complete victory. They hoped more for a political division within the anti-Hitler
coalition, a possibility as long as they were able to keep the Western Allies
contained within their lodgement for long enough and with heavy enough
losses. It should be borne in mind that democracies even in wartime have
a very limited willingness to sustain heavy casualty rates over a long period
of time. Nevertheless, the idea of negotiating a separate peace with the
Western powers, in whatever shape or form, clearly reveals that the German commanders in the West were professional soldiers but not trained in
foreign affairs. Hitler – always more politician than military commander –
assessed the situation much more realistically when he stated, ‘Mit mir macht
niemand Frieden’ (No one makes peace with me).
The chaos of command – that is, the sometimes confused and conﬂicting
command structures in the OB West section, the supply problems, the often
destructive intervention of the OKW in OB West areas of expertise and the
tank controversy between Rommel and von Schweppenburg prior to the start
of the invasion – did not really come to bear during the Battle of Normandy.
Prior to 6 June 1944, all German commanders were of the opinion that
defeating the invasion was to be the decisive battle of World War II, yet on
the day of the invasion, none – maybe with the exception of Marcks –
reacted decisively enough to match the dangers they perceived to exist. In
addition, the ﬁxed thinking of German generals, who only focused on operations, led to an oversight of many factors which normally determine the
long-range course of a highly technical, modern war. The military elite
developed very little sense of politics and economic and logistical relationships, though their operational and tactical leadership qualities were no
doubt excellent. However, this often did not count for much on the Western
European stage. Other factors which the Allies paid so much attention to –
such as air superiority, access to information, deception plans and integrated command structures across navy, army and the air force – more than
balanced the advantages of excellent German leadership. Ultimately, the
events of June 1944 had only one consequence for the German public and
most German military commanders in the West, an acceptance of impending defeat, and this emerged once the euphoric hope of a German victory in
the face of an Allied landing gave way to deep feelings of despair when it
became clear that the Allies had been able to establish a secure bridgehead
in Fortress Europe.

Notes
1 See Michael Salewski, ‘Die Abwehr der Invasion als Schlüssel zum Endsieg?’
in Rolf-Dieter Müller and Hans-Erich Volkmann, Die Wehrmacht – Mythos und
Realität (München: Oldenbourg, 1999), pp. 210–24.
2 For an introduction to the concept of Blitzkrieg see Charles Messenger, The Art
of Blitzkrieg (Shepperton: Allan, 1976).

The German commanders on D-Day 47
3 See Norbert Frei, ‘Der totale Krieg und die deutsche Heimatfront’, in Günter
Bischof and Wolfgang Kreiger (eds) Die Invasion in der Normandie 1944:
Internationale Perspektiven (Innsbruck: Studien Verlag, 2001), pp. 17–32.
4 For a deﬁnition of the term Entscheidungsschlacht see Carl von Clausewitz, Vom
Kriege (München: Studien Verlag, 2003), pp. 238–55.
5 Historical Division Headquarters, United States Army, Europe: ‘Foreign Military Studies’. Begun in Europe while the authors were Allied prisoners of war, the
Foreign Military Studies were completed in the 1950s under the auspices of what
is now the US army’s Ofﬁce of the Chief of Military History.
6 Oberbefehlshaber West – commander in chief West.
7 Oberkommando der Wehrmacht – Armed Forces High Command.
8 Walther Hubatsch (ed.) Hitler’s Weisungen für die Kriegsführung 1939–1945 (Bonn:
Nebel Verlag, 2000), pp. 176–83, 233–41.
9 Oberkommando der Luftwaffe – Air Force High Command.
10 Oberkommando der Marine – Naval High Command.
11 Foreign Military Studies: MS, B-284‚ Normandie ‘6 Juni – 24 Juli 1944’ Gen. d.
Inf. Günther Blumentritt (Chef des Stabes OB West).
12 Ibid.
13 Dieter Ose, Die Panzerkontroverse in Wehrwissenschaftliche Rundschau, Bd. 31,
No. 6, 1982, pp. 189–195.
14 Oberkommando der Wehrmacht – Armed Forces High Command.
15 See Detlef Vogel, ‘Deutsche und Alliierte Kriegführung im Westen’, in Militärgeschchtliches Forschungsamt (ed.) Das Deutsche Reich und der Zweite Weltkrieg
Band 7, Das Deutsche Reich in der Defensive (Stuttgart: Deutshe Verlags-Anstalt,
2001), p. 463.
16 Quoted in Dieter Ose, Entscheidung im Westen 1944: Der Oberbefehlshaber West
und die Abwehr der alliierten Invasion (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, 1982),
p. 49.
17 Winfried Mönch, Entscheidungsschlacht ‘Invasion’ 1944? Prognosen und Diagnosen
(Stuttgart: Steiner, 2001), p. 136.
18 See Vogel, p. 536.
19 KTB – Ia/Heeresgruppe B, 06.06–04.07. 1944, BA/MA: RH 19 IX/ 2 bis 3.
20 Hans Wegmüller, Die Abwehr der Invasion: Die Konzeption des Oberbefehlshabers
West 1940–1944 (Freiburg: Rombach Druck und Verlaghocus, 1986), pp. 142–58.
21 Foreign Military Studies: MS, B-258 Geschichte der Panzergruppe West Gen. d.
Pz.Tr. Leo Freiherr Geyr v. Schweppenburg.
22 Ibid.
23 Foreign Military Studies: MS, B-122 Allgemeine Bemerkungen zur deutschen
Invasionsabwehr Gen. Maj. Rudolf Freiherr von Gersdorff (AOK 7).
24 Armeeoberkommando – Army Command Staff.
25 Alfred B. Stanford, Force Mulberry. The Planning and Installation of the Artiﬁcial
Harbor Off U.S. Normandy Beaches in World War II (New York: Morrow, 1951).
26 Reinhard Stumpf, ‘Marcks, Erich’ in David G. Chandler and James Lawton
Collins Jnr (eds) The D-Day Encyclopedia (New York: Helicon, 1994), pp. 350–1.
27 Foreign Military Studies: MS, B-403 Der Einsatz der 711. Infanterie-Division.
28 Ibid.
29 Ibid.
30 Foreign Military Studies: MS, B-845 Die 709. Infanterie-Division.
31 For a German perspective of the fall of Cherbourg see Ose, Entscheidung, p. 140
32 Ibid.
33 Samuel W. Mictham Jr, ‘Richter, Wilhelm’, in Chandler, p. 458.
34 Günther Hiller, ‘Kraiss, Dietrich’, in Chandler, p. 334.
35 Samuel W. Mitcham Jnr, ‘Feuchtinger, Edgar’, in Chandler, p. 231.
36 Hans von Luck, Panzer Commander ( Westport, CT: Praeger, 1989), p. 87.

48

4

Stephen Badsey

Culture, controversy, Caen
and Cherbourg
The ﬁrst week of the battle
Stephen Badsey

‘It had always been impossible’ according to the historian of 3rd British
Infantry Division, ‘to imagine D plus 1’.1 Compared with the drama of
D-Day, the events of the subsequent week have received very little attention.
The typical history of the Battle of Normandy starts with the debates over
its planning on both sides of the English Channel, then the narrative swoops
down onto the experiences of the soldiers on D-Day for a chapter or two,
either to end on the beaches or to pull back up into the stratosphere of
the debate on how the senior commanders conducted the remainder of the
battle. While much has been made of Montgomery’s insistence on being in
overall command on D-Day, and of Rommel’s absence from the battleﬁeld
(actually from his headquarters at la Roche-Guyon Château, over 150 miles
from the beaches) before the late afternoon, the joining up of the Allied
lodgements has been treated largely as a foregone conclusion, coupled perhaps
with a mild scolding at their failure to achieve the inevitable more quickly,
or to capture Caen at the ﬁrst attempt. Narratives that continue past D-Day
generally rush through this ﬁrst week to pick up again at 13 June, with the
remarkable but massively over-written action by Obersturmführer Michael
Wittman at Villers-Bocage.
This is a view of the Battle of Normandy that even after 60 years still
conforms very much to the agenda set by the senior ofﬁcers on both sides,
through their own memoirs and the writings of compliant aides and journalists during and immediately after the war. However, it is possible to
break away from this, even if to do so inevitably leads to speculation and
some presently unanswered questions. On 7 June Montgomery, Bradley (who
engaged in a perilous boat journey in order to confer with his two corps
commanders) and Eisenhower (who toured the beaches with Admiral Ramsey
in the minesweeper HMS Apollo), all issued essentially the same orders: that
the Allied priority had been changed from an advance directly inland to
linking up the beachheads.2 There were no other orders that they could
possibly have given, and both their orders and even their presence were
rendered largely irrelevant by circumstances for the next few days. On the
German side, the few decisions that Rommel could make also made little
difference to the battle’s actual conduct. What happened between D-Day

Culture, controversy, Caen and Cherbourg 49
and the securing of an Allied continuous front on about 12 June depended
almost entirely on the unspoken assumptions inherent in the planning of the
battle, the structuring and training of the formations that fought it, and on
military and broader national ‘cultures’, a term including but not limited to
the military idea of doctrine as presently understood.
This is important to our understanding of the Battle of Normandy,
because it was in its ﬁrst week that the battle was won and lost. D-Day as it
was fought could not have failed, in the sense that without some radical and
large-scale change made months beforehand the best German performance
imaginable could not have wiped out all the Allied lodgements.3 By 14 June,
after committing 12th SS Panzer Division and Panzer Lehr Division alongside 21st Panzer Division against the British and Canadians, and 17th SS
Panzergrenadier Division against the Americans at Carentan, the Germans
achieved a brief equality in numbers of divisions with the Allies and were
able to contest any further advance inland. It was this which led Air Chief
Marshal Tedder to advise his senior ofﬁcers that day that the situation had
the ‘makings of a dangerous crisis’.4 But the apparent stalemate was an
illusion based on divisional numbers which masked the great Allied superiority across the front and at all levels. German commanders who expressed
an opinion, including General Erich Marcks commanding LXXXIV Corps
(killed on 12 June by an Allied air attack), agreed that 9 or 10 June was the
critical last day on which the Allies could have conceivably been defeated.5
On 10 June, the SHAEF planners advised that the best way to break any
future stalemate was to use air power in support of an attack out of the
beachhead: and this was the method used in Operation CHARNWOOD on
8 July, Operation GOODWOOD on 18 July and Operation COBRA on
25 July to achieve a successful breakout for the Allies.6 On 14 June, while
Tedder was expressing his concerns, US VII Corps launched its major attack out of the Utah beachhead, not as the Germans expected directly north
from the Montauban-Quinéville ridge towards Cherbourg, but west to
cut the Cotentin peninsula. Thereafter the succession of Allied attacks was
delayed or weakened only by the weather: either Montgomery’s set-piece
attacks of corps size or more at approximately weekly intervals from late
June onwards, or the more continuous actions on a wider front preferred by
First US Army prior to Operation COBRA.7
The verdict that Normandy was already a lost battle was conﬁrmed at
the German higher commanders’ conference on 17 June at Margival near
Soissons, the closest that Hitler ever travelled to the Normandy battleﬁeld,
at which he rejected pleas by Rommel and von Rundstedt for a retirement,
demanding that Cherbourg must be held at all costs. To attempt to retire
behind the Seine in June might or might not have produced a better result
for the Germans in the long term; but once these facts are grasped most
historiographical controversies about the generalship of the battle either
vanish into irrelevance or are reduced to their proper size. The exact reasons
for Hitler’s decision were not something for which his generals felt able to

50

Stephen Badsey

ask. They may have been based on a genuine assessment that without Cherbourg
the Allies would run out of supplies and be forced to scale back their offensive, or on a wider political conviction that the Third Reich could not be
seen to fail in battle. Regardless, Hitler’s decision condemned the troops of
Army Group B to a further two months of repeated defeat. After its ﬁrst
week, Normandy was a hard-fought battle, but it was never a close-run one.
Unless the Allied commanders committed some unthinkable and colossal
blunder, there was no chance of the Germans holding their line in the face
of the relentless ﬁrepower to which they were subjected. Senior German
commanders were fully aware of this, and continued to demonstrate their
concerns, most spectacularly Colonel-General Friedrich Dollmann of Seventh Army in his despairing suicide on 28 June. True to their own military
culture, they were puzzled only by what they saw as the Allied reluctance to
take greater risks, not realising that their indifference both to the destruction of French life and property and to the loss of their own soldiers could
not be shared by their Allied opponents.
All accounts of the Battle of Normandy also include a brief and sometimes ﬂorid passage acknowledging the importance of the Normandy terrain and of the weather, particularly on D-Day itself, to the conduct of the
battle; although having mentioned these, most proceed to neglect them in
favour of deciding which senior Allied ofﬁcer deserves bouquets or brickbats. Uniquely, only Field Marshal Sir Alan Brooke among the senior
Allied commanders had ﬁrst-hand knowledge of both the beaches and the
bocage, from visits before the war.8 It is one of the many paradoxes of our
present historiography that Eisenhower is praised for what Montgomery’s
ofﬁcial biographer calls his ‘greatness’9 in taking the courageous decision to
launch the invasion on 6 June in only marginal weather, but that Montgomery
is then roundly condemned for failing to achieve all the Allied D-Day objectives, as if the bad weather and its impact on the battleﬁeld were not a factor.
In fact the marginal state of the weather on D-Day meant that all the Allied
airborne landings suffered from some scattering, and all the beach landings
suffered from eastward drift due to wind and current, although these conditions affected the western landings of First US Army more than those of
Second (British) Army. The problem was least evident at Sword Beach,
where the prominent landmark of the Canal de Caen-River Orne estuary and
the mudﬂats to its far side largely prevented eastward drift, although the
narrow beach required 3rd British Infantry Division to land the equivalent
of ﬁve brigades sequentially on a one-brigade front, instead of the twobrigade fronts at Juno, Gold and Omaha. But the presence of a prominent
landmark, although it gave the assault craft a target for which to aim, did
not always work to the Allied advantage. Steering towards the church steeple
at Vierville-sur-Mer on the western edge of Omaha Beach, the strongest
part of the Omaha defences, led to the slaughter of many of the ﬁrst-wave
troops who landed there. At Utah Beach on the Cotentin the initial landing
was also made on a one-brigade front, although there were no obstacles to

Culture, controversy, Caen and Cherbourg 51
prevent a landing by two or even three brigades abreast. Although histories
and sources are strangely silent on the reason for this, the most probable
explanation for the single-brigade front at Utah is a shortage of assault
landing ships and landing craft. In fact, at Utah the impact of the bad
weather on the offshore tides and currents, and the lack of prominent landmarks, meant that the ﬁrst landings by US 4th Infantry Division took place
about 2,000 yards south-east of the intended point, but the lie of the land
prevented observers for the most powerful German batteries from seeing
that subsequent waves of craft were turning southwards close inshore, and
much of the German ﬁre fell on the wrong beach. After the ﬁrst landings,
the rapidly incoming high tide, also due to the bad weather, reduced all
the Normandy landing beaches to narrow strips of sand (or in the case of
Omaha, obliterated the beach altogether), precluding the swift movement of
armoured ﬁrepower inland, and delayed further landing of troops and supplies for several days. By far the greatest problem after D-Day for US V
Corps moving off Omaha was the limitation imposed on movement by the
slow landing of follow-up formations and supplies. But even on the comparatively successful Juno Beach the follow-up British formation on D-Day,
51st (Highland) Division, did not complete landing until D plus 7.10 This is
a large part of any explanation for the nature of the Allied advance inland
both on D-Day and for days afterwards.
If it was hard at the time to envisage D plus 1, then from the perspective
of 60 years on it is equally hard to appreciate the Battle of Normandy from
the perspective of D minus 1. With the knowledge of hindsight, the record
of senior Allied ﬁgures, most notably Eisenhower and Brooke, bracing themselves for heavy casualties or a disaster, makes them appear pessimistic in
the extreme.11 The story of the Allied deception plan, Operation FORTITUDE, has been told so often and so well that its success has come to be
regarded as inevitable. The impression persists that surprise on the morning
of D-Day was absolute, and – if only from television re-runs of the
ﬁctionalised feature-ﬁlm version of The Longest Day (1962) – that the ﬁrst
the Germans knew of the Allied invasion ﬂeet was when Major Werner
Pluskat of Artillery Regiment 352 looked out from resistance nest WN-62
on Omaha Beach at dawn at 5.56 a.m. to see the whole of Task Force O
coming straight for him. In fact, from OB West downwards the German
defenders of Normandy in Seventh Army, and Fifteenth Army further north,
moved to various stages of alert in the course of the night of 5 June and the
following morning. The Allied success in achieving surprise required a total,
triple, failure of the Luftwaffe reconnaissance effort, the patrol craft of the
Kriegsmarine from Le Havre and Cherbourg (a failure to which the high
seas in the bad weather contributed), and also of Abwehr military intelligence. Given that one German success could have provided the information
that the Allied invasion ﬂeet was in mid-Channel, this was unlikely, especially in the light of the E-Boat incursion into Operation TIGER off Slapton
Sands on the night of 28 April.12 Although senior commanders put on a

52

Stephen Badsey

brave face for the troops, before D-Day a realistic Allied assessment was
that the Germans would have anything from 12 to 24 hours prior warning
of the seaborne invasion. This was long enough to move at least some
elements of 12th SS Panzer Division and Panzer Lehr Division from reserve
to join 21st Panzer Division in counter-attack positions south of the CaenCherbourg road. It would also probably have meant heavy casualties from
Luftwaffe nightﬁghters for the transport aircraft carrying the Allied airborne divisions. That the actual result on 6 June was almost freakishly
favourable for the Allies puts both the controversy over the disposition and
command of the German reserve Panzer divisions, and the complaints about
Allied failures, in their proper perspective.
All accounts of Normandy also acknowledge the early capture of Cherbourg as a supply base as the fundamental ﬁrst objective for the Allies.
Once Normandy was agreed for the landing area, Operations NEPTUNE
and OVERLORD were a compromise between this and the decision to land
on the Calvados coast rather than chieﬂy in the Cotentin peninsula. This
decision was partly based on operational military considerations: the distance across the peninsula from Lessay in the west to Carentan in the east is
only 17 miles, and the Germans could too easily seal up the area. Partly it
was a function of the Cotentin terrain, chieﬂy its unsuitability for airﬁelds.13
The Cotentin was also unsuitable for large armoured formations, and First
US Army’s plans did not include landing any armoured divisions at Utah
during this ﬁrst week. The German defensive scheme was also based on
protecting the ports of the Channel coast, and what became the Normandy
beach defences were actually the southern defences of Le Havre in Fifteenth
Army area and of Cherbourg in Seventh Army area respectively. On 6 June
three of LXXXIV Corps’ six divisions (plus one paratrooper brigade and
two weak armoured battalions) and the bulk of its heavy artillery were
positioned to defend both sides of the Cotentin. Also, the Kriegsmarine
had advised LXXXIV Corps that landing across the offshore shoals of the
Calvados coast was impractical. German military doctrinal orthodoxy was
that a major port was needed to sustain an Allied invasion. This belief that
Cherbourg was the Allied Schwerpunckt (point of main effort, a fundamental concept in German military culture) did not change even when, from late
on D-Day onwards, they could see from land and air the Gooseberry
blockships being sunk and Mulberry harbours being built. On 7 June Third
Air Fleet was ordered that ‘no possibility is to be left untried’ in attacking
Allied ships off the beaches,14 although there was little that the Luftwaffe
could do in the face of Allied air superiority except drop a few bombs and
sea-mines. But beyond that, the German response to the Normandy landings
for the ﬁrst few days, including Hitler’s position at Margival on 17 June,
was predicated on the idea that the Allies were vulnerable until they
had secured Cherbourg. Nowhere in Seventh Army and Army Group B
records is there any indication that Rommel or any other senior German
ofﬁcer grasped the operational, rather than logistic, signiﬁcance of Mulberry:

Culture, controversy, Caen and Cherbourg 53
that it had freed the Allies from the early capture of Cherbourg. This was a
major blind spot in the German response to the Normandy landings.
The need for a large port remained of course a high priority in the Allied
plans: their famously controversial phase lines called for Cherbourg’s capture by D plus 16 and unloading to start on D plus 19; Cherbourg was in
fact captured on D plus 21 (27 June) although only 31,000 tons were discharged in July and about ten times as much – half what had been expected
– for each month thereafter. Also, and with perfect hindsight, Mulberry
itself was less important for Allied supply purposes than the direct landing
of supplies across the beaches, particularly after the abandonment of
‘Mulberry A’ off Saint Laurent after the ‘great storm’ of 19–21 June, leaving
only ‘Mulberry B’ (Port Winston) working off Arromanches. But the
German lack of response to the signiﬁcance of Mulberry in terms of the
battle is only explicable in the context of their military doctrine and culture
of the time, which stressed tactical and operational prowess while neglecting
and undervaluing logistics,15 and a military orthodoxy that simply ﬁxated
on the nearest major port to the Allied landings.
Protracted arguments about the German defensive scheme for the Battle
of Normandy have focused almost entirely on Rommel’s plans for defence
on the beaches, and so on the compromise over the deployment and command of the reserve Panzer divisions inland. As already pointed out, this
argument would have been much less signiﬁcant without the unexpected
total surprise achieved by the Allies. But the emphasis placed on the Panzer
divisions, together with the repeated use of the German propaganda term
‘Atlantic Wall’ to describe Rommel’s beach defence concept, has also
obscured the fact that both were only part of a much more sophisticated
doctrinal debate among the German commanders. The Eastern Front veterans (Ostkampfer) whose inﬂuence transformed LXXXIV Corps after
November 1943 believed in a defensive doctrine which had originated on the
Western Front in the First World War and had been further developed
ﬁghting against the Red Army, based on a thinly-held infantry front line, a
series of infantry and anti-tank artillery battle positions a few thousand
yards further back, and armoured counter-attacking forces in reserve.16
Rommel and other veterans of battle against the western Allies in North
Africa and Italy argued that vulnerability to Allied ﬁrepower, including
airpower, made this kind of elastic defence impossible, and static forward
defence the only option. The result was an unhappy doctrinal compromise
typical of Hitler’s Third Reich, in which neither scheme was adopted wholeheartedly. Although the construction of the beach defences absorbed most
of the steel, concrete and labour resources available, they were never as
strong as Rommel wanted: Sword Beach was defended by two infantry
companies (each of about 100–150 men), Juno Beach and Gold Beach by
three companies each, Omaha Beach by four, and the landing area at Utah
Beach by only one. Given that Task Force O (for Omaha) alone included 386
seagoing ships and craft plus a further 33 minesweepers and 585 support

54

Stephen Badsey

vessels, the grim German joke on D-Day that the Allies had more ships than
they had men may have been, at the water’s edge, literally true. But the real
strength of the German defences lay not only in these resistance nests but in
a second line of defences set on a dominating ridge about 90–150 feet high
(actually the prehistoric sea-cliff from the time of the last ice age), varying
from 2,500 to 4,000 yards inland. On this ridge the Germans deployed the
reserve companies of their front-line infantry battalions, and also most of
their artillery. The defensive scheme at Utah was slightly different from that
along the Calvados coast, with the counter-attacking reserve coming from
the two-company 795th Georgian Battalion (an Ost battalion that fought
very well on D-Day), and a second line of battalions deployed to defend the
Cherbourg road chieﬂy north of Montebourg. On the morning of D-Day,
all these reserve companies launched counter-attacks against the Allied landing troops as they moved inland, although mostly they were so savaged by
Allied ﬁrepower that the attacks went almost unnoticed, with one exception.
This was a company-sized attack with some armour towards Ste-MèreEglise from the south, identiﬁed by 82nd Airborne Division as the most
serious threat to its positions that day.17
The German artillery defending the beaches were chieﬂy ﬁeld guns protected by earth and wood, but also included a few concrete casemated batteries, of which the most important were at Merville inland to the south-east
of Sword and both Crisbecq and Azeville to the north-west of Utah, all of
which continued to function as miniature fortresses for the Germans after
D-Day. These artillery positions were mostly sited along the inland ridgeline,
with only a few batteries along the cliffs that separated Omaha from Gold
to the east and from the mudﬂats of the River Vire estuary to the west, such
as the battery at Longues-sur-Mer in the Gold Beach sector, and at the Pointe
du Hoc. What was conspicuously missing from this defensive scheme was a
third line of mobile counter-attacking armoured battalions or brigades held
near the main Caen-Cherbourg road (the ‘lateral road’ in Allied planning),
except for the brigade groups of 21st Panzer Division south of Caen. This
was largely a result of Rommel’s forward defence doctrine. His order to
352nd Infantry Division to move forward from Saint Lô in March 1944 to
take over what became the Gold Beach and Omaha Beach sectors more
than halved the coastline frontage defended by 716th Infantry Division, at
the cost of removing any substantial counter-attacking reserve in the sector
between Bayeux and the Vire estuary.
A combination of German military culture, which stressed independent
thinking on the part of lower-ranking commanders, and a certain contempt
for Rommel himself and his humble social origins, led to Eastern Front
veterans openly condemning Rommel’s tactical scheme; Major General KarlWilhelm von Schlieben, commanding 709th Infantry Division, claimed after
his capture to have done so in front of Rommel himself and his staff.18 They
criticised the lack of concrete defences and strongpoints further inland
and at roadblocks, and the way in which working on the beach defences

Culture, controversy, Caen and Cherbourg 55
exhausted their troops and left inadequate time for training. In partial deﬁance of Rommel, both 709th Infantry Division and 352nd Infantry Division
contrived to create small mobile reserves, in the latter case an engineer battalion and some assault guns held near Cerisy forest. This division also provided LXXXIV Corps’ mobile reserve of three battalions (two on bicycles
and one in French civilian transport) as Battle Group Meyer, held south
and east of Bayeux. In 709th Infantry Division sector the local reserve was
Infantry Regiment 1057 (belonging to 91st Luftlande Division) deployed
west of the River Merderet together with a few tanks, mainly obsolete French
models, and Fallschirmjäger Regiment 6 at the base of the Cotentin.
As with any conventional set-piece land battle of the First and Second
World Wars, the Allied success on the morning of D-Day depended on
the extent to which they could suppress not only the immediate German
beach defences but also the supporting artillery pieces and reserves, by using
ﬁrepower coupled with a rapid advance to occupy the German battle positions. What made the ﬁrst few days of Normandy an unusual battle was
that the Allies had to start this process from the sea, and that a large part of
their supporting gunﬁre came from ships offshore. The Allied reliance on
the shock of ﬁrepower was deeply rooted in their own doctrines and military
cultures. For the United States this went back to their Civil War; while a
British version had developed on the Western Front in the First World War,
and had been adopted by Montgomery as the so-called ‘Colossal Cracks’
approach, and also accepted by Simonds for the Canadians.19 Although
British amphibious doctrine preferred night landings with surprise away
from the main enemy defences,20 the British planners were perfectly aware
that the terrain of the landing beaches and Rommel’s beach defences made
this option impractical. The Anglo-Canadian forces landing on Gold, Juno
and Sword were faced with a problem unique in military history: ﬁghting
house-to-house from the water’s edge through the seaside villages, for which
heavy ﬁrepower and armour was essential. On D-Day, Allied airpower and
the heavy guns of the larger warships were directed chieﬂy at the German
second line of defences on the inshore ridge, leaving ‘beach drenching’ from
destroyers and landing craft together with specialist armour including the
‘DD’ (for Duplex Drive) amphibious Shermans to overcome the immediate
beach defences. The lightest Allied casualties came at Utah Beach, where
beach drenching almost destroyed the defending heavy weapons of resistance nest WN-5, and the reserve gun line was destroyed or suppressed by
a combination of paratroopers, airpower and naval gunnery. The heaviest
Allied casualties came at Omaha, where the amphibious tanks of one of the
two leading battalions largely foundered offshore, the initial beach drenching failed, but even more importantly the previously undetected gun line of
Artillery Regiment 352 behind the beaches was not suppressed until about
midday, and not completely eliminated until D plus 1, along with the last of
the beach defenders. There is even a suggestion that some German guns
simply ran out of ammunition.

56

Stephen Badsey

The Allied success on D-Day on each of the landing beaches depended
heavily on the support given by specialist troops and equipment to each of
the assaulting divisions. All ﬁve beach landings were supported by the
amphibious Shermans, with varying successes largely depending on the effect
of the weather and sea currents. The problem created for Second Army by
the defended chalets and houses on its three beaches was solved largely by
the addition of specialist armoured vehicles, chieﬂy from 79th Armoured
Division (‘Hobart’s Funnies’). In addition, the importance of airborne forces
in identifying and engaging the German guns and reserve companies along
the ridgeline was shown not only by their successes, notably those of 101st
Airborne Division inland from Utah, but also by their absences, particularly the problems caused to 3rd British Infantry Division from Sword Beach
by the inland Hillman and Morris positions, which played an important
part in preventing the division from reaching Caen on D-Day. The two
beaches where the Allies suffered their heaviest casualties, Omaha and Gold,
were also the furthest away from the disruptive effects on the Germans of
the airborne drop. As an extreme case, the bunker complex including the
Luftwaffe radar station at Douvres-la-Deliverande just three miles inland
from Juno Beach was not ﬁnally captured by British troops until 17 June.
This raises the question as to why no thought was given to splitting the
Allied airborne divisions to put airborne brigades down between Caen and
Bayeux and directly south of Omaha, operations that would have carried no
greater risk than those actually attempted. The answer is rooted in both
British and American institutional military culture. The best and most ﬂexible
structure for the Allied airborne troops would have been independent mixed
brigades of paratroopers and gliders, on the same model as the commandos
or rangers (paratroopers by themselves were vulnerable to enemy armour,
and needed the anti-tank weapons and ammunition carried by the gliders),
rather than divisions, which were too unwieldy for their intended purpose.
However, the institutional difﬁculties and complexities of establishing new
forces in the Second World War were so great that without the creation of
airborne divisions as a power base the British and American airborne forces
might not have existed at all.21
The focus in the historiography of Normandy on the individual Allied
beaches on D-Day has led to a neglect of some important aspects of their
wider plan and its implications, especially for the days that followed. The
original COSSAC plan for the battle was ﬁrst presented in July 1943, and
changes were made by SHAEF and 21st Army Group from mid-January
1944 onwards. There was a strong sense among Allied higher commanders
in early 1944 of critical decisions being made under great time pressure, and
of the need to maintain a consensus among themselves. The initial 21st
Army Group plan for Operation OVERLORD was issued on 1 February
1944, conﬁrmed two weeks later, and after that most of the effort went into
revising details. The corps’ plans were ﬁnalised by 27 March with a few late
adjustments, of which the most signiﬁcant was the change to the American

Culture, controversy, Caen and Cherbourg 57
airborne plan on 27 May in the light of new information on German dispositions in the Cotentin. A point often missed is that the two beaches
added by SHAEF in February to the COSSAC plan were Sword Beach
with its narrower frontage, as well as Utah Beach on the Cotentin.22 But if
Sword gave the British a problem, the addition of Utah completely changed
the objectives for Omaha: as well as an advance south-eastward towards
Bayeux to link up with Gold, a distance of about ten miles, the forces at
Omaha were now also required to make a further simultaneous and even
greater advance towards Isigny-sur-Mer and beyond to link up with forces
from Utah. This problem was ingeniously solved by US V Corps at Omaha
by landing two half-divisions side by side for its ﬁrst waves, with the intention of 1st Infantry Division peeling off towards Bayeux and 29th Infantry
Division towards Isigny-sur-Mer. But one effect of this command arrangement was to increase the confusion on Omaha when things went wrong on
D-Day. Further, Omaha was not only the most critical beach in terms of the
Allied plan and the most challenging in terms of German defences and
natural terrain features, it was also the only beach where the landing troops
received (other than the amphibious Shermans) no additional help at all in
the form of either specialist armour or vehicles, or airborne troops.
What is even harder to explain is that, although the German military
doctrine and culture almost instinctively identiﬁed Cherbourg as the Allied
Schwerpunckt and therefore the link-up between US V Corps and VII Corps
as critical, there was no such emphasis in First US Army’s plan. Second
Army landed two commando brigades with the speciﬁc mission of linking
up their beachheads: 1st Special Service Brigade on Sword Beach on D-Day
to reinforce 6th Airborne Division in the River Orne bridgehead, and 4th
Special Service Brigade on Juno and Gold on D-Day and D plus 1 to tie in
these beaches together with Omaha. But the First US Army plan called only
for 116th Infantry Regiment to lead the push inland in the general direction
of Isigny-sur-Mer, even though this was also one of the two leading assault
regiments to hit the beaches. First US Army’s plan actually weakened the
COSSAC version, which had a British commando battalion landing to the
east of Omaha and American paratroopers landing to the west. In addition,
the VII Corps plan called for 4th Infantry Division from Utah to swing
north and north-west towards Cherbourg on D-Day and D plus 1, leaving
Carentan to be captured by 101st Airborne Division, assumed to be able to
ﬁght as a formed division on D plus 1 or soon after, despite the division’s
paratrooper regiments being dropped in darkness on D-Day, and contrary
to all previous experience of the nature of airborne assaults. Unlike the
British and Germans, US military culture of this period made little room
for the possibility of unforeseen failures. The difference in military cultures
between the two Allies was further highlighted by the British decision to
suppress the Longues-sur-Mer cliff-top battery by airpower and naval gunﬁre alone, leading to its capture from the landward side on D plus 1, in
contrast to the US decision to use its two elite ranger battalions and their

58

Stephen Badsey

associated landing craft to capture the Pointe-du-Hoc on D-Day by scaling
the cliffs. This raises the issue of whether the ranger battalions, which were
assigned their role at the Point du Hoc in the original COSSAC plan, would
have been better employed, once that plan was changed by SHAEF, landing
as a second brigade with the ﬁrst wave at Utah, with a mission to push
towards Carentan on D-Day.
By the fortunes of battle, the only Allied division to achieve all its major
objectives on D-Day was British 6th Airborne Division, although it continued
to have problems for some days afterwards. The story of the airborne
landings is usually told in terms of objectives achieved on D-Day and the
problems caused particularly for the two American divisions from the scattered night landing (for which the airborne forces and some historians have
most unjustly blamed the pilots of their aircraft). But when seen from the
German perspective this scattering of paratroopers across the Cotentin in
the early hours of D-Day worked considerably to the Allied advantage. The
threat to Cherbourg continued to impress Seventh Army, which recorded
in its summary of events on 6 June that, ‘It is the opinion of the chief of
staff ’ Lieutenant General Max Pemsel, ‘that the enemy intends to cut off
the peninsula COTENTIN at its narrowest point’,23 a formal statement
identifying the enemy Schwerpunckt. This impression was reinforced by American paratroopers landing in the Vire estuary and south of Carentan, and
then by the Utah Beach landing. The defenders of the bunker complex at
Grandcamp and Maisy, which was heavily shelled on D-Day, also seemed
convinced that they had beaten off a signiﬁcant Allied seaborne landing
attempt, and until 8 June Army Group B continued to believe that a deliberate airborne landing had also taken place on the western side of the
Cotentin. Before dawn on D-Day, even while Battle Group Luck, the leading formation of 21st Panzer, was having its ﬁrst encounters with 6th Airborne Division east of Caen, LXXXIV Corps ordered attacks towards Sainte
Mère Eglise, by two battalions of Infantry Regiment 1058 from Montebourg
in the north, Infantry Regiment 1057 from the west, and Fallschirmjäger
Regiment 6 from the south, in the classic German battle of encirclement.
The corps also ordered its reserve, Battle Group Meyer, to move from
south-east of Bayeux westward to the Carentan area. Shortly after dawn, as
it became apparent that the immediate threat to Carentan had been exaggerated, Battle Group Meyer was turned around, and committed during the
afternoon of D-Day north of Bayeux against the ﬂank of 50th (Northumbrian) Division advancing from Gold, peeling off a battalion northward
towards Omaha as it did so on the assumption that this was sufﬁcient to
eliminate a failed Allied landing there. If the attack by Battle Group Meyer
had succeeded together with the attacks by 21st Panzer Division, these
together with the arrival of 12th SS Panzer Division west of Caen on D plus
1 would have formed the basis for an encirclement of the whole of Second
Army. This episode gives the almost certain answer to the often-raised
question as to what would have happened at Omaha if a brigade of 12th

Culture, controversy, Caen and Cherbourg 59
SS Panzer Division had been present to the south: it would have been sent
elsewhere, either towards Sainte Mère Eglise or Bayeux.
For D plus 1 and the following days, attention has mostly been paid to
12th SS Panzer Division’s prevention of 3rd Canadian Infantry Division
reaching Caen from the west, while 21st Panzer Division blocked the British
advance from the east. But across the Allied landing area the Germans, almost
without formal orders being issued above divisional level, continued to launch
the pincer-like double envelopments that were their classic (even stereotyped)
manoeuvre. All these double envelopments failed to reach the beaches in the
face of Allied ﬁrepower. Although airpower and artillery played their part,
the most important Allied weapon was naval gunnery, which the Germans
acknowledged as decisive in destroying or blocking any attempt on their
part to manoeuvre north of the Caen-Cherbourg road, very much as Rommel
had predicted.24 Although the German armoured battle groups at least remained intact, by the end of D plus 1 Fallschirmjäger Regiment 6’s counterattack against Utah from the Carentan area had failed with heavy casualties,
as had Battle Group Meyer’s counter-attack against Gold. But the strong
German doctrinal instinct for such counter-attacks led to attempts on D
plus 1 to repeat Battle Group Meyer’s attack with the last remaining available LXXXIV Corps reserve, Mobile Brigade 30 (mobile on bicycles), which
was likewise effectively destroyed north of Bayeux. Counting this last
attack, three battle groups of 352nd Infantry Division had been smashed by
the British from Gold, and a further two by the Americans from Omaha,
producing the brief gaping hole in the German centre on 8 June that became
known as the Caumont Gap.
The Allied landing divisions also, after the shock of D-Day, behaved
almost as if they were on autopilot to complete their objectives rather than
responding to events around them. 1st Infantry Division pushed forward
eastward from Omaha on D plus 1 quite unaware that in combination with
50th (Northumbrian) Division from Gold it was driving the remnants of the
two failed German counter-attacks by Battle Group Meyer and Mobile
Brigade 30 into a pocket north of Bayeux, from which the survivors broke
out in the darkness of the early hours of 9 June, the junction between
Omaha and Gold coming next day. Short of transport and even ammunition, the otherwise redoubtable 1st Infantry Division was so conscious of its
own vulnerability to a large German attack from the south that before
dawn on 8 June it reported one happening, and went brieﬂy onto the defensive. It was not until 9 June that V Corps realised that 352nd Infantry
Division had disintegrated in front of it, by which time the ﬁrst units of II
Parachute Corps were arriving to steady the German line. As 1st Infantry
Division drove to the east, 29th Infantry Division pushed to the west along
the coast and the northern side of the Lower Aure valley, driving the
remains of 352nd Infantry Division back towards Carentan. This was a
very hard advance: veterans of Omaha Beach considered that capturing the
German bunker positions at Grandcamp on 8 June was the harder ﬁght. But

60

Stephen Badsey

V Corps orders still required 29th Infantry Division only to secure Isignysur-Mer. Early on 9 June its reserve formation, 175th Infantry Regiment,
reached the town, sending patrols across the Vire estuary the next day.
Allied plans expected a full-scale German counter-offensive to start at
any date from D plus 3 to D plus 7, with reinforcing divisions arriving in
the interval. Rommel now found himself torn between his preferred objective and his biggest problem. While the immediate Allied threat was from
the British and Canadians in front of Caen, Army Group B and Seventh
Army were convinced that the Utah beachhead (or as the Germans inevitably thought of it, the Sainte Mère Eglise pocket) remained the Allied
Schwerpunckt and also their chief vulnerability. This conviction was reinforced by the German capture on 7 June near Omaha Beach of the order of
battle and scheme of manoeuvre for V Corps, including information about
the ‘Mulberry A’ harbour at St-Laurent, and on the morning of 8 June,
from a landing craft beached in the Grandcamp area, of a comparable set of
documents for VII Corps, including Carentan as a main objective. So, by
the evening of 8 June, Army Group B had the complete plans for First
US Army for the entire ﬁrst week of the battle. These plans conﬁrmed
Rommel’s views about the weakness of First US Army’s position at Carentan,
but he continued to ignore the evidence regarding Mulberry.25 On the afternoon of 9 June he ordered all his forces facing the Calvados coast from the
Orne to the Vire brieﬂy onto the defensive, in favour of his belief that
‘everything must be used to defend Cherbourg’.26 Orders were also issued to
the arriving Panzer Lehr Division to hold (in fact to retake, as it has already
fallen) Isigny-sur-Mer at all costs.27 The success of 50th (Northumbrian)
Division from Gold led to Panzer Lehr Division being instead diverted to
the Bayeux sector, preventing a very dangerous situation indeed developing
for the Allies.
Meanwhile, and regardless of Bradley’s new orders, in the Cotentin VII
Corps’ plan unfolded very much as it had been drawn up, with the main
effort being made northwards led by 4th Infantry Division, leaving a
weakened but very determined 101st Airborne Division (including its
glider brigade, which had arrived by sea) to seize Carentan. Starting early
on 9 June, the airborne troops attacked over some of the most exposed and
difﬁcult terrain on the Normandy battleﬁeld against an even more weakened Fallschirmjäger Regiment 6. During the afternoon of 10 June the lead
company of 327th Glider Infantry Regiment made the ﬁrst fragile contact
just west of the River Vire with 29th Reconnaissance Troop and 175th
Infantry Regiment. According to one account, many of the American
soldiers from both sides of the junction had adopted German transport
methods and were riding horses.28 101st Airborne Division secured Carentan
on the morning of 12 June after an epic ﬁght supported by airpower, artillery and naval gunnery, after the town’s abandonment by Fallschirmjäger
Regiment 6 (according to its commander chieﬂy because his men were out
of ammunition), and barely hours before the arrival of the leading elements

Culture, controversy, Caen and Cherbourg 61
of 17th SS Panzergrenadier Division as reinforcements. It was only circumstances and some extraordinary bravery that prevented an American failure
to take Carentan rather than a British failure to take Caen being the great
controversy of the Battle of Normandy.
Despite the jokes that it caused among Bradley’s ofﬁcers, Montgomery’s
message to him on 25 June that ‘Caen is the key to Cherbourg’ contained
much truth.29 On 11 June Army Group B planned ‘to replace the Panzer
units [opposite the British and Canadians] with infantry divisions and transfer its Schwerpunkt to the Carentan-Montebourg area in order to avert
the danger to Cherbourg’.30 Rommel was unable to do this because of the
continued Anglo-Canadian threat to break out past Caen, and because of
Hitler’s opposition. On 12 June, in response to the fall of Carentan, Hitler
ordered both absolutely no retreat, and for the Allied beaches to be rolledup sequentially from the east starting with the Orne bridgehead. Despite
repeated complaints by German senior ofﬁcers about Hitler’s interference in
battleﬁeld decisions, this order almost certainly saved Rommel’s military
reputation. Given the strength of the Anglo-Canadian threat in front of
Caen, the unsuitability of the Cotentin for armour, and the difﬁculties
involved in moving and supplying the Panzer divisions for such a redeployment, Rommel’s plan would surely have led to a defeat even more rapid and
complete than that which was eventually achieved. Even so, Hitler’s orders
on 12 June set the attritional agenda for the rest of a Battle of Normandy
that he had already lost.

Acknowledgements
This chapter arose largely out of research for three volumes in the ‘Battle Zone
Normandy’ series of combined history/ battleﬁeld guidebooks published by Sutton
Publishing of Thrupp in 2004: Utah Beach, Omaha Beach and The Battle for Caen.
I would like to acknowledge the work of my co-authors on two of these volumes,
Tim Bean and particularly Dr Simon Trew. The chapter’s conclusions are based
chieﬂy on war diaries and other original documents in the National Archives of the
United Kingdom (Public Record Ofﬁce), the National Archives of Canada, and the
National Archives and Research Administration (NARA) of the USA, including translations of German documents and the results of debrieﬁngs of German prisoners
of war. The following ofﬁcial accounts of Normandy have been also been used: Ellis,
L.F. et al., Victory in the West Volume I: The Battle of Normandy (London: HMSO,
1962); Harrison, G.A., Cross-Channel Attack (Washington, DC: War Department, 1950); Stacey, C.P., The Victory Campaign (Ottawa: the Queen’s Printer, 1960);
Omaha Beachhead 6 June–13 June 1944 (Washington, DC: War Department, 1945);
Utah Beach to Cherbourg 6 June–27 June 1944 (Washington, DC: War Department,
1947); together with the following recent editions of accounts by senior German
ofﬁcers as prisoners of war: Isby, D.C. (ed.) Fighting the Invasion: The German Army
at D-Day (London: Greenhill, 2000); and Isby, D.C. (ed.) Fighting in Normandy: The
German Army from D-Day to Villers-Bocage (London: Greenhill, 2001). For German dispositions on D-Day see the facsimile maps in Mehner K. (ed.) Die geheimen
Tagesberichte der Deutschen Wehmachführung im zweiten Weltkrieg 1939–1945
(Osnabrück: Biblio Verlag, 1984–95), Volume 10; and also Chazette, A., Le Mur de
l’Atlantique en Normandie (Bayeux: Heimdal, 2000).

62

Stephen Badsey

Notes
1 N. Scarf, Assault Division (London: Collins, 1947), p. 93.
2 W.B. Brauer, Hitler’s Fortress Cherbourg: The Conquest of a Bastion (New York:
Stein and Day, 1984), pp. 98–9; D.D. Eisenhower, Crusade in Europe (Baltimore,
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997), pp. 253–4; N. Hamilton, Monty:
Master of the Battleﬁeld 1942–1944 (London: Sceptre, 1983), pp. 612–15.
3 Paradoxically, this view has been strengthened by experiments in counterfactual history attempting to produce a total Allied defeat on 6 June: it cannot be done. See
P. Tsouras, Disaster at D-Day (Machanicsburg, PA: Stackpole, 1994); T.N. Dupuy,
Options of Command (New York: Hippocrene, 1984), and S.E. Ambrose, ‘D-Day
Fails’ in R. Cowley (ed.) What Ifs? (London: Macmillan, 1999), pp. 341–51.
4 Ellis, Victory in the West Volume I, p. 265; R.J. Kershaw, D-Day: Piercing the
Atlantic Wall (London: Ian Allen, 1993), p. 237.
5 Isby, Fighting in Normandy, pp. 76–80.
6 Planning document PS SHAEF (44) 21 (Final) 10 June, cited in M. Blumenson,
Breakout and Pursuit (Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 1961), p. 187.
7 See S.A. Hart, Montgomery and ‘Colossal Cracks’: The 21st Army Group in Northwest Europe 1944– 45 (London: Praeger, 2000); T. Copp, Fields of Fire (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 2003); R.A. Hart, Clash of Arms (Boulder CO:
Lynne Reinner, 2001).
8 F. Morgan, Overture to Overlord (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1950), p. 163.
9 N. Hamilton, Monty: Master of the Battleﬁeld 1942–1944, p. 593.
10 Omaha Beachhead, p. 116; J.B. Salmond, The History of the 51st Highland Division
(Edinburgh: Pentland, 1953), pp. 139– 41.
11 C. Ryan, The Longest Day (London: Victor Golancz, 1982), p. 207; A. Danchev
and D. Todman (eds) Field Marshal Lord Alanbrooke: War Diaries 1939–1945
(London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson, 2001), p. 554.
12 For Slapton Sands see R.J. Kershaw, D-Day: Piercing the Atlantic Wall, pp. 9–
15; see also J.C. Masterman, The Double-Cross System (London: Pimloco, 1995);
R. Hesketh, Fortitude: The D-Day Deception Campaign (London: St Ermin’s,
1999), F.H. Hinsley et al., British Intelligence in the Second World War Volume 4
(London: HMSO, 1990).
13 E.P.F. Rose and C. Pareyn, ‘British Applications of Military Geology for
“Operation Overlord” and the Battle in Normandy, France, 1944’, in J.R.
Underwood Jr and P.L. Guth (eds) Military Geology in War and Peace (Boulder,
CO: Geological Society of America, 1998), pp. 55–65. For a full description of
the reasoning see ‘Operation Overlord – Report and Appreciation July 1943’ in
CAB 106/969 ‘History of COSSAC’ National Archives of the United Kingdom
Public Record Ofﬁce (PRO).
14 R. Bennett, Ultra in the West (London: Hutchinson, 1979), p. 73.
15 See M. van Creveld, Fighting Power (London: Arms and Armour, 1983) and
T.N. Dupuy, A Genius for War (London: Macdonald & Janes, 1977). As may
be guessed from their titles, both authors enthusiastically support this German
doctrinal approach.
16 T. Copp, Fields of Fire, pp. 26–8; P. Grifﬁth, Forward into Battle: Fighting
Tactics from Waterloo to Vietnam (Chichester: Anthony Bird, 1981), pp. 78–82;
D.M. Glantz and J. House, When Titans Clashed (Lawrence KS: University of
Kansas Press, 1995).
17 Utah Beach to Cherbourg (Washington, DC: War Department, 1947), p. 34.
18 CSDIC (UK) ‘Report on information obtained from Senior Ofﬁcer PW on 13–14
Aug 44 – C/22 Generalleutnant von Schlieben – conversation between Schlieben
and Broich’. I am grateful to Mitchell Yockelson of NARA for this reference.
See also Isby, Fighting the Invasion, pp. 102– 4.

Culture, controversy, Caen and Cherbourg 63
19 S. Badsey, ‘The American Experience of Armour 1919–1953’, in J.P. Harris
and F.H. Toase, Armoured Warfare (London: Batsford, 1990), pp. 124– 44;
Hart, Montgomery and ‘Colossal Cracks’, Copp, Fields of Fire.
20 See A.R. Lewis, Omaha Beach: A Flawed Victory (Chapel Hill, NC: University of
North Carolina Press, 2001), pp. 34–49.
21 N. Crookenden, Dropzone Normandy (Abingdon: Purnell, 1976), pp. 12–61;
T.B.H. Ottway, Airborne Forces (London: Imperial War Museum, reprinted 1990);
J.A. Hudson, Out of the Blue (West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University, 1972).
22 ‘Operation Overlord – Report and Appreciation July 1943’, CAB 106/969 PRO;
Hamilton, Monty: Master of the Battleﬁeld, pp. 482–3; Morgan, Overture to
Overlord, pp. 152–3.
23 German Seventh Army War Diary, entry for 6 June 1944, RG 407 – Box 24154
– ML488 NARA.
24 Ellis, Victory in the West Volume I, p. 239.
25 D. Kahn, Hitler’s Spies: The Extraordinary Story of German Military Intelligence
(London: Arrow, 1980), pp. 387–99; G.L. Harrison, Cross Channel Attack, (Washington, DC: Government Printing, 1951), p. 350.
26 Isby, Fighting in Normandy, p. 80.
27 Bennett, Ultra in the West, p. 77.
28 R.F. Weighley, Eisenhower’s Lieutenants: The Campaigns of France and Germany
1944–1945 (London: Sidgwick & Jackson, 1981), p. 98.
29 Quoted in D. Irving, The War Between the Generals (London: Penguin, 1981),
p. 177.
30 Seventh Army War Diary, entries for 11 and 12 June 1944 RG 407 – Box 24154
– ML488 NARA.

64

5

Nigel de Lee

American tactical innovation
in Normandy, 1944
Nigel de Lee

Opinions of the tactical performance of the American army in Normandy
differ widely. Apologists for the German army are inclined to be highly
critical, ascribing the victory of the Allied armies to superiority of numbers
and quantity of material resources alone. They imply that in a more equal
contest the Germans would have won, as if any armed struggle had ever
been equal. But some authorities from the Allied side are in agreement with
this view. Albert Norman, the historian attached to the HQ of the US First
Army wrote: ‘. . . the principle of mass was applied throughout the OVERLORD campaign. At every chosen point of attack overwhelming manpower
and material force was pitted against numerically weaker forces. That is
how . . . the breakthrough at St Lo was achieved’.1
Major-General Richard Schimpff, commander of the 3rd Fallschirmjaeger
Division claimed that in his sector, ‘The purely numerical proportion of power
was therefore estimated to be 1:4 to 1:5’.2 Colonel Zerbel of the 352nd
Infantry Division remarked that in mid-June, ‘. . . the enemy was only
inclined to attack when he felt completely superior in material’.3 The German
ﬁeld commanders were also very critical of the American tactics, although
their comments in regard to this subject are inconsistent. Colonel Ziegelmann
of the 352nd Division remarked on a general lack of audacity and enterprise
on the part of the American troops. With regard to the ﬁghting between 11
and 14 June he commented: ‘Soon it became noticeable that the enthusiasm,
which previously had prevailed during attacks was lessening . . . it became
a practice with the enemy to spray each hedge with his MPs for longer
and longer periods of time . . .’. In describing the ﬁghting on 16 of June
he noted: ‘the tendency not to take advantage of success . . . stubbornly
adhering to his plan . . . The caution and lack of daring prevailing in the
American infantry was characterised by their stopping in small sub-sectors
whenever they met with stubborn resistance, rather than by-passing it’.
But Ziegelmann also mentioned that on 16 June, ‘the situation north of
St Lo actually became rather serious . . . the intermingled and exhausted
German units were threatened with a complete tearing-up of the weakened
front . . .’. The HQ of the 352 Division at Le Mesnil Rouxelin was brought
under direct ﬁre by leading elements of the US 29th Division. According to

American tactical innovation 65
Ziegelmann the American inﬁltration of the German positions ‘. . . increased
the beginning feeling of panic’.4 He also remarked that the Americans used
few tanks after having lost some to panzerfausts while stuck in the hedgerows. He was critical of the failure of the 29th Division to use tanks to
follow up the success of infantry supported by artillery and tactical aircraft
on 16 June,5 but in a comment on the ﬁghting in July he acknowledged
the fundamental reason for the American limited employment of armour,
and the radical effectiveness of one of the technical measures taken to meet
the difﬁculty:
The fact that the enemy did not make use of . . . tanks, was due to the
terrain. Their commitment was restricted to employment in numbers,
and the use of a new kind of shoveling apparatus attached to their
fronts which dug breaks into the rows of hedges, and furthermore made
the hedgerows useless as protection for the infantry men.6
Schimpf agreed with most of the critical comments made by Ziegelmann.
He stated of 10 June, ‘If the Americans . . . had launched an energetic attack
from the Forest of Cerisy, St. Lô would have fallen’. He also made a more
general remark that the Americans ‘only decided on extremely limited
objectives and failed to exploit achieved successes by continuing their thrusts
in depth . . .’. He found them generally predictable in tactical behaviour,
saying, ‘American tactics . . . were much more schematic and inﬂexible than
the German, which fact often gave the defensive troops the opportunity to
take appropriate counter measures’.
But, although struck by a tendency not to use covered approaches, stealth
and surprise, he did admit that American raids of company strength could
get to within 70 metres of his division’s main line of resistance undetected,
evading outposts by such techniques. He also admitted the advantage which
the Norman terrain gave the defence: ‘The terrain hindered the attacking
enemy from fully developing his air and tank superiority . . .’.7
Some American scholars agree that the tactics were deﬁcient, particularly
in the early stages of the campaign. Doubler remarked that ‘companies and
battalions learned that spirited but ill-prepared attacks produced heavy
casualties’ – that mass and conﬁdence combined were not enough to bring
success.8 Carafano stated that, with their insistence on ‘winning the ﬁreﬁght’,
before attempting any decisive movement, ‘U.S. Army tactics were ill-suited
for hedgerow ﬁghting . . .’.9 More speciﬁcally he found that ‘The US Army
had not foreseen the requirement for close infantry-armor co-ordination,
and did not have radios that allowed small infantry units and individual
tanks to communicate’.10 In his discussion of COBRA he was very critical
of US artillery tactics: ‘Artillery barrages, both before and during the operation, were often ineffective. Artillery was only used to good effect when the
U.S. infantry and armor could advance and see the enemy and then direct
cannon ﬁre directly onto the German positions . . .’.11

66

Nigel de Lee

Doubler remarks that senior ofﬁcers were unwilling to admit that the
tactics were in need of change or improvement and quotes Bradley as claiming, ‘Our tactics as taught at home are as sound as a dollar’.12
This curious but common military affectation, of claiming infallibility
in a ﬁeld in which practical ﬂexibility has always been a supreme virtue,
was followed by other ofﬁcial commentators such as the G-3 Division of
SHAEF which stated in December 1944, ‘basic pre-invasion infantry-tank
doctrines still remain sound. They had to be applied with a bit of ingenuity
and a tremendous amount of energy, but they did produce results even
in the hedgerow country’.13 The same line was taken by the commander of
the 29th Division, Major-General Charles Gerhardt in his comments on the
ﬁghting in June 1944: ‘Certain minor variations must be made to ﬁt peculiar
terrain requirements. However, this should not be allowed to inﬂuence tactics or organization once the need has passed’.14
Both Doubler and Carafano concede that despite the inherent conservatism of the higher commanders the US Army did adapt to the tactical
requirements of Normandy. Carafano says, ‘the US Army . . . adjusted to
the requirements of Normandy ﬁghting reasonably well . . . two months of
hard ﬁghting had provided stiff lessons . . .’.15
This judgement is too harsh. As Doubler argued, the American troops
in action in Normandy began to adapt their tactics to concrete realities and
the needs of survival and success much earlier. There is plenty of evidence
that the necessary changes in practice began at low level, ‘hedgerow level’,
and were gradually recognised and adopted by units and formations as
they proved their value. The best-known are those which were approved
by the higher levels and then discussed and disseminated in orders and
journals, means which have left their traces in written form. Others have
been recorded in regimental literature, memoirs and orally. Because this
process was spontaneous and not ofﬁcially inspired or controlled it was
sporadic and patchy, often driven by particular local conditions and events.
As standard tactical modes failed, troops who survived and had imagination
devised new improvised forms of organisation and methods. This inherent
adaptability had already impressed their great enemy Field Marshal Rommel
who remarked: ‘What was astonishing was the speed with which the Americans adapted themselves to modern warfare. In this they were assisted by
their extraordinary sense for the practical and material and by their complete lack of regard for tradition and worthless theories . . . great imagination and foresight . . .’.16
Balkoski, the historian of the 29th Division observed, ‘. . . it took a few
weeks for the squad leaders to grasp the signiﬁcant differences between real
war and “war by the book”, and by then many of them were dead . . . men
discovered that the infantry tactics they had been taught were in urgent
need of modiﬁcation’.17
According to the histories of the 115th Infantry Regiment and the 110th
Field Artillery Battalion, which formed a Regimental Combat Team in the

American tactical innovation 67
29th Division the troops grasped the need for change on ﬁrst contact with
the enemy and the terrain in Normandy. The regiment had been in training
for 18 months in England and, ‘All of this training . . . was designed to teach
them what to do without stopping to think. It was hoped that the men would
become so familiar with the solutions to the problems that they would have
to face that these solutions would be automatically carried out’.18
This is not what happened in Normandy. On 6 June, according to one
sergeant, ‘we moved forward along the hedgerows. We moved cautiously
and hesitantly partly because of fear and partly because of the strangeness
of the situation . . . it was not rare for a single well-hidden sniper to hold
up an entire battalion’.19 The artillery also found the country strange, as
recorded in the Battalion history, ‘the 110th advance parties found that the
actual country differed vastly from their mental pictures . . .’.20 They also
rapidly had to improvise a new temporary order of battle, taking over control of four SP guns on 6 June and then a stray armoured car and six guns
from an infantry cannon company the following day.21 Later that month
they acted as a ﬁre control unit for other battalions combined with their
own, incorporated a battery of light anti-aircraft artillery and developed
experimental tactics to put ﬁre onto hedgerows and also behind them in
support of the infantry.22 Artillery forward parties were used to lead infantry advances and safety margins were cut to stop enemy inﬁltration.23 Intimate close support for the infantry proved invaluable on 12 June when most
of the 3/115 had shown a little too much audacity by going through the
enemy lines south of the Elle and were about to be cut off in the bocage,
much reduced and having used all their ammunition. A timely and accurate
barrage two hedges away allowed at least some to get back to their own
lines.24 The infantry learned a bitter lesson in an early attempt at close
cooperation with armour. ‘K’ Company of the 3/115 advanced into St Laurent
with tank support but had to retreat when German anti-tank ﬁre drove
back their armoured support. The company planned a new attack, with two
tanks in support at night, but ‘the tankers refused to bring their heavy
vehicles back into St Laurent, fearing the enemy’s high-velocity gun . . .’.25
By 20 June the 29th Division had devised a new scheme for the combination of tanks and infantry with engineer support in the attack. The new
system was tried out by the 3/115 and 747 Tank Battalion in an attack on
Sequeville, north of Villiers Fossard, but proved the need for more thought
and training. According to the plan:
The infantry was to clear a ﬁeld, engineers . . . would then rush in and
blow a gap in the hedge. Then a tank would move in, stick its cannon
and machine-guns through the gap and blast the corner of the next
ﬁeld. Under cover of this ﬁre the, the doughboys would advance up the
lateral hedges, clear the remaining resistance, and then the tanks would
move up and the entire process would be repeated . . . It sounded like a
good plan but on this particular day it didn’t work out too well.

68

Nigel de Lee

The infantry and engineers managed to clear the ﬁrst ﬁeld and gap the
hedge, but the tanks were impeded by mud while moving up and hit by
88mm anti-tank guns. They attempted to manoeuvre out of the line of ﬁre
but were hit again, when ‘The tankers at this point became reluctant to
proceed and despite the efforts of the CO of the 747th . . . the attack boggeddown and the troops became disorganised’. The infantry pushed on but
were soon held up by machine-guns and mortars, and were recalled.26 It was
obvious that as yet the infantry and tanks lacked the mutual conﬁdence
necessary for effective cooperation. There were similar failures at other times
and places in other formations. On 7 July the 83rd Division advanced on
the area of Saintenay but, ‘When tanks paced our infantry attack they were
permitted to pass and the troops following them were ﬁred upon, allowing
the next enemy line of defence to engage the tanks’.27
On 11 and 12 July the 35th Division assaulted a most elaborate defensive
position at Le Carillon. The 2/137 found the armoured support provided
entirely ineffective. The tank destroyers were wrecked by mines and mortars, and of four tanks sent in, one was blown up on a mine and two became
bogged in the mud.28 These misadventures reﬂect the German policy of
always separating enemy armour from infantry where they could do so. The
2/137 was more successful in changing tactical organisation and procedures
for the infantry and their own and attached ﬁre support weapons. Colonel
O’Connell decentralised his forces, attaching a platoon of heavy machineguns and a section of 81mm mortars to each company. The riﬂe companies
were ordered to abandon conventional formation and create attack groups
of four or ﬁve men. O’Connell remarked, ‘The best tactic was to ﬁrst place
very heavy concentrations of mortar ﬁre on all suspected enemy lines and
then to follow this up with a liberal use of grenade launchers and hand
grenades’.29
Of course, decentralisation made control much more difﬁcult. The HQ
VII Corps noted, ‘The hedgerow country of small plots or ﬁelds made any
large scale co-ordinated attack impossible’.30 But some degree of control
was necessary as remarked by the staff of SHAEF: ‘Decentralization is
necessary because limited visibility tends to isolate the ﬁght in each ﬁeld.
Control is necessary to insure against exposure of a unit to ﬂanking ﬁre by
a too rapid advance’.31
By July the 29th Division had worked out an effective way to combine
infantry, tanks and engineers to clear bocage. The basic tactical team consisted of an infantry squad, a tank and four sappers. The 60mm mortar
bombarded the ﬁeld beyond the one under attack, the infantry tossed grenades over the hedge, the tank moved up to the hedge, ﬁred its 75mm gun
into the corners of the ﬁeld and sprayed the hedgerow ahead with machinegun ﬁre. The infantry squad then advanced across the middle of the ﬁeld to
gain the next hedge. Once they had done so, the tank pulled back to allow
the sappers to blow a gap in the hedge. The tank then advanced, escorted
by the sappers, on watch to deal with mines and panzerfaust teams.32 The

American tactical innovation 69
division usually employed two such teams in echelon to sustain the effort,
as reported in the ‘Battle Notes’ for July:
The Divisional plan for Infantry-Armor tactics . . . one infantry squad,
one tank and one ﬁeld, proved itself a very practical solution . . . It was
found that a pair of tanks in column, separated by at least one ﬁeld,
gave elasticity in the attack in that when a tank ran out of ammunition
or gasoline or the demolition squad needed explosives, a new tank was
leap-frogged through . . .33
On 11 July the 116th Infantry attacked via St Andre de L’Epine and up
the Martinville Ridge, gaining some 3,000 metres in the face of the German
3rd Fallschirmjaeger Division, using these tactics.34 A few days later, having
made a number of unsuccessful formal attacks with massive support, both
the 115th and 116th Regiments made inﬁltration attacks in darkness or mist
to penetrate and compromise the German defensive positions on the western end of the Ridge. In the advance of the 3/116, silence was required: ‘only
two men in each platoon were permitted to ﬁre, and then only in the event
of an emergency. The others were to rely on their bayonets and hand grenades’.35 When ‘A’ Company of 1/116 followed on, ‘The Company advanced
past Martinville in two columns, working along axial hedgerows one ﬁeld
apart and maintaining visual contact. Only occasional sniper ﬁre was met.
Each column left small combat groups of two men in every ﬁeld passed
through to hold the corridor open’.36
Finally, on 18 July the 29th Division improvised a mixed task force at
three hours notice to dash into St Lô and disperse to seize key points in the
town by a coup de main which relied on ‘speed, boldness and surprise’ to
succeed. The motorised part of the force picked up 1/115 en route on the
outskirts of the town which was secured before the enemy artillery could
react in full strength.37
Other formations devised proposals and solutions of their own. The 3rd
Armoured Division believed that the 29th Division system could be defeated
by mines, panzerfausts and dug-in infantry. Brigadier-General Bohn proposed an alternative. In his scheme the attackers should advance on a road
in column. The leading tank should be followed at a distance of 100 yards
by the tank of the platoon leader, and the tank of the company commander
should be 100 yards behind that of the platoon leader. Immediately behind
the company commander should be a tank-dozer and then the rest of the
tanks in close column with the infantry riding on them. If enemy anti-tank
weapons opened ﬁre on the lead tank the platoon leader would alert the
company commander, who would order the dozer to open a gap in the
hedge along the road. Next the tanks would go through the gap, and move
up parallel to the road some 300 yards to the side, led by the dozer to make
the necessary gaps on the way. Once this lateral column was within one ﬁeld
of the enemy anti-tank position, the infantry would dismount and inﬁltrate

70

Nigel de Lee

forward to attack it. The HQ staff of 3rd Armoured Division felt that
Bohn’s tactics themselves could not work against a strong enemy. The tactics
they preferred involved advancing on a broader front, using one platoon of
tanks, a squad of engineers and at least two tank destroyers in each assaulting unit. The tanks were to move through the ﬁelds, with infantry on the
ﬂanks and rear of each one, keeping at least 20 yards away from all hedges
until that in front had been cleared by the infantry and gapped by the
sappers. Artillery should be in support to suppress enemy mortars and heavy
weapons.38
This system was described in more detail by the G-3 staff of SHAEF.
They remarked that the artillery should ﬁre a general preparation before the
advance while the mortars hit suspected enemy anti-tank positions. On the
advance, ‘The tanks moved forward slowly on both sides of hedges paralleling the direction of advance, avoiding roads . . . they sprayed the hedges
with machine-gun ﬁre. Tanks, mortars and artillery shelled crossroads and
suspected A / T gun locations. Artillery forward observers accompanied the
leading wave of tanks’. This style of attack made the infantry auxiliary to
the tanks. The infantry were to protect the tanks, mop up enemy remnants,
put prophylactic ﬁre into cover and destroy enemy anti-tank weapons by
outﬂanking attacks or using mortars and machine-guns. A second echelon
with the same organisation was to follow to give support against any counterattacks.39
The 2nd Division was active in developing new tactical procedures which
were used most strikingly in the highly elaborate set-piece attack on Hill 192
on 11 July. The tactical innovations employed applied to the uses of artillery, tanks, engineers and infantry and were the product of reﬂection on
the causes of failure of previous attacks on the hill. The divisional staff
remarked in retrospect, ‘The lesson learned from the initial operation on
Hill 192 was the necessity for careful and meticulous planning if the enemy
was to be dislodged . . .’.40 The analysis of the attack on 16 June remarked,
certain rough spots had shown up . . . The most serious of these was the
failure of the tank-infantry team to function smoothly. In storming the
hedgerows there had been occasions when the tanks and infantry had
become too widely separated: the tankers wanted to pick their own
terrain, which often did not agree with the doughboys’ estimate of the
situation. Often the tank would boldly advance where infantry feared to
tread. When the two groups became separated and the tankers started
ﬁring at the enemy, there were several cases when friendly infantry got
caught between. Such situations bred mutual distrust.
The cure applied was to design new tactics and train intensively in their
application. From the end of June onwards the battalions chosen to attack
the hill trained with the tanks and sappers who were to accompany them
in the operation under the supervision of their executive ofﬁcers. They used

American tactical innovation 71
a cycle of explanation, demonstration, discussion and critique, and each
went through the process three times over. As a result of the training, ‘The
smaller units could get used to operating closely together. The same tanks
and their commanders operated with the same infantry squads . . . a mutual
appreciation and trust was thus built up, which was reinforced as soon as
the shooting actually started’.
The tactical procedure taught was as follows:
Each hedgerow represented a new line of departure. With the tank ﬁring
its machine-gun at the next hedgerow, the infantry scouts went out
along the sides of the hedge-bound ﬁeld, also covered by the BAR team.
Two of the four demolitions men followed behind, and the engineers
and infantry squad leader would agree on the best place for the tank to
go through. Having selected a suitable place . . . one of the demolitions
men would signal back with a handkerchief. This message would be transmitted to the buttoned-up tank by one of the engineers who had remained
with the tank. Special EE-8 phones were installed on the rear of the
tanks and connected with the tanks’ interphone system[s] . . . The two
engineers remaining with the tank would protect it during its advance,
scanning and ﬁring at the side hedges to keep down bazookamen.41
During the ﬁghting on 11 July the new tactics were used with great success
by most of the companies in the attacking battalions. But even as they went
forward they were making their own local variations as suited their particular tasks and circumstances, such as adjusting the use made of the light
and heavy machine-guns in support of the assault squads.42 The artillery ﬁre
plan for the attack on the hill was exceptionally massive but also highly
ﬂexible and allowed the assaulting infantry to hold, retard, advance or halt
the rolling barrage. Control was facilitated by giving each battery a colour
code, each phase line a letter, and every one of the plotted ﬁelds on the
hill a number. The communications system allowed observers with the forward companies to signal direct to the batteries in support of them as well
as to the central Fire Direction Centre. During the attack the guns ﬁred
25,000 rounds which kept the enemy’s heads down and destroyed at least
some defensive positions. The Divisional Artillery Staff described the ﬁre
plan as, ‘A World War rolling barrage with modern instincts’.43 Later in
July the Divisional Artillery used airburst over closed tanks to assist them in
overrunning enemy dug-in positions around St Jean des Baisants.44
The relatively few examples cited above indicate that there was a great
deal of tactical innovation in the US First Army in Normandy. Once under
the stress of combat tactics are bound to evolve as an army, being human,
is an organic entity, predisposed to change in order to maximise its chances
of survival: this process is described in regard to the British infantry on the
Somme during the First World War by John Lee.45 Doctrine, that formal
discipline of the mind, has its uses. It gives a sense of solidarity to believers

72

Nigel de Lee

and brings conﬁdence and consistency to training and planning. It bears
some relation to the actual conduct of operations, in the same way as drill
did to minor tactics. But when soldiers are exposed to the realities of ﬁghting,
lethal disappointment inspires invention, and doctrine has to adapt to the
new realities of battle behaviour or become completely irrelevant.

Notes
1 A. Norman, Operation Overlord (Harrisburg: Military Service Publishing Co.,
1952), p. 209.
2 R. Schimpff, Operations of 3rd Parachute Division, precis of MS#B-541, US
National Archives.
3 A. Zerbel in Ziegelmann, The Fighting North of St Lô, MS#B-241, US National
Archives.
4 Ziegelmann, The Fighting North of St Lô, MS#B437, US National Archives.
5 Ibid.
6 Ibid.
7 Schimpf, op. cit.
8 M.D. Doubler, Closing with the Enemy: How GIs fought the war in Europe
(Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas, 1994), p. 24.
9 J. Carafano, After D-Day, Op COBRA and the Normandy Breakout (Boulder,
CO: Lynne Rienner, 2000), pp. 27–8.
10 Ibid., p. 48.
11 Ibid., p. 260.
12 Doubler, op. cit., p. 28.
13 G-3 Division SHAEF, ‘Employment of Tanks and Infantry in Normandy’, in
Military Review, December 1944, p. 13.
14 H.Q. 29th Infantry Division, After Action Report, 6 –30th June, 329-0-3, US
National Archives.
15 Carafano, op. cit., p. 63.
16 B.H. Liddell-Hart (ed.) The Rommel Papers (London: Collins, 1953), pp. 521–2.
17 J. Balkoski, Beyond the Beachhead: The 29th Division in Normandy (Harrisburg,
PA: Stackpole Books, 1989), p. 87.
18 J. Binkoski and A. Plaut, The 115th Infantry Regiment in World War II (Nashville, TN: Battery Press, 1988), pp. 4–5.
19 Ibid., p. 17.
20 J.P. Cooper, History of the 110th Field Artillery (Baltimore, MD: Maryland
Historical Association, 1953), p. 93.
21 Ibid., pp. 94 –5.
22 Ibid., pp. 111, 116.
23 Ibid., pp. 117, 119–20.
24 Binkoski and Plaut, op. cit., pp. 44 –5.
25 Ibid., p. 24.
26 Ibid., pp. 61–2.
27 HQ VII Corps, History of VII Corps for the period of 1–31 July, 1944, RG407
VII Corps Records, Box 3827 207-0.3, US National Archives.
28 Lt. Col. G.T. O’Connell, O.C. 2/137, in G-3 Report to Adjutant-General,
4 August 1944, 35th Division, RG 407 Box 24042, Folder 106, US National
Archives.
29 Ibid.
30 HQ VII Corps, op. cit.
31 G-3 Division SHAEF, op. cit., p. 15.

American tactical innovation 73
32 Balkoski, op. cit., p. 231.
33 HQ 29th Division, After Action Report for July 1944, 329-0-3, 113, US National
Archives.
34 Colonel Dwyer, C.O., 116 Regiment, interview of 21st July, in 29th Division,
Battle for St Lo, GL 405, 2, US National Archives.
35 Ibid, interviews with Colonel Dwyer and Captain Puntennay C.O. of 3/116, and
Colonel G. Ordway C.O. of 115 Regiment.
36 Ibid., interview with Captain Rabbitt.
37 Task Force ‘C’ in Battle for St Lô, GL 405, 3, US National Archives.
38 XIX Corps, Reduction of the Villiers Fossard salient, operation of TF ‘Y’,
3rd Armored Division, RG 407 Box 24088 Folder, US National Archives.
39 G-3 Division SHAEF, op. cit., p. 16.
40 2nd Division Combat Interviews, RG 407-427-box 24014-Folder 12, US
National Archives.
41 Colonel J.H. Stokes, Chief of Staff, 2nd Division, Interview of 1st December
1944, in Combat Interviews, RG 407-427 Box 24014, Folder 12,6, US National
Archives.
42 Narrative of Attack, 1st Battalion, 23rd Infantry Regiment; Narrative of Attack,
1st Battalion, 38th Infantry Regiment; Narrative of Attack, 2nd Battalion, 38th
Infantry Regiment; 2nd Division Combat Interviews, RG 407-427 Box 24014
Folder 12; 8,9,10, US National Archives.
43 2nd Division Artillery Staff, GL-405 in 2nd Division Combat Interviews;
D.C. Little, ‘Artillery Support in the Capture of Hill 192’, in Military Review,
March 1948 pp. 35–6; Combat History of the 2nd Infantry Division (Nashville,
TN: Battery Press, 1979), pp. 32–3.
44 Combat History of the 2nd Infantry Division, p. 36.
45 J. Lee, ‘Some Lessons of the Somme: The British Infantry in 1917’, in Brian
Bond et al., Look to Your Front: Studies in the First World War – British Commission for Military History (Staplehurst: Spellmount, 2000), pp. 79–87.

74

6

John Buckley

British armoured operations in
Normandy, June–August 1944
John Buckley

As British armoured formations drove hard across Northern France and on
into the Low Countries in August and September of 1944, exceeding the
rate of advance achieved by the Germany army in May 1940, many tankcrew
and commanders believed they had completed a good job in the most difﬁcult and trying of conditions, winning out against a resourceful and recalcitrant foe. It had been a spectacular success, achieved in less than 90 days
with tolerable casualties, and which had ﬁnally put paid to the ghosts of
1940. For the British tankcrews, following the disasters and frustrations of
the ﬁrst few years of the war, their contribution in Normandy represented a
considerable achievement; or so it appeared to them. Yet, many historians
and analysts studying the campaign in subsequent years did not regard it in
the same way. Indeed, it has become something of an orthodoxy to view the
performance of British armour in 1944 as disappointing, inadequate or even
peripheral to Allied victory.
Basil Liddell Hart naturally had a judgement to pass, claiming that
British units had demonstrated a poor grasp of armoured doctrine in
Normandy, a view supported by commanders from opposite sides of the
hill, such as Michael Carver and Kurt Meyer.1 Later historians have also
subscribed to this analysis: John Ellis in Brute Force (1990) was roundly
critical of the armoured divisions, while in 1991 Jack English described
the armoured arm as the ‘weakest link in the Anglo-Canadian order of
battle’. More recently still in 2001 Russell Hart claimed that ‘British armour
made little contribution to Allied victory in Normandy’, and in the same
year Roman Jarymowycz unfavourably compared Allied operational
techniques, in particular their employment of armour, with Soviet late-war
and German methods.2 The consensus appeared to be that Allied armour
had played a limited role in Normandy, and that this ﬁtted with an overall picture of the Allied armies winning out against the Germans thanks
to their overwhelming superiority in resources, artillery and air power, and
not because of tactical or operational ability. Moreover, this view fortiﬁed
the already apparently impregnable belief that the German army’s tactical
and operational ﬂair and ﬂexibility allowed it to hold back much larger
and better-supported opposing armies for long periods from 1943 onwards,

British armoured operations in Normandy

75

until they were overwhelmed by sheer weight of numbers and crumbling
infrastructural support.3
Indeed, it is contended that when key operations of the Normandy
campaign are examined, there is clear justiﬁcation for such views. At Villers
Bocage on 13 June the highly respected British 7th Armoured Division (the
Desert Rats) was severely mauled by a much smaller German force (though
not just one Tiger tank as still suggested in many sources), while during
the ﬁrst set-piece engagement, Operation EPSOM (26 June to 1 July),
British armour signally failed to break out into the Orne Valley to the south
of Caen. Subsequent battles around that pivotal city also underlined weaknesses in armour-infantry cooperation technique. Most famously of all,
however, during Operation GOODWOOD on 18 July, following a huge
supporting aerial and artillery bombardment, three British armoured divisions assaulted but failed to penetrate German positions to the east of
Caen. Some progress was made but at a heavy cost; in excess of 400 tanks
were knocked out and no breakthrough beyond the Bourguébus Ridge
was achieved. During Operation BLUECOAT in late July and early August,
slow and painful progress was made, but once again the armoured arm
did not entirely cover itself in glory to the extent that 7th Armoured Division’s GOC, Major General Bobby Erskine, and many of his senior staff
were sacked in order to ‘pep up’ the unit. Canadian-directed operations in
August – TOTALISE and TRACTABLE – showed some degree of innovation in operational technique and the employment of armour but, it is
claimed, opportunities for bold and aggressive exploitation were yet again
frittered away.
There are, however, many ﬂaws and weaknesses in this prevailing view
that British armour and operational methods were found wanting in Normandy throughout the summer of 1944. The contemporary sources raise a
number of important issues of reliability, for example Liddell Hart’s analysis is based upon his desire to highlight the positive pre-1939 inﬂuence he
had on the German army’s development of superior operational methods,
as employed in the Second World War. His view, already considerably
laced with egotism, was further underpinned by the opinions of German
generals in post-war interviews. Such men were willing to tell Liddell Hart
what they believed he wanted to hear in order to ingratiate themselves, and
more importantly were determined to blame their defeat in the ﬁeld on
others; usually the Luftwaffe, frequently Hitler, but most often the Allies’
huge superiority in resources and materiel. Indeed, largely unrepentant and
unsavoury characters, such as Kurt Meyer, much preferred to pinpoint weaknesses in the Allied armies and highlight the superiority of their own troops
and units. This type of evidence must be treated at the very least with a high
degree of caution.
Furthermore, any analysis of operations in Normandy must examine the
employment of armour in the context of the 1944 campaign as it existed, not
how many subsequent writers would have preferred it. Indeed, much of the

76

John Buckley

criticism levelled at British armoured formations in 1944 is based upon the
erroneous notion that the Allies were attempting to ﬁght a campaign quite
different to the one that they did; or, even if they were not so doing, it is
argued that they should have been. Too often the starting point of analyses
has been that because Anglo-Canadian armoured and operational techniques
did not mirror those of their much lauded German opponents, they were
inappropriate and ﬂawed.
Yet it is clear that 21st Army Group, under Montgomery’s direction,
did not endeavour to conduct armoured operations in a manner similar to
their enemy. The Anglo-Canadian armies in Normandy strove to prosecute
the campaign in a style which suited their strengths, whilst minimising the
impact of their weaknesses: not for Monty and his generals were the type of
bold yet risky ventures conducted by the Germans earlier in the war.
Operational methods in 21st Army Group were founded upon a number
of assumptions made by Montgomery and his staff. Firstly, heavy combat casualties could not be sustained in Northwest Europe as the pool of
personnel replacements would begin to dwindle by the summer of 1944.
Secondly, concern was growing over the ability and willingness of Allied frontline soldiers to endure harsh and exacting close combat with their German
counterparts and Montgomery was worried that a series of setbacks and
costly defeats may rapidly undermine morale in his forces. Finally, the Allies
held a considerable advantage in resources: artillery, tanks, fuel, ordnance,
air support and transport to name but a few. In such circumstances it was
entirely logical to conduct operations to maximise this superiority, and thus
the Commonwealth and American armies attempted to attain victory over
the Germans by employing high levels of equipment and ﬁrepower; ‘let
metal do it rather than ﬂesh’ as one put it.4
Consequently, 21st Army Group’s doctrine reﬂected these three assumptions, employing particular operational methods in an attempt to force the
Germans to ﬁght as the Allies wanted, not as the Germans desired. The
operational approach placed considerable emphasis on heavy concentrations of ﬁrepower focused across a narrow front to blast troops onto their
objectives. Thorough planning was the key to the successful prosecution of
such operations, along with commanders sticking to the plan and understanding clearly and unambiguously what was required of them. The second, and arguably most crucial aspect of operations would centre on defeating
the almost certain German counter-attack; thus, getting troops, artillery and
tanks into defensible positions once an objective had been seized was pivotal
to making the doctrine effective. Moreover, it was in throwing back these
counter-attacks, usually with heavy concentrations of defensive ﬁrepower,
that the heaviest casualties were likely to be inﬂicted on the Germans. Thus,
Anglo-Canadian operational planners aimed to seize the initiative; choose
the most appropriate ﬁeld of battle where possible; launch a well coordinated and ﬁrepower-supported set-piece attack; absorb and defeat the German counter-attack; and if possible exploit without taking too many risks.

British armoured operations in Normandy

77

It was an operational doctrine with shortcomings, but one that nevertheless
played to the Allies’ strengths and simultaneously exploited the weaknesses
of the Germans.5
The extent to which armour conformed to and supported this operational
technique, and indeed the degree to which this approach facilitated armoured
warfare, is therefore crucial to any analysis of its overall effectiveness in the
summer of 1944. Although there were clear and understandable reasons
underpinning the operational methods in 21st Army Group, they did not
always aid the employment of armoured forces. Montgomery and his staff
planned to conduct tightly-controlled operations with heavy concentrations of ﬁrepower support, launched across a narrow front. Narrow front
attacks allowed greater concentrations of suppressing ﬁrepower to be delivered upon the enemy and would allow follow-up forces to be deployed in
depth to push forward once leading units had become worn down. Such
attacks would also be tightly constrained and more easily controlled by
senior commanders, particularly as ofﬁcers would have been issued a set
of clear and obvious objectives. There were obvious advantages to the
approach, but for armoured forces, particularly the armoured divisions,
there was a price to pay. Over-reliance on ﬁrepower became an issue as units
increasingly ground to a halt and awaited artillery or air attack to deal with
battleﬁeld difﬁculties. Moreover, heavy concentrations of ﬁrepower often
devastated ground and road networks, compromising the ability of mobile
forces to manoeuvre and advance rapidly. In any case, commanders of
armoured forces complained that they were often forced to deploy over too
narrow an area and that this contradicted the dictums of tank warfare.
Exploiting armoured forces were also supposed to seize opportunities on the
battleﬁeld as they emerged, but were hindered in this; in 21st Army Group
they were expected to stick to the overall plan with little room for manoeuvre. Monty preferred a tidy and carefully ordered battleﬁeld, one in which
he knew what was going on and where commanders had a ﬁrm grip on
those under their direction.
These traits of 21st Army Group operational technique and their impact
on the likely effectiveness of armoured forces, particularly in the exploitation
phase, would have mattered less if all staff ofﬁcers and senior commanders
appreciated them or always incorporated them into planning. This did not
always occur however, and many plans such as EPSOM, JUPITER and
GOODWOOD all suffered because too much was expected, usually of the
armoured divisions, or senior commanders employed such forces inappropriately. Monty’s operational approach may have served his command well
overall, but in some cases and at certain times it choked armoured operations, most obviously in the exploitation phase. Perversely, the greatest weight
of historical inquiry, driven by the fascination with blitzkrieg, has focused
on this, the weakest aspect of British armoured operations and doctrine in
Normandy, whilst much less attention has been paid to the much more
successful role played by armour in the break-in phase of operations.

78

John Buckley

Montgomery had at his disposal ﬁve regular armoured divisions in the
campaign – three British, one Canadian and one Polish – which were theoretically intended to act as weapons of exploitation, once the enemy had
been successfully compromised. However, although historians have focused
greatest attention on this phase of 21st Army Group operations, it was
in fact of lesser importance than the role played by the more numerous
independent armoured and tank brigades. These formations, of which there
were eight (with extra support provided by the three specialised brigades of
79th Armoured Division), were largely intended to act as ﬁrepower support
units to the infantry divisions. In all cases however, Montgomery insisted
on a degree of ﬂexibility between armoured formations: that they be able
to adopt both an infantry support role during the break-in/through phase
of an operation, and be able to exploit should an opportunity on the battleﬁeld arise.
In this, however, formations were hindered by equipment. The slow and
heavily armoured Churchill tanks of the tank brigades were better suited to
infantry support duties, while the Cromwells and Shermans of the armoured
brigades and divisions, though less effective in this role, were better able to
speed forward quickly and exploit operational opportunities as they emerged
in battle. This caused Montgomery to complain that he had been saddled
with two distinct types of tank when he would have preferred one standard
or ‘capital’ tank, as he called it. He did not want the Churchill at all,
believing it would be unable to keep up with ﬂuid operations due to its low
speed. Moreover, he discarded any idea of disseminating separate doctrine
for independent brigades equipped with Shermans as opposed to Churchills,
even though there was clear and mounting evidence from Italy that different
tactics were required. As Lieutenant-General Archie Nye, Vice Chief of
Imperial General Staff, stated: ‘Are Sherman equipped regiments handled
when supporting infantry in exactly the same way as infantry tank battalions? General Montgomery says they are, and everyone else says they are
not’.6 However, Montgomery’s approach was not without merit; he desired
simplicity for his troops in an effort to minimise confusion on the battleﬁeld. Thus he pressed for a single and straightforward doctrine where possible and viewed different doctrine for the same task dependent on vehicle
as unnecessary; consequently, the Churchill was viewed with suspicion
and hostility. Nevertheless, in battle in Normandy, Churchills, especially the
even more heavily armoured mark VIIs, proved superior in the infantry
support role and were well liked because of their thick armour plate.
Matters were further complicated by the structure of the armoured divisions. Each division had two brigades: one infantry, one armoured. Ofﬁcial
pre-invasion doctrine stated that the two brigades should operate separately,
though in support of each other. The contention was that the armoured
brigade within the division would need to be free to move quickly, unencumbered by slower-moving infantry and that any infantry support
for the armoured brigade would be supplied by its one motor battalion

British armoured operations in Normandy

79

(transported in half-tracks and tracked universal carriers, rather than lorries).
However, this force structure was exposed in Normandy as the armoured
brigade was too often short of infantry support at critical moments with a
resulting loss of momentum. Guards and 11th Armoured Divisions both
suffered in this way, the latter during Operation EPSOM and both during
GOODWOOD.
The level of cooperation between infantry divisions and independent
armoured and tank brigades is also an area highlighted as a weakness in
armoured doctrine in 21st Army Group. Major-General Pip Roberts, GOC
11th Armoured Division, noted that during Operation EPSOM, the level of
infantry-armour cooperation between 15th (Scottish) Infantry Division and
31st Tank Brigade was low, and a variety of other actions during WINDSOR, CHARNWOOD and BLUECOAT all seemed to reinforce this view.
This deﬁciency has in part been attributed to doctrinal indecision and
confusion in 21st Army Group prior to the invasion. There had been little
consistency in the methods and approaches to infantry-armour cooperation
inculcated into the British army in the 1940–3 period, with an array of difﬁculties being created by lack of training space, inappropriate equipment and
conﬂicting views being fed back from events in the Mediterranean theatre.
By mid-1943 there was still a reliance on squadron-level ﬁre support for
infantry assaults, almost in the manner of self-propelled artillery tactics –
that is, ﬁnding safe positions for the armour and delivering a heavy concentration of high-explosive shells onto the objective from a distance. In part
this had been caused by units having to train with outdated or inadequate
equipment prior to 1943; often tanks were ﬁtted with 2-pounder guns which
could not deliver the required weight of high explosive onto a target without
massing them into large static ﬁring groups. Consequently, advancing in
close support of infantry or leading infantry onto the target was eschewed
as the tanks could not provide sufﬁcient ﬁrepower to reach the objective
without prohibitive casualties both in infantry and tanks. This conﬂicted
with ofﬁcial doctrine published earlier in 1941, which argued that heavily
armoured infantry support tanks should lead ahead of infantry to neutralise
enemy strongpoints.7
Experience of action in the Mediterranean following the TORCH landings in November 1942, and the increasing likelihood of some of the independent brigades in 21st Army Group having to operate with Shermans
rather than Churchills in Normandy, forced a rethink, however. By the
autumn of 1943 doctrine was based upon on a revised ATI (Army Training
Instruction) No. 2 (May 1943) which pressed for a more ﬂexible approach
to infantry-armour cooperation wherein the question of which arm should
lead, or whether a grouped attack was desirable, was to be based on the
phase of the operation being undertaken, be it initial penetration, development or exploitation. This approach was to be supplemented by a new
pamphlet in the autumn of 1943 which provided for separate tactics for
Shermans and Churchills in close-support operations.

80

John Buckley

However, as has been previously noted, soon after his appointment as
commander in chief of 21st Army Group, Montgomery blocked the distribution of the new doctrine and attempted to stamp his authority on the
situation by issuing the 8th Army method of linking tanks and infantry on
the battleﬁeld. In this document, issued in February 1944, following the
initial penetration phase of a battle, tanks would lead followed by infantry.8
Montgomery’s approach was to attempt to eliminate any potential confusion by having one straightforward doctrine, though the price of this was
to be inﬂexibility. The impact of Montgomery’s 8th Army doctrine came
very late however, being issued just four months before the invasion, and
consequently had much less impact than he would have wanted.
By the time British armoured formations landed in Normandy, therefore,
they were in a state of some confusion as to which approach to infantryarmour doctrine was the ofﬁcial one, let alone the best one. Some conformed to Montgomery’s methods, some to the doctrine issued in May
1943, some to the revised May 1943 doctrine issued in December 1943,
and some even to the self-propelled artillery tactics developed in the UK
between 1941 and 1943. Even in the armoured divisions where a degree of
infantry-armour cooperation was still necessary, methods varied from one
division to another. It might be argued that such a doctrinal hotchpotch
was a recipe for failure and a clear cause of the difﬁculties encountered in
Normandy: the independent brigades had no clear or standard notion of
what to do, while the armoured divisions were inappropriately structured
and conformed to an inadequate doctrine.
However, what some have argued was a weakness in the Commonwealth
armies’ approach to doctrine – indiscipline – was to prove a considerable
advantage for the armoured units as they attempted to grapple with the
operational difﬁculties thrust upon them by the Normandy campaign.
Indeed, the British army’s approach to doctrine was to be ﬂexible and nondogmatic: commanders could not openly contradict ofﬁcial doctrine, but
they were encouraged to view it as a starting point and to be willing to
adapt and mould practices to operations and battle ‘in-theatre’ as they saw
ﬁt. The disadvantages of this approach were that effective doctrine would
not be uniformly practised, resulting in opportunities on the battleﬁeld
potentially being lost, and that units would not conform to similar working
practices, creating difﬁculties in units new to each other operating together
successfully.
Nevertheless, the advantages of the ﬂexible problem-solving approach
to the conduct of operations outweighed the shortcomings in Normandy
for the Anglo-Canadian armies, and for the armoured formations. Because
the campaign threw up a variety of new tactical problems and issues, some
beyond the remit of ofﬁcial doctrinal teachings, the ﬂexible approach allowed
battleﬁeld difﬁculties to be resolved and for different doctrines in the case of
infantry-armour cooperation to be tested and jettisoned. Units often found
their way quickly, adapting new operating practices to the circumstances in

British armoured operations in Normandy

81

Normandy, and moulding unit structures to situations as and when necessary. This was not uniformly successful, as might be expected, especially
with a largely inexperienced army, but commanders imbued with a ﬂexible
approach to doctrine generally identiﬁed problems and devised methods to
overcome them.
The weaknesses in the force structure of 21st Army Group’s armoured
formations were exposed in the early stages of the campaign by German
strategy adopted in response to the failure of the Allies to achieve all that
had been hoped for in D-Day planning. The Allies planned to have pushed
deep inland in the opening 72 hours of the landings, capturing Caen and
opening up the territory to the south of the city for follow-up operations,
in terrain more conducive to ﬂuid armoured battles. This did not happen
however, and Commonwealth forces ran out of impetus and were halted
outside Caen. The Germans then adopted a strategy of digging in and ﬁghting for every inch of territory rather than falling back onto terrain better
suited to conducting a ﬂexible and elastic defence as desired by Rommel,
Rundstedt and Geyr von Schweppenburg, though not by Hitler. Thus, the
campaign was to become one somewhat different to that originally envisaged
by Allied planners, fought across terrain and in circumstances which caught
21st Army Group a little by surprise.
One might argue that Montgomery and his staff should have trained
their formations and planned for a number of eventualities and contingencies, but it should be noted that this was a largely inexperienced army
and as has been seen there was enough difﬁculty in ﬁnding one mutually
acceptable doctrine, let alone a whole variety to be employed in different
circumstances dependent on what the Germans did or did not do. Indeed,
consideration was given to closer infantry-armour cooperation prior to
D-Day but was rejected because 21st Army Group staff expected to be
ﬁghting beyond the notorious bocage terrain soon after 6 June.9 It made
more sense to plan for the most likely eventuality and use the available time
to train accordingly.
The terrain in which British armoured units found themselves in June was
quite unsuited to the style of operations for which they had prepared, and
was such that it required particularly close infantry-armour cooperation,
something in which, as has been noted, the Anglo-Canadians did not yet
have a ﬁrm grounding. The bocage terrain to the west and south-west of
Caen consisted of seemingly sunken roads with a patchwork of small ﬁelds,
often no more than a few tens of yards across, surrounded by steep-banked
hedges sometimes 12 feet high and more. Rivers also cut the land at unhelpful angles to the likely axes of 21st Army Group thrusts, often forcing
operations to be conducted across steep, wooded valleys with few roads to
ease congestion. To the east of Caen the ground was also unsuitable for
armoured operations, being partly waterlogged and ﬂanked to the east by
wooded high ground still occupied by the Germans. Much of the land in
and around Caen was also sprinkled with stout farm buildings, and dotted

82

John Buckley

with woods and orchards, all immensely helpful for the defending Germans
and a source of great difﬁculty for the attacking Allies, particularly the
armoured forces.
For the divisions, the early stages of the Normandy campaign were distinctly unsettling. The highly regarded 7th Armoured Division struggled
to coordinate its infantry battalions with its armoured regiments during
Operation PERCH, the attempt to outﬂank Panzer Lehr, which came to
grief at Villers Bocage on 13 June. During EPSOM, 11th Armoured Division’s GOC, Major-General Pip Roberts, recorded that he had not combined
his infantry and armoured brigades effectively enough, while GOODWOOD
again exposed the inherent ﬂaw in the structure of Commonwealth armoured
divisions. The separate infantry and armour brigades did not link together
effectively on the battleﬁeld, leaving the single motor battalion in the
armoured brigade with too much to do. Conversely, the infantry brigade
was unsuited to working with the armour as its troops were transported in
lorries, which were unable to debus soldiers close enough to the frontline, or
mobile enough to work off-raid with the armour.
Yet, the armoured divisions all endeavoured to solve this problem, with
considerable success. Senior ofﬁcers in 7th Armoured quickly identiﬁed that
closer infantry-armour cooperation would be essential for operations in
Normandy and had already operated mixed groups drawn from both the
infantry and armour brigades in June. Soon after landing in Normandy
units in Guards Armoured Division began experimenting with new infantryarmour tactics, while Roberts and Major-General Allan Adair, GOC Guards
Armoured, each pressed for a restructuring of their divisions after GOODWOOD.10 During BLUECOAT both divisions began moving to a mixed
brigade organisation, wherein each of the division’s four armoured regiments (three from the armoured brigade plus the armoured reconnaissance
regiment), worked closely with one of the four infantry battalions (three
from the infantry brigade along with the motor battalion). Although the
reorganisation sacriﬁced some manoeuvrability on the part of the armoured
brigade, it nonetheless boosted the level of infantry support for the armour
and proved both successful and popular in the close and dense terrain
in which the armoured divisions found themselves operating, particularly
during BLUECOAT.11
An obvious difﬁculty involved transporting the previously lorried infantry with the tanks, but this was partly alleviated by carrying the troops
as tank riders, even though this has been previously eschewed in training
back in Britain.12 Infantry commanders would also ride with respective
armoured commanders to facilitate greater cooperation. By the time of
TOTALIZE the Commonwealth forces had begun converting self-propelled
artillery vehicles into large fully tracked personnel carriers, named Kangaroos, to carry the infantry forward into battle alongside the tanks, yet
again illustrating ﬂexibility and adaptability. It is worth noting that the
Germans also struggled to link armour and infantry on the Normandy

British armoured operations in Normandy

83

battleﬁeld as their half-tracked troop transports did not provide adequate
protection against Allied heavy artillery, thus limiting the effectiveness of
their panzergrenadiers.
For the Allies, although there was still some increased risk for tank-riding
infantry, the mixed brigade group concept worked. Roberts’s 11th Armoured
employed the new structure most effectively but the Guards also adopted
the formation and remained with it for the rest of the war. The Polish 1st
Armoured Division employed the mixed structure during TRACTABLE
and even the much-criticised 7th Armoured continued to employ a ﬂexible
structure, mixing infantry battalions and armoured regiments according
to circumstances.
For the independent brigades, revised doctrine was also employed and
developed ‘in-theatre’ in Normandy. Units initially attempted to employ the
methods set down and disseminated in training and derived from experiences
in the Mediterranean. However, none proved to be universally successful,
though some were quickly abandoned after early chastening experiences.
Montgomery’s 8th Army tactics of leading with tanks once through enemy
mineﬁelds, perhaps better suited to more open country, were generally found
to be unworkable in the close terrain of Normandy. During an attack on
Cristot (10–11 June) 4/7 Royal Dragoon Guards found the approach wanting. Dug-in and concealed German troops allowed the leading tanks to pass
by, and then shot up the following infantry, before focusing on the now
unsupported tanks. Of nine tanks only two withdrew to safety.13 This and
other examples quickly demonstrated that leading with tanks did not work
unless the enemy was caught by surprise or was known to be very weak.
Another approach used with more success, though still riddled with shortcomings, was to employ tanks in a self-propelled artillery role, and shoot
the infantry onto target with heavy concentrations of high-explosive ﬁrepower. Such tactics were on occasion appropriate for Sherman-equipped
formations deployed in the infantry support role for, as has been noted, the
M4 had limited armour protection which hindered its effectiveness as a
close support tank. However, there were weaknesses with this tactic also.
With the armour standing off, the infantry risked being exposed without
immediate and on-hand ﬁre support to suppress uncovered targets and enemy
strongpoints, which could only be provided by closely supporting tanks.
Moreover, if the targets became shrouded in smoke or if the weather was
poor, the tanks shooting from some distance away proved unable to provide
sufﬁcient ﬁrepower support. Infantry also felt vulnerable without the comforting and morale boosting presence of tanks close by, however illusory
this support was in reality. Tank losses might be reduced by the stand off
and shoot approach, but it nevertheless increased the strain on the already
overburdened infantry. Finally, in view of the standard German tactic
of immediate counter-attack to recapture ground lost to the Allies, it was
essential for armour to be on hand to provide direct high-explosive and even
anti-tank ﬁre support.14

84

John Buckley

The most sophisticated approach and one that 21st Army Group had
been moving towards prior to Montgomery’s appointment, was a ﬂexible
and ﬂuid doctrine which relied upon infantry and armour generally intermingling to provide immediate and mutual assistance. The infantry would
provide the eyes and local protection for the armour, while the armour
would deal with identiﬁed enemy strongpoints once located. They could
also act as mobile rallying and defensive points for the infantry when under
small arms ﬁre. Troops of tanks would often employ ﬁre and move tactics,
with armour advancing from one position to another while being overwatched
by other tanks. In this way, armour could maintain a worthwhile presence
with the infantry and provide effective levels of ﬁre support from static
positions. Only in the densest terrain, such as bocage, would the infantry
initially screen the tanks in order to provoke the enemy into giving away
their position so that the armour could then be brought up relatively safely
to blast the enemy.
These tactics, though more successful than others, did throw up problems
and difﬁculties. Most obviously they relied upon good communications between tanks and infantry and this was not always possible. Tank telephones
were useful but easily damaged in action, and the 38-radio set, though technically acceptable, was stretched in action as the communications networks
became overburdened; coordinating ofﬁcers had to communicate with tanks
and infantry through the same equipment. Flares and lights were also employed at times for communications purposes, with mixed success. In essence,
as the ﬂexible approach was more demanding, it worked best with troops
who were experienced and knew how to overcome the various difﬁculties.15
The operating problems were largely dealt with as units began to come
to terms with the tactical conditions in Normandy, but the most effective
solution was for units to work together regularly. Where they did, better
results followed. For example, 6th Guards Tank Brigade trained with 15th
Scottish Infantry Division in the UK prior to OVERLORD and a measure
of understanding was developed. Alas, 15th Scottish’s ﬁrst major action in
Normandy – EPSOM – saw them working with 31st Tank Brigade, a unit
with which they had little experience. Partly as a result of this, EPSOM saw
a number of problems emerge over infantry-tank cooperation. A few weeks
later, when 15th Scottish was able to link up with 6th Guards, much better
levels of cooperation were achieved.
It was nevertheless a bone of contention with many middle-ranking and
junior commanders that units were moved around far too frequently and
that this worked against the development of better understanding and working practices. One report claimed that it took at least two days for infantry
and armour units to establish effective lines of communication and interaction. Much of this might have been alleviated by the imposition of a
standardised infantry-armour doctrine prior to OVERLORD. However, as
has been seen, the only attempt to impose a doctrine – Montgomery’s 8th
Army method – would have had disastrous consequences if it had been

British armoured operations in Normandy

85

rigorously enforced, because it was largely unworkable in many situations in
Northwest Europe. The problem-solving approach allowed the difﬁculties in
Normandy to be overcome but the price to pay for the doctrinal indiscipline or ﬂexibility was that units needed time to communicate to establish
respective methods of achieving similar ends.16 If senior command erred, it
was in failing to recognise this and incorporate it fully into planning.
Further problems were encountered in Normandy by British tank formations when dealing with enemy armour. Although a tank’s job was still
largely centred upon engaging soft targets with high-explosive in Normandy,
dealing with German armour was also a key role. The enduring perception of tank-to-tank combat in the summer of 1944 is one based upon
the supposed mismatch between Allied and German armoured equipment.
British tankcrews had to operate ﬂimsy Shermans and Cromwells against
German Tigers and Panthers and therefore were both undergunned and
underarmoured.17
This view is somewhat misleading, however. Seventy per cent of German
armour was little if any better than Allied types; indeed only some 120–30
Tigers, which were in any case dreadfully unreliable, were deployed against
the Allies in Normandy. In post-war interrogations German commanders
claimed that perhaps some 15 to 30 per cent of their tanks were lost to
breakdown.18 Moreover, weakness in armour protection counted for less in
Normandy where the average range at which tanks were knocked out was
under 600 metres. At these ranges most German anti-tank guns could
penetrate any Allied armour, including the heavy Churchill with its 150mm
plus frontal protection, so increases in armour protection would have counted
for little.19
What mattered much more was the inadequacy of Allied armoured
ﬁrepower, which consisted predominantly of medium velocity 75mm guns.
These were quite unable to penetrate heavy German armour at anything
other than very short to point-blank range, if at all. Operational research
indicated that it took around 1.5 hits to eliminate a Panzer IV, 1.63 hits to
knock out a Sherman, 2.55 to deal with a Panther and 4.2 to disable a Tiger.
Perhaps it was as well that Panzer IVs and other weaker models made up
the bulk of the German Panzer arm in Normandy. It was clear that increasing numbers of the British 17-pounder anti-tank gun, mounted on Allied
vehicles – Shermans, Challengers and M10s – were required to even the
ﬁrepower score with the Germans.20
Although the ‘tank gap’ was an important issue, it was not the main
factor behind the tactical difﬁculties confronting Commonwealth tank crews
as they endeavoured to deal with German Panzers in the summer of 1944.
At the short ranges over which lethal anti-tank engagements took place,
even the Allied 75mm gun could deal with anything other than Tigers,
of which there were few, and Panthers frontally. Furthermore, in the
close terrain it was quite possible to gain ﬂanking positions on Panthers
where their armour was relatively weak and defeatable at usual battleranges.

86

John Buckley

Additionally, heavy enemy tanks could also be peppered with artillery stonks
and air-strikes to force them to move and risk breakdown, expose themselves to ﬂanking ﬁre, or panic the crew into ﬂeeing.
The tactical environment in Normandy was such that the most important
factor in determining the outcome of armoured engagements was who got
the ﬁrst shot from a stable, camouﬂaged ﬁring position; and more often
than not this was the Germans who were for the most part on the defensive. Because of the terrain, Allied advances were forced to work along
road networks which could be easily targeted by German guns. The hedges,
orchards and woods provided excellent positions for concealing tanks, selfpropelled and anti-tank guns which ﬁred upon the cautiously advancing
Allied armour, scattering them to cover. It often could take two or more
shots before the Allied troops located the ﬁring position, at which point the
enemy could be stalked or bombarded. However, increasing numbers of
self-propelled guns were being deployed by the Germans and these, like
tanks, would often relocate to begin the process again. It had been hoped
in pre-OVERLORD planning that artillery would be able to play a major
role in suppressing enemy anti-tank gunnery, but in this the Allies were to
be somewhat disappointed. Although towed anti-tank guns could often be
suppressed in this way, self-propelled weapons proved to be much less
vulnerable and thus their increasing presence in 1944 created a further headache for Allied tankcrews.
However, the greatest difﬁculty in responding came in locating the enemy
and then bringing ﬁrepower to bear. Technical shortcomings entered the
equation, but the process was much more of a combined arms operation
involving tanks, artillery, infantry and air power and should not be seen, as
is often the case, as a battle between armour plate and tank-mounted ﬁrepower alone. It was a difﬁcult and dangerous process which often resulted
in Allied casualties. Nevertheless, it proved to be the most effective way of
winkling the Germans out of their positions in Normandy; it also indicated
that by 1944 the age of blitzkrieg was long over.21
To the Allies, therefore, fell the burden of having to maintain the offensive with an army still ﬁnding its way against an experienced, canny and
desperate foe, in difﬁcult terrain. It should be noted however that the
Germans found no better solution to the problems of employing armour in
a combined arms group on the offensive in Normandy. Indeed, when German forces attempted to launch attacks with armour, they encountered all
the same problems as the Allies and suffered heavy losses as a consequence.

Conclusion
British armoured forces, far from being ‘disappointing’ actually acquitted
themselves well during the Normandy campaign. In particular, they played
a key supporting role to the infantry – their most important duty – and
became increasingly effective in this as the ﬁghting developed. In contrast,

British armoured operations in Normandy

87

when conducting dynamic armoured thrusts in order to exploit battleﬁeld
situations, armoured forces performed less effectively. This mirrored the overall strengths and weaknesses of 21st Army Group’s operational methods:
it was successfully able to conduct break-in operations and defeat enemy
counter-attacks, but was structurally and conceptually found wanting
when asked to carry out high-tempo thrusting actions. This did not in itself
mean that British armoured forces ‘failed’ in Normandy; merely that they
largely conformed to the preferred operational approach of Montgomery and
his staff, even when such techniques actually worked against the successful
employment of armour in certain situations.
It is also clear that by the mid-point of the campaign, Commonwealth
armoured units had seized upon the methods necessary to combat German
forces in the difﬁcult and unhelpful terrain of Normandy. They adapted
existing doctrine and integrated new tactics in order to impose themselves
upon the terrain, the operational environment and the enemy. In this they
were increasingly successful, particularly when viewed as part of a combined
arms doctrine which ﬁtted relatively well to the operational techniques
employed by 21st Army Group.
There is no doubt that failings and shortcomings in doctrine existed,
particularly in the ﬁrst weeks of OVERLORD, but the British and Canadian armoured forces, unlike their German counterparts, were able to
abandon failing offensive methods and solve the problems they were confronting ‘in-theatre’. For a largely inexperienced army, faced with a set of
unexpected difﬁculties, whilst ﬁghting a more experienced and often brutalised
enemy, this represents a remarkable achievement. They developed a method
of ﬁghting which suited the environment and for the most part complemented the manner in which Montgomery and his staff wished to tackle the
Germans in 1944. This was not the approach of the Germans in 1940–2 –
though the circumstances then were quite different – and not the methods
revered by the post-war armies and military analysts. It was, however, an
armoured doctrine in keeping with the nature of the Commonwealth forces
as they existed in 1944, which suited 21st Army Group’s methods, and
which demonstrated sufﬁcient ﬂexibility and ﬁghting power to allow us to
put aside the criticisms that have been levelled at British and Canadian
armoured forces since 1945.

Notes
1 LHCMA (Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives), Liddell Hart papers,
9/28/84, Tanks in Normandy, Liddell Hart to C.S. Forrester, 18 February
1952; LHCMA, Liddell Hart correspondence with Field Marshal Lord Carver,
8 May 1952; Kurt Meyer, Grenadiers (Winnipeg, Manitoba: Federowicz, 1994),
pp. 280–98.
2 John Ellis, Brute Force: Allied Strategy and Tactics in the Second World War
(London: Andre Deutsch, 1990), pp. 373–88; John English, The Canadian Army
and the Normandy Campaign: A Study in the Failure of High Command ( Westport,

88

John Buckley

CT: Praeger, 1991), p. 312; Russell Hart, Clash of Arms: How the Allies Won in
Normandy (Boulder, CO: Rienner, 2001), p. 309; Roman Jarymowycz, Tank
Tactics: From Normandy to Lorraine (Boulder, CO: Rienner, 2001).
3 This view has taken hold in popular military history writing on the Second
World War – for example, see Max Hastings’s books Overlord (London: Simon
& Schuster, 1984) and Armageddon: The Battle for Germany 1944– 45 (London:
Macmillan, 2004) but has also become the ‘ofﬁcial’ view of western armed forces,
most notably the US and British armies. During the Cold War as NATO sought
to develop plans to stop the Soviets, there seemed to be more merit in mirroring
the methods employed by the Germans in the later half of the Second World
War. Justiﬁcation was derived from the events of the war to support this position, though in reality this was a highly selective reading of history.
4 See Stephen Hart, Montgomery and Colossal Cracks: 21st Army Group in Northwest Europe 1944–5 (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2000) for a discussion of this;
LHCMA Allfrey, 3/1, diary, 17 January 1943, comments by Brigadier Edgar
Williams.
5 NAC (National Archives, Canada) RG 24, vol. 10797, G.G. Simonds, ‘Operational Policy – 2nd Canadian Corps’, 17 February 1944. See also Terry Copp,
Fields of Fire: The Canadians in Normandy (University of Toronto Press, 2003),
pp. 26–7.
6 LHCMA Alanbrooke, 6/2/23, Nye’s notes on Montgomery’s comments concerning Pyman’s pamphlet on infantry-tank cooperation doctrine, 17 December
1943.
7 War Ofﬁce Army Training Instruction no. 2, The Employment of Army Tanks in
Co-operation with Infantry (March 1941).
8 See Imperial War Museum (IWM) BLM 52/17, Eighth Army Notes on the Employment of Tanks in Support of Infantry in Battle (November 1943) and LHCMA de
Guingand, 21st Army Group Notes on the Employment of Tanks in Support of
Infantry in Battle (February 1944).
9 Michael Carver, Out of Step: The Memoirs of Field Marshal Lord Carver
(London: Hutchinson, 1989), p. 180.
10 LHCMA Liddell Hart, 15/4/85, 22nd Armoured Brigade notes on operations,
6–15 June 1944; WO 171/1257, 3rd Irish Guards War Diary, 13 July 1944.
11 LHCMA O’Connor, 5/3/37, O’Connor to Lt-Gen Allan Harding, CoS, HQ
Allied Forces Italy, 19 August 1944; J. Baynes, The Forgotten Victor: General Sir
Richard O’Connor (London: Brassey’s, 1989), pp. 213–14; G.P.B. Roberts, From
the Desert to the Baltic (London: William Kimber, 1987), pp. 184–5; Allan Adair,
A Guards’ General: The Memoirs of Sir Allan Adair (London: Hamish Hamilton,
1986), pp. 147–52.
12 PRO/National Archives (PRO) WO 171/456, 11th Armoured Division War
Diary, intelligence summary, no. 11, 28 June 1944 and notes for August 1944;
PRO WO 166/8576, 2nd (Armoured) Irish Guards War Diary, 19 October 1942;
PRO WO 166/12687, 8th Riﬂe Brigade, War Diary, 6 May 1943; Maj John
Langdon, 3RTR, interview with author, October 2002.
13 Tpr Austin Baker, 4/7th Dragoons, 27th Armoured Brigade, interview with
author, April 2003; L.F. Ellis, Victory in the West, Vol. I (London: HMSO,
1962), p. 252; LHCMA Liddell Hart, 15/4/85, 22nd Armoured Brigade notes on
operations 6–15 June 1944.
14 WO 171/862, 1st East Riding Yeomanry War Diary, June–July 1944; Similar
lessons were being learned in Italy, LHCMA Allfrey, 4/5 XIII Corps conference,
‘Need for a common doctrine for infantry-armour co-operation’, 8 April 1944.
15 Ian Daglish, Operation Bluecoat: Battleground Normandy (Barnsley: Pen & Sword,
2003), p. 69; RAC Archive, Bovington, Minutes of conference held at 34 Tank
Brigade HQ to discuss tactics, gunnery and administration, 25 August 1944.

British armoured operations in Normandy

89

16 LHCMA, Allfrey, 4/5, XIII Corps conference, ‘Need for a common doctrine for
infantry-tank co-operation’, 8 April 1944; Maj-Gen Roy Dixon, 5RTR, interview with author, November 2002.
17 Hastings and others.
18 US National Archives II, RG 331/240E/14, 7th Army Interrogation Center,
interviews with Generals Heinz Guderian, Leo Geyr von Schweppenburg, Sepp
Dietrich and Paul Hausser, 18 May 1945.
19 US NA II, RG 331/210A/1, ‘Intelligence Report of Tanks Rendered Inoperative
due to Enemy Action’, June to August 1944, First US Army; BRL MR-798,
quoted in Jarymowycz, Tank Tactics, p. 270.
20 PRO WO 291/1331, 21st Army Group ORS report no. 12, Analysis of 75mm
Sherman tank casualties suffered between 6 June and 10 July 1944.
21 See John Buckley, British Armour in the Normandy Campaign 1944 (London: Frank
Cass, 2004) Chapters 4 and 5 in particular for a full discussion of these points.

90

7

Ian Daglish

Operation BLUECOAT – a
victory ignored?
Ian Daglish

It was certainly the toughest battle we had in the campaign.
Major General G.P.B. ‘Pip’ Roberts,
commanding ofﬁcer, 11th Armoured Division
We experienced battle as we had not met it in previous war years.
Unterscharführer Ernst Streng,
Tiger tank commander, schwere SS-Panzer Abteilung 102
Perhaps the most successful op. of all.
Major John Kenneth,
commanding ofﬁcer, 2nd Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders

Introduction
In the last week of July 1944, Lieutenant-General Sir Miles Dempsey’s
Second Army moved two entire corps from the Caen sector to the relatively
quiet countryside around Caumont. Here, the British XXX Corps prepared
to give battle, with VIII Corps advancing in support on the right ﬂank
between XXX Corps and the American First Army. The offensive which
ensued, Operation BLUECOAT, has not ﬁgured prominently in the historiography of the Normandy campaign.
On reaching late July, histories of the campaign understandably tend to
focus on Operation COBRA and the American breakout, the story moving
on to the encirclement of the German Seventh Army, the débâcle of the
‘Falaise Gap’, and the rush to the Seine. In such a context, BLUECOAT
is memorable for little more than the failure of XXX Corps to keep to its
assigned schedule, the ﬁnal catalyst leading to Dempsey’s sacking of the
commanders of the corps, its armoured division, that division’s armoured brigade and numerous other ofﬁcers.1 Indeed, a recent study of the Normandy
campaign has represented BLUECOAT as ‘a major strategic blunder, perhaps
the worst of his [Montgomery’s] career’.2
This chapter reconsiders the role of Operation BLUECOAT in context
of the Normandy campaign, arguing that it was not the failure sometimes

Operation BLUECOAT 91
depicted, and that further study of the whole operation can be most rewarding. Not only does BLUECOAT showcase many of the differences
between British and German operational and tactical management of the
Normandy campaign, but in particular we may discern the implementation of important organisational and tactical methods by the British. In
BLUECOAT, we ﬁnd a major operation which (at least so far as VIII Corps
is concerned) ran to schedule, achieved its objectives, overcame and penetrated deep German defences and focused on distress caused to the enemy
rather than on avoiding risk. It is arguable that the reﬁnement of cooperation between tanks and mobile infantry achieved by 11th Armoured
Division in July 1944 and implemented during BLUECOAT heralded an
important step in the metamorphosis of a British citizen army into an effective offensive force.3
Why then should BLUECOAT pass (relatively) unnoticed? This chapter
argues that the achievements of BLUECOAT have been not only neglected
but deliberately played down; in particular, that the operation was ‘written
out’ by Montgomery. No stranger to the beneﬁts of hindsight, Montgomery
chose to represent the Normandy campaign as a ‘tidy’ sequence of events,
a linear unfolding and homogeneous execution of his own, unchanging
strategy. His presentation left little room for an operation which strayed
from the initial plan, and whose successes were shaped by initiatives taken at
lower – sometimes much lower – levels than the Army Group commander.
A complete account of Operation BLUECOAT would include the story
of many units: both British XXX and VIII Corps, also the various German
formations drawn in to the battle. This chapter necessarily has a tighter
focus and will consider principally the experience – and achievements – of
VIII Corps. After the early hours of the operation it became clear that XXX
Corps’ advance was falling seriously behind schedule. Before its momentum
could be regained, VIII Corps had forged ahead. VIII Corps then shed its
intended ﬂank support role to become the principal instrument of breakthrough. In one of several deviations from the plan, BLUECOAT became
primarily an VIII Corps ‘show’.

The plan
By the end of July, Allied forces had been ﬁghting in Normandy for seven
long weeks. After the initial achievement of securing a foothold on Hitler’s
Fortress Europe, progress had been slow. At least the Americans had
secured most of the Cotentin peninsula, territorial gains and good news headlines offsetting some of the high cost in casualties. But on the British side
frustration grew as it became apparent that the front had (in Montgomery’s
own words) ‘glued up’. British losses mounted and victory seemed to come
no closer.
Montgomery’s boss, Supreme Commander Dwight D. Eisenhower, made
clear his frustration. The day after an acrimonious 6 July meeting with

92

Ian Daglish

Montgomery, he wrote to clarify his forebodings: ‘We must use all possible
energy in a determined effort to prevent a stalemate’.4 The words made little
impact. Montgomery carried on with scant regard for criticism, his selfassurance not visibly dented. At the tactical level, he ensured that German
advantages in weapons and battle tactics were as far as possible negated by
his own forces’ superiority in logistics, artillery and air power. At the operational level, his offensives pre-empted German efforts to regain the initiative, forcing the arriving Panzer divisions to be ﬂung into battle piecemeal
before they could be concentrated for a strategic counter-thrust.
The British were broadly supportive of the American plan to break out
of the Normandy beachhead. Montgomery (still in command of all ground
forces) approved Operation COBRA on 18 July. COBRA began inauspiciously. On the afternoon of 24 July, in bad visibility and as frantic efforts
were made to recall the bombers, 685 tons of high explosive and fragmentation munitions were dropped through the haze. ‘Friendly ﬁre’ losses were
incurred and the day’s operations were called off. Nevertheless, COBRA
was reinstated and the following day over 4,000 tons of bombs fell on less
than ten square miles. American casualties were again suffered, but whole
German units were obliterated. An American breakthrough commenced
which, once the crust of German resistance was broken, would lead to
Avranches and beyond.
Montgomery’s principal support for American operations was unchanged:
to ‘ﬁx’ as many of the enemy’s armoured formations as possible in the
east, around Caen. But additionally on 25 July he instructed Second Army to
recommend more speciﬁc actions to minimise German opposition to the
American advance. Dempsey responded in characteristic fashion. Less patient
than his master, he was keenly seeking opportunities to execute a British
breakout from the Normandy deadlock. Observing that the British right
ﬂank, the boundary with the US First Army, was opposed by only weak
enemy forces, his recommendation was a hastily prepared advance southwards from Caumont on a two-corps front.
Though the recommendation was accepted by Montgomery, Operation
BLUECOAT was far from being a ‘typical’ Monty battle. Timing was tight;
logistic preparations would be limited and would impose limits on available
support. Simply getting the vast numbers of men and vehicles to the battleﬁeld for the morning of Sunday 30 July was a major challenge. Most units
did not receive movement orders until late on 28 July. The 43rd Infantry
Division was just three days into a rest period after their gruelling ordeal
on Hill 112, and the return to action was unpopular. Progress was hardest
for the armoured divisions, whose routes took their thousands of vehicles
across other units’ supply lines. ‘Pip’ Roberts, commanding 11th Armoured
Division, recalled, ‘Corps orders arrived at our HQ during the cross-country
march, so that our orders to brigades arrived at around 02.00 on 30th July
and ‘H’ hour for the attack was 06.55 hours. It was a scramble, but just
worked’.5

Operation BLUECOAT 93

Sunday 30 July: break-in
The British assault followed a familiar pattern. In the case of VIII Corps’
three divisions, the 15th (Scottish) Infantry was to lead the way. Preceded
by Royal Air Force bombers, its brigades were as ever supported by their
respective Royal Artillery ﬁeld regiments, its regiments accompanied by
squadrons of Churchill ‘infantry’ tanks. The infantry role was to break into
the enemy line. Behind waited 11th Armoured Division, poised to ﬂow
through the breach, and behind them Guards Armoured Division awaited
its turn to exploit.
The ground to be covered was some of the densest bocage in Normandy,
and the axis of attack ran directly across some dramatic ridge lines. This
was the Suisse Normande, the little Switzerland in Normandy, terrain where
even depleted and surprised German defenders might sell ground dearly.
Correspondingly, 15th Scottish Major-General MacMillan planned a narrowfronted, multi-phased attack, with just two of his nine infantry battalions in
the ﬁrst wave.
The infantry division was to attack with one brigade ‘up’. That is to say,
of the division’s three brigades, the initial breakthrough was to be led by
just 227 Brigade, strengthened by 9th Cameronians for a total of four battalions. In the ﬁrst phase, just two battalions of the four were to lead the
way. And since each infantry battalion advanced on a two-company front,
with its two remaining riﬂe companies to follow, the entire VIII Corps
attack was led by four riﬂe companies: barely 400 men, strung out along a
front of about a mile. Moving down off the Caumont ridge, 9th Cameronians
on the right would secure the hamlet of Sept Vents, while on the left 2nd
Gordon Highlanders would clear the Lutain Wood.6
Small groups of seven or eight men advanced at walking pace, well separated, across thickly-hedged ﬁelds varying from 100 metres across down to
50 metres or less. Unlike their German counterparts, trained in inﬁltration,
the groups advanced more or less in unison. This was largely to ensure that
their progress was closely synchronised with the development of the broader
battle, with its complex orchestration of infantry, tanks, artillery and air
power. To each company of roughly 100 men was assigned a troop of three
Churchill infantry tanks loosely in support, though the ability of the tanks
to follow the infantry closely was severely limited by the terrain.
In these circumstances, intimate familiarity between tanks and infantry
was called for. Amid the dense Normandy hedgerows, tanks and infantry
were mutually dependent yet rarely able to communicate directly. A continuing theme of BLUECOAT (and a relative novelty for the British army
in 1944) was the great advantage gained when tank and infantry units were
familiar with each other: squadrons with battalions, troops with companies,
tank commander with squad leader. In previous Normandy battles, the
15th Scottish had been teamed with an unfamiliar tank brigade. Unfortunate
consequences resulted, including ‘friendly ﬁre’ incidents and failure of infantry

94

Ian Daglish

adequately to protect tanks in close ﬁghting. By good fortune, 15th Scottish
Division had been reunited on the eve of BLUECOAT with 6th Guards
Tank Brigade, old friends with whom they had trained in Britain prior to
coming to Normandy.7
Previous set-piece British offensives in Normandy frequently underestimated the depth of German defensive positions. Time after time, instead of
achieving breakthroughs, British and Commonwealth forces were slowed by
successive defence lines. Stopping to consolidate, attackers would be thrown
back by vigorous local counter-attacks. This time, the forward momentum
was supposed to be maintained. But before the morning was out, the advance
already risked falling behind schedule. Waiting behind the Cameronians and
Gordons were the remaining two battalions of 227 Brigade: 10th Highland
Light Infantry and 2nd Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders.
Having displaced forward to their own forming-up places the two battalions waited with growing impatience. The Argylls’ acting commander,
Major John Kenneth, ‘began to wonder about 0820 hrs if we should ever get
through to cross our S.L. [start line] on time’. So, on his own initiative and
without waiting for the Gordons’ struggle in the Lutain Wood to be resolved,
he ordered his two leading companies to set off, followed by the supporting
tanks of 3rd Scots Guards. Similarly, the 10th Highland Light Infantry
set off down the hill towards Sept Vents supported by the tanks of 4th Coldstream Guards. From the outset, command and control were problematic.
As usual, the Number 18 infantry wireless sets were either malfunctioning
or else their operators were picked off by snipers. The Argylls had difﬁculty
contacting brigade, and ‘we found it increasingly difﬁcult for the forward
companies of infantry to keep in touch with the tanks, due to the tanks
having to jink about and increase speed in order to ﬁnd crossing places over
ditches and hedges. It was not long before we lost sight of the leading
squadrons of tanks’.8
In fact, the two supporting Guards tank battalions (4th Coldstream and 3rd
Scots Guards) were purposefully crashing through the German line ahead
of the infantry they were supposed to be supporting. This daring move was
highly unorthodox and demands some explanation. Churchill tanks were
not expected to press on across country without infantry support. Conferring by the ﬁshing tackle shop in Caumont, the infantry’s General MacMillan
and the tanks’ Brigadier Verney had determined on a gamble which would,
if successful, keep the VIII Corps plan on track. As Verney later recalled:
The situation throughout Phase II had been very confused, and my
recollections are of many conversations over the air with the two tank
battalions, on the rival themes of hurrying on to the objective or staying
close to the infantry whose whereabouts were continually uncertain . . . It
was becoming clear that we would never get Phase III off at the rate we
were going. It seemed that the only hope was to take a chance and push
on alone, and follow up with infantry later as best we could.9

Operation BLUECOAT 95
Verney and MacMillan agreed to throw away the book of rules and push
the tanks on ahead.
A gamble it certainly was. To the British, it seemed incredible good fortune that the enemy lacked heavy anti-tank guns. In fact, the overstretched
defenders had few of these to deploy, trusting that the dense hedgerows of
the bocage country would be impenetrable to vehicles, even fully-tracked
tanks. But as was so often the case, from the mountains of Tunisia to the
forest of the Reichswald, the Churchill tank’s extraordinary ability to traverse
unfavourable terrain proved equal to the occasion.10 The Coldstream bade
their riding Glasgow Highlanders au revoir, leaving them with instructions
to ‘follow the tank tracks’. The tanks plunged on towards their objective,
the distant Hill 309.
The cross-country route was not easy. Some tanks shed tracks as they
attempted particularly difﬁcult obstacles. Others simply found the strain too
much for their engines. Lieutenant Cazenove’s whole troop became bogged;
Sergeant Maughan’s tank turned over on its side, setting off a grenade
inside the turret which severely wounded the three occupants. Yet the objective was reached about 1600 hours. The hill which defending General Straube
had said ‘must not be allowed to fall into enemy hands’ was abandoned by
the Germans as the 40-ton monsters clambered towards its summit. Though
the hold of the tanks was tenuous – armour unsupported can rarely hold
terrain securely – nevertheless the Coldstream remained until the ﬁrst elements of the 2nd Glasgow Highlanders began to arrive about 2230 hours.
By 0230 hours, the last of their riﬂe companies was on the hill and the guns
of the anti-tank platoon had been manhandled into place. From the north,
the 7th Seaforth of 46 Brigade were on their way to strengthen the position
further. Five miles behind the front at the start of the day, Hill 309 was now
ﬁrmly in British hands.
Similarly to the east, setting off from the vicinity of the Lutain Wood
towards Hill 226, the Scots Guards Churchills experienced a wild ride: crashing over hedgerows like heavy horses in a steeplechase, spraying whole belts
of Besa and putting high explosive rounds into any knots of resistance. The
crews were shaken and bruised, commanders struck by low branches and
pelted with small, hard cider apples which accumulated on the ﬂoors of the
tank turrets. Somewhere behind them, the Argylls were on the move again
with a leap-frog advance, alternating ﬁre and movement by companies which
carried them rapidly forward in the wake of the tanks. By 1530 hours, the
village of Les Loges was secured and B and D Companies of 2nd Argylls
joined their armoured friends on the slopes of Hill 226. The infantry dug in
on the northern reverse slope while the tanks adopted hull-down positions
on the crestline.
Almost uniquely for a major Normandy battle, British forces ended the
ﬁrst day in ﬁrm control of ambitious objectives. Success had been achieved
with a complex interaction of weaponry: air power and artillery suppressing
defenders; specialist armoured vehicles clearing mines and dousing defensive

96

Ian Daglish

strongpoints with ﬂame. But in analysing the success, the human element
must be considered. The commanders of 6th Guards Tank Brigade and
15th Scottish Division risked unorthodox tactics to keep up momentum.
The tankers set off alone with every conﬁdence that ‘their’ infantry would
eventually catch them up.
Although achieved by tanks and footsoldiers brieﬂy separated, the breakin south of Caumont was nevertheless an illustration of infantry and ‘infantry tanks’ working together in harmony. The history of the 15th Scottish
records that their success on the ﬁrst day of BLUECOAT was largely due to
the ‘previous and intimate cooperation’ of 6th Guards Tanks, ‘old friends’
of the division.11 The history of the 6th goes further, acknowledging that
‘It was an act of providence which ordained that the 6th Guards Tank
Brigade should go into their own ﬁrst battle with their old friends . . . Had
the infantry been strangers, the tanks would not have advanced alone so far’.12

Monday 31 July: breakthrough
The Scots infantry and their Scots Guards infantry tanks had achieved the
break-in, and it now fell to 11th Armoured Division to keep up the momentum. Through the afternoon of 30 July and into the night, tanks and infantry
of the division pressed forward, and by nightfall the German defenders of the
little town of St Martin-des-Besaces were being hard pressed. But by morning, little further progress had been made. The place was being ﬁrmly held.
This was a problem. St-Martin lay squarely astride the axis of the VIII
Corps’ advance. The Normandy road network of 1944 made few concessions to the needs of a modern army, and trafﬁc jams were an inescapable
part of every British offensive there. From Caumont, the only practical
artery for the majority of VIII Corps’ wheeled vehicles was the single road
leading south to St Martin-des-Besaces. From the epicentre of this little
town, where bitter ﬁghting continued, armour and infantry fanned out west,
seeking points of weaker resistance but ﬁnding none. And fanning out even
further aﬁeld were the troops of armoured cars of the division’s reconnaissance regiment, the 2nd Household Cavalry.
Put simply, the job of a reconnaissance unit was to drive beyond the front
lines to locate the enemy. In Normandy this usually meant driving until
ﬁred upon. Commanders in their thinly armoured cars travelled with eyes
peeled for signs of trouble, ready at a moment’s notice to trigger the smoke
dispensers and engage reverse gear, most often keeping a grenade within
easy reach.
One troop of Household Cavalry had already ventured into St Martin
from the north, and lost its two leading cars. Another car taking a wrong
turning and entering the town from the east was shot to pieces. Probing
further west, 1 Troop of C Squadron lost two of its four cars, immobilised
in a narrow lane. This left a Daimler Dingo scout car and the troop commander Lieutenant Derek (‘Dickie’) Powle in his Daimler armoured car.

Operation BLUECOAT 97
Passing through a German battery, Powle judged it safer to press on forwards than to retrace his way through an alerted enemy. So the two cars
motored on, down dusty minor roads leading through thickly wooded hills,
the Forêt l’Evêque. The road twisted and turned through the dark, eerilysilent forest. Eventually the cars emerged to pass through the small town of
la Ferrière-Harang, and carried on southwards, still without encountering
any substantial opposition.
Eventually, a bridge appeared ahead of the British cars. The steep sidedvalley of the River Souleuvre was a major obstacle, and the bridge an unexpected prize. The two cars crossed in turn and both vehicles went into cover
in the trees within sight of the bridge. As the crews set about camouﬂaging
the vehicles, Corporal Staples, the armoured car’s gunner/operator, worked
the radio, which in effect was the principal weapon of the troop. Information from behind enemy lines could potentially wreak far more havoc than
a small 37mm cannon. But as with any weapon, range was a factor, and the
combination of distance and rolling wooded terrain made contact very
difﬁcult. Six miles away, 2nd Household Cavalry headquarters was struggling to make contact with cars much closer than Powle’s. Staples had to
transmit over and over again before he made contact. Finally, he got off the
vital message: ‘At 1030 hours the bridge at 637436 is clear of enemy and still
intact. I say again, at 1030 hours the bridge at 637436 is clear of enemy and
still intact’. When the reference was found to be so far beyond any known
penetration of enemy lines, Colonel Abel Smith was incredulous and demanded an instant repeat. Back came the conﬁrmation. Personal initiative
and extreme good fortune had won a bridge over the Souleuvre, several
miles behind the German front line.13
This was not according to plan. Still notionally in a supporting role, VIII
Corps should in theory have been seeking to advance on a south-easterly
axis, not westward, away from XXX Corps. But the commander of 11th
Armoured Division had the imagination to recognise a unique opportunity,
and the initiative to exploit it. Major-General ‘Pip’ Roberts was a rising
star. Aged 37, he was the youngest British divisional commander. He was
experienced – no British general had spent longer ﬁghting in the turret of a
tank – and he was conﬁdent. In leading his division through two major
Normandy battles, Roberts had endured setbacks caused by interference
from above in the management of his division. In both Operations EPSOM
and GOODWOOD, ofﬁcers of 11th Armoured felt that their division
suffered from misguided directives from Corps. Even General O’Connor’s
sympathetic biographer admits that for the Corps commander, EPSOM
‘must at times have been a bewildering experience’ and that he and his staff
were ‘perhaps more concerned with the mechanics of GOODWOOD than
the philosophy of it’.14 Now, even before seeking O’Connor’s approval (which
arrived in due course), Roberts had no hesitation in changing the axis of his
divisional advance. No matter that reinforcing the bridge might involve
trespassing across the army boundary onto roads allocated to American

98

Ian Daglish

units. While his division continued to invest St Martin-des-Besaces, all available force was rushed west and south to secure the bridge.
First, six Cromwell tanks of the 2nd Northamptonshire Yeomanry arrived
to reinforce the ﬁve men and two cars at the bridge; later came more substantial force in the shape of Sherman tanks of the 23rd Hussars carrying
infantry of the 3rd Monmouths. By evening, as elements of 21.Panzerdivision
appeared in the wooded heights south of the bridge, the crossing was already
secure.

August 1–2: Break out?
Throughout Tuesday 1 August, XXX Corps struggled to make progress southward towards Jurques and Aunay, with Mont Pinçon on the distant horizon.
Consequently, instead of covering their sister corps’ right ﬂank, VIII Corps’
continuing advance increasingly risked exposing its own left ﬂank. And on
this ﬂank, German pressure grew with increasing attempts to reduce the
VIII Corps salient. 15th Scottish grimly held their line between Hills 309
and 226, ﬁrst against desperate counter-attacks by 326.Infanteriedivision, later
by Feuchtinger’s 21.Panzerdivision. To the west, 11th Armoured Division
poured across ‘Dickie’s Bridge’ and by the end of the day the entire division,
with its four armoured and four infantry regiments, was in position south of
the Souleuvre, holding the Bény-Bocage ridge and the main road running
arrow-straight in the direction of Vire.
From the German perspective, the true front line remained somewhere
south of St Martin-des-Besaces, where Guards Armoured Division was struggling to make progress southbound on the originally planned, more direct
route to Vire. In this rolling country, pockets of 21.Panzerdivision resistance
succeeded in bringing the Guards to a halt barely halfway to the VireVillers-Bocage highway where a combat team on the extreme left ﬂank of
11th Armoured awaited their arrival.
Only late in the day did Panzergruppe West awake to the crisis developing
north of Vire. The fracture of the German front along the boundary of the
two German armies in Normandy posed a threat to Vire, a vital junction
and a hinge of the whole defensive line. With 21.Panzerdivision on the verge
of being ‘pinched out’ between 11th and Guards Armoured Divisions, ﬁrst
10.SS-Panzerdivision (‘Frundsberg’) was commanded west and soon after its
sister 9.SS-Panzerdivision (‘Hohenstaufen’) was ordered to proceed directly
to confront 11th Armoured. The scene was set for a day of decisive conﬂict.
Wednesday 2 August was also the day when two months of trial and
error culminated in a demonstration of new British infantry and armour
tactics. In spite of open ﬂanks, Pip Roberts was looking forward, prepared
to strike south. Tactically, his division abandoned the traditional separation
of infantry and armoured brigades. Instead, multi-arm regimental task forces
were formed, infantry riding on tanks, batteries of the Royal Artillery leapfrogging behind the armoured columns to provide on-call support.15

Operation BLUECOAT 99
Montgomery had told Dempsey that the operation to assist COBRA
would have ‘no geographical objective’.16 Roberts nevertheless had learned
in earlier operations the importance of basing tactical objectives on physical
features which, once taken, could be securely held. On 1 August, the corps
commander had speciﬁed the objective of 11th Armoured as the important
town of Vire. However, as Roberts ﬁnalised his plans for the following day,
he received the unexpected and ‘somewhat frustrating’ news that Montgomery
had approved a shift of army boundaries which placed Vire in the American
sector.17 11th Armoured was explicitly forbidden to enter the place. Roberts’
frustration was all the worse given reports that the town was only lightly
defended. The reports were correct. The place could have been taken on
2 August with minimal effort. Vire was thereafter hastily reinforced: ﬁrst
by elements of II.SS-Panzer-Korps from the east, soon after by elements of
II.Fallschirmjäger-Korps retreating from the west. Seizing the rubble that
had been Vire would later cost the Americans over 3,000 casualties.
The 11th Armoured Division’s tactical objective was redetermined, now
to be the major ridge running parallel to and just north of the Vire-Vassy
road. Three columns radiated out to the south-east, each comprising one
infantry battalion and one armoured regiment. The advance was hindered
by adverse terrain; few roads ran in the desired direction. Only a lesser
force, the Cromwell tanks of the Northamptonshire Yeomanry, probed in
the direction of Vire. By day’s end, in spite of losses and in the face of
increasingly determined counter-attacks, the Perrier ridge was held.
Once again, chance and individual initiatives played their part. One lone
tank ofﬁcer, striding forward at the very apex of the VIII Corps advance,
was ﬁrst to cut the Vire-Vassy road. One lone, angry sergeant-major left his
positions wielding a PIAT to destroy a Panther tank and in so doing preserved an outpost which was later to prove a bastion on the open left ﬂank
of 11th Armoured. Later, as II.SS-Panzer-Korps struggled with increasing
desperation to throw the British off the Perrier ridge, one young corporal
gave his life – and gained a Victoria Cross – individually throwing back the
last assault of the Frundsberg Panzergrenadiere.18
This fourth day of BLUECOAT was memorable for the new tactics
demonstrated by Roberts’ 11th Armoured Division, but equally for the
operational skill with which the division was conducted. Plunging forward
with little regard for ﬂanks could, of course, have ended in disaster. For
days to come, the British ‘front’ would more resemble a series of defensive
strongpoints rather than a continuous line. Well might the defenders of
Perrier ridge look over their shoulders and wonder if the Royal Army Service Corps convoys bringing forward ammunition and fuel would get through
the extensive German penetration of the countryside to the rear. As it
happened, the Germans were slow to recognise the enormity of the breakthrough. Even as the Frundsberg was pouring out its life blood in increasingly
desperate attempts to regain Perrier ridge, the high command persisted in
the view that the true ‘frontline’ remained somewhere to the north around

100

Ian Daglish

St Martin-des-Besaces and that the forward elements of the British breakthrough were liable to isolation. Field commanders dared not contradict
the delusions of high command. Even Oberbefehlshaber von Kluge had to
maintain the pretence that his élite armoured divisions engaged on the Perrier
ridge were still en route to participate in the Mortain offensive, when in
truth their combat strength was rapidly dwindling.

Assessing BLUECOAT
How should we assess Operation BLUECOAT? As regards Montgomery’s
challenge to Dempsey (to distract German forces that might otherwise be
redeployed against the American breakout), it would be churlish to deny the
success of the operation. After the ﬁrst week of August, 21.Panzerdivision
was a shadow of its former organization. 9. and 10.SS-Panzerdivision had
each been substantially ‘written down’ (Montgomery’s phrase) with 12.SS
(the Hitlerjugend ) also weakened. And none of these formations had reached
the American sector.
Of course, it may be asked whether similar results might have been achieved
by concentrating force further east, even east of the Orne River on the road
to Falaise. But it was accepted by Montgomery and Dempsey that alternating hammer blows on widely-spaced parts of the front was preferable to
focusing on one single area of operations.19 And, quite apart from damage
inﬂicted on the ﬁeld of battle, given Allied command of the skies through the
long summer daylight hours, inadequate roads, and the relative weakness of
German logistic arrangements, the effort and loss incurred in continually
repositioning the German armoured formations must not be underestimated.
Can one go further, speculating that in attempting to ‘ﬁx’ the German
capability for defence, Montgomery unwittingly drew teeth from the coming, and as yet unexpected, enemy attack? Von Kluge certainly had a fair
estimation of Operation LÜTTICH’s (slim) chances of success. Would the
availability of at least part of II.SS-Panzer-Korps have made any difference
to the fate of the Mortain counter-offensive? As ever, the question of ‘what
if ’ is problematic. Historians rightly present alternative possibilities in order
to demonstrate that events which transpired were not necessarily inevitable.
But the temptation to overreach must be resisted. Battles are frequently won
by the side making fewer mistakes; if our speculation excuses the mistakes
of one side, must we not allow the other a similar ‘break’? A distinguished
historian of the German campaign in Russia has warned, ‘Which is the
more absurd – to allow, with the wisdom of hindsight, an immaculate German
campaign against a Russian resistance still plagued by those blunders and
follies that arose in the heat and urgency of battle, or to correct both and to
reset the board in an atmosphere of complete fantasy?’20 If we speculate
about a reinforced Lüttich, perhaps we should also ponder the very real
possibility of 11th Armoured Division seizing Vire on 2 August, and the
myriad possible outcomes of such a high-stakes venture!

Operation BLUECOAT 101
German armour tactics in Normandy is an area still deserving of further
study. Several attempts in June and July to apply Eastern Front shock
tactics failed dismally as unprepared and poorly coordinated Panzer attacks
broke against prepared British and Commonwealth defences. New ‘Panzertrupptaktik’ for use on the ‘invasion front’ from the end of June marked
a reversal of policy. Instead of the typical insistence on concentration of
armoured force, deployment in ‘penny packets’ was now sanctioned.21 While
an individual Tiger or Panther tank well emplaced could still represent a
formidable obstacle, many British observers criticized German armoured
assaults during BLUECOAT for lacking focus and concentration.
The British armour also drew some lessons from disasters of their own in
the month of June. Arguably the performance of 11th Armoured Division
was inﬂuenced as much by inspired leadership as by effective tactics. Nevertheless, the organisational and tactical lessons implemented by 11th Armoured
during BLUECOAT stood as a model for other formations. And, in the
words of a member of that division, ‘There was much unpleasantness to come.
But after the crossing of that small bridge over the Souleuvre there was no
more retreat for 11th Armoured between Normandy and the Baltic’.22

An operation ‘written out’
Through nearly two months of bludgeoning by the Allies, the German front
had held. Despite high rates of attrition, the defending line showed few signs
of being about to shatter. Then on 1 August the British found themselves
facing a gap in the defensive wall. The infantry divisions forming the left
ﬂank of Panzergruppe West and the Panzer divisions sent to buttress them
all failed. Fortuitously, this occurred at a time and in a place where a corps
commander was giving encouragement to the most creative and energetic
divisional commander in the British sector, who in turn led the most effective British armoured division of the war.
The idea that Montgomery then missed a critical opportunity to shorten
the war was proposed by Major J.J. How in 1981.23 Subsequent historians
have debated his accusation. Without rehearsing all the arguments, it can
safely be said that Montgomery did deny O’Connor and Roberts an opportunity which they realised was within their grasp. At a time when a small
force could have seized Vire, Roberts recalled later, ‘We had strict instructions from Monty that we were not – repeat NOT – to go into Vire. That
was the American objective’. One wonders what would have happened if a
similar order had been given to American General George Patton, just short
of a key strategic goal. Was Montgomery playing a political game? Was he
in fact more stung by his enemies’ criticism of his perceived failure during
GOODWOOD than he liked to make out? Was he seeking to restore his
reputation by appeasing Eisenhower?
There is a more likely explanation. By 1 August Operation BLUECOAT
was turning into just the sort of ﬂuid encounter which Montgomery abhorred.

102

Ian Daglish

In Normandy, Montgomery was keen to avoid any battle which he might
lose. Well aware of the shortcomings of the armies he commanded in 1944,
he set his sights accordingly. His concern on 1 August was not pushing
11th Armoured Division still further ‘into the blue’, but rather getting
some movement into XXX Corps’ stalled offensive. Or as he would have
put it: ‘ungluing the battle’ so that he could ‘tidy it up’. Then he could restore
a ﬁrm front line, bring up the rear elements, and then if the opportunity
presented itself have another ‘big push’. But on 2 August, he was more
concerned with sacking Lieutenant-General Bucknall (of XXX Corps),
Major-General Erskine and Brigadier Hinde (of 7th Armoured Division),
than with discouraging O’Connor from plunging into the unknown. By
3 August, Montgomery already had half a mind on the forthcoming
Canadian assault to the east of Caen, Operation TOTALIZE.
With the beneﬁt of hindsight, Pip Roberts magnanimously conceded
that the capture of Vire might have risked 11th Armoured Division becoming stranded beyond the reach of vital supplies and the range of VIII
Corps artillery. This is arguable. Perhaps it is most appropriate to end with
Montgomery’s own memoirs. His only comment on VIII Corps’ operations
on 2 August was that opposition to its advance ‘was now becoming more
stubborn’,24 that elements of the division reached the outskirts of Vire, and
that patrols cut the Vire-Vassy road. He very much played down the role of
BLUECOAT. This operation simply did not ﬁt well into his narrative of a
Normandy campaign which went strictly to plan – his plan.

Acknowledgement
Ian Daglish is grateful to Pen & Sword Books Limited for permission to use extracts
from his work Operation BLUECOAT, the British Armoured Breakout and Operation GOODWOOD, the Great Tank Charge in the preparation of this chapter.

Notes
1 This topic has been well covered in the literature of the campaign; a good
account is found in Stephen Hart, Montgomery and ‘Colossal Cracks’, the 21st
Army Group in Northwest Europe (London: Praeger, 2000), pp. 32–3.
2 Terry Copp, Fields of Fire, The Canadians in Normandy (Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 2003), pp. 187–9.
3 These and other aspects of BLUECOAT mentioned in this chapter are explored
in Ian Daglish, Operation BLUECOAT, The British Armoured Breakout (Pen &
Sword, 2003).
4 Martin Blumenson, Breakout and Pursuit (Washington, DC: US Army Center of
Military History, 1989), p. 119.
5 Major-General G.P.B. Roberts, From the Desert to the Baltic (London: William
Kimber, 1987), p. 185.
6 Brigadier C.N. Barclay, The History of the Cameronians (London: Sifton Praed,
1947), pp. 169–70; Wilfred Miles, The Life of a Regiment, the History of
the Gordon Highlanders vol V, 1919–1945 (London: Frederick Warne, 1961),
pp. 278–80.

Operation BLUECOAT 103
7 The story of Montgomery’s attempts to keep 6th Guards Tanks out of Normandy is one involving personal pride and animosities and does him little credit;
it is most usefully recounted by Scots Guards ofﬁcer Charles Farrell, Reﬂections,
1939–1945 (Edinburgh: Pentland Press, 2000) pp. 54–8; also Forbes, 6th Guards
Tank Brigade, The Story of Guardsmen in Churchill Tanks (London: Sampson
Low Marston, 1946), p. 11.
8 Major John Kenneth, 2A & SH, BAOR Battleﬁeld Tour, 1947.
9 Major-General G.L. Verney, 6 GDS TK BDE, BAOR Battleﬁeld Tour, 1947.
10 Though no single explanation for the Churchill tank’s remarkable climbing ability has been identiﬁed, an authoritative account of this vehicle’s development and
performance is to be found in David Fletcher, Mr Churchill’s Tank: The British
Infantry Tank Mark IV (Atglen, PA: Schiffer, 1999).
11 Lieutenant-General H.G. Martin, The History of the Fifteenth Scottish Division
(London: Blackwood, 1948), p. 81.
12 Forbes, ibid., pp. 14 –15.
13 This full story of these events, recounted in Daglish, ibid., pp. 55–61, includes
material from several sources, but notably from Roden Orde’s delightfully
written Second Household Cavalry Regiment (Aldershot: Gale & Polden, 1953),
pp. 96–107.
14 John Baynes, The Forgotten Victor (Exeter: Wheatons, 1989), pp. 194, 201.
15 For details, see Daglish, ibid., Chapter 5.
16 Hart, ibid., p. 139.
17 Roberts, ibid., pp. 191–2.
18 These stories are related in full in Daglish, ibid.
19 Hart, ibid. This is one of the central themes of Dr Stephen Hart’s invaluable
Colossal Cracks.
20 Alan Clark, Barbarossa, The Russian – German Conﬂict, 1941–1945 (New York:
William Morrow, 1965), p. xxi.
21 Thomas L. Jentz, Panzer Truppen, Volume 2, 1943–1945 (Atglen, PA: Schiffer,
1996), p. 182.
22 Roger Gray, Normandy Revisited (Edinburgh: Blackwood’s Magazine, November 1977), p. 397.
23 Major J.J. How, Normandy: The British Breakout (London: William Kimber, 1981).
24 Field Marshal The Viscount Montgomery of Alamein, From Normandy to the
Baltic (London: Hutchinson, 1946) p. 91.

104

Stephen A. Hart

8

‘The black day unrealised’
Operation TOTALIZE and the
problems of translating tactical
success into a decisive breakout
Stephen A. Hart

Many historical analyses of Allied offensives during the 1944 Normandy
campaign have focused on operations such as GOODWOOD/ATLANTIC,
where the Allies struggled to break-in or through the German defences
successfully. Less well understood is Operation TOTALIZE.1 LieutenantGeneral Guy Simonds’s II Canadian Corps launched this attack from its
positions along the Bourguébus Ridge, striking south-south-east astride the
main Caen-Falaise road toward the high ground that dominated Falaise.
The relative lack of focus on this operation is surprising given that it utilised
sophisticated operational art, and that its initial break-in achieved rapid
success. Even more surprising, moreover, is the relative lack of focus on
what happened next for, despite this rapid initial success, TOTALIZE did
not subsequently secure a decisive operational-level victory. Indeed, Simonds’s
forces subsequently struggled – in the face of modest opposition – swiftly to
complete the second break-in battle, and to transit into rapid exploitation
operations. To understand why it proved impossible to exploit this initial
success, this chapter will provide an overview of the plan and the successful
break-in. It will then examine the problems that dogged the Allied forces
during the transition between the ﬁrst and second phases of the operation,
and the Allies’ subsequent mounting of the offensive’s second phase.2

The plan
During late July 1944, the Allies ﬁnally managed to shake off the attritional
stalemate that had increasingly gripped the Normandy theatre of operations. After the success of the American COBRA offensive around St. Lô,
General Patton’s ruthless subsequent exploitation translated this into a
decisive breakthrough along the western sector of the German front. By
early August, therefore, American forces were advancing rapidly through the
interior of France in all directions. In contrast to this, however, Montgomery’s
Anglo-Canadian forces remained bogged down by the determined German
defence of the eastern sector, situated between Caumont and the coast at
Ouistreham. This strategic context now made it politically imperative that

‘The black day unrealised’ 105
these forces successfully advanced southwards. It was in this context that
Simonds’s II Canadian Corps planned Operation TOTALIZE.3
On 1 August, Simonds’s corps came under the command of the newly
operational First Canadian Army, led by Lieutenant-General Henry Crerar.
That day Simonds produced a written appreciation of the mission that
Montgomery had recently allocated him; to plan an offensive from the
Bourguébus Ridge toward Falaise to be mounted on 8 August at the latest,
depending on how the American advance inﬂuenced the strategic situation.
The attack was designed to facilitate the British and American operations
then unfolding further to the west. Simonds concluded that an attack toward
Falaise would encounter ﬁerce German resistance because the enemy viewed
this sector as the key ‘hinge’ that supported their forces located further west.
Consequently, they had deployed here elements of the fanatical 1st and 12th
SS Panzer divisions Leibstandarte and Hitlerjugend. Simonds’s appreciation
recognised that to be successful in the face of such opposition, the planned
offensive would have to address four factors.4
First, the attack had to reﬂect the enemy’s defensive system, which comprised a forward line that ran west from la Hogue through to May-surOrne, and 7.5km further south a partially prepared reserve position between
St Sylvain and Bretteville-sur-Laize. Simonds concluded that this system
compelled the Allies to mount two separate break-in battles.5 Second, the
plan also needed to ensure that, unlike previous Allied offensives in Normandy, the attack’s forward momentum did not falter just as it reached
the depths of the German defensive zone. If Simonds employed all available
air support to assist the initial break-in battle, the only ﬁre support left
available for the second break-in would be the few artillery pieces that had
managed to move forward. Thus, Simonds decided to mount a daring surprise night assault, backed by all his available artillery, to penetrate rapidly
the ﬁrst German defence line. This novel approach, he believed, would thus
only require the support of half of his available heavy bomber assets. This
would allow the Allies to keep back half their strategic aerial resources –
the day bombers – to facilitate the second break-in battle that would enjoy
only limited artillery support. Simonds believed that with this approach the
offensive would swiftly penetrate the entire depth of the German defences,
thus permitting rapid exploitation toward Falaise.6
Third, the appreciation stated that any plan would have to accept that the
terrain favoured the defenders. The open terrain was dominated by enemycontrolled high ground, and thus Allied forces would enjoy little protection
from the long-range killing power of well-concealed German tanks and antitank guns. To obtain initial success, therefore, the offensive had to curtail
these capabilities by attacking at night, when enemy German observation
would be handicapped. Moreover, as the attack’s objectives and axis of
advance were obvious, a night attack was the only way of gaining tactical
surprise.7 Last, Simonds recognised that the offensive would have to destroy
the enemy’s deep-lying anti-tank positions. Consequently, he employed night

106

Stephen A. Hart

inﬁltration tactics; all-arms mobile columns would bypass the enemy’s
forward defended localities (FDLs), race through the depth of the initial
German position, and overrun the enemy’s deep anti-tank positions. To
ensure that the columns’ infantry could keep up with the tanks, and once on
the objective help the latter repel enemy ripostes, Simonds insisted they be
embussed in armoured vehicles.8
Four days later, on 5 August, Crerar briefed his subordinates on the
forthcoming offensive – now called TOTALIZE. He stressed that if successful, the operation might lead to ‘a quick termination of the war’. Observing
that TOTALIZE was to start on the same date as the Amiens offensive of
1918, he expressed his hope that the offensive would make 8 August 1944
‘an even blacker day for the German Armies than is recorded against that
same date twenty-six years ago’.9 Next, Simonds outlined his corps plan
to the assembled ofﬁcers. This plan envisaged that after strategic night
bombers had struck targets on the ﬂanks of the attack, two infantry
divisions would mount the initial night break-in. Then, around 1300 hours
the next day, a second strategic bombing run would strike the reserve German defensive position. Subsequently, in the offensive’s second phase, an
armoured division would then break through this second enemy line, before
two armoured divisions advanced 14km during the ﬁnal phase to seize the
key high ground situated north of Falaise.
Reﬂecting the high hopes expressed by Crerar on 5 August, the critical
potential signiﬁcance of TOTALIZE only gradually became apparent as
events developed apace elsewhere in Normandy. Indeed, it was only by the
end of the now abortive offensive on 10 August that its real signiﬁcance had
become evident for, if Simonds’s corps had only managed to advance to
Falaise, it could have cut the key lateral road that ran through the town. In
so doing, Simonds’s forces might well have prevented the German Seventh
Army from escaping eastward from the looming encirclement it now faced.
If Simonds’s forces could have subsequently advanced further south, they
might have been able to seal the pocket in the Falaise-Argentan area by
linking up with the northward advance of Patton’s spearheads. Such a
success might have ensured the destruction of an entire German army and
thus have realised the re-creation of the enemy’s ‘black day’ that Crerar had
envisaged back on 5 August. Sadly, it was not to be.
The day after Crerar’s brieﬁng, Simonds had to issue a modiﬁed corps
plan. The Allies had gained intelligence that indicated the withdrawal of
the Leibstandarte from the front opposite II Corps. Simonds interpreted
this (erroneously) as indicating a weakening of the ﬁrst German defensive
position and the bolstering of their second line.10 His new scheme now
committed two armoured divisions simultaneously to the second break-in
across a widened frontage. It also amalgamated the operation’s original
second and third phases into a new consolidated second phase, this change
being designed to drive the Allied armour forward so that it secured the high
ground north of Falaise by 9 August. In so doing, Simonds also hoped to

‘The black day unrealised’ 107
exploit any tactical advantage that would accrue in the immediate aftermath
of the second Allied bombing run.11

Night break-in
By 7 August, Simonds’s corps had assembled 85,000 troops backed by 2,000
aircraft and 720 artillery guns. The main force deployed against it was the
89th Infantry Division, part of I-SS Panzer Corps, while located to the rear
were the fanatical teenagers of the Hitlerjugend.12 Simonds’s plan envisaged
that from 2300 hours on 7 August, two infantry divisions would execute the
initial night break-in. On the Allied left (east) the British 51st (Highland)
Division grouping was to operate, while west of the road the 2nd Canadian
Infantry Division grouping was to attack. Seven mobile columns spearheaded the initial break-in, with each typically ﬁelding an embussed infantry
battalion, armoured forces and supporting arms. These columns would
rapidly inﬁltrate between the German FDLs to seize key objectives up to
6.3km behind the enemy frontline. As the column assault unfolded, ﬁve
Allied infantry battalions would advance on foot to secure the FDLs that
the columns had bypassed. These foot missions were just as important as
the more spectacular column assaults. If these bypassed FDLs continued
to hold out, their ﬁre could interdict the forward movement of Allied
forces and supplies up the routes cleared by the columns, and thus slow the
offensive’s momentum.13
Even though the columns, predictably, experienced severe problems with
maintaining command and control in the confusing shroud of darkness,
Simonds’s novel night inﬁltration attack nevertheless secured resounding success. By noon on 8 August, ﬁve of the seven columns had secured
their objectives, while the remaining two had dug in not too far away from
these locations.14 In addition, two of the ﬁve marching infantry attacks
had secured their objectives, while the remaining three would subsequently
complete their missions later that afternoon.15 For the tolerable cost of
380 casualties, Simonds’s night break-in had secured a 7km-wide penetration
of the entire, 6.3km deep, ﬁrst German defensive position.16

Dilemmas of phase transition
With the rosy beneﬁt of hindsight available to the historian, it seems that
if the Allies had mounted an improvised continuation of the break-in offensive that morning, they may have achieved considerable success, for their night
attack had shattered the initial German defensive zone, and the latter’s
second defence line remained largely unmanned. Simonds’s plan, however,
understandably assumed that a successful assault on the supposedly potent
second German line was only feasible after a second bombing strike had
occurred. Unfortunately, as this second bomb run was not due to commence
until soon after noon, the Allies were apparently left with an undesirable

108

Stephen A. Hart

three-hour operational pause, during which the enemy could recover from
the shock action already inﬂicted by the Allied offensive. After the war,
Hitlerjugend commander SS-Colonel Kurt Meyer lambasted Simonds’s
approach because it ‘transferred the initiative’ from ‘leading combat elements
to timetable acrobats [back at] Headquarters’.17 Irrespective of the perceptiveness (or not) of Meyer’s verdict, this lull in the offensive’s forward
momentum no doubt helped contribute to the subsequent failure of
TOTALIZE to translate its early promise into a decisive success.
In all probability, such a loss of offensive momentum was, however, unavoidable. First, at this late hour, Simonds could not have brought these
complex air support arrangements forward in time. Nor was it easy simply
to cancel them at this late stage. It would have taken Crerar’s authority to
do so, and even then it would have been an extremely controversial decision. After all, Crerar had lobbied the reluctant bomber barons long and
hard to secure this support. It might also have proven impossible to recall
all of the bombers then approaching the Normandy coast successfully: this
left Simonds with little choice but to follow the original plan. But these
arguments miss the point. At that time Simonds did not know what we now
know: that the German second line was largely undefended. So there was no
compelling reason to abandon his plan, even if waiting for the bombers
meant a lull in forward momentum. Even cancelling the aerial strike might
not have solved this loss of momentum, for that morning the armoured
divisions were struggling forward through trafﬁc congestion to their assembly points. A passage of lines is always a difﬁcult task to accomplish, but
given the troop densities in this area, this was an extremely difﬁcult one.
Nor would scrapping the bombing run and continuing the initial break-in
have solved the problem. Such a decision may have kept momentum going
during the middle part of the day, but at some point the armoured echelon
would have to pass through the spearhead break-in forces. This would merely
have postponed the loss of momentum, not made it go away. Of course,
if the passage of lines had been delayed to after the second break-in battle
had been completed, say late on the 8 August, this lull in momentum may not
have been so signiﬁcant. On the other hand, the break-in forces were tired
and disorganised after the night inﬁltration and an impromptu continuation
of the assault, without properly arranged ﬁre support, was probably asking
too much of them. Some loss of forward momentum was therefore unavoidable. The key points to consider are: when would it occur, how long would
it last, and what would be the consequences of it occurring?

The second break-in
During the late morning of 8 August, therefore, Simonds’s break-in forces
completed their missions or consolidated their recent gains. Meanwhile,
the 1st Polish and 4th Canadian Armoured Divisions struggled forward to
their assembly areas, ready to spearhead the offensive’s second phase once

‘The black day unrealised’ 109
the B-17s had unleashed their cargoes of destruction. Subsequently, between
1226 and 1355 hours, 497 B-17s successfully struck six targets, with the
remaining bombers having to abort their runs. To prevent the risk of ‘blueon-blue’ casualties, the Allies had established a 1.3km-wide safety area
between their positions and the bombing zone. Despite these provisions,
tragic friendly-ﬁre incidents still occurred which left 315 Canadian and Polish
troops killed or wounded. These accidents caused widespread confusion
within the affected units, and sapped troop morale. The Polish division was
particularly heavily hit, and the subsequent lack of dash evident that afternoon among some of its sub-units may in part be explained by the damage
inﬂicted by these accidents.18
It was now that I-SS Panzer Corps – whose response to TOTALIZE had
hitherto been lethargic – struck back with a vengeance. This local riposte
contributed to the Allied failure to translate the early success gained in
TOTALIZE into a decisive breakthrough. Shortly before noon, Kurt Meyer
and SS-Major Hans Waldmüller were observing the battleﬁeld from an
observation point situated on the gentle rise northeast of Gaumesnil. Meyer
now feared that the Allies, having sundered the ﬁrst German position, would
swiftly pass through massed armour, smash through the as yet largely
unmanned German reserve line and race south to Falaise. Surveying the
battleﬁeld, the ofﬁcers apparently observed the vanguard of two Allied
armoured divisions ready to strike south – a sight that, according to Meyer,
took their breath away!19
Initially, Meyer could not fathom why this mass of armour had not commenced its attack south, but he knew that his forces had to stall the Allied
attack before it developed forward momentum. Consequently, he ordered
all Hitlerjugend units located nearby to launch an immediate counter-attack.
These forces amounted to ten tank destroyers, 20 tanks, and 500 panzergrenadiers from Battle Group Waldmüller, plus the four Tigers of SSCaptain Michael Wittmann’s staff troop of the 2nd Company, SS Heavy
Tank Battalion 101. Despite facing numerically superior forces, Meyer’s
audacious riposte might surprise the Allies and delay the impending Allied
onslaught, thus buying precious time for other German reserves to man the
second defensive line.20
Meyer then allegedly witnessed a solitary American bomber ﬂying over
his location several times, sending out coloured ﬂares – a Pathﬁnder aircraft
marking the aim points for an impending heavy bomber strike that was just
minutes away! Now Meyer knew why the Allied armour had not commenced its assault south. If his forces remained in their present positions,
they would soon be obliterated. Immediately after such a strike, Meyer
calculated, the Allied armour would pour south, overrun his still dazed
forces, swiftly shatter the second German defensive line, and charge south
to Falaise. Meyer immediately ordered his forces to counter-attack north
into the relative sanctuary of the ‘safety area’ that the Allies typically left
between their own forces and the bombing zone.21

110

Stephen A. Hart

In fulﬁlment of these orders, Wittmann’s Tigers rumbled forward in line
ahead. Wittmann had anticipated enemy ﬁre from the main road to the
north-north-west, but this rendered the Tigers vulnerable to ﬁre from the
north-east. In this latter location, elements of the 1st Northants Yeomanry
had – unbeknown to Wittmann – only recently secured the orchards south
of St Aignan. At 1240 hours, a Yeomanry Sherman Fireﬂy engaged the
Tigers from the edge of the orchard, while simultaneously, Sherwood
Forester and 144th RAC Fireﬂies engaged Wittmann’s tanks from west of
the main road and Hill 122, respectively. Ten minutes later, with the range
shortened, a hail of standard Yeomanry Sherman ﬁre fell upon Wittmann’s
Tiger. While these rounds failed to penetrate the tank’s thick frontal
armour, they caused the vehicle to veer out of control. At 1252 hours,
additional hits caused Wittmann’s tank to burst into ﬂame, by which time
his other three Tigers had also been knocked out. As beﬁtted his legendary
reputation, Wittmann had met a warrior’s death attempting to stem the
TOTALIZE offensive.22
Meanwhile, 20 tanks and 200 panzergrenadiers from Battle Group
Waldmüller had struck north to capture the high ground south of St Aignan.
By 1255 hours, the force had reached the hedge-lines around Daumesnil,
which they used as cover to advance to the eastern end of the le Petit Ravin
deﬁle. The force then inﬁltrated south-west through the deﬁle to engage the
Yeomanry from the ﬂank. Although Waldmüller’s forces had accounted for
20 Shermans, by 1340 hours, intense Allied ﬁre had forced them to retreat
south in some disarray after losing six panzers. By 1400 hours, Waldmüller’s
forces were digging themselves in back at their original starting positions –
just as the Allied armour rolled south.23
Even though Meyer’s bold attempt to disrupt the Allied advance had
been rebuffed, it seemed to him that it had stalled the Allied onslaught for a
precious 90 minutes during which German forces could frantically dig in
along their second defensive line. In reality, however, the Allied armoured
attack was only due to commence at 1355 hours, well after the bombing had
ended. Thus, Meyer’s counter-strike had gained the Germans no additional
time. Yet Meyer’s riposte was far from being a futile and costly exercise.
Rather, this display of audacity in the face of overwhelming odds sapped
Allied offensive determination. It was this that helped make the afternoon
of 8 August a ﬂeeting battleﬁeld opportunity that the Allies could not seize.
The Allied drive south that afternoon, moreover, was hampered by a
number of problems. At 1355 hours, Simonds’s corps commenced the second phase of TOTALIZE – the (second) break-in battle against the (second)
German defensive position. The 1st Polish and 4th Canadian Armoured
Divisions thrust south along axes located either side of the main CaenFalaise road. In the western sector, as the Canadian division advanced,
some of its units – including Halpenny Force – experienced communication
problems. In some cases, these difﬁculties hindered them in calling down
prearranged artillery support. At certain times, moreover, this ﬁre support

‘The black day unrealised’ 111
was less extensive than had been anticipated, as some artillery units had
been disrupted by the recent ‘friendly-ﬁre’ accidents.
The 4th Division, moreover, was a ‘green’ formation – it had not fought
before in Normandy and had only recently joined Simonds’s command.
These circumstances no doubt reinforced the grave concerns that many of
the division’s armoured unit commanders had about the enemy’s potent
anti-tank capabilities. Most had heard about the costly encounters that
other Normandy ‘veterans’ had experienced in recent weeks. Their recent
witnessing of Meyer’s daring riposte, moreover, only fuelled these fears.
Consequently, 4th Division’s unit commanders conducted their operations
that afternoon in a cautious manner. When the advancing spearheads
encountered various copses or hedges that might conceal German anti-tank
or tank assets, for example, they paused until their unreliable communications had called down artillery to suppress these potential positions. South
Alberta tank troop leader Lieutenant Gerry Adams, for instance, concluded
that his regiment’s inexperienced soldiers had mounted the attack on the
lightly-defended locality of Cintheaux with excessive caution and an amateurish lack of coordination.24
The large number of troops operating in a modest battle space that contained few quality routes, moreover, created congestion that further slowed
Allied offensive momentum. Now, another retarding factor on Allied progress
emerged – problems with command and control. It is alleged, for example,
that 4th Division commander George Kitching found the exhausted 4th
Armoured Brigade commander, Brigadier Booth, asleep in his command
tank. Simonds was by no means an experienced armoured commander, but
he nevertheless believed that greater forward momentum ought to have
been generated that afternoon. This perception led him to become increasingly irritated by the lack of progress. Soon, repeated exhortations were
coming down the chain of command urging the spearhead units to get a
move on – but to little avail. The frontline units failed to generate the
momentum expected – whether appropriately or not – by the higher commander. At 1900 hours, for example, Booth ordered Halpenny Force to
capture Bretteville-le-Rabet before daylight faded. But the battle group
could only manage to form up by dusk; in these circumstances, LieutenantColonel Halpenny decided a night attack was too risky. Postponing the
mission until dawn, his tanks instead obeyed current doctrine by withdrawing back to harbour that night in Cintheaux.25
If these problems were not enough with which to contend, some advancing Canadian units encountered ad hoc enemy forces that nevertheless
offered ﬁerce resistance. These encounters helped restrict what little forward
momentum the Allies had managed to generate. Between 1500 and 1900
hours, for example, one Canadian battle group did push 2.1km south to
secure Cintheaux and the northern part of Haut Mesnil. Here, however, the
intense resistance offered by the improvised Group Klein – formed from an
SS panzergrenadier battalion’s staff company and 89th Division stragglers –

112

Stephen A. Hart

stalled the Canadian advance. When some Shermans attempted to outﬂank
Klein’s position they suffered heavily when caught in the open by accurate 88mm ﬁre. Meyer, sensibly, had moved his two 88mm-equipped ﬂak
batteries to near Potigny, where they dominated the Caen-Falaise road. As
twilight fell, the Canadians had no choice other than to abandon the advance
and consolidate their gains. By dusk, therefore, 4th Division had managed a
maximum advance of just 3.8km.26
That same afternoon, similar problems dogged the advance undertaken
by 1st Polish Division to the east of the main road. Like the 4th Division,
the Polish formation had never fought as a division, and possessed no
experience of either combat in Normandy or of working within Simonds’s
corps. From 1355 hours, two Polish armoured regiments probed their way
south from St Aignan, only to stumble into an enemy killing zone. In just
15 minutes, German anti-tank ﬁre left 40 wrecked Polish tanks burning
furiously. This appalling introduction to the brutal realities of warfare in
Normandy forced the Polish armour to withdraw back into the shelter of
the nearby orchards. After two hours of reorganisation the Poles courageously resumed their thrust south. As the Polish armoured columns rumbled cautiously forward they passed the still-burning wrecks of their tanks
destroyed in the earlier battle. The combination of this painful reminder of
the enemy’s potent capabilities and the serious damage done to morale, staff
procedures and effective ﬁre support by the earlier ‘friendly-ﬁre’ accidents,
accounts for the cautious manner in which the division executed its subsequent operations. Consequently, by dusk the Poles had only managed to
advance a disappointing distance of 1.8km.27
Although the Poles could make a more convincing defence of their limited progress that afternoon than could the 4th Division, none of this special
pleading cut much ice with their increasingly frustrated corps commander.
Simonds had expected his armour to exploit the second bombing strike by
swiftly breaking through the second German line and then race south to
secure the hills north of Falaise by evening. Dogged periodically by problems of unreliable communications, unsatisfactory command and control
and inadequate ﬁre support, the cautious operations mounted by Simonds’s
inexperienced forces failed to overcome the numerically inferior forces
deployed against them. The instances of ﬁerce resistance offered by the latter,
and their skilful exploitation of favourable defensive terrain, moreover, further retarded Allied offensive momentum. The combination of these factors
ensured that Simonds’s forces could not grasp the golden opportunity that
existed during the afternoon of 8 August: to translate the signiﬁcant success
achieved in the initial break-in assault into a decisive breakthrough.

Turning point
At this point, the II Canadian Corps still might have resurrected the ﬂagging
prospects of the TOTALIZE offensive. However, over the next 18 hours

‘The black day unrealised’ 113
the risks inherent in Simonds’s attempts to restore offensive momentum
ultimately led to the demise of the ill-fated offensive. At 2100 hours on
8 August, Simonds cast aside standard Allied doctrine by ordering his
armour to continue their attacks relentlessly throughout the night. Halpenny
Force was tasked with a 7.4km night advance to secure Bretteville-le-Rabet,
while Worthington Force was to secure by dawn the vital Hill 195 north
of Fontaine-le-Pin. From this latter location, the Allies could observe the
western exits of Falaise, located 9.9km further south.28
At 0400 hours on 9 August, Worthington Force – formed from British
Columbia Regiment tanks, two embussed Algonquin infantry companies
and supporting arms – set off from Gaumesnil. The battle group headed
down the Caen-Falaise road until at Haut Mesnil it encountered the stalled
Halpenny Force. Worthington Force detoured south-east along an ancient
raised grass track – the Chemin Haussé du Duc Guillaume – to avoid
Halpenny’s engagement. The task force intended subsequently to swing southwest to rejoin the main road and from there continue the advance to Hill
195 as planned. Unfortunately, during the next hour Worthington Force
became lost and inadvertently continued south-east along the Chemin Haussé.
Eventually, Worthington’s disorientated soldiers sighted through the gloomy
half-light some high ground in front of them. With much relief, the task
force uncritically assumed that this must be their objective, Hill 195. Continuing along the Chemin Haussé, the battle group secured the high ground
without a ﬁght at 0655 hours, and then radioed back to 4th Brigade Headquarters that it had secured its objective. Sadly, by then the seeds of the
disaster that was to engulf Worthington Force had already been sown. The
high ground the task force had secured was not Hill 195, but rather the les
Trentes Acres area, part of the Hill 140 ridge feature. Worthington Force
was positioned west of the main road, a staggering 6.6km north-north-east
of their objective, Hill 195! The fact that both the battle group and the
Allied higher command wrongly believed the force to be on Hill 195 helped
seal its fate.29
Unfortunately, SS ofﬁcers located at the la Brèche observation point and
at the divisional Headquarters (situated by the adjacent Tombeau de Marie
Joly) had already detected the battle group as it approached les Trentes
Acres.30 Over the next 14 hours the ‘lost’ Worthington Force courageously
repelled repeated SS armoured onslaughts. Sadly, during this time the task
force lacked signiﬁcant assistance from friendly forces: the Allies directed
some of their relief efforts – including accurate artillery support – onto Hill
195. Consequently, the heroic defenders of les Trentes Acres could do no
more than delay until evening their inevitable destruction at the hands of
numerically superior SS forces. This ill-fated 18-hour odyssey represented
the most heroic yet most tragic action of the entire TOTALIZE offensive.
The Allied failure to locate Worthington Force, and then reinforce its success, allowed the offensive’s most promising tactical advance to degenerate
into disaster. This painful experience also reminded Simonds’s forces of the

114

Stephen A. Hart

terrible dangers they might face when mounting a daring advance that might
leave the unit without adequate ﬁre support.31
As this tragedy unfolded, the other advances that Simonds’s forces
mounted that day again demonstrated that the open terrain favoured the
long-range killing power of German tank and anti-tank assets. During the
afternoon of 9 August, for example, the Canadian Grenadier Guards struck
south-east from Cauvicourt toward Hill 140 to locate and assist Worthington
Force. At about 1615 hours, however, the regiment was caught in the open
by accurate German ﬁre, which speedily accounted for 26 Shermans. Disregarding such losses, Simonds viewed the progress secured that day by his
forces as no more satisfactory than it had been the previous afternoon. By
now, however, the chances of translating the initial success of TOTALIZE
into a decisive breakthrough had dwindled substantially.32
During 10 August a disappointed Simonds attempted to kick-start his
corps’ ﬂagging advance. At 1600 hours, 3rd Canadian Division and 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade were to mount an improvised attack. Backed by substantial artillery support, they were to thrust south-east from Langannerie
through Quesnay Wood, across the Laison River, to secure the high ground
north of Falaise. The attackers fought their way into the wood, but after
extremely bitter ﬁghting that raged all night, the survivors had to withdraw.
Simonds’s hastily-arranged attempt to kick-start the stalled momentum of
TOTALIZE had been a dismal failure. During the night of 10–11 August,
therefore, the corps commander terminated his stalled offensive. Although
TOTALIZE had secured major territorial gains – a 15km advance across a
13km frontage – it had not entirely realised Simonds’s aim of seizing the
high ground that dominated the road that ran through Falaise.33

Summation
The ultimate failure of TOTALIZE is surprising given the signiﬁcant success achieved during the offensive’s initial night break-in operation. This
failure can be attributed to two periods of the subsequent operation: ﬁrst,
the transition from Phase One to Phase Two; and second, the manner in
which Phase Two was conducted. With regard to the ﬁrst period, Simonds
has been criticised for allowing a loss of momentum during the morning
of 8 August, when his forces had to sit patiently for three hours until the
second bomber armada unleashed its cargo of destruction. Some loss of
momentum, however, was inevitable that day during the period when
Simonds’s second echelon – his armoured divisions – passed through his
spearhead break-in forces. The key issue was how far could the enemy
recover during this brief respite.
The real reasons for the failure of TOTALIZE, however, can be traced to
the way in which Simonds’s forces conducted Phase Two of the offensive. In
particular, during the afternoon of 8 August, they forces could not grasp the
golden opportunity that existed to translate the signiﬁcant success already

‘The black day unrealised’ 115
achieved into a decisive breakthrough. Periodically hampered by unsatisfactory command and control, unreliable communications and restricted
ﬁre support, the cautious operations mounted by these inexperienced forces
failed to overcome the numerically inferior forces deployed against them.
The ﬁerce improvised resistance offered by the latter in certain locations,
and the enemy’s skilful exploitation of favourable defensive terrain, further
impeded the generation of Allied offensive momentum.
By dusk on 8 August, however, it was far from the case that TOTALIZE
now stood no chance of realising the decisive potential Crerar had voiced
on 5 August. True, the chances were much slimmer than they had been
at noon that day, but it was the events of 9 August that doomed the offensive to failure. The risks inherent in mounting daring night-time armoured
assaults came to haunt TOTALIZE that day. The Allied failure to know
where Worthington Force was allowed the enemy’s energetic responses to
transform the most threatening tactical advance achieved during TOTALIZE
into its greatest disaster. This setback reinforced the dangers inherent
when Allied units daringly charged off into the enemy rear and rendered
themselves lacking effective artillery support. The other actions mounted
that day, 9 August, again demonstrated some of the problems that had
haunted the operations of the previous day. With the failure of Simonds’s
last-gasp attempted to breathe life into the offensive on 10 August, it was all
but over.
The fate of Worthington Force, moreover, sheds much light on the ambiguities of Allied operational art that haunted the TOTALIZE offensive. For
it was only through such audacity that Simonds’s forces would overwhelm
the improvised German defensive measures they encountered. It may well
only have been possible for the Allies to translate the early tactical success
of TOTALIZE into a decisive victory by embracing such a high-risk
approach. Yet, this ﬂew in the face of the instincts of many armoured unit
commanders, who understandably feared the deadliness of enemy anti-tank
capabilities. As TOTALIZE unfolded, indeed, some of these ofﬁcers personally experienced the terrible price that the enemy could exact from Allied
units that embraced such risk-taking. This remained the intractable paradox
that dogged Allied offensives in Normandy.34
The tactically-justiﬁed cautious manner in which many Allied tactical
actions were executed, however, had an obvious price. This approach
restricted the generation of Allied offensive momentum, and consequently
allowed the enemy valuable time during which they could recover the battleﬁeld cohesion that the immediately preceding Allied actions had degraded.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, Allied offensive technique in Normandy never fully
surmounted the many tensions that arose as a result of the interplay of these
various factors. Consequently, during the second phase of TOTALIZE,
Simonds’s forces could not translate the offensive’s initial success into the
signiﬁcant breakthrough that, at various times, remained so tantalisingly
close to being realised.

116

Stephen A. Hart

Notes
1 The latest analysis of TOTALIZE is Stephen A. Hart, The Road to Falaise
(Battlezone Normandy series) (Stroud: Alan Sutton, 2004).
2 Other analyses include: Terry Copp, Fields of Fire: The Canadians in Normandy
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2003), pp. 187–204; John A. English,
The Canadian Army and the Normandy Campaign: a Study in the Failure of High
Command (London: Praeger, 1991), pp. 263–94; R.J. Jarymowycz, ‘Canadian
Armour in Normandy: Operation TOTALIZE and the Quest for Operational
Maneuver’, Canadian Military History, 7(2): 19–40, and Tank Tactics (London:
Lynne Reinner, 2001), pp. 163–83; C.P. Stacey, Ofﬁcial History of the Canadian
Army in the Second World War, Vol. 3, The Victory Campaign (Ottawa: The
Queen’s Printer, 1960), pp. 203–31.
3 For Simonds’s career, see Dominick Graham, The Price of Command: The Biography of Gen. Guy G. Simonds (Toronto: Stoddart, 1993).
4 National Archives of Canada, Ottawa (henceforth NAC), Papers of General
Crerar, Vol. 2 (CP/2), File 1-0-7/1, folios (fs) 2–3, Operation TOTALIZE:
Appreciation by Simonds, 1 August 1944.
5 Ibid.
6 Ibid.
7 Ibid.
8 Major-General George Kitching, Mud and Green Fields: The Memoirs of Major
Gen. Kitching (Langley, BC: Battleline, 1986), p. 207. See Lieutent-General
O’Connor’s earlier efforts, Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives, London
(LHCMA), O’Connor Papers, 1/5.
9 NAC, CP/2, 1-0-7/1, fs. 17–18, Remarks to Senior Ofﬁcers, 5 August 1944.
10 NAC, CP/2, 1-0-7/1, f. 11, Notes of Telephone Conversation, 4 Aug 1944;
Jarymowycz, ‘Canadian Armour’, pp. 19–20.
11 NAC, CP/2, 1-0-7/1, fs. 34–5, Memorandum, Simonds to Crerar, 2100 hours
6 August 1944.
12 See Stephen A. Hart, ‘The Fanaticism of the 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend
in Normandy’, in Matthew Hughes and Gaynor Johnson, Fanaticism in Modern
Conﬂict (London: Frank Cass, 2004).
13 The National Archives, Kew, London (TNA), WO179/2964, War Diary (WD)
II Canadian Corps (2CC), August 1944, Operation Instruction 4, 5 August 1944.
14 TNA, WO171/640, WD 33rd Armoured Brigade; /859, WD 1st Northants
Yeomanry (1NY); /878, WD 144th Regt RAC; /880, WD 148th Regt RAC;
WO179/2859, WD 4th Canadian Infantry Brigade; /2964, WD Royal Regt of
Canada; /2931, WD 1st Essex Scottish; /3010, WD Sherbrooke Fusiliers;
J.B. Salmond, The History of the 51st Highland Division (Edinburgh: Blackwood
& Sons, 1953), pp. 154–9.
15 TNA, WO171/674, WD 152nd Brigade; TNA, WO171/877, WD 141st RAC;
WO171/1369, WD 2nd Seaforth Highlanders; WO179/2944, WD Les Fusiliers
Mont Royal; Alastair Borthwick, Battalion: A British Infantry Unit’s actions from
El Alamein to the Elbe, 1942–1945 (London: Bâton Wicks, 1994), pp. 142– 4;
Ken Tout, The Bloody Battle for Tilly (Stroud: Alan Sutton, 2000).
16 TNA, CAB106/1047, BAOR Battleﬁeld Tour (BFT) TOTALIZE, pp. 21–2.
17 Meyer Interview, cited English, Canadian, p. 292, n. 9.
18 Hubert Meyer, History of the 12SS-Panzerdivision ‘Hitlerjugend’ (Winnipeg:
J.J. Fedorowicz, 1994), p. 173.
19 Kurt Meyer, Grenadiers (Winnipeg: J.J. Fedorowicz, 1994), p. 259.
20 For Wittmann’s career see E.G. Krätschmer, Die Ritterkreuzträger der WaffenSS (Preußisch Oldendorf: Verlag K.W. Schütze, 1982), p. 622.
21 Meyer, History, p. 172.

‘The black day unrealised’ 117
22 TNA, WO171/859, WD 1NY; The Tank Museum, Bovington (TTM), R.F.
Neville, The 1st and 2nd Northamptonshire Yeomanry, 1939– 46 (Brunswick:
Johan Heinrich Meyer, 1946), pp. 22–36; John Abbott, ‘1st Northamptonshire
Yeomanry, St Aignan’, Military Illustrated, 69 (February 1994): pp. 12–18; Les
Taylor, ‘Wittmann’s Last Battle’, After the Battle, 85 (1995): pp. 46–53; Eric
Lefevre, Panzers in Normandy: Then and Now (London: Battleline Books, 1984),
pp. 181–3.
23 The Yeomanry’s maps showed the deﬁle as ﬂat ground; see, for example, the
maps in CAB106/1047, BAOR BFT TOTALIZE.
24 Donald E. Graves, S. Albertas: A Canadian Regiment at War (Toronto: Robin
Brass, 1998), p. 113.
25 Kitching, Mud, p. 213.
26 TNA, WO179/2924, WD Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders; WO179/3012, WD
South Albertas.
27 Jarymowycz, Tank, p. 172.
28 TNA, WO179/3011, WD British Columbia Regiment (BCR); /2923, WD
Algonquin Regt (AR); /2900, 10th Cdn Infantry Brigade; English, Canadian,
pp. 279–82; Graves, Albertas, p. 113; Meyer, History, pp. 177–9; Stacey, Victory,
pp. 225–7.
29 NTA, WO179/2923, WD AR; /3011, WD BCR.
30 Trees obscured observation from these locations, except for the direction where
Worthington Force was; Hart, Falaise, pp. 165–8.
31 The task force suffered 250 personnel casualties and lost 47 tanks; TNA, WO179/
3011, WD BCR; Stacey, Victory, p. 228.
32 Meyer, History, p. 178.
33 Will R. Bird, The North Shore (New Brunswick) Regiment (Fredericton, NB:
Brunswick Press, 1963), pp. 410–11; Stacey, Victory, pp. 230–1.
34 For Anglo-Canadian operational art in Normandy, see Stephen Hart, Montgomery
and ‘Colossal Cracks’: the 21st Army Group in Northwest Europe, 1944– 45,
(Westport, CT: Praeger, 2000).

118

Gary Shefﬁeld

9

Dead cows and Tigers
Some aspects of the experience
of the British soldier in
Normandy, 1944
Gary Shefﬁeld

In my experience, the glory and thrill of battle were missing, to me the
most important things in life were – When would I see my wife again?
Where was my next meal coming from? What would it consist of ?
Would I have a dry and warm bed that night? Would I still be alive to
see the next dawn? All of these things were of vital importance to me,
and these, together with long periods of extreme boredom and others
when I was scared out of my wits, made up my life.1
This comment, made by Gunner Jack Vivian, who fought with 185 Field
Regiment Royal Artillery, encapsulates much of the British soldier’s experience in the Normandy campaign. It was a period composed of tedium and
fear, bereft of glamour. His mental horizons, restricted by the uncertainty of
whether he would be alive or dead in a few hours, rarely lifted beyond the
basics of life: the desire for food, shelter and a modicum of comfort. British
soldiers were, to quote the Shakespearean title of a novel of the campaign
written by a Normandy veteran, Warriors for the Working Day, not professional soldiers, and certainly shared little of the fanaticism of some of their
opponents.2 Nevertheless, their performance in a bloody, attritional operation was impressive. It was characterised by stoicism, determination and
some skill. Above all, they, along with forces from the USA, Canada and
other Allied nations, were ultimately victorious in a hard-fought campaign
against a determined and skilful enemy.
This chapter examines a few aspects of the experience of the British soldier in Normandy. It is based on a work in progress, a full-scale ‘bottom-up’
study of the experience of the British soldier and regimental ofﬁcer in the
Second World War, provisionally entitled Citizen Army.
The British soldiers that fought in Normandy were members of an army
that had already endured ﬁve years of war. A depressing series of defeats
in 1940–2 reinforced a pre-existing cynicism – the initials BEF (for British
Expeditionary Force) were reinterpreted as meaning ‘Back Every Friday’.
Montgomery’s victory at Alamein had reversed the trend, although the subsequent conduct of the war in Italy by British generals scarcely engendered

Dead cows and Tigers 119
optimism. Cynicism was rife. The British army that was sent to Normandy
was originally named the British Western European Force, and the acronym
BWEF was interpreted as ‘Burma When Europe Finished’. When the name
changed to British Liberation Army, BLA was said to stand for ‘Burma
Looms Ahead’.3 Many of the men of 1944 were children of the Depression,
who had seen that their fathers and uncles had returned from the First
World War to a land that was not, despite the promises of politicians, ‘ﬁt
for heroes’. In the 1930s there had been a period of widespread, although
shallowly rooted, paciﬁsm. Many men carried a streak of anti-militarism –
‘anti-Blimpism’ might be a better term – into the army. Left-leaning and less
deferential than their fathers’ generation, they were apt to write to their MP,
or the Daily Mirror, if they felt themselves ill-used. They were, after all,
citizens of a democratic state at war.4
One should not push this line too far, however. The men of 1944 were
drawn from a class-based society, in which many individuals were brought
up to ‘know their place’. The army was structured upon hierarchical lines
instantly recognisable to products of that society. This could cause outrage
among middle-class men who found themselves at the bottom of the military pile rather than in the ofﬁcers’ mess. One grammar school boy complained that at his training unit ‘There was no apparent understanding . . . that
it was a citizens’ army they were dealing with’.5 But for working-class men
used to industrial and social discipline, the army provided more of the same.
‘The wartime Army was tough’ recalled a man who joined the Royal Welch
Fusiliers in 1943. ‘Few men were happy with their lot, especially upon being
ﬁrst called-up . . . None of this bothered me. I hadn’t been accustomed to
anything better and was, at least, being well-fed, with solid and regular
meals, for the ﬁrst time in my life’.6
It is possible to talk, in a general sense, of a collective British experience
in Normandy. In their writings, many soldiers of all arms described the taste
of Calvados; the heat of Normandy summer; cider apples; and Camembert
cheese, once compared to the stench of dead cows, ‘of which there were
many’.7 However, there are obvious differences between infantry, gunners
and armour, between making an assault beach landing and ﬁghting in bocage,
and so on and so forth. Above all, an invisible wall separated the experience
of the ‘teeth arm’ troops – infantry, armour and artillery – from the 44 per
cent of British soldiers who served on the lines of communication, and
indeed some other troops. The historian of a unit of medium and heavy
artillery alluded to this when he commented that the hedgerows of the bocage
provided excellent cover for gun positions but ‘made for very difﬁcult tank
country . . . so were only a blessing to some branches of the service’.8 In campaigns earlier in the war, the threat from the Luftwaffe had made logistic
work a hazardous business.9 The almost complete domination of the skies
over Normandy by the Allied air forces transformed the situation. This is
not to suggest that service in the Royal Army Service Corps (RASC) or
Royal Army Ordnance Corps (RAOC) in Normandy was devoid of danger;

120

Gary Shefﬁeld

rather, that the substantial diminution of the air threat widened the gulf
between the rear area and the frontline, especially the riﬂe companies.10
These caveats notwithstanding, some valid generalisations can be drawn, at
least about the armour and infantry.
The ofﬁcial historian rather optimistically called the British army in Normandy a force of ‘seasoned soldiers’, in the sense that all were well trained.11
In reality, it was a mixture of green and veteran soldiers. While three divisions (50th, 51st and 7th Armoured) were brought back from the Mediterranean, not all members of these formations were combat veterans. Many
British soldiers, however, saw their ﬁrst action in Normandy after having
undergone up to four years of training in the UK.
From Dunkirk to D-Day, the British army fought its major battles in
alien terrain: desert, jungle, and Mediterranean scrub. Normandy was different. The countryside looked very familiar, very English. It is not surprising to ﬁnd, for example, soldiers making comparisons with Box Hill, a
beauty spot in Surrey and a popular excursion for south Londoners.12 This
perhaps helps to explain why soldiers found the Normandy countryside so
disconcerting. Even more jarring was the phenomenon of the so-called ‘empty
battleﬁeld’. An apparently peaceful area could conceal an enemy machine
gun or tank – and the tank was likely to be described as a Tiger, whatever it
was in reality. One experience must stand for many similar ones: 8th Riﬂe
Brigade, the Motor Battalion of 11th Armoured Division, fought its ﬁrst
action at Hill 112 in late June:
This operation combined the worst features of the ﬁghting at this
time . . . Most of the Riﬂemen were subjected to shelling and mortaring
without ever seeing a German, and our tanks were picked off by an
enemy whose better armament and skill in concealment gave him an
advantage over our troops who were advancing across the open. The
thick, wooded, leafy bocage country handicapped our Gunner observation posts as well as the armoured regiments . . .13
In Normandy, the terrain favoured the defender, and added to the quality
of some of the German troops and Montgomery’s strategy, which drew
enemy forces on to the eastern ﬂank, the inevitable consequence was attrition. When two British veterans of Normandy quoted Evelyn Waugh’s aphorism ‘All wars are infantry wars’ in their study of the battle, they did so with
good reason.14 British infantry battalions in Normandy suffered a minimum
of 100 casualties per month, but 175 per month were not uncommon – the
ﬁgures for North Africa and Italy were about 70 per month.15 The British
style of warﬁghting in Normandy depended on massive ﬁrepower. One German soldier involved in the ﬁghting for Hill 112 commented that the British
used a volume of ‘ﬁre such as we Eastern Fronters had never known; the
Russians had never as many guns as this’.16 Eighteen per cent of British
troops in Normandy were gunners, while infantry amounted to 14 per cent.17

Dead cows and Tigers 121
Of the roughly 18,000 strong standard infantry division in Normandy, the
36 riﬂe companies totalled only some 4,500 soldiers. Yet 70 per cent of
casualties were sustained by what Terry Copp has rightly called this ‘tiny
minority’ in the riﬂe companies.18 In comparison to the First World War,
Britain had a gentle introduction to heavy battle casualties in the early years
of Hitler’s war. Only towards the end of 1942 did casualties in the armed
forces exceed those of civilians. Normandy was a brutal reminder of how
bloody modern industrialised warfare could be. Overall, the casualty rate
for the Allied armies in Normandy was higher than for the British army
(including the Royal Flying Corps) at Passchendaele in 1917.19 More than
half of the deaths in the British armed forces during the Second World War
occurred in the ﬁnal 18 months of the conﬂict. For the army, the proportion
would have been even higher.20
The units that took the bulk of the casualties in Normandy were battalions of county infantry regiments. The county regimental system was an
invention of the Victorians, who imposed order and a degree of logic on an
existing system. Like another Victorian invention, the Dickensian Christmas, it soon became so familiar that it became difﬁcult to remember a time
when it had not existed. The variety of regimental badges on the headstones
in war cemeteries in Normandy bear mute testimony to the fact that this campaign saw a late ﬂowering of the system. In 1948, a process of amalgamation
and disbandment began that has continued unabated to the present day.
One incident is instructive. In 1943, the War Ofﬁce ordered that regimental
shoulder titles should be replaced by a standardised form. The Oxfordshire
and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry was denied permission to use the wording ‘Oxf & Bucks Lt Infty’. Instead, the War Ofﬁce suggested ‘two anathemas
which made some vomit indignation’. The eventual compromise, which
‘please[d] no one’ was ‘Oxf & Bucks’.21 The criticism that it was ludicrous to
expend energy on such trivialities would be hard to refute, were it not for
the importance that British regiments attach to such things, and the formidable record of the regiment in developing cohesion and esprit de corps.
However, this was a regimental system under pressure. From 1942, soldiers were initially enlisted into the General Service Corps (GSC), before
being assigned to the branch of the army that they were – in theory – best
suited.22 While this and other reforms to the selection of other ranks instigated by Sir Ronald Adam, the reforming adjutant-general, improved the
efﬁciency of the army’s use of manpower, this system was subjected to
considerable criticism from ofﬁcers who saw it as weakening the regimental
system.23 A survey of February 1945 showed that only just over half (53 per
cent) of recruits ‘were posted to the regiment to which they were most
closely connected’.24 Moreover, being assigned to anonymous general service was very different from being embraced by the regimental family, for
such it was at least in theory. Some indication of attitudes can be gauged
from the fact that ofﬁcers commissioned into the General List, who wore
the royal coat of arms as a cap-badge, as did members of the GSC, nicknamed

122

Gary Shefﬁeld

themselves ‘the Crosse and Blackwell Hussars’, from the royal warrant displayed on jars of pickle.25
By 1944, the shortage of British infantry had become serious. ‘Latest
drafts of men . . . very good’ reported the commander of British 1st Division
in the Anzio beachhead in April 1944, ‘[but] Not enough of them and infantry bns still short. “No riﬂe coys – no nothing” – this simple truth has
escaped emphasis the whole war’.26 In reality, British higher commanders
and the War Ofﬁce were all too aware of the severe restrictions on Britain’s
infantry manpower budget. As Stephen Hart has demonstrated, Montgomery
went into the Normandy campaign aware that he could not afford to be
proﬂigate with the lives of his infantrymen. His operational design was
based on the linked concepts of ‘casualty conservation’ and maintaining
morale. Hart has demonstrated that before the campaign the War Ofﬁce
underestimated the rate of infantry wastage in Normandy by about 17 per
cent. This exacerbated the problem, but it did not create it.27
There was a particular shortage of infantry ofﬁcers. A report from late
1944 on the Italian campaign stated that ‘The platoon commander inﬂuences
his command in a greater degree than a commander at any other level, and
a platoon reﬂects the character of its commander to a remarkable degree’.
Although NCOs could and did serve as platoon commanders, a commissioned ofﬁcer was seen as being vastly preferable. Unfortunately, ‘The supply
of platoon cdrs does not meet the demand, and it is unusual for a battalion
to go in to battle with twelve really good riﬂe platoon commanders’.28 Expedients included transferring ofﬁcers from other arms to the infantry, and
seconding 623 infantry ofﬁcers (and a further 50 ordnance ofﬁcers) from the
Canadian army. These ‘Canloan’ ofﬁcers, wearing ‘Canada’ ﬂashes on their
battledress, proved an invaluable accretion to British strength, wining nearly
100 gallantry awards, and sustaining 75 per cent casualties.29
Increasingly, ofﬁcers and men were posted to where they were needed,
rather than to a battalion of their own regiment. Major Martin Lindsay of
the Royal Scots Fusiliers, posted to Normandy in mid-July, was initially
offered to the 9th Durham Light Infantry in 50th (Northumbrian) Division
before being posted to 1st Gordon Highlanders in 51st (Highland) Division.
Although he was proud to join such a distinguished formation, he noted
in his diary that he would ‘have to read up the history’ of the regiment.30
Replacements tended to be either youthful or ‘old sweats’ who had been
wounded or somehow had been excluded from front line infantry service
hitherto. Into the former category came the ‘large number of young soldiers
of nineteen years of age brought forward to replace the casualties of the past
fortnight’ in the 4th and 5th battalions of the Wiltshire Regiment (43rd
(Wessex) Division) who attacked at Maltot on 19 July.31 The latter included
the 2nd Scots Guards, which while in training in the UK in June 1944
received 400 men from the RAF Regiment. The resulting clash of cultures
took some time to resolve. The newly-reinforced battalion joined Guards
Armoured Division in Belgium in early 1945.32 Of course, it was not just the

Dead cows and Tigers 123
infantry that suffered from the manpower shortage. Lacking adequate reinforcements, two experienced armoured units, 3rd and 4th County of London Yeomanry, were forced to amalgamate in Normandy on 29 July 1944.33
It is one thing to recite facts and ﬁgures, quite another assess the impact
of attrition on units, formations and individuals. Units did not have to
attack to suffer heavy casualties. In the understated but revealing words of
the Black Watch’s historian, ‘The entire period in the Bois de Bavent . . .
was most trying. There was little to be done but sit and endure the shelling
and mortaring, and to seek to keep up morale in these most difﬁcult of all
conditions’.34 Private Richard Harris landed on D-Day as an 18-year-old in
1st Suffolks, a green soldier in a largely green battalion. His platoon was
33 strong. By 29 June there were just six originals left. He was wounded on
18 August, along with the other remaining original – ‘so our casualty rate
in Normandy was 100 per cent’.35
As Lord Moran suggested in 1945, soldiers cannot go on indeﬁnitely in
battle: like clothes, they wear out. A Royal Army Medical Corps report
from the end of June 1944 noted that ‘battle exhaustion’ was running at
about 15 per cent of all casualties, and much of it was ‘exhaustion in the
everyday sense of the word’.36 An ofﬁcer of 4/7 Dragoon Guards recorded
that simply being in a tank for days on end was exhausting, and the opportunity of sleeping outside, on hay, for nine hours was ‘pure nectar’.37 For
some, it went much further than mere tiredness, however extreme. A tank
gunner of the Sherwood Rangers refused to emerge from his tank.38 A signaller of 43rd (Wessex) Division was found hiding under a scout car, crying
and trembling uncontrollably. The latter had been subjected to mortaring
and artillery ﬁre for seven weeks.39
The length of time in action was important. While psychiatric casualties
in June were manageable, the duration as well as the intensity of the ﬁghting
led to men becoming ‘bomb happy’: a euphemism for becoming a psychiatric casualty. As Copp and McAndrew have argued, there was a ‘battle
exhaustion crisis’ in 21st Army Group in July 1944. About a quarter of the
infantry casualties were due to this cause – in 3rd Division, a green formation that had shown plenty of enthusiasm for ﬁghting in the initial stages
of the campaign, the ﬁgure was one in three.40 As we have seen, a disproportionate number of casualties fell on a small part of the army, the infantry
riﬂe companies, which amounted to less than a quarter of divisional strength.
The 15th (Scottish) Division suffered 18 per cent casualties during Operation EPSOM, in late June, but 80 per cent of the losses were borne by riﬂe
companies. As one veteran commented, ‘Regimental esprit [sic], the mutual
trust of men in the ﬁghting platoons, carefully built up in years of training,
would have a struggle to survive’.41
Two interesting examples demonstrate low-level institutional responses to
heavy losses. The casualties sustained by 53rd (Welsh) Division in July led
to a readjustment of the divisional order of battle. Two of the three battalions of the Royal Welch Fusiliers in 158 Brigade were exchanged for other

124

Gary Shefﬁeld

units, and likewise the two Welch Regiment battalions in 160 Brigade were
split up, because, as the divisional historian explained, ‘Difﬁculties were
experienced in providing reinforcements in the event of heavy casualties.
This was particularly so with Ofﬁcer reinforcements . . . By this means it
was likely that a more even spread of casualties among regiments would
result in the event of any part of the Division suffering severe losses’.42
By the end of the ﬁghting at Rauray on 1 July, the 1st Tyneside Scottish
had lost roughly 50 per cent of personnel that had arrived in Normandy
only three weeks earlier. On 2 July the battalion received as replacements
200 South Wales Borderers and 100 men from the Herefordshires. The
battalion was restructured to minimise the disruption to sub-unit cohesion.
The remaining Tyneside Scots were formed into B and C Companies, while
the newcomers formed A and D Companies.43
Against this backdrop it is not surprising that ‘morale [which] pertains to
[the individual’s] efforts to enhance the effectiveness of the group in accomplishing the task in hand’44 has sometimes been identiﬁed as being low.
Certainly, cynicism was rife:
When one’s battalion has a period of rest in war[,] delight in washing
and sleeping, in drinking, perhaps, Calvados, and in buying eggs and
butter, is tempered by the realization that this respite does not spring
from the altruistic motives of the Higher Command, but that you are
simply being fattened up, like pheasants in pre-war Septembers, for a
particularly important occasion.45
These words, from the history of the Riﬂe Brigade, would have been echoed
by many other soldiers. When 1st Black Watch (51st (Highland) Division)
received news that the battalion was going into action it was greeted with a
shout of ‘Monty, you bastard! Give us a bloody break!’ – although Private
Stan Whitehouse, who told this story, noted that Montgomery was ‘generally popular’ with the rank and ﬁle. However it is one thing to grumble and
carry out orders, quite another to refuse to do so; and grumbling can be a
valuable safety valve. Whitehouse told another story, indicating that he
was aware that other units had undergone worse experiences. 1st Black
Watch received reinforcements from the Tyneside Scottish in October 1944.
Whitehouse recalled that the Tynesiders were ‘Bitter and angry towards the
hierarchy, maintaining that they had been used needlessly as cannon fodder
in Normandy’ and wondered whether this unit had been deliberately split
up, its morale and cohesion broken beyond repair.46
As Marcus Cunliffe, who served in an armoured regiment, noted frankly,
to the ordinary soldier in the second half of June and July, it appeared as
if their efforts were achieving little. Despite the hopes invested in Operation
GOODWOOD, ‘progress seemed to be as difﬁcult as ever . . . Whether in
the “bocage” or in the open, rolling countryside south of Caen, the Germans,
if not masters of the situation, at any rate appeared to adapt themselves to

Dead cows and Tigers 125
it only too well’. However, Cunliffe went on to argue that what the troops
on the ground could not know, any more than the purveyors of ‘armchair
criticisms’ from home, was how well Montgomery’s attritional strategy was
working, and he traced the growing optimism when, after Operation COBRA,
it became clear that the Allies were indeed winning.47 Cunliffe’s perspective,
as a Normandy veteran who served in Operations EPSOM and TOTALIZE,
and who went on to become a distinguished historian, is one that demands
respect.
The constituents of morale, and the relationship between morale, combat
effectiveness and psychiatric casualties is a complex topic. Fear was ever
present, but that should not necessarily be confused with low morale or
poor combat cohesion, and most soldiers mastered fear to a greater or lesser
degree. The ultimate test of morale is the willingness to engage in combat,48
and judged by this criterion, British morale in Normandy was good enough.
In the actual conduct of battles, British troops demonstrated much the same
stoicism and endurance as on the Somme in 1916 – a battle that Normandy
resembled in many ways.
The morale of units of individuals depended on a vast number of variables. The age of the soldier could inﬂuence attitudes. Ray Bottrill of 1
Coldstream Guards (Guards Armoured Division), who fought in Normandy
as a 19-year-old, recalled it as ‘a great adventure’. Older men with families
thought somewhat differently.49 Just before leaving England to join 1st
Gordon Highlanders, Major Martin Lindsay wrote a letter, the sentiments
of which were echoed in those written by hundreds of thousands of other
soldiers: ‘Darling wife . . . if I do not return I want you please to remember
that the boys . . .’50
Members of armoured units had a particular challenge to their morale,
when it became painfully clear that some enemy tanks (although not all)
were superior to their Shermans and Cromwells. Allied tanks were particularly vulnerable to the German 88mm anti-tank gun. The Panzer VI ‘Tiger’
was particularly feared, with the less effective Panzer IV frequently being
misidentiﬁed as its fearsome cousin. Montgomery, ever conscious of the
importance of morale, was evidently perturbed, writing when the campaign
was three weeks old to Brooke: ‘I have had to stamp very heavily on reports
that began to be circulated about the inadequate quality of our tanks, equipment etc., as compared with the Germans’. Montgomery blamed reports
written by a staff ofﬁcer: ‘he is a very unbalanced ofﬁcer and his views are of
no value. Furthermore his experience is conﬁned to the “bocage” country –
which is not tank country – it is infantry country . . . If our armour is used
properly we have nothing to fear from enemy tanks; in close country we
have had cases of infantry “doing in” the Panther with a Piat mortar (sic)’.51
Montgomery might have suppressed ofﬁcial criticism, but he could not
remove the feelings of many that their equipment was inferior to that of
the enemy, especially – and this is a point often forgotten – given that the
Germans were able to use defensive tactics ‘so that’, a Sherman commander

126

Gary Shefﬁeld

of the Sherwood Rangers wrote, ‘their lack of mobility counted for less.
Once the pursuit began, however, the Sherman’s greater speed and endurance came into its own and our tanks overwhelmed the German defences in
a mobile battle’.52
For the tank crew, death could be particularly random. A tank of the Fife
and Forfar Yeomanry was hit during Operation EPSOM. Two crewmen
escaped, but the tank commander and gunner did not. The men who crewed
the armoured cars of the 11th Hussars, used for reconnaissance, soon came
to terms with ‘one grim fact . . . that . . . their ﬁrst contact with the enemy
was most likely to come from an armour-piercing shell ﬁred point-blank at
the leading car’. The crew realised ‘full well their chance of survival . . . rested
on the aim of the ﬁrst German gun or tank they might encounter’. ‘Providentially’, wrote the historian of the 11th Hussars, ‘soldiers are not given to
dwelling too much on the fate which they may meet in war’. This is perhaps
as good an explanation of the survival of morale under severe stress as one
is likely to ﬁnd.53
The morale of an individual was subject to ﬂuctuations as circumstances
changed. The diary of Private N. Bretherton, a member of a glider-borne air
landing battalion, 2nd Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (or
the 52nd, as they referred to themselves) is an interesting case study. He was
a member of 6th Airborne Division, a self-consciously elite formation. On
15 June he implicitly contrasted low German morale with the high morale in
this division. On 22 June he is wondering when the division will be relieved.
By 3 July, after a spell of trench-digging as ‘Gloriﬁed Pioneers’, in the rain
and being attacked by mosquitoes, his diary recorded that ‘Everybody [was]
fed up to the teeth’. Apart from the unpleasant conditions, Bretherton’s
main complaint was that his battalion and division, trained as a coup de main
formation, found itself holding the line as standard infantry (moreover,
without the equipment of a standard division). He laid stress on the unfairness
of ‘crack troops [b]eing used like children’.54 This sense of fair and unfair
play was not just a public school trait: it went to the very heart of the
paternal /deferential relationship between the leader and the led.
In the battle conditions of Normandy, the role of the leader – both NCO
and ofﬁcer – was vitally important. This naturally placed a huge burden on
the leader. Nineteen-year-old Lieutenant Michael Bendix of 5th Coldstream
Guards recalled ‘the dread of showing fear and not doing your best for your
Platoon’.55 Many led in a literal sense. Private Harris of 1st Suffolks wrote
of the vicious battle at Chateau de la Londe on 28 June. Following a creeping
barrage, the line of infantry was thinned by German ﬁre but ‘the Major was
still in front, bellowing words of encouragement to those remaining, a leader
of men if there ever was one; I followed like a dog at his master’s heel’.56
In war, the leader’s role is Janus-faced: to exercise paternal care for his
men; but also to ensure that they risk their lives by ﬁghting. These two roles
are in direct conﬂict with each other, and it is a tribute to the effectiveness
of leadership in Normandy that there were relatively few combat refusals

Dead cows and Tigers 127
or breakdowns in unit cohesion. The importance of good leadership to defy
logic and human instinct and go forward into battle is captured by these
two quotations, one from the infantry, one from the Royal Armoured Corps
(RAC). Private Ron Ludgater (1st Manchesters, 53rd (Welsh) Division),
wrote:
[W ]e always seemed to be moving on our own; it was a small platoon
world. On some days nothing happened and on others you dug like
mad with mortar bombs dropping all around and steel splinters everywhere. The worst thing of all was not being kept in the picture, not
being told of the state of things and the reason for failed attacks.57
Trooper Steve Dyson, 107 Regiment RAC (King’s Own) recalled:
[A]n individual’s part in a battle seems inﬁnitesimally insigniﬁcant . . . The
private or trooper doesn’t know much about the part he is playing . . . in
the wider context of the battle. He just does what he is ordered, and
that’s it . . . I recall the tank commanders returning from brieﬁngs and
synchronising watches. They would brieﬂy tell the crew that we were
going to attack a certain target; we would mount up; and, in liaison
with the infantry, ﬁght our way to the objective.
Dyson got to the heart of the matter when he went on to say that ‘it is the
amount of sacriﬁce, tenacity and courage the individual can display under
great pressure, welded together hundreds of times in a unit, that determines
defeat or victory on the battleﬁeld’.58
The ofﬁcers and NCOs did the welding; but an important part of building
and maintaining operational effectiveness lay in individuals becoming
‘battlewise’. Jack Vivian wrote of learning ‘an instinct for survival . . . it was
a reﬂex action when moving about to automatically register in your mind
the nearest slit trench . . . this reﬂex was linked with an automatic listening
for shells coming inward’, while by the afternoon of D-Day, an subaltern of
45 Royal Marine Commando had come to realise ‘the value of digging’,
having realised the truth of the military aphorism that all a soldier needed in
a battle was ‘a bloody good riﬂe and a bloody good shovel’.59
The British army contributed mightily to the Allied victory in Normandy.
As Stephen Hart has demonstrated, Montgomery’s operational methods
played to British strengths and minimised weaknesses, delivering success at
a manageable cost in casualties and with morale intact. It was a citizen army
that achieved this victory. Most soldiers would never have joined the army
had it not been for the war. Some were deeply cynical. Most treated the war
simply as a job that had to be done before they could go home to their
families and jobs. This was not an army of crusaders or fanatics. In the land
of dead cows and Tigers, under conditions of extreme fear and appalling
stress, they did their job well.

128

Gary Shefﬁeld

Marcus Cunliffe’s comments about the Royal Warwickshires, although
occasionally exaggerated, can be applied to the experience of the entire
British Liberation Army:
In comparison with their comrades of earlier wars, the men [who fought
in Normandy] had many advantages. They were well fed and equipped;
medical services were excellent; they were never thrown away in illconceived battles, but beneﬁted from thorough and expert generalship.
Even so, they faced a very capable enemy; they were required to attack
often and usually by night; by day they remained in close contact.
The physical and mental ordeal of a week of such activity was
prodigious . . . in courage, stamina and battlecraft the British soldier
could challenge any in the world. Months and years of training and
preparation at every level had preceded the Normandy landings. The
campaign that ensued proved how proﬁtably the time had been spent.
Like those in other units, the ofﬁcers and men of The Regiment emerged
from Normandy as veterans deservedly victorious and anxious to clinch
the matter.60

Acknowledgement
I would like to thank the following for permission to make use of material for which
they hold the copyright: the Trustees of Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light
Infantry Museum; the Trustees of the Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives;
Mr M. Bendix; Mr B. Evans; the National Archives. I would also like to thank Mrs
Pam Cooper for her assistance with research.

Notes
1 Jack Vivian, unpublished memoir, p. 1. Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light
Infantry Museum, Slade barracks, Oxford.
2 Peter Elstob, Warriors for the Working Day (London: Corgi, 1974 edn).
3 Martin Lindsay, So Few Got Through (London: Collins, 1946), p. 16.
4 G.D. Shefﬁeld, ‘The Shadow of the Somme: The Inﬂuence of the First World
War on British Soldiers’ Perceptions and Behaviour in the Second World War’,
in Paul Addison and Angus Calder (eds) Time to Kill: The Soldier’s Experience of
War in the West 1939–1945 (London: Pimlico, 1997), pp. 29–39.
5 Norman Smith, Tank Soldier (Lewes: Book Guild, 1989), p. 26.
6 D. Evans, unpublished account, p. 9, Imperial War Museum, Department of
Documents (hereafter IWM Docs) 92/37/1.
7 L. Chrimes, Five Agra: The story of the 5th Army Group Royal Artillery
(Dannenburg: privately published, 1945), p. 74.
8 Ibid., p. 73.
9 For the problems of operating in conditions of enemy air supremacy in Greece
and Crete 1941, see (no editor given) The Story of the Royal Army Service Corps
(London: Bell & Sons, 1955), pp. 164, 166, 168.
10 It should not be forgotten that the term ‘logistic troops’ covers a wide variety of
service. 6th Airborne Division’s 90-strong light company RASC landed by air on
D-Day and suffered 36 casualties. Ibid., p. 394.

Dead cows and Tigers 129
11 L.F. Ellis, Victory in the West, Vol. I The Battle of Normandy (London: HMSO,
1962), p. 132.
12 E.g., Stuart Hills, By Tank into Normandy (London: Cassell, 2002), p. 137.
13 R.H.W.S. Hastings, The Riﬂe Brigade in the Second World War, 1939–1945
(Aldershot: Gale & Polden, 1950), p. 358.
14 Eversley Belﬁeld and Hubert Essame, The Battle for Normandy (London: Pan,
1967 edn), p. 182.
15 Jeffrey Williams, The Long Left Flank (London: Stoddart, 1988), p. 318.
16 J.J. How, Hill 112 (London: William Kimber, 1984), p. 185.
17 Ellis, Victory in the West, I, p. 536.
18 Terry Copp, ‘ “If this war isn’t over, And pretty damn soon, There’ll be nobody
left, In this old platoon”: First Canadian Army, February–March 1945’ in Addison
and Calder, Time to Kill: pp. 148–9.
19 Williams, Long Left Flank, pp. 318–20; Julian Thompson, The Imperial
War Museum Book of Victory in Europe (London: Sidgewick & Jackson, 1994),
p. 138.
20 Malcolm Smith, Britain in 1940 (London: Routledge, 2000), p. 70; Adrian Gregory,
The Silence of Memory (Oxford: Berg, 1994), p. 213. I am grateful to Dr Gregory
for his guidance on this matter.
21 J.E.H. Neville (ed.) The Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry War
Chronicle, Vol. IV, 1944–1945 (Aldershot: Gale & Polden, 1954), p. 468.
22 ‘Notes for S. of S. Estimates Speech – Feb 1943. A.G.’s Dept’, Sir Ronald Adam
papers, ADAM 3/3, Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives (hereafter
LHCMA), King’s College London.
23 Jeremy A. Crang, The British army and the People’s War 1939–1945 (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2000), pp. 11–17.
24 Ibid., p. 17.
25 Denis Healey, The Time of My Life (London: Michael Joseph, 1989), p. 51.
26 ‘Notes by Comd 1 Div’, 21 Apr 44, PENNEY 8/33, W.R.C. Penney
papers, LHCMA. ‘Bn’ and ‘Coy’ were standard abbreviations of ‘Battalion’ and
‘Company’.
27 Stephen Hart, Montgomery and ‘Colossal Cracks’: The 21st Army Group in Northwest Europe, 1944– 45 (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2000), pp. 50–61.
28 ‘Lessons from the Italian Campaign’ (Dec. 1944), pp. 77– 8. WO 231/8, The
National Archives/Public Record Ofﬁce (hereafter TNA/PRO).
29 Wilfred I. Smith, Codeword CANLOAN (Toronto: Dundurn, 1992), p. xi.
30 Lindsay, So Few Got Through, pp. 9, 13, 16.
31 H. Essame, The 43rd Wessex Division at War 1944–1945 (London: William Clowes,
1952), pp. 47–8.
32 W.A. Elliott, Esprit de Corps (Norwich: Michael Russell, 1997), pp. 104–6.
33 G.L. Verney, The Desert Rats: the History of the 7th Armoured Division (London:
Hutchinson, 1954), p. 210.
34 Bernard Fergusson, The Black Watch and the King’s Enemies (London: Collins,
1950), p. 270.
35 R. Neillands, The Battle of Normandy 1944 (London: Cassell, 2003 edn), pp. 49,
193, 389.
36 ‘Note on surgery . . .’ Appx D, WO 222/176, TNA/PRO.
37 John Stirling, D-Day to VE-Day from my Tank Turret (privately published, nd),
p. 25.
38 Hills, By Tank, p. 130.
39 Stan Procter, A Quiet Little Boy Goes to War (Tadworth: Dillons, 1997), p. 72.
40 Terry Copp and Bill McAndrew, Battle Exhaustion: Soldiers and Psychiatrists in
the Canadian Army, 1939–1945 (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1990),
pp. 114–15.

130

Gary Shefﬁeld

41 How, Hill 112, pp. 125, 140.
42 C.N. Barclay, The History of the 53rd (Welsh) Division in the Second World War
(London: Willian Clowes, 1956), pp. 66–7.
43 Kevin Baverstock, Breaking the Panzers: The Bloody Battle for Rauray, Normandy, 1 July 1944 (Stroud: Sutton, 2002), p. 162.
44 Deﬁnition by Irvin L. Child, quoted by G.D. Shefﬁeld, Leadership in the Trenches
(London: Macmillan, 2000), p. 180.
45 Hastings, Riﬂe Brigade, p. 359.
46 S. Whitehouse and G.B. Bennett, Fear is the Foe (London: Robert Hale, 1995),
pp. 87–8. Conversely, another ex-Tyneside Scot, Private L. Baverstock, although
sad at the break-up of his battalion, was proud to serve with 1st Black Watch.
E-mail, K. Baverstock to author, 6 July 2004.
47 Marcus Cunliffe, History of the Royal Warwickshire Regiment 1919–1955 (London: William Clowes, 1956), pp, 105, 118, 20. I am grateful to Professor Brian
Holden Reid for details of Cunliffe’s military career; see also the introduction to
Brian Holden Reid and John White (eds) American Studies: Essays in Honour of
Marcus Cunliffe (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1991), pp. 3–5.
48 For a dissenting view, see Gerard Oram, Military Executions during World War I
(Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2003).
49 Interview with author, 20 July 2004.
50 Lindsay, So Few Got Through, p. 8.
51 Montgomery to Brooke, 27 June 1944, Alanbrooke 6/2/25, Alanbrooke papers,
LHCMA.
52 Hills, By Tank, pp. 96–7.
53 Dudley Clarke, The Eleventh at War (London: Michael Joseph, 1952), pp. 342–3.
54 Private N. Bretherton, diary, Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry
Museum, Slade Barracks, Oxford.
55 Michael Bendix, unpublished memoir, p. 27, 98/3/1, IWM Docs.
56 Neillands, Battle of Normandy, p. 192.
57 Ibid., p. 377.
58 Stephen Dyson, Tank Twins (London: Leo Cooper, 1994), p. 51.
59 Vivian, unpublished memoir, p. 36; Bryan Samain, Commando Men (London:
Greenhill, 1988 edn), p. 11.
60 Cunliffe, Royal Warwickshires, p. 121.

10 The Luftwaffe in Normandy
James S. Corum

The air side of the Normandy campaign can be easily summarised as: Allies,
– 1, Germans – 0. Given the enormous disparity of the respective air forces
in mid-1944 the outcome of the air campaign was never in doubt. However,
although the German side of the Normandy air battle is usually ignored in
all the major histories of the war it was still one of the decisive moments of
the air war. Just as the Normandy battles ruthlessly attritted the German
army on the ground, the air campaign saw the destruction of the last ﬁghter
and bomber reserves of the Luftwaffe. After Normandy the Luftwaffe was a
broken force, able to carry out nuisance raids over the front and occasionally able to inﬂict serious damage on Allied bomber units, but it was no
longer a force that could achieve operational results.
If any single campaign of the war can be termed ‘decisive’, the Normandy
campaign is it. In the ﬁrst half of 1944 the German high command held out
the hope that somehow the Eastern Front could be stabilised and the relentless Russian advance halted. But if the Allies managed to land and establish
a second front in the West then the strategic position became hopeless for
Germany. Already hard-pressed in Russia, the Mediterranean and by the
Allied bombing offensive, the Germans simply did not have the manpower
or resources to successfully hold on if Allied army groups began advancing
in the West. Unlike Italy, where the army and the Luftwaffe had the option
of retreating and ﬁghting again from better defensive positions with only
a slight weakening of their strategic position, in France the only realistic
option was to defeat any Allied landing attempt quickly and decisively.
The Wehrmacht High Command in the spring of 1944 was well aware
of the weakness of the Luftwaffe in comparison to the Allied air forces
and little was expected of Luftﬂotte 3 (Air Fleet 3). The Oberkommando der
Wehrmacht placed its trust in the ﬁghting ability of the German soldier and
was still conﬁdent that the army could hold and repel the Anglo-American
invasion.1 Still, almost as a matter of pride, the Luftwaffe planned to
carry out a maximum effort against the expected Allied landings with the
understanding that even if it could not sink the Allied ﬂeets, even a moderate rate of attrition of the Allied shipping or disruption of Allied port
operations would work to the beneﬁt of the hard-pressed ground forces.

132

James S. Corum

In Italy the Luftwaffe had inﬂicted relatively light damage to Allied shipping.2
When the battle of the Channel coast began, the Luftwaffe would have to
do much better.

The Luftwaffe’s forces in the West in the spring of 1944
Luftﬂotte 3, under the highly experienced Field Marshal Hugo Sperrle, commanded all the Luftwaffe forces in France and the Low Countries in 1944.
On paper, it was an impressive organisation. As of 6 June 1944, the Third
Air Fleet had 384,579 troops under its command, including 16,109 Luftwaffe
Helferinnen (uniformed women assigned to the Luftwaffe); 45,331 German
and foreign workers; 24,019 labourers of the Reichs Work Service; and
323,139 ofﬁcers and men of the regular Luftwaffe.3 The air commands of
Luftﬂotte 3 consisted of: X Air Corps, a force of heavy bombers and specialist naval attack aircraft; IX Air Corps, a force of conventional bombers
(mostly JU 88s); II Fighter Corps, headquarters for the ﬁghter wings stationed in Belgium and France; and II Air Corps, organised as a command
headquarters for ﬁghter-bomber and ground attack aircraft. The largest
command was III Flak Corps with tens of thousands of personnel manning
radar and ﬂak positions in the Low Countries and France.
In reality, the air units of the Luftwaffe were hopelessly inadequate for
the task. At the beginning of June in 1944, II Fighter Corps was down to a
mere six ﬁghter groups, with 160 operational Me 109 and F-W 190 ﬁghter
planes. Luftﬂotte 3 had had only 272 bombers of all types including the
virtually unusable He 177 heavy bombers, Dornier 217s, F-W 200 longrange bombers and 136 Ju 88 torpedo bombers of X Air Corps and 144
Ju 88/Ju 188 aircraft of IX Air Corps. II Air Corps had four groups of twin
engine Ju 88 ﬁghters and F-W 190 ﬁghters, for a total of 67 aircraft, plus
one tactical reconnaissance group of 42 Me 109s. Of a total 693 aircraft, the
serviceability rates were low, normally no more than 60 per cent of aircraft
operational (in contrast to the 70–80 per cent operational rates of the RAF
and AAF) so that when the Allies landed in Normandy Luftﬂotte 3 would
have no more than 500 operational aircraft to oppose over 7,000 Allied
aircraft supporting the invasion.4
The Luftwaffe’s air forces on the Western Front were in a state of rapid
decline by the spring of 1944. Air superiority over Germany had been lost in
February and March, during the massive Allied bombing offensives against
Germany. Several books describe in detail how the Luftwaffe lost the command of the air in early 1944.5 The Allied bomber offensive, now supported
by long-range escort ﬁghters, quickly decimated the ranks of German pilots.
From February 1944 on, the Luftwaffe lost more trained pilots than it could
replace. In March, losses reached 22 per cent of Reich Air Defence pilots. In
April, losses were 38 per cent of Reich Air Defence pilots and 24 per cent of
Luftﬂotte 3 pilots. In April 1944 the Luftwaffe lost 489 ﬁghter pilots, but
trained only 396.6 The replacement pilots were barely trained in comparison

The Luftwaffe in Normandy

133

with the airmen of 1940–2. Until September 1942, all Luftwaffe ﬁghter and
bomber pilots received a thorough ﬂight training and a course in the latest
aircraft models before being sent into combat.7 In 1942 shortages of fuel
and instructors forced the Luftwaffe High Command to shorten aircrew
training courses and in 1944 Luftwaffe ﬁghter pilots went into action
with little more than 130 hours total ﬂight time and usually no more than
25 hours in operational aircraft. In contrast, the US ﬁghter pilots entered
combat during this same period with well over 400 hours of ﬂying time,
including over 100 hours in operational aircraft.8 Since the beginning of
1944, II Fighter Corps had been taking a consistent battering while opposing
the Allied bomber offensive and for several months it was unable to replace
trained airmen lost in combat.
The combat effectiveness of the German ﬂak force was another story. As
the air units of the Luftwaffe declined, the ﬂak force had become increasingly larger. The Germans used their mobile ﬂak units as multi-purpose
weapons and the mobile 88mm ﬂak guns in particular had been designed to
engage enemy tanks as well as aeroplanes. On the Russian front, the Luftwaffe
ﬂak corps and divisions had racked up an impressive tally of Soviet tanks,
in many cases Luftwaffe ﬂak regiments destroying more Russian tanks than
planes. Through the Normandy campaign, the ﬂak would not only be the
most effective weapon against the Allied air forces, it would play a major
role in the ground battles.
In preparation for the anticipated invasion of the Channel coast, the
Luftwaffe created III Flak Corp in February 1944. It was designed as a mobile
force to be rushed to the most threatened part of the front and deployed
over 3,500 light (20mm and 37mm) and medium (88mm) ﬂak guns.9 The
88mm medium ﬂak guns as well as the rapid ﬁring 20 and 37mm light ﬂak
guns, many of them in multiple mounts, were among the most effective antiaircraft weapons of World War II. By the time the Allies landed, Flak
Corps III was carefully dispersed in reserve positions near the coast and
ready for immediate deployment.10 The commander of III Flak Corps was
General der Flakartillerie Wolfgang Pickert. As commander of the 9th Flak
Division on the Russian Front in 1942–3 Pickert had established an outstanding combat record. He insisted that his force be trained for mobile
ﬁeld operation and be proﬁcient in destroying tanks as well as planes. In the
weeks before the Allied landing, he put his ﬂak regiments, which had gone a
bit soft on occupation duty in France, through a series of exercises to bring
up their tactical skills to the level of the ﬂak forces in Russia.11
In addition to the ﬂak guns of Flak Corps III, each army and SS division
had its own ﬂak battalion and sometimes additional ﬂak batteries were
attached. The number of ﬂak guns assigned to an army division ranged
from 12 guns for an infantry division to 74 light and heavy ﬂak guns in a
Panzer Grenadier division.12 German naval units were stationed in all of the
French and Low Country ports and the Kriegsmarine had its own ﬂak force.
By 1944, the German navy had 88 ﬂak battalions with four to six batteries

134

James S. Corum

per battalion (and usually four guns to a battery). In addition to all this,
many of the static coastal defence divisions had been equipped with a wide
array of extra weaponry, including numerous captured anti-aircraft guns
taken from the French in 1940. An exact accounting is difﬁcult, but one
can reasonably estimate that all the branches of the Wehrmacht had 7,000–
8,000 ﬂak guns in France and southern Belgium by mid-1944.13

Anticipating the invasion: the strategy in early 1944
With an Allied invasion threatening, the Luftwaffe considered several strategies to deal with it. Since the Luftwaffe had little realistic chance of regaining air superiority over France, operational thinking had to be geared to the
best means of hampering Allied efforts and attriting Allied forces, especially
Allied shipping. In 1943, Field Marshal Sperrle proposed that the Luftwaffe
build up its last reserves of bombers and retrain and re-equip them as an
anti-shipping strike force. He urged that the Luftwaffe increase the effort
to conduct anti-shipping strikes and long-range reconnaissance over the
Atlantic. In this he was strongly supported by the German navy, as this
strategy could assist the U-boat campaign.
Sperrle was well aware of the weakness of the Luftwaffe’s bomber force
which had been steadily decimated since the Stalingrad disaster of 1942–3,
when the equivalent of three experienced bomber wings were destroyed in
an attempt to use bombers to lift supplies to the doomed 6th Army. In Italy
the bomber wings assigned to Luftﬂotte 2 had suffered heavy attrition in
trying to stop the Allied landings. However, in late 1943 and early 1944 IX
Air Corps, Luftﬂotte 3’s main bomber force, saw a rise in aircraft numbers
as bomber groups were pulled out of Italy and the Mediterranean and
brought to France for re-equipping and training. By early 1944 the last
reserve of Luftwaffe bombers had been concentrated in France.
In one of his most impressive strategic blunders, Hitler insisted on using
these last bomber reserves in attacks against British cities to crush British
civilian morale. Sperrle was strongly opposed to Hitler’s strategy. In 1943,
Sperrle proposed that the Luftwaffe’s bomber units in the West not be used
in attacks on British cities which he saw as potentially costly yet strategically meaningless.14 Sperrle argued that the bombers could best be used in a
naval air campaign to attack shipping in and out of Britain, outside of the
RAF Fighter Command’s effective defensive range.15 Hitler, supported by
Goering, saw Sperrle’s air strategy as too passive. Ever since the bombing of
Hamburg in the summer of 1943, the Nazi leadership had turned more and
more toward terror-bombing campaigns as a strategic solution and Hitler
and his entourage believed that terror-bombing would break British morale.
Hitler insisted, ‘I can only win the war if I destroy the enemy more than he
destroys us – therefore, I will bring the terror war to him . . .’.16 So in late
1943 IX Air Corps was taken away from the operational control of Luftﬂotte
3 and placed under the direct control of Hermann Goering, who would

The Luftwaffe in Normandy

135

select the targets for the bomber force, presumably after consultation with
Hitler. Bomber expert Major General Dietrich Peltz was placed in command
of IX Air Corps and continued to receive additional reinforcements of aircraft and aircrew. By December 1943, IX Air Corps contained 524 bombers,
mostly Ju 88s and Do 217s as well as a few He 177 heavy bombers.
Although this force looked impressive on paper, Luftwaffe aircrew training
was very deﬁcient and extra training was paramount as the bombing campaign could only be conducted at night due to the huge superiority of the
Allies in day ﬁghters.
The German night bombing techniques of 1944 were similar to those of
the British. For there to be any reasonable chance of the bombers to hitting
the target at night they needed to be guided by a highly experienced and
specially trained bomber pathﬁnder force. Unfortunately for IX Air Corps,
they were given no time to develop pathﬁnders.17 Indeed, the training levels
for the Luftwaffe bomber force in basic skills were exceptionally weak. Due
to the heavy attrition of 1942–3, the ﬂight hours in the Luftwaffe bomber
training programme had been cut to the bone and the Luftwaffe was unable
to replace trained airmen with pilots of even minimal competence.18
Peltz was ordered by Goering to begin a major bombing offensive against
the British in January 1944 and Goering selected London as the major
target – at that time the city with Britain’s largest concentration of ﬂak and
night ﬁghter defences.19 In the ﬁrst Blitz of 1940 the British night defences
had been extremely weak and the Luftwaffe could attack British cities with
minimal losses. However, in 1944 the British were fully prepared to repel
night bomber attacks. The ﬁrst big German raid was carried out against
London on 21 January 1944 with a force of 447 bombers. German bomber
losses were heavy and little was accomplished. It set a pattern for future
Luftwaffe bombing operations. Because of the poor level of aircrew training
few bombs even came near the assigned targets.20 In 29 night attacks from
January to May, IX Air Corps ﬂew 4,251 sorties. The Luftwaffe loss rate
averaged 7.7 per cent per raid and by May 1944 329 bombers had been lost
over England, along with their aircrews.21 In short, the Luftwaffe destroyed
its last reserve of bombers in pointless attacks and eliminated its best hope
of inﬂicting a heavy attrition upon the Allied shipping when the invasion
came. By D-Day, IX Air Corps possessed only 261 twin-engine bombers
and the bomber units were clearly worn out. In fact, the operational rate of
the force had dropped to below 50 per cent.22
The other bomber force of Luftﬂotte 3, X Air Corps, was in no better
shape than IX Air Corps. X Air Corps specialised in anti-shipping attacks
by torpedoes and by radio-guided dive bombs, the Fritz X and the Henschel
Hs 293. To make these revolutionary but cranky weapons effective, the
precision-guided bombs of World War II called for considerable specialised
aircrew training. As potentially dangerous as these weapons were, the
Luftwaffe never had more than 40 crews at any time who were fully trained
to use them.23

136

James S. Corum

X Air Corp’s most serious problem was lack of personnel, not aircraft.
As of 30 May 1944, Group III of Bomber Wing 100 in Toulouse, France,
was equipped with 30 Dornier 217 bombers, but had only 17 trained crews.
II Air Corps, intended as the specialised ground-attack force for the Western
Front, had virtually no planes or trained pilots available to meet the Allied
invasion as nearly all the Luftwaffe’s ground attack aircraft had been thrown
into combat against the Russian offensive on the Eastern Front. Due to a
general shortage of trained ground-attack pilots, there would be no reserve
available to meet the Allied invasion in June 1944.
Because of the weakness of Luftﬂotte 3, any hope for an effective Luftwaffe
contribution to the Wehrmacht defence of the French coast would require
strong reinforcements from the Reich air defence. In December 1943,
detailed Luftwaffe plans were published under the code name Drohende
Gefahr West (‘Immediate Danger West’), also known as ‘Operation Doktor
Gustav’.24 The Luftwaffe planned to shift the major proportion of the home
defence ﬁghter forces to airﬁelds near the invasion area as soon as the Allies
landed. In the ﬁrst days of the invasion, 31 ﬁghter units were to be transferred from Germany to France with 700– 800 aircraft.25 Stripping the Reich
air defence meant that Germany was left with only eight night ﬁghter groups
and three replacement ﬁghter groups, all of limited effectiveness.26 However,
the battle for France was considered so important that the risk was regarded
as worth it.

D-Day and the ﬁrst days of the campaign
The Luftwaffe made a considerable effort to attack the D-Day landings on
6 June 1944 with the very limited forces at hand yet, on that day, Luftﬂotte
3 was able to ﬂy only 319 sorties against the Allies.27 On the ﬁrst day, the
primary effort of the Third Air Fleet was made by General Peltz’s IX Air
Corps, which sent 130 bomber sorties against the invasion ﬂeet on the evening
of 6–7 June.28 X Air Corps sent 40 guided bomb and torpedo planes against
the Allies on the night of D-Day, but failed to sink any Allied ships. The
Luftwaffe’s counter-offensive intensiﬁed over the next few days. On 8 June,
500 sorties were ﬂown against the Allied forces off Normandy.29 Despite the
increased effort, there were few results to show for it.
In the days immediately after D-Day, the Luftwaffe attempted to conduct
the kind of air campaign it had conducted against the British and American
ﬂeets a few months before during the Salerno landings in Italy. The two
groups of X Air Corps equipped to drop the radio-guided bombs attacked
shipping with the Fritz X guided bomb and other bombers dropped torpedoes. IX Air Corps’ bomber force, with an operational strength of scarcely
more than a wing (100 aircraft), dropped torpedoes and conventional bombs.
In the air campaign over Salerno, the Luftwaffe had been able to inﬂict
considerable damage against Allied shipping during night attacks. For example, in September 1943 German radio-guided bombs disabled the British

The Luftwaffe in Normandy

137

battleship, HMS Warspite, badly damaged the British cruiser HMS Uganda
and sank the US cruiser Savannah. An Allied hospital ship, two merchant
vessels and 20 other craft were also sunk, mostly by radio-controlled bomb
attacks.30 Yet in the two weeks after the landing in Normandy, the radio
controlled bombs sank only two Allied vessels and damaged seven. Torpedoes sank three ships and damaged two more. In contrast to the Mediterranean, where large Allied ships had been disabled or sunk, the largest Allied
vessel to be lost from air attack off the Normandy coast was a destroyer.
One reason behind the poor showing of X Air Corps’ radio-controlled
bombs during OVERLORD was the increased effectiveness of Allied electronic warfare capability that had been developed after the Salerno campaign. In late 1943 parts of an unexploded radio-guided bomb had been
recovered in the Mediterranean and carefully examined by Allied intelligence. The likely bomb guidance radio frequencies were determined from
recovered radio crystals and when the same weapons were used over the
Normandy beaches the Allies were ready for them. Aircraft that broke
through the Allied night defences faced an impressive electronic barrage by
several vessels ready to jam the signals.31
The conventional bombers of IX Air Corps fared worse than the units of
X Air Corps. Poorly-trained German bomber crews ﬂying at night were
especially dependent on assistance from German ground radar and navigation aids to get to the target. However, the thorough Allied pre-invasion air
offensive had effectively knocked out over 80 per cent of the German coastal
radar sites before the invasion.32 In case the Luftwaffe managed to get their
radars working and use their communications effectively, the RAF had
prepared a strong force with effective counter-measures to oppose them –
an entire group of 100 bombers equipped to conduct electronic warfare.
On top of the electronic warfare defences the Allied ﬂeet and ground forces
were well defended by anti-aircraft guns and several squadrons of night
ﬁghters that kept up a constant patrol over the embarkation sites. On
D-Day, anti-aircraft units of the US 9th Air Force, the IXth Air Defence
Command, a two-brigade strong anti-aircraft command, started moving
ashore and the Allied defences were constantly reinforced just as the
Luftwaffe’s attack capabilities decreased.
IX Air Corps pilots sent back hair-raising reports on the strength of the
Allied night ﬁghter opposition. One Luftwaffe bomber ofﬁcer commented:
‘Every raid we made, four attacks by night ﬁghters!’33 From the start, the
Luftwaffe’s bomber forces suffered a heavy loss rate in every attempt to
attack Allied shipping. At dusk on D-Day there was the famous incident of
Spitﬁres of 410 Squadron shooting down six Ju 88s over Sword Beach. Ulf
Balke’s story of Luftwaffe Bomber Wing 2 (Kampfgeschwader 2) (KG 2)
tells the story of the steady attrition faced by the Luftwaffe’s conventional
bomber units over Normandy. On the night of 6–7 June KG 2 lost three
planes. On 8/9 June one aircraft was lost and on 10/11 June three planes
were lost. Between 6 and 29 June this one wing lost a total of 31 bombers –

138

James S. Corum

most of its operational aircraft.34 Interestingly, fully half of the German
bomber losses were not from Allied ﬂak or ﬁghters but from landing accidents or damage from German ﬂak. The poorly-trained bomber crews were
not proﬁcient in the always tricky procedure of night landings and poor
navigation skills led the bomber units over areas where the Luftwaffe’s ﬂak
units had not been warned of the presence of Luftwaffe bomber operations.
Other factors that limited the effectiveness of Luftﬂotte 3’s bomber force
were the lack of aerial reconnaissance units to ﬁnd targets for the bombers
and the generally poor intelligence provided by the Luftwaffe staff on Allied
forces and shipping. The few reconnaissance planes of Luftﬂotte 3 were able
to provide only the most perfunctory information concerning the Allied dispositions. In the absence of hard information on Allied shipping and locations
of Allied ground troops, the German bomber and ﬁghter-bomber units were
simply told to attack the beachhead in the hope that, with luck, they might
hit something. German intelligence failed in other ways as well. For example,
on the night of 6 June, German E-boats of the 4th Motor Torpedo Boat
Flotilla were ordered to make torpedo attacks against Allied shipping. However, German intelligence was unable to provide the requested information
on the draft of the Allied vessels. This knowledge was vital because in lieu of
accurate data the Kriegsmarine would have to arm the torpedoes with the
less effective contact fuses rather than the more effective and more lethal
magnetic fuses because magnetic fuses could only be used at preset depths.35
Such lapses in basic tactical and operational intelligence explain how, even
when the bombers got through, they had trouble ﬁnding worthwhile targets.
Of course, the primary reason for the Luftwaffe’s performance over Normandy was the enormous degree of Allied air superiority. On D-Day alone,
the Allies together ﬂew 14,674 sorties; the German could only mount a few
hundred to oppose them.36

The campaign continues: Operation Doktor Gustav activated
On D-Day the Luftwaffe activated its plan to counter the Allied invasion:
‘Operation Dr Gustav’. Luftwaffe ﬁghter and ground attack units that
had been pushed out of Northern France by the relentless Allied attacks on
airﬁelds in the months before the invasion were now ordered to stage forward to airﬁelds in Northern France. The plan started to unravel as soon as
it was activated. Some ﬁghter units were actually shot to pieces while ﬂying
in transit. On 6 June Group III of Ground Attack Wing (Schlachtgeschwader)
4 with 50 FW 190s was ordered to ﬂy from Southern France to the
St Quentin airﬁeld where it would be better placed to attack the Allied
landings. One of the squadrons, the 9th, was intercepted en route by Allied
ﬁghters with ﬁve of the Luftwaffe ﬁghters falling in ﬂames.37 Throughout
the campaign the Allies had a tremendous operational advantage in the
Luftwaffe message trafﬁc intercepted by Ultra. Decrypted Luftwaffe Enigma
messages gave the RAF and AAF complete information on major German

The Luftwaffe in Normandy

139

air movements and the Allies just ‘happened’ to have ﬁghters ready to intercept en route or were ready to target their forward airﬁelds as soon as the
Luftwaffe units landed. Since Allied air power and reconnaissance was so
ubiquitous over Northern and Central France, and since the German airﬁelds within 150 miles of the Normandy coast were under fairly constant
attack, the Germans failed to notice that airﬁelds receiving Luftwaffe reinforcements came in for a bit of extra punishment.
The German airﬁeld system in France was extensive, well-camouﬂaged
and hardened with aircraft placed in revetments, bunkers or in carefully concealed positions far from the runway. While all of these measures ensured
that the Allied campaign against the Luftwaffe airﬁelds destroyed relatively
few aircraft on the ground (many of the aircraft claimed by the Allied ﬁghter
planes were dummies or worthless obsolete aircraft expressly set out to
attract the attention of British and American ﬁghters), repair facilities and
fuel storage took a constant beating. With the airﬁeld facilities under regular
punishment, the Luftwaffe units deployed to France had a very low operational rate during the whole Normandy campaign.
Within days of the Allied landing, over 800 ﬁghter planes were sent to
France from the Reich Air Defence force. The Luftwaffe also scraped up
its last available bombers to go to France. X Air Corps received 45 JU
88 torpedo bombers as reinforcements and IX Air Corps received an
additional 90 bombers.38 Half of the ﬁghter planes deployed to France were
immediately allocated to the II Air Corps for ground attack missions.
Although the FW 190 was a superb ground attack aircraft, all of the pilots
deployed from the Reich were trained (minimally) as interceptor pilots and
none had received any training in ground attack. Ground attack missions
were also regularly intercepted by Allied ﬁghters and German units were
forced to drop their bombs prematurely and abort their missions. Allied air
superiority was so overwhelming and the ground attack missions of the
Luftwaffe so ineffectual that on 12 June II Air Corps ceased ground attack
missions and all of its surviving FW 190s reverted to a pure interceptor role.
In an extraordinary effort, by 9 June the Luftwaffe was able to ﬂy more
than 500 sorties a day against the Allied forces in Normandy, though even
this effort achieved minimal results. German ﬁghter aircraft had little effective ground control thanks to the Allies’ destruction of most of the radar
sites in France. Moreover, because of little air reconnaissance or accurate
intelligence, Luftﬂotte 3’s ﬁghter units were reduced to ﬂying ﬁghter sweeps
in the general direction of the Allied beachhead. This was ﬁne for the RAF
and AAF as they could regularly intercept the Luftwaffe sweeps and inﬂict
a high daily attrition on the Germans.
A major part of the Luftwaffe’s anti-shipping offensive was to carry out
extensive aerial mining of the sea approaches to the invasion beaches. Aerial
mining had been used against the Allied landings in Salerno and Anzio –
but the Luftwaffe planned for a much larger campaign when the Allies landed
in France. The Germans had a superb, new naval mine in production in

140

James S. Corum

1944, the ‘oyster mine’, which reﬂected a major advance in technology and
would cause the Allies a good many headaches in the campaign. The oyster
mines worked on hydrostatic pressure and were thus much more difﬁcult
to detect and sweep than other mines. The change in water pressure by the
movement of a large vessel armed the mine, which was then detonated by a
conventional acoustic or magnetic trigger. There was, in fact, no method to
safely sweep the mines once they were delivered. The Luftwaffe decided it
was too risky to use the mines against Allied shipping before the invasion in
case the Allies should manage to acquire an intact mine and develop countermeasures. Instead, the Luftwaffe built up a large stockpile of the mines
and prepared to launch a mining campaign the moment the invasion began.39
A mining campaign also made a good deal of sense, given the state of training of the German bomber force. It was a lot easier for the poorly trained
pilots of Luftﬂotte 3 to ﬁnd an area of water near the beachhead, drop the
mines and run for home than it was to carry out an accurate night-time
bomb run against an allied ship.
Because IX and X Air Corps’ valiant effort to drop torpedoes and bombs
on the Allied ﬂeet showed few results, the German bomber force was
relegated to less risky minelaying missions after 12 June. The Luftwaffe’s
minelaying operations went on almost nightly through the whole campaign.
By 6 July, more than 600 of these mines had been dropped.40 The oyster
mines sank ﬁve warships and four other ships off the British beaches
between 22 and 29 June. In the American Utah Beach sector, four destroyers
and two minesweepers were sunk and 25 other vessels were damaged in the
ﬁrst ten days of the mining campaign.41 The mere presence of oyster mines
hampered Allied shipping operations as ships could not safely travel faster
than four or ﬁve knots in areas where mines had been sown or where mining
was suspected. By August, the Luftwaffe had sown over 4,000 mines on the
sea approaches of Normandy.
In June–July 1944 the Third Air Fleet’s mining campaign was far more
successful than its bombing attacks. However, the price was high and every
mission had to ﬁght its way through Allied night ﬁghters and anti-aircraft
capability. If the Germans came in high, they would certainly be spotted by
the radars of the Allied night ﬁghters; if they came in very low they were
vulnerable to Allied anti-aircraft ﬁre. To avoid the Allied air and ground
defences the Luftwaffe bombers could try to get over the Allied shipping
lanes in poor weather – but this greatly increased the possibility of a crash
or landing accident by the mostly inexperienced pilots. In any case, attrition
of the bomber force was constant and at the end of the Normandy campaign several bomber wings were simply disbanded as there were not enough
replacement bombers or crews to man what had once been the primary
force of the Luftwaffe.
Through the summer of 1944 the Luftwaffe carried out a maximum effort.
In June 1944 over 1,100 aircraft were sent from the Reich to reinforce
Luftﬂotte 3 and most were quickly lost with few results to show from the

The Luftwaffe in Normandy

141

effort. From 6 to 30 June, Luftﬂotte 3 and Air Fleet Reich ﬂew 13,829 sorties and lost 1,181 aircraft from all causes. Indeed, June was the bloodiest
month for the Luftwaffe in all of 1944.42

German ﬂak operations
In contrast to the aerial actions the ground-based Luftwaffe ﬂak operations
in the spring and summer of 1944 were fairly effective and inﬂicted serious
losses on the RAF and USAAF. During the Allied pre-invasion bombing
campaign the Luftwaffe, fully aware of the Allied targeting strategies, emplaced heavy ﬂak defences around the obvious targets such as vital bridges,
railyards, major airﬁelds and military command centres. Luftwaffe airﬁeld
units were also equipped with extra ﬂak guns for defence. In the spring of
1944 the Germans, knowing the propensity of Allied ﬁghter bombers to
make low-level attacks on Luftwaffe airﬁelds, set up numerous ‘ﬂak traps’
on French airﬁelds equipped with decoy or derelict aircraft sitting on
runways in order to bring Allied ﬁghters straight into the ﬁre of several
rapid-ﬁring 20 or 37mm ﬂak guns.43 The US 9th Air Force’s accounts of the
Normandy air campaign indicate that it was a rare for American air units to
even see a Luftwaffe ﬁghter but that ﬂak opposition was extremely heavy
and led to constant attrition of aircraft and crew. Between April and July of
1944, the medium bombers of the 9th Air Force took a monthly attrition
rate of 10–15 per cent – virtually all losses caused by ﬂak.44 By June and
July 1944, 9th Air Force medical ofﬁcers commented on the relatively large
number of psychological casualties caused by the high intensity of the
9th Air Force bomber operations and by the stress of constantly ﬂying in
a highly lethal ﬂak environment.45
During June 1944, the RAF and USAAF lost 1,564 aircraft over France
and Germany, with the majority of losses over France caused by ﬂak. Indeed,
June was the month of maximum effort by both the German and American
air forces in 1944. The attrition rate imposed by the German ﬂak forces in
the spring and in June ﬁnally led to a reduction of Allied air activity in July
and August. Because losses were heavier than planned for, the air units that
had borne the brunt of the pre-invasion air campaign needed a rest. So in
July, with air superiority assured and the interdiction campaign working well,
the British and Americans were able to reduce the number of air sorties over
France by 20 to 25 per cent. The US 9th Air Force reduced its daily bomber
sortie rate from a ﬁgure of 400 in May and June to 270 in July, while from
June to July the daily ﬁghter-bomber sortie rate fell from 1,000 to 750.46

German ‘wonder weapons’ in the campaign
The Luftwaffe employed several of its newest ‘wonder weapons’ in the
Normandy campaign. New and high-tech weapons usually look wonderful
in theory and sometimes look very good in tests. However, real operations

142

James S. Corum

often show up the ﬂaws in the concepts and this was certainly the case for
the Luftwaffe’s special weapons in Normandy. The ﬁrst to be employed was
the Mistel, an obsolete Ju 88 bomber armed with an 8,400 lb warhead and
equipped to ﬂy by remote control. The crewless Ju 88 was mated with a
manned Me 109, which was attached above it. The Me 109 pilot ﬂew both
aircraft off the ground and, upon reaching attack altitude and position,
released the Ju 88 and guided the bomber into an Allied warship using a
simple joystick remote-control device. Theoretically, the Mistel should have
been quite lethal. In actuality, the concept worked poorly. The Mistel was
slow, not very manoeuvrable and was not survivable in a high-threat environment. The Luftwaffe carried out a few Mistel sorties against the Allied
shipping in June and July, all of which failed.
The ﬁrst sortie was typical of the Mistel programme’s performance.
On 24 June a ﬂight of ﬁve Mistels guided by pilots of the 4th Group of
Kampfgeschwader 101 were on their way to attack Allied shipping off the
British sector. They were intercepted by Allied night ﬁghters long before
they reached effective release range and the Mistel controllers quickly
released their lumbering bombers to crash in the countryside early and
retreated to their bases.47
Another wonder weapon upon which the Germans placed considerable
hope was the Me 262 jet ﬁghter. This aircraft had just come into mass production but, by the time of the invasion, the Luftwaffe had few pilots who
were even minimally qualiﬁed to ﬂy the jet. There were also difﬁculties with
deploying the Me 262 to France. The Me 262 needed much longer runways
than conventional ﬁghters due to much higher landing and take-off speeds.
The short range of the Me 262 also required that it be deployed to forward
airﬁelds, but by this time all of the improved runways in France and the
Low Countries were under constant attack by the Allied air forces. Despite
these problems, nine Me 262s of KG51 were ordered to France on 20 July
1944 – even though the unit reported only four pilots were even moderately
competent in the aircraft.48 A few aircraft of this unit did take to the skies over
France, ﬂying patrols and apparently missing the notice of any of Allied air
units. In any case, just getting the early jets into the air was a big problem
for the Luftwaffe. In the summer of 1944 the average lifespan of a jet turbine
engine was about eight hours and the Luftwaffe repair and supply services
were too hard-pressed to effectively support the jet maintenance. Since the
Luftwaffe’s airﬁelds were under constant attack, the Me 262 detachment
was forced to change airﬁelds constantly. This left the mechanics and motor
convoys of spare engines and parts to drive all over France in order to keep
up with their unit – all the while being constantly bombed and strafed by
Allied ﬁghter-bombers. After a month of intermittent operations in France
the Me 262s were evacuated to Belgium and then to Germany, but not before
one of the ground support convoys of KG 51 got lost, took a wrong turn
and was captured by Allied forces, thus delivering a new jet turbine engine
to the Allies.49

The Luftwaffe in Normandy

143

Conclusion
While the Luftwaffe had no hope of winning even local or temporary air
superiority over the Normandy beachhead it still could have waged a much
more effective campaign against the Allied landings. The greatest German
mistake, and one that saved the lives of many Allied troops and sailors, was
Hitler’s decision to throw away his last reserve of bombers in meaningless
attacks on British morale. Had the more than 300 Luftwaffe bombers lost
over England in early 1944 been available to drop mines off the Normandy
coast, Allied shipping losses would have been dramatically increased.
The Luftwaffe’s operations also demonstrate the mistake of relying too
much on unproven ‘wonder weapons’ to redress an imbalance in numbers.
Between September 1943, when the weapons were ﬁrst employed, and
June 1944 the British and Americans learned to adapt to the German radiocontrolled bombs and developed effective counter-measures, and these
weapons therefore proved much less effective than they had been in the
Mediterranean campaigns. The ﬁrst use of jets in combat operations was a
complete washout. The Luftwaffe’s Me 262s claimed not one Allied plane
while deployed to France. The Mistel programme, which looked awfully
good in the concept phase, proved a waste of effort as the weapon could
only be effectively used in a benign air environment – something that the air
over Normandy wasn’t in 1944. It is notable that the most effective and
lethal technology employed by the Luftwaffe was a small improvement in a
weapon that had been around for a long time – the naval mine. The difﬁculty of sweeping the oyster mines with their hydrostatic pressure arming
device made life difﬁcult for the RAF and USAAF in the summer of 1944
and potentially could have seriously hindered Allied shipping operations if
more had been employed.
In the end, the most effective contribution by the Luftwaffe to the German defence of Normandy was the ﬂak force. While German air units were
ineffective, the Luftwaffe proved that ﬂak forces could, by themselves, inﬂict
a heavy attrition rate upon enemy aircraft. Perhaps more importantly, the
Luftwaffe’s ﬂak units, especially the 88mm medium guns with their exceptional tank-killing capability, played an important role in making the German defence of Normandy such a tough nut to crack. When the campaign
began, the Luftwaffe ordered extra ﬂak units to the front in France and an
additional 140 heavy and 50 light ﬂak batteries were dispatched.50 The effectiveness of the German ﬂak units in the ground battles is mentioned in most
of the major histories of the Normandy campaign. In mid-June the 88mm
guns of Flak Corps II helped hold British armour back from the approaches
to Caen.51 In the July battles, Luftwaffe ﬂak regiments played a prominent
role in support of the 1st SS Panzer Division and other German divisions
deployed to halt the British offensives.52 There is much more to say about
the employment of the Luftwaffe’s ﬂak units in the Normandy campaign,
their important role in the German defence and their eventual destruction as

144

James S. Corum

the Allies drove the Germans in disorder across the Seine. If there is a major
issue in the Normandy campaign that merits a fresh look and its own book,
the role of III Flak Corps in the ground battle is certainly it.

Notes
1 General Walter Warlimont, Inside Hitler’s Headquarters 1939–1945 (Novato:
Presidio Press, 1964), p. 424.
2 For an overview of the Luftwaffe’s campaign against the Allied landings in
Sicily see James Corum, ‘To Stop Them on the Beaches: Luftwaffe Operations
Against the Allied Landings in Italy’, RAF Air Power Review, 7(2), summer 2004,
pp. 47–68.
3 USAF HRA Monograph: Karl Gundlach, Die Einﬂuss der allierten Luftangriffe
der Bodenorganisation der deutsche Luftwaffe im Westen, 1944, pp. 14–18. Edward
Westermann, Flak: German Anti-Aircraft Defenses 1914–1945 (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2001), p. 259.
4 For a good summary of the Luftwaffe campaign in Normandy see Horst Boog,
‘Strategischer Luftkrieg in Europa und Reichsluftverteidigung 1943–1944’,
in Horst Boog, Gerhard Krebs, Detlef Vogel (eds) Das Deutsche Reich und
der Zweite Weltkrieg (Stuttgart: Deutsche VerlagsAnstalt, 2001), pp. 3–418. On
Normandy operations see pp. 288–97.
5 See Steven McFarland and Wesley Newton, To Command the Sky (Washington,
DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1991) and Donald Caldwell, JG 26-Top Guns
of the Luftwaffe (New York: Orion Books, 1991).
6 Caldwell, JG 26, pp. 231, 241.
7 The United States Strategic Bombing Survey, The Defeat of the German Air Force
(1946), pp. 19–20.
8 Ibid.
9 Westermann, pp. 259–61.
10 General Hans von Rohden, Die deutsche Luftwaffe im Angesicht der Invasion
1944, Unpublished MS in Air University Library, Maxwell AFB (1947).
11 Information obtained from copies of service records in Karl Friedrich Hildebrandt
(ed.) Die Generäle der deutschen Luftwaffe 1935–1945, vols. 1–3 (Biblio Verlag
Osnabruck, 1992).
12 von Rohden, Die deutsche Luftwaffe im Angesicht der Invasion 1944.
13 Ibid.
14 Rolf Schabel, Die Illusion der Wunderwaffen (Munich: Oldenburg Verlag, 1994),
p. 141. Also see Basil Collier, The Defence of the United Kingdom (London:
HMSO, 1957), p. 512.
15 von Rohden, Die deutsche Luftwaffe im Angesicht der Invasion 1944.
16 Helmut Hieber (ed.) Hitler’s Lagebesprechungen. Die Protokollfragmente seiner
militaerischen Konferenzen 1942/1945 (Stuttgart: Deutscher Verlag, 1962), p. 296.
17 See Matthew Cooper, The German Air Force 1933–1945 (London: Janes, 1981),
pp. 332–3, and General Hans von Rohden, Die deutsche Luftwaffe im Angesicht
der Invasion 1944.
18 Interview with Hansgeorg Wilberg, September 1993. Wilberg received his pilot
training in multi-engine aircraft in 1943. He entered combat as a Ju 188 pilot
in late 1943, with a little over 100 hours’ total ﬂight time. He maintains the
only reason he survived is that he was deployed as a reconnaissance pilot to
the Eastern Front, where the air opposition was not nearly as effective as on the
Western Front.

The Luftwaffe in Normandy

145

19 Interview by the author with Major General a.D. Dietrich Peltz, 14 June 1994.
20 For example, only 30 tons of bombs, out of 500 tons dropped, actually hit
the target city of London in the ﬁrst raid on 21 January 1944. See Rolf Schabel,
Die Illusion der Wunderwaffen, p. 172.
21 Matthew Cooper, The German Air Force, pp. 332–3.
22 Alfred Price, ‘The IX Air Corps’, in The D-Day Encyclopedia (New York: Simon
& Schuster, 1994), pp. 390–1.
23 Interview with Major General Dietrich Peltz, 14 June 1994.
24 Karl Gundelach, Effect of the Allied Air Attacks on the Ground Echelon of the
Luftwaffe in Western Europe in 1944 (USAF HRA Monograph, 1956), pp. 18–29.
25 Hans Ring and Werner Girbig, Jagdgeschwader 27 (Stuttgart: Motorbuchverlag,
1991), p. 295.
26 General Beppo Schmid, The Employment of the German Luftwaffe Against the Allies
in the West 1943–1945, USAF HRA Doc. K113.107-58. pp. 11–12. Matthew
Cooper, The German Air Force 1933–1945, p. 335.
27 Matthew Cooper, The German Air Force 1933–1945, p. 335.
28 The D-Day Encyclopedia, pp. 390–1.
29 Ibid., p. 459.
30 See Martin Blumenson, Salerno to Cassino (Washington, DC: US Army Center
for Military History, 1993), pp. 147–8, and Brigadier C.J. Maloney, The Mediterranean and Middle East, vol. 5 (London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce, 1973),
pp. 312, 322, 325.
31 Alfred Price, The Last Year of the Luftwaffe (London W.J. Williams, 1991), p. 58.
32 W.A. Jacobs, ‘Operation Overlord’, in B.J. Cooling (ed.) Case Studies in the
Achievement of Air Superiority (Washington, DC: Center for Air Force History,
1990), p. 305.
33 Alexander McKee, Last Round Against Rommel: Battle for the Normandy Beachhead (New York: Signet Books, 1964), p. 276.
34 For a detailed view of the campaign from the German side see Ulf Balke, Der
Luftkrieg in Europa, vol. 2 (Bechtermuenz Verlag: Augsburg, 1997). On losses see
pp. 492–3.
35 Interview with Lieutenant Dietrich Bludau, 8 June 1990. Bludau was with the
4th MTB Flotilla, based in Le Havre, and took part in the naval engagements of
6–7 June as an e-boat commander.
36 Matthew Cooper, The German Air Force 1933–1945, p. 335.
37 Alfred Price, The Last Year of the Luftwaffe, p. 57.
38 Von Rohden, Die deutsche Luftwaffe im Angesicht der Invasion 1944.
39 Hans Ring and Werner Girbig, Jagdgeschwader 27, p. 295.
40 Theodore Wilson (ed.) D-Day 1944 (Kansas: University Press of Kansas, 1994),
pp. 107, 116.
41 Hans Ring and Werner Girbig, Jagdgeschwader 27, p. 156.
42 Major Stangl, ‘Operationsfuehrung und Taktik der Englisch /Amerikanische
Luftwaffe vom Absprungbasis’. 8th Section (Luftwaffe General Staff, Study of
Allied Operations Against the Germans in France), 24 September 1944, in USAF
HRA doc. K113.60.
43 When the Americans attacked the German airﬁeld at Valence, France on 6 June,
a derelict old Italian Caproni 3-motor bomber had been set out as a target for
them. See Karl Gundelach, Effect of the Allied Air Attacks, p. 52.
44 USAF HRA. Report of 323 Medium Bomb Group. Ofﬁce of the Surgeon.
Report on Casualties 29 Jan. 1945. Doc. 5-1946-28.
45 Ibid.
46 USAF HRA, Historical Summary of Ninth Air Force Operations 1944–1945.

146

James S. Corum

47 William Green, Warplanes of the Third Reich (New York: Doubleday, 1971),
p. 478.
48 Wolfgang Dierich, Kampfgeschwader 51 ‘Edelweiss’ (Stuttgart: Motorbuch Verlag,
1991), p. 230.
49 Ibid., pp. 230– 4.
50 Westermann, p. 260.
51 Major L.F. Ellis, Victory in the West – The Battle of Normandy, vol. 1 (London:
HMSO, 1962), p. 265.
52 Ibid., pp. 311, 332.

11 Arthur Tedder and the
transportation plans
Vincent Orange

When Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder landed in England on 20 January 1944, to take up his appointment as Deputy Supreme Allied Commander to General Dwight D. Eisenhower, he ended 38 months of service in
the Mediterranean theatre, broken only by two visits to London that lasted
a total of 18 days. He therefore had plenty of sand in his shoes. So, too, had
Eisenhower, Lieutenant General Carl A. Spaatz and those colleagues they
brought with them to England. The future would show that this gritty sign
of experience at the sharp end of war justiﬁed them in imposing their opinions on those who were ‘sandless’ and, consequently, ‘not one of us’.1
Tedder was ‘an anomaly among RAF senior leaders’, thought Williamson
Murray, in that he was ‘consistently willing to take a joint service perspective
rather than follow the narrow prejudices of his own service’.2 He had created
in the Mediterranean a balanced air force that was skilled at interrupting
enemy supply lines in addition to winning air superiority and offering close
support to soldiers. John Terraine agreed. His handling of that air force,
together with his achievements before and after D-Day, made him ‘the outstanding airman of the war’. In Terraine’s opinion, ‘We dwell too much on
D-Day and the Normandy beaches. We should think more about what
made D-Day possible’: air superiority and Tedder’s ﬁrst transportation plan.3
We also dwell too much, I believe, on the Luftwaffe’s weakness by 1944,
as if that made life cushy for airmen while poor old brownjobs slugged it
out against poor old greyjobs in the real war down below. Aircraft were
vulnerable to ground ﬁre, bad weather and, only too often, the courage of
their crews, determined to press home attacks at all costs. During the ﬁrst
eight months of 1944, no fewer than 6,000 aircraft and nearly 29,000 airmen
were lost.4
In addition to advocating his plan, against persistent opposition from
many quarters, service and civilian, Tedder had learned in Cairo, even before
Pearl Harbor, that this was a coalition war. More exactly, a war in which
the British Empire and the USA gradually became effective allies, with
the Soviet Union as an uncooperative co-belligerent. By 1944, he was more
acutely aware than many British ofﬁcers in all three services, quite apart
from xenophobic politicians, journalists, broadcasters and civilians, that

148

Vincent Orange

the USA was the senior partner in the alliance. That awareness enabled him
to win support, however grudging, from those of his American friends who
were thoroughly ‘sanded’.
Like the rest of us, Tedder at times wanted to be someone else: in his
case, a scientist, which helps to explain what drew him to Solly Zuckerman.5
This particular scientist shared his malicious delight in waspish one-liners,
delivered deadpan. But Tedder also had a gift for manipulating dogged
opponents (and they come no more dogged than Spaatz, commanding the
American heavy day bombers, and Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Harris,
commanding the British heavy night bombers) into reluctantly conceding
that his arguments in favour of impeding German access to Normandy’s
beaches before D-Day might possibly have some merit.
Zuckerman, already an eminent zoologist by 1939, got into war work
in England by studying the effects of exploding bombs on humans, animals
and structures. He arrived in Algiers in March 1943, where he began to
frame a bombing strategy. Tedder invented for him in May an impressive
title – ‘Chief Scientiﬁc Ofﬁcer’ – and graded him as a Group Captain. In
July, when the Allies were safely ashore in Sicily, Tedder arranged for
Zuckerman to examine the damage done by bombing in order to use air
power more efﬁciently in the forthcoming invasion of Italy. He concluded,
from a study of railway records, that concentrated attacks on certain key
points – those regulating major trafﬁc routes, servicing and repairing locomotives and wagons – would impede large-scale movement of troops with
heavy equipment. Tedder and Zuckerman then formulated, and reﬁned in
the light of experience, a coherent bombing strategy that proved of great
value during the rest of the war. Yet it generated opposition from ofﬁcers
and civilians, British and American, of such bitter intensity that neither
man ever forgot or forgave those responsible. Operation OVERLORD could
not succeed unless the Allies ruled the skies above the landing areas and
inhibited enemy movement toward those areas, but Tedder had noticed
the ability of German soldiers in the Western Desert, Tunisia, Sicily and
Italy to ﬁght ﬁercely without either air support or reliable lines of supply
and reinforcement. These were unpromising omens for OVERLORD, where
much larger enemy forces would be encountered, with access to a much
denser rail, road, river and canal network. Moreover, Tedder had no hope
of unstinting support from the heavy bomber commanders for his ﬁrst
assault upon that network.
Spaatz grossly exaggerated the bomber’s capacity for destruction. On
20 November 1943, for instance, he assured Harry Hopkins (President
Roosevelt’s special adviser) that once the weather cleared over Germany
next spring, thus allowing continuous operations from England and Italy,
Germany would surrender in three months. Neither the transportation
plan, nor OVERLORD itself, need ever be mounted. These opinions were
seconded by Harris in even more extravagant language: ‘to divert Bomber
Command from its true function’, he asserted, ‘would lead directly to

Arthur Tedder and the transportation plans
6

149

disaster’. In order to win from these strong, stubborn men (supported by
large, devoted staffs) a measure of cooperation, Tedder would need all those
qualities that Zuckerman saw in him of ‘patience, tact, cunning and political
sense’, together with Eisenhower’s backing, who had ‘inﬁnite faith in the
judgment that he quietly exercised in the background’.7
Advised by Tedder, Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Portal (Chief of the Air
Staff ) drafted a directive on 5 March that reconciled Eisenhower’s demand
for complete control of the strategic air forces with Churchill’s desire, backed
by many airmen, that Operation POINTBLANK (Anglo-American raids
on Germany) should continue. Although these air forces would remain under
the command of Spaatz and Harris, Eisenhower was able to rule on 14 April
that they would ‘receive their general directives’ from Tedder: ‘an historic
event by which a supreme air command was at last created’.8 As Harris later
wrote, ‘I recall only one period of calm sailing [in all his time at Bomber
Command] when all went well, when all pulled together . . . and that was
during the all too short period when Eisenhower was Admiral and Tedder
the Captain on the bridge’.9 I must emphasise here that Tedder and Harris
were not friends and had never served together. They had disagreed very
sharply in 1942–3 when Tedder retained Bomber Command crews in the
Mediterranean, and just as sharply over the transportation plan. Yet Tedder
won him over. The Royal Air Force has had few ofﬁcers more difﬁcult to
move than Harris, and few more capable of managing that feat than Tedder.
Admiral Eisenhower’s ‘Captain’ worked hard to implement a plan which,
he later wrote, ‘was to run like a thread through all the operations up to
the end of the war’: a thread sometimes tangled by ‘deliberate intrigue and
sometimes by ignorance and misunderstanding’.10 On Zuckerman’s advice,
he proposed a systematic attack on the numerous railways, roads, bridges,
rivers and canals which the enemy could use to move reinforcements into
the invasion area. Railways were particularly vulnerable because nearly a
third of the pre-war locomotives had been transferred to the Eastern Front,
‘including most of the more powerful types, suitable for heavy hauling.
Also, there had been little or no repair work during the war’. The tactical air
forces would certainly play their part, but the main servicing and repair
centres could only be disrupted by heavy bombing.11
The attack should be prolonged for as many weeks as possible, in order
to exhaust repair squads and use up their materials. If the Allies were not to
be swept back into the sea shortly after D-Day, the German build-up must
be delayed and disorganised. The plan was so arranged that Calais, rather
than Normandy, seemed to be its focus.12 It was all the more essential in
the light of the British army’s weakness in training, leadership, equipment,
numbers and the fears so often expressed by Churchill and his top soldier
(Field Marshal Sir Alan Brooke) of a massacre on the beaches.13
A number of ﬂuent civilian pundits, American and British, many of them
academics over-stimulated by their ﬁrst brush with the real world, examined
Tedder’s plan and condemned it. Although ignorant of the actual workings

150

Vincent Orange

of transport systems (to say nothing of military operations), they argued
that the systems available to the Germans in France and Belgium were too
large and complex to be seriously wrecked in time to help the ﬁeld armies.14
Encouraged by Spaatz, they advocated an ‘oil plan’, without realising the
difﬁculty day bombers, lightly loaded because they were operating far from
their English or Italian bases, would face in attempting to destroy widelydispersed, well-defended and carefully-camouﬂaged oil targets.15 Scepticism
about the destructive power of American ‘precision’ bombing was justiﬁed.
On 10 January 1944, for example, Spaatz advised General Henry H. Arnold
(head of the USAAF) to avoid the accurate term ‘blind bombing’ in press
handouts and speak instead of ‘overcast bombing technique’ or ‘bombing
with navigational devices over cloud’.16
On 25 March, Portal summoned everyone who mattered to a grand meeting which was intended to settle the argument, once and for all. Spaatz
admitted that his oil plan could have no immediate effect, certainly not in
time to help soldiers establish themselves ashore. Eisenhower therefore backed
Tedder because victory, he believed, depended on ‘the plodding doughfoot’
taking and holding ground. Spaatz left the meeting apparently defeated,
but actually ‘jubilant and overjoyed’17 on being assured that Tedder (whom
he respected) would be ‘directing’ the heavy bombers and not Air Chief
Marshal Sir Trafford Leigh-Mallory (whom he did not).
Leigh-Mallory, appointed in 1943 to command the newly-formed Allied
Expeditionary Air Force, held an important position in what Spaatz called
the ‘lousy organisation’ devised to employ air power in OVERLORD.18 It
was an unwise appointment. His record over the past ﬁve years as a ﬁghter
commander was poor; he lacked experience in handling aircraft other than
ﬁghters; he knew nothing about inter-Allied relations; his opinion that air
superiority might not be won until D-Day alarmed ofﬁcers who had sweated
through the campaigns in Sicily and Italy; his assertion that the heavy bomber
should be regularly employed as a battleﬁeld weapon was rejected by many,
especially Spaatz and Harris; he was ‘sandless, not one of us’; and he had
an abrasive, pompous manner. Tedder had disliked him since their undergraduate days in Cambridge, he distrusted his judgement, and had grown
wary of his ambition since 1940. Leigh-Mallory did not formally leave his
command until October, but by then Tedder, Harris and their American
friends had long since marginalised him.19
Spaatz was also pleased by the decision of 25 March because he knew
that whatever Harris might assert or write (in his colourful way), he too
respected Tedder and obeyed speciﬁc orders. In fact, British night bombers,
carrying far heavier loads than American day bombers, did most of the
work, while Spaatz had enough bombers on hand both to appease Tedder
and satisfy his own determination to hit targets in Germany.
After that meeting, Portal informed Churchill that ‘very heavy’ civilian
casualties would be ‘unavoidable’ when Tedder’s plan was implemented.
Churchill, who had overlooked this obvious consequence of a major assault

Arthur Tedder and the transportation plans

151

on occupied Europe, asked Lord Cherwell, his scientiﬁc and technical adviser,
to comment. The noble lord asserted, with his usual conﬁdence, that as
many as 40,000 civilians might be killed, a further 120,000 were likely to be
gravely injured, and the plan would fail anyway. Bomber Command experts
agreed, claiming that 80–100,000 casualties might result.20
Churchill thereupon arranged a string of meetings, ‘midnight follies’ as
Zuckerman called them, in April to reconsider a plan which airmen were
already carrying out. It soon became clear that the assertions of Cherwell
and Bomber Command were grossly exaggerated and that most French and
Belgian civilians understood that their transport networks must be attacked.
But Churchill’s opposition did not weaken, nor did Tedder waver in the face
of the great man’s hostility. ‘You are piling up an awful lot of hatred’, he
snapped at Tedder on 3 May. ‘You will smear the good name of the Royal
Air Force across the world’.21
Advised by Tedder, Eisenhower responded to Churchill the next day,
2 May. The entire campaign, he said, was based on the assumption that the
Allies’ overwhelming air power would be fully used. Otherwise, an already
hazardous enterprise must fail. French and Belgian people were now ‘slaves’
and it would be ‘sheer folly’ to abandon a carefully-considered plan to help
free them because of ‘grossly exaggerated’ casualty estimates.22 Disregarding the Supreme Commander’s unusually blunt words, Churchill invited
Roosevelt on 7 May to order the plan’s cancellation. His letter used the
word ‘slaughter’ (of civilians) four times and quoted casualty estimates
that he then knew to be false. Roosevelt, neither impressed nor deceived,
replied coldly on 11 May: he refused to intervene and Churchill grudgingly
accepted defeat on 16 May, but nearly three months later, on 10 July, one
of his nastier minutes arrived on Tedder’s desk: ‘how many Frenchmen did
you kill’ before D-Day?
Civilian casualties from attacks on rail centres before D-Day cannot
now be separated from the horrendous suffering of those helpless victims
of powerful armies and the destruction of their homes, ﬁelds, crops and
livestock after that day, but it seems that fewer than 6,000 French civilians
were certainly killed and an unknown number injured; no ﬁgures for Belgian
losses survive.23 Every raid had tragic consequences, for airmen as well as
those on the ground.24 Could more use have been made of agents working in
France for the Special Operations Executive (SOE) and members of the
Resistance movements to achieve Tedder’s goals at less cost? M.R.D. Foot,
SOE’s ofﬁcial historian, claimed that too much credit was given to what he
called ‘the photogenic allied air forces’; more was due to ‘obscure, devoted
French saboteurs’,25 but their gallant actions were too widely spread to be
immediately helpful to Allied troops bound for Normandy, and Tedder
could not reveal to SOE agents or French and Belgian resisters the focus of
his plan.26
The Transport Ministry in Berlin reported on 15 May that ‘large-scale
strategic movement of German troops by rail’ in western Europe ‘is practically

152

Vincent Orange

impossible at the present time’. A week later, on 23 May, the Germancontrolled radio station in Paris admitted ‘complete chaos’ throughout the rail
network, made worse by ‘experienced squads of saboteurs’. By 25 August,
Tedder and Zuckerman were in Paris and came into possession of daily
trafﬁc-ﬂow charts which conﬁrmed the success of their plan and convinced
them that a second plan should be made to wreck the transport network
in western Germany and, more ambitiously, to strangle the enemy’s entire
war economy.
There were, inevitably, failings in the ﬁrst plan.27 For example, a month
after D-Day, when a million men and 190,000 vehicles were ashore, and
air control was total, the Germans were still able to get enough men and
material forward to prevent a breakout for another three weeks. Bombs
do not always hit their targets, even nowadays, nor do they always explode;
darkness and bad weather have always been good friends to defenders;
and many Germans were skilful, determined and brave. ‘Crucial to their
logistic support was barge trafﬁc on the Seine – inexplicably not a major
target of Allied interdiction efforts.’28 Tedder also took too long to recognise
that the tactical air forces could shatter bridges over the Seine, Meuse and
Loire. And although he understood the importance of marshalling yards, he
overrated attacks on locomotives and the sheds where they were serviced
and repaired.
Despite such criticisms, the plan was an overall success, although neither
in conception nor execution did it require more than common sense. It was,
in fact, a perfectly obvious method of helping those landing in Normandy,
and the Allies had the air power needed to implement it, even without
wholehearted backing from the heavy bomber commanders.
The Germans, however, had in their grasp two equally obvious methods
of defeating those hoping to land in Normandy. One was the unpiloted ﬂying
bomb. Cheap to produce and difﬁcult to destroy, this weapon could have
been available in quantity long before D-Day. Fortunately, the lack of sensible direction at the top of the Reich’s chaotic structure meant that a fortune
was wasted on the V-2 (a complex rocket carrying the same explosive load)
and the V-1 appeared too late to be a disaster for the Allies, rather than a
serious problem. If hundreds of ﬂying bombs had been launched against
soldiers, trucks and tanks tightly packed into roads and ﬁelds near England’s south-eastern coasts during April and May, it seems likely that the
invasion force would have been dispersed, D-Day postponed, and the attack
on communications halted until missile-launching sites were destroyed.29
The second German means of defeating OVERLORD seems equally
obvious. Fewer than 60 German divisions were based in the west, whereas
322 lay elsewhere. Even a dozen more divisions in France and Belgium
would have cost the hard-pressed Allies much heavier losses, despite Tedder’s
best efforts. As Pete Quesada, a great American tactical air commander,
later reﬂected: ‘one’s imagination boggled at what the German army might
have done to us without Hitler working so effectively for our side’.30

Arthur Tedder and the transportation plans

153

Tedder made such a thorough job of wrecking the north’s transport
system that by August there was a clear need for access to the system, and
capacious ports, of southern France. He therefore supported Eisenhower
against Churchill and many senior British ofﬁcers in his determination to
activate Operation ANVIL/DRAGOON. Marseille and Toulon were, in fact,
essential to supply Allied forces after the Normandy breakout; there was
a need to feed into France those French divisions being formed in Italy
and North Africa; Resistance forces were numerous in the south and could
easily be supplied from the Mediterranean; ﬁnally, German forces there
were weak and poorly trained. Landings began on 15 August, Napoleon’s
birthday, and by late October the southern French ports were handling
nearly 40 per cent of all American supplies reaching Europe, and transporting them along a rail network deliberately left intact by Tedder.
The British belief that the alternative to ANVIL/DRAGOON, ‘a push
into northern Italy and into the Alps toward Austria would have gotten
anywhere, is beyond belief ’, thought Gerhard Weinberg. ‘As Stalin tried
to point out to Churchill at Teheran, there were some very high mountains
barring that route into Central Europe.’ In their opposition to ANVIL/
DRAGOON, the British showed ‘a complete disregard of logistics’, an
essential factor in military operations which inspired both Tedder’s transportation plans. He would have echoed Weinberg’s cry: ‘how did they expect
the huge armies of the Allies to be supplied without the French Mediterranean ports?’31 Marseille was ‘a logistical godsend’, agreed Williamson Murray
and Allan Millett, ‘especially since the Allies could not use the port of
Antwerp until December . . . while the French rail network up the Rhone
River valley remained intact because Allied air forces had concentrated
mostly on destruction of the French railroad network in northern, western,
and central France’. The Allies had to supply not only their own men, but
also to feed thousands of French and Belgian civilians, whose livestock and
crops had been stolen or destroyed by retreating Germans or incinerated by
‘friendly ﬁre’.32
After the Normandy breakout, Allied armies found themselves on the far
side of a ‘supply desert’ created by Tedder’s plan. Consequently, ‘No matter
how fast or how hard engineers worked to rebuild bridges and marshalling
yards’, Allied commanders faced grave difﬁculties in moving large forces
forward quickly.33 These difﬁculties meant that ‘The great arguments over a
narrow versus a broad front in the West were largely academic’, in Weinberg’s
opinion: ‘Until major ports, especially Antwerp, were operational and the
railway system was functioning at a high level of efﬁciency, there was no
prospect of a major advance against the stiffening German resistance on
either a broad or a narrow front’.34 All the more reason, then, for backing
Tedder’s second plan.
His ﬁrst plan had not isolated the Normandy battleﬁeld, but it had signiﬁcantly impeded access to it. His second plan proved even more successful,
leading to a gradual collapse of the German transport system over the

154

Vincent Orange

winter of 1944 –5. The second plan, recalled Air Chief Marshal Sir Norman
Bottomley (Deputy CAS), was ‘completely successful’ in isolating the
Rhineland: ‘Coal piled up at the pit-heads of the Ruhr and could not be
distributed. Electricity plants and gas plants began to close down; and so
did industries all over Germany’.35
That happy state took too long to achieve: ‘I feel our efforts are rather
patchwork’, Tedder complained to Portal on 25 October. ‘The various
targets (oil, cities, depots, marshalling yards, canals, factories, etc.) do not
together build up into a really comprehensive pattern’; we need ‘a common
denominator’, which is communications.36 During the war’s last winter
the effectiveness of transport bombing was consistently undervalued until
February 1945, when Oliver Lawrence (Ministry of Economic Warfare) was
obliged to admit that 20,000 commercial intercepts made weekly were left
undecrypted because he considered them worthless. ‘In effect’, his actions
‘prevented the full fury of Allied air capabilities from destroying the German transportation network before winter began, and thus they may have
extended the war by several months’.37
The Enemy Objectives Unit (a group of articulate and conﬁdent Americans based in the London embassy) declared on 11 September 1944 that
the European war would be over in October and a second transportation
plan was therefore a waste of time and effort. This ‘Happy Hypothesis’
of imminent victory was widespread before Antwerp, Arnhem and the
Ardennes jointly dispelled it, and gradually obliged reluctant minds to listen
to Tedder.38
All intelligence agencies were guilty of shaping their appreciations to
suit a strong preference for oil targets, but oil was not essential to German
industry and a concentration on communications, especially marshalling
yards, might have ended the European war months sooner. The German rail
network, aided by the inland waterway system, was vital for moving the
economy’s lifeblood: coal – ‘Six tons of coal stood behind every ton of synthetic gasoline’, calculated Alfred Mierzejewski; ‘A heavy tank could rumble
from the factory only after 115 tons of coal had been burned by a myriad
of companies to produce it’. Fortunately, this intelligence failure was offset
by the immense power of the Red Army on the Eastern Front and, in the
West, the ‘crushing superiority’ of the Allied air forces and, Mierzejewksi
argued, ‘the successful bureaucratic game played by Sir Arthur Tedder’.39
Here you may protest: did not that nice Nazi, Albert Speer, Hitler’s
Armaments Minister, state after the war that attacks on oil posed his
most serious problem? Indeed he did. Like the Bible, Albert has words of
comfort for everyone. Area bombing on the scale achieved over Hamburg
in July–August 1943, he said, would soon have compelled surrender; so, too,
would attacks on ball-bearing factories; and so, too, attacks on the transport
network.40
American pundits ﬂocked to Germany on the heels of the Allied armies,
desperate to conﬁrm their faith in precision attacks by day bombers and

Arthur Tedder and the transportation plans

155

equally desperate to denounce the heresy of area attacks by night bombers.
Their admirable energy, their unreliable methods, their contradictions of one
another and their inability to offer general conclusions produced ‘a set of
documents more often quoted than read, and more often read than understood’.41 But John Kenneth Galbraith (later to become one of the most
distinguished economic gurus of the age) upset many pundits by ﬁnding that
‘the attack on transportation, beginning in September 1944, was the most
important single cause of Germany’s ultimate economic collapse’.42
British pundits were also keen to assess the value of attacking various
targets. Tedder invited Portal’s support in March 1945 for a ﬁeld research
team, under a senior ofﬁcer and an experienced scientist. Portal needed
no persuasion. He had already told his fellow Chiefs of Staff that without
such an inquiry, ‘we shall face the grave danger of Government opinion
on the lessons of this war being based largely on propaganda, personal
recollection, or on the results of investigation by other nations’.43 Sadly,
the proposal came before Churchill in one of his perverse moods. He refused
his support and did his best to scupper it. According to Sir Michael Howard,
the Prime Minister probably referred the proposal to create a ‘Bombing
Research Mission’ to Cherwell, who would certainly have advised blocking
an inquiry that was likely to invalidate his own ‘grandiose claims’ for area
bombing.44
Despite Churchill’s opposition, there was a British inquiry. It reﬂected
the opinions of Tedder and Zuckerman and, thanks to the meticulous
critique of Sebastian Cox, its failure to give fair weight to the oil and area
offensives is now clear.45 But Cox accepted as ‘sound’ the conclusion that
Germany’s economic collapse followed from the destruction of her transport systems.46 And ‘sound’ is the ﬁnest tribute an ofﬁcial historian can pay
to any measure.
On 6 June 1964, 20 years after Eisenhower launched what he called ‘this
great and noble undertaking’,47 he wrote to Tedder: ‘I suspect your memory
goes back, as mine does, to live over again the gnawing anxieties, the realisation of unavoidable sacriﬁces and the bright hopes that ﬁlled us on D-Day
1944’. The former Supreme Commander then paid this magniﬁcent tribute
to his former deputy: ‘Your professional skill and selﬂess dedication to the
cause in which we all served will be noted by the historians of those dramatic months, but no historian could possibly be aware of the depth of my
obligation to you’.48

Notes
1 This chapter is partly based on my biography, Tedder: Quietly in Command
(London: Frank Cass, 2004), pp. 249–99.
2 Williamson Murray and Allan R. Millett, A War to be Won: Fighting the Second
World War (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000), p. 326.
3 John Terraine, ‘World War II – The Balance Sheet’, Proceedings of the Royal Air
Force Historical Society, 2 (August 1987): 26–7.

156

Vincent Orange

4 John Terraine, The Right of the Line: The Royal Air Force in the European War
(London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1985), pp. 662–3.
5 Solly Zuckerman, From Apes to Warlords: The Autobiography of Solly Zuckerman
1904–1946 (London: Hamish Hamilton, 1978), passim; Lord Zuckerman, Six
Men Out of the Ordinary (London: Peter Owen, 1992), pp. 65–97.
6 Ralph Bennett, Behind the Battle: Intelligence in the War with Germany, 1939–
1945 (London: Pimlico, 1999), p. 157.
7 Zuckerman, Six Men, pp. 79, 65.
8 Sir Charles Webster and Noble Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive Against
Germany, 1939–1945 (London: HMSO, 1961), vol. iii, pp. 20–1.
9 Henry Probert, Bomber Harris: His Life and Times (London: Greenhill Books,
2001), p. 303.
10 Lord Tedder, With Prejudice: The War Memoirs of Marshal of the Royal Air
Force Lord Tedder, GCB (London: Cassell, 1966), p. 506.
11 Air Vice-Marshal E.J. Kingston-McCloughry, ‘The Transportation Plan’, Item
16, paras 19 –22, 26–8 of Air Ministry Exercise Thunderbolt, Old Sarum, August
1947, two vols, British National Archives (BNA), formerly Public Record Ofﬁce,
AIR 8/1536.
12 Tami Davis Biddle, Rhetoric and Reality in Air Warfare: The Evolution of British
and American Ideas About Strategic Bombing, 1914–1945 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2002), pp. 236, 242–4, 253.
13 Noel Annan, Changing Enemies: The Defeat and Regeneration of Germany (London: Norton, 1995), pp. 54–7.
14 Alfred C. Mierzejewski, ‘Wheels Must Roll for Victory: Allied Air Power and the
German War Economy, 1944– 45’ (D.Phil dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 1985) and his subsequent book, The Collapse of the German
War Economy, 1944–1945 (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press,
1988), passim.
15 The transport versus oil debate is well summarised by Robert C. Ehrhart, ‘The
European Theater of Operations, 1943–1945’, in John F. Kreis (ed.) Piercing the
Fog: Intelligence and Army Air Forces Operations in World War II (Bolling AFB,
Washington, DC: Air Force History and Museums Program, 1996), pp. 208–15,
225–6 (with a clear map of Normandy’s transport network on p. 227).
16 W.W. Rostow, Pre-Invasion Bombing Strategy: General Eisenhower’s Decision of
March 25, 1944 (Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1981); Spaatz Papers,
Box 14, Library of Congress, Washington, DC.
17 Richard G. Davis, Carl A. Spaatz and the Air War in Europe (Washington, DC:
Center for Air Force History, 1993), pp. 352–3.
18 Responses to Dr Bruce Hopper, USSTAF historian, 20 May and 27 June 1945,
Spaatz Papers, Box 136, Library of Congress, Washington, DC.
19 Richard G. Davis, ‘Pointblank vs Overlord: Strategic Bombing and the Normandy Invasion’, Air Power History, 41(2): 4–6.
20 Davis, ‘Pointblank vs Overlord’, p. 10.
21 Zuckerman, Six Men, pp. 82–3; Zuckerman, Apes to Warlords, pp. 25, 246–56;
Defence Committee Minutes for April and May, BNA PREM 3/334/2–3; Tedder,
With Prejudice, pp. 521–33.
22 BNA AIR 37/1030; Alfred D. Chandler, Jr. and Stephen E. Ambrose (eds)
The Papers of Dwight David Eisenhower: The War Years (Baltimore, MD: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1970), vol. III, p. 1892.
23 Sir Charles Webster and Noble Frankland, The Strategic Air Offensive Against
Germany, 1939–1945 (London: HMSO, 1961), vol. III, pp, 37–8; ‘Effectiveness
of Air Attack against Rail Transportation in the Battle of France’, 1 June 1945:
Maxwell AFB 138.4–37; A.L. Funk, ‘Caught in the Middle: The French Population in Normandy’ in T. Wilson (ed.) D-Day, 1944 (Abilene, KS: University
Press of Kansas, 1971, 1994), pp. 238–57.

Arthur Tedder and the transportation plans

157

24 Martin Middlebrook and Chris Everitt, The Bomber Command War Diaries:
An Operational Reference Book, 1939–1945 (London: Viking Penguin, 1985),
pp. 489–520.
25 M.R.D. Foot, SOE: An Outline History of the Special Operations Executive,
1940–46 (London: BBC, 1984), p. 225.
26 Tedder Diary (in author’s possession), 12 & 25 May, 13 & 16 June 1944.
27 The issues are well summarised by John E. Fagg, ‘Pre-Invasion Operations’
in Wesley Frank Craven and James Lea Cate (eds) The Army Air Forces in
World War II (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1951, new imprint, Ofﬁce
of Air Force History, Washington, DC, 1983), vol. III, pp. 138–81.
28 Murray and Millet, War to be Won, p. 425.
29 Basil Collier, The Defence of the United Kingdom (London: HMSO, 1957),
pp. 338–9, 354 –6, 386–8; F.H. Hinsley et al. British Intelligence in the Second World
War, vol. 3, part 1 (London: HMSO, 1984), pp. 357–9; Jozef Garlinski, Hitler’s Last
Weapons: The Underground War against the V-1 and V-2 (London: Methuen, 1978),
pp. 78–80; David Irving, The Mare’s Nest (London: Granada, 1985), passim.
30 Max Hastings, Overlord: D-Day and the Battle for Normandy, 1944 (London:
Michael Joseph, 1984), p. 179; Ronald Lewin, Hitler’s Mistakes (London: Book
Club Associates, 1984), pp. 150–1; Peter Calvocoressi et al. Total War: The Causes
and Courses of the Second World War (London: Viking Penguin, 2nd edn, 1989),
p. 510; Gerhard L. Weinberg, A World at Arms: A Global History of World War
II (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), pp. 676, 685.
31 Weinberg, World at Arms, pp. 677, 725; Matthew Jones, Britain, the United States
and the Mediterranean War, 1942– 4 (London: Macmillan, 1996), pp. 138–9;
Alan F. Wilt, ‘The Summer of 1944: A Comparison of Overlord and Anvil/
Dragoon’, Journal of Strategic Studies, 4(2): 187–95.
32 Murray and Millet, War to be Won, pp. 433, 444.
33 Ibid., p. 456.
34 Weinberg, World at Arms, p. 762.
35 ÁCM Sir Norman R. Bottomley, ‘The Course of the Combined Strategic Bomber
Offensive from 14th April 1944 to the End of the European War’, item 18,
para. 29 of Air Ministry Exercise Thunderbolt, Old Sarum, August 1947, 2 vols,
BNA AIR 8/1536.
36 Mierzejewski, ‘Wheels Must Roll’, pp. 265–6.
37 Williamson Murray, ‘Retrospection’ in John F. Kreis (ed.) Piercing the Fog:
Intelligence and Army Air Forces Operations in World War II (Bolling AFB,
Washington DC: Air Force History and Museums Program, 1996), pp. 411–13;
Mierzejewski, ‘Wheels Must Roll’, pp. 410–12.
38 Annan, Changing Enemies, p. 117.
39 Mierzejewski, ‘Wheels Must Roll’, pp. 425–30; see also pp. 112–15, 137–42, 148,
158.
40 Terraine, Right of Line, pp. 547–8; Annan, Changing Enemies, p. 63.
41 Malcolm Smith, ‘The Allied Air Offensive’, Journal of Strategic Studies, 13(1): 77;
Noble Frankland, History at War (London: Giles de la Mare, 1998), pp. 64–6.
42 Biddle, Rhetoric and Reality, pp. 270–86.
43 Denis Richards, Portal of Hungerford (London: Heinemann, 1977), p. 334.
44 Michael Howard, review of The Strategic Air War Against Germany, 1939–1945:
Report of the British Bombing Survey Unit (London: Frank Cass, 1998) in The
Times Literary Supplement, 21 August 1998, p. 10.
45 Sebastian Cox, ‘An Unwanted Child – The Struggle to Establish a British Bombing Survey’, Strategic Air War, pp. xvii–li.
46 Ibid., pp. xxxvii–xxxix.
47 David Eisenhower, Eisenhower: At War, 1943–1945 (New York: Vintage Books,
1987), p. 257.
48 Eisenhower Papers, Post-PP, 1964, Box 47, Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas.

158

Peter Gray

12 Caen – the martyred city
Peter Gray

Many aspects of the air operations during World War II have attracted
their share of myths and controversy. The efﬁcacy of the strategic bombing
campaign has been debated at length with considerable attention given to
the primacy of targeting German morale and industrial capacity.1 Individual
raids such as the Dams, attacking the Tirpitz, and Dresden have also attracted
much discussion.2 It is, however, fair to say that this is not a new or even
recent phenomenon; the various policies attracted debate and controversy
both at the time and in the respective bombing surveys produced after the
end of the war.3 The ardent exponents of strategic bombing such as Air
Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Harris and his US counterpart, General Carl
Spaatz, decried any deviation of their assets from the attacks on the German heartland. Harris in particular resisted ﬁercely wasting time on what he
called ‘panacea targets’.4 This debate reached a crescendo in the run up to,
and immediate aftermath of, Operation OVERLORD – the Allied invasion
of occupied Europe in June 1944. A relatively complicated command and
control structure exacerbated the marked divergence of doctrinal (and dogmatic) priorities. The positions of senior airmen in the command chain may
have been essential for pragmatic reasons – especially where speciﬁc assets,
such as the heavy bombers, were kept separate from the force assigned to
the Supreme Allied Commander. But these issues did little to harmonise
relationships and will be discussed in greater depth below.
Out of all of the various myths, legends and controversies that have arisen
since the liberation of France and the eventual overthrow of Nazi tyranny,
few have left such a long-standing scar on the psyche of a city than the
Allied bombing of Caen – the city that considers itself to have been martyred.5 The strength of feeling is still evident today as any visitor to the
memorial in the northern outskirts of the city is clearly able to see. In
an area that is full of commemorations to the British, American and Free
French forces, the poignancy of the Caen Memorial is most marked. Why
should it be the exception? Any attempt to answer this question must include
an examination of why Caen was subject to Allied aerial bombardment;
that this question is regularly asked on staff rides and battleﬁeld tours to the
area adds to the need for some analysis.

Caen – the martyred city

159

This chapter will examine the various factors leading up to the bombing
of Caen and the eventual capture of the city. It will therefore look at the
planning for D-Day and the importance of Caen at the operational level
of war. The planning will be set in the context of the air power strategy
that pertained at the time with particular reference to the thinking on the
support – direct and indirect – of ground forces. The chapter will also look
at the command and control structures and examine some of the tensions
therein. The decision-making process will then be set in the context of the
progress of the air and ground war as it evolved. From this, it should be
possible to show how events gathered momentum, resulting in the requests
for aerial bombardment, its actual execution and eventual effectiveness.

The planning for OVERLORD
The prospect of a serious invasion of mainland Europe seemed remote in
the dark days of 1940 and 1941. France had fallen and, although the Battle
of Britain had been won, the contest in the Atlantic showed how tenuous
Britain’s survival was. The German invasion of Russia made a second front
necessary as pressure in the East had to be relieved. For many long months,
Bomber Command was the Allies’ only option.6 The entry of the USA into
the war following Pearl Harbor and the German declaration of war made a
second front not only vital, but also inevitable. The key question, however,
was where this front was going to be. The Americans accepted a policy of
Germany ﬁrst; but the demand for settling scores with Japan meant that this
would have to be done quickly. Churchill and his senior advisers considered
a cross-Channel invasion (Operation SLEDGEHAMMER) to be too risky
in 1942.7 The decision was therefore taken to launch Operation TORCH
in North Africa, thereby delaying the return to the Continent. Nevertheless,
planning for an eventual invasion began in April 1942 with the tasking,
by the British chiefs of staff, of General Sir Bernard Paget (C-in-C Home
Forces) and Captain Lord Louis Mountbatten (Head of Combined Operations) to begin planning for Operation ROUNDUP. This early planning
showed the potential of Normandy as a viable alternative to the Pas de
Calais region which had seemed the most obvious choice of landing area
(to the Germans as well as to the Allies). The Casablanca Conference of
January 1943 saw the British chiefs of staff prevail over their US colleagues
with action remaining in the Mediterranean with Operation HUSKY – the
invasion of Sicily. Partly to keep the cross-Channel option ‘in play’, Lieutenant
General Frederick Morgan was appointed as chief of staff to the supreme
allied commander (designate). The acronym COSSAC was obviously less
of a mouthful for those involved in the planning, which quickly gained
momentum. By July 1943, the outline was in place for the invasion of Normandy with the target date of 1 May 1944.8
The Casablanca Conference was followed by a similar event in Quebec
in August 1943. OVERLORD was high on the agenda, with the choice

160

Peter Gray

of supreme commander an important topic. The initial speculation was
that the commander would be British and Churchill was keen for General
Sir Alan Brooke (Chief of the Imperial General Staff and Chairman of
the Chiefs of Staff Committee) to take on the role.9 During the Quebec
Conference, Churchill relented to American demands that their numerical
superiority should guarantee them the key position. Underlying these discussions was a marked suspicion that neither Churchill nor Brooke was fully
committed to OVERLORD. The almost automatic American nomination
for the post was General George C. Marshall, the US Chief of Staff. President
Roosevelt was reluctant to allow his key strategy adviser out of arm’s reach,
however, and General Dwight D. Eisenhower became the default option.
Churchill had let it be known that Eisenhower was the only acceptable
alternative to Marshall and his appointment was formally announced on
6 December 1943. Major General Omar N. Bradley was selected to command
US ground forces. Competition for his British and Commonwealth counterpart was between Lieutenant General Bernard Montgomery and General
Sir Harold Alexander. Churchill tended to favour ‘Alex’ while Brooke spoke
strongly in favour of Montgomery. Brooke also doubted that Alexander
had the strategic vision necessary to cope with OVERLORD. Eisenhower’s
marked preference was for Alexander – he considered Monty abrasive and
difﬁcult to control. The decision, in Montgomery’s favour, was announced
on 22 December 1943 with Alexander to remain in Italy where he provided
much-needed continuity. This removed any lingering barriers to the appointment of Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Tedder as Eisenhower’s deputy – air
was going to be critical to the success of the European adventure.
Eisenhower’s ﬁrst impressions of the plan for OVERLORD were that the
forces assigned were insufﬁcient. Montgomery came to similar conclusions
in parallel.10 Popular myth has it that the latter was solely responsible for
beeﬁng up OVERLORD; while it is true that he became the architect for
many of the changes, it is typical of the man that he claimed absolute credit.
COSSAC was considerably expanded with many new faces, and detailed
planning entered a new phase. Montgomery envisaged the rapid seizure of
the main centres of road communication – Caen and Bayeux – and the high
ground to the south and east of the former city. This area controlled the
approaches and crossings of the Odon and Orne rivers and had to be captured early to prevent German reinforcement. This area would also provide
vital land for the construction of airﬁelds to reduce the ﬂying times for close
support aircraft. Montgomery also insisted on the use of airborne forces, on
both ﬂanks, to prevent German counter-attacks on the beachheads. The
other element of Montgomery’s thinking was the simultaneous attack on
Caen, the high ground around it and the capture of Cherbourg by means of
a Cotentin landing. Montgomery disregarded the risk of splitting his forces
and not achieving sufﬁcient concentration on Caen. He nevertheless believed that the battle would be lost or won in the British sector with considerable potential for the Allies to be repulsed by heavy Panzer counter-attacks.

Caen – the martyred city

161

As the planning matured, the importance of the capture of Caen became
abundantly clear. The Allies would have to capture Caen and its associated
river crossings: it could not just be bypassed. With characteristic boldness,
Montgomery saw the city being taken by speed and aggression on D-Day
itself. There was no question of using the city as ‘a hinge’ or maintaining a
defensive posture on the ﬂank.11

Air strategy
The planning requirements for air forces generally, and for those engaged in
OVERLORD, were set in place at the Casablanca and Quebec Conferences.
COSSAC effectively saw the air campaign in four phases.12 The ﬁrst of these
was the continued strategic bombing of Germany. The second, or preparatory phase, saw the addition of communications targets, coastal defence
batteries and airﬁelds. The priority in the third phase would be the direct
support of the invasion ﬂeet. The fourth phase would be more of the same
with the requirement to prevent enemy movement and reinforcement.
The Casablanca Conference set the tone for the use of air power for the
remainder of the war in a number of ways. The ﬁrst of these was the understandable, and laudable, aim to achieve complete mastery of the air. The
Luftwaffe was to be dispersed, harried and destroyed by all possible means.13
The second requirement was for the formation of large tactical air forces
able to assert mastery over the battleﬁeld and wield the ﬁrepower ﬁrst seen
in the desert. There was, however, less agreement on the utilisation of the
bomber forces. The Casablanca directive read: ‘The primary objective
will be the progressive destruction and dislocation of the German military,
industrial and economic system, and the undermining of the morale of
the German people to a point where their capacity for armed resistance is
fatally weakened’. As Biddle has pointed out, this contained something
for everyone and gave the commanders a deal of latitude, both in target
sets and methodology.14 This allowed Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Harris
(C-in-C Bomber Command) to pursue targets based on German industrial
output and morale and the USAAF, under Lieutenant General Carl
A. Spaatz, to attack key, or vital, centres such as oil manufacture and
storage. Harris saw the diversion of his aircraft from Germany to gun
emplacements and beach defences as a disservice to the army and, potentially,
a disaster.15
Doctrinal issues were complicated by the appointment of Air Chief
Marshal Sir Trafford Leigh-Mallory as Air Commander-in-Chief of the
Allied Expeditionary Air Force. Neither bomber force took kindly to direction from a person that they considered to have only ﬁghter experience.16
That Leigh-Mallory had written extensively in the inter-war years on the use
of air power in support of armies only served to deepen the antagonism.17
The matter was only resolved in practice by ‘direction’ from Tedder, acting
on behalf of the Supreme Commander.

162

Peter Gray

To facilitate the second phase of pre-OVERLORD operations, LeighMallory set up an AEAF Bombing Committee under the chairmanship of
Air Commodore Kingston-McCloughry; its membership included Professor
Solly Zuckerman. The latter argued that attacks on rail facilities would be
the most efﬁcacious means of disrupting German potential for reinforcement. Some 75 repair, servicing and similar targets were identiﬁed. Harris’s
objection that the necessary precision was beyond the capability of his crews
was shattered on 6 March 1944 when 263 aircraft of Bomber Command
dropped 1,258 tons of bombs on the railway centre at Trappes, south east of
Paris. The centre was so hard hit that it was out of action for over a month.18
The ‘Transportation Plan’ was formally adopted by the chiefs of staff and
appropriate direction was issued to the strategic bomber commanders on
15 April 1944. Having had his objections swept aside, Harris put his command to the task with a vengeance and the plan was a considerable success.19
Bomber Command, and their American colleagues, had by D-Day ﬂown
21,949 sorties dropping 66,517 tons of bombs on 80 targets.20 Targets were
deliberately chosen to minimise collateral damage with a maximum acceptable potential French casualty toll of 150. As the RAF ofﬁcial historian
points out, the French were stoical about the need for these operations – in
marked contrast to the aftermath of Caen.
The third phase of the air campaign was conducted at the tactical level by
aircraft under the command of Air Marshal Sir Arthur Coningham (Second
Tactical Air Force) and General Louis Brereton of the US 9th Air Force.
A range of targets were attacked from the Pas de Calais area down to the
Cotentin peninsula. By this time the Luftwaffe had taken a pounding on all
fronts. They were still able to operate on an occasional basis, but air superiority had been fought for, won, and then maintained primarily over the
skies of their own heartland.

Command and control – the vexed issue of personalities
Supply of seriously good wartime commanders is always limited. It is therefore no surprise the same old list of ‘usual suspects’ keeps on reappearing –
or stalwarts like Harris remain in post. With success inevitably comes an
ego to match with Montgomery as the primus inter pares. There was no love
lost between Tedder and Montgomery following their experiences in the
desert campaign, but the greatest dissension was between Coningham and
Monty. In the desert the two men had worked together exceptionally well,
proving to be the model of co-located component commanders. By the time
Normandy came round, the airman considered that his erstwhile colleague
had slighted him. Coningham was, however, one of the most capable and
experienced senior commanders available and Tedder may also have felt
that he could be used as a foil to Montgomery. Both senior airmen considered that Montgomery had not made best use of air power in the desert and
that he needed a strong team.21 The batting order was enhanced further by

Caen – the martyred city

163

Air Vice-Marshal Harry Broadhurst who had fought with distinction in the
Battle of Britain, North Africa, Sicily and Italy. He considered that the feud
between Montgomery and Coningham was badly counter-productive and
sought to minimise its impact. His sound relationship with Montgomery,
whilst of considerable beneﬁt to the conduct of the campaign, did little to
improve his standing with Coningham and Tedder.
The battle of the egos found its culminating point in the need to capture
ground suitable for the airﬁeld sites necessary for the full exploitation of air
power. This had been requested as a priority by Leigh-Mallory as early as
20 March. The tactical aircraft had relatively little combat task time over
Normandy when operating from UK bases; this had been long recognised
as a limitation to the choice of this region over the more logical Pas de
Calais area. Leigh-Mallory saw tactical air as being key to the push to the
Seine. During the planning phase, Montgomery refused to make promises
that he could not guarantee keeping. But the airmen’s demands for territory
coincided neatly with Montgomery’s own operational priorities. The eventual failure to take Caen and the surrounding area quickly provided the
aviators with the ammunition with which to attack Montgomery.
The delay in capturing Caen also exasperated the Americans, who began
to suspect that Montgomery was overly cautious. The importance of the
British sector had not changed, but by 30 June Montgomery had begun to
talk of containment rather than breakthrough. The lack of progress led to
increasingly strident calls for Montgomery’s removal – particularly from
those that opposed his appointment in the ﬁrst place. Bradley for example
thought that it was typical ‘Monty’ – over-cautious, promising much and
delivering little.

D-Day and beyond
Tidal conditions in the English Channel gave the Allies a narrow window
for invasion in June 1944. A full-blown storm wrecked any chance of invasion on the morning of 5 June. Group Captain J.M. Stagg provided the
meteorological brief for 6 June 1944. In what was probably the most critical
met brief in the history of that rather inexact science (or black art), Stagg
offered a glimmer of hope that Eisenhower and Montgomery seized upon,
albeit to the scepticism of their air marshals.22 The essential surprise was
achieved, not least because of the marginal nature of the weather. Indeed,
Rommel was in Germany on the strength of the weather-reporting! On
D-Day itself, Bomber Command ﬂew over 1,000 sorties dropping more than
5,000 tons of bombs as well as copious quantities of window (a codename
for strips of aluminium foil used to confuse enemy radar). The aerial armada
was reinforced by waves of transport and glider tugs carrying out the airborne landings on the ﬂanks. British forces landed on their beaches at
approximately 0700 with I Corps tasked to take Caen: in particular British
Third Infantry Division was to ‘capture Caen and secure a bridgehead over

164

Peter Gray

the River Orne at that place’.23 The move inland from Sword Beach did not
occur as rapidly as had been hoped, with elements of the division bogged
down in front of the German fortiﬁcation named ‘Hillman’. By nightfall,
a combination of the fortiﬁcations and elements of the 21st Panzer had
effectively blocked progress towards Caen. Matters had not been helped
by unusually high tides that restricted the amount of space on the beaches,
which had in turn slowed the disembarkation of armour.
Hitler’s prohibition to all commanders that they must not give up an inch
of ground meant that they fought where they stood. Overwhelming Allied
air power ensured that there could be neither re-supply nor reinforcement in
depth. Counter-attacks were essential German doctrine. Set-piece battles
were therefore the exception rather than the rule, with the war quickly
degenerating into an attritional grind of vicious small-unit engagements.
Much of this was inevitably the province of the infantry – and they were in
short supply.24 Likewise, close coordination between armour and infantry
was frequently absent. In the face of highly effective anti-tank guns, determined Panzer divisions and brutal determination, the British forces made
slow going. Arguably, had the Germans had even air parity, matters could
have been considerably worse. Recriminations over lack of progress surfaced
quickly with an overwhelming sense that these latter-day citizen armies were
reluctant to commit to the type of warfare being fought. Commanders, from
Montgomery downwards, were aware of the paucity of reinforcements, and
most carried with them the legacy of the Somme and Passchendaele.25
In June, Montgomery made three major attempts to take Caen. The ﬁrst
of these was a direct assault as a continuation of D-Day operations on 7
and 8 June. He then tried to envelop the city in the Villers-Bocage operation
of 13 June. Operation EPSOM followed on 25 June. This was to be a direct
penetration by a powerful force involving all three corps. EPSOM, like its
predecessors, was a dismal failure.26 The best that can probably be said was
that it prevented the Germans from mounting the expected counter-attack
along the River Odon where much of the ﬁghting took place.
By early July, Montgomery was running out of time and ideas. Caen was
beginning to lose its strategic importance per se as the German reinforcements were tied down and the US army was making progress to the west.
But the high ground to the south-east was still vital and as Caen could not
be bypassed it would have to be taken – head-on if necessary. The planning
for CHARNWOOD gathered momentum and with it the use of air power
on the city.

The bombing of Caen
The ﬁrst suggestion that heavy bombers be used to break the logjam in front
of Caen came as early as 14 June when Leigh-Mallory ﬂew to Normandy
to see Montgomery. Relations between the two were strained because the
airman had refused to sanction an airborne raid on the grounds of risk.

Caen – the martyred city

165

27

Montgomery, according to Leigh-Mallory’s papers, found the counterproposal very attractive. The core idea had again originated with KingstonMcCloughrey and Zuckerman, and involved the use of the strategic bombers
in direct support of the ground forces. This had only previously been done
at Monte Cassino (15 February 1944) and Cassino (15 March 1944) in Italy.
The concept was discussed further in a schoolhouse in Bayeux that was
being used as the headquarters for the Second Army under General Dempsey.
Their meeting was short-lived due to the arrival of Tedder, Coningham and
Broadhurst. Neither Bomber Command nor the USSAF favoured the plan.
More importantly, the nature of the terrain prevented the identiﬁcation of a
bomb line and suitable aiming points with the attendant risk of killing one’s
own troops. Furthermore, the target concentration was too low to justify
the diversion of bomber assets.28
The politics and ﬂexing of egos may have been sufﬁcient for the plan to
die stillborn. In reality, the practical problems spoke for themselves. Tactical
air continued to be used with extra tasking against particular strongpoints –
admittedly with only limited success. What was more relevant was that the
kernel of the idea remained dormant for later use.
As Montgomery was putting together his plans for CHARNWOOD, he
decided to try again for heavy bomber support. The German defences were
known to be strong and intelligence suggested that they had recently been
reinforced. The request envisaged the heavy bombers blasting a path through
the defences in the northern suburbs of Caen. Leigh-Mallory and his staff
considered the bid at their Stanmore Headquarters on 7 July. Tedder normally attended these meetings, but exceptionally, Eisenhower also attended
this meeting – presumably to ensure that Montgomery received the full
support that he had requested and coincidently would have no scapegoats
should CHARNWOOD fail. With little apparent debate, the meeting agreed
to task 450 heavy bombers for that night.29
Bomber Command launched its ﬁrst attacks at approximately 2200 on
7 July using 10001b bombs. Most were fused to explode six hours later to
coincide with the ground advance. The operation lasted for about an hour
and featured 467 aircraft dropping some 2,276 tons of bombs. The concept
was almost identical to the plan rejected in June, albeit with the aiming
points reduced to two. Notwithstanding German reinforcement, the target
density was no better than when the concept had been rejected in June. The
target area was a box 4,000 yards wide by 1,500 yards deep and included the
northern part of the city. Care was taken to avoid fratricide, but this left
some of the strongpoints untouched.

The aftermath
Two days of heavy ﬁghting then ensued with little evidence to suggest that
the defenders had been affected by the air attacks; the northern half of Caen
was eventually secured by I Corps. Montgomery’s victory was somewhat

166

Peter Gray

pyrrhic in that he had captured a ruined city at high cost. The Germans had
also suffered heavily, but had dug into new positions on the south side of
the river. They also retained the high ground to the south and east. Many of
the desired airﬁeld sites had not been reached and those in the bridgehead
remained within artillery range. The breakout into Normandy was as elusive
as ever and, despite favourable press, the pressure on Montgomery remained.
An immediate byproduct of the heavy bombing of Caen was that it was
the ﬁrst time that many of the soldiers had seen the full wrath of the heavy
bomber force. General Dempsey was actually airborne with Broadhurst and
watched the proceedings. Broadhurst recalled that his senior colleague had
been shaken by the scale of the destruction – as well as by the damage done
to their aircraft by anti-aircraft ﬁre which necessitated a crash landing!30
Some reports suggest that this beneﬁcial effect on morale extended down to
those in the slit trenches facing Caen.31 Montgomery claimed that the heavy
bombing had been a vital part in the subsequent capture of Caen; he also
praised Leigh-Mallory for his consistent support.32 Later assessments of
Montgomery’s analysis range from fantasy to guilty conscience.33
Having been instrumental in the initial concept of using heavy bombers
in support of the army, Kingston-McCloughry and Zuckerman conducted
a survey immediately after the capture of Caen. They reported that there
had been virtually no sign of enemy gun emplacements, tanks or casualties
in the target area that the army had requested. This was in contrast with
other areas close by that would deﬁnitely have been worthy of Bomber
Command’s efforts. The effect on friendly morale had been beneﬁcial, but
transitory. Kingston-McCloughry concluded that the air element of the operation was little more than a frill for a ground plan already made.34
The bombing created considerable quantities of rubble and impeded the
advance into Caen. This restricted the access for armour, reduced the number
of exits that the Germans had to defend and allowed extra scope for snipers
against the exposed infantry. The obstructions also prevented the rapid
seizure of the Orne bridges which were destroyed by the defenders.
The French population of Caen had been advised to evacuate the city by
the Germans and their own prefect. About one quarter had taken this advice.
Many of those who remained had expressed a rather fatalistic ‘frying pan
and ﬁre’ attitude, preferring to remain in their own homes.35

Conclusions
The military efﬁcacy of Bomber Command’s attack on Caen appears to
have been somewhere between negligible and counter-productive. The effect
on the residents was devastating. Any impact on the morale of either side
was transitory with the Germans continuing to ﬁght ﬁercely for two further
days. The decision-making process was hasty and totally uncoordinated
from the major land offensive. What had been decreed as being too barren
in target density suddenly became worth the effort. There are therefore

Caen – the martyred city

167

no easy answers, from a straightforward effects-based approach, as to why
Caen was bombed.
It is, however, less cut and dried if one attempts to analyse how Caen
came to be bombed. Montgomery was under increasing pressure to break
the stalemate that had persisted for a full month after D-Day – the original
target date. There can be no doubt that his later claims that he had always
planned a ‘holding’ operation while the Americans developed their campaign in the West are anything other than fabrication. The balance of German forces in his sector may have made this reality into a slight virtue, but
it was not pre-planned.
Tedder recalled in his diary on the day after the bombing that ‘The problem is Monty who can be neither moved nor moved to action’. There is no
doubt that he was under considerable pressure from Eisenhower – not least
because the Supreme Commander was conscious that his fellow countrymen
were becoming increasingly strident in their views that the war was being
fought exclusively at the cost of American lives. There is some speculation
that Montgomery was under pressure directly from Churchill; KingstonMcCloughry has suggested that the Prime Minister wrote to Monty along
the lines that he must make progress or be replaced. It is feasible, and in
character, that Churchill would so threaten. But as D’Este points out, it is
inconceivable that Monty could have been removed at that stage. The wider
message that such a move would have given – in Moscow, with Roosevelt,
the British public and among the Germans – would have been unthinkable.36
Nevertheless, Montgomery was not the sort of character who was going to
risk future fame and fortune on such a gamble.
The personalities involved on the air side makes for somewhat unsavoury
analysis. There was an unhealthy mix of egotism and ambition with many
ofﬁcers covertly looking forward to the appointments lists of the peacetime
air forces. Kingston-McCloughry was an arch wheeler and dealer who
had been involved in a number of backstairs controversies.37 There was little
chance that he and Zuckerman would be prepared to take a back-seat role.
Likewise, Leigh-Mallory was frustrated with having so little genuinely to
command – especially with the heavy bombers remaining under their respective commanders. He was determined that he would make his mark on the
war and his casting of straws for Montgomery to clutch was a key factor in
the eventual destruction of Caen.
The early appointment of Montgomery can be considered to be the starting point as he was neither a visionary leader nor someone capable of
improvisation when matters turned sour. Failure to take Caen on D-Day
accelerated the series of events with the direct attacks on D + 2 and D + 3,
through Villers-Bocage and EPSOM to CHARNWOOD themselves as the
key milestones. That they developed a momentum of their own helps to
show how Caen came to be bombed, but cannot satisfactorily answer the
question why.38 This is why the normally stoic French response of ‘it had to
be done’ is not always held to apply to Caen – hence the martyred city.

168

Peter Gray

Notes
1 For authoritative accounts, see Richard Overy, The Air War 1939–1945 (New
York: Stein and Day), and more recently, Why the Allies Won (London: Pimlico,
1996). See also Noble Frankland, The Bombing Offensive Against Germany –
Outlines and Perspectives (London: Faber & Faber, 1965).
2 For an account on Dresden see Peter W. Gray, ‘Dresden 1945 – Just Another
Raid?’, Royal Air Force Air Power Review, 4(1): 1–14, and for the Tirpitz see
John Sweetman, ‘Barnes Wallis’s other Bouncing Bomb: Plans to Sink the German Battleship Tirpitz in 1943’, Royal Air Force Air Power Review, 5(2 & 3).
3 For the American version see the Reports of the United States Strategic Bombing
Survey and subsequent debates on the subject: Gian P. Gentile, How effective
Is Strategic Bombing? Lessons Learned from World War II to Kosovo (New York:
New York University Press, 2001). The British equivalent is The Strategic Air
War against Germany 1939–1945: Report of the British Bombing Survey Unit,
republished by Frank Cass, London with introductory material by Sebastian
Cox, 1998.
4 MRAF Sir Arthur Harris, Bomber Offensive (London: Collins, 1947), p. 220
et seq.
5 This remains the perception today – the martyrdom aspect is reﬂected in the City
Memorial.
6 Discussions between Churchill and Stalin in August 1942 conﬁrmed the grand
strategic level direction for Bomber Command. The leaders agreed that not only
should German industry be bombed, but also the population and its morale.
Stalin stressed the importance of attacking Berlin and this cascaded down to
Harris later that month. Stalin’s appreciation of the efforts of Bomber Command was reinforced by Harris sending the Russian leader a book of aerial
photographs of the damage wrought.
7 Carlo D’Este, Decision in Normandy (London: Robson, 2000), p. 25.
8 Ibid., p. 35.
9 Ibid., p. 43 and David Fraser, Alanbrooke (London: Harper Collins, 1982),
pp. 332, 333.
10 D’Este, ibid., p. 61.
11 Ibid., p. 74.
12 Hilary St George Saunders, Royal Air Force 1939–1945, Volume III, The Fight is
Won (London: HMSO, 1954), p. 84.
13 Overy, The Air War 1939–1945, p. 95.
14 Tami Davis Biddle, ‘British and American Strategic Bombing’, in John Gooch
(ed.) Air Power Theory and Practice (London: Frank Cass, 1995), p. 120.
15 Saunders, The Fight is Won, p. 85.
16 Overy, The Air War 1939–1945, p. 97.
17 See for example the article by Wing Commander Trafford Leigh-Mallory in
Volume 1 of The RAF Quarterly.
18 Saunders, The Fight is Won, p. 87.
19 As conﬁrmed by Professor Zuckerman in his private diary; cited by D’Este,
Decision in Normandy, p. 215.
20 Saunders, The Fight is Won, p. 88. Harris records that Bomber Command, by the
end of June 1944, had ﬂown 13,349 sorties dropping 52,347 tons of bombs with
a casualty rate of 2.6 per cent. Bomber Offensive, p. 204.
21 D’Este, Decision in Normandy, pp. 218–19.
22 Ibid., p. 110.
23 Ibid., p. 120.
24 Ibid., pp. 252 et seq.
25 Ibid., p. 301.

Caen – the martyred city

169

26 Ibid., p. 245.
27 Reproduced in Bill Newton Dunn, Big Wing – The Biography of Air Chief Marshal
Sir Trafford Leigh-Mallory (Shrewsbury: Airlife, 1992), p. 131.
28 D’Este, Decision in Normandy, p. 228.
29 Ibid., p. 310.
30 Ibid., pp. 314, 316.
31 Ibid., p. 316.
32 Bill Newton Dunn, Big Wing, p. 155.
33 Alexander McKee, Caen, Anvil of Victory (London: Souvenir Press, 1964), Chapter 14.
34 Cited in Ian Gooderson, Air Power at the Battlefront; Allied Close Air Support in
Europe 1943–1945 (London: Frank Cass, 1998), p. 136.
35 Max Hastings, Overlord; D-Day and the Battle for Normandy 1944 (London:
Pan, 1999), p. 263.
36 D’Este, Decision in Normandy, p. 311.
37 For a discussion on the political intrigue behind the downfall of Air Chief
Marshal Sir Cyril Newall see Sebastian Ritchie’s article in War and Society,
16(1): 83.
38 From a historiographical viewpoint, this should not be an issue. Some could
argue that the functional approach is at least as valid as the causal; see for
example E.H. Carr, What is History? (London: Penguin, 1987), p. 88. From a
staff ride, or education, perspective, this debate adds to the value. It can be
further enhanced by the importance contextual element added by R.W. Davies in
the notes to the second edition. This aspect of military education is discussed
elsewhere in this book.

170

Mary Kathryn Barbier

13 Deception and the planning
of D-Day
Mary Kathryn Barbier

When Allied troops stormed the Normandy beaches on the morning of
6 June 1944, their action was the culmination of years of preparation and
anticipation. Victory was by no means assured. The Germans had had time
to construct the Atlantic Wall and to erect their strongest defences at ports
such as Calais. The Allies’ operation at Dieppe in August 1942 had demonstrated several things, including the strength of the German position, the
need for adequate training and preparation, and the importance of surprise.
Consequently, as they began to plan the cross-Channel assault, the Allies
chose to design and implement a series of deception operations to cover
Operation OVERLORD.1 The deception plan that had the most direct
impact on the cross-Channel invasion was Operation FORTITUDE SOUTH,
which was designed to pin down the German 15th Army in the Pas de Calais
region of France. After the war, evaluators of the deception concluded that
it was successful because the Germans failed to move the army for several
weeks after the commencement of the Normandy invasion. Most historians
have concurred with that conclusion. Few, however, have asked whether
or not there were any reasons, besides the deception, that would explain
why the 15th Army did not receive orders to move into Normandy. Before
examining other factors that could explain this German decision, however,
an understanding of the deception plan is necessary.
Two separate groups ultimately worked on a cover plan for OVERLORD
– General Sir Frederick Morgan, the chief of staff to the Supreme Allied
Commander designate (COSSAC), and his staff and Colonel John Bevan
and his staff on the London Controlling Section (LCS). Bevan hoped to
mask the build-up of US forces in Britain and was thus concerned by
impending communications restrictions and the closing of frontiers in
England, Scotland and Wales. He opposed the early closing of the frontiers
because he believed that this might signal that the time of the invasion
was at hand. Morgan, however, carried the day, choosing to emphasise
tactical, not strategic, surprise. He stressed that the Allies would be unable
to keep the build-up of troops a secret until D-Day. Therefore, it was his
contention that the deception plan only had to hide the target of the Allied
invasion.2

Deception and the planning of D-Day 171
Because they had a high opinion of the German Intelligence Service,
Morgan and his staff believed that they had to deceive the enemy in three
separate ways – by intelligence, air reconnaissance and spies – which
‘automatically implied an extensive programme of visual misdirection’.3 The
resulting vast nature of the deception scheme created problems for Allied
commanders whose main concern was Operation OVERLORD. Because providing available troops, armaments, equipment, landing craft and other supplies for OVERLORD took precedence over making them available for other
operations, including deception, the planners decided to coordinate the planning of OVERLORD and the cover plan to enable the sharing of physical
supplies whenever possible. Planning for the deception operation, however,
remained tentative until Allied leaders came to a ﬁnal agreement concerning
its nature and goals at the Teheran Conference in November 1943.4
While at the conference, Bevan received orders to develop a cover plan
for the Normandy invasion. Upon his return to London, he and the LCS
began work on an overall plan for the war against Germany in 1944. After
three weeks of almost continuous effort, the LCS submitted a plan dubbed
BODYGUARD to the British chiefs of staff, who approved it on 25 December 1943, shortly after Eisenhower’s appointment as Supreme Allied Commander. Washington concurred with the British chiefs, and the combined
chiefs of staff voted to proceed with the deception, which included several
elements. The strategic goal of the plan was to convince the Germans
to keep their troops in various locations around Europe even after OVERLORD had begun. To that end the plan even called for Soviet cooperation in a ﬁctitious invasion of Norway. While much of BODYGUARD
was designed to focus German attention in various parts of Europe, Operation FORTITUDE would have a direct impact on the upcoming D-Day
landings.5
The goal of FORTITUDE was to convince the German High Command
‘to make faulty dispositions in Northwest Europe before and after the
Neptune assault’.6 (Neptune was the codename for Operation OVERLORD.)
Acknowledging that it would be difﬁcult to conceal the build-up of Normandy invasion troops, Bevan increased the number of units involved in
the deception to suggest forces sufﬁcient for two invasions, by placing a
ﬁctitious army group in south-eastern England along with the true invasion
force based more in the south-western part of the country. By doing so, the
planners were able to use the Germans’ own expectations that the Allies
would cross the Channel at the Pas de Calais. Thus, the implementers hoped
to convince the Germans that the Normandy invasion was merely a diversion
for a second, more powerful landing near Calais. According to the ﬁctitious
plan, General Sir Bernard Montgomery would command one assault force,
21st Army Group, which would consist of British and American troops,
while the Canadian and American forces of the First United States Army
Group (FUSAG) would come ashore later near Calais.7 Consequently, the
deception scheme contained the right mix of actual fact and falsehood.

172

Mary Kathryn Barbier

FORTITUDE had numerous objectives. The planners hoped to limit the
‘rate and weight’ of enemy reinforcement of Normandy prior to the assault,
and to persuade the Germans to concentrate on fortifying areas outside the
invasion site and focus their attention elsewhere. In addition, they wanted
to convince the Germans to keep their troops away from Normandy for as
long as possible. Although the deception had two parts, only FORTITUDE
SOUTH, which suggested a threat to the Pas de Calais, had a direct impact
on the D-Day invasion.
Allied leaders divided FORTITUDE SOUTH into two phases – preinvasion and post-invasion. During the pre-invasion phase, the implementers hoped to convince the Germans that the main invasion would occur in
the Pas de Calais 45 days after the real invasion. During the post-invasion
phase, the Allied leaders wanted the Germans to conclude that the Normandy assault was a diversion designed to draw their reserves from Belgium
and the Pas de Calais. The goal was to convince the Germans to leave their
15th Army in Calais for as long as possible after D-Day.8
As noted, three methods would be used to implement the FORTITUDE
deception – wireless transmissions, physical displays and double agents. The
planners assigned the code word QUICKSILVER to the numerous ways in
which the deception would be implemented. QUICKSILVER I referred to
the two phases of ground force activities by 21st Army Group, commanded
by Montgomery, and FUSAG, initially under the command of General
Omar Bradley. FUSAG would set up camp in east and south-east England,
supported by the Ninth US Air Force. Following the Normandy invasion,
21st Army Group would persuade German reserves to move toward the
Allied beachhead, which would allow FUSAG and the Ninth US Air Force
to assault the Pas de Calais area. The armies involved would participate in
invasion exercises prior to launching their attack.
The wireless part of the plan, simulating the radio trafﬁc of the nonexistent FUSAG, was QUICKSILVER II. The wireless stations would initiate operations on 24 April. The plan scheduled ‘two notional combined
exercises, the ﬁrst DRYSHOD the second WETSHOD . . . by the 4 Canadian Infantry Brigade assisted by Force G’ for 16 and 25 April.9 QUICKSILVER III referred to ‘craft indication’. The planners ordered that 270
dummy landing craft be displayed in Yarmouth, Lowestoft, Waldringﬁeld,
Wolverstone, Dover and Folkestone to support the deception in the event
that the enemy ﬂew reconnaissance ﬂights to verify the existence of an invasion force in the south-east. Naval wireless trafﬁc would simulate the presence of craft in designated areas.
The air threat to the Pas de Calais received the QUICKSILVER IV designation. Prior to D-Day, air forces would suggest long-term preparations
for the D plus 45 target date in several ways. Fighter squadrons based in
southern England would engage in ﬂight training exercises. High speed air
sea rescue launches and air sea rescue squadrons stationed in south-east
England would also practise. Fighters and bombers would participate in a

Deception and the planning of D-Day 173
‘large-scale air operation’ in east and south-east England approximately
three days before the Normandy invasion. By using ‘careful manipulation of
call signs, arrangement of deliberate indiscretions by R/ T [radio telephony]
and very strict orders as to the height at which aircraft are to ﬂy’, the air
force would attempt to ‘conceal’ the movement of aircraft to Kent and the
Thames Estuary from southern England. The construction of ‘dummy hard
standings’ would supplement the normal activity on airﬁelds in the southeast. Small-scale ﬁghter and bomber practices would also occur in the same
area and include ‘deliberate indiscretions on R / T and manipulation of call
signs’. Immediately before the invasion, the air force would bomb beaches
and rail targets in the Pas de Calais area as part of the tactical railway
bombing initiative.10
Orchestrating increased activity by Combined Headquarters, Dover,
QUICKSILVER V would perpetuate the menace to the Pas de Calais. Combined Headquarters, Dover (in reality, II Canadian Corps Headquarters)
undertook special work to create the illusion of ‘extra tunnelling and the
erection of further wireless stations’. New wireless circuits would go on line
to supplement the deception. The plan also contained a provision for nighttime activity: QUICKSILVER VI. Beginning in the middle of May, QUICKSILVER VI included the erection of night lighting installations and imitated
activity in areas such as Great Yarmouth, Lowestoft, the River Deben and
the River Orwell.11
The deception was much more complex than one might suppose. In agreement with the LCS, the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force
(SHAEF) devised a wide-ranging cover plan that incorporated implementation by all branches of the military, including naval diversionary operations,
as well as several subsidiary plans.12 By March 1944, thousands of real and
imaginary American soldiers began arriving in Great Britain. While the real
units joined Bradley’s Twelfth US Army Group, the imaginary troops
reported to the Third US Army in south-east England, which had recently
received a new commander when Bradley was transferred. Command of the
ﬁctitious FUSAG now fell to General George Patton, which allowed the
deception planners to take advantage of the enemy’s fears; because they
considered Patton to be ‘the most able [Allied] battleﬁeld commander’, the
Germans were quite certain that he would command the most important
force involved in the impending invasion. In reality, because he had recently
fallen from favour, Patton only received the responsibility of preparing the
Third Army for future action in France.
The arrival of American troops in the UK began to lend an air of realism
to the deception. In order to facilitate it further, several American units
received orders to conduct their training in south-east England. Some of the
men erected dummy army camps, fake airﬁelds and dummy landing craft.
After additional training, others provided the wireless trafﬁc to simulate the
existence of real forces engaged in invasion exercises. Wireless trafﬁc for
FORTITUDE SOUTH ofﬁcially opened on 26 April 1944.13

174

Mary Kathryn Barbier

Planning for the wireless component of the deception, however, had
begun much earlier. Designed by COSSAC, the initial wireless plan dictated
periods of wireless silence and intense activity for FUSAG and 21st Army
Group. The length of silence periods varied from two to ten days, with the
ﬁrst scheduled to begin on 25 December 1943 and the last to end on 5 September 1944. Within each period the participating formations began and
ended at different times. In late February 1944, SHAEF allocated deception
units and equipment for the FORTITUDE scheme. The Supreme Commander received three deception units from No. 5 Wireless Group, which
would establish one static monitoring section, one divisional section and
one monitoring section. The Allied naval commander, the Expeditionary
Force, the 21st Army Group commander in chief and the air commander in
chief, AEAF all received three deception units, which were the 3103rd US
Signal Service Battalion and two units from No. 5 Wireless Group, one of
which would establish two divisional sections, while the other would set up
a mobile monitoring section.14
The purpose of the wireless part of the deception was to reinforce the
physical aspects of the plan. Although American troops helped erect physical displays, the main responsibility fell to the British. Montgomery formed
a deception staff called G(R) or ‘R’ Force, appointed Colonel David
Strangeways as its commander, and instructed him to implement the physical aspects of the FORTITUDE SOUTH deception. ‘R’ Force had to
produce the illusion of another invasion force, FUSAG, by ‘providing troop
concentrations, vehicle parks, guns, tanks, and landing craft throughout
southeast England’.15
Deception crews constructed fake troop camps, including ‘tent cities’, ﬁeld
kitchens, ammunition dumps, vehicle displays and whatever was needed to
add realism. Canvas tent sides ﬂuttered in the wind; ﬁeld kitchen chimneys
emitted large amounts of smoke daily to suggest the preparation of meals
for the ﬁctitious soldiers. By driving army trucks back and forth to leave
visible tyre tracks, American engineers laid tracks to connect existing roads.
Movie-set designers from Shepperton Studios provided rubber tanks, artillery,
trucks and landing craft for some of the FUSAG displays. Using ﬁberboard,
wood, canvas and sewer pipe, the studio’s craftsmen constructed a dock and
‘a large oil-storage complex near Dover’. To perpetuate the illusion of functional facilities, both King George VI and Montgomery ‘inspected’ the new
dock and during a dinner at a hotel in Dover, Eisenhower addressed the
workers who had built the dock and the storage complex. In addition, RAF
ﬁghters patrolled the skies overhead to enhance the illusion.16
However, implementation of the deception plan involved more than
physical displays, wireless trafﬁc and a ﬂamboyant American commander.
SHAEF and the LCS also decided to use double agents to reinforce the
physical aspects of the deception. Special Means and the Double-Cross
Committee had been cultivating several double agents, including ‘Garbo’,
‘Brutus’, ‘Tricycle’, ‘Treasure’ and ‘Tate’. While some double agents had

Deception and the planning of D-Day 175
been captured and ‘turned’ by the British, others volunteered to work against
their German masters.
Dusko Popov, or Tricycle, was a Yugoslav businessman who unwillingly
began working for the Germans shortly after the war broke out. Within a
year, the Germans had sent him to England. By 1944 not only had Tricycle
established himself as a reliable double agent, he had also become ‘the
Abwehr paymaster in England’.17 The Double-Cross Committee decided to
use Tricycle and other agents to provide the enemy with information about
FUSAG and the threat to the Pas de Calais in the hope that the Germans
would reach the following faulty conclusions. First, the Pas de Calais region
would be the primary location of the impending Allied assault. Second,
following the initial landing, the Allies would launch a second more powerful attack in the same area. Third, the possibility that the Allies might
launch a diversionary attack in the Bordeaux area to draw enemy troops
from the invasion area was real. Finally, the Normandy invasion in early
June would be a diversion, while the main attack would be the Pas de Calais
assault near the end of June. According to Popov, ‘Never did we say anything directly about the Pas de Calais. Naturally we couldn’t say things
right out. We had to give the Germans indications that would make them
draw these conclusions themselves’.18
Of the double agents who participated in the deception, the most notorious was Juan Pujol Garcia, or Garbo. A trusted member of the German intelligence network, Garbo amassed a ﬁctitious ring of 24 agents, all of whom
provided various pieces of the puzzle that would help the Germans reach
the intended conclusions about Allied plans. Consequently, he succeeded
in presenting the Germans with a wide range of information for the FORTITUDE scheme. Some of it was gathered so that Garbo could respond
to questionnaires sent by his German contact. The information was all
plausible and authoritative, including details of the movement and training
of Allied troops, which suggested that the Pas de Calais was indeed the true
target of the upcoming Allied offensive.19
As D-Day approached, Garbo prepared to perform his most important
work. In late May, his German contact in Madrid enquired about a division
located near Glasgow. He also wanted an estimate about ‘how much time
will be lost from the moment the division starts its embarkation operation
until news reaches you for transmission to us by message’.20 One of Garbo’s
agents had observed the division in question. Garbo instructed him to keep
close watch on a ﬂeet in the area, because its departure would indicate
the commencement of an invasion. In addition, he wired Madrid that
he could transmit the information within 12 hours, which meant that the
receiving station would have to stay open past its normal shutdown time
of 11.00 p.m.
It was a truly dangerous game. Now, in order to maintain his credibility,
Garbo would have to notify the Germans about the start of the Normandy
invasion. Although he initially opposed such a move, Eisenhower eventually

176

Mary Kathryn Barbier

agreed, but stipulated that the message could go out no sooner than three
and a half hours prior to the initial landing of Allied troops. Ironically, the
Madrid receiving station was closed when Garbo tried to wire the message
in the early hours of 6 June. Consequently, in addition to being unable to
announce the start of the invasion, Garbo could not communicate his most
important message until two nights later. Even so, Garbo’s superiors in
Germany raised his level of credibility based on the information that he
provided about the Normandy invasion. As a result, his continuous assertion that Normandy was but a diversion and that the main invasion was yet
to come and would take place at Calais carried more weight.
Thanks to the FORTITUDE deception, by the time the vulnerable Allied
forces landed on the beaches at Normandy on 6 June, the Germans were
apparently convinced that the enemy had enough troops stationed in the UK
to launch more than one invasion. Intelligence indicated that the Germans
believed that the Allies would take the shortest route across the English
Channel, from Dover to the Pas de Calais. Hence, the Germans put most of
their efforts into defending Calais and were quite reluctant even after the
invasion to transfer their 15th Army from the Pas de Calais to Normandy.
They did, however, reinforce the battleﬁeld with divisions from other parts
of France and from as far away as the Eastern Front.
No one can doubt that the FORTITUDE deception plan had an effect
on the Allies’ success in Normandy, but the extent of that effect can be
questioned. When reaching a conclusion about the importance of FORTITUDE one must ﬁrst consider whether or not the deception operation
was a success. Most historians who mention the deception do so in terms
of the success, not the importance, of the scheme. Several of them intimate
that success and importance are synonymous and praise FORTITUDE,
because it appeared to be successful. They fail, however, to address the issue
of which part or parts of the operation – wireless transmissions, physical
displays or double agents’ messages – successfully transmitted the cover
story to the Germans.
In general, historians rely upon analyses of the deception’s outcome by
Sir Ronald Wingate and Roger Hesketh. Both men served on the LCS and
wrote accounts of the planning, implementation and outcome of FORTITUDE. Although he suggested that the deception succeeded in disguising
the time and place of the Allied invasion from the Germans, Wingate conceded that not all aspects of the plan contributed to the Germans’ acceptance of the ﬁctitious threat. According to Wingate, the OKW Lagebericht
(intelligence summary) indicated that the Germans accepted all of the imaginary formations that participated in FORTITUDE as real. He admitted,
however, that the OKW might not have obtained its information about
these formations from the wealth of wireless trafﬁc sent out over the airwaves
as part of the deception: ‘It is rather surprising to note that the OKW
Lagebericht provides no single example of [the] wireless programme having
brought any item in the FORTITUDE story to the knowledge of the

Deception and the planning of D-Day 177
Germans in the ﬁrst instance. There are a few rare cases where the “Y”
report purports to conﬁrm Intelligence which has already been supplied by
one of the controlled agents’.21
In addition, the Germans apparently failed to observe the numerous
displays of fake landing craft, supply depots, airﬁelds and army camps. The
OKW Lagebericht did not, according to Wingate, indicate the presence of
landing craft in south-east England, primarily because few German aircraft
succeeded in ﬂying reconnaissance missions over the area either before or
after Allied troops arrived in Normandy. Wingate concluded, ‘every phase
in the story can be directly attributed to the three double-cross agents,
GARBO, BRUTUS, and TRICYCLE. Individual messages can be checked
with passages in the German Intelligence Summary’.22 Wingate did not,
however, suggest that Allied deception teams should not have transmitted
wireless messages or displayed dummy landing craft, which he called ‘valuable insurance, the omission of which might on another occasion cause
disastrous results’. Although the lack of enemy reconnaissance ﬂights
explained the Germans’ lack of awareness of the physical displays, Wingate
admitted that he did not understand why the wireless programme failed to
garner German attention.23
Hesketh concurred with some of Wingate’s conclusions. He acknowledged that the dummy landing craft did not contribute to the deception.
Like Wingate, he compared the physical displays to having an insurance
policy. Because British intelligence had captured all the German agents
who entered Great Britain, no uncontrolled spies could provide the Germans with information about the displays. Noting the limitations of wireless
deception, Hesketh stated, ‘even if one has the resources and the skill to
disclose false intentions by controlled leakage, one can scarcely hope that
the enemy will always be listening at the right moment, nor can one be sure
that faulty reception may not prevent him from hearing if he is listening’.24
Consequently, he admitted that the most reliable aspect of FORTITUDE
SOUTH was the role played by the double agents. Throughout his report,
however, Hesketh reiterated his opinion that FORTITUDE succeeded
beyond their initial expectations in convincing the Germans that the assault
on Normandy was a feint and that the Allies would invade later in the area
around the Pas de Calais.
If one accepts the assertions made by Wingate and Hesketh, then one can
legitimately attempt to ascertain the dependability of Abwehr, which was the
principal German intelligence service from 1935 until 1944. The Germans
made incorrect assumptions about the how, when, where and the strength
of the Allied invasion because of a failure in the ‘estimative process’, which
resulted from poor intelligence. After crediting the Allies with a system of
intelligence that provided their leaders with an accurate portrait of German
defences, coastal obstacles and troop strength and placement, Major Anton
Staubwasser asserted, ‘As to the sources of German military intelligence . . . in
Great Britain and the USA, H Gp B knew that we did not have one single

178

Mary Kathryn Barbier

agent in these countries that were on the defence, who had any insight to
the Allied invasion plans, and that the whole intelligence service against the
western Allies was exceedingly faulty’. Staubwasser went on to say that the
Allies had ‘been very clever at playing no end of false reports into the hands
of the German command . . . The Oberkommando of H Gp B was well aware
of the complete lack of agents having insight to Allied invasion plans’.25
An analysis of the German Intelligence Service after the war reinforced
Staubwasser’s perception of inadequacies. Part of the problem was attributed to Admiral Wilhelm Canaris, the head of Abwehr, who was apparently
a bad judge of men. In addition, he was a poor organiser. There is some
evidence to suggest that Abwehr ofﬁcers ‘sat in Paris and Athens, in Biarritz
and Estoril, enjoying the opportunities for self-indulgence provided by these
resports [sic], undisturbed (thanks to a complete lack of centralization at
Hq), so long as a quota of reports was sent in’. The validity of these reports
was unimportant: ‘ “It was better to have a controlled agent than none at
all”, observed one cynical ofﬁcer when it was suggested to him (correctly)
that his principal source of information was under Allied management’.
Another ofﬁcer reacted in horror at the thought that his agent was controlled by the enemy: ‘If he were to admit that to his chief, he said, he would
be shot for defeatism’.26
The fact that John Masterman, who ran the Double-Cross Committee,
asserted that the British captured and turned every agent that the Germans
sent could imply a certain degree of ineptitude on the part of the Germans
either in the people whom they chose to be agents or in the level of training
they received. There is no denying that the British excelled at identifying
possible enemy spies. The exploits of Garbo and Tricycle, as portrayed in
their autobiographies and their case ﬁles, seem at times a bit far-fetched;
therefore, one has to wonder why the Germans failed to question their
reliability and appeared to accept all of the information that these two and
other spies provided.27 According to ‘Johnny’ Jebsen, a double agent known
as ‘Artist’, Canaris ‘did not care if all the agents in Britain were fakes as
long as he could go to Field Marshal Keitel, the head of the German high
command, and report that he had twelve agents in Britain, each of them
writing a letter once a week’.28 In addition, it is possible that by the end of
the war several Abwehr ofﬁcers were no longer employing agents despite the
fact that they were still providing information from them. Several ofﬁcers
pocketed the money meant for their agents and either fabricated the information or obtained it from the newspapers.29
Despite the possible failings of the Abwehr and other German intelligence
agencies, Wingate, Hesketh and many historians judge the FORTITUDE
deception as wildly successful because the Germans failed to move the 15th
Army from the Pas de Calais to Normandy. They credit the deception for the
enemy’s decision not to transfer the army, but they fail to ask an important
question. Are there any other reasons why the Germans decided to leave
the 15th Army where it was? There are several factors to consider here.

Deception and the planning of D-Day 179
Because they had concluded months earlier that the Allies might launch
several assaults, some of which would be diversionary, the Germans could
not immediately react to the Normandy invasion as if it were the main
attack.30 As a result, they did not transfer their Panzer reserves immediately
to Normandy. Some historians emphasise the role of Garbo’s 8/9 June
message for the cancellation of Gerd von Rundstedt’s order transferring the
1st SS Panzer Division to Normandy. The 1st SS Panzer did, however, move
to Normandy a week later. Even if the Germans had tried to transfer the
division earlier, its movement would have been harassed by Allied air forces
and the forces of the Resistance, which would have delayed its arrival.31
Prior to D-Day, the Allies instituted the Transportation Plan, which was
an air offensive aimed at isolating Normandy to prevent German reinforcement of the battleﬁeld. By attacking road and rail bridges across the River
Seine, Allied aircraft performed a twofold function. They intimated the Pas
de Calais as the site of the impending invasion and they limited trafﬁc from
the Pas de Calais into Normandy. Allied bombing forced the Germans to
send supplies and troops to the battleﬁeld via indirect routes, often through
or around Paris, which frequently delayed their arrival for several days.
By D-Day no routes across the River Seine north of Paris remained open.
Allied bombers were particularly successful in attacking the railway bridges
across the River Seine and the Paris-Cointure railway junctions prior to
D-Day, which forced the Germans to disembark from trains north of the
Seine and travel to Normandy by road. Before the invasion, the Germans
could only use three road bridges across the river between Paris and the sea.
As a result, the Germans had to ferry troops, supplies and vehicles across
the river, which greatly impeded their ability to reinforce their troops in
Normandy.
Continuous attacks on railways by Allied bombers after D-Day caused
the Germans to experience further delays in reinforcing the battleﬁeld. For
example, damage caused by Allied aircraft and the French Resistance
hindered the movement of the 9th and 10th SS Panzer Divisions, which the
Germans transferred from the Eastern Front. It took less time for the two
Panzer divisions to travel from the Eastern Front to France than it did for
them to proceed from eastern France to Normandy.32 In addition, shortly
after the invasion, Allied aircraft succeeded in obstructing the major railways across the River Loire, which hindered the movement of German
forces and supplies into Normandy from the south. By closing the Loire rail
lines, the Allied air forces completely isolated the Normandy battleﬁeld.
During the ﬁrst week of the invasion, the Germans failed ‘to run a single
supply train into Normandy across the Seine and Loire’.33
Evidence of German difﬁculties with regard to the movement of troops
and supplies beginning in early May can be found in the Ultra intercepts.
On 1 May, Keitel complained about inadequate repairs to railways damaged by air attacks. Two days later there were complaints about 2nd
SS Panzer Division’s deﬁciencies in motor transport and 12th SS Panzer

180

Mary Kathryn Barbier

Division’s lack of fuel for training. On 8 May, according to C-in-C West,
‘the enemy is already effectively hampering our supply and troop movements, and in the event of active operations would hamper the latter in
particular . . . Latterly the enemy has also been attacking important railway
bridges on the lower Seine. The supplying by air of agents and of the Resistance Movements has been stepped up very greatly and acts of sabotage,
especially on the railways, have increased’. Reports in this vein continued
well after the invasion began. By early June, approximately 15th per cent
of German fuel supplies for the Western Front were ‘backlogged’ throughout France. By 12 June, the extremely strained fuel situation resulted in
unnecessary travel being forbidden and the use of fuel from state of emergency stocks. By the middle of June, German forces in Normandy received
daily deliveries of munitions that replaced less than 15 per cent of what they
expended in a day. By the end of June, the 7th German Army had received
only 37 per cent of the munitions that had been sent.34
However, transportation difﬁculties did not prevent the Germans from
reinforcing the Normandy battleﬁeld. Although the 1st SS Panzer Division
was rerouted to the Pas de Calais area for a week before being sent to
Normandy, Rommel immediately transferred the 21st Panzer Division to
the battle area, and within 24 hours he ordered the movement of the 2nd
Panzer Division. Von Rundstedt obtained the release of three divisions of
the OKW reserve – the 12th SS Panzer, the 17th Panzer Grenadier and
Panzer Lehr – within 12 hours of his request. Although the 12th SS Panzer
Division arrived in Normandy on 7 June, Allied aircraft delayed Panzer
Lehr’s arrival for two days. By 13 June two more German Divisions – 2nd
Panzers and 17th SS Panzer Grenadiers – entered the battle. A few days
later the 1st SS Panzer Division, which the Germans held as a reserve behind
the 15th Army, travelled to Normandy.35
In addition to Panzer divisions, the Germans immediately began to transfer two types of infantry division to Normandy – static and attack. Between
6 and 7 June, the Germans committed six static divisions to the ﬁghting.
Two of the 15th Army’s static divisions received orders for immediate transfer to Normandy and were subsequently integrated into the 7th Army. Numerous infantry divisions stationed around France received orders to proceed
to Normandy. Although the remainder of the 15th Army did not receive
transfer orders, several factors would have made it difﬁcult for it to move
from the Pas de Calais to Normandy. Much of the 15th lacked transport,
suitable equipment and armaments. Many of the men were not well trained
and were either very old or very young. Of the 11 infantry divisions attached
to the 15th Army, 7 were static divisions, which meant that they were trained
for defence, and 2 were Luftwaffe in origin. Furthermore, many of the 15th
Army formations were not battle-ready.36
Although the 15th Army formations might not have been combat-ready,
the fact remains that the German High Command did not order the transfer
of the 15th to Normandy for several weeks. Apart from the FORTITUDE

Deception and the planning of D-Day 181
deception, there is another reason that is equally important in terms of the
German decision. According to several Ultra intercepts, the Germans were
beginning to focus their attention on Normandy during the month before
the invasion. Based on Allied air attacks on railroads and waterways, they
concluded ‘that landing is planned in the area Le Havre – Cherbourg, is
conﬁrmed once more’.37 In early May, the Germans were aware of the ‘AngloAmerican landing exercise “Fabius” in the area of the Isle of Wight, [which]
provides evidence for the conjecture that the enemy, in view of the outer
beach obstacles known to him, is attempting to achieve a modiﬁed landing
and battle technique for his foremost landing wave’. According to the same
communication:
C in C West appreciates the situation as follows: Invasion preparations
by the Anglo-Americans in the English Motherland are completed. Despite the fact that visual and photo recce has not yet been able to include
the whole of the English south coast, the observed concentrations of
landing shipping space, especially in the area north of the Isle of Wight
(Portsmouth – Southampton), nevertheless give a clear picture of a main
concentration deﬁning itself in that area. Tonnage of shipping space for
landings which has so far been observed can be assumed to be sufﬁcient
for 12 to 13 divisions . . . for fairly short sea-routes . . . The point of main
effort within the whole threatened Channel front stretching from Schedlt
to the northern tip of Brittany, appears to be roughly from Boulogne as
far as Normandy inclusive. In this connection, the enemy’s chief concern
must be to gain possession of large harbours with good performance.
Of primary importance as such would be Le Havre and Cherbourg, and
of secondary importance (in respect of performance as well) Boulogne
and Brest . . . The enemy landing exercise which took place most recently
indicates that the enemy attaches special importance to recognising and
clearing the outer-beach obstacles at low water . . .38
This communication, which was sent during the time when the Allies
were implementing the FORTITUDE deception, seems to suggest that von
Rundstedt, at least, was aware of the threat to Normandy. Although the
wireless component of FORTITUDE SOUTH did not open until late April,
the Allies had begun passing the cover story through physical deceptions
and double agents much earlier. Despite the deception, some Germans did
realise that the threat to Normandy was real.
Operation FORTITUDE was a well-organised, complex plan that its
creators and implementers wanted to believe was instrumental in making
Operation OVERLORD a success. Just as the Germans had preconceived
ideas about the importance of the Pas de Calais, so Allied ofﬁcials had a
preconceived notion of what FORTITUDE would accomplish. Because the
15th Army remained in the Pas de Calais until mid-July, they concluded
that the deception had achieved its objective. A new look at the evidence,

182

Mary Kathryn Barbier

however, suggests that other factors, in addition to FORTITUDE, inﬂuenced the German decision not to transfer the 15th Army immediately to
Normandy. While FORTITUDE helped the Allies successfully invade
Normandy, it is time to consider that the importance of the deception has
been overrated.

Notes
1 Peter Snow, ‘Operation FORTITUDE: The Deception Tactics Used for the
D-Day Landings, Normandy 1944’, Dirty Tricks, BBC radio programme, 134493/
2, recorded 7 October 1993 by the Imperial War Museum Sound Archive.
2 Major General Whiteley, letter dated 9 September 1943; R.F. Hesketh, Appendix
‘C’, dated 30 August 1943 in WO 219/250, PRO; Sir Ronald Wingate, Historical
Record of Deception in the War Against Germany & Japan, Volume II, DEFE
28/49, PRO, p. 391.
3 Wingate, ibid. Wingate was Bevan’s second in command in the LCS.
4 Ibid., p. 391.
5 Ibid., p. 361; Roger Hesketh, Fortitude: The D-Day Deception Campaign (London: St Ermin’s Press, 1999), pp. 17–19; Michael Howard, Strategic Deception in
the Second World War (London: Pimlico, 1990), pp. 107–9.
6 Exhibit 62, in Document 9 – ‘Operations in Support of NEPTUNE: (A) Plan
FORTITUDE, 26 February 1944, Exhibit “6” of C & D Report ETO’, in John
Mendelsohn (ed.) Covert Warfare, Volume 15 – Basic Deception and the Normandy Invasion (New York: Garland Publishing, 1989), p. 1.
7 James Bowman, ‘Fortitude South: The Making of the Calais Hoax’, a 1,000 page
manuscript and clippings ﬁle, Eisenhower Center, New Orleans, Part II, 2–1,
Part III, 2–9, 2–10.
8 Hesketh, 19–20; Wingate, Volume II, 392–5; ‘Cover Plan – Fortitude (South)’,
N.J.C./00/261/33, in WO 205/173, PRO.
9 Ibid.; ‘Order of Battle for S.E. Force’, Appendix ‘A’ to Part I, NJC/00/261/33, in
WO 205/173; ‘Wireless Layout S.E. Force’, Appendix ‘B’ to Part I, NJC/00/261/
33, BLM 102, Imperial War Museum.
10 ‘Cover Plan – Fortitude (South)’, WO 205/173; ‘Cover and Diversionary Plans’,
BLM 102; Part I of ‘Cover Plan – Fortitude (South)’, Covert Warfare, Volume 15
– Basic Deception and the Normandy Invaison; ‘Appendix D to Part I – Fortitude
(South) – Air Plan’, WO 205/173; Hesketh, p. 93.
11 Hesketh, p. 93; ‘Order of Battle for S.E. Force’, Appendix ‘A’ to Part I, NJC/00/
261/33, in WO 205/173, PRO; ‘Cover and Diversionary Plans’; N.J.C./00/261/33,
BLM 102, IWM.
12 Tactical and Staff Duties Division (Historical Section), Naval Staff, Admiralty,
Battle Summary No. 39, Volume 1, ‘Operation “Neptune”, Landings in Normandy, June 1944’, ADM 234/366, 38, PRO.
13 Howard, p. 121; Wingate, Volume II, p. 407.
14 ‘Operation “OVERLORD” Wireless Deception’, Appendix ‘A’ to COSSAC/2355/
Ops, dated 9 December 1943, WO 219/2208, PRO; ‘Plan “Fortitude” (“Neptune”)
– Allotment of Wireless Deception Units and Major Equipments’, Appendix ‘B’
to SHAEF (44) 21, dated 26 February 1944, WO 219/1847, PRO.
15 Len Whittaker, Some Talk of Private Armies (England: Albanium Publishing,
1984), p. 72.
16 William Breuer, Hoodwinking Hitler (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1993), pp. 113–15
and The Secret War with Germany: Deception, Espionage, and Dirty Tricks
(Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 1988), pp. 233–5.

Deception and the planning of D-Day 183
17 Howard, pp. 16–18, 121, 223; Hesketh, pp. 53– 4; Dusko Popov, Spy/Counterspy
(London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1974), pp. 14–58, 69, 97, 99–101, 188–92. See
also Russell Miller, Codename Tricycle: The True Story of the Second World
War’s Most Extraordinary Double Agent (London: Secker & Warburg, 2004).
18 Popov, p. 224.
19 Hesketh, pp. 47– 9; Howard, p. 231.
20 Juan Pujol and Nigel West, Operation GARBO: The Personal Story of the Most
Successful Double Agent of World War II (New York: Random House, 1985),
p. 129. See also GARBO: The Spy Who Saved D-Day (Richmond: Public Record
Ofﬁce, 2000).
21 Wingate, Volume II, pp. 407–8.
22 Ibid., p. 408.
23 Ibid., pp. 408–9.
24 Hesketh, pp. 351– 4.
25 T.L. Cubbage, II, ‘The German Misapprehensions Regarding OVERLORD:
Understanding Failure in the Estimative Process’, in Michael I. Handel (ed.)
Strategic and Operational Deception in the Second World War (London: Frank
Cass, 1987), p. 124; Anton Staubwasser, ‘The Enemy as Seen by the Oberkommando of the Heeresgruppe B before Invasion (Time: End of May – Beginning
of June 1944)’, MS # B-675, dated 1 October 1947, pp. 9 –10, 13–14. Document
furnished by Professor Russell Hart, Hawaii Paciﬁc University.
26 ‘The German Intelligence Service and the War’, p. 4. Norman Holmes Pearson
Papers, Beinecke Library, Yale University.
27 J.C. Masterman, The Double-Cross System in the War of 1939 to 1945 (New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1972), pp. 3, 6–7. For more information
about the exploits of Garbo and Tricycle, see the following books: Dusko Popov,
Spy/Counterspy (London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson, 1974); Juan Pujol and Nigel
West, Operation GARBO: The Personal Story of the Most Successful Double
Agent of World War II (New York: Random House, 1985); GARBO: The
Spy Who Saved D-Day (Richmond: Public Record Ofﬁce, 2000); and Russell
Miller, Codename Tricycle: The True Story of the Second World War’s Most
Extraordinary Double Agent (London: Secker & Warburg, 2004).
28 Miller, p. 184.
29 ‘The German Intelligence Service and the War’, p. 4.
30 Nr. 007774.43 g, K. WFSt/Op., Keitel directive dated 12 December 1943, Führer
Directives and Other Top-Level Directives of the German Armed Forces 1942–
1945, translation (Washington, DC: n.p., 1948), pp. 110–15. AL768, Imperial
War Museum.
31 Howard, pp. 188–9.
32 Sir Arthur Travers Harris, Bomber Offensive (Don Mills, ONT: Stoddard, 1990),
p. 207; Forrest C. Pogue, United States Army in World War II: The European
Theater of Operations, Volume 3 Part 4, The Supreme Command ( Washington,
DC: Ofﬁce of the Chief of Military History, Department of the Army, 1954),
pp. 132– 4; Russell A. Hart, ‘Feeding Mars: The Role of Logistics in the German
Defeat in Normandy, 1944’, War in History, 3 (1996), p. 420; Richard Overy,
Why the Allies Won (New York: W.W. Norton, 1995), p. 167; Lieutenant Colonel A.E. Warhurst, the Historical Section of the Cabinet, Section D, Chapter II
(Book One), ‘OVERLORD: D-Day 6 June 1944’, pp. 23–5, CAB 44/243, PRO.
33 Hart, pp. 423, 425– 6.
34 C/6431 from Boniface to Loxley, dated 6th May 1944, HW 1/2765, PRO; CIBS/
PM/497 dated 3rd May 1944, signed Brooke, CIGS to the Prime Minister, HW
1/2761, PRO; CX/MSS/T183/84, KV 37663, dated 8 May from Commanderin-Chief West, HW 1/2784; Hart, pp. 419–21, 425, 434. According to Russell
A. Hart, ‘The interdiction campaign had thus already seriously compromised the

184

Mary Kathryn Barbier

German ability both to redeploy forces to Normandy and to resupply such forces
once committed’. See ‘Learning Lessons: Military Adaptation and Innovation in
the American, British, Canadian, and German Armies during the 1944 Normandy
Campaign’, dissertation, Ohio State University, 1997.
35 Howard, pp. 187–8.
36 Niklas Zetterling, Normandy 1944: German Military Organization, Combat Power
and Organizational Effectiveness (Winnipeg, Manitoba: J.J. Fedorowicz, 2000),
pp. 396– 400; Craig Bickell, ‘Operation FORTITUDE SOUTH: An Analysis
of its Inﬂuence upon German Dispositions and Conduct of Operations in 1944’,
War & Society, 18: 105–21; David Westwood, ‘The German Army in France
6 June 1944’, paper presented at ‘Normandy 60 Years On’ conference, University
of Wolverhampton, July 2004.
37 CX/MSS/ T178/86, KV 3242, dated 8 May 1944, from Luftﬂotte 3, IC, NO7228/
44, HW 1/2781.
38 CX./MSS/ T.183/84, KV 3763, ‘Appreciation by Charlie in Charlie West Eight
May’, HW 1/2784, PRO.

14 Intelligence and OVERLORD
A snapshot from 6 June 1944
John Ferris

Allied intelligence for OVERLORD is usually seen as a success story. That
is the truth – just not all of it. Intelligence revealed German expectations,
understanding and intentions. It showed the enemy was behaving as OVERLORD assumed, how the Allied deception plan, FORTITUDE, was working, and the weakness of enemy wireless intelligence and aerial reconnaissance.
MI5’s control over German agents revealed enemy expectations, and shaped
them. Ultra and Magic showed that German generals and Adolf Hitler
exaggerated Allied forces in Britain by 200 per cent, the initial strength of
a seaborne assault by 400 per cent and remained ﬁxed on the Pas de Calais.
However, during May 1944 they were paying increasing attention to Normandy and strengthening its garrison.1 Intelligence was excellent on great
issues yet mediocre about major ones, like enemy strength in Normandy on
6 June 1944. Scholars have noted these facts but not explained them. In
1994, Alexander Cochrane described intelligence and deception as the ‘missing dimension’ of studies in OVERLORD.2 In 2006, planning and intelligence
in OVERLORD remain mutually exclusive topics. That problem cannot be
solved in 8,000 words or so, but this chapter will examine Allied assessments
before the invasion of the enemy’s combat strength in France, and consider
why intelligence success and failure marched hand in hand for OVERLORD,
and how far either mattered.
OVERLORD involved a struggle between two sides in military rationality, intelligence and deception. The Allies won in every sphere. Reason led
both sides to conclude that the ideal place for an Allied attack would be
the Pas de Calais, with Normandy second and anywhere else a distant third;
and an attacker would have great logistical problems. Thus, the Germans
assumed any Allied attack must aim immediately to seize a major port.
They spread their bets everywhere, but above all at the Pas de Calais. The
Allies put all theirs on Normandy, where they faced just a fragment of
enemy strength and evaded most of it – and carried a port in their hands.
Again, OVERLORD was the ﬁrst priority for Allied intelligence services,
aided by specialist organs focusing on issues like beach topography. They
had good human sources, excellent imagery and Ultra, and fused them. German sources failed in coordination and quality. Their spies were controlled

186

John Ferris

by MI5, their imagery was spotty and their signals intelligence mediocre,
missing truth and eating lies. German commanders paid almost as much
attention to deception as Allied ones, leaking false news about their strength
in defences and divisions – to no avail.3 Conversely, FORTITUDE reinforced German preconceptions which the Allies predicted by reason and
detected by intelligence.4
In planning for OVERLORD, military rationality always came ﬁrst, intelligence second. Operational decisions were made by middle-level planners at
Chief of Staff Supreme Allied Commander Designate (COSSAC), Supreme
Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) and 21st Army Group,
by the Supreme Allied Commander and the Chief of 21st Army Group,
Dwight Eisenhower and Bernard Montgomery, and sometimes by the British
Chiefs of Staff (COS). The key decisions were made purely on the basis of
military rationality, with intelligence irrelevant, by COSSAC in July 1943,
to avoid the Pas de Calais and strike Normandy, tant pis; and by Eisenhower
and Montgomery in January 1944, to double the frontage and strength of
the initial attack. Intelligence was secondary even in the formulation of the
initial plan for OVERLORD, though it became central when that plan was
reﬁned and applied between April and June 1944. Most decisions emerged
through the routine interaction of mid-level military bureaucrats, their arguments, agreements and differences.
This was especially true of intelligence. The British Joint Intelligence
Committee (JIC), MI14, the German branch at the Military Intelligence
Division, and mid-level ﬁgures in COSSAC, SHAEF and 21st Army Group,
dominated estimates. Specialists handled collection and deception. These
ofﬁcers were able, experienced and British. Montgomery and his chief of
intelligence, Edgar ‘Bill’ Williams, had served harmoniously for two years.
Montgomery’s chief of staff, Freddie de Guingand, thought Williams ‘the
most able and clear-headed’ general staff intelligence ‘I have ever met’.
From January to May, General John Whiteley, an operations ofﬁcer trusted
by Eisenhower but not Montgomery, and without experience as an intelligence chief, ran SHAEF G-2. He was replaced just before D-Day by Ken
Strong, Eisenhower’s intelligence chief in 1943 and ﬁrst choice for SHAEF
G-2.5 MI14 and JIC reports went only to top commanders and staff ofﬁcers;
so too, some assessments by SHAEF G-2 and Williams, though all staff
ofﬁcers and commands to division level received their weekly estimates.
During the planning for OVERLORD, MI14 and JIC dominated analyses
of strategic issues and enemy organisation, while Whiteley and Strong
harmonised all sources for their commander and his forces. After D-Day,
SHAEF G-2 dominated intelligence in the west, seizing power from MI14
and Williams, but until then it was a ﬁfth wheel. The 21st Army Group
dominated operational planning, and Williams the intelligence for it.
Tensions there were within intelligence, because of opinion, personality
and tangled lines of command. Thus, in February 1944, the senior operations ofﬁcer at SHAEF thought Williams was addressing ‘a problem of a

187

Intelligence and OVERLORD
6

much larger nature than any with which he had been previously faced’. Yet
they also pulled together. Williams told Whitely, his senior in hierarchy but
junior in experience:
I do not want to be preaching a contrary doctrine to yours, for I feel
there is real value in an agreed text. If we are to be wrong, let’s all
be wrong together. At least then our Commanders will not have had
muddled counsel. You will remember the loss of conﬁdence in the
Middle East caused by the internecine but public disputes between the
‘I’ people which helped nobody, least of all the disputants.7
These ofﬁcers avoided disputes, but agreed texts were hard to ﬁnd, because
they confronted a situation up to 12 months away. They made and argued
over predictions as much as assessments; all strove for accuracy, each understood its limits. COSSAC’s July 1943 plan for OVERLORD noted:
As it is impossible to forecast with any accuracy the number and location of German formations in reserve in 1944, while, on the other hand,
the forces available to us have been laid down, an attempt has been
made in this paper to determine the wisest employment of our own
forces and then to determine the maximum number of German formations which they can reasonably overcome. Apart from the air situation, which is an over-riding factor, the practicability of this plan will
depend principally on the number, effectiveness and availability of
German divisions present in France and the Low Countries in relation
to our own capabilities.8
Commanders and planners thought less about Germany’s current strength
in France than how it would meet amphibious attack, its power relative to
Allied forces in recent battles, its uncommitted forces across Europe and
their speed of deployment. When making these decisions, Allied planners
used whatever intelligence they had. It served them well. Yet between the
time plans were made and executed, much might change; and many key
points did not lie simply in the sphere of intelligence – like how good the
enemy would be, and how it would prepare its defences and counter-attack.
The value of intelligence was deﬁned by its ability to support planning based
on predictions of power and military rationality.
This produced characteristics in preparations for Normandy. Intelligence
and planning were never effectively combined on paper, only in the minds
of commanders. The planning applied on 6 June 1944 rested on old estimates, not current ones. Most planning was done by April, reﬂecting estimates of that era. Even more, these estimates and plans recognised a wide
range of possibilities. Assessment had to be ﬂuid, because enemy strength
and intentions were changing, and rapidly. The Allies originally planned
to attack on 1 May. Had they done so, Normandy would have had barely

188

John Ferris

50 per cent of its garrison of 6 June, which in turn might have received the
extra few divisions needed to force the postponement of OVERLORD had
the attack waited until 1 July. If the enemy guessed right, it could defeat
OVERLORD, or deter it. Meanwhile, a dynamic tension emerged between
worst-case and better-case assessments. Worst-case logic has a bad reputation, because in open-ended circumstances it causes timidity and costs
opportunity. Yet in OVERLORD, uncertainty on basic issues and the need
to control risks were unusually high. Caution was the better part of error,
doubly so because planners and commanders recognised they were applying
worst-case logic, tried to minimise its impact, and sought to understand how
the Germans (not the Allies) would act.
COSSAC assumed the quality of enemy units would remain constant and
the enemy would use them as well as it could. COSSAC’s July 1943 assessment of the air aspect of OVERLORD was a classic statement of worst-case
planning:
The following estimates and appreciations are based on factual intelligence and consider the scale of enemy air effort possible under ideal
conditions, not taking into account any effect that the present Allied
air offensive may have on the G.A.F.’s ﬁghting value in the future . . .
Furthermore, the rates of reinforcement are those of which the enemy is
physically capable, considering the scale of efﬁciency of his organization as a whole, and do not take into account the effects of any counteraction by Allied forces. The scale of effort envisaged assumes also that
the enemy would concentrate the maximum strength possible even at
the expense of adequate defence elsewhere.9
In this instance, worst-case logic was accurate: during June 1944 the Luftwaffe
did throw most of its remaining aircraft across Europe into the battle of
Normandy. Had that logic been applied to land forces, planners would have
had to abandon OVERLORD; here, the worst case centred on the nature
and the number of ‘full-strength ﬁrst quality divisions’ Germany could use
against OVERLORD. In July 1943, COSSAC concluded that OVERLORD
had a ‘reasonable chance of success’ only if German forces and defences in
Normandy, its reserves in the West and all aircraft deployable there, did not
rise above the level of 30 July 1943, including 12 ‘full-strength ﬁrst quality
divisions’ in France; if no more than three such formations joined the local
forces of three infantry divisions on D-Day, ﬁve by D + 2 and nine by D + 8;
and if no more than 15 good formations moved in from other theatres by
D + 60.10
Soon, the quality of German forces sagged, and was seen to be sagging.
In July 1943, COSSAC calculated Germany had 1,740 ﬁrst-line aircraft in
the West, but its key concern was the ‘steady rise’ in ﬁghter strength, which
must be ‘checked and reduced’ before invasion. Air intelligence estimated
that between 1 January and 1 August 1943, German ﬁrst-line strength in

Intelligence and OVERLORD

189

ﬁghters had grown by 245 aircraft to 1,340 (or 2,260, counting second-line
reserves), and in the West from 305 to 600 machines.11 In February 1944,
planners expected to confront 1,650 ﬁrst-line German aircraft on D + 1,
perhaps soon joined by 950 more but, like COSSAC, they noted the
Luftwaffe’s lack of ‘appreciable depth’ and inability to sustain losses. Soon,
SHAEF thought German ﬁghter pilots ‘vastly inferior in quality’ to American ones. By May, the British COS agreed that the Luftwaffe’s strength
exceeded July 1943 levels by 5,250 to 4,870 aircraft, including 2,700 ﬁghters
versus 2,175 (ﬁrst-line and all reserves), but this was irrelevant: its decline in
quality, production and reserves changed the meaning of the numbers.12
These ﬁgures still distorted German air strength – the Luftwaffe did throw
most of its ﬁghters into OVERLORD, but they numbered barely 1,300 – yet
that problem was minor. All planners abandoned the worst case about the
Luftwaffe save Trafford Leigh-Mallory, commander of the Allied Expeditionary Air Force; this provoked needless debate over any part of OVERLORD related to air support, crippled the use of airborne forces and made
decisions imperfect, but not seriously so. Worst-case logic ruled the air
equation and also the naval one, but caused little worse than waste.
The story was different regarding assessments of the German army. As
COSSAC wrote, the issue was not so much ‘the precise number’ of enemy
divisions as their ‘effectiveness’: if they ‘are below strength or of low morale,
or if German ability to move them is reduced, we can face and defeat a
proportionately larger number’.13 When assessing the balance between the
Allied and German build-ups in Normandy, a major ﬁgure in the operations
section at SHAEF, General H.R. Bull noted:
we are tempted to look on the enemy forces as fully-equipped, fullytrained, battle experienced 1940 divisions, instead of regarding them as
1944 divisions, diluted by foreign elements, and in several cases far from
being up to strength or effectively trained . . . I feel that the whole difﬁculty in estimating the enemy’s course of action lies in appreciating
what real strength we are up against as opposed to theoretical strength.
This, I think, must be evaluated in the monthly estimate of the rate of
reinforcement, to avoid giving us the one-sided impression a purely
logistical calculation is apt to do.14
Great problems emerged in understanding the enemy’s real strength. Several good sources, Ultra above all but also agents in France and imagery,
kept an extraordinary grip on the enemy’s order of battle. From August
1943 to June 1944, the number of German formations in France constantly
shifted, as did Allied estimates of them, reﬂecting both knowledge and ignorance. Until April, when SHAEF thought its information ‘unsatisfactory’,
they included several German formations which were not in that theatre.15
Estimates were ﬁlled with speculation about the value and name of formations. Given the nature of planning and the situation, these problems were

190

John Ferris

hard to avoid and errors often cancelled each other out. At any time, Allied
intelligence was good on the identiﬁcations, numbers and locations of formations in, entering or leaving the theatre, and almost perfect on these matters
in the weeks before D-Day. It gave commanders accurate information
they trusted, reinforcing their faith that enemy strength was still within the
COSSAC conditions.16
Yet, simply to identify the quantity of divisions was not enough; their
quality was of equal importance. Virtually every formation in France was
rebuilding, some starting in early 1944 from just 10–25 per cent their establishment of equipment and trained soldiers; to determine how good they
would be on the day, one needed to know not just their current strength,
but how far and fast each would improve. Two types of formation proved
especially hard to assess. ‘Training’ divisions, infantry and armoured, had an
uncertain value: though usually that title described their function, rarely they
did serve in combat, and over time their rating could rise. Meanwhile, the
Allies ranked German infantry divisions either as ﬁeld infantry, capable of
independent assault in mobile operations, or lower establishment (LE), defensive formations ranging from poor to decent in quality, about half having just
two instead of three regiments, including some ‘Ost’ battalions (with German
ofﬁcers and ex-Soviet soldiers). The Allies had mixed success in determining
the ‘real strength’ of most enemy infantry, and also of its best forces.
Ultra illuminated the manpower and training of Panzer, Panzer grenadier
and paratroop formations, but not their equipment. Ultra and the Combined Service Document and Interrogation Centre (CSDIC), which collected
and assessed material from prisoners and captured documents, offered
good material about LE divisions.17 The Allies’ grasp of these formations
was sound, no easy task, yet not perfect. Conversely, intelligence on ﬁeld infantry was lacking, and estimates of their value were arbitrary and erroneous.
These problems were fundamental to planning, though not on the battleﬁeld, fortunately. JIC’s last full estimate of German strength in France
identiﬁed 14 ﬁeld infantry divisions there. It overrated by 33 per cent the
manpower of four of them, and that of eight others and most LE formations by 10 per cent. JIC slightly underrated the quality of the best infantry
in France, 3 Paratroop Division, which also had 33 per cent more soldiers
than expected – 18,000 men, twice the strength of the average infantry division in France. With that exception, every other so-called ﬁeld infantry
formation had just 50–66 per cent the manpower of average ones of 1939.18
Only one of them, 5 Paratroop Division, had the strength even of German
formations that in 1943 the British termed ‘2nd quality infantry divisions’
(12,000 soldiers), while four were much weaker than ‘defensive infantry
divisions’ (10,000 men).19 Manpower was only one indicator of combat value,
but a central one, and the Allies knew German infantry placed increasing
reliance on organic ﬁrepower. All told, Allied intelligence distorted the
combat quality of German infantry – in reality, only one ﬁeld infantry
division stood in France, 3 Paratroop. The rest were just slightly better

Intelligence and OVERLORD

191

LE formations, and many of the latter were far worse than even that title
would indicate.
A little intelligence and knowledge of standard enemy practices provided
a fair, if overstated, account of the number of ﬂak guns which could be
deployed at Normandy, calculated at around 1,300.20 This approach failed
in another sphere. In its greatest technical failure before D-Day, Allied
intelligence did not know the number of tanks in Panzer divisions, or the
number of divisions in France, and knew it did not. This failure stemmed
from limits in Ultra, which did worse in tank counting than ever since 1941,
because changes in the way German formations reported their tank strengths
stymied Bletchley Park. Ultra solved messages, but could not understand
their meaning. Bletchley began to overcome these problems on D-Day itself,
but all prior calculations rested on guesses.21 These took many forms. Allied
planners knew the number, location and manpower of armoured formations
in France, but errors over tank strength crippled views of their combat
value. The Germans had fewer tanks than Allied intelligence feared, but
more than Allied planners assumed. On 6 April 1944, Ultra showed that
the German commander in the West, Gerd von Rundstedt, aimed to make
his three Panzer training divisions combat worthy as quickly as possible.
Williams, thinking this ‘a desperate improvisation’, never took it seriously,
at most seeming to think each might provide a combat worthy battlegroup.
Before von Rundstedt’s message, the JIC rated these formations and all
non-divisional armour as together matching two divisions in strength. In
early April, conversely, MI14 expected each Panzer training division to be
fully operational by D-Day. By 30 April, JIC rated them as equal to two
operational divisions; by 25 May it thought only ‘elements’ of each ‘are at
present capable of employment in an offensive role’. In fact, they did not
ﬁght until the last days of Normandy, with mediocre quality.22 Yet throughout this period, these formations were always counted at face value on the
books, crediting the enemy with three more Panzer/Panzer grenadier divisions in France than the seven which were there on 6 June. Hard intelligence
on these formations was scanty – one training division had no Panther
battalion and was short of motor transport; 2 SS Panzer and 17 SS Panzer
grenadier lacked motor transport while 12 SS Panzer did not; ‘slight evidence’ suggested 21 Panzer had two tank regiments (in fact, it had one
weak regiment).23 The absence of intelligence drove the Allies to predict
German tank strength by their understanding of enemy establishments. This
approach usually caused overestimates, as the Allies understood these establishments no more than the Germans followed them.
MI14, thinking it knew from Ultra the formal establishment of Panthers
in Panzer divisions but ignorant of their real strength, assumed all but training divisions had a full strength battalion with 81 Panthers, unless it had
proof to the contrary, reversing the analytical process used to determine the
number of Panzer divisions in France.24 MI14 and SHAEF’s grasp of the
strength of Tigers and Panthers in non-divisional units was accurate enough

192

John Ferris

(135 Tigers and 283/320 Panthers, against in reality 102 and 250 on 6 June,
or the armoured elements of three Panzer divisions). They were, however,
wrong on important elements of German organisation. They did not know
21st Panzer Division lacked its Panther battalion, while those of two
armoured formations and a training one were at 50–66 per cent their establishment strength; and thought four assault gun battalions were additional
non-divisional units, rather than being part of formations. Predictions of
strength derived from establishments could take many forms. If one added
the ﬁgures for non-divisional armour and assault guns to seven Panzer divisions on what was taken to be full establishment, plus one Panther regiment
above establishment, and three training divisions weak in Panthers, one had
some 1,750 armoured ﬁghting vehicles (AFVs) – or 1,560, if the training
divisions were entirely removed from that ﬁgure.
In reality, even the low-ball projections exaggerated the problem. On
6 June 1944, in France the Germans had 1,891 AFVs, including 179 captured
ones, 39 Mark IIIs (for command purposes), 758 Mark IVs, 102 Tigers,
655 Panthers and 158 assault guns. Of these, 12 per cent had little combat
value (captured tanks and Mark IIIs), while another 15 per cent, the 253
Mark IVs and 40 Panthers in training divisions, were irrelevant until 25 July
1944, leaving 1,420 battleworthy AFVs on 6 June 1944. German strength
was hard to determine. Allied estimates of it varied wildly, and many were
grossly wrong.
Just before D-Day, Third US Army thought the Germans had 1,750 to
2,600 tanks. The First United States Army Group, relying on estimates of
enemy strength from February, assumed each of the seven Panzer and Panzer
grenadier divisions it thought were in the theatre would have what it took to
be a full complement of 160 tanks, but ignored non-divisional forces and
training divisions, for a total of 1,120. MI14, the JIC and SHAEF thought
the Germans had 800 to 850 to Panthers alone, though they could not offer
‘a reliable estimate’, and ‘may possibly’ have a total of 3,000 tanks – 159 per
cent above the true strength.25 The ﬁgure of 1,120 came from knowledge
of average German complements; so too that of 3,000, added to every
piece of certain and uncertain information, including aircraft sightings of
empty ﬂat cars, commonly used to carry Panthers on trains, moving eastward toward the Rhine, indicating they had done so in an unobserved
inward trip. At the strategic level, imagery on train movements created more
mysteries then it solved. However, Allied estimates of German tank strength
were wrong, in many ways, not just one. They were all over the map. The
problem was uncertainty rather than error. This caused debate at the strategic level, but little harm, since the issue was academic and the mistakes
cancelled each other out. Greater problems emerged at the tactical level.
The issue was not just the enemy’s total and real strength, but also how
much of it could intervene in the battle, and when. This matter, central to
planning for OVERLORD, is too large for proper analysis here. Brieﬂy,
Allied planners were split on this point. Most grossly overestimated the
problem, but Williams came close to the truth, and 21st Army Group acted

Intelligence and OVERLORD

193

on his assessments. On 6 June, the Normandy garrison was stronger than
any analyst predicted before 25 May – past the level COSSAC thought
manageable. This rise in strength did not produce failure, but it did prevent
success. After 6 June, conversely, German reinforcements were smaller and
slower than any Allied analyst dared predict, though close to the level
Williams hoped. By D + 12 (18 June), ﬁve Panzer/Panzer grenadier divisions,
three infantry divisions (including 3 Paratroop) and elements from two
more reached Normandy. Compared to SHAEF’s predictions of 3 June,26
this was 66 per cent the expected level of reinforcements in armoured formations and 40 per cent in infantry, producing a total of 60 per cent the
mechanised divisions (six) and 65 per cent the infantry (nine divisions and
three battlegroups) at the front. Even more, two of these Panzer divisions
were not yet in action. By D + 25 (1 July), another infantry division, elements
of four others and two Panzer divisions reached the front. Compared to
SHAEF’s predictions of 3 June, this was 100 per cent the expected gains in
armoured formations but only 20 per cent of the infantry, producing at the
front 80 per cent the Panzer/Panzer grenadier divisions (eight) and 47 per
cent the infantry – much less, given their losses (ten divisions, and elements
from another seven;) in both cases, battlegroups were treated as 33 per cent
of a division, an overstatement which perhaps balances 3 Paratroop’s superiority over any other German division. On these issues, Williams was much
more accurate than any other analyst, and good by any standard. All Allied
analysts, however, were wrong on two major matters. On 6 June, 19 per
cent of German tanks in France (including 40 per cent of their Panthers and
Tigers) were in non-divisional units. Planners never forecast their arrival,
which shaped the ﬁghting. Roughly half these tanks reached the front by
D + 12, the rest by D + 25. Meanwhile, no analyst predicted the main
German transfer to France, the return from Poland of 9 and 10 SS Panzer
Divisions, with 15 per cent the total tank strength in France on 6 June.
Thus, the Germans transferred as many elite forces to France from outside
it as the Allies ever feared, but only one other infantry division. These
transfers were smaller than Allied analysts had predicted before 25 May,
but larger than they had hoped just before D-Day.
Compared to what did happen, Williams’s assessments of what would happen were good, but not perfect. He slightly underrated enemy capabilities,
which all other analysts signiﬁcantly exaggerated. Allied planning followed
his estimates, gaining from their strengths and losing from their ﬂaws, which
stemmed less from intelligence per se than its relationship to planning. The
Allies could use strategic intelligence until the moment landing craft
were launched, but just in one sense, to postpone OVERLORD. Tactical
intelligence could be incorporated up to 48 hours before, but only in matters
like ﬁre plans on the beaches. From mid-May, however, operations and
operational intelligence were prisoners of prior planning. The naval commander forbade any change to plans for D-Day involving seaborne landings
or supply. Except on the Cotentin peninsula, where in late May airborne
attacks were changed to reﬂect enemy redeployments, the planning applied

194

John Ferris

on D-Day was made between February and April. It rested on Williams’s
estimates from that period, the most optimistic reading of evidence from
the most optimistic time, which no one entirely accepted on 5 June. These
plans assumed the enemy would have fewer formations at Normandy
between D + 8 and D + 20 than SHAEF expected and more than 21st Army
Group did; and that the Normandy garrison would be weaker than every
analyst thought it was.
Williams rightly predicted the value of German infantry and armoured
divisions, and their strength in formations around the beachhead by D + 8
and D + 20. When these plans were formulated between February and
April, he was more right on those issues than anyone else; and so too when
they began to be executed. Yet his estimates on the day of execution were
different from those during the days of planning. Again, because he accurately assessed the numbers of combat-worthy formations in France, his
estimates were upset more by unexpected matters, like the rise in the Normandy garrison just before OVERLORD, or the arrival of 9 and 10 SS
Panzer Divisions, than were those of other analysts, with fat free from their
worst cases to cover underestimates elsewhere. The Allies paid for Williams’s
accuracy in assessment by underestimating the enemy in important particulars, though the gains were worth the costs. Again, by 5 June Williams had
a remarkably good picture of the enemy which, alas, could not help units on
6 June, though it guided actions in coming days. Like other planners at 21st
Army Group, he was more accurate about numbers of enemy formations
than the situation they would produce once battle was joined. His estimates
and their planning attempted precisely to gauge the nature of many variables
and their interactions and combine them into one whole. He and they were
remarkably accurate, but imperfect, and the battle took a different form
than they had expected. This should not be surprising. Normandy was a
hard operation; it only seems easy because it was done so well, something
critics often forget. OVERLORD, the most complex operation of the Second
World War, faced interlocking problems that required precise and accurate
solutions. Either inaccuracy or imprecision could hamper operations or wreck
them; yet the more precise planning was, the less accurate it could be, because
chance must strike like a tsunami. Planners for OVERLORD controlled just
one part of a reciprocal system. They determined what to do on the basis of
guesses about what the enemy would do, and the interaction between their
wills and actions and chance. The 21st Army Group understood these facts.
It played to the odds and understood them. What went right outweighs
what went wrong, and avoided the worst of outcomes; but still some mixed
ones occurred, because of the way the Allies made decisions.
Some aspects of OVERLORD were planned in a tight and centralised
way – in particular, anything to do with seaborne issues, like beach assault
and logistics – others not. OVERLORD, after all, was deﬁned by a staff
without power or responsibility. Its land component was reﬁned by another
staff parachuted in ﬁve months before the attack; and it was fought by
armies of several nationalities, each with its own command, doctrine, training

Intelligence and OVERLORD

195

and preparations on stream. This produced a strikingly loose approach to
intelligence, planning and training. Estimates of German armoured strength
were imprecise, contradictory, and left that way – every authority was free
to believe what it wished; so too, views of enemy strength between D-Day
and D + 25. The 21st Army Group followed Williams, while American
forces were more pessimistic. In May 1944, FUSAG’s version of Neptune
used for intelligence an estimate of 10 February 1944, so old that many of
the formations it listed were no longer in the West, while others known to
be there were not mentioned. The Third US Army gave its forces an assessment based on SHAEF’s views of 17 April.27 That every command had its
own estimates created some confusion on 6 June. Above all, it blinded
generals and units to tactical realities. In preparing for OVERLORD, the
Allies faced three circumstances, each requiring complex and distinct training: beach assault, attrition and mobile war. Everyone expected and trained
for the best case – quick breakthrough leading to mobile war – and ignored
the prospect of having to ﬁght through the bocage, which seemed pessimistic
and old-fashioned. This issue fell through that gap in intelligence, planning
and training. No Allied commander matched Montgomery in the ability to
ﬁght this kind of battle, but even his plans did not play to this strength. He
knew how to handle these circumstances, but hoped they would not happen.
Where British and Canadian units had a tribal understanding of how to
ﬁght such a battle, American units did not, and their commanders ignored
these weaknesses. This shaped a key phenomenon of the ﬁrst six weeks of
the Battle of Normandy: the failure of the American army.
This problem grew because the Allied ability to gain what usually is the
easiest material to ﬁnd, tactical intelligence, was constrained. In the 50 days
before 6 June, eight dedicated squadrons aimed to conduct 735 photographic reconnaissance (PR) missions in north-west France, including seven
overﬂights of the main beachhead up to 4,000 yards inland, and detailed
coverage of beach gradients and enemy forces. Yet the Allies could not
focus these resources on the real target for fear of tipping their hand. They
sought to ﬂy two imagery missions elsewhere for every one ﬂown over Normandy, a high price for security and deception, beyond the reach of poorer
powers and expensive even for them. Tactical ignorance was the cost of
strategic security. When free to concentrate on the real target, PR was far
more effective – from 6 June 1944, 380 sorties were ﬂown over Normandy
each day.28 Had this effort been possible before OVERLORD it might have
solved the problems in tactical intelligence. So too, in February 1944, the
Allies ceased trying to take prisoners or conduct seaborne reconnaissance in
Normandy, though they knew this would cripple the collection of tactical
information. The only such mission run thereafter, aimed to examine outer
beach defences, was done at the Pas de Calais, for security reasons and with
effect – though the Germans detected the mission, it reinforced OKW’s
predisposition to fear for that region.29 The Allies hoped to make up for the
damage to tactical intelligence by interrogating prisoners taken in Italy who
previously had been in Normandy, with mixed success.30 Allied forces in Italy

196

John Ferris

did not capture prisoners from any division presently in Normandy, though
some based there in 1943 did illuminate old procedures, while other captives
gave excellent and recent accounts of defences and their defenders in Brittany,
Belgium and the Netherlands.31 CSDIC provided useful background to assessments of defences in Normandy, but nothing concrete; imagery provided
many facts, which guided planners and commanders, and the maps issued
to assault units, but much was missed. Whenever the Germans changed
anything in Normandy, the Allies could not know of it for days or weeks.
These circumstances and constraints prevented good intelligence services
from discovering basic points. Errors that normally would be inexcusable
were unavoidable. Few things should be easier in intelligence than to determine the strength and defences in a tactical sector one plans to attack; but
this proved beyond the grasp of services which otherwise achieved marvels.
Though prior planning and the initial assault rested on a good picture of
the topography and defences on the beaches, the Allies missed important
details: and at H hour, a prior failure to locate individual guns could have
deadly costs. In particular, they were unsure of the deployment of two of
the enemy’s seven divisions in Normandy, its best formations there, standing precisely at places the Allies must attack on D-Day: 352 Infantry Division raised by 150 per cent the strength of the garrison on Gold and Omaha
Beaches and made them formidable, while 21 Panzer placed its anti-tank
units and half its infantry between the River Orne and Caen, key British
targets on D-Day, with its armour in easy reach behind. This position was
well suited to its task and its enemy – the Germans deployed their forces as
well in Normandy as they did badly in other parts of France.
Allied intelligence looked hard and objectively for information on these
forces. Williams suspected, but could not prove, they might be near their
true locations. His last report before D-Day, of 4 June, warned 352 Division
might be where it really was but 21 Panzer was unlocated, though thought
to be entirely outside the assault area, from which it would advance toward
Caen as a whole around H + 12. Williams was wrong about where enemy
armour would be met, but right on its strength. He warned his forces that
they might engage 280 AFVs on D-Day; the two armoured formations
in the sector actually had 276, though poor German decisions kept 12 SS
Panzer with its 164 tanks from the battle until D + 1. Second Army intelligence, conversely, warned its units to expect immediate local counterattacks by some armour, while between H + 12 and H + 24, they might
encounter 540 tanks (twice the real strength at hand), and perhaps 160 more
from 17 SS Panzer Grenadier Division (which had only 42 assault guns).32
Second Army correctly warned some armour might be met before Caen,
and more there, but distorted that strength, in one of the greatest examples
of worst-case logic before OVERLORD. As with the JIC or SHAEF in
similar instances, Second Army probably was not stating its real beliefs, but
deﬁning the absolute worst case to make people think about the problem in
advance, to show the limits to bad news, and for the record. This warning,
however, was too big and vague to help; only a more precise and timely

Intelligence and OVERLORD

197

statement could have done so. In fact, if it was right, all that could be done
was cancel OVERLORD – the Allies could not possibly defeat a force so
much larger than that deﬁned in the COSSAC conditions.
Williams’s last estimate reached divisional commanders only as they were
at sea, but that of Second Army was known to all units. They treated it as
academic – above their pay grade. Units prepared only for what they could
handle. They focused on known problems like hitting the beaches and forming
up to advance, which already were necessary, difﬁcult and time-consuming.
They tended to ignore problems which would emerge later, doubly so
because these circumstances were unpredictable and estimates of them
constantly changing. Units simply assumed they would drive straight off the
beaches and ﬁrst meet enemy forces around Caen, in an encounter battle,
possibly with Germans attacking British positions, rather than charging
themselves into enemy units deployed in defensive systems. They expected
to meet much enemy armour after Caen, but little before it. Nothing but a
clear warning weeks in advance that the enemy already controlled the approaches to Caen in force could have affected their attitudes. Williams would
have issued such a warning had he been able to, as might have been the case
had the attack waited a few days – by which time, of course, more Germans
might have reached Normandy. Even such a warning could only have saved
some tanks and, above all, conﬁdence in high command; the real problem
was that the Germans held Caen, not that this surprised the Allies. These
failures in intelligence cost lives, but not the battle. Even had they known
the truth, the Allies would have had to advance on 6–7 June, and largely
as they did – otherwise they would have been damned for passivity. So too,
sure knowledge of the location of 352 Division could have done nothing to
stem the slaughter at Omaha Beach. These intelligence failures were indicative, but not inﬂuential.
More signiﬁcant was a muted version of an old problem. When CRUSADER was launched during 1941, British intelligence was precise in classic
ways – 99 per cent accurate on the enemy’s order of battle and numbers
of tanks – and let the British time their attack with optimum effect. Yet
they were grossly wrong on basic matters, like the quality of enemy forces
and weapons relative to their own.33 Meanwhile, an extremely precise plan
relying on intelligence collapsed, as did the Eighth Army. Poor training
negated good intelligence. British intelligence was more accurate before CRUSADER than OVERLORD, and integrated as much into planning; but
by 1944, Allied armies, plans and commanders were better. Even so, before
OVERLORD the Allies misinterpreted the relationship between terrain and
tactics. Planners and units assumed that once ashore they would quickly
enter the rolling country inland from Normandy, and ﬁght mobile battles.
Even an able ‘tactical study of the terrain correlated with the latest Intelligence estimates of enemy capabilities’ of 7 May, which discussed ﬁghting
in circumstances like and roughly on the line of 28 June 1944, was overoptimistic. It deﬁned that territory as ‘not an easy one for forces to advance
through rapidly in the face of determined resistance, but it will likewise

198

John Ferris

be most difﬁcult for the enemy to prevent a slow and steady advance by
inﬁltration’. It was ‘difﬁcult to judge’ whether the bocage would better suit
attacker or defender; tactics for the matter ‘should be given considerable
study by formations to be employed therein’. This advice was not followed.34
Allied planners knew they might be forced into a battle of attrition in
terrain well suited to the defender, but units did not train for it. They knew
Panthers, Tigers and 88s were formidable, not that they would be attacking
the largest force-to-space densities in these weapons the Germans ever managed on the defence, in terrain well suited to their strengths and Allied
weaknesses. Through these gaps in operational expectation and tactical
intelligence ﬂowed tragedies.
The conventional assumption is that intelligence for OVERLORD was
precise and powerful, and almost everything right and certain, with some
errors. In fact, as many things either were erroneous or uncertain as they
were accurate and trusted, though the latter category included most key
matters. Allied intelligence was ﬁlled with errors, but they were not systematic, so most cancelled each other out, or else shaped things which did not
matter – as did many successes, including the most famous or complex. Too
much attention has been paid to Ultra, too little to the main sources of
tactical intelligence and their limits. Success was most pronounced at the
strategic level, where Allied intelligence bracketed the truth closely enough
to show where it was, or was not. Since planners and commanders cared
about gaps in their information at the strategic level, intelligence was fundamental as a source of knowledge and psychological certainty. Even so, even
here key issues were ﬁlled with uncertainty and error, like enemy armoured
strength and the speed and scale of reinforcements. These problems were
fundamental to planning but had little negative impact on operations, either
because their practical signiﬁcance was small, or 21st Army Group made the
least mistakes and acted on its own views.
The biggest intelligence failures occurred at the tactical and operational
levels. In principle, they might have had major consequences, as on 6 June
tactical problems could trigger operational ones. However, one may doubt
that these failures (as against the realities they masked) mattered much in
practice, or that successes would have done so. The point of intelligence is
to aid action. Its value depends on the circumstances. Good tactical intelligence allowed useful changes in the plans for assault on the Cotentin
peninsula, where enemy forces were weak and scattered, the Allies had
room to manoeuvre, and forces to redeploy or add. It could have done little
to change the outcome on Omaha Beach, or the Anglo-Canadian front from
D + 3 to D + 60, where the Allies had to ﬁght strong forces which could not
be sidestepped. Good tactical intelligence might have led Anglo-Canadian
forces to think better in advance about how to handle their circumstances of
H + 12 to H + 36, but to what effect? As it was, they knew this battle would
be hard and the enemy strong. They fought well enough to make the enemy
focus on them, abandoning the initiative and their hopes to annihilate the
Americans. Better advance preparations might have let every Allied force,

Intelligence and OVERLORD

199

especially the Americans, do better than it did between D + 3 and D + 45,
but they had been warned of the problems they might face. They would not
have done better unless weeks or months ahead of D-Day, at a time when
units still could have improved their preparations for a prolonged and
intensive battle in close country, 21st Army Group and FUSAG had made
them do something they did not want to do, at the expense of preparing for
other matters. As this would have had to happen before 352 Infantry and
21 Panzer Divisions reached Normandy, it was less a failure of intelligence
than command. Perfect knowledge of these movements might have made
the Allies in the week before D-Day realise attrition was unavoidable; but
what good would that have done? Intelligence failures did little harm to
the Allies. The successes did some good, and FORTITUDE still more, but
they could not win the battle. On 6 June 1944, the problem was the enemy,
not intelligence about it. Allied intelligence had done as much as could be
expected. The rest was up to the men.

Notes
The RG 331 and RG 165 series are held in the National Archives, Washington, and
the PREM and WO series at The National Archives, London. All citations appear
with permission from the copyright holders.
1 MI14 Weekly Summaries, 15.5.44., 5.6.44., ‘The OKW and Allied Intentions–
Apr 1944’, passim, WO 208/4312; JIC (44) 221 (0) Final, 29.5.44, RG 331/3/131;
F.H. Hinsley, E.E. Thomas, C.A.G. Simkins and C.F.G. Ransom, British Intelligence in the Second World War, Its Inﬂuence on Strategy and Operations, Volume
Three, Part II (London: Cambridge University Press, 1988), pp. 49–65, 790.
2 Alexander S. Cochran, ‘ULTRA, FORTITUDE and D-Day Planning: The Missing Dimension’, in Theodore Wilson (ed.), D-Day, 1944 (Lawrence, KS: Kansas
University Press, 1994), pp. 63–79, assesses the literature well. The best study of
intelligence and OVERLORD, an excellent one, is Hinsley et al., British Intelligence, Three, II. The best account of planning before Normandy, Carlo d’Este’s,
Decision in Normandy, 50th Anniversary Edition (London: Harper, 1994) offers
good but brief accounts of intelligence.
3 Interrogation of General Gerd von Rundstedt, 4–14, 1.2.46, WO 205/1020.
4 For FORTITUDE, cf. Michael Howard, Strategic Deception, British Intelligence
in the Second World War, Its Inﬂuence on Strategy and Operations (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1991); Michael Handel (ed.) Strategic and Operational
Deception in The Second World War (London, 1989). The chapter by Katherine
Barbier in this volume, and John Ferris, ‘The Roots of Fortitude: The Evolution
of British Deception in the Second World War’, in Thomas Mahnken (ed.), The
Paradox of Intelligence: Essays in Memory of Michael Handel (London: Frank
Cass, 2003).
5 ‘Notes taken at a meeting of Army Commanders and their Chiefs of Staff, at HQ
21 Army Group, 7 Jan. 1944’, WO 205/16; Francis de Guingand, Operation Victory
(London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1947), p. 106; Nigel Hamilton, Montgomery,
Master of the Battleﬁeld (New York: Hamish Hamilton, 1983), p. 144.
6 West to Whiteley, 17.2.44., RG 331/12/9.
7 Williams to Whiteley, 2.2.44., RG 331/12/9.
8 C.O.S. (43) 416 (O), ‘Operation “Overlord”, Report and Appreciation’, 30.7.43.,
p. 4, PREM 3/342/2/8.
9 Ibid., pp. 1, 69.

200

John Ferris

10 Ibid., p. 25, passim.
11 CCS 309, 15.8.43., PREM 3/333/15.
12 Fourth Draft, 30.1.44., ‘Neptune, Initial Joint Plan’, WO 205/15, 1.2.44., Neptune, Initial Joint Plan, WO 171/126; SHAEF Weekly Intelligence Review, 6(11),
RG 165/79/2566; PREM 3/342/10, COS to Churchill, 23.5.44., ‘Opposition to
Overlord’; Hinsley et al., British Intelligence, Volume Three, Part II, pp. 35, 103–
25. The discrepancies between these ﬁgures occur because Allied estimates of
what German air strength would be on 31 July 1943 changed, while two different
issues were being assessed, the ‘initial establishment’ of ﬁrst-line units, and total
Luftwaffe strength, including second-line reserves.
13 ‘Overlord’, p. 10, PREM 3/342/8.
14 Bull, Assistant Chief of Staff, G-3, to Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, SHAEF/
17100/12/Ops, 24.2.44., RG 331/29A /119.
15 SHAEF to AGWAR, S-50558, 21.4.44., RG 331/1/114.
16 Material on these matters is contained in RG 165/79/2566, RG 331/29A/119,
RG 331/12/9, RG 331/1/114, RG 331/1/59, WO 208/4312 and WO 171/102.
17 CSDIC (UK) SIR Nos. 110, 115, 117, 119, 236, 256, 277, 340, RG 165/179/659;
CSDIC (UK) No. 293, RG 165/179/660.
18 Compare JIC (44) 215 (0) 25.4.44., RG 331/3/131, to the ﬁgures in David
Westwood, ‘The German Army in France 6 June 1944’, paper presented to the
conference on Normandy, Wolverhampton University, July 2004.
19 Appendix ‘E’, COSSAC (43) 4, RG 331/3/124.
20 JIC (44), 215 (0), 25.5.44., RG 331/3/128.
21 Ralph Bennett, Ultra in the West, (London: Hutchinson, 1981), pp. 29–57.
22 Hinsley, British Intelligence, 3(11): 72–7, 814.
23 JIC (44) 215 (0) 25.5.44., RG 331/3/131.
24 ‘Allotment of Panthers to Armoured Divisions in the West’, MI14 /Apprec/8/44,
18.5.44., WO 208/4312; JIC (44) 215 (0) 25.5.44., RG 331/3/131.
25 After Action Report Third U.S. Army, 1 August 1944–1 May 1945 (Scholarly
Resources), Reel One, Chapter 2, p. 10; ‘Operation Neptune’; FUSAG, 20.5.44.,
First United States Army Group, Report of Operations, 23 October 1943–1 August
1944, Reel Two, Book Two (Scholarly Resources), ‘Allotment of Panthers’, WO
208/4312; JIC (44), 215 (0), 25.5.44., RG 331/3/128.
26 SHAEF, ’G-2 Estimate of the Enemy Build-Up Against Operation ‘OVERLORD’,
3.6.44., RG 331/1/59.
27 First United States Army, SR, Reel One, Book One, 20.5.44., HQ First US
Army, ‘Operation Neptune’; After Action Report Third U.S. Army, Reel One,
Third United States Army Outline Plan, Operation Overlord, n.d.
28 ‘Operation Neptune, Joint Commanders-in-Chief Memorandum No. 7, Air Reconnaissance – Requirements and Resources’, NJC/00/74/6, 15.4.44., WO 205/15.
29 Hinsley et al., British Intelligence, 3(11): 89; Helmut Heiber and David Glantz
(eds) Hitler and his Generals, Military Conferences 1942–1945, The First Complete Stenographic Record of the Military Situation Conferences, from Stalingrad
to Berlin (New York: Enigma, 2003), p. 434.
30 3rd Joint Commanders in Chief meeting, 22.12.43., WO 205/12; SHAEF/45BX/1/
INT, 9.2.44., SHAEF/17/225/Ops, 12.2.44, RG 331/12/9.
31 CSDIC (UK) SIR Nos. 130, 132, 136, RG 165/179/659; CSDIC (UK), Nos. 160,
213, 260, RG 165/179/660.
32 Hinsley et al., British Intelligence, 3(11): 847–51.
33 John Ferris, ‘The “Usual Source”: Signals Intelligence and Planning for the
Crusader Offensive, 1941’, in David Alverez (ed.), Allied and Axis, Signals Intelligence during the Second World War (London: Frank Cass, 1999), pp. 84–118.
34 21 A Gp/20651/55/G (Plans), 7.5.44., ‘Appreciation of Possible Development of
Operations to Secure a Lodgement Area, Operation Overlord’, WO 205/118.

15 Reconstructing D-Day
6 June 1944 and British
documentary ﬁlms
Michael Paris

Veterans of the Second World War have usually been scathing about attempts to recreate the experience of that conﬂict on ﬁlm. Indeed, many seem
to believe that there were actually two wars – the real one in which they
fought and endured, and the guts and glory version that has emerged from
the imagination of populist ﬁlm makers. Steven Spielberg’s Saving Private
Ryan (1998) has proved to be a notable exception, and was highly praised
by survivors of D-Day for its realism, particularly the reconstruction of the
initial landings on Omaha Beach. But generally, war ﬁlms have had a cool
reception from those who had ﬁrst-hand experience of the war. Historians,
especially military historians, have also expressed reservations about the use
of ﬁlm as a legitimate historical source or as a medium through which to
reconstruct the past. Let a commercial ﬁlm maker use the wrong model of
tank, the wrong type of aeroplane or uniform, and immediately the whole
production becomes suspect. Grudgingly, sceptics might concede that original newsreels or documentaries shot by combat cameramen at the time
are of some value, but there is still an ingrained resistance to accepting ﬁlm
as a valid window on the past. Certainly, ﬁlm can never replace the traditional
sources of the historian in search of the complete story – ﬁlm cannot deal
adequately with causation or with complex political issues, for example; but
what it can do is enable us to share in a historical experience in a way that
no other source can.
Through the painstaking work of many historians who, over the years
since 1944, have unravelled the complex story of the Normandy invasion,
we now have an incredibly detailed understanding of the sequence of events
of D-Day. Sixty years after the events themselves we probably know almost
all there is to know about the planning and execution of Operation OVERLORD, the sequence of events, the parts played by individual units, the
facts and ﬁgures and so on. Through diaries, autobiographies and oral
history projects, we have equally gained some insights into the personal
experiences of participants, enabling us to understand something of what
it was like to storm the beaches of Normandy, to wade ashore under the
guns of the enemy, to be a part of one of the most signiﬁcant moments of
the Second World War. But here our knowledge is somewhat less than

202

Michael Paris

complete, for although sensitively written accounts can help us to understand
something of the realities of combat, and particularly the danger of taking
part in a high-risk seaborne invasion, we really need to have taken part in
those events or at least to have witnessed them ﬁrst-hand, before we can
claim any sort of real understanding of what being in battle is really like.
This point was made explicit in the testimony of Cliff Morris, a young
commando, recorded for a recent television documentary. Morris took part
in the landings on Sword Beach, and described how on 6 June he left his
invasion barge, struggled through the water, then crossed the beach where
‘bodies and body parts lay around him, where the moans of the wounded
mingled with the shriek of bullets and the screaming of shells’, and then
concluded, ‘all this has to be seen before the full effect of what war really
means can be understood’.1 What Morris experienced on D-Day is almost
impossible to capture in words. Even the most eloquent and powerfully
descriptive writing cannot convey the full meaning of what men endured in
combat. But if we could see it for ourselves, we might gain a more complete
understanding, and that is the value of ﬁlm; it is simply the only medium
through which we can reconstruct the past in all its dimensions, as it actually happened.
At its most basic, ﬁlm is a simple visual record, but the real popularity of
cinema is located in the manner in which audiences can be drawn into the
unfolding narrative on the screen, identifying with the characters and, in a
sense, sharing their experiences. Clearly it is this aspect of ﬁlm, what we
might call the ‘magic of cinema’, that accounts for the enormous impact of
the landing sequence in Saving Private Ryan. Here for a short time it is
almost as if we are actually on Omaha Beach, sharing the mind-numbing
chaos of combat, and experiencing just what it was like to be a part of the
invasion of Europe – and that’s due to the magic of cinema. I’m not sure
that any other source can give us that same shared sense of ‘being there’.
That so many ﬁlms have unfortunately sacriﬁced historical accuracy in
pursuit of box ofﬁce success is not an inherent fault of the medium but
a conscious decision by the ﬁlm maker to make their work more appealing,
more saleable, to a mass audience. The most effective and persuasive form
of cinema is the feature ﬁlm, the drama, which so easily draws us into its
narrative, but documentaries, making use of actuality footage shot at the
time, can still provide us with that same sense of being there and experiencing war in a more realistic way than any other source. The purpose of this
chapter, then, is to provide an overview of the way in which D-Day has
been recorded in British documentary ﬁlms, from the ﬁrst newsreel reports
to the most recent television documentaries made to commemorate the
sixtieth anniversary of the Normandy landings, and to explore some of
the ways in which producers have attempted to recreate the experience of
participants as realistically as possible.
For the public, the ﬁrst news of D-Day came from a BBC bulletin at 9.32
on the morning of the 6 June, read by John Snagge:

Reconstructing D-Day 203
This is London. London calling in the Home, Overseas and European
services of the BBC and through United Nations Radio Mediterranean,
and this is John Snagge speaking. Supreme Headquarters Expeditionary Force have just issued Communiqué Number One. Under the command of General Eisenhower, Allied naval forces, supported by strong
air forces, began landing Allied armies this morning on the northern
coasts of France.
This came as little surprise – almost everyone had known the invasion was
imminent; troop movements and the build-up of military might along the
south coast were obvious and resulted in endless speculation, much of it
surprisingly accurate. The only question had been: exactly when and where
would the Allies land?
But as soon as Eisenhower’s statement had been broadcast the public were
anxious for details, for this was what the British had been waiting for, the
beginning of the end of a long and bitter war. But for a public hungry for
news, details of the invasion were scarce over the next few days. The BBC
and newspapers gradually added detail but the information they released was
still cautious and it was difﬁcult to piece together exactly what the invasion
had been like from these reports. One can fully understand why the authorities were so reticent. While preparations for OVERLORD had been meticulous, invasion was still a risky business. The disastrous landings at Dieppe
in 1942, which had seen over 50 per cent casualties among the attackers,
cast a long shadow over the planning for D-Day and was a constant reminder of just how dangerous such seaborne invasions could be. Even Alan
Brooke, Chief of the Imperial General Staff, noted in his diary on 5 June
that the offensive upon which they were embarking could be a ‘ghastly
disaster’.2 Thus, until the Allies were ﬁrmly established, it was simply common sense not to say too much. However, what the public wanted was to
see the landings for themselves. Through cinema newsreel reports and government information ﬁlms that had become increasingly common through
the early years of the war and through the graphic moving images recorded
by combat cameramen almost sharing, albeit artiﬁcially, the experiences of
those at the sharp end of war, they had become accustomed to ‘seeing’ the
news. But even the most enthusiastic advocate for the use of ﬁlm as a
historical source would have to admit, the ﬁlm shot on 6 June by combat
cameramen was disappointing, for while it does provide a simple visual
record of some aspects of the landings, it offers remarkably little detail.
The Army Film and Photographic Unit (AFPU) had been established in
1940 under the control of the Directorate of Public Relations at the War
Ofﬁce. In the aftermath of Dunkirk, conﬁdence in Britain’s military was at
an all time low, and it was felt that something was needed to redress the
balance. Film, the most popular method of mass communication, was thought
to be the most effective channel through which to redress the army’s image,
so the Unit’s initial function was to sell the army and its leaders to the public;

204

Michael Paris

to produce a visual record of military operations and to make footage available to the commercial newsreels. The AFPU was based at Pinewood Studios
and eventually included over 80 cameramen working in a number of selfcontained units.3 For the invasion of Europe, seven cameramen of Number
Five section were detailed to go in with the assault troops – all had volunteered for the assignment. They were not told what to shoot, simply to
accompany the military units to which they were attached, stay as close to
the ﬁghting as possible, and ﬁlm as comprehensive a record of the action as
they could. In addition, automatic movie cameras were mounted on invasion
barges and tanks to record the actual landings. Operated by clockwork, these
were to be switched on by naval personnel prior to landing. Unfortunately,
most were broken in the assault or were not switched on. The Americans, in
comparison, had some 23 cinematographers to cover the landings on Omaha
and Utah Beaches.4 While British cameramen were not excluded from ﬁlming
anything, there were accepted conventions of self-censorship. There was, for
example, a reluctance to show dead Allied soldiers or distressing injuries –
the wounded shown usually had ‘cosmetic’ wounds, such as bandaged heads,
arms, legs and so on. This was usually due to the fact that cameramen knew
such shots would be ‘wasted ﬁlm’ in so far as such scenes would be censored; or because they had become part of a military unit and were as
distressed as anyone at the sight of a dead or badly injured comrade.5
The ﬁrst newsreel reports about the invasion reached British cinema audiences on 8 June, but these showed nothing of the actual landings, rather
shots of the preparations and of the invasion ﬂeet setting sail. Gaumont
British News, British Movietone and Pathe Gazette were all released on the
same day and used much the same footage. Under the heading ‘The Hour of
Liberation’, Gaumont British reported the communiqué from Supreme Headquarters and showed Winston Churchill’s visit to the invasion ports, paratroopers preparing their equipment and a night bombardment of a distant
coastline. Signiﬁcantly, the commentary pointed out that it was ‘four years
to the very month, since we were hurled off the Continent of Europe’, a
reference to the evacuation of the British Expeditionary Force from Dunkirk that was picked up by most of the other newsreels. Pathe Gazette’s
report even included a short visual sequence of the 1940 evacuation to
remind its audience of that humiliating episode. Pathe used similar footage
of Churchill’s visit to the invasion ﬂeet and a close-up of Eisenhower’s
communiqué, but told its audience that while these were the ‘ﬁrst pictures
of the opening of the Second Front’, security demanded they should be
‘meagre at this stage’. However, the commentary went on to point up the
signiﬁcance of the moment: ‘Four years ago Europe was Hitler’s. The lights
of freedom went out. Now the world of free men strikes in all its assembled
might at the weakening chains of bondage’.
But while these ﬁrst reports captured something of the intense excitement
of the moment, they offered no evidence of the actual experience of landing
on the beaches under the guns of the German defenders. Audiences had to

Reconstructing D-Day 205
wait a further week until the ﬁrst pictures of the landings were screened;
and even then they were impersonal and disappointing for who wanted to
understand something of the experience of the men who had taken part in
that historic moment.
Arguably the most dramatic ﬁlm report was that of the 15 June issue of
Pathe Gazette, under the title:
INVASION
Pictorial Reports from France
In this report audiences could almost gain some sense of the drama and excitement of the landings. The opening shot – taken from the rear of a British landing craft packed with Canadian troops by a clockwork camera mounted at
the back of the vessel and operated automatically – shows the craft approaching Juno Beach; the doors open and the soldiers disembark, one places his
hand on another’s shoulder – a small gesture of support and comradeship.
The staccato commentary reinforces the drama of the moment:
French rooftops over the bows of Allied landing craft beaching on the
Normandy shore. There comes the grinding of heels on shingle and our
troops spill ashore across that open stretch menaced by enemy gunﬁre.
Newsreel and Allied service cameramen go in with the landing forces. The
pictures they take make up this lengthened edition of Pathe Gazette.
While the commentary creates a sense of immediacy, the report seems to
combine the initial landing with footage taken later. Thus much of the drama
of the landings is lost. In this report, the second scene is taken from further
up the beach looking back to the disembarking troops and one soldier
appears to stumble and fall, suggesting enemy resistance. However, the scene
is immediately followed by others which undermine the intensity of the
opening sequence and can only have been ﬁlmed later: tanks and heavy
equipment coming ashore, the camera lingering on wrecked enemy gun
emplacements, and ﬁnally Montgomery coming ashore and posing for the
cameras before overseeing the advance inland. But even this report did not
offer those dramatic pictures of combat that audiences had come to expect
from the war ﬁlms they had seen and which had been artfully reconstructed
in the studio – shells exploding, men ﬁghting, the wounded, the burnt-out
tanks and the shattered debris of the battleﬁeld. In contrast, newsreels could
offer only an impression of events, a factual record that could not deal with
personal experience. Thus, dramatic imagery was largely missing from
the D-Day footage, which presented the landing as a highly successful but
almost mechanistic event, a sanitised view from which almost all the real
drama of war is missing, and particularly the personal experience.6
While the British celebrated the success of the landings, albeit with images
that played down the human cost, so German newsreels tried to ignore the

206

Michael Paris

events of 6 June altogether. News of the invasion was long delayed and
when newsreel reports were ﬁnally released they were highly selective in
their view of events. German cameramen had little opportunity to ﬁlm the
actual landings, thus the report from Die Deutsches Wochenshau, the ofﬁcial
German newsreel, issued on 20 July, was largely comprised of old footage
from the archives accompanied by a conﬁdent narrative that suggested that
the invaders were being contained and that their losses had been heavy.
Reinforcing such claims were scenes of abandoned Allied landing craft,
wrecked gliders, and shots of dazed and wounded prisoners – probably
stock footage of Canadians captured during the disastrous raid on Dieppe
in 1942. Interestingly, much of the footage here had already been used in a
late June report from France Actualities, the ofﬁcial newsreel of Occupied
France. Here, the commentary was anxious to stress that not only were the
British and Americans being contained but that the invasion was causing
great suffering for the French people through air raids and the bombardment of Norman towns. For example, over a sequence of a devastated town,
the commentator claims: ‘Every minute Frenchmen are dying and French
homes crumble to dust. How many other Norman cities are now ghost
towns or cemeteries?’ The message was clear – the Allies, in their relentless
war against Germany, have little concern for innocent French civilians or
their property – and invited the audience to consider whether these pitiless
men really were the noble ‘liberators’ of France.
So while British audiences may well have wanted to share the drama and
the danger of the invasion through the moving image, they were offered
only short newsreel reports that dealt with some of the facts but ignored the
wider experience of those involved. As we know there was a little more footage, but by the time that was available, the invasion story had moved on to
the advance into the heartland of Normandy. The experience of 6 June,
as far as the newsreel companies were concerned, was ‘old’ news. The
D-Day ﬁlm reports, however limited, did of course fulﬁl one of the basic
functions of documentary cinema – the creation of a visual record of events.
But as the Allies secured their position in France and the Normandy campaign got underway, ﬁlm shot on D-Day was worked into more a more
detailed record of events in the ofﬁcial documentaries produced by the Ministry of Information, through which audiences could learn more and share
something of the experience of the men who took part. These later ﬁlms
made use of other footage, establishing material that showed something of
the background to invasion, and added a narrative which again increased
the level of detail.
From autumn 1944 a number of British documentary ﬁlms about D-Day
began to appear. Towards the Offensive (1944) andThe Air Plan (1945) were
both from the Royal Air Force Film Production Unit and detailed the
RAF’s preparations for D-Day and the battle for air supremacy over the
Continent. The RAF Film Unit had been established in September 1941 to
create a ﬁlm record of air operations, produce documentaries and training

Reconstructing D-Day 207
ﬁlms, and provide footage for the commercial newsreels. Implicit in the
creation of such a unit was to ensure that the RAF gained its share of
publicity. The Unit however, was not simply concerned with air combat. Its
cameramen were active in ﬁlming on the ground – not only on airﬁelds but
equally in forward combat zones where they often worked alongside their
army colleagues.7 Towards the Offensive dealt with the build up of air and
other units for the Allied invasion, a story that was continued in The Air
Plan which focused on the part played by the RAF and other air forces in
the Normandy landings. Here the emphasis of the narrative, spoken by the
actor Eric Portman, is that the Normandy invasion had been a ‘combined
operation’ where the RAF had signiﬁcantly contributed to the success of
the landings. The ﬁlm begins with combat footage of the battle for air
supremacy, and details the offensives against enemy coastal defences, communications and supply centres. There is some excellent footage of the
air cover provided for the invading troops, and the building of forward
airstrips once the Allies were established in Normandy.
What the RAF ﬁlms ignore, of course, is the antipathy of Arthur Harris
and Carl Spaatz – the British and American bomber barons – who believed
that invasion was an unnecessary diversion from the main business of bombing Germany which would inevitably lead to the complete collapse of the
Third Reich. A short report on the Allied air forces pre-invasion bombing
of northern France was also included in issue six of the RAF’s own
newsreel The Gen, but the main report was included in issue eight under the
title ‘The Day’. Included here are some brief but telling shots of air attacks
on German coastal defences and the dropping of airborne forces. However,
as the report was issued some time after the invasion, the assumption was
that the audience would already be familiar with the story.8 In 1944 the
RAF Film Unit also began production on a docudrama that would tell
the story of the RAF’s support of the Resistance movements in France
which had played a signiﬁcant role in intelligence-gathering and in disrupting
enemy communications before and after D-Day. The ﬁlm, however, was
not released until June 1946 under the title School for Danger. The ﬁlm was
interesting, however, in that real agents were asked to play themselves in a
reconstruction of their experiences in occupied France, thus establishing a
precedent for ‘re-enactment’ in the documentary form.9
These documentaries were accompanied by other productions which
explored events after the landings such as A Harbour Goes to France (1945)
which told the extraordinary story of the mobile ﬂoating harbour (Mulberry)
used by the Allies to bring in supplies and reinforcements immediately after
the landings. But the most important of these later documentaries was The
True Glory – the ofﬁcial Anglo-American documentary record of D-Day
and the subsequent campaign in Europe – and one of the most powerful of
all feature-length wartime documentaries.10 Directed by Carol Reed and the
American Garson Kanin, the ﬁlm’s commentary had clearly been inspired
by Laurence Olivier’s highly successful ﬁlm version of Henry V, released in

208

Michael Paris

November 1944, which dealt with an earlier and equally successful invasion of
France. The True Glory was originally intended to cover only the Normandy
campaign, but inter-service rivalries and disagreements between the British
and American production teams delayed the project. In October 1944 it was
decided to extend the ﬁlm into one which would cover subsequent events
down to Germany’s surrender. Consequently it was not completed until the
summer of 1945.
The ﬁlm was introduced by Supreme Commander General Dwight D.
Eisenhower, who emphasised that the focus of the ﬁlm was on the ‘really
important men in this campaign, the enlisted soldiers, sailors and airmen’ –
and the ﬁlm does precisely that by relating what happened to these ordinary
men at key points in the campaign. A commentary in blank verse, clearly
inspired by Shakespeare, links these episodes of personal experience and
creates a sense of the past impacting on the events witnessed on the screen.
Over a hand-drawn map of the Channel coast, the verse narrative explains:
We planned to breach the wall and smash the German spine,
but where?
We searched the coast of Europe like ﬁerce eagles,
Between low Flushing and deep-harboured Cherbourg,
Our eyes sought out the place of the assault . . .
Until ﬁnally ‘All resolved on Normandy, on Caen’: ‘So on ﬁve miles of still
unblooded sand; the fretful course of fate would be assailed by armoured
nations’.
The ﬁlm sequences dealing with 6 June combine footage from Allied
service cameramen and captured German ﬁlm and provide the backdrop for
the personal testimony of participants, delivered in everyday language by a
variety of voices and in perfect counterpoint to the high rhetoric of the verse
narrative. Indeed, it is surprising that men who had so recently been a part
of this enormous and highly dangerous enterprise could be so matter-of-fact
about their experiences. For example, a Scottish soldier relates how on
GOLD Beach, ‘It wasn’t too bad getting ashore. After that it started, we
had to ﬁght for every bloody ﬁeld. And it was the same each time; crawling
on your belly, keeping your backside down like you’d been told, chucking a
few grenades then rush them. Sometimes they killed us, but we were killing
more of them . . .’.
The True Glory made a brave attempt to document the personal experiences of those taking part in D-Day; and audiences found it a far more
absorbing ﬁlm than the usual documentaries issued by the Ministry of Information, but it was still in stylised, semi-ofﬁcial form and far removed
from the intensely dramatic and emotional reconstruction of events than
can be created in narrative ﬁlms, and which cinemagoers looked to in order
to experience how such momentous events impacted upon the individual
soldier, sailor or airman. Nevertheless, The True Glory established the

Reconstructing D-Day 209
format for most of the post-war documentary ﬁlms about the invasion – the
narrative of events against a background of original footage and interludes
of personal experience of combatants. The ﬁlm, however, was almost the
last of the war documentaries made for a cinema-going public. The waning
popularity of cinema audiences through the post-war years and the increasing popularity of television meant that by the 1950s, documentary ﬁlms had
become the exclusive preserve of television producers; and the major problem faced by these television historians was simply that the lack of detailed
archival footage prevented them from exploring the story of 6 June in terms
of personal experience. Thus producers were forced to develop new techniques, new approaches, in documentary ﬁlm making that would enable
them to recreate the experience of the individual.11 And in the years since
D-Day, successive generations of documentary ﬁlm makers have extended
to the story of the D-Day landings1944, adding more detail to the original
core footage, and attempting to ﬁnd more ‘realistic’ ways of recreating the
experiences of those who were there.
The tenth anniversary of D-Day more or less coincided with the screening
of the ﬁrst signiﬁcant television history series, War in the Air. Made by BBC
Television and the Air Ministry, the series has frequently been overlooked
by historians, yet it was a ground-breaking precursor to television histories
such as The Great War and The World at War. Written and produced by
John Elliott, in 15 parts, its major focus was on the part played by the RAF
in the Second World War; nevertheless, the coverage the of the war as a
whole is generally good. The episode ‘Overlord’ (Programme 10) offers us
useful insights into the landings. Starting with the tenth anniversary commemorations at Arromanches-Les-Bains – seemingly a remarkably low-key
affair compared to the recent sixtieth anniversary celebrations, the programme concentrates on the air aspects of the invasion. There is considerable detailed coverage of the bombing raids and ﬁghter sweeps that prepared
the way for the landings, and clearing the Channel of enemy shipping –
mostly footage from The Air Plan and other RAF productions. D-Day is
covered by shots of the armada of troop transports crossing the Channel,
the bombardment of the enemy defences and the landings, again using the
original AFPU footage. However, the ﬁlm offers some new insights: the
deception techniques over the Pas de Calais, the landings of the airborne
divisions and the reinforcements going in after the initial landings. Like The
True Glory the ﬁlm adopts a linking narration, interspersed with episodes of
personal testimony. Although these are clearly read by actors, such as Sam
Kidd, Ferdy Mayne and Marius Goring, such interludes offer a personal view
of D-Day and should be praised for their diversity – including as they do a
French airman, an American war correspondent, a British sailor and a French
woman who thanks the Allies for liberating her country from the Germans.
Signiﬁcantly, War in the Air makes use of scenes from earlier documentary
ﬁlms and even wartime docudramas such as Target for Tonight and Journey
Together in an attempt to capture a more personalised approach. While its

210

Michael Paris

focus is on the RAF, War in the Air was not just made for the domestic
market. The high cost of television productions, even ones which relied
largely on pre-existing ﬁlm, meant that producers had to appeal to a wider
market. Consequently, it became mandatory for documentaries to include
more than just national experience, and to explore the American and Commonwealth contribution to victory as well – an increasingly important factor
in British television production which aimed at a world audience.
Twenty-two years after the War in the Air Thames Television screened its
acclaimed series The World at War, which although not without its critics, is
now generally considered to be one of best visual histories of the Second
World War yet produced. Programme 17, ‘Morning’, dealt with events during June and August 1944. Taking its lead from the newsreels of that year,
‘Morning’ prefaced its D-Day programme with a reminder of the humiliation of Dunkirk, and then focused on the inherent danger of seaborne invasion with a brief report on Dieppe. Coverage of the landings began by
examining the detailed preparations coupled with the comments of signiﬁcant ﬁgures like Mountbatten and Dr John Stagg, the meteorologist, as well
as less distinguished participants – the ordinary soldiers and sailors, British,
French and American. The series adopted the ‘talking head’ approach but
the original ﬁlm footage is shown uncut, thus we see casualties and other
distressing scenes so obviously censored out when originally screened for
wartime audiences. Viewed today, The World at War stands up remarkably
well as a thoughtful and concise visual history of the Second World War.
From 1939 until the immediate post-war period, documentaries had
been made for an audience intimately connected to the war – it was ‘their
war’, after all; and even in the longer post-war period such ﬁlms appealed to
viewers who had experienced at least some aspects of the war themselves
and who wanted to know more, or perhaps how their small part in the
conﬂict contributed to the bigger picture. However, by the late 1970s, while
such ﬁlms still played to a section of the audience who remembered the war,
they also had to appeal to an increasing number of viewers who had no
direct connection with the war and who could look back at the conﬂict with
detachment. Primarily this new audience wanted to know the story of the
war but they wanted above all to be entertained. They did not want detailed
and complex explanations of how and why, rather they wanted to see it for
themselves. Thus, producers were required to make ﬁlms for a mass audience that were entertaining, visually exciting, but informative enough to
satisfy a minority of viewers who wanted more than a Noddy in Toyland
version of events. Thus not only has the documentary ﬁlm maker to ﬁnd the
right level of detail for an audience which is extremely diverse, but their task
is overshadowed by the driving force of being entertaining, while still striving to present ‘good’ history.12 It would probably be impossible to produce
a documentary in the style of The World at War today with any real hope of
it being transmitted on a major network. Thus, in the drive to be entertaining
it is obvious that not only have producers turned to the latest developments

Reconstructing D-Day 211
of visual technology, but have also drawn closer to the style of populist ﬁlm
makers. Where these factors come together most clearly are in the ﬁlms that
were made for the anniversaries of D-Day in 1994 and 2004.
The ﬁftieth anniversary of D-Day in 1994 saw a considerable number of
documentaries produced,13 though most offered very little that was new,
with perhaps the exception of BBC Television’s Destination D-Day, which
used original combat footage and veterans’ testimony with studio reconstructions. But two of the major productions made for the recent sixtieth
anniversary, Ten Days to D-Day (Channel 4) and the BBC’s D-Day, 6.6.44.
are worth discussing because they have incorporated interesting new
approaches to documentary ﬁlm making culled from the world of popular
cinema in an effort to recapture something of the personal experience of
participants. A third ﬁlm, D-Day in Colour from Carlton Television, made
at this time is, despite the interesting contributions of historian Steven Badsey,
little more than an attempt to cash in on the anniversary by cobbling
together all the original colour footage. Most of this had been taken by
American cameramen and had already been used in earlier ﬁlms such as
From D-Day to Berlin (1985). However, little colour footage of the actual
landings was taken and the programme is padded out with material that is
too often irrelevant.
Ten Days to D-Day was based on David Stafford’s popular book of the
same title. It tell the story of the invasion through the experiences of ten
participants: the story of commando Cliff Morris; Juan Pujol (codenamed
‘Garbo’), the agent responsible for one of the major deceptions; Andre
Heintz, a French resister in Caen; an American infantryman, and so on.
Their stories are told through personal testimony, original wartime footage
and dramatised scenes of their experiences. As docudrama it works reasonably well. For example, as Cliff Morris relates his memories of the landings,
on the screen we see genuine combat footage supplemented with reconstructed scenes of his own experiences. The original footage is not always
well used, but it offers a lively, accessible and reasonably accurate visual
account of personal experiences on D-Day with a degree of realism that
would be difﬁcult for the historian to create using words alone.
The BBC’s D-Day 6.6.44. is remarkably similar in structure, even duplicatng some of the case studies – ‘Garbo’ and Andre Heintz, for example –
and a cross-section of others – an American, a Canadian and a German
soldier, and, perhaps most interestingly, a reconstruction of the experience
of photographer Robert Capa during the ﬁrst landings. The inter-cutting
between original footage and reconstruction is sometimes brutal, and there
are some truly bizarre computer-generated graphics which appear to have
been heavily inﬂuenced by the Disney Studio, and sound effects taken
directly from Saving Private Ryan. Only the veterans’ voice-overs remind us
we are not watching a wunderkinder director desperately attempting to make
a sequel to Spielberg’s ﬁlm. Nevertheless, some episodes do work well – the
re-enactment of 6th Airborne Division attacking the Merville battery, for

212

Michael Paris

instance. And it is through these reconstructions that, when they are well
done, we can come close to sharing the experience of those who participated
in the Normandy invasion.
But what is obvious in both of these documentaries is the inﬂuence of
popular ﬁlms such as The Longest Day and Saving Private Ryan. Both adopt
the episodic approach of the former and the shaky, hand-held cameras and
washed-out colour ﬁlm of the latter. This, in itself, is no bad thing, because
most audiences who watch history on the screen today want something more
than an ageing historian talking to the camera. The docudrama, properly
made by a knowledgeable and honest ﬁlm maker, is probably as close as we
will ever get to reconstructing the past, and the most effective way in which the
viewer can be drawn into becoming a participant in the events portrayed.
Both the historian and the documentary ﬁlm maker are, in essence, tellers
of stories; the only real difference between them is the integrity with which
they tell them.14

Notes
1 Morris’s testimony is cited in the docudrama Ten Days to D-Day (Channel 4,
24–5 May 2004).
2 Alex Danchev and Daniel Todman (eds) Field Marshal Lord Alanbrooke, War
Diaries, 1939–1945 (London: Phoenix Press, 2002), pp. 553–4.
3 See James Chapman, The British at War: Cinema, State and Propaganda, 1939–
1945 (London: Tauris, 1998), pp. 138–54.
4 See Toby Haggith, ‘D Day Filming – For Real: A Comparison of “Truth” and
“Reality” in Saving Private Ryan and Combat Film by the British Army’s Film
and Photographic Unit’, Film History, 14: 332–53.
5 Ibid., p. 346.
6 Pathe’s coverage of D-Day, including the report cited, is included on the DVD,
1939–1945 (Telstar, 2003).
7 See Chapman, The British at War, pp. 155–8.
8 The Air Plan is available on video from After the Battle video, and Gen from
the Imperial War Museum and DD Video.
9 Clive Coultass, Images for Battle: British Film and the Second World War, 1939–
1945 (Newark, DE University of Delaware Press, 1989), pp. 166–7.
10 The True Glory (MoI, 1945) is available on video from the Imperial War
Museum and DD Video.
11 The issue of television history is discussed in Taylor Downing, ‘History on
Television: The Making of “Cold War”, 1998’, in Marcia Landy (ed.) The
Historical Film: History and Memory in Media (London: Athlone Press, 2001),
pp. 294–302.
12 On this point see the interesting discussion by Jerome Kuehl, ‘History on the
Public Screen, II’, in Paul Smith (ed.) The Historian and Film (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1976), pp. 177– 85.
13 See for example D-Day Eyewitness (DD Video, 1994); British Campaigns:
D-Day Heroes (InterVision, 1994); D-Day – The Secret Battle (DD Video, 1994);
D-Day 6th June – the Ofﬁcial Story (Castlevision, 1997); D-Day – The Best Kept
Secret (IMC Vision, 1999).
14 D-Day in Colour, Ten Days to D-Day and D-Day 6.6.44. are all currently available on video and DVD.

16 D-Day in Hollywood
motion pictures
A brief history of changing
perceptions of war
Carsten Hennig
Introduction: ﬁlm and history
There has been a considerable public debate in Germany concerning the
scheduling of Steven Spielberg’s Saving Private Ryan on German television.
In its wake, the FSK (Freiwillige Selbstkontrolle)1 and the television station
in question organised a symposium on war and its depiction by the media
in Berlin in September 2003. Attending this conference, I found myself in
a conversation with a history teacher. He was airing his disappointment
with today’s students, who, in his view, did not seem to have any interest
in history any more. The insufﬁcient knowledge they had, he claimed, mainly
stemmed from motion pictures. I argued that, if he already knew about his
students’ interest in ﬁlms dealing with certain events in history, he had a
great opportunity to go on from there. So we started playing movies back
and forth in our heads, thinking about what issues would have to be considered when incorporating ﬁlm into a history seminar.

Narrative, history and the movies
A central issue concerning the representation of historic events in ﬁlm is the
discrepancy between the necessity for narrative dramatisation of cinematic
content and the demands concerning the accuracy of pictured history as
claimed by scientiﬁc approaches.2 However, the issue of bridging the gap
between fact and ﬁction, between chronicled events and dramatised attractions, is not entirely new.3 When discussing whether the work of a professional
historian should or even can be reduced to just chronicling and interpreting
events, we will have to keep in mind the problematic relationship between
history and its developing means of mediation, and the challenges every new
medium presents. First, some clarifying comments on narrative form, and
its role in the processes of constructing history, seem necessary. The main
features in constructing an ideal narrative have been characterised by Kenneth
Gergen.4 According to him, introducing a ﬁnal goal that contains some
moral or ethical value has to be considered a narrative’s central issue. This
value introduces strong cultural inﬂuences into the story, because that value

214

Carsten Hennig

is determined in relation to a cultural background. Events within the story
will all be structured in view of the narrative’s ultimate goal, and all characters carry a ﬁxed identity. Also, a narrative ideally offers explanations, often
through selected events which are causally linked and woven into the plot,
and there are markers for the beginning and the end of a story, or formal
conventions as symbols for entering the world of the narrative (like opening
credits and end titles of a ﬁlm). These features of narrative help to create a
feeling of coherence and direction with respect to events; incidences receive
meaning, and life starts to make sense. Furthermore, there are culturally
speciﬁc forms of narrative, used frequently, easily recognisable and highly
functional. The function of narratives, according to Gergen, lies in the expression and production of cultural values: by deﬁning an ultimate goal and
its value, by populating a story with certain actors and events, the narrator
enters the realm of moral and political judgement.5 Certain patterns of behaviour (such as trying to win as opposed to obvious signs of competing), of
social structures (such as individual heroes and villains instead of anonymous communities), and of allocated meanings (such as perceiving the world
as being material rather than spiritual) are propagated. A credible narrative
has to take into account speciﬁc cultural and sub-cultural achievements, and
it is crucial to understand these as social forms of objective judgement. That
means a true story does not necessarily represent an account of things that
really happened, but rather registers a certain state of affairs in relation to a
speciﬁc community. Narrative accounts are important parts of continuing
patterns of social behaviour, which are often institutionalised, argues Gergen,
and in this sense they serve to create cultural traditions and help to keep
them alive (and sometimes to end or change them).
According to Gergen, history’s ability to create truth has to be considered
as culturally deﬁned. The measurements of its correctness need to speciﬁcally correspond to certain communities, and the scope in which they may be
kept up depends on the steady ability of this community to (re-)negotiate
reality constantly.6 That means history, and the narrative thereof, is unavoidably tied to cultural values and moral standards, and to lend credibility
to certain traditions is, in effect, silent support for the sense of goodness
they represent. Consequently, representations of history only partly deal
with the past. More importantly, the meaning of the past is constructed with
respect to the cultural life and its range of values offered by the present. It is
the way in which we presently attain our sense of right and wrong which
achieves a shared worldview to build a common future upon.
While certain movie genres and, due to the nature of their content, war
movies in particular, link ﬁction with reality by constructing a dramatic
story in front of a historical background, accurate depiction of history has
never been one of the strong aspects of Hollywood. Instead, the cinema
strives to entertain; it offers the possibility to take part emotionally in the
stories it has to tell. Turning around the argument, it does not seem unfair to
declare that ‘pure’ chronicles have difﬁculties trying to provoke an emotional

D-Day in Hollywood motion pictures

215

response, even if the recipient does have an above average general interest in
history as such. The cinema presents us with the opportunity to really immerse
ourselves in the experiences it evokes. The structure of our experiences,
according to David Carr, is a function of narrative as embodied in our way
of life.7 He identiﬁes this narrative structure as the organising principle
of identity as such, on the level of both the individual self as well as the
story of a community, and thus narrative as a feature of historical existence.
Jürgen Straub in turn argues that ‘historical realities are constructs’,8 which
occasionally attain a certain degree of objectivity through technical recording or material form, such as texts, monuments, museums and other important objects or places created and shaped through creative acts.9 From these
two perspectives, added to Gergen’s insights about narrative, we may conclude that products of popular culture dealing with aspects of history do
have an impact on a society’s self-perception. This is especially true for those
products conforming to narrative forms, because they correspond with our
perception of reality. Even though Straub does not speciﬁcally mention the
cinema, his rather broad deﬁnition is perfectly suited to include war movies
which, we have to conclude, must have considerable impact on the way
history is perceived today, because they link strong emotional responses
(intense experiences) with dramatised history (narrative form).

D-Day made in Hollywood
According to Jeanine Basinger, the combat ﬁlm is perfect for Hollywood:10
‘It provides ready-made conﬂicts that are easily simpliﬁed and clariﬁed –
and reversed’.11 She argues that the genre of war movies embraces the virtues of both cinematic action and drama, while it ‘brings its own credibility,
since it is based in reality’.12 She observes an evolutionary process in the
course of development of the combat ﬁlm genre, in which it deﬁnes itself,
then repeats itself, and ﬁnally varies itself to adjust to the changing contexts
of its times. Looking at a longer period of change, these variations can
reveal what audiences expected to learn from the genre during a certain era,
making it clear how important such shifts in ideologies are for the construction of movie genres, and how these shifts are used to demonstrate different
political attitudes to the past, the present and the future:
When war nears, we make ﬁlms about it. When it goes away, we make
ﬁlms about military battle maneuvers, or ﬁlms about how awful the war
was (awful, even if glamorous). We also make other genre ﬁlms that
serve similar purposes, of course. As war nears, we change our minds,
and get involved in the new mechanized war and a new understanding
of it. To do all this, we tell stories in the old way, updating them with
new equipment and new ideology, slowly moving toward a new period
of time when the new war breaks out and the issues it will provide can
be amalgamated into the story.13

216

Carsten Hennig

Following from these processes of development described by Basinger, we
may argue that ﬁlm can actually preserve the contemporary views and opinions concerning its general subject, and by looking at the genre of war
movies we can get an impression of a society’s changing attitudes and values
towards war in general (since war as a general subject basically transcends
the genre’s development). In her book, Basinger presents a very detailed
analysis of the evolutionary process of the World War II combat ﬁlm genre.
The ﬁrst ﬁlms of this genre were made as attempts to create stories about
the real thing, incorporating narrative aspects in order to let events come
to life for the audience. Viewers had the chance to participate in the war,
learning about the new ways it had to be fought: ‘Presumably, this process
also created patriotic pride and fervor, a desire to win the war’.14 Soon, the
ﬁlms started to develop an awareness of genre rules, establishing a visual
shorthand for viewers. While their realism was still based on the war itself,
the presentation started to be increasingly distanced, turning the story of
World War II into myth and legend. Going to see war movies had turned
into a ritual with the social function to let the American public relive the
war, veterans and civilians sitting side by side. The genre had turned into
a uniting force, creating consent on how to remember the war, bridging
the gap between memory and imagination to create a national heritage of
victory and success. More and more, the ﬁlms started to draw their material
from other ﬁlms instead of representing reality, even though they did keep
events of history as points of reference. This way, ‘war was now war movies’,
states Basinger, arguing that the ‘displacement of fact of history by legend is
well known to historians in all ﬁelds. In ﬁlm, we can see it happen’.15 The
key to ﬁlm’s central meaning for the representation of history is connected
to memory as mental image. While visualised recollections of past events
fade over time, ﬁlm images remain as they were. They may be refreshed by
watching them again, that way replacing mental images of reality even in
those who actually saw combat.
With respect to D-Day, Ulrike Klein identiﬁes the mechanisms of remembering the past through mass-mediation as processes of secondary communication that have the ability to reinforce selected events in our memory.
The mass media’s inﬂuence on our perception of the past has at least an
equally great effect as our history books do, and eventually collectively
remembering the past is nothing other than ‘forming public opinion on
a shared past’.16 Considering this mediated process of remembering, the
D-Day ﬁlms are particularly interesting, because not only do they cover a
fairly large time-span of war ﬁlm history (thus offering an exemplary sketch
of the genre), but they also all cover, more or less, the same point of reference in history, and thus invite comparison. Some details of the ﬁlms’ content can serve as an example of how the cinematic construction of collective
memory integrates cinematic events of past and present. Furthermore, the
creators of the two most central D-Day ﬁlms, Darryl Zanuck and Steven
Spielberg, have commented on, and thus displayed an awareness about,

D-Day in Hollywood motion pictures

217

the relation of ﬁlm and collective memory. Zanuck, according to Lawrence
H. Suid, was convinced that his ﬁlm would not just portray history:
He maintained that any picture ‘made on such a scale and with so much
effort must say something’. He felt it was important to convey through
the ﬁlm a message about the current world situation and the threat
to ‘our way of life’. He wanted his movie to serve as ‘a reminder to
millions and millions of people that the Allies, who once stood together
and defeated an evil because they stood together, can do so again in a
different situation today which in some way is similar to what they
faced in 1940.’17
While Henry Koster’s D-Day, 6th of June (1956) is mainly concerned with
a triangle relationship in front of a World War II backdrop, and thus
addresses common domestic issues of its time, its combat sequence is centred
on assaulting Pointe d’Hoc. Darryl Zanuck’s The Longest Day (1962) already
features the ﬁrst major reoccurrence, for here, too, this assault is covered.
The ﬁlm itself impresses through its sheer scope. Parallels have been pointed
out between its incredible production efforts and logistics and those of Operation OVERLORD, and imitating the undertaking it tries to portray really
adds to the ﬁlms credibility. Lawrence Suid compares Zanuck’s efforts to
the preparations made for D-Day when he describes the producer as ‘a
supreme commander in assembling his staff, in supervising all aspects of the
production, and in all decision making’.18 The Longest Day breathes the
spirit of its time, when the epic greatness of Hollywood-CinemaScope seemed
to state that if it was not on ﬁlm it never happened. Consequently, the
movie displays the attitude of a documentary. Central characters and places
of action are introduced via subtitles, original language is preserved in
dialogue, the story basically sticks to factual chronological development,
and it seems to cover all major events of the operation in fair enough detail.
The complexity of events leaves little time to develop characters in depth.
To cover up this drawback, screen-image is employed deliberately. Zanuck
cast a large number of international stars to appeal to his audience, and one
of them was John Wayne, whom we know as a great warrior from many
combat ﬁlms, and who thus gives credibility to his role as commanding
ofﬁcer of a paratrooper unit – or rather makes us believe the real ofﬁcer
surely was a man somewhat like John Wayne. More importantly, we
encounter the legendary Bangalore torpedoes for the ﬁrst time, and of course
we are allowed to look at the ﬁrst blueprint of Spielberg’s famous half-hour
landing sequence. The Longest Day relishes the magnitude of the operation
with a very upbeat ending:
Until the early 1960s, most Americans perceived the nation’s armed
services as an all-conquering and infallible force that could protect the
United States from any threat and project the national interest to any

218

Carsten Hennig
corner of the world. Conveyed in history books, popular literature,
and the mass media, this image received its highest expression in the
military’s overwhelming success in World War II.19

Before the mid-1960s, war movies tended to show the glamorous side of
combat, and the victories of the almighty American military. While not
necessarily depicting battle as a positive experience, ﬁlm makers established
pain and suffering as important ingredients of victory. Later ﬁlms included
more implicit criticism of war. Robert Aldrich’s Dirty Dozen (1967) and
Brian Hutton’s Where Eagles Dare (1968), even though not D-Day ﬁlms as
such (they present commando operations in preparation for the invasion),
both feature actors who had just recently established a new screen image of
the anti-hero, replacing the clean-shaven hero of the ﬁfties: Charles Bronson
and Clint Eastwood characterise ruthless killers and brutal criminals who
make fun of war and disrespect the military establishment. Both of them
had starred as the main character in a new kind of western created by the
Italian director Sergio Leone (A Fistful of Dollars [1964] and Once Upon a
Time in the West [1968] ), which established a major shift in representing
heroism in the cinema, be it Western or war ﬁlm, mirroring the general
change in public opinion constituted by the problems of the conﬂict in
Vietnam.
In Patton (1970), Made during the decline of Hollywood’s epic CinemaScope era, Franklin Schaffner characterises the American military commander General George S. Patton. While D-Day is only referred to in a
short newsreel scene, the hero is shown as somehow larger than life and full
of himself, giving the ﬁlm an ironic twist and thus questioning the motives
of both the soldier and the war. Schaffner also presents the three major
stages of invading the European Continent by visiting northern Africa, Italy
and France. Samuel Fuller does the same thing in his The Big Red One
(1980); however, he is pushing this even further, ‘culminating with the
liberation of a concentration camp in Czechoslovakia and ﬁnal victory in
Europe’.20 In this graphic (and coloured) recollection of D-Day events, we
also encounter the nameless soldier being shot underwater and the bloodred sea washing up on the shore, as well as the Bangalore torpedoes. Fuller
made this ﬁlm to memorialise his own World War II experiences, establishing characters that did their job ﬁghting a necessary war, caring about
survival and performing bravely. He managed to capture the nature of combat, periods of anxious boredom suddenly interrupted by bloody moments
of sheer terror, making it clear that ‘even when it may become necessary,
war still had few socially redeeming qualities’.21 Nevertheless, Fuller’s ﬁlm
somewhat rehabilitated the military, helping to give new life to the war ﬁlm
genre.
Starting with Samuel Fuller’s The Big Red One, the war movie genre
explored various directions during the eighties and nineties. There were
further efforts to rehabilitate the military image, and many of the movies

D-Day in Hollywood motion pictures

219

about Vietnam were still full of self-criticism, while the appearance of Rambo
in Ted Kotcheff’s First Blood (1982) marked a counter-current in this area
as well. After the Cold War ended, the old enemies were gone. In addition,
there have been moral insecurities fuelled by the USA taking part in international conﬂicts (such as Somalia and the Balkans). By the end of the
nineties, criticism of war seemed to have become relative through efforts of
reassurance. That goes for Saving Private Ryan (1998) as well, and to make
his point, Steven Spielberg obviously did have a whole sub-genre of combat
ﬁlm to draw from. Covering the invasion of Normandy he is using all the
familiar devices from the history of D-Day ﬁlms to appeal to the audience
to live as good (American) citizens. By showing us the landing craft and
the soldier being shot underwater, the blood-red sea washing ashore, the
Bangalore torpedoes, the soldier adding a can of French sand to his collection of African and Italian sand (ﬁlm cans, by the way), he does not merely
display his ability to recreate the images of a popular genre in a modernised
version. Spielberg reminds us of what we have come to know about D-Day
from his colleagues, and in the same way he wants to bring across his
message: he wants to remind us that we are supposed to make the sacriﬁces
others made for us count, in this case the eight lives sacriﬁced to save the
one life symbolic of an American value (however, why all four of Mrs
Ryan’s sons had to go to war in the ﬁrst place is never questioned).
The evolutionary process of genre development shows how a set of useful
characters and situations has been created to present us with new insights.
While ideologies may shift over time, the strategies to communicate them
basically stay the same, modifying themselves with the medium they choose
to employ, and adapting its narrative characteristics accordingly. Considering this perspective on D-Day ﬁlms, it becomes clear why, for example, the
work of Spielberg is quite important.22 His Survivors of the Shoah Visual
History Foundation testiﬁes to the director’s conviction that ﬁlm is the ideal
medium to create and store collective memory. The traces of his conviction
are found in his other works as well, especially in ﬁlms like Schindler’s List
(1993) and Saving Private Ryan, and of course in the television mini-series
Band of Brothers (2001), which is closely connected to Saving Private Ryan.
The series may be interpreted as a popularised background story for the
movie, and as an experiment in applying the principles of creating consent
on collective memory through collecting personal impressions of participants,
mixing them with dramatisation in the form of popular mass media. One
could argue that the loose connection between Schindler’s List and the visual
history project has been structurally developed into Band of Brothers, the
difference being only that its contents have been inspired by the events of
D-Day and those of the following invasion until the end of World War II in
general. We may even argue that this aspect of the work of Steven Spielberg
has vaguely been anticipated by Zanuck’s attempts to make a ﬁlm that is
‘both a pseudo-documentary history and a commercial drama’,23 and by
Fuller’s cinematic recollections of his own wartime experiences, representing

220

Carsten Hennig

roughly the same structure of events. These parallels only underline the
work of Spielberg being an excellent example for Klein’s argument about
how a collective past is growing out of shared cultural identities and mainly
shaped by a public discourse to form consent on a common history. Basinger’s
work summarises the role and function of a speciﬁc form of media and
conforms with Klein, who is in line with Carr, Straub and Gergen.24 Ulrike
Klein, however, is the only one who explicitly expresses the conclusion
following from the work of these scholars when she notes that different
cultural spheres (or, in our sense, other collective communities) may have
differing attitudes to how a common past should be formed, and, more
importantly, what it should contain. That means public discourse about
history is of considerable political importance, since it is ‘a question of
communicative negotiation which version of history will gain the upper
hand’.25 While the proverbial history books written by winners may conform to a colloquial form of Klein’s argument in some part, it certainly is
too far fetched to see propagandistic motivations as the major force in
written history. Nevertheless, negotiating consent about shared history most
certainly has some aspects of strategic structural acquisition, and as an
aspect of deﬁning cultural identity deserves attention in terms of its importance for the social function and the political meaning of history.

Collective memory and the cinema
As has been shown, the cinema, as an American form of social consciousness, has always offered the American culture part of the material to shape
its attitudes about war through war movies. Since its declaration of war
against global terror, the USA has gone to a state of war once more. Indications for the scope of this development can be found in the contemporary
products which have come from Hollywood since 11 September 2001. Films
like Ridley Scott’s Black Hawk Down (2001), John Woo’s Windtalkers (2002),
Randall Wallace’s We were Soldiers (2002), Gregory Hoblit’s Hart’s War
(2002) and Antoine Fuqua’s Tears of the Sun (2003) come to mind; others,
like Peter Weir’s Master and Commander (2003), Edward Zwick’s The Last
Samurai (2003) and Wolfgang Petersen’s Troy (2004) follow. As Virchow
and Thomas have already made clear, on 9/11 some of these had already
been more or less in production, but even those almost ﬁnished by then had
to undergo a process of revision and adjustment before being released.26
Consequently, the ﬁlms that were produced and came out post-9/11 should
give us even more insight into the currents of culture, politics and war.
While some of these ﬁlms do not relate directly to wars the USA participated in, they nevertheless present a possibility to take a closer look at
contemporary representations of today’s culture of war. Even though,
unfortunately, no ﬁlm has been produced dealing with the events of D-Day
since then, looking at the steps the genre has taken, it immediately becomes
clear that a considerable shift must have occurred.

D-Day in Hollywood motion pictures

221

Most of these ﬁlms’ heroes have become traumatised heroes. Interpreting
their standards and values makes it clear that criticism of war has moved
into the background. As in the later Vietnam ﬁlms, coping with traumatic
experiences of war is an important role for the hero’s psyche. However,
his strategies to deal with the problems have changed considerably. The
hero seeks catharsis through reliving the traumatising situation; he wants to
redeem his failure through success, through martyrdom, if necessary. The
ﬁlm hero, who had evolved into an opponent of war in search of his inner
self during the last two or three decades, suddenly ﬁnds himself thrown
into a massive regression. The armed conﬂicts of the American past are
deﬁning the framework of his war trauma, and become stylised depictions
of national myths in themselves. The hero’s inner journey to overcome war
as a form of pre-civilised conﬂict management has been replaced by dying in
the line of duty. He has become the uncritical and patriotic arm of political
and military violence, for whom death has turned into a necessity of war,
symbolising a part of constant social renewal. The war heroes’ struggles
serve as examples for dealing with the ‘dark hours’ of American history,
offering strategies to reintegrate them into the national psyche and thus
symbolically to cope with the shock of 9/11. Fighting has again become a
cause, death has once more a meaning for the greater good. With this in
mind, it is particularly interesting to notice a rising number of ﬁlms dealing
with the myths and circumstances of early American wars, especially the
Civil War – for example, Ronald F. Maxwell’s Gods and Generals (2003),
Anthony Minghella’s Cold Mountain (2003) and John Lee Hancock’s The
Alamo (2004). However, other ﬁlms borrow from the myths of the early
American wars as well, especially We were Soldiers and The Last Samurai.
The Civil War in the movies has a long tradition of being used to symbolise
the trauma of the American nation. The struggle for uniﬁcation, one of the
dark chapters in US history, in combination with the traumatised war hero
and his strategies to overcome defeat clearly show how ﬁlms attempt to
reintegrate American traumatisation into the dynamics of national identiﬁcation. Because of the central role of ﬁlms dealing with the Civil War, in
combination with trying to overcome a nationwide trauma, I have come to
label this phenomenon in today’s Hollywood cinema ‘rebirth of a nation’.27
The themes of war depicted in contemporary American cinema resemble
efforts to process and integrate the trauma of 9/11 into the national myth.
Since the emotional experiences and the psychological mechanisms of narrative offered by the war movies of today constantly contribute to the negotiations about our collective past, the interpretations of history they offer,
particularly through redeﬁning social values, and through reframing political phenomena, mark a considerable shift towards a determinist perception
of war as a result of evolution, modernisation and technological development. Thus perceived, war becomes a phenomenon of nature, and as such
cannot be questioned any more, it can only be handled as advantageously
as possible, which obviously means winning. In that way, however, war has

222

Carsten Hennig

left its role as an object of representation and become a subject of presentation. It has become a prerequisite, a presumption of its own discourse. The
new cinema of war, through its strategies of representing heroes of war
combined with the traditions of depicting national myths, has extinguished
decisive steps in the evolution of one of the most traditional ﬁlm genres.
Analysis of the new war ﬁlms illustrates efforts to reintegrate American
traumata into the dynamics of national identiﬁcation, and to reframe public
opinion to raise acceptance of the war effort and the culture of war. Normalisation of armed intervention is presented as an implicitness of national
and individual American self-conception, while public opinion is shifting
from seeing war as a man-made means of politics towards considering it an
unavoidable socio-historic phenomenon.

Conclusion: notes on a motion picture lesson in history
After discussing various aspects of cinematic representations of history, the
history teacher and I agreed that it could be quite useful to make use of the
medium in the classroom to catch the students’ attention and to arouse their
curiosity, motivating them to approach history from a new point of view.
Going even further, by looking at the development of ﬁlms dealing with
history, it might be possible to discover certain dynamics, narrative or other,
that can tell us something about the effects the general and mass mediation
of history has on the way we perceive the past, arrange ourselves in the
present, and prepare ourselves for the future. There could be discussions
about the purpose of history, something students most likely would be happy
to discuss, especially in relation to popular ﬁction and entertainment. Maybe
these discussions would shed some light on how professional historians should
approach new trends in the development of the media, and what the connection is between the social functions of communication technologies and
related assumptions on the content they carry, be it religious paintings,
historical books or popular ﬁlms. Most likely, each of them has its own
form of narrative, waiting for audiences, be it contemporary or future ones,
to tell this story.

Notes
1 Freiwillige Selbstkontrolle (‘voluntary self-control’): a volunteer initiative of Germany’s media industry consisting of independent experts to ensure the compliance of media products with German laws for youth protection via self-censorship
as a precautionary principle (comparable to the movie ratings of the Motion
Picture Association of America).
2 Narrative is one major device in Hollywood movies, amongst others, which are
much more typical for ﬁlm, to create the drama which makes a ﬁlm exciting and
successful at the box ofﬁce. In the context of cinema and for our purposes,
narrative does not literally mean a story with a narrator. The term refers to the
characteristics of story construction. Films not based on narrative structure do
exist, however, for our purposes, they are not of interest.

D-Day in Hollywood motion pictures

223

3 Hayden White theorists of history have kept pointing out how our tradition of
historiography is closely related to the western culture of storytelling. See Hayden
White (trans. P. Kohlhaas), Metahistory: Die historische Einbildungskraft im 19.
Jahrhundert in Europa (Frankfurt am Main: Fischer Verlag, 1991).
4 See Kenneth J. Gergen (trans. J. Straub and A. Kochinka), ‘Erzählung, moralische
Identität und historisches Bewußtsein. Eine sozialkonstruktionistische Darstellung’,
in J. Straub (ed.) Erzählung, Identität und historisches Bewußtsein. Die psychologische Konstruktion von Zeit und Geschichte (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp
Verlag, 1998), pp. 172–6.
5 Ibid., pp. 184–8.
6 Ibid., pp. 198–202.
7 See David Carr, Time, Narrative, and History (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1991).
8 See Jürgen Straub, ‘Geschichten erzählen, Geschichte bilden. Grundzüge einer
narrativen Psychologie historischer Sinnbildung’, in J. Straub (ed.) Erzählung,
Identität und historisches Bewußtsein, p. 84. The original quote is ‘historische
Wirklichkeiten sind Konstrukte’ (trans. Carsten Hennig).
9 See Straub, ‘Geschichten erzählen, Geschichte bilden’, p. 85.
10 Even though Basinger and Suid use terms like ‘combat ﬁlm’ and ‘war movies’ or
‘genre’ with different intent, for our purposes a slightly wider approach is necessary, mainly due to the lack of large numbers of war ﬁlms related to the subjects
discussed in this chapter.
11 See Jeanine Basinger (updated ﬁlmography by J. Arnold), The World War II
Combat Film: Anatomy of a Genre (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press,
2003), p. xii.
12 Ibid.
13 Ibid., p. 108.
14 Ibid., p. 111.
15 Ibid., p. 141.
16 See Ulrike Klein, Das internationale Medienereignis D-Day: Presse und kollektives
Erinnern nach 50 Jahren (Bochum: Verlag Brockmeyer, 1996), pp. 28–9. The original quote is ‘öffentliche Meinungsbildung über eine gemeinsame Vergangenheit’
(trans. Carsten Hennig).
17 See Lawrence H. Suid, Guts & Glory: The Making of the American Military
Image in Film (Lexington, KY: The University Press of Kentucky, 2002), p. 172.
18 Ibid., p. 178.
19 Ibid., p. xi.
20 Ibid., p. 425.
21 Ibid., p. 427.
22 See Robert F. Daniel, Erinnerung als ethisches Projekt: Aufarbeitung der
Vergangenheit im Filmwerk von Steven Spielberg (München: KoPäd-Verlag, 2001).
23 See Suid, Guts & Glory, p. 184.
24 See Klein, Das internationale Medienereignis D-Day, p. 15.
25 Ibid., p. 25. The original quote is ‘eine Frage der kommunikativen Verhandlung,
welche Version der Geschichte die Überhand gewinnt’ (trans. Carsten Hennig).
26 See Tanja Thomas and Fabian Virchow, ‘Militainment als “banaler” Militarismus.
Auf dem Weg zu einer Militarisierung der politischen Kultur?’, in M. Löffelholz
(ed.) Krieg als Medienereignis, Bd. 2. Krisenkommunikation im 21. Jahrhundert
(Wiesbaden: Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften, 2004), pp. 299 –300.
27 See Carsten Hennig, ‘Rebirth of a Nation: Das Kino im amerikanischen
Kriegsdiskurs’, Newsletter Arbeitskreis Militärgeschichte, 23: 37– 40.

224

Index

Index

Abwehr 177–8
Adair, Allan 82
AGRA 12
Air Plan, The 206–7
Alamein, El 118
Alanbrooke, Lord 16, 50–1, 125, 149, 160,
203
Aldrich, Robert 218
Antwerp 153–4
ANVIL/DRAGOON, Operation 153
Apollo, HMS 48
Ardennes 154
Argentan 106
Army Film and Photographic Unit 203–4,
209
Arnhem 154
Arnold, H.H. 150
Arromanches 53
ATI (Army Training Instruction) 79
ATLANTIC, Operation 104
Aunay-sur-Odon 98
Aure Valley 59
Azeville 54
Badsey, Stephen 5
Band of Brothers 9, 219
BARBAROSSA, Operation 35
Barbier, Kathryn 8
Basinger, Jeanine 215
Baverstock, Kevin 19
Bayeux 44, 54–60
BBC 202
Beny Bocage 98–102, 120
Bevan, Frederick 170–1
Big Red One, The 218
BLUECOAT, Operation 6, 75, 79, 82, 90–5,
99–101
Blumentritt, Gunther 36–7
bocage 6, 31, 50, 67–8, 81, 84, 93, 95,
119–20, 124
BODYGUARD, Operation 171
Bon Repas 18
Booth, E.L. 111
Bottomley, Norman 154

Bourguebus Ridge 74, 104–5
Bradley, Omar 2, 48, 60–1, 66, 160, 163,
173
Breche 113
Bren gun 14, 26
Bretteville-le-Rabet 111, 113
Bretteville-sur-Laize 105
British Movietone 204
Brittany 12
Broadhurst, Harry 163, 165–6
Bucknall, Gerard 29, 102
Bullen-Smith, D.C. 16–17
CABRANK 20
Caen 4–8, 12, 17, 24, 28, 41, 43–4,
48, 54–6, 59–61, 75, 81, 104, 110,
112, 124, 158–60, 163–6, 196,
208
Caen Canal 50
Calvados 41, 52
Canaris, Wilhelm 178
Carafano, James 65–6
Carentan 49, 52, 58–61
Carr, David 215
Carver, Michael 74
Casablanca Conference 159, 161
Caumont 59, 90–5, 104
Cauvicort 114
Cerisy Forest 55, 65
Challenger tank 85
CHARNWOOD, Operation 8, 17, 49, 79,
164–6
Cherbourg 5, 12, 42–3, 49–54, 57–61, 160,
181, 208
Cherwell, Lord 151, 155
Churchill tank 78–9, 85, 93–5
Churchill, Winston 149–51, 153, 155, 166,
204
Cintheaux 111
Clausewitz, Carl 11, 35
COBRA, Operation 6, 31, 49, 65, 90–2, 99,
104, 125
Cochrane, Alexander 185
Colombelles 17

Index 225
Commonwealth Military Formations
21 Army Group 4, 6, 12, 13, 15, 19, 31,
56, 76–81, 84, 87, 123, 171, 174, 186,
194–5, 198–9
1 Canadian Army 15, 18; 2 British Army
14, 29, 43, 50, 56, 58, 90, 92, 197; 8
British Army 80, 83–4
I Corps 16, 163, 165; II Canadian Corps
104–6, 112; VIII Corps 24, 90–9, 102;
XXX Corps 29, 90, 97–8, 102
59 Staffordshire Division 16; 43 Division
92, 122–3; 53 Welsh Division 16, 18,
123, 127; 51 Highland Division 16, 51,
107, 120, 122, 124; 2 Canadian Division
18, 107, 114; 15 Scottish Division 18,
24, 79, 84, 93–6, 98; 49 Division 18–19;
50 Northumbrian Division 19, 58–60,
120, 122; 3 Division 50, 56, 123, 163;
6 Airborne Division 57–8, 126; 3
Canadian Division 59, 114; 1 Polish
Armoured Division 83, 108, 110, 112;
4 Canadian Armoured Division 108,
110–12; 7 Armoured Division 28, 75,
82–3, 120; 11 Armoured Division 79,
82–3, 91–5, 97–100, 102, 120; 79
Armoured Division 56, 78; Guards
Armoured Division 79, 82–3, 93, 98,
122, 125
8 Rifle Brigade 120; 46 Brigade 95; 70
Brigade 19; 131 Brigade 28; 152 Brigade
16; 153 Brigade 17; 146 Brigade 18; 158
Brigade 123; 160 Brigade 124; 227
Brigade 93–4; 8 Armoured Brigade 19;
22 Armoured Brigade 28, 9; 31 Tank
Brigade 79, 84; 6 Guards Tank Brigade
84, 94–6
2 Seaforths 16; 5 Seaforths 16; 5
Camerons 16; 13/18 Hussars 16; 5 Black
Watch 17; 5/7 Gordon Highlanders 17;
148 RAC 17; 24 Lancers 19; 3 Scots
Guards 94; 2 Glasgow Highlanders
95; 23 Hussars 98; 3 Monmouths 98;
1 Northants Yeomanry 110; 144 RAC
110; RASC 119; RAOC 119; Royal
Scots Fusiliers 122; 9 Durham Light
Infantry 122; 2 Scots Guards 122; 3
County of London Yeomanry 123; 4
County of London Yeomanry 28, 123;
RAMC 123; Fife and Forfar Yeomanry
126; 11 Hussars 126; Coldstream
Guards 126; 107 RAC 127; 45 Royal
Marine Commando 127; Royal Welch
Fusiliers 119, 123; Ox and Bucks Light
Infantry 121, 126; Sherwood Rangers
123, 125; 1 Suffolks 123, 126; 1 Gordon
Highlanders 17, 122; 4/7 Dragoons 83,
123; 2 Argylls 94–5; 2 Northants
Yeomanry 98–9
Coningham, Arthur 162, 165
Copp, Terry 4, 6, 121, 123

Corum, Jim 7
COSSAC 56–8, 159–61, 170–4, 186–90,
193, 197
Cotentin 49–52, 56, 58
Cox, Sebastian 155
Crerar, Henry 105–8, 115
Crisbecq 54
Cristot 83
Crocker, John 16–17
Crocodile tank 20
Cromwell tank 28, 78, 98–9, 125
CRUSADER, Operation 9, 197
Daglish, Ian 6
Daily Mirror 119
Daumesnil 110
D-Day 6.6.44 211
D-Day 6th of June 217
D-Day in Colour 211
De Lee, Nigel 6
Delaforce, Patrick 18
Dempsey, Miles 6, 13, 16, 29, 90–2, 99–100,
165–6
D’Este, Carlo 2, 4, 16, 18, 166
Destination D-Day 211
Die Deutsches Wochensau 206
Dirty Dozen, The 218
DOKTOR GUSTAV, Operation 138
Dollman, Friedrich 40–1, 50
Dornier Do 217 135–6
Doubler, Michael 65–6
Douvres 56
DRYSHOD, Operation 172
Dyke, Trevor Hart 18–19
Eisenhower, Dwight D. 48, 50–1, 91, 101,
147, 149–51, 160, 163, 166, 171, 174,
186, 203, 208
Ellis, John 74
English, John 74
Enigma 138
EPSOM, Operation 18, 24, 75, 77, 79, 82,
84, 97, 123, 126, 164, 166
Erskine, G. ‘Bobby’ 29, 75, 102
Evrecy 18
Fabius 181
Falaise 2, 18, 30, 90, 104–6, 109–12, 114
Falley, Wilhelm 44
Ferriere-Harang 97
Ferris, John 8–9
Feuchtinger, Edgar 24, 45, 98
Firefly tank 16, 20, 110
Focke Wulf FW 190 132, 138
Fontenay-le-Pesnel 18–19
Foot, M.R.D. 151
Foret l’Eveque 97
FORTITUDE SOUTH, Operation 170–5
FORTITUDE, Operation 8, 51
French, David 3

226

Index

Fritz X 135–6
From D-Day to Berlin 211
Fuller, Samuel 218
FUSAG 172–5, 195, 199
Galbraith, J.K. 155
Garbo 177–81
Gaumesnil 109, 113
Gaumont British News 204
Gerhardt, Charles 66
German Military Formations
OB West 36–8, 43, 46, 51; OK
Wehrmacht 36, 42, 46, 131, 176–7,
180, 196; OK Luftwaffe 36
OK Marine; 36, 41; Army Group B 37–8,
50, 52, 58, 60–1, 177–8; Panzer Group
West 38, 40, 98, 101
7 Army 40–1, 51–2, 58, 60, 90, 106, 180;
15 Army 8, 37, 51–2, 170, 176, 180, 187
LXXXIV Corps; 41, 49, 52–3, 55, 58–9;
II Panzer Corps 99–100; II Parachute
Corps 59, 99; I SS Panzer Corps 107–9
711 Division 42; 18 Panzer Division 42;
327 Glider Regiment 60; 326 Division
98; 89 Division 111; 5 Fallschirmjaeger
190; Leibstandarte 105–6, 143, 179–80;
21 Panzer Division 16, 24, 26, 28, 41,
43, 45, 49, 52, 54, 58–9, 98, 100, 164,
180, 191–2, 196, 199; 12 SS Panzer
Division 18, 24, 49, 52, 58–9, 100,
105–7, 109, 179–80, 191, 196; Panzer
Lehr 18, 28, 49, 52, 60, 82, 180; 10 SS
Panzer Division 18, 98, 100, 179,
193–4; 101 SS Heavy Tank 28, 109;
2 Panzer Division 28, 180, 191; 17 SS
Panzergrenadier Division; 41, 61, 180,
191, 196; 709 Division 42–3, 54–5;
716 Division 43, 45, 54; 352 Division
44, 54–5, 59, 64, 186, 197, 199;
91 Airlanding Division 44, 55; 3
Fallschirmjaeger; 64, 69, 190, 193; 9 SS
Panzer Division; 98–100, 179, 193–4
Gersdorff, Rudolf 40
Geyr von Schweppenburg, Leo 5, 37–40, 46,
81
Goering, Hermann 134–5
Gold Beach 43, 50, 54–5, 58–60, 196, 208
GOODWOOD, Operation 24–6, 49, 75–9,
82, 97, 104, 124
Gooseberry blockship 52
Grandchamp 58–60
Gray, Peter 8
Great War, The 209
Halder, Fritz 32
Halpenny, W. (Force) 110–13
Hansen, Marc 5
Hargest, James 19
Harris, Arthur 148, 150, 158, 161–2, 207
Hart, Basil Liddell 2, 74–5

Hart, Russell 3, 74
Hart, Stephen 4, 7, 122
Hastings, Max 3, 16, 18
Haut-Mesnil 111
Heinkel He 177 135
Hennig, Carsten 9
Henschel Hs 293 135
Hesketh, Roger 176–8
Hill 112 92, 120
Hill 140 113–14
Hill 192 70
Hill 195 113
Hill 226 95, 98
Hill 309 95, 98
Hillman bunker 56, 164
Hinde, R. 102
Hitler, Adolf 6, 24, 38, 40, 43, 45–6, 49–50,
53, 61, 81, 91, 121, 134, 152–64
Hopkins, Harry 148
How, J.J. 101
Howard, Michael 155
HUSKY, Operation 159
Hutton, Brian 218
Isigny-sur-Mer 57, 60
Jarymowycz, Roman 74
Jodl, Alfred 38
Journey Together 209
Junkers Ju 88/188 132, 135, 137, 139, 142
Juno Beach 43, 50–3, 55, 205
JUPITER, Operation 77
Jurques 98
Kangaroo personnel carrier 20, 82
Keitel, Wilhelm 38, 178–9
Kenneth, John 90, 94
Kinston-McCloughrey, E.J. 162, 165–6
Kitching, George 111
Klein, Ulrike 216
Kluge, Hans von 100
Koster, Henry 217
Kraiss, Dietrich 44
La Hogue 105
Laison River 114
Langanniere 114
Le Carillon 68
Le Havre 51–2
Le Mesnil Rouxelin 64
Lee, John 71
Leigh-Mallory, Trafford 150, 161, 163–6,
189
Les Loges 95
Lessay 52
Longest Day, The 51, 212, 217
Longues-sur-Mer 54, 57
Luck, Hans von 16, 26, 28, 45
Luftwaffe 7, 42, 51–2, 75, 119, 131–40, 180,
189

Index 227
Luftflotte 2 134
III Group Ground Attack Wing 138
Luftflotte 3 52, 131–2, 136, 138–41
II Air Corps 132, 136, 139; II Fighter
Corps 132–3; III Flak Corps 132–3,
143–4; IX Air Corps 132, 134–7, 140;
X Air Corps 132, 135–7, 139–40
Lutain Wood 93–4
LUTTICH, Operation 100
M10 tank destroyer 85
MacMillan, Gordon 93–95
Magic 185
Maisy 58
Marcks, Erich 41–2, 44–6, 49
Margival 49, 52
Marshall, George 160
Martinville 69
MARTLET, Operation 18
Masterman, John 178
May-sur-Orne 105
McAndrew, Bill 123
Melvin, Mungo 5
Merderet 55
Merville 54, 211
Messerschmitt Me 109 132, 142
Messerschmitt Me 262 142–3
Meyer, Kurt 74–5, 108–11
Millett, Allan 153
Ministry of Information 206–8
Mistel 142–3
Mont Pincon 98
Montauban-Quineville 49
Montebourg 54, 61
Montgomery, Bernard 2, 4, 6, 12–13, 16–17,
22, 29, 48–50, 55, 61, 76–81, 84, 87, 90,
92, 99–102, 105, 118–20, 124–7, 160–6,
171, 174, 186, 195, 205
Morgan, Frederick 159, 170
Morris bunker 56
Mortain 100
Mulberry harbour 5, 41, 52–3, 60
Murray, Williamson 147, 153
NATO 3
Nebelwerfer 26
Neillands, Robin 3–4
NEPTUNE, Operation 52, 171
Nye, Archibald 78
O’Connor, Richard 97, 101–2
Olivier, Lawrence 154
Omaha Beach 31, 44, 50–60, 196–8, 201
Orange, Vincent 8
Orne River 16–18, 42, 50, 100, 160, 164, 196
Ouistreham 104
OVERLORD, Operation 1, 12, 39, 41, 44,
52, 56, 64, 84, 86, 137, 148, 150, 152,
158, 160, 162, 170–6, 181–9, 192–8,
201, 203, 217

Paget, Bernard 159
Panther tank 19, 85, 99, 101, 125, 191–3,
198
Panzer IV tank 85, 125, 192
Panzerfaust 67–9
Paris, Michael 9
Pathe Gazette 204–5
Patton 218
Patton, George S. 2, 101, 104, 106, 173
Pemsel, Max 40–1, 58
PERCH, Operation 82
Perrier Ridge 99–100
Petit Ravin 110
Petltz, Dietrich 135–6
PIAT 125
Pickert, Wolfgang 133
Pinewood Studios 204
Pluskat, Werner 51
POINTBLANK, Operation 149
Pointe du Hoc 44, 54, 58
Portal, Charles 149–50, 154–5
Potigny 112
Powle, Dickie 96–7
Quebec Conference 161
Quesada, Pete 152
Quesnay Wood 114
Quiberon Bay 12
QUICKSILVER 172–3
RAF 137, 139, 140, 143, 147, 149, 162,
206–7
RAF Bomber Command 149, 151, 159,
162–3, 166
RAF Fighter Command 134
RAF Film Production Unit 206–7
Ramsey, Bertram 48
Rauray 19, 124
Reichert, Josef 42
Rennes 43, 45
Rennie, Tom 16
Rhine river 37, 192
Rhineland 154
Richter, Wilhelm 43, 45
Roberts, G.P.B. 79, 82, 90, 97–99, 101–2
Roche-Guyon Chateau 48
Rommel, Erwin 5, 25, 37–41, 46, 48–9,
53–55, 60–1, 81, 180
Ross, R.K. 18
ROUND-UP, Operation 159
Ruhr 37, 154
Rundstedt, Gerd von 36–8, 49, 180, 191
Saintenay 68
Salerno 136
Savannah, USS 137
Saving Private Ryan 4, 9, 201–2, 211–13,
219
Schimpff, Richard 64
Schindler’s List 219

228

Index

Schlieben, Karl Wilhelm von 42–3, 45
Seine river 12, 41, 49, 90, 152, 179
Sept Vents 93
Sequeville 67
SHAEF 49, 56–7, 66, 68–9, 173–4, 186,
189, 191, 194–5
Sheffield, Gary 7
Sherman M4 tank 17, 78–79, 83, 95, 98,
112, 114, 125–6
Simonds, Guy 13–14, 55, 104–14
Slapton Sands 51
SLEDGEHAMMER, Operation 159
Snagge, John 202–3
SOE 151
Souleuvre 97–8, 101
Spaatz, Carl 147–50, 158, 161, 207
Speer, Albert 154
Speidel, Hans 39
Sperrle, Hugo 132, 134
Spielberg, Stephen 201, 211, 213, 216–20
Spitfire 137
St Aignon 110, 112
St Andre de l’Epine 69
St Laurent 53, 60, 67
St Lo 41, 44, 54, 64–5, 69, 104
St Martin-des-Besaces 96, 98, 100
St Mere-Eglise 43, 54, 59–60
St Quentin 138
St Sylvain 105
Ste. Honorine la Chardonerette 16–17
Streng, Ernst 90
Strong, Ken 186
Suid, Lawrence 217
Sword Beach 43, 50, 53, 55–7, 137, 202
Target for Tonight 209
Tedder, Arthur 8, 49, 147–55, 160–6
Tehran Conference 171
Ten Days to Glory 211
Terraine, John 147
Tessel Woods 18–19
Thames TV 210
Tiger tank 17, 26, 28, 75, 85, 90, 101,
109–10, 125, 127, 191–3, 198
TIGER, Operation 51
Tombeau de Marie Joly 113
TORCH, Operation 79
TOTALIZE, Operation 6–7, 16, 75, 82, 102,
104–15, 125
Towards the Offensive 206–7
TRACTABLE, Operation 75, 83
Trentes Acres 113
Tricycle 174–8
True Glory, The 207–8

Truppenführung 22–6, 31
World at War, The 9
Uganda, HMS 137
Ultra 138, 179, 181, 185, 189–91, 198
USAAF 137–40, 143, 150, 165, 172
US Military Formations
12 USAG 173; 1 US Army 49–50, 57, 60,
64, 71, 90, 92, 171; 3 US Army 173,
192, 195
V Corps 51, 57, 59–60; VII Corps; 49, 57,
60, 68
83 Division 68; 35 Division 68; 2 Division
70; 1 Division 43, 49, 52, 59; 82
Airborne Division 44, 54; 4 Division
51, 57, 60; 101 Airborne Division
56–7, 60; 29 Division 59–60, 64–9;
3 Armoured Division 69–70
116 Regiment 57, 69; 175 Regiment 60;
115 Regiment 66, 69; 110 Field Artillery
Battalion 66–7; 747 Tank Battalion
67–8
Utah Beach 49–60, 140, 204
V1 152
V2 152
Vassy 99, 102
Verney, Gerald 94–5
Vierville-sur-Mer 50
Villers Bocage 28–9, 48, 75, 82, 98, 166
Villers Fossard 67
Vire 44, 54, 60, 98–102
Vogel, Robert 11
Waldmuller, Hans 109
War in the Air 209–10
Warsaw Pact 3
Warspite, HMS 137
Wasp flamethrower 20
Wayne, John 217
Wedemeyer, Albert C. 31
WETSHOD 172
Where Eagles Dare 218
Whiteley, John 186–7
Williams, Edgar ‘Bill’ 186–7, 191, 193–6
Wilmot, Chester 2
WINDSOR, Operation 79
Wingate, Ronald 176–8
Wittman, Michael 28, 48, 109–10
World at War 209–10
Worthington, Donald (force) 113–15
Zanuck, Darryl 216, 219
Zuckerman, Solly 148, 152, 155, 165–6

