ATION OF WAR DIARIES (COMPILED FROM F.S.R., VOL. 1, 174).
(iv) Detailed account of operations. Exact hour of important occurrences, factors affecting
of mobilisation or
operations, topographical and climatic.
Clear sketches showing positions of troops at
important phases.
bordinate command
(v) Nature and description of field engineering works constructed, or quarters occupied.
(vi) Changes in establishment or strength.
As regards casualties the names and ranks of
officers
and the number of other ranks or followers and of animals should be noted.
In addition in the case of units on the I. of C. changes in stores, transport, etc.
(vii) Metsorological notes.
(viti) Summary of important information received, whether military or political.
occur, or come to notice.
1) Fe to to strel be mered up nch in the order desiren th ve hit he the time they
PARA. 5.—Appendices as under will be attached to the original copy of each war diary :—
the war diary.
ii) Copies of orders, or instructions, received from higher commands if no longer required
for reference.
ec. 36), and personal
a his representatives.
y, war diaries will be
NoTE B.—See also A.C....
Nome Aer tuestion of done whatch or no, a tar diary storia be of st a at
The War Office, London, S.W.1.
Its object is to furnish a historical record of operations
ana To to an an an at to ate it into ernie it is rod peation,
A.F. C.2118.
wil be entered up day hach entry faction a by the fier detailed to, meep it,
A. Car Say is to be ne ted that the citraction and re
and retention of appendices, maps, etc.,
NoTt.—It should be made clear that the officer who initials the entries is the commander
or other person mentioned in para. 1, not the officer he details to do the clerical work.
PARA. 3.-Omitted.
PARA. 4.- In so far as they are applicable, the following points should be recorded when
preparing a diary :—
") Ind deant osters, instructions, reports, messages or despatches received and issued,
(1) pay ation he cement further ot renty our hour and present dispositions,
ii) Important matters relating to the duties of each branch of the staff.
PARA. 6.—All diaries will conform to the regulations for drafting orders, reports, etc.
(See F.S.R., Volume II)
PARA. 7.-(FORMATIONS AND UNITS OF EXPEDITIONARY FORCES).
Disposal will be made monthly of war diaries as follows :—
Month and Year.
Place
FIGSBURY
BORRACAS
NINTER BOURNE
GUNNER:
WILTSHIRE.
the we NoT The in entered should be the time the from it in order racies
SHEET 1
WAR DIARY
Unit..
bAIRBORNE DIV ORY FOm
2118.
INTELLIGENCE SUMMARY
(Erase heading not required).
Commanding Officer.
MAJOR W.L. TAYLOR
Summary of Events and Information
References to Appendices
0.G. attended car/ounce at H.Q Dis on scaling & Maintenance Packe
Personsel fired Lew Men MI Go 30 d Range. Sobifactory performa co
Pore stores despatched 6 / Corbs an ADOS eistro l
Gate Ke WIE 1/337/304
1700)
0900
Packind ln stores in containers for deling tourist
12
WAR DIARIES SECTION-+
No
- G-VUN 1911
Ấ. H.Q. 2rid Echelon
NE provides.
14
15
1730,
0900
26 Antoine Dw. 6.
Pitacant atte trage ad alle
M3524/1218 1200M 10/41 H.B. & Co.Lta. 51-1641)
ents in your Bulk Or
u have requested,
re of your doc
e documents are in use
Desk for full details
