386
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
out of action by mines and under-water obstacles, and one convoy
narrowly escaped capture when they stopped to ask some sodden
soldiers the way, and discovered that they were Germans.
The
surprise must have been mutual because the convoy was able to
turn about on a mined road and escape with only one casualty
which was 'ditched'.
The Airborne and Air Despatch Units
The RASC of ist Airborne Division shared to the full the
experiences of the devoted band in the Arnhem bridgehead.
They
went in among the first to land, and for the first day or two carried
on with normal activities.
A maintenance area was formed, the
supplies landed by glider were cleared under spasmodic enemy fire,
and a fair proportion of the earlier drops were collected.
Soon the
dumps came under heavy attention from mortars, small arms and
machine-gun fire, so that issues became difficult and dangerous.
The dumps were moved, but were still subjected to increasing and
accurate mortar and shell fire, especially after a supply drop.
spite of this, collection and issue of the meagre supplies which did
arrive were carried on without interruption.
The roads became
impassable even to jeeps, and the dump area was a mass of debris;
but tireless, and seemingly fearless, drivers went on with their task
until they
were hit, or their jeeps were knocked out under them.
Many under the Red Cross were continually engaged in carrying
casualties to
the enemy occupied hospital, or fetching water from
an enemy controlled well.
One driver so engaged met a German
tank, but was allowed to proceed after being asked to give an
undertaking not to disclose its position.
The losses to the transport
became crippling; only two jeeps remained serviceable, and nearly
all the trailers were holed.
Before the withdrawal, on the night of
September 25th, there had been no rations to issue for several days,
but ammunition was issued until that evening.
By the fifth day, the gaps in the perimeter had become wide and
dangerous, and a RASC party, 70 strong, was ordered to take over
a sector.
This they held in face of considerable attacks by infantry,
tanks, guns, mortars, etc., and withdrew in good order when required
The officer
commanding
the party,
Captain J. L.
Cranmer-Byng, 250 Light Company, was awarded an immediate
Military Cross.
Many acts of heroisms were performed by the
RASC in the Arnhem battle.
One officer ran into an ambush
while collecting supplies, and sacrificed himself by advancing in
the open under machine-gun fire, to give covering fire with a Bren
while his men withdrew.
A driver took a captured enemy lorry
into Arnhem with a load of ammunition for the isolated parachute
battalion there; several times he came under fire, but he hid for the
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
387
night in a side street, delivered his load, and came back for more,
his vehicle riddled with shot holes.
Of the 10 officers and 243 other ranks of the RASC who took
part in the airborne operations, five officers and 83 men came back,
30 were left in hospital wounded; the number of fatal casualties
cannot be established, but the rest were mainly prisoners, including
a whole platoon which went down in the first lift and made straight
for the town to take over supply installations there.
All three airborne divisions employed in the Battle of Arnhem
(Ist British, and 82nd and 10ist American) were supplied by air in
daylight on the four days after zero. A total of 596 sorties were
flown on this task, and the stores were ejected from Stirling bombers
by RASC crews, drawn from the air despatch and airborne divisional
companies.
Air supply was only partially successful.
The weather
was bad and the area into which supplies had to be dropped was
extremely restricted.
Furthermore, German anti-aircraft fire was
intense.
The bombers were obliged to fly in very low to make
sure of dropping the loads on our own troops, and an observer in
the Guards Division speaks of the unforgettable sight of the Stirlings
flying low under a heavy cloud bank, searching for their exact
bearings before making the final run in to drop the supplies on the
pocket-handkerchief which was ist Airborne Division.
He describes
the big
bombers, which formed an easy target for enemy fire,
swinging in unflinchingly to perform their desperate mission from
which many did not return.
Not only the RAF, but also the RASC engaged in these missions,
did all they could to deliver the goods, and of the goo RASC men
who flew on the missions 264 were shot down and 116 were killed
or missing.
Several were decorated.
The Distinguished Flying
Medal was awarded to L/Cpl W. Whittaker, NCO commanding a
despatch crew. As the aircraft approached the dropping zone, one
of his crew was badly wounded, and he had to decide quickly that
he must leave him, rally the rest of the crew, and despatch the load.
The drill went through without a hitch, and all the panniers went
down in one run in.
had been given the chance to bale out,
Later the aircraft crash-landed; Whittaker
wounded men.
but stayed to tend the
Rejoining his company, he volunteered for another
sortie, but this was not allowed as he was suffering from shock.
Cl W. Hutchinson won the Dist as ished flying Medal, when his
Stirling was hit in many places, and he was wounded in the legs
and back.
He still succeeded in despatching the load while the
aircraft was over the dropping zone.
awarded the Military Medal.
Cpl C. B. Sproston
was
His aircraft was hit and caught fire,
explosive.
and he was ordered to despatch the load, which consisted of high
He got it away at the right moment, although the rear
