642
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
by Sgt C. H. Jones, after the consent of the officer commanding
had been obtained by telephone.
Some French Army huts were taken over as stores, and the school
was used for billeting.
A petrol dump was established on a piece
of adjoining waste ground.
Among units on the feeding strength
from this point on was the Tunisian Task Force commanded by
Colonel Raff, referred to in newspaper write-ups as that 'stick of
human dynamite from New York City' and 'the saviour of Tunisia'.
Rations for this unit were later delivered by vehicles of 239 GT
Company RASC, attached to this unit.
Deliveries, including those
of 87 octane petrol for half-tracks and ammunition, were sent
forward each night to Feriana and Gafsa, necessitating a journey
over a mountain range where the road was usually covered in
cloud.
On these runs and on many other occasions during the
campaign when vehicles of this company were attached to
the drivers deserved the highest praise for the excellent services
they rendered.
Early in January, the unit changed over to bulk rations and
moved their stores to the local theatre which made an excellent
depot. At that time the unit were issuing between 70,000 and
80,000 rations and between 30,000 and 40,000 gallons of petrol a
The American aerodrome at Youx-les-Bains was supplied
direct from the railhead there having a daily consumption of
20,000 gallons of 100 octane aviation spirit.
When we eventually handed over the depot to an American
supply unit. an American sergeant produced a wonderful electric
calculating machine which he set up in the office.
He explained
that this machine calculated ese ration entitlement to two places
of decimals.
The first item they calculated was milk, and the
ration calculated was 49•67 Ib, for which the issuer immediately
issued two cases (96 lb).
fact that this was not correct, he replied: 'Sure it's not, but we only
On having his attention drawn to the
issue to the nearest case anyway?'
large quantities of American rations, and the mixture of rations was
During the time the unit was operating at Tebessa they received
such that a daily menu had to be worked out amalgamating the
British and American ration scales and available stocks.
This worked well on the whole except that several American units
thought that they should have been providad with the full American
scale of rations.
in the scale of beverages.
This was impossible owing to the vast difference
The British troops, who were very much
in the minority, were satisfied, as such items as tomato juice, grape-
fruit fuice, chile con carne, apple butter, golden corn, etc., made
ery welcome changes in the diet.
On January g6th, 1g4g. R Section rejoined the unit from Canrobe
and on February ist the complete unit moved to Ebba Ksour, where
a depot was opened for the
issue of compo rations to American
forward troops and bulk rations to static troops.
We were here
during the Kasserine action and one night found that our trade
had diminished alarmingly.
On orders received from corps head-
quarters preparations were made for the destruction of all stocks
to prevent them from falling into enemy hands.
were manned for about 48 hours by this unit and five sections of
pioneers from 119 Company.
On March 27th, 1943, the unit moved to Zafrane near Le Kef,
transferring all remaining stocks to the new site.
While the unit was operating at Ebba
Ksour, C Section was
detached to Le Sers for a few days to start a petrol depot.
building up stocks of about 2,000 tons, the depot was handed over
At Zafrane the unit had its first experience of a depot entirely
The depot consisted of eight store tents, heavily
camouflaged.
Additional stacking ground was levelled off beside
the railway track and camouflaged by the erection of nets between
At this depot the feeding strength rose to what is claimed
to be a record for DIDs, namely 140,000 daily.
This large feeding
strength obviously necessitated considerable physical and mental
effort by all ranks, and it is especially worthy of note that never
before or since has the morale of the unit been so high.
that they were doing an important job and gave of their best.
the words of our sergeant clerk (with apologies to Sir Winston
Churchill): 'Never before in the field of human conflict have so
few worked so hard to feed so many?'
At Zafrane the unit fed the Eighth Army for the second time, the
first having been at Tebessa early in January,
when a special
delivery of rations was made for a flying column of the Eighth Army
On May 9th, 1943,
the two sections which had been helping
99 DID by loading the pack trains for them moved to Manouba,
near Tunis.
The site chosen for the depot was the barracks of the
Gand Artillery Regiment of the French Army, and was a former
palace of the Bey of Tunis.
During the occupation the Germans
had used it as a tank repair shop.
They had effected extensive
demolitions before leaving, and had left behind them many booby
traps which had to be rendered safe before work could be begun.
The depot was cleared up and large stocks were received.
In this
location rations were issued to 218 units daily, which is claimed to
be a record for two sections of a DID.
All enemy supply dumps in the area were taken
over, anc
supplies were collected and brought into the depot.
Here the
