626
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
Mediez and its tail at the top of a winding hill near Grenadier
Hill.
Peter Milford was in front talking to the APM who said
that the enemy had broken through in considerable force, captured
Grenadier Hill and had crossed into Red Cap Alley, about a mile
and a half behind our tail. I went back and sat in a sand-bagged
observation post with Jimmy Boyd, watching some vehicles burning
in the basin we had just left. I then returned to the head of the
convoy, which had closed up and was told by the APM that we
could not move yet as the main road in front was full of the transport
of a gunner regiment moving up.
At this point a certain amount of firing broke out at the rear of
the column.
I got a lift back in a car.
There was a lot of dust
and smoke in the air and I found an infuriated Boyd lying in a
ditch with the company sergeant major of 107
Company.
He
stood up and saluted when I arrived and reported, in a most official
manner, that the enemy was bracketing the road with mortars.
We woke the drivers up and closed the vehicles up further so that
the tail of the convoy avoided the danger area, and then Jimmy Boyd
remembered his course at the battle school and came all over infantry.
It was now one o'clock, and the APM threw the road open to us.
The convoy went down the hill towards Medjez, met the main
road and swung hard left, almost back on its own tracks. The last
lorry contained the rejoicing Jimmy, who said that Boche infantry
had crossed the road 150 yards behind the lorry as they moved off.
Feeling that we were well out of it, I followed on and gradually
overtook the convoy which had again halted near a track to the
right called 'Dryshod Drive' which led away until it joined another
track called 'Auchinleck Avenue', eventually coming out in the
main Medjez-Teboursouk road.
The rumour was that the enemy had cut the road in front of us
so, feeling rather jittery, I went up to the front and had a conversa-
tion with Peter.
He, remembering his days in the East Lancashire
Regiment, wanted to leave the lorries and wade into battle.
me, however, never having
been in
anything
but the RASC,
lorries were rather sacred, so I said: 'No, we will get these bloody
trucks home somehow.'
I went forward in my car to find out what was happening and
almost immediately found two moaning men in a pool of blood.
They had run into a tank in a light car.
I gave them two blankets
and got some RAMC men from a field ambulance which had been
overrun to attend to them.
I then met a signaller who told me,
quite untruthfully, that divisional head a arters had moved, and
then a lot of Scorpion tanks, but I met no enemy although there
was a fire in a farm on my left where the field ambulances had been.
The road home seemed clear, so I returned to Peter.
A DIVISIONAL R.A.S.C.
627
Somebody was firing across the rear of the convoy, so I sent
Peter with the front half down the road I had just reconnoitred,
which turned away to the right down Auchinleck Avenue, while I
took the rear half down Dryshod Drive.
The run was uneventful except for meeting a number of our tanks
coming up,
and eventually we ran into Auchinleck Avenue and
joined up with the front half convoy as if on a march table.
The
whole convoy then turned left and made for Teboursouk with fire-
eating Jimmy Boyd bringing up the rear, while I stayed behind,
seated on a rock, thinking out my next move.
The most important
thing was to find divisional headquarters, so I started back again
along Auchinleck Avenue until stopped a quarter of a mile on by a
military policeman who said I could not get through that way.
He did not know whether divisional headquarters had moved, but
thought it likely.
I turned back and followed the main road to Testour, where I
knew there was a REME company, which I hoped might be in
touch with division by wireless.
They were most hospitable, gave
me a cup of tea and got hold of CREME by wireless.
He lived at
divisional headquarters and stated quite definitely that they had
not moved.
I went back to the car where I found Woolnough and
Moulton eating spam and drinking tea.
When they had had their
breakfast we moved off again.
This time we took a more circuitous route past a cross roads
called Tally-ho Corner.
There was intermittent firing in the hills
to our left, but otherwise things seemed peaceful and it was really
a beautiful morning.
When we were getting near our goal our chaplain, Leslie Mitchell
(who was temporarily attached to the Black Watch), suddenly
appeared.
He said it would be quite impossible to get through, as
the Black Watch were just going to mount an attack.
The Black
Watch, however, seemed more intent on having their breakfast, so
I decided to push on.
We had only gone a short distance when a terrific crash, as if
sent Woolnough,
someone were firing straight across our bows,
Moulton and me into the long grass with incredible speed.
It was
only our own artillery firing across the road, so, feeling rather
sheepish, we emerged from the long grass and resumed our journey.
The policeman at Handley Cross was at his normal place, quite
unperturbed and wearing his white trafhic sleeves.
He said every-
thing was quiet, so we just went straight on to divisional head-
quarters and into AQ's office, arriving just in time for his morning
conference, after which I went back to Teboursouk and had a
wash and a shave.
We learned later that the 'patrol" had been two German infantry
