spluttered and set fire to the tale covering the huge operations map
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
Within minutes, both ACVs were blazing furiously; the preparatory
work and the orders for the conference were
destroyed.
conference was held punctually elsewhere, orders and instructions
were prepared again, maps were collected and re-marked and at
first light, as planned, the division moved out.
The 'team' including
its valued clerks had risen to the occasion.
A newspaper report of
this episode, some days later, read: "As darkness fell, the sky was
fit bry a huge bonfire that the local population had lit in the publ
gardens to celebrate their liberation!'
Mention has been made of the transport task involved in 'uncover-
ing' our prisoners of war,
Here is the story told by a Corps officer,
Maior PO Dutt flie eperences as an uncovered prisoner pe
war during this final phase of the war in Europe.
At the
'In March, 1945, I was in a camp south-east of Kassel.
end of the month, when the Allied advance into Germany had
gathered momentum, the camp was closed, and the 400 office
prisoners were
marched away eastwards to
an undisclosed, and
probably undecided, destination.
manner we were now experts at. for each fall in half of us would
We played the Germans up in a
have lost our boots in the dark, blisters were exaggerated into the
most painful hobbling.
during the day in barns and village schools, we had covered a
After marching for five nights, and sleeping
distance of go miles and had village the village of Leganfeld on
the east of the river Werra.
Here further movement became
impossible, as the armoured units of the American Third Army
were already well to the east of us.
A se dicion occubied the sillage aleo. but early one morning
withdrew their FDIs about half a mile further east,
leaving us
between them and the advancing American motorized infantry.
That evening we were discovered by the Americans,
after calling
them up on
the village telephone.
Curate counter atta led etconely and we bed an uncer fortable
The following morning,
the
few hours until a truck company managed to reach us just before
the Americans were forced to draw back temporarily.
We were then taken, through the astonishing lines of modern
mechanized units waiting to cross the river Werra, to an airfield
at Eschwege.
Here we were welcomed as potential infantry and at
once issued with arms.
I and two other RASC majors spent our
German
first night of freedom standing in the rain guarding
prisoners.
airfield against German units which were still active.
Others guarded vital points on the perimeter of the
Four days
latfeld a faint Getat units which were stills back to Le Havre
as a return load.
tas to use the airfield tink us to the amazing.
efficient machine in Buckinghamshire through which released POWs
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
399
were processed.
Seven days after seeing the first American soldier,
I was in my own home with 42 days' leave ahead of me?
Aftermath
May 8th, 1945:
"The achievement of victory in Europe provides an opportunity
to teview the work of our Corps in this campaign, upon which we
entered determined to enhance the high traditions earned in many
others.
"Throughout the campaign, from the beaches of Normandy over
tany rivers to the banks of the Elbe, the Corps has been working
almost continuously
at the highest pressure.
It has endured
almost every form of enemy attack, from small arms fire to V 25,
and every condition of weather.
It has been called on with almost
monotonous regularity to make "that extra all-out effort" whenever
vital operations were in preparation or in progress, and it has never
failed.
"This has been the greatest military operation ever conducted by
the British Army and, in some of its phases, the fastest moving,
magnificent result is the reward of good training, good leadership,
80od discipliesult is the rewahi, and above all a determination to
live up to our traditions.
This applies equally to the Royal Army
Service Corps tradi the Royal Canadian Army Service Corps
As
Director of Supply and Transport in 21 Army Group, the ultimate
responsibility for all that you have done falls upon me, and I wish
to place on record that I have never once during the campaign been
called upon to answer criticisms on the work of the Corps.
I send you
my congratulations, grateful thanks, and best wishes for the future?
The rounding up and dispersal of the remnants of the German
armies in Schleswig-Holstein, the 'cleansing' of concentration camps,
repatriation of prisoners of war and staging, direction and transport
of displaced persons became the pressing military
commitments
immediated persons becar had been signed, and the Corps was
probably more deeply committed in most of these tasks than any
other arm or service.
Then, as it gradually became possible to
hand over these commitments to military government, the fighting
nachine had to be converted to the post-campaign problems ol
lemot/liantion, training fleaders and harnessing local civil man
power and resources in support of the occupation forces.
