10
PRELUDE
requirements of the Corps and of the part it could, and should, play
in a future war.
The reorganized RASC Training Centre prepared a series of war
courses for senior officers.
These gave officers of the Corps oppor-
tunities for examining every aspect of Corps work connected with
higher planning and with the administrative background of imagin-
ary but highly realistic campaigns.
Nor was co-operation with other
arms and with the General Staff overlooked.
A GSO 2, usually an
infantry or artillery officer, was included in the establishment of the
headquarters of the RASC Training Centre and, as the courses were
open to officers of other arms beside the RASC, a useful interchange
of ideas and points of view took place.
The preparation of these courses was complicated in the carly
days by the lack of a firm governmental policy.
There was little
guidance on either the form of the next campaign or on the require-
ments of the mechanized formations which would undoubtedly play
a part in it.
Moreover the strategical and tactical effects of air
forces on military operations were by no means predetermined, while
the size and probable nature of the forces which could be equipped
and put in the field was equally doubtful. All the more credit is
therefore due to those on the staff of the Centre who, helped by the
co-operation of the Staff College and War Office staffs (both G
and Q),
were able to forecast future administrative trends with
considerable accuracy.
While imparting valuable instruction to
the students at the Centre, they provided material for working out
the plans of many big projects vital to our war effort.
The debt owed by the Corps to its two DsST from 1938 to 1936
General Gibb has already
been men-
tioned, while his successor, General C. W. Macleod, after his four
years as DST, returned voluntarily during the war as a deputy
director,
combining a rare degree of determination and single:
mindedness with creat personal charm and great readiness to help
In spite
Recognition of the need for reforms came just in time.
of the
heavy
cuts in the Army's vote which resulted from
the
financial crisis of to21, no steps were taken to whittle away the smal
additions made recently to the Corps.
A few years later, prepara*
tions for war began in earnest.
The main responsibility for this,
at the War Office.
from the noint of view of the Corps. rested, of course, on the DSt
For that reason the most important activities
of his directorato are related laten in thic prelude under the specific
headings of Transport, Supplies and POL.
The DST's staff was
small.
He had no personal aides, and the Inspector of the RASC
GENERAL SURVEY
was not even one of his staff officers (the IRASC, for his part, had
no personal staff either!).
The DST's two branches each consisted
of an ADST (colonel) with a DADST (major) and a staff captain,
and dealt respectively with transport, QMG 3, and supplies and
petrol, QMG 6.
Barrack duties,
though performed at the
War
Office to some extent by RASC officers, were the responsibility of
another of the QMG's directors, the
Director of Quartering.
DST's former third branch, QMG 5,
was transferred to the AG's
Department as AG 8 when the reforms already described took place
in General Gibb's time.
Coupled with AG 8, the
QMG 5 still remained, signifying the sub-branch which dealt with
questions affecting civilians employed in RASC establishments.
This simple and slender organization, by dint of the devotion and
foresight of its members and the guidance given by its directors,
was able to lay the foundations of a sound ST service in the field in
a very short time. This was made evident when the testing time
came in 1939.
The Divisional RASC takes shape
Cursory mention has been made of 'divisionalization'. This, and
the integration of the Corps in peace with operational formations,
must now be described in more detail.
By 1932 the ist and and
Divisional RASC, each of a headquarters and three companies,
had already been established, and these were followed a year later
by those for the grd and 4th Divisions.
That for the 5th Division
was to come later.
The headquarters consisted of a CRASC and
his clerks, and the companies were of uniform size,
two officers, 50 men and 15 vehicles.
Although these units bore little relation to the
they would assume on mobilization, the adoption of small standard-
ized units spread resources to the best advantage.
assisted in producing a uniform method of training and provided a
field, hitherto lacking, for training both officer and man in leadership
and readiness to assume higher responsibilities on mobilization.
The divisional RASC progressed from a mechanized model of the
old HT divisional train to a headquarters and three companies
designed on a 'commodity basis', i.e. a supply
ammunition company and a petrol company.
The last named was
also responsible for the carriage of blankets and baggage
At the same time the CRASC was made the divisional
commander's adviser on transport matters and, in peace, had the
duty of co-ordinating the availability and use of the transport of
other arms in the division when not required for training.
resources of the divisional RASC companies could not, themselves,
be set aside entirely for training purposes, and they took their part
