168
THE MIDDLE EAST II
were in the improvised brigade. The strength was about 28,000:
there were also 16,000 Italian prisoners of war.
Reinforcement
between sectors, except Suda Bay-Maleme, in any numbers was
not practicable because of lack of roads and of transport.
The RASC element before the evacuation of Greece consisted
of three detail issue depots and a petrol depot with various sections
and detachments including the RASC portion of 18g Field Ambu-
lance and a section of 231
Company, of which the majority of the
personnel were British citizens locally enlisted in Egypt.
The total
was about 340 all ranks.
Of these, considerably less than 50 per
cent returned to Egypt, but they were accompanied by about 280
all ranks who had also
been in
Greece, so it may be concluded
that about 1,000 members of the RASC were on the island in one
capacity or another.
Transport was at a premium throughout the operations.
The
detachment of 231 Company possessed 36 3-ton lorries, and was
later increased by 44 personnel who had been in Greece.
They
were double manned and worked continuously.
All other RASC
detachments were similarly reinforced so that a base supply depot
and sufficient minor supply and petrol units to meet all requirements
were made available.
There was no lack of food or petrol, and
reserves were held in all sectors, but once fighting commenced it
became very difficult to keep them up to strength.
The main attack began on May 20th with the attempted air-
landing of paratroops and
glider-borne forces.
In spite of heavy
casualties inflicted, about 7,000 are reckoned to have landed, the
majority at Maleme where there was an airfield.
Landings con-
tinued from May 21st to 25th.
Two reinforcing battalions arrived
from Egypt, but by May 27th the enemy was estimated at 30-35,000
and he was in the ascendancy.
Once more we had to evacuate,
and some 14,600 only came away between May 28th and June 2nd.
Had it been possible to continue the fight in the island, continued
maintenance by sea would have probably been impossible as the
enemy had command of the air and cuooly otherwise than by
HM ships would have been impracticable.
As it was, many dumps
of supplies and petrol were destroyed by air attacks and the feeding
of troops during evacuation was effected with difficulty.
There is little information about the action of any RASC who
may have been included amongst the riflemen organized to assist in
the defence, but undoubtedly a number took part in the fighting.
In addition, at one time 34 Detail Issue Depot, commanded by
and Lieutenant J. G. P. Atkinson, was ordered to occupy part of a
defence perimeter,
and did so for seven days under
heavy this
bombardment, and engaged a number of enemy
gliders.
officer was taken prisoner, but escaped trom Greece with a party he
THE SUDAN AND ERITREA
16g
had collected, and brought back valuable information.
He volun-
teered to return to Greece to arrange further escapes.
For all
these activities he received the immediate award of the Military
Cross. Later he was awarded a bar to this decoration, having
gone back yet again, obtained more information, and brought away
20 British soldiers.
THE SUDAN AND ERITREA
Refer to Map at p. 184.
Organization on the outbreak of War
The part taken by the Corps in the campaign in Eritrea and
Ethiopia cannot be fully appreciated without a knowledge of the
pre-war RASC organization in the Sudan.
Until 1939 the Corps
had only a detachment in Khartoum, commanded by a major,
which ran a small supply depot and the barrack services for the two
infantry battalions normally stationed in the Sudan.
In addition,
however, there was the
Sudan Defence Force,
which before
its
expansion in 1939 consisted of some 5,000 Sudanese officers and men
and about 6o officers seconded from the British Army.
The Corps was represented in this small Sudan Army by some six
officers, who formed the British element of a Sudan Service Corps.
As the Sudanese soldier was not rationed, except on patrols,
the
supply duties were not heavy and transport was the main task of
the RASC officers in the SDF.
The DST, HQ SDF was responsible
for purchasing and maintaining all the mechanical transport for the
SDÉ and for the maintenance of civil government transport through-
out the million square miles of the Sudan.
It was on this small
nucleus that was built the supply and transport organization which
eventually supported two Indian
infantry
divisions,
expanded to a strength of 25,000, an Ethiopian irregular force,
various British and Soth African units, and a considerable RAF
contingent in a campaign covering five fronts and many hundreds
of miles of Sudan, Eritrean and Ethiopian desert and mountains.
At the outbreak of war with Germany in 1939, it was decided to
amalgamate HQ Britsh Troops Sudan and HQ Sudan Defence
Force.
Local differences in
administrative methods made the
fusion of the services a dificult and lengthy progress and, as far as
ST were concerneds a dificult until Lieut-Colonel J. K. Gillespie
was appointed ADST HQ Troops Sudan in September, 1940, that
a unified S'T directorate was achieved.
Even then the supply and
transport services of the SDF proper. requiring specialized knowledge
and experience was lef largely in the hands of Fl Kaimakam E. R
Goode Bey, the was left largely inche at that time still seconded to
