518
AIR DESPATCH
The landings at Eindhoven and at Graves were successful, and
at Nijmegen partially so, but at Arnhem most of the British ist
Airborne Division found itself at Oosterbeek, some six miles west of
the bridge.
A small body did seize the buildings commanding the
northern exit from the bridge, but it was isolated and eventually
destroyed after a heroic struggle of small arms against continuous
assault by infantry, supported by artillery, and then by tanks.
force at Oosterbeek could not gain ground very much to the east as its
dropping zone was restricted and under intense enemy fire.
weather let us down as it so often does, and, instead of a 48-hour
operation culminating in relief by the ground forces, the division
had to fight for its existence in a diminishing perimeter for nine days
before its remnants,
across the river under cover of darkness.
As the perimeter contracted, maintenance by air became more
difficult every day, and much of the heroic work of the air despatchers
and the RAF crews was rendered abortive.
German hands and only 7•4 per cent of supplies and ammunition
dropped reached ist Airborne Division.
chance remained of giving aid to the men of the ground, the main-
tenance by air was kept up. Had the operation continued for
only three more days, the last trained RASC crews would have
been used up, for of a total of some goo trained officers and men in
the air despatch crews, 264 were shot down in four days of air
supply operations.
involving the employment of 450 despatchers in the air daily for
several days.
did two sorties and some three.
The exploits of these air despatch crews are apt to be overlooked
in most narratives of the Arnhem operation, owing to the more
moving story of the struggle on land.
ated by the Army and, as narrated later, in addition to the awards
to individuals for valour, the Air Despatch Group itself were allowed
to wear a distinguishing emblem in recognition of their part it
the operation.
Finally, the Air Despatch Group played a large part in the
feeding of Holland just before the German withdrawal from that
country whose unfortunate people were faced with starvation even
as liberation approached.
into British bombers and free dropped.
Many tons of food a day were loaded
A Sign is given
The formation sien of the Air Despatch Croup was a yellow
Dakota aircraft on a blue ground.
The sign was designed by HQ
RASC 18 Air Despatch in the first days of its existence
AIR DESPATCH
519
although it could not then be worn, it was used on all notice boards,
direction signs, etc.
When the Air Despatch Group was formed,
application was made for a sign to be granted as an official formation
sign under the appropriate Army Council Instruction.
This was
eventually granted, in the words of the War Office minute, 'for the
good work done by the Air Despatch Group over Arnhem'.
It is
believed that this was the first formation sign granted officially to
an operational RASC formation, and for this reason, and because
of the circumstances in which it was granted, it was a matter of
great pride to all ranks.
Air Despatch in SEAC
Turning now to South-East Asia Command, when operations
there came to an end in August, 1945, the RIASC organization for
air supply had reached a state,
both in size and in efficiency,
unequalled in any other theatre.
Air supply had become the most
important form of supply in the whole theatre and without it many
of the operations would not have been successful or even possible.
No less than g6 per cent of the stores and supplies delivered to the
Fourteenth Army in its advance in 1945 were airborne.
The development of the organization started in a small way.
In 1941 at a time when the British war record in most theatres was
one of defeat, retreat, and, in many cases evacuation, an Air Landing
School was, with great vision, established at Delhi.
Its charter
was the study of airborne operations and tactical air supply, and it
was from this school that the Airborne Training Establishment, the
Army Air Transport Development Centre, and the Air Despatch
Centre were developed.
These three training units
located at Chaklala (that old stamping ground' of the RASC in
India) and Compana Plea to Got company to be
trained in air supply duties.
The first large scale air supply operation took place in 1942, when
1 Company RIASC was sent to Assam to help with the dropping of
3,000 tons of foodstuffs to refugees in Burma.
One of the most important lessons from the withdrawal from
Burma was that air supply on a large seale would be resired for
the support of future operations, and Wingate, as has been men-
, was quick to drive this home.
Training at Chaklala was
intensified, and during the years from 1942 to 1945 a total of 10,000
oicers and men of the RYAS. were trained in air supply duties.
The development of air supply equipment and of the technique for
dropping awkward louds reply equa high degree of perfection, and
overcome.
even the problem of dropping mules by parachute was quickly
And the mules did not seem to mind!
