600
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
of the coasters was stopped between 2300 hours and 0500 hours
because vital maintenance was not being done,
the drivers were
not getting enough rest, and it was decidedly difficult to find the
coasters at night through a thick smoke screen.
When another
49 dukws were attached the next day, this, together with the other
factors already mentioned, caused off-loading of stores to be much
quicker.
All days from June lith onwards, as far as the dukw work was
concerned, were similar and can be represented by this description
of a typical day's work.
The previous night, the officer in charge of Dukw Control, one
Captain Leith, attended a conference and was informed by the
MLO what coasters were expected in the next day, their ETA,
their load, and how many holds or hatches they had.
Consequently
he was able to judge how many dukws could be used in each ship.
At 0445 hours, the dukws of the first platoon out this morning
lined up in the road to the beach entrance and the Dukw Control.
The driver of the first dukw was told the number of the coaster to
which he was to go, and if that coaster had only just arrived, he
would be told its approximate whereabouts, and so he pushed off
to sea to this coaster.
In the meantime, on a large board in Dukw
Control a tag with his dukw number on it was placed opposite the
ship's number.
This process went on until sufficient dukws had
been allocated to each coaster-
that morning there were six coasters
in.
The officer in command of Dukw Control is able to foretell
how many dukws will be needed
to keep a coaster going; this
depends on the number of hatches it has, its distance from the
shore (which might be anything up to three miles), and its cargo
(ammunition can be unloaded more quickly than ordnance stores,
for example).
By the time all the necessary dukws had been sent out, the first
loaded ones were returning and a man stationed by the dukw exit
took the number of each loaded dukw; he then gave this number to
Dukw Control, where that dukw's tag was carefully removed from
a ship's number and placed in a space marked 'transhipment.
The dukw in question,
having had its number taken, proceeded
about 200 yards to the transhipment area, where it was unloaded,
usually rather slowly.
Each dukw is equipped with three cargo
nets, and when a ship's derrick unloads a net on board the dukw,
the driver gives the ship one of his empty ones in exchange.
When the dukw had unloaded, it went back round the circuit
to the Dukw Control and was sent out again to a coaster, not
necessarily, in fact probably not, the same one.
On the way round
it passed the cookhouse and, if he wanted to, the driver could jump
out and get a cup of tea and a snack.
This business went on all
536 GENERAL TRANSPORT COMPANY (DUKWS)
6o1
day until 2230 hours, when the last dukws were sent out. It might
be an hour or more, however, before they returned.
afternoon the drivers were relieved, and another driver took over
the dukw, this being done under platoon arrangements.
was a spare dukw standing by the Dukw Control all day for rescue
purposes; and the driver kept a close look-out for the distress signal—
a hat on the end of the boathook, waved about, or a Very light—
from any dukw at sea.
During the day, one of the platoon officers was on duty, chugging
about the harbour in a motor launch, checking on various things
such as the ropes holding the dukws to the coasters, whether there
were too many dukws to a coaster, and seeing that time was not
So it is seen that the work of the dukws unloading on the beaches
was hard and monotonous.
There were also occasions when we carried famous people on
shore or for a trip round the Mulberry.
For example, on June 12th,
B 9 brought ashore Mr. Churchill, General Eisenhower and General
The Mulberry, incidentally, although much praised
and publicized, did not at any time unload more than a third of
the total tonnage carried by the il dukw companies working on
the British sector of the beach-head.
The one period that the dukws could not work was the time of the
storm, that is between 0700 hours, June 19th and 1700 hours,
The seas at this time were mountainous, and the
devastation caused on the beach was remarkable.
On certain stretches of the beaches just after the storm, there
was not room to get a dukw into the water, because of the wreckage
of landing craft, rafts, etc., thrown up by the sea.
one of utter desolation.
Then on June 22nd, when we started
operating again, the seas were so rough that two dukws were holed
by being battered against the side of the coaster to which they were
tied, in spite of fenders.
These two were, fortunately, recovered.
The only advantage of this storm from our point of view, was
that we were able to put in some much needed maintenance on
All the rest of the time we were operating from Gold, Item and
Jig beaches.
Towards the end of June the monotony of the job
began to be felt; this, however, in no way impaired the running
efficiency of the company.
It had been estimated that go days would be required by No. 9
Beach Group to unload on to the beaches their quota of stores.
This was actually accomplished in 45 days.
At the end of that
time we moved to Buchot and operated inside the Mulberry, which
of course was much casier from the drivers' point of view.
