THE MIDDLE EAST I
lorry, turned aside, towed out Il and sent them on.
stayed until the others had been towed out by the battalion carriers.
Nearly 300 men were thus saved from capture.
This column got
through with the loss of 31 vehicles in all, some of which had to be
destroyed to save petrol.
By the end of the march, lorries were
each carrying 35 men.
L/Cpl Rimmer was awarded the Distin-
guished Conduct Medal.
L/Cpl C. H. Platten, also of 49 Company, was cut off south of
Benghazi, so, immobilizing his vehicle,
he made his way towards
our lines with the help of tribesmen, until he was picked up by a
patrol on March 4th, having covered 250 miles in 36 days in most
arduous conditions.
On his way he had acquired valuable informa-
tion about enemy dispositions, and volunteered to lead a patrol
back and point them out.
In consequence, our aircraft were guided
on to important
concentrations of enemy troops, which were
successfully bombed. He too won the
Distinguished Conduct
Cipl J. O. Seed, of 24I Company, which was also engaged in
troop-carrying for 4th Indian Division,
brought up transport to
assist in the withdrawal of a company which was in position on an
exposed ridge, with enemy tanks less than I,200 yards away,
shooting at our guns and lorries.
The drivers drove round in
circles picking up the men of the infantry company, who were
dispersed on a 500-yard front, and did not move off until all who
could be seen had been embussed.
It was because of the initiative
of the RASC men, who acted promptly and with complete disregard
for their own safety under heavy shell fire, that the company was
Cpl Seed received the
immediate award of the Military Medal.
other recipients of this award were ambulance drivers.
Dvr V. F. G. Hudson, 25 Company,
evaded enemy columns for
two days and brought the patients in his ambulance into hospital.
He was cut off on the return journey, so he collected casualties
from a column he met,
and brought them in as well.
Walker, ist Armoured Division, had a load of patients when his
ambulance was bogged in sand; he took them out, put them under
cover, and then walked for four hours to get help,
attacked from the air and in danger of capture.
But he completed
the evacuation of his patients in the end.
Lieutenant P. J. W. Henderson, of 37 Company, who was in
charge of an ammunition point at Antelat, won the Military Cross
when he got the ammunition away safely, in spite of heavy shelling
and being harassed by enemy patrols.
it must always be remembered that for every one individual whose
While all honour must go to the gallant recipients of these awards,
THE MIDDLE EAST I
141
timely fortitude brought him deservedly in the limelight, there
were thousands of RASC men in all kinds of units from the lordly
tank transporters to the humble water section who, day in and day
out, carried on
their essential duties conscientiously and well, in
the trying conditions which prevail in the desert in winter.
The
essential work of the RASC, to maintain the forces in the field, must
for the many represent solid hard work and little variety; only for
the few does it mean action in contact with the enemy.
The Gazala Line
The withdrawal to the Gazala Line was most disappointing after
the strenuous efforts before and after the relief of Tobruk.
ever, it did afford a breathing space.
Railhead was pressed forward
to Tobruk, and some opportunity was given to
the hard worked
third line to recover from its hammering during the winter.
while, there were newcomers among the divisions, and the RASC of
Ist Armoured Division and 50th Divisions soon became as desert-
worthy as the columns of 7th armoured,
Zealand Divisions.
It is probable that 50th Division was unique in
having its own properly organized and trained anti-tank platoon
based on its pre-war band and armed with weapons acquired by
means other than normal issue channels.
This comparatively easy spell in the Gazala Line was not to be
On May 26th a German attack developed, the
enemy coming round the open desert flank south of Bir Hakeim in
The subsequent three weeks of fighting in the area
between Tobruk and the Gazala Line eventually went in favour of
the enemy and once more, on June 17th, 1942,
Few expected that the second siege would last but four
days. The period of hard fighting in which, it must be admitted,
the enemy got the better of us, is admirably described in Crisis in
the Desert, compiled by the South African official historians.
volume examines all facets of the battle, including the administrative
Such was the confusion of the fighting which went on in
the area around the Gazala Line and extending as far
Tobruk-El Adem or even farther, that normal maintenance was
rendered extremely difficult at the best and, at the worst, impossible.
The problems arising and the manner of their solution are illustrated
by some of the incidents recounted below.
They could be multi-
Great persistence and ingenuity were displayed by many
members of the RASC of all ranks in performing their maintenance
duties at that time.
Administrative elements of 50th Division had for safety and ease
of handling been formed into a column ("Teecol') under command
of the CRASC, Lieut-Colonel S. T. Divers.
