286
THE
CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
In many instances, when the Royal Engineers had not sufficient
men for their tasks,
RASC units came to their assistance in the
repair of roads, the construction of minor bridges and the erection
of petroleum storage tanks.
Throughout this campaign the co-
operation between the two Corps was complete and harmonious.
Another instance of the RASC coming to the aid of the army
occurred soon after AFHQ had moved to Caserta, when for the
first time almost all the officers in that huge headquarters were
gathered under the one roof (the Palace at Caserta is reputed to
have 1,000 rooms) and the arrangements for their messing broke
down badly.
It was a novel problem for the DST, who was asked
to find a solution and act as a super PMG.
With the expert aid
of the catering officers on his staff, he formed a special mess unit
with a staff which was the replica of the 'ranks' and 'trades' employed
in a large hotel.
Men who were leading chefs and head waiters
and barmen of many well-known hotels were brought in to man the
new unit, and before long 900 officers were being messed at a good
hotel standard in the main ballroom of the palace, and two other
messes for about 100 each were set up in huts adjoining the main
building. The only difficulty experienced by the officer command-
ing the mess unit was, eventually, how to keep down the profits.
While the campaign in Italy was in progress, AFHQ, in its
capacity as the headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander
for the Mediterranean
area,
operations in Italy.
had other preoccupations than the
Greece,
At the end of 1944 a force was despatched to
and a fuller account of the operations in which it was
unwittingly involved will be found at the end of this chapter.
There were still troops in North Africa, although by the end of the
campaign in Italy most of the vast stocks which had been accumu-
lated there for the original operations in Tunisia had been exhausted
and all units which could be had been transierred to Italy; but the
running down was a slow process.
There were small detachments
to be administered in Corsica and Sardinia.
British forces had
been represented in the Allied invasion force which landed in
southern France as part of the main 'Overlord' plan.
Conclusion
In this short account of the activities of the RASC in the Tralian
campaign we have tried to show the diversity of roles which military
operations under dificult conditions at terrain and climate impose
on our Corns and the necessity for improvisation which is constantly
before us.
The course of this campaion showed that the RASC
suited to such conditions.
organization, by virtue of its simplimp and civity, was admirably
Perhaps the best tribute to our organiza-
tion was the successes way in which so many nationalities and races
GREECE, 1944
287
managed to combine to ensure that the Allied armies did not go
short of any of their essential requirements.
GREECE, 1944
The Return to Greece
After the British troops had been forced to withdraw from Greece
in 1941 a continuous and relentless war was carried on by Greek
guerillas against the German occupying forces.
During the years
that followed, the Allies continued to plan for an eventual return to
the country and close touch was kept with the Greek Government,
which was exiled in Egypt, so that when the opportunity arose we
would be ready to assist in re-establishing law and order and to
provide the relief that would be so sorely needed by the stricken
Greek people.
Early in 1944 there was good hope that the combined efforts of
the guerillas and the gradual encirclement of the Axis Powers would
cause the Germans to withdraw.
Plans for a return to
Greece
were then perfected and by the Caserta agreement of September,
1944, the GOC designate of the British force which was to be landed
was nominated as Supreme Allied Commander, on
the under-
standing reached with the Greek Government that all the guerilla
forces would place themselves under his command.
The object of
providing a British force was to help the re-establishment of the
exiled government and to assist in the preservation of law and order.
A separate organization for supply and relief had been set up in
Egypt under the name of the Headquarters Military Liaison Greece,
which was to assist in the rehabilitation of the civil economy.
The force placed at the disposal of the GOC, Lieut-General Sir
Ronald Scobie, was small, and consisted of the
3rd Armoured
Brigade, the qth Indian Division, the 2nd Independent Parachute
Brigade, and ancillary services.
The situation moved quickly, and on October I4th British troops
re-entered Athens amid scenes of the wildest enthusiasm and rejoicing
by the civil population.
Public opinion saw in their arrival the
end of all want and the possibility of the extension of Greek frontiers,
a hope so close to the heart of the Greek irredentist.
But internal
politics soon changed the situation as the strong left wing element
of the guerillas, who were numerically superior to other factions,
saw the opportunity of seizing political power.
Open attempts by
the left wing political party known as EAM. who controlled the
Communist dominated guerillas referred to as ET AS to undermine
the newly returned God emment led to growing tension in November,
and the first shots of what developed into a civil war were fired on
