516
AIR DESPATCH
done over a very wide area by single aireraft, for the most part, and
detection by enemy fighters and ground forces was thus rendered
more difficult.
Considerable transport aid was also given to the United States
forces in connection with the supply by air of petrol to Genera.
Patton's forces during his impetuous advance.
As is now common
knowledge, the advance of his Third Army (US 4th and 6th Ar-
moured Divisions) took place simultaneously with the advance of
Our own Guards and 11th Armoured Divisions, the Americans
covering 210 miles and the British 250 in the first 14 days,
this Patton went ahead faster.
Priority of maintenance went to
the American Third Army on the Allied right. but in soite of this
both forces, after sensational advances and the capture of prisoners
many times greater than their own numbers, were forced to halt
for service and maintenance at a moment when German resistance
was near to crumbling,
It is possible that a more ambitious and
pre-organized air supply plan might have sustained the momentum
of the advance and have continued to keep the enemy off balance.
As things were, this pause gave the enemy also the respite he so
desperately needed, and from then on, with the toughness which
we have come to expect of the German, he put up a strong resistance
for many months,
The subieet is an interestine study in the influ
ence of the services (in this case the ST service) in maintaining
the power of an offensive, an influence which the student of war
can face and assess in most of our operations during this Second
World War.
This is no criticism of phe fir Despatch Group for
failure to deliver the petrol required by the United States Third
They were not asked to do more.
As the armies moved rapidly across France, the call for supply hy
air was intensified, and 1,000 tons a day were required,
operation. ammunition petrol and composite rations were the
main loads.
Later, they became more varied and included large
quantities of steel planking and of Unit a siet a ordnance stores of
all dres and shapes, These had to be sorted into aireraft loads at
railhead, a matter requiring a good deal of calculation, measure
ment and thought.
As regarde maintenance by air,
operations for ground troops, notably those connected with the
there were only a few small
Valaise Gap and with Walcheren Island,
were limited
operations, and, important though they were, they did not present
any unusual features.
So ether oberations of the Air Descate Group are even in a
The number of sories made in these and
table at the end of this chapter.
Two other large scale operations were planned and effected
almost to the point of take-off, when they were cancelled.
AIR DESPATCH
519
was the operation to be conducted in conjunction with the United
States Army Air Force to drop supplies to American troops in
danger of being isolated by the German advance through the
Ardennes from December r6th, 1944, until the end of the year.
The other was the operation in support of the Rhine crossing in
carly 1945.
In the first of these a detachment of the Air Despatch Group was
pushed down to airfields in the south of England to prepare to drop
about 100 aircraft loads.
These were required for the 101st US
Airborne Division, which made a stand at Bastogne that proved
decisive in preventing the crumbling away of the right flank of the
Allies' broken lines,
The Germans, for their part, failed to reach
the line of the Meuse or to overrun the maintenance and supply
centres which were their main objectives, and the air drop was
found to be unnecessary.
In the second operation, which promised to be second only in
magnitude to the
Arnhem supply operation, some 250 aircraft
were loaded, despatchers prepared, briefed and standing by to
maintain the British Army for 24 hours or more after crossing the
Khine, The crossing and advance were, however, performed so
successfully that normal methods of supply were able to function
and the air support was cancelled at the last moment, except for a
few USAAF bombers dropping bomb cell containers,
Arnhem
The operation which gave the Air Despatch Group its biggest
job of all, and its most costly and dificult one, was the attack of
the ist British Airborne Division at Arnhem,
The chapter on
perations in North-West Europe gives the outline story of the plan
he division, maintained by its RASC and by the whole of the Air
Despatch Group, was to be landed, mainly by gliders, at Arnhem
to seize the bridge over the Lower Rhine there, and to open the
way for a left hook into North-West Germany:
This might have
cut out the costly fighting on the German frontier farther south and
the big river crossing
there. It was intended that the force,
which landed purposely on the north bank of the river, should be
elieved after 48 hours by ground troops passed up the main axi
Tuming through Eindhoven, Graves and Nijmegen from bridge.
heads in Belgium over the Canal de I'staut which were already
securely in British hands.
The three towns named were to be
seized by the American tand and 101st Airborne Divisions,
axis would of necessity have little depth until the road and the
surending country for some miles on either side of it were firmly
held. for there were comesful German fence athwar and, C
course, the main German force te the east,
