446
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
a favoured position among the users of motor transport by reason
of its store of experience, its perfected methods of stocking and
distributing vehicles and spares, and the intense 'unit pride' of its
workshops.
Justification
for the change may be found in the
fact that the benefits of this 'most favoured' situation were now
spread more evenly over the whole service, with loss of efficiency in
vehicle administration (for lack of a better term) in the Corps and
a corresponding gain in other arms.
This was poor consolation.
Plans for return to the Offensive
Operationally, the first half of 1942 was still disastrous overseas,
with the retreat of the Eighth Army to the Alamein line, the loss
of Hong Kong,
Singapore and Malaya,
and the overrunning of
Burma, but at home preparations were in hand for launching two
offensive enterprises,
both entailing amphibious assaults.
These
were the minor operation for the snatching of Madagascar from
Vichy French control, and the much larger and more ambitious
plan for the invasion of North Africa, operation 'Torch'.
The Corps were closely concerned with the waterproofing of
vehicles for both these operations.
The question of amphibious
operations had been studied at the Combined Operations training
centres in Scotland and, later, at a Combined Operations experi-
mental establishment COXE, which was set up at Westward Ho!
in Devon.
These were fall arms' establishments. with strong RASC
representation.
Methods of waterproofing were considered initially by manufac-
turers working with the Ministry of Supplv, and practicable schemes
were prepared in time for application in both these early operations,
In general, military teams or individuals were instructed at firms
works in the schemes applicable to each maker's products and, on
return to their units, these men were responsible for instructing
their fellows.
The results proved that they performed their duties
satisfactorily and that the schemes
were
suitable for somewhat
limited application under favourable conditions.
Put time showed that these methods with their great variation
in regard to different makes of vehicle,
and with the types
materials then available, had two great drawbacks.
One was the
difficulty of application of the various methods, including difficulty
of manipulation of some of the plastic materials used.
The other
was the deterioration of the waterproof qualities of the materials
during any appreciable time of storage.
In 1943 the responsibility for the preparation of waterproofing
schemes for all vehicles and armaments,
including those
RASC, passed to the REME, and standardized or near-standardized
methods were adopted,
Their application remained the duty of
TRANSPORT
447
the user units,
except in the case of other arms destined for the
assault force for operation 'Overlord' itself.
At a later date these
principles were extended to the South-East Asia Command, which
had a number of amphibious projects in view.
The record of the
waterproofing and of the landing of RASC units in Normandy,
under most unfavourable conditions, both in respect of weather and
of enemy opposition, is a tribute to the good work done by vehicle
crews and workshops beforehand.
The amphibian duties of the RASC grew from the early days of
combined operations until the Corps operated dukws and Terrapins,
in the wheeled category, and Buffaloes and Weasels in the tracked.
In 1943 an Amphibious Training Centre was set up at Towyn in
North Wales, where all ranks received instruction.
The amphibious
companies were based on GT company war establishments, and
could revert to a GT role when not required for special operations.
The exploits of these companies are mentioned in the chapters
dealing with each campaign and in the chapter on RASC activities.
It must suffice here to mention that the dukw was a converted
United States General Motors standard six-wheeled drive
2}-ton
truck, with an astonishing degree of sea-worthiness and of reliability,
though naturally much time had to be given to maintenance.
was both wheel and propeller driven.
An amphibious jeep
WAs
also produced on somewhat similar lines and was used in limited
numbers.
The other wheeled amphibian, the Terrapin, was a
British product, sponsored by the Ministry of Supply and built by
Messrs. J. I. Thornycroft.
It had the same capacity as the dukw,
was an 8-wheeler with four wheels normally in contact with the
ground, and had, like the dukw, propeller drive.
An interesting
feature was that the Terrapin had two engines, one driving each
'side', and steering was effected by a combined throttle which
reduced speed on one set of wheels, and increased speed on the
other.
This was a reversion to the steering system in the 'Whippet'
tank of the First World War!
The Terrapin had not come into
full production before the end of the war, and almost all of the
wheeled amphibian work of the Corps was done by dukws.
Of the tracked carriers, the Buffalo was a large capacity lightly
armoured machine built on tank hull lines, with a track of light
construction and a propeller drive for sea work,
It had a good
performance in water and on mud, and a fairly high freeboard.
It could carry three tons of stores or 24 infantrymen in full fighting
equipment.
It was particularly valuable in the Pacific and would
have been so in SAC had opportunity offered.
The Weasel was
a small tracked machine of very light construction, with very little
freeboard. It was thus handicapped in a sea-way, but had an
amazing performance
mud,
marshes or still water.
It was
