406
OTHER THEATRES
techniques completely foreign to their tribal history and experience
and did their work satisfactorily as WAASC soldiers.
MISCELLANEOUS OVERSEAS STATIONS
In the chapters of this volume the reader will find set out the
achievements of the Royal Army Service Corps in the bigger
theatres of war.
While these events were taking place, here and
there in remote corners of the world small RASC detachments did
their duty unheralded and unsung.
Many of these detachments
found themselves in pleasant places climatically and otherwise.
Others laboured amid snow and ice and in conditions of acute
discomfort.
Some knew that enemy action in their neighbourhood,
though possible, was unlikely, while a few knew not what excitements
the next day might bring forth.
The
most important in size of these detachments was that
stationed in Iceland.
When that wintry island was occupied as a
precautionary measure in 1940 by the 49th Division, the divisional
RASC did not accompany it.
Corps duties were performed in
difficult terrain and climate, by a base supply depot, a field bakery,
four detail issue depots, four petrol depots, a field butchery, 275
(Reserve MT) Company, a detachment of 70 (WT) Company, and
a section of 246 (motorboat)
Company-
These units had a total
strength of about 6o officers and 1,400 other ranks.
The work was
arduous, especially for the road transport in the building and
maintenance of airfields.
In 1942 the force was relieved by Ameri-
can troops, but a small RASC detachment remained for some time
to look after naval and RAF units, the officer commanding RASC
also doing the duties of Officer Commanding,
British
Troops,
Iceland.
Even more arduous climatie conditions were faced by the small
RASC parties in the Faroe Islands, where water transport detach-
ments served with distinction in maintaining the forces which were
sent there to forestall any enemy attempt to seize them.
This does
not complete the list of our
Arctic commitments.
Small RASC
detachments were sent to Archangel and Murmansk to maintain
the convoy bases at those ports.
Here to the Arctic weather were
added the restrictions imposed by our suspicious allies, the Russians,
These produced difficulties of an unusual kind which must have
Finally
been most frustrating,
However, they were overcome,
there was the RASC participation in the raid on Spitzbergen, where
we provided launches.
A section of a motor boat company was
carried as deck cargo on the ships of the expedition.
In the Antarctic the augmentation by & battalion group of the
MISCELLANEOUS OVERSEAS STATIONS
407
local forces in the Falkland Islands called into action an RASC
detachment of about 100 all ranks.
The climate was nothing like
so severe as that endured by their comrades in the far northern
regions the islands being about the same distance
from the
equator as Great Britain- and the occupation was uneventful.
In between these two terrestrial extremes were the isolated
islands of St. Helena and Ascension.
The reason for garrisoning
these small places was to deny their possible use to the enemy as
submarine refuelling and victualling points.
No attempts to do so
were evidently made, so the RASC detachments, which totalled
under go, of which only two were in Ascension, had an uneventful
time.
There was one other RASC station in the Atlantic. The force
which occupied the Azores was mainly RAF, but the Army provided
certain services, including RASC. This gave rise to some diffeulties
in planning and in the early stages of occupation.
Things settled
down, and the RASC contingent, which eventually amounted to
three officers and some 50 other ranks, functioned satisfactorily.
Better known, because of popular peacetime garrisons in Bermuda
and Jamaica, were the Corps stations on the former island and in the
Caribbean.
Except for the introduction of a few motor vehicles
Bermuda underwent little change from peacetime conditions.
the West Indies, however, many of the islands had small volunteer
forces, which
were mobilized and augmented.
The area
was
divided into North and South Caribbean with officers commanding
RASC in Jamaica and Trinidad respectively,
The theatre proved
to be uneventful and there was no great difficulty in performing
RASC duties, including maintenance of the islands by sea.
Half way round the world from the West Indies was the peacetime
garrison of Mauritius, with one officer and four other rapks of the
RASC. It is of interest that on the out four other ranks of the
commanding RASC (Major later Brigadier
A. J. W. Bavin) was
also Officer Commanding Troops, and on him fell the responsibility
for all mobilization arrangements.
As the war went on, Mauritius,
from being a quiet backwater in the Indian Ocean, found itself
facing a new enemy, Japan, whose submarines sank shipping in
sight of the island.
Defence against any determined attack would
have been of doubtful suecess with the small forces available, but
the danger was removed with the British occupation of Madagascar
and the establishment of a naval base in that large island.
During
the course of the war Mauritius became an important reserveir of
manpower for the recruitment of pioneer corps companies, and
the RASC commitment was thereby considerably increased.
In November, 1949, the island became a sub-area in East Africa
Command, and the direct communication with the War Office,
