136
THE MIDDLE EAST I
during the night, they remained unaware of the booty that lay so
near them.
Meanwhile, there was much consternation back at main Eighth
Army HQ 'on the wire' at Maddelena, and attempts were made by
certain persons, only some of whom were well informed, to stop the
forward move of third line transport to the FMCs.
In the event
such attempts were misguided, although in the light of available
information at the time the action was perhaps excusable.
For-
tunately the RASC platoon commanders, most of them 2nd lieu-
tenants, were not over-awed by unofficial, or indeed properly
impressed by official, attempts to stop them and continued stubbornly
on their way.
Their action proved to be correct, and had not the
FMCs, 62 FMC in particular, continued to receive convoys through-
out November 24th and 25th, the maintenance of 7th Armoured
Division might well have been compromised, with disastrous results.
Meanwhile, things were not quiet on XIII Corps RASC front,
and at one time the commander of 51 FMC, together with his
RASC DID, were driven off their dumps, while the enemy refilled.
The FMC commander reported the progress of his battle by field
telephone.
On the 25th, XIII Corps were trying to pass a third
line convoy to the NZ Division fighting outside of Tobruk.
Under
the command of Captain J. M. Crawford, it passed near 62 FMG.
The Chief Engineer of XXX Corps, Colonel (now Brigadier) G. H.
Clifford, a New Zealand Officer, who had spare time on his hands
for lack of engineer tasks, was appointed to command this convoy
and certain other elements and
get them to their destination.
This distinguished New Zealand officer still has a soft spot for the
Corps with which,
as he puts it, he won his first award of the
Distinguished
Service
Order.
Captain J. M.
Crawford and
Captain J. C. Kent, who accompanied him, were awarded Military
Crosses, and Sergeant (now Major) W. C. Grierson the Military
Medal.
When gth Australian Division was relieved by yoth (formerly
6th) Division the divisional RASC of the latter consisted of 61,
145, and '7? (later 459) Company, on an ad hoc establishment which
was a typical, if not exactly endearing custom in MEE.
They had
plenty to do, as the existing organization had grown rather
than
been set up and had many imperfections less apparent to those
had made it work during the months of siege than to the
comparatively fresh 7oth Division.
There was the. Polish ASC to
train, and soon plans were being made for the break-out to assist
the operations taking place in the desert outside.
In these opera-
tions both 61 and 145 Companies were very actively engaged.
Around Tobruk there was confused fighting,
and particularly
good work was done by ambulance drivers.
Captain W. H. B.
THE MIDDLE EAST I
137
Roberts won his Military Cross by recovering many New Zealand
wounded from enemy territory, and Dvr A. G. Shaw was awarded
the Distinguished Conduct Medal for an excellent individual effort.
He was later to win the Military Medal at Salerno.
The Advance continued
Rommel's incursion into our back areas proved to be only tem-
porary, and after a few days' chaos, affairs were tidied up and he
was compelled gradually to withdraw westwards.
Tobruk was
relieved.
HQ XXX Corps was withdrawn from the battle in early
December, and it fell to XIII Corps, with all available columns
under command, to maintain the forces which pursued the enemy
once again to the frontier of Tripoli.
The period was not without incident so far as the RASC was
concerned.
The rapid advance from Tobruk to the frontier and
the subsequent rapid withdrawal when once again Rommel counter-
attacked gave rise to much troop-carrying, and RASC vehicles
were involved in many scattered fights.
For instance,
on a day
in early December, 11th Indian Infantry Brigade was dismounted
from its RASC transport to attack Bir el Gubi.
The enemy attacked
with tanks and the infantry had to make a hurried withdrawal.
It is on record that the RASC drivers behaved with great steadiness,
picking up their passengers within a few hundred yards of the
advancing tanks and withdrawing in good order.
The weather and the condition of Benghazi placed out of question
any material assistance from that port, so that maintenance was on
a six days' turn-round across the desert from Tobruk to FMC at
Msus, all available transport being concentrated on this task.
The
20 or more GT companies employed on these runs worked with
almost complete regularity, with a turn-round of up to 400 miles,
and they never failed to deliver the daily quota of essential supplies
of all sorts, proving once again that RASC transport could operate
on the desert, running for continuous periods with reliable results,
provided that the mileages were not above 6o a day.
This allowed
time for meals, rest, and maintenance, and could not be exceeded,
except for brief periods, without risk of breakdown.
Over such distances, the problem of carrying the petrol, food and
water for the convoys themselves was one of great importance.
The daily despatches from Tobruk to Msus were sometimes as many
as 200 lorries, and the petrol alone for these for the round trip came
to about 16,000 gallons.
When lubricants, rations and water were
added, from 35 to 40 lorries were necessary for the domestic main-
tenance of the convoy.
It was no use delivering 50,000 gallons of
petrol, the average daily figure, at MC, and then withdrawing
8,000 for the convoy's return journey. These facts had to be taken
