354
BURMA AND CEYLON
as they entered and left the stream by the only practicable route.
By February, 1945, these vehicles were becoming rather the worse
for wear, as nearly all of them had been in use continuously for
several months.
The situation was not improved by there being
no spare parts throughout the period.
Another trouble was that
the intensive employment in three detachments required
extra
men-there were only five officers and 160 other ranks in the
company
but manpower was short.
It was at this point that the company brought off its crowning
achievement of the campaign, at the crossing of the Irrawaddy by
2nd Division at Ngazun, 25 miles west of Mandalay.
Here the
river is from 1,000 to 1,500 yards wide, and the current about two
and a half knots.
The stream contains many large sandbanks and
shifting shoals, and so the channel to be followed was one and a half
miles long, on a diagonal course, which lengthened the time that
the boats were exposed to the view of the enemy.
Across the Irawaddy
The plan for the assault was to land on three beaches at once,
the troops being carried in amault boats.
Beaches A and B lay
some two miles and one mile respectively west of Ngazun village,
and C Beach on a large island north of the village which it was
necemary to secure since it enfiladed the other crossings and was
patrolled by the enemy.
To add to the other difficulties, the moon
was nearly full.
Zero hour was 10 p.m.
The first assault wave on C Beach was fired on, but one company
reached the shore and charged through the enemy positions,
The
next wave failed to land, and enemy fire prevented the return of
the first wave's boats to fetch more troops.
The asault on A
beach met heavy fire from artillery, mortars, and infantry, many
boats were sunk and the amault had to be abandoned,
The situa
tion was verious, and it looked as if the croming might fail; but
there remained B beach.
There the assaulting battalion,
which
hact the longest crowing to make, had yot ashore, and by gam,
hact established a bridgehead with two companies; but again no
boats returned,
What followed in described by the Gin-C ALYSE.A in his despatch
as an outstanding feat of control, staff work, and discipline,
it was
orhouly emential to reinforce with infantry the
bridgehead on
E beach, but to do so entailed a complete change of plan.
The
portility of partial failure had been forencen,,
and an alternative
phan had been prepared; but the fact that it was rapidly
and
successfully executed in darknes (the moon having set), in spite ch
the inevitatle conten of the initial fallures and the lack oh equip
ment, reflected, stated the despatch, great credit on all concerned
BURMA
That includes the dukws, for they now entered the fray.
955
Apart
from four loaded with RE stores for the assault, their original role
had been to stand by to ferry over, on rafts, loaded vehicles and
ammunition and food for the build-up in the bridgehead,
Now
they were called on to perform a much more active and exacting
role, that of carrying troops to the beaches.
Every crossing, came
under fire, and dawn found five of the dukws out of action through
grounding on sandbanks or enemy action,
Captain H. D, Clark,
orone commanding gly Company, undertook to sound a way
round the banks, and accomplished his task under fire, so earning
the immediate award of the Military Cross,
In the next few hours, the drivers took over an average of seven
loads each of troops to strengthen the bridgehead, and every inp
meant coming under machine-gun fire as they rounded the sand
bank; casualties were inevitably incurred,
Gpl K, Eglon, 1./Cpls
B. B. Lines and A. A. Meese, and Dvrs J. Hall and J, O'Irien,
received the immediate award of the Military Medal for gallant
conduct,
They continued at the work for i6 to 18 hours.
nightfall the leading, brigade was over and the situation was saved,
During, the next y2 hours, rafts towed by the dukwe moved the rest
of the division, 6,000 men and 200 vehicles, including tanks and
guns, and supplies as well,
The rafis represented a more prosale, but none the lem valuable
contribution by the divisional RASC to the river crossing,
Every
one was called on to help make good the lack of equipment,
and
the workshops of 8 and 20 Companies had to build rafts,
These
were made from salved Japanese pontoons, the holes in which were
welded,
Three rafts each of five
pontoons were
onstructed, and three pontoons were made self propelling by thi
natallation of Chevrolet engines, everything else but the propeller
being made from
A raft carried a go-ewt
lorry or the
equivalent,
With there, was vehicles,
Goo tone of supplies, and
several hundred infantry, were ferried acrows
With the bridgehead secure,
the dukws
turned to the task of
carrying over the division's reserves of ammunition, supplies, and
They did this for another month as a vital link in the main
tenance of yyy Indian
Corm, whích by then wan reducing
Mandalay,
Another RASC unit employed on the water link was
84 Motor Boat Company, which arved in March,
The share of the RASC in the crowing of the ferawaddy had been
no small one, and it is fair to quete once more from General teese's
despatchs I would like in emphasize here the magnitide of Four.
teenth Armys achievemene i excusing this great river untade, in
the face of a brave eve et mied enemy and with a minimum of
modem equipment,
It is worth considering that the ferawaddy la
