440
THE UNITED KINGDOM
met.
The Anti-Aircraft Command organization
was by
now
complete though not at the full strength to which it later attained.
But there was another commitment for the Corps.
The use by the
Luftwaffe of parachuted mines led to the formation of the Land
Incident Company,
which worked under Admiralty control, and
whose exploits have been mentioned already.
The Battle of Britain
The Battle of Britain and the subsequent night bombing offensive
against London gave much emergency work to RASC transport
companies.
They removed débris, delivered water to areas whose
supply had been cut off, removed the homeless, and made them-
selves generally useful.
Usually re-mobilized formation transport
was made available for these duties.
August 24th,
1940, saw the first night bombing of London.
Nobody, it may be supposed, enjoys being bombed, though familiar-
ity may breed contempt.
But the effect of enemy raids on move-
ment generally was considerable, and there
were indeed times
when the safe arrival at one's place of duty could be counted an
achievement.
For a spell the raids were a daily occurrence both by
day and by night, and provided a handicap to work which may by
now be nearly forgotten.
Apart from the extra work thrown on
headquarters of commands formations, etc.. road transport was
necessarily inflicted with very severe lighting restrictions so that,
While movement by night was still possible, it could only be done at
a slow pace and at the cost of much fatigue to the driver.
ST 3 could congratulate themselves, for their old offices received
a direct hit a few days after they had been moved, protesting
strongly, from the War Office building to QMG House nearby.
This was only one of many hits on the War Office which displayed
unexpected powers of absorption of high explosive.
Although the
adjoining 'Queen Anne' building in
Whitehall Place was totally
wrecked, QMG House escaped all but minor damage.
of the
ST , was concerned in certain emergency plans for the evacuation
War Office from London in the event of invasion forces
overrunning or directly threatening the city, or of the bombing
becoming impossibly severe.
put to the test.
These plans luckily never had to be
The growth of the RASC led to increasing demands on the
vehicle reserve depots, the MT store depots and the heavy repair
The first two types of unit were increased to three of each
(at Feltham, Slough, and Ashchurch).
The HRS was not so easy
to duplicate or triplicate owing to its requirements in machinery
and silled workers. but a site at Achford near Feltham, which
had been acquired for an extension of the VRD, Feltham, was
TRANSPORT
441
converted into a new HRS, while an entirely new shop was set up,
on a smaller scale, in requisitioned premises at High Wycombe.
These three shops, with a further one which had been opened in
Northern Ireland, coped with the load at home, with the help of
the Ministry of Supply 'Army Auxiliary Workshops', which were
civil workshops run under Ministry of Supply control for the
repair of B and RASC vehicles at home.
These AAWs grew out of
the hundreds of works, large and small, which were harnessed by
the Ministry in 1940 to the rapid overhaul of vehicles for the
unequipped BEF after its return from the Continent.
They were
a great help, receiving repairable vehicles and engines direct from
the Army and returning the overhauled ones, in the case of the
RASC, to VRDs and MTSDs.
(A heavy repair shop, RASC, it may
be noted, was calculated basically to provide an overhaul service
for a fleet of 4,000 vehicles, but it had a flexible organization
capable of great expansion by the addition of one or more increments
of men and tools.)
The MTSDs did not each have a provision office, submitting
separate demands on the Ministry of Supply.
To save overheads a
Central Provision Office was set up, at Molesey, which co-ordinated
the demands from all MTSDs,
adjusting stocks where desirable
in the case of home MTSDs.
This was a great economy, introduced
at the suggestion of Colonel E. Watts Allen, a stores expert who gave
his services as a voluntary and unpaid stores adviser to the QMG
in both world wars.
Colonel Allen also introduced an extremely
simplified accounting system into the MTSDs which, by using one
copy of a unit's demand as an issue voucher in due course, saved
thousands of man-hours in clerical effort and, literally, reams of
paper. His system of maintaining a check on stocks and of auto-
matic warning when fresh ordering was due, and of follow up
action on uncompleted demands were all of enormous assistance in
keeping the MTSD's service to home and overseas theatres a model
of efficiency and quickness.
Reorganization of RASC Transport Units
The importance of these technical units in the RASC organization
may be realized from a glance at the numbers of vehicles in the
service.
In the First World War the Corps operated about 90,000
load carriers and 35,000 light vehicles and motorcycles.
At the
end of the Second World War the number of B and RASC vehicles
in depots and units was nearly 1,500,000, and of those with units
roughly 40 per cent were in the hands of the RASC.
This immense fleet owed much of its existence to the Canadian
and the United States motor industries.
As the war progressed an
ever growing proportion of our vehicles was of North American
