634
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
it was believed, aviation spirit. Before Jerry pulled out, he mixed
all the remaining stocks of these commodities thoroughly together
in all the tanks, and intended to blow the place up.
The Italians
interfered with the charges so that their assets should not be
destroyed.
Summing up, we had four very dirty tanks to be prepared for
100 octane, and without the following essential equipment and any
idea where to get it: breathing apparatus, brooms,
steam, water,
pumps,
and flameproof lamps.
A true army inspection,
or
"scrounge', was made of the bombed-out oil depots and sidings at
Catania, and about six small forges were found.
The hand blowers
from these were mounted on benches and connected to long lengths
of water hose from ordnance, and on the other end was fitted a
standard gas mask facepiece, without, of course, the container, and
here we had our breathing apparatus.
Brooms were found, but
no steam could we get.
The workshop cleverly adapted a Bedford
distributor for an Italian pumping unit, and we had a continuous
supply of water, which was later supplemented by our fire section.
From the damaged oil depots enough parts were collected to
enable a semblance of a Worthington pump to be virtually welded
together, and we had our bottoming pump.
Workshops applied
rubber and adhesive tape to their portable floodlights to make them
gas proof.
Work went ahead nearly a4 hours a day; the tanks being eleaned
by sheer hard water brushing followed by a spirit wash; but the
first tank was ready at the scheduled time, and soon afterward the
tanker British Endeavour started pumping.
Spirit was then sent to
the Gerbini airfields, from where aperatt were soon taking off to
give the Germans a taste of what they had been giving us.
was a most satisfying sight to the officers and men who had worked
on this proiect, for at that time a large number were down with
enteritis from having been exposed to petroleum fumes for so long.
it was not long be bren he posed to pete to fresh fields on the
mainland of Italy and to spread its sections again to take over
installations, one after the other, as they were fieed by the advancing
The neut alery conceres de fi Gecata lestelladon er Paranto
in southern Italy, a large establishment formerly belonging to the
Italian Air Force.
The tate besins at Monopoli, about to miles
from Taranto, the site of headquarte a of 6 1P5 Company, RASC,
and of more large installations,
company commander, castain (distribution), and captain (engin
One evening after dinner the
cering), together with the administration officer, were sitting round
the bar, as was their wont, playing tide, When the telephone bell
rangs it was for captain (eng),
The captain of the section at
6 BASE PETROL STORAGE COMPANY
695
Taranto was away, and a worried subaltern wanted to know what to
do, for the Navy said that 100 octane was running through his drains
into the Mare Piccolo at about 1,000 gallons an hour,
The under-
ground tunnel system was full of gas and they could not get down,
and a rushing, sound could be heard.
He was told to take any
action he thought sensible and appropriate, warn all concerned to
stand by, and that the captain (eng) would break all records to
Taranto,
When the captain (eng) arrived at Taranto he was greeted by
a young sapper subaltern armed with two large wooden plugs,
repeatedly asking what he should do; fortunately at that moment
the section commander returned,
It was decided to descend into
the tunnel system with Siebe Gorman breathing outfits and waders,
It will be appreciated that all this time the level was rising, there
were 5,000 tons in the defective tanks, and minutes were precious if
the installation were not to go out of operation, which would cause
the supplies to the airfields by pipeline to be eut off in a fow hours.
After a hasty consultation, it was decided that lifelines were just
out of the question, and in view of the unknown situation below,
the captain (eng),
the section commander and his second-in-
command decided to make
investigation jointly,
Having
donned waders, SC breathing suits, and carrying a selection of
tools, the party descended into the tunnels with the 100 octane
swirling past their legs like a deep green sea.
The electrie lights
were on, and dressed as they were, they must have presented corie
sights to each other.
All tanks were found to be in order except the last one, which
was the farthest from the entrance and had no way of approach
other than along the full length of the tunnel.
The three officers
would admit readily that they often cocked an anxious eye on the
oxygen gauges upon their suits.
They entered the valve chamber
of the tank and were met by a vast swirling fountain lashing about
in changing directions,
Here a tragedy nearly occurred, for one of the officers, in attempt.
ing to approach the main valve on the tank, was struck fill in the
face by the jet and his goggles were displaced so that the spirit
must have got in his eyes,
i acered that he was about to remove the mouthplece of the
The pain must have been intense, for
breathing apparatus, and he had to be escorted to the surface and
receive attention.
The other two then returned and the section
commander made a rush, managed to get to the main valve and
close it. It was fourd t, man blank on the end of the line had
collapsed, but the leakage was now controlled, although the whole
tunnel system tie tow waist deep in petrol.
The next step was to clear the tunnel system. Upon inquiry it
