A. T.S.
Convoy
Halt for
Lunch
TRANSPORT
449
given a very high priority.
It was felt in the War Office that many
things could be done to the vehicles before despatch, calculated to
help the Russians to operate them more easily on arrival at the
North Russian ports, where temperatures were far below anything
in the experience of British manufacturers or of the British Army.
ST 2 devised special oils of very low viscosity which were also used
for our vehicles in Norway carlier. Frantic efforts were made to
ascertain what form of anti-freeze, if any, would be of use,
and
consideration was given to providing batteries of higher voltage
than normal to facilitate easy starting, though this last proposal
never reached fruition.
After some months ST g were anxious to find out how these
lorries, which were of Bedford make, were behaving, and a question-
naire was sent to our Russian allies.
One question naturally
referred to their ability to start their engines in temperatures of
minus go degrees Fahrenheit, and mild surprise was registered
when the Russian reply told us that they had no difficulty whatever
in starting and warming up their engines because they always lit a
fire underneath them beforehand!
The latter part of 1943 and the early months of 1944 were periods
of intense preparation of formations and units for participation in
the coming invasion of Normandy.
The vehicles of all the assault
formations and of the follow-up formations had to be put into first
class mechanical condition and then to be
waterproofed,
operating crews had to be taught the technique of waterproofing
and of driving through deep water.
As a 'target' they and their
vehicles had to be prepared for at least six minutes' immersion in
salt water 5 feet deep, with a 'wave height of 18 inches, and they
had, moreover, after landing, to know how to de waterproof their
vehicles immediately and to carry on with their transport tasks
without a break.
All this kept our training centres and our forma-
tion transport companies fully stretched while, superimposed on
their normal full time programme, the home transport companies
were given the heavy task of moving and delivering the numerous
articles of equipment required by units preparing for the invasion
and by the concentration and embarkation areas which were being
prepared in southern England.
While all this was in train, the threat of the V weapons had to be
met.
It was known that a pilotless aircraft and a heavy rocket had
both been nearly pertected by the enemy, but the speed of approach
and the range of these weapons were not accurately known, nor,
although their 'breeding wround' at Peenemunde had been heavily
raided and damaged, could the date of their launch to the attack
be exactly foretold.
The intensity of the attack was known to be
designed to wipe out, in a lew weeks, the area of London from
