368
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
forces.
All other campaigns had been subordinated to this primary
object, and, when the time came when re-entry became practicable,
the resources of all kinds which were concentrated and employed
exceeded anything which had been seen before.
These remarks
apply to the manpower and equipment of the RASC as much as to
any other arm or branch of any of the three services.
For the purpose of this story, the campaign can be divided into
the long planning and preparation period, stretching from early
1942 until D Day, the amphibious assault and operations in the
beach-head, the advance to the Rhine, and finally the Rhine assault
and the sweep across the North German plain.
Planning and Preparation
Serious planning for the re-entry into North-West Europe, the
original code name for which was 'Round Up',
began at the
beginning of 1942, when a special army planning staff was set up
within the framework of GHQ Home Forces.
C-in-C Home Forces
was also appointed as one of the three 'combined commanders' for
these projected operations.
The MGA Home Forces was Major-
General H. M. Gale.
He was responsible for the initial administra-
tive planning, including the
build-up and preparation
of the
administrative units which were to form part of the order of battle.
The executive work in this connection was done by the War Office
and other Ministries
concerned,
and General Gale. co-ordinated
their planning efforts through the medium of a series of inter-service
and inter-ministerial committees known as the Round Up adminis-
trative planning staff.
The efforts of this staff were delayed by the
decision to launch the North African Expeditionary Force, to the
headquarters of which General Gale went as Chief Administrative
Officer.
Early in 1942, a new planning headquarters was formed, known
milie staff aramined the west coast of Eurone from North Cape to
as Cossac' (Chief of Staff to Supreme Allied Commander Designate),
the Pyrenees to find the most suitable area, and devised an outline
plan for the initial assault and build-up which was tentatively
accepted by the Combined Chiefs of Staff.
General Eisenhower had been appointed Supreme
By the end of 1943,
Commander,
21 Army Group.
and General Montoomery had also returned to Enoland to command
Early in 1914 a revised plan was produced by
21 Army Groun and approved by SHAEF, the Combined Chiefs of
Staff of the two Governments (see diagram on p. 369):
On May 15th, 1943, Major-sen a Ta Ro Ker had assumed the
appointment of STat the War Office, and the work of huilding
up the ST order of battle for 21 Army Group and the RASC units
in the United Kingdom to support the expedition began in earnest.
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
369
SHAEF
HQ 21 Army Group
HQ 12 US Army Group
Allied
(and later HQ 6 Army Group) Air Forces
HQ Communication
one
HQ Second HQ First Canadian
Army
Army
HQ i Canadian HO II
Corps
Canadian
Corps
US Armies
HQ L of C
HOT HOVIII HOXII HQ XXX
Corps
Corps
Corps
CorDs
Nole: Corps are shown under their National Headquarters. But HQ, Corps served
under HQ First Canadia Army for the greater part of the campaign and XXX Corps
served under HQ First Canadian Army for operation 'Veritable' (Reichwald).
That
period provided many
examples of the Corps' ability to
improvise and of the adaptability of RASC units and individuals.
For example, an artillery platoon was successfully converted into
the original Dukw Training Unit, and a GT company located on
Belfast racecourse was hastily summoned to England to perform
air despatch duties.
In neither of these cases were any of the
personnel changed and in both cases the speed of conversion was
remarkable.
It would be difficult to exaggerate the volume and variety of the
work done by the ST branches in the War Office in preparation
for the mounting o Spe brancheverlord, as it had now been named.
A few general examples only can be given here.
A new 24-hour
Dack ration was devised and produced at chort notice and proved
itself light, compact and highly nutritious.
A reserve of 75 million
bulk rations and 6o million special pack rations had to be built up
in spite of a world scarcity of foodstuffs and shipping.
The great
transport problem was the formation of some 200 companies in tic
face of the inevitable manpower difficulties and a lack of certain
