566
.A.S.C. FLEET
Motor Boat Company was moved to the West Mersea area on the
East Anglian coast and in October, 1941, took over from the Royal
Navy the security patrols in the Rivers Stour, Deben, Blackwater
and Crouch.
Their job was to spot enemy aircraft on mine
dropping forays, to keep a look out for mines, and to check and
examine all craft entering the special defence zones.
This opera-
tional role, although at variance with the original conception of the
duties for which the motor boat companies were formed,
was
necessitated by the lack
of naval manpower.
The
unit
was
administered through Headquarters, Eastern
Command, but the
chain of command was unusual in that the company was under the
operational control of the Commander-in-Chief, the Nore, through
the Flag Officer-in-Charge, Harwich.
It is interesting to note,
too, that in the water transport companies at this time,
craft were
being provided for the security control officers at all the big ports.
New defence commitments involving the provision of
RASC
water transport arose continuously.
Notable among these was the
decision to fortify the islands of Flatholm and Steepholm in the
Bristol Channel.
Thousands of tons of material and stores had to
be ferried from Barry Docks and 12 cargo carrying barges and
lighters were provided.
The difficulties of maintaining this service
in all seasons and weathers with such craft will be appreciated
only too readily by those who know the vagaries of wind and water
in the Bristol Channel.
To the natural hazards was added the
danger from mines, for the Bristol Channel was a favourite dropping
7.01 P.
In April, 1941, the third motorboat company was formed to
operate off the West African coast, the cadre being provided from
Nos, 1 and 2 Motor Boat Companies, but more will be told of this
unit anon.
The next call for an operational unit came in August, 1941, when
one section of an RASC motorboat company was included in
Force II1 for operations in Spitzbergen.
This was provided from
No t Motor Roat Company RASC and equipped with four launches
requisitioned in Scottish. waters.
arrival in
Spitzbergen,
the section found several Russian launches of various shapes and
sizes and endeavoured to make them seaworthy.
Starting them
in cold weather, however, is reported to have caused not a little
bad language.
During
their short stay there, our craft were
employed continuously on ferrying men and stores between the
transport Empress of Canada and the jetty at Barentsburga 12-
mile turn round.
they improvised impressed and earned the praise of many in the
The keenness of the crews and the way in which
force.
By the end of 1941 the number of craft had more than doubled.
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
567
True,
they were a heterogeneous lot, but they filled the gap until
our own craft came off the stocks.
The Superintending Engineer
and Constructor of Shipping and his naval architects had prepared
and approved designs for standard RASC launches for operational
duties and also for bigger and faster craft for coast artillery practices.
These were to simulate with the use of targets the fastest vessels
the enemy were likely to
use in a coastal attack.
Construction
had been arranged in conjunction with the Admiralty, and work
pressed on, although it was not until late in 1942 that the first of
the new craft was commissioned.
Arrangements had also been
made for the provision from naval construction of large numbers of
36 ft Admiralty harbour launches, 45 ft pinnaces, and motor fishing
vessels varying from 45 ft to go ft in length.
All these in the later
years of the war more than proved their worth in all parts of the
world.
Likewise, the provision of boat stores and marine engine
spares had become a great problem.
Large contracts were placed
by the War Office itself and through the Admiralty.
The small
WD Fleet Store which existed at Woolwich in September,
1939,
was expanded first into F Group at No. 3 MT Stores Depot, RASC,
Ashchurch, and then, early in 1942, when nearly all boat and vessel
stores were transferred from RAOC to RASC supply, into the Boat
Stores Group, RASC.
Stores Depot,
RASC, and was moved to
Woolwich Dockyard.
There it held all the marine stores, equipment, paint and the like
required for the Service at home and overseas.
At its peak, its
stores holdings were valued at some four million pounds.
It also
provided the cadres for the RASC boat stores depots subsequently
formed for overseas service, and played a big part in their mobiliza-
tion and despatch.
In home waters, the demands on the RASC Fleet had become so
heavy that more water transport companies had to be formed, and
these came into being in 1942 at Plymouth, Sandbank (in the Clyde),
Grimsby, and Sheerness.
The beginning of 1942 also saw
despatch of the
400-ton steam target
towing
vessel Sir
Walter
Campbell to Iceland.
She operated around that difficult coast for
about six months on artillery practices seawards, and the value of
her work can be judged from the following extract from a letter
written by the DDST, Iceland:-
"The Gunners were loud in their praises of her, and without
doubt she did an excellent job of work under extremely arduous
conditions?
The Fleet had the usual growing pains during those mid-war
years, and a special Inspectorate of Water Transport Services was
set up in 1943 to help advise home and overseas commands with
their problems.
The
Fleet
was fortunate,
