104
THE MIDDLE EAST I
weeks or more.
Heavy losses of shipping added to the difficulties
of the situation, and RASC units and stores ready for despatch in
Britain were frequently delayed for long periods because of lack of
shipping space.
Efforts were made to offset the deficiencies in
British manpower by the employment of other nationalities, and in
this some success was achieved, particularly in the case of transport
units.
But the period from June, 1940, till the end of 1941 was one
of great difficulty in the build-up of the base.
The gradual growth
in the strength of the RASC made it necessary to set up certain
organizations in the base area.
An RASC training school was established in February, 1940, for
the training of officers and other ranks, and courses were run with
a comprehensive syllabus on supply, petrol and transport subjects.
A surprising amount of hidden talent was discovered, and it was
possible to re-muster many NCOs and men to trades in which
there were shortages, such as clerks, MT artificers and petrol
technicians.
The school also trained officer cadets, drawn from
units in the theatre, and large numbers of them were commissioned
during the war.
This reduced demands from Britain, and had the
advantage of providing officers with experience of desert conditions.
An RASC base depot was formed at Geneifa in September, 1940,
to receive and hold RASC reinforcements and men from hospital,
and to train locally enlisted men.
It hardened those coming out
from hospital, and conducted the technical and military training of
reinforcements, including trade testing, upgrading and re-mustering.
The large number and differing types of RASC units made their
organization, equipping and training a complex business, and the
continuous demand for units called for quick improvisation.
To
meet these needs, an RASC Mobilization Centre was formed at
Tahag early in 194t, and all units newly arrived from Great Britain,
those which had to be reorganized or reformed, and those raised
locally were given such training at the centre as was possible to fit
them for service in the field.
Supplies
Lack of men for base supply depots was the chief difficulty in the
build-up of stocks.
Many depots were needed for the holding of
reserves, for issues to detail issue depots, and for the despatch of
supplies by road, rail or ship to the various theatres of operations.
Demands for supplies were made on the War Office on the principle
of maintaining a reserve of 6o days for all troops in the Middle East,
plus a working margin of go days.
A supply holding of some
150,000 tons was eventually reached, representing a reserve for a
force of 900,000 men.
Base supply depots were located at all base
ports at which supply ships were discharged, and the largest holding
THE MIDDLE EAST I
105
was at El Kirsh in the Canal area, where a group of depots was
When two or more BSDs were located together, a
base provision officer was appointed to command the depots and
to co-ordinate stock returns: he assumed general responsibility for
the technical efficiency of his charge.
The increasing volume of supplies coming into the ports made it
necessary to provide special RASC staffs to clear and load at the
For this purpose port detachments
each port. They helped to ensure proper handling of supplies in
the discharge of ships, and correct loading when supplies were
despatched.
in the port organization, and the technical advisers of movements
and transportation on all matters affecting supplies.
principle of stock control was to hold balanced rations at every BSD
and to connect the latter with theatres according to the type and
grade of the rations held.
Concurrently with the formation of BSDs, large numbers of DIDs
were needed to provide for the ever-increasing numbers of troops
of diverse nationalities, many of which required special scales and
different types of food.
Ration scales became a serious problem,
and althouch cuce eMut as made to achieve de much standardies.
tion as possible, tyre were snore than go different ration scales in
force in the Middle East to meet particular needs.
The British
field service scale applied, with modifications,
to, among others,
Americans, Belgians,
French, Ceylonese, Greeks, Jews,
Maltese,
Mauritians, Polesa sechs and Yugoslavs, the Union Defence Force
(European, Cape-coloured and Indian) Seychellois and the Trans-
Jordan Frontier Force.
Then there were scales for Indian troops
(Hindu and Muslio), the Sudan Defence Force, troops from French
and Belgian Africa, Ethiopians and so on.
There were also special
scales for women's services, operational air crews, for prisoners of
war and internees, and for a variety of animals.
This threw a great
strain on DiDices, and for a ya although designed to feed only 7,500
troops, was often obliged to serve 20,000 or more.
The feeding of
prisoners of war presented a problem in the very carly days, as in
the first battle of Libya the number of prisoners far exceeded expecta-
tions and caused some concern at a time when resources were
Food for the civilian nopulation in occupied areas also became a
serious commitment at times.
The civil administration was held
responsible for this task, int the RASC depots had to handle the
supplies at any rate in the initial stages, and to despatch them as
of common user commodities for the Roval Navy in the Mediter-
The RASC also assumed responsibility for the provision
ranean, including many items obtained from local resources.
