230
THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
airfields were becoming unusable, and the enemy had been able to
mass about 40,000 men to oppose him.
On December 24th, after
two postponements, he reluctantly had to call off the operation.
Transport in the First Advance
For the RASC this first phase of the campaign, was something of
an unequal struggle in trying to maintain the striking force so far
from its bases and at the same time endeavouring to keep pace with
the rate at which thousands of tons of stores of all kinds were being
dumped on to the quays at Algiers and at Bougie, Philippeville and
Bone as those ports were gradually opened up.
Providentially, the state of the railways was better than had been
expected.
Although rolling stock and locomotives were worn and
old, it was found possible to use the branch lines which led from
Philippeville and later Bone to the main line from Algiers and to
forward supplies by rail in two directions, eastwards to Souk Arhas
and Souk el Arba and to Tebessa in the south.
The railhead at
Souk el Arba station received considerable attention from the enemy
and in one raid Sgt L. Marland of 350 Company was awarded the
Military Medal when, in company with Lieutenant Broach of 58
DID, he emptied a lorry filled with hand grenades which had been
set on fire by an exploding bomb.
The narrow gauge line from Bone to La Calle was also taken into
use for maintaining the troops in the north.
But the capacity of
the system was quite insufficient and had to be supplemented by
road transport when the advanced
portions of the striking force
had reached points as much as 8o to 100 miles from the nearest
railhead.
For the first few weeks the only transport available for the force
was the second line companies which at their assault scale amounted
to little more than a platoon each although they were gradually
brought up to strength as further convoys arrived.
The third line
company for the 78th Division did not arrive until December and
that for the 6th Armoured Division until the winter battle was over.
Transport at the bases for docks clearance was equally scarce yet
some had to be diverted to help with the maintenance of the forward
troops.
In spite of the precarious general transport position,
minute decisions to
postpone the despatch of some companies,
including some much needed to-ton lorry units due to arrive in
the third convoy, and to defer the to latry ones left the DDST
short of more than 400 vehicles at this critical period.
Unfortun-
ately many of the heavy lorries at hich had been received were a
mixture of various makes and types of vehicles which had been
requisitioned from the Liverpool docks. They presented an almost
impossible spare parts problem.
NORTH AFRICA
231
At one time two brigade companies, designed to maintain 9,000
men, were working to support 20,000.
Even if the programmes for
embarking transport units at home had not been altered the situation
would have been difficult, as in addition to the arrival of American
units without their maintenance transport, assistance had also to
be provided for the ill-equipped French forces and a large number
of RAF units which began to arrive in the eastern zone.
The only redeeming feature was the discovery that the intelligence
reports on the availability of local transport were over-cautious, and
although many civil vehicles had been converted to producer gas
burners, some vehicles were hired for work at the base in Algiers,
and more would have been obtainable if the French Army had not
had to depend on requisitioned vehicles for mobilizing their units.
The absence of the third line companies in the
forward area
during the first few weeks was keenly felt, but the second line com-
panies and the various platoons of other companies which were
sent up to help did splendid work.
No. 328 Company, the brigade
company for the o6th Bricade. lost some of its effective strength
through being badly bombed at Tabarka,
and the company of
the rith Brigade also had losses when its ammunition point was
overrun by enemy tanks.
Much of the work had to be carried out
by night. No. 328 Company was a versatile unit; it undertook to
and couple of trucks 'to make certain that the track was not mined',
test the railway from Tabarka to Sedjenane by running an engine
and at Christmas collected pigs, poultry, fruit and eggs in such
quantity that all units enjoyed the usual seasonable fare.
In the four base sub-areas there were so many
demands for
transport for various purposes, in addition to the main task of
dock clearance that necial organizations had to be set un to decide
on prioritance, that spe the matters of labour, transport and turn-
round so that every vehicle catters of used to, the best advantage.
Our transport companies had much
to contend
with.
Some
ports were subject to heavy bombing raids, and as the winter became
more severe, road surfaces began to deteriorate through use and rain
and mud, and in some parts of the forward area whole sections of
vehicles became bogged.
The weather was appalling, and at one
time communications with the forward troops were almost severed,
a factor which is well brought out in the official despatches as one
of the reasons why success was not achieved earlier.
Weather, work, and losses by enemy action threw a heavy load
on the companies artificers and as the organization for providing
vehicle replacements or spare parts had not been built up, ever
form of ingenuity had s are ped to keep vehicles on the road.
The position was made do cater hecause unite terkninal (workshop)
vehicles had in many cases to be shipped in later convoys, so that
