326
THE INVASION
OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
first tasks of 522 Company was the maintenance of 4.7th Commando
at Port-en-Bessin, which was destined to be the
which
was still well inside enemy
'Pluto' port and
territory.
Delivery
of vital
requirements to this commando was continually effected in the face
of small arms fire and shelling from enemy tanks.
Linden and
Captain B. W. M.
Sgts T. Burt and W. J.
Tams received immediate
awards of the Military Cross and the Military Medal respectively
for their part in these operations.
Two hours after the first landing
39 GT Company came ashore.
Their first task was to deliver anti-
tank guns required for the defence of the beach maintenance area.
Delivery was effected under mortar and small arms fire, and three
awards of the Military Medal were made to members of the company.
A platoon of 127
Company, which
had been with XXX Corps
since 1941, and detachments of XXX Corps HQ Car Company
were also ashore on D Day.
The performance, in general, of divisional second line transport
in the period immediately after the landings was most creditable.
Although distances were small, demands for petrol and ammunition
were heavy and urgent.
These units were only skeleton, and they
worked like tigers to maintain their divisions.
Beach Maintenance
There were two beach groups with each of the assaulting divisions,
and each group included, as beach maintenance area units, a detail
issue depot and a petrol depot.
Maintenance areas for goth and
grd Canadian Divisions were established without much incident
and within three days of landing.
DDST XXX Corps landed at
about H plus 6 on D Day and found a DID and a petrol depot with
stock on the ground and actually making issues a truly remarkable
achievement and undoubtedly a factor in our success.
Opposition
in the grd Division's sector prevented the maintenance area from
functioning until D plus
Nevertheless,
the average
tonnages brought ashore were not below that of the other two sectors,
Supplies began to arrive at 5 DID on June 8. Units' vehicles began
drawing the same day,
and the DID worked continuously on
receipts and issues for 14 days.
After a few days, 5 DID and 2 DID,
belonging to the other beach group, combined their resources,
receiving and issuing on alternate days.
Men worked round the
clock tocht hour shits, achieving an average handling in or out
of 119,000 compo packs, in addition to arge numbers of jerricans,
drinking water, hospital supplies and coal.
The petrol depots were
delayed by bad weather in the Channel, but were nevertheless all
In operation by June 7th.
Petrol demands were less than expected,
which compensated for the heavy expenditure of ammunition.
and Dittor a stet of hombs set alicht dumos containing
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
377
the whole reserve of petrol and half the ammunition reserve.
The
area quickly became a blazing inferno of bursting petrol cans and
exploding ammunition.
An officer, a sergeant and a 19-year-old
soldier of g6 DID with only a month's service received immediate
awards for driving loaded vehicles out of the blaze.
In spite of
their efforts 100,000 gallons of fuel and 400 tons of ammunition
were lost.
The dukws were a big feature in the success of the assault and
build-up. There were Il companies of them altogether, employed
in ferrying stores from coasters and other craft to shore, and in
evacuating casualties from the beaches to LSTs lying off.
Individual training of the drivers had been thorough, but there
had not been enough time to complete collective and inter-service
training.
Most of the dukws were carried across the
Channel,
stowed in the LSTs, but some were slung from davits, and a few
were carried in Rhino ferries, which were towed by LSTs.
The
crossing was rough.
Major M. J. B. Hornsby writes of the landing
of the dukws on XXX Corps sector: 'The dukws were launched in
an angry sea and headed for the shore.
Visibility at the time was
poor.
The wind was blowing from west to north at about 15 knots,
which made the beaches a lee shore and raised a considerable sea.
However, enemy interference from the air was practically
non-
existent, and that from the shore batteries was ineffective.
Beach
obstacles were numerous but, with one or two exceptions, were
avoided by the drivers' skilful handling.
It was extremely difficult
to handle an amphibian in the sea without having to negotiate such
obstacles, and these hazards, added to a rising tide, tested the drivers'
ability to the utmost.
On one beach the first wave of amphibians
was held up for some time by mortar and machine-gun fire and had
to take cover, such as it was, among the sand dunes.
Eventually,
the enemy strong point which had been offering this resistance was
silenced by the assault infantry.
Altogether on the first tide,
dukws were landed. These mostly contained ammunition,
RE
stores for beach roadways, medical stores and unit G 10g8 equip-
ment.
Casualties to both men and vehicles were extremely light?
Until sufficient GT companies had been landed, the dukws had
to carry their loads through to the dumps, but as soon as possible,
transhipment areas were established in the vicinity of the beaches
where
the dukws dropped their loads and returned through
control point to the sea.
During the 24 hours ending 1800 hours
June rith, dukws carried torno tons of stores over the beaches.
On June 1ath one dukw br teht Mr. Winston Churchill and General
Eisenhower ashore and, on June 14th, another,
known thereafter
as the royal dukw, had the honour of carrying King George VI.
Two dukw drivers who were wounded while attached to an American
