276
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
dump short of Minturno beyond the mouth of the river, a distance
of 12 miles by sea.
Finally an emergency plan was made to supply
the bridgehead, in which four brigades and half the divisional
artillery were concentrated, by air.
methods of supply were used in the operation except supply by air.
Jeeps and trailers proved once again their value in delivering
ammunition to gun positions, and
February gth 10,000 to 12,000 rounds of 25-pounder were delivered
across the Gargliano each day by 28 jeeps and trailers of the 5th
Divisional Column RASC, which operated only in the hours of
In the Cassino area, a platoon of 40 jeeps manned by drivers of
the 78th Divisional Column were continuously engaged in main-
taining units of the division in most inaccessible positions and a
jeep platoon of 563 Company RASC, XIII Corps Troops Company,
was employed for six weeks with the Royal Engineers in building a
vital road to forward positions within 800 yards of the enemy.
Fifty of these were used as infantry assault craft
and for landing anti-tank guns in the 5th Division's attack on the
At Anzio 239 Company distinguished itself by being
which carried the following
commendation from General Mark Clark:—
‹ From Headquarters, Fifth Army.
Commendation to whom it may concern.
239 General Transportation Company (Dukw) is hereby
commended for outstanding performance of duty?
Other RASC units which bore the brunt of early difficulties at
Anzio were 295 Company, which served the 24th Guards Brigade,
7, 40 and 42 Companies, which completed the ist Divisional Column
RASC, 548 Company,
and a section of 348 Tipper Company.
Later they were joined by the RASC companies of the 56th Division
—513, 514, 515 and 49
-which, in their turn,
relieved by the divisional column of the 5th Division (2, 69, 80 and
434 Companies).
In March, 1944, it was at last found possible to start a system of
relief for those divisions which had been continuously engaged in
operations since the assaults on the Italian mainland, and whose
value as fighting formations was beginning to suffer.
The first
divisions to be relieved were the 46th and goth, which handed over
all their vehicles and heavy equipment and were sent to Palestine
and Egypt to refit and recuperate.
The 56th Division's positions
at Anzio were taken over intact, complete with vehicles,
weapons
and equipment, by the corresponding units of the 5th Division, the
relief being done by a brigade at a time and taking from four to
The 5th Division's turn for relief came after the fall of
Rome, and the divisional RASC once more found themselves taking
over the transport of the 56th Divisional Column-this time in
The Build-up for the Final Offensive at Cassino
The two and a half months available for the build-up for the
final offensive at Cassino was a busy time for the many RASC
depots involved. The three base supply depots at Naples, none of
which was rail served, handled an average daily turnover of 4,000
During March, the record figure of 32,000 tons was cleared
from the Naples docks in one day, and it is a matter for pride that
25,000 tons of this total were cleared in RASC transport.
Between January and June,
1944, the following awards for
gallantry were made to RASC officers and men: two Military
Crosses, 20 Military Medals, two George Medals, two Memberships
of the Order of the British Empire, three British Empire Medals
and two Distinguished Flying Medals.
The Pursuit North of Rome -Capture of Florence
The capture of Rome gave no respite to the Allied armies. It was
imperative to continue the pursuit of the beaten enemy as far as
our advancing columns could go without having to pause for
administrative reasons.
The enemy's powers of recuperation were
sufficiently well known. If he were given a chance of regaining his
breath he was quite capable of reorganizing his forces on another
strong defensive position and compelling us to deploy our full
strength to break through his defences again.
We have already seen how the reserves accumulated at Anzio
assisted the advance.
June 6th helped to shorten the lines of communication still further.
The first real check to the Allied pursuit came at the historic
Lake Trasimene. Here the Germans succeeded in checking our
advance for nearly 1o days at the end of June, thereby gaining an
invaluable breathing-space in order to begin organizing their next
serious line of defence.
The immediate task of the Allies was expressed as: to destroy all
German forces south of the Pisa-Rimini line.
This was greatly
hampered by the withdrawal of substantial forces from Italy to
support the projected landings on the French Riviera.
The whole
of the American VI Corps was withdrawn between June 14th and
R7th, and the French Expeditionary Corps followed soon afterwards.
Not only did this interrupt the impetus of the pursuit, but later or
it was to have a interrupt the on the campaign as a whole, as it
