PREFACE
THIS is a book of many authors, written for the most part by
the the hat are hind to sade of the wore in toye
which they describe.
It is the story of the work of the Royal
Army Service Corps from 1939 to 1945 and because it covers every
theatre of war it is necessarily much condensed.
In the space
available it has not been possible to name more than a few of the
many units concerned and to recount but a small part of their deeds.
In spite of this it is hoped that the story will suffice to illustrate the
extraordinary diversity of the work of the Corps and the degree of
high endeavour demanded of its officers and men.
To those readers who may look in vain for mention of their units
in which they served, the R.A.S.C. History Committee (on whose
shoulders lies the responsibility for producing this book) offer their
apologies and regrets that limitations of space forbade a fuller
treatment of the story.
The Committee was originally composed of Major-General Sir
Cecil Smith, K.B.E., C.B., M.C. (Chairman), Major-General E. H.
Fitzherbert,
C.B.E.,
D.S.O., M.C., Major-General H. C. Good-
fellow, C.B., C.B.E. and Lieut-Colonel P. M. Edgell, O.B.E., with
Major-General H. M. Whitty, C.B., O.B.E., as Honorary Secretary.
Major-General W. H. D. Ritchie, C.B., C.B.E., joined the Com-
mittee in 1954•
The preparation of the book has been rendered difficult by the
lack of war diaries of some campaigns, and by the absence of suitable
information on which to base an account in some of the diaries
available.
In these cases, the authors have had to build up their
story from personal narratives collated with the general history of
the operations concerned.
Fortunately, instructions were sent to
theatres during the war
by
the
D.S.T. that they should
collect
records from which a history might eventually be compiled and this
material was for the most part available.
The book may truly be described as a co-operative effort, shared
in varying degree by a large number of people, mention of every
one of whom would be impracticable.
The share of some con-
tributors has, however, been so great that the Committee feel that
these names must be mentioned, but their gratitude to those whose
names are omitted is no less sincere.
The Committee
wish
to pay tribute to those who have been
mainly responsible for the preparation of the various chapters.
