Scaling the Loaf
Double Deck Field Ovens
536 GENERAL TRANSPORT COMPANY (DUKWS)
609
the Reichwald in which, at the time, there were still pockets of
enemy resistance.
into Cleve before realizing their mistake.
Many dukws missed the turning and went nearly
some German soldiers where they were.
They stopped and asked
The surprise was mutual.
However, all the dukws, except one which was ditched, turned
round in a mined road in the least possible time and came back to
the dump without a shot being fired, a fortunate escape.
Anyway,
all the dukws, there being now some 120 as we had a platoon of
297 Company attached, reached the dump, with the one exception,
and there unloaded and stayed the night.
In the meantime, company headquarters and part of workshops
had moved via Eindhoven, where they spent a day, to Nijmegen—
in the town itself this time.
By the next day the River Maas
had not only overflowed its banks, assisted by the Germans, who
had done some demolitions, but had reached the main road
between Nijmegen and Cleve.
The water on this road rose steadily
until in places it was three feet deep, and only amphibious vehicles
could move along it.
During the next few days, a transhipment area with a report
centre, labour, both army and civilian, and a cookhouse with a
sort of running buffet were organized.
The dukws worked 24
hours a day for five days and, to enable a system of relief drivers to
operate, one platoon of 633 Company and one platoon of Terrapin
drivers were attached to act as reliefs.
We once again proved our
operational necessity, as without the supplies carried forward by
the dukws, the operations in the Cleve area would have been delayed
until the floods had subsided.
In addition, a panzer concentration
was broken up by 5•5-inch guns firing ammunition brought up by
our dukws.
Had this not happened,
the situation would have
become most awkward, to put it mildly.
We also evacuated all the
casualties from the Cleve area to a FDS in Nijmegen.
As tyre troubles were assuming large proportions,
the company
commander ordered that tyre pressures should be raised to 50 lb.
This improved matters a little.
The difficulty in this job was that
the drivers could not see the surface of the road underneath the
water and were, therefore, frequently hitting underwater obstacles.
There were admittedly trees lining the edge of the road, but there
were also some deep potholes and also floating tree trunks and other
things.
Consequently it was essential that two drivers should be
on each dukw.
On the 17th some 10-tonners were waterproofed
and were thus able to get through the floods.
Captain L. Dashwood, workshops officer, did some experiments
with two dukws, loading an armoured jeep into one by means of
A frame
attached to
the
other.
These experiments were
satisfactory.
QI RASC
