510
AIR DESPATCH
their victorious advance, had out-distanced their lines of communica-
tion.
Small air drops were also made to British troops in action in
minor operations in Somaliland and on the North-West Frontier
of India in 1919.
It was not until 1936 that large-scale exercises in the dropping
of men, equipment and supplies were conducted in Russia.
These
were shown, in part, in the cinema newsreels of the time, but apart
from indication
being given of the large scale of the operations,
care was taken to release very little useful information, and fuller
details were never made available outside the Soviet Union.
At the outset of the Second World War, an attempt was made, as
an emergency measure, to supply the BEF at Dunkirk in 1940,
using converted civilian airliners.
It was not until 1942, however,
that air supply on a large and organized scale was really begun.
The initiative came from Burma, where the main supply line,
Irrawaddy River, had fallen under Japanese control, and the force
there of two
weak Indian
divisions,
newly formed Burma
Division and the British 7th Armsured Brigade had no land lines of
communication worth the name.
They managed to live largely
on stocks in the country,
but about 3,000 tons
of supplies were
dropped by air to the refugees struggling out of the country with
means of subsistence.
However,
the question
subsistence by air as a routine matter was not seriously tackled
until, with our last foothold in Burma lost, the eccentric but gifted
guerilla organizer
and
Major-General Orde Wingate,
conceived the idea of raiding deep and long into Japanese held
territory.
He left columns of his long range penetration groups,
the now famous Chindits, to range the country behind the Japanese
lines, spreading disorganization and alarm among the enemy and
encouraging loyal elements in the population to help the British
and await the return of the Imperial forces.
When confronted
with the difficulties of carrying enough supplies with his groups to
render them independent of any lines of communication,
Santa Claus!'
cated, in his own words 'bringing them down the chimney like
took place.
And so the beginnings of organized air despatch
Later, profiting by the successful lessons in maintaining
Chindits, and realizing that surrender was the only alternative to
air supply (in the case of several beleaguered forces),
this whole
theatre of war passed over almost entirely to air supply.
A complete
and very efficacious Army Air Transport Organization (AATO)
grew up mainly under the executive control of the Royal Indian
Army Service Corps.
Air Despatch in North-West Europe
The problema to bo faced in North-West Europe, however differed
AIR DESPATCH
511
from those in the Far East in several respects.
With the exception
of airborne operations, supply and maintenance by air were planned
as emergency measures rather than as a normal system.
For this
reason the Air Despatch Group was only used spasmodically and
was never stretched to its full capacity except for short periods.
The enemy opposition from air and ground
was very much
heavier in North-West Europe and this had considerable influence
on the technique for dropping, which was designed to eject the
whole load in one run over the dropping zone.
The airfields used for supply operations, although spread over
eight counties, were fairly concentrated, were served by excellent
roads, had good rail facilities, and were connected by a first-class
system of telephone and teleprinter communications.
This made the
central control of RASC transport and air despatch personnel reason-
ably simple, and enabled transport, stores and men to be switched
rapidly from airfield to airfield in order to meet the
frequent
changes of aircraft and airfield availability brought about at short
notice by casualties and bad weather.
Composition of the Group
In the United Kingdom the War Office assumed responsibility
for all army functions connected with the supply and maintenance
by air of ground formations and airborne force from this country,
including the Special Air Service Brigade.
These duties were
discharged by means of the Air Despatch Group, RASC, which
included air despatch units, transport units, petrol and ordnance
depots, and pioneers.
strong (including those attached) with 1,500 vehicles.
The Air Despatch Group was nearly 5,000
The main
tasks of the group were first, the maintenance and re-supply by
air of ground and airborne troops.
This was normally effected by
packing stores in special containers and pushing them out of aircraft
on parachutes. The group were able to find efficient air despatch
crews to man 205 Dakotas (our-man crews) or 410 Stirlings (two-
man crews) on one mission.
The reason for the smallness of the
air despatch crew in the Stirling was that half the load was carried
in the bomb bay and was released by the RAF crew.
The group's other task was supply by air, when aircraft were
loaded with stores straight from depots and dumps without any
at their destinations.
special packing (except in certain difficult cases) and were landed
In this case the group had to collect the stores
from railheads or depots and dumps near the airfield, make them
up into aircraft loads. load them, and lash them correctly for flich
the loadino and lashing of storea a most important tock were done
by men who were specially trained for this job in addition to their
duties as air despatchers.
