212
RAI
in endeavouring to keep
and civilian vehicles on the
road.
It was with pride
that the RASC company workshops
fitted a Morris truck with a Ford back axle and then, when the gear
box gave out, replaced that assembly by adapting one taken from
an old Austin.
Although many of the vehicles were on their last
legs there were always enough of them, especially when lack of
petrol caused an almost total stoppage of all but essential traffic.
For the first three years of the war the single RASC company had
to carry the whole of the transport load of the island.
In 1941 two
transport sections, each of 44 vehicles, had to be formed for field
ambulances, and by June, 1942, the vehicle strength of the company,
exclusive of these sections, had risen to 280 vehicles.
It was only
then that an appeal to the War Office for a second MT company
was met, and the opportunity was also taken of giving to the existing
and new companies the newly adopted RASC platoon organization.
Petrol Supply
A growing problem was how to make the best use of the small
amount of petrol that could be spared for the Army.
used mattered, so that every possible means of saving the precious
spirit had to be adopted.
over the use of both civil and military transport.
forbade the use of civil transport on Saturdays and Sundays, and
no public vehicle was allowed on the road on those days without a
special permit which was sparingly granted.
barely it days' petrol remained in the island, and the Army's allot-
ment was cut to 6,000 gallons a week.
In 194t it was decided to make use of the large number of mule
carts in the island, and at one time no fewer than 500 of them were
in use-
-at a cost of £5 a week each.
load, but usually
continued it might have become a question of whether to use the
mules as transport or as food.
Petrol was
one of the commodities which were accepted as a
common
requirement,
and was
ordinating committee set up by the Malta Government; looking
back, it now seems
storage
regrettable that planning for provision and
not have been centralized before
January, 1939, the Army was given authority to hold a reserve of
six months' supplies.
Up to that time there was no military petrol-
eum installation in the island, and reserves were ensured by the
petroleum contractors guaranteeing that their normal stocks were
adequate to meet certain additional requirements if the occasion
The main civil installation was owned by the Shell Company,
at Kallafrans and the army needs were met by the refiling of
kerbside tanks or delivery in cans.
The best that could be done to
follow the War Office instructions was to draw up 30,000 gallons,
the estimated requirement for six months, in cans and to disperse
the stock over various points in the island. Authority for the
construction of 300 tons of bulk storage in protected accommodation
was given in March, 1939, and six tanks holding about 240 tons
between them were landed in April, 1940.
Sites were selected for
their installation at Naxar and Falka, and the tanks were set up and
ready for filling by April, I94I, but they were only partly below
ground level although protected by blast walls.
A small military
filling plant was also provided from home and was installed at
St. Patrick's, a few miles away from the new bulk tanks.
meantime, the Navy were asked to construct 22 500-gallon tanks,
which were installed in disused quarries at Pembroke, each tank
being enclosed separately by splinter walls.
The general lack of petrol began to be felt in early 1941, and
continued to be acute, so that the Army's holding began to fall until
it was eventually reduced to 'a last ditch' reserve.
also a lack of other sorts of liquid and solid fuels which were vital
for the operation of plant for anti-aircraft defences and essential
The island's water supply was entirely dependent on
pumping apparatus, and when the power station failed, candles
had to be used for lighting. Little or no fuel wood was available
locally, and efforts to burn sump oil which had been drained
from the sump pits of vehicles were stultified by the reduced
number of MT vehicles on the roads.
Towards the end of the
siege the old RASC fire engine had to be diverted from its proper
use and, after the wheels had been removed, it was taken into use
at a pumping station.
Whether the heart of the
was touched by this incident is not recorded, but a demand for its
replacement brought two new Merryweather engines in its place.
Undoubtedly the greatest achievement of the RASC was the
continued maintenance of a daily ration of food even though for
some time during the siege it had to be reduced to what is known in
military language as a siege scale.
As comparatively little food was grown in the island, food supply
was a problem common to civilians and servicemen.
the usual practice, the Army was responsible for supplying
RAF and the Navy maintained their own victualling organization.
The need for coordinating reauiremente in escantial materials and
foodstuffs was accepted by the civil government and the services
