242
THE
WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN
bulk to Bone, which was the nearest port to the forward area, until
coastal tankers arrived, as ocean tankers could not be employed on
the task.
Bone was continually bombed, and the sea lines were set
on fire twice and a tanker holed in 36 places by near misses.
Other
losses were sustained at Bougie.
Although tankers arrived fairly
regularly many losses were sustained on the high seas, as in the case
of one convoy when two ships were sunk, four were damaged by
enemy action but managed to make Algiers and one, also damaged,
limped back to its home port.
To make matters worse, three ships
containing petrol cargoes were shut out altogether from the same
convoy.
Rehabilitation of plant and equipment went on steadily but took
time.
Tanks and pipelines which had been previously used for
alcohol had to be
classed as being irremediably contaminated,
while installations which had not been in use for some time were
difficult to clean satisfactorily before the RASC petroleum chemists
were satisfied that motor or aviation spirit could be stored in them
without any risk to vehicle or aircraft engines.
Preparation for the Final Phase
The first task of 18 Army Group was, so far as the First Army was
concerned, to sort out the position of American, British and French
formations which had become intermingled as the result of the
enemy's attacks
around
Kasserine.
This was achieved by
allotment of distinct sectors to each of the three corps (V British,
XIX French and II American) and the gradual concentration of
their troops within the new boundaries.
By early March the army
Norther insa, the American I Corps in Central Tunisia and
group was disposed into First Army (V and French XIX Corps) in
the Eighth Army
facing
the enemy in Southern
Corps Headquarters which had arrived from home was placed in
reserve with
6th Armoured Division and the American 34th
Division under command.
Even so it was not
possible to make a complete regroupment.
For example I AGRA had to be left with the French corps, and an
RASC artillery company allotted for its maintenance, and a pool
of general transport had also to be provided for the French in the
form of a headquarters of a transport column with general transport,
troop carrying and ambulance units.
column had to be
provided
Philippeville
to Constantine,
advanced bases were being established, the column also controlling
the American convoys which were working on the same route,
An average of 700 tons of American stores was lifted by the British
column daily.
NORTH AFRICA
243
Intensive efforts had to be made to build up the reserves of food
wanted at the new advanced base at Constantine and in the army
area at a time when the strength of the force was increasing rapidly.
Conditions at the base depots had greatly improved with better
the arrival of more supply
units from home
and the
provision of some hutted accommodation.
But the two problems
of preventing pilferage and of how to deal with the never-ending
flow of broken packages remained a constant bugbear.
The flow of broken cases became so great that the organizations
which had been set up to repair and recase the hundreds of tons
which arrived damaged could not keep pace, and loose tins had to
be sent forward to DIDs in any form of basket or sack which could
be obtained locally.
The 2,000-ton food reserve for the advanced base was completed
by March 25th, and smaller reserves were also in position at or
close to all railheads in the army area by the same time.
The First Army was to be supplied through railheads at La Calle,
Souk el Arba, Souk Ahras and Le Kef.
Supply to La Calle was by
narrow gauge railway from Bone, supplemented by small coasters
and landing craft.
Souk el Arba and Souk Ahras depended on the
broad gauge railway and road transport from Bone.
ance of Le Kef was by narrow gauge and road via Tebessa.
DIDs and some artillery composite platoons were provided to look
after reserves and act as railhead supply detachments, and four and
a half bakeries were provided to make the army self-contained
By the end of April the feeding strength had risen to 360,000,
most of whom were British troops, as by that time the Americans
had taken over the maintenance of most of their own troops.
The French had maintenan zone d'étapes, and the American II
Corps relied on their advanced base at Constantine which was
supplied from Philippeville, forward supply being by narrow gauge
to Tebessa and onwards by road.
All railheads were to be moved forward as soon as the situation
allowed, the V Corps railhead to Oued Zarga, IX Corps to Medjez.
el Bab, and XIX Corps to Bou Arada.
Two DIDs were held ready
to operate in Tunis and Bizerta when those towns were captured.
The period leading up to the final offensive was also a busy one
for the British and American petroleum organizations in achieving
their object of having over 180,000 tons of spirit in place before the
battle began.
About half the quantity was to be held at the bases
and half divided over an advanced base and the forward area.
The first step was to stock an advanced depot at El Guerrah about
18 miles south of Constantine.
The depot was staffed by a base
petrol filling centre early in March, and stocks were built up at a
