360
BURMA AND CEYLON
in the theatre, and the RIASC was more and more closely associated
with the RASC.
There was a much closer liaison between the
two directorates in London and Delhi, marked by the exchange of
senior liaison officers.
A RASC officer was DDT at GHQ, India,
during 1943-44, and after him another became DDS (POL).
A RASC officer was sent out from ST I, War Office,
to the
Indian Directorate, to help in organizing the growing water transport
service of the RIASC.
A CRASC water transport unit, with a boat
stores depot, and a harbour launch company, went out as what
would have been the advance guard of a considerable body of water
transport units for employment with SEAC which was being prepared
This included units of an entirely new type,
such as an ambulance launch company, and a floating workshop
company for the repair of craft and amphibians; but the sudden end
of the war in the Far East prevented the despatch of these units.
The RIASC at length, after a delay of more than two years,
adopted the standard component organization of supply and trans-
port units which had been introduced into the British, Dominion,
and colonial Army Service
Corps in 1941, and had proved so
successful. It was equally so in the Indian Corps.
Headquarters transport columns, for the command of groups of
half a dozen of the many Indian transport companies working on
the ro as entween Dimapur and Mandalay, began to arrive in the
theatre in the early part of 1945.
The flow of RASC supply units
to Are the eat a began in January, 1945, and some 30 supply
platoons and other units had left the United Kingdom by the middle
of the year; but not many were actually employed in the theatre
before the end of the war with Japan.
The POL units began to g
out earlier, and at the end of the war there were three companies, a
dozen platoons, and some technical units serving in SEAG, besides
those previously mentioned.
As a footnote to this story of the work of the RASC in a theatre
predominante to sphere of the RASC, it may be observed that,
after India was granted her independence in 1947, a considerable
number of British officers of the RIASC was absorbed into
RASC; and so it may be said that union of the two Corps was
eventually achieved, but it had been to a great extent effective
throughout the war wherever they had worked together.
Ceylon at Peace
Before the war. the Cevlon garrison consisted of an artillery
regiment, with ancillary troops.
The regiment had batteries at
Colombo, Dyatalawa and Trincomalee.
Apart from these three
361
stations there were no troops of any sort except that, during the hot
season in Colombo,
Headquarters Ceylon Garrison moved from
Colombo to Nuwara Eliya, a hill station.
The military command of
the island was vested in a brigadier.
The RASC representation was two officers (a major and captain),
seven other ranks, and a few civilian employees.
The major, in
addition to his Corps duties, usually functioned as DAQMG, while
the captain, in addition to ST & B normal duties, acted as adjutant
to the Ceylon Army Service Corps.
The CASC were part of the
Ceylon Defence Force, which was more or less of Territorial Army
status, that is, it carried Regular British Army instructors and
periodically
attended drills
and summer camps.
The
Ceylon
Defence Force was a composite force equivalent to approximately a
British brigade.
On the outhreak of hostilities, the Defence Force was mobilized,
but as Ceylon at that time was unaffected by the war, partial
demobilization took place soon afterwards.
Several officers of the
CASC remained embodied, however, and two of them (a major
and captain) took over the duties of the two RASC regular officers
who were ordered to the
United Kingdom.
These two officers
(one located at Colombo and one at Trincomalee), with the assist-
ance of three Regular warrant officers and non-commissioned
officers of the RASC, carried on the whole of the Corps duties in
the island until May, 1940, when a Regular quartermaster, RASG,
arrived from Singapore.
in the Cevlon establishment which had been aeked for just before
This posting was to implement an increase
the war.
The officer was intended as Officer in charge of Barracks,
the duties
Ceylon.
In fact he had,
in addition,
to assume
officer in
charge of transport,
and
embarkation
staff officer.
Embarkation duties at that time were still the responsibility of the
the port of
Corps in overseas stations, and, with a war in progress,
Colombo was a hive of activity and the duties were fairly onerous.
Supplies for the island were demanded direct from the War Office
hired, and
and shipped to
Colombo.
Transport
extensive hiring was essential at Trincomalee in connection with the
extension of the naval base there.
Barrack duties were continued
as in peacetime, the same system of accounting being maintained.
Early in 1941, consequent upon a decision
to use
Trincomalee
as a transhipment port for
Australian forces on their way to
the Middle Fast, it was found necessary to form a movements
branch for Ceylon.
ence of movements was the RASC quartermaster who had been
The only officer in the island with any experi-
with the pre-war embarkation establishment at Southampton.
was entrusted with the task of forming Movement Control, Ceylon,
and became the first staff captain (movements) Cevlon, in February,
