416
THEJR.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Operation 'Dynamo"
Within a few weeks there were other urgent calls on both the
supply and the transport organizations in commands for the priority
operation known as 'Dynamo', the withdrawal of the BEF from
France.
The
main function of this operation at home was to
remove inland the thousands of men who were being landed at the
south coast ports.
This had to be done as rapidly as possible for,
apart from the need to reform the many shattered units at once, it
was vital to avoid delay, as it was feared that the enemy might try
to follow up his success by heavy bombing attacks on the south coast
ports and on the railways leading from them.
Not only was transport needed for carrying the fit and the unfit
to entraining points and from detraining points to reception centres,
but also considerable reserves of transport had to be assembled to
continue movements which might be interrupted by enemy action
against the main railway arteries.
shown by all units was
An instance of the adaptability
the temporary "mobilizing" of a fleet of
about 2,000 civil motorcoaches and buses by the M'T Stores Depot,
RASC, a unit which was normally concerned with the holding and
issuing of stocks and not with the operation of transport.
The unexpected return of some 300,000 additional mouths to be
fed was taken in its stride by the supply organization, but operation
"Dynamo' was to be an excellent test of the newly formed catering
organization which by this time had grown sufficiently to be repre-
sented at the War Office by a branch of its own under the DST.
There were few men who did not arrive both hungry and thirsty,
but as speed in moviny, the men inland was essential, the general
plan was based on providing each man as he arrived with a snack
meal and something to drink and then of providing more solid fare
at halting places, outside the immediate coastal evacuation zone, on
the way to the reception areas.
There were 14 of these haling places, and the people to staff
them were gathered from Army schools, depots, ete., and elsewhete,
while an appeal, most generously met,
had been made to
various voluntary organizations, such as the WVS and YMCA, to
lend a hand in providing hot drinks and cuting sandwiches, each
At one point
alone wrote eithin aharge of a ete died in a hours and, an the
organization got into its stride, the meals provided were supplene
ted with hard boiled eges and a ration of cigarettes and matches,
NAAFT rose to the occasion and among other things produced
120,000 bags of fruit and chocolate.
The arrival of unexpectedly large numbers of French troye
meant a hasty whip reund to produce a ration suitable to thei
GENERAL SURVEY
419
taste.
The provision of the food required was soon arranged but
finding the daily quota of red wine which every good French soldier
expects was a different matter.
However, an immediate appeal by
the War Office Wine Adviser* to the wine trade produced casks of
the desired 'vintage', although the suppliers knew well that the
stocks would be irreplaceable.
Although, apart from
the hard work and additional effort
required, the return of the BEF was easily dealt with by the supply
organization, the possibility of the United Kingdom becoming an
area of active operations clearly indicated the need for adjusting
the existing system of messing to one suited to active service condi-
tions, and for expanding the policy of making commands more self
contained for supplies in the event of any given area being isolated
in consequence of the landing of large numbers of enemy airborne
troops on a large scale.
To the supply branch at the War Office it
was a case of 'an ill wind', as they had before the war pressed
strongly for the replacement of the peacetime 'cash' system of
messing by one more practically related to war conditions, Reserves
in commands were immediately increased and then backed up by
the establishment of nine large new depots, sited strategically
throughout the country.
These, thanks to the efforts of the two
supply reserve depots and of the Ministry of Food, were stocked
with 11 million rations by July,
Possibly at no time in our history has the country been faced
with such imminent danger as during the months which followed the
reverse in France.
There was no time to be lost in reforming and
re-equipping the Army.
The returning RASC men were first
directed to the newly formed RASC mobilization centres which
were specially designed to raise, equip and organize RASC units,
These centres, which were unique in Army organization, immedi-
ately set about re-forming units and, when these were sufficiently
organized, passing them back to the care of the division or other
formation from which they originally came.
The most serious aspect of the return of the BE was the loss of
equipment, particularly of weapons,
So heavy was this loss that a
special branch of the War Office General Staff had to be formed to
control supply and priority of issue.
Fortunately the re-equipment
Of RASC units with their particular need, the vehice, although by
no means an easy task, had been helped by plans for new production
and by the continuance of the impressment scheme (as an example,
16,ooó vehicles and 4,000 motorcyeles were procured and issued
between August 6th and 16th, 1940).
By the end of June five divi too were deemed to be sufficiently
In By eust a member of the vine teade acts as honorary advier to DST, Wat
Office, on the provisen of spirits and wines.
DI RAMI
