550
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
but firm, wound up its side. Over the top the track dropped into
a little valley which would do well for a halting place or could
even be used as a forward company site.
The area was not over-
looked, and from this valley the track rose steeply again up another
mountain.
Near the top of this was another little valley, just the
place for a dumping site for the forward troops who were over the
top facing the enemy not the length of a football pitch away.
The
'carry', subject to the strict maintenance of silence, proper spacing
and careful timing, could be performed in daylight.
That night the main body of the group
-five companies moved
forward to mule-head.
This term 'mule-head' was especially apt
for the new location which the company commander had selected,
as the lines consisted of tier upon tier of mules facing outward from
the hill so that anyone looking up the mountain-side saw nothing
but row upon row of mules' faces.
Mule-head was called 'Skipton',
and from there the lift was to a dump in the first valley known as
'Harrogate'. Here loads were re-sorted according to various needs.
Gunners, sappers and signals all gave a willing hand before the
next lift to the final destination, which was a small valley just out
of sight of the enemy, but within easy reach of the forward troops
facing the enemy on the top of the adjoining hill.
This most forward
spot was referred to as 'Cheshire'.
As it was a dangerous spot,
mules were only brought to it in small groups to have their loads
shed and be sent back immediately.
Here the RASC supply
officer made his headquarters and, in the interval of manning his
Bren gun, checked the loads as they came in.
Although the tracks used were not in the enemy's view, effective
mortar fire was occasionally brought to bear on them.
This
always seemed to occur when there was a relief between companies.
This was noticed throughout the campaign, and many attributed
it to fifth columnists, but the truth is that however carefully a newly
arrived unit is briefed, it does not possess the sixth sense about
the enemy's characteristics and intentions that develops in an
experienced unit.
Little things such as a sudden shout, smoke
from a fire which should not have been lit, or careless exposure, can
attract the undesirable attention of a suspicious and active enemy,
There were many examples of the effects of this lack of a sixth
sense.
At one time, as casualties grew and rest was needed, the
Within an
group commander moved up a fresh relief company.
hour of the change a heavy barrage of both shell and mortar came
down, causing the loss of one officer, 17 men and go animals.
Lack of experience was also the cause of many gaps in the ranks
of the units, and unfortunately experience could only be gained in
the hard way. On one accation a newly joined young officer,
* The late Lieutenant Maurice Irving, who lies buried in Minturno military cemetery.
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
keen to lead his troops into action for the first time, was detailed to
carry up a load of mortar bombs to a commando with express
instructions to hand over his load and return before sunrise.
Delayed by the change-over of an infantry battalion, he was still
determined to fulfil his task; but dawn found the troops still climbing.
When the commando was reached, he was told to get back at once,
but by then it was too late.
He was killed in trying to extricate his
troop.
Although life at 'Skipton' was rough, and accommodation consisted
of two-men bivouacs and slit trenches, the early training in North
Africa was shown to have been worthwhile.
It was rare to see a
man without his chin strap brightly polished, and that essential
sign of cleanliness in pack transport saddlery kept well soaped
and supple-
-was in evidence throughout.
This innate cleanliness
meant that when a formal occasion arose the units were able to show
themselves to the best advantage.
had only been relieved the day before.
of the site for weeks.
it is believed, further heightened when, after accepting an invitation
'conscript' when the unit was first formed in North Africa.
to be relieved.
division until its own pack units arrived.
scared one they seemed to do everything that might attract the
enemy's attention, leaving lights blazing, blowing up rocks,
thought they must be 'hearing things', for not a shell dropped for
days. Truly a quiet ending to the first adventure of the group in
Italy.
Cassino
So many other writers have described the country round Cassino
and the battle there, that litte more need be said than that it
provided the sort of conditions where pack transport could be used
to the best advantage.
on either side,
The narrow gorge with precipitous mountains
the monastery,
which was a perfect observation
point looming over the gorge and menacing the winding valley
