to improve the soldier's lot.
Their efforts were duly rewarded, as
with the help of the new policy which was followed after 1930 to
make army life more attractive, financial agreement was obtained,
after protracted negotiations, to provide a fourth supper meal in the
daily diet, to the grant of extra messing allowances to small units,
and to a revision of the methods of assessing individuals' ration
The introduction of a 'supper meal' was aptly recorded
in Punch by the portrayal of the then Secretary of State (Mr. Duff
Cooper) 'angling for his supper'.
The improvements which were made in the training and status of
cooks and their pay and conditions of service followed gradually and
are described separately at the end of this section.
When the Government decided in 1934 that the nation would
have to begin to rearm, QMG 6, as the branch at the War Office
which was responsible for both food and petrol supply, had to lay the
foundations of their arrangements on what was almost virgin soil.
The existing field service ration scale was out of date; the productive
capacity of the food manufacturing industry to produce the large
stocks which would be needed for a field force was untested, and
there was little storage space available for holding reserves.
The usual practice of expanding the peace organization, to pro-
duce the units required for a field force, could not be followed, as the
few supply units which existed at home were units in name only, and
the reserve of trained officers and men which could be drawn on
on mobilization was known to be quite inadequate.
The creation of a petroleum supply organization meant breaking
completely fresh ground, as there was not even a peace nucleus on
which to build or any settled policy regarding the requirements of
the forces to be supplied or the methods which should be adopted
for distribution in a theatre of war.
Any petrol wanted by the Army
in peacetime was provided by civil contract, and when the question
of supply in the field had been considered a few years before the
order to rearm, there was an open difference of opinion on whether
distribution should be by special bulk tanker or by utilizing a small
Nearly all the preparatory measures to be taken to provide food
and petrol if war came involved fairly heavy expenditure, and before
any plan was accepted it was necessary to get the agreement of the
financial departments in the War Office, and, when that was ob-
tained, the projects had to receive Treasury sanction.
The latter process was hastened by the institution of a Treasury
Inter-Service Committee, known as TISC, which allowed of each
project being discussed 'round a table' and decisions given, or
SUPPLIES
35
deferred, on the spot. But even when the Treasury agreed to a
project, the executive action which had to follow was again subject
to the scrutiny of the War Office financial branches.
The procedure
often resulted in the military branches having to devote what ap-
peared to them to be an undue proportion of time and energy on
matters of financial detail at a time when their staff was very small
and rather overworked and when they had many other military respon-
sibilities to perform.
The general effect was, therefore, to increase the
concern of the military branch that plans might not be completed in
time, that supply to the field force might be jeopardized, and also,
perhaps less important, that the good name of their service might be
impugned.
The first step taken by QMG 6 in connection with food supply
was to redesign the field service ration which,
operative for so many years, was outmoded in relation to changes in
social outlook and food manufacturing technique since the end of the
A new scale which was more in keeping with modern
nutritional practices was prepared and it included a complete range
of tinned or preserved foods to replace the old 'hard fare' which used
to be issued when fresh food could not be distributed.
An opportunity to test the new scale came soon afterwards when
it was agreed that the small force which was to take part in the Saar
plebiscite should be provided with it.
For once there were no
financial demurs, as any additional costs incurred were not to fall on
The test was so successful that the new ration was accepted as the
basic active service scale of the future, but the difficulty of obtaining
the components of the ration in a reasonable time made it clear that
considerable stocks would have to be held in
peacetime if the
maintenance of a field force of any size were to be assured.
But
there was a general feeling at that time that food was abundant and
that stocks for the forces which would have to take the field could be
obtained easily when war came.
Imperial Defence beran to examine national food defence measures,
the emphasis was laid on price control and the avoidance of inflation
rather than on stockpiling as, in the Admiralty's view, there would
be no serious interference with our imports.
ance of food was reflected in its cheapness.
Office could provide the best quality imported meat for 42d. a lb,
and the average price of bread was a id. a lib.
However, QMG 6 pressed their case with the General Staff, who
recognized the importance of holding a reserve and,
support, authority was received to spend £250,000 on purchasing
a 3o days' reserve for 170,000 men.
30 days' reserve was insufficient for maintaining the force and for
