514
*AIR DESPATCH
necessary to form a supply dump.
However, there was still the
question of ground transport to bring all the 'bits and pieces' of the
organization together.
For this purpose a pool of general transport
companies, under a CRASC, was made available in the area of the
airfields.
This pool grew to six companies of four platoons each.
The whole of this organization was controlled by DST War Office,
through ST 3, where a control room was set up in which the latest
position in stocks and transport availability was constantly main-
tained.
Here all information regarding supply and maintenance
by air was available and all supply and transport activities con-
nected with them were co-ordinated.
There was also a small movement control organization set up by
the RAF at the Air Freight Control Centre, for dealing with their
own supply by air, and what was known
as 'Schedule Supply
by Air', a limited regular service with which the RASC had little
to do.
While the air despatch organization was being built up,
there
also existed in the vicinity of the same airfields an organization for
the maintenance by air of airborne troops.
This consisted of two
air composite companies, RASC (one from each airborne division)
controlled directly by DDST Airborne Troops, with an extremely
limited staff.
These airborne companies were not organized on a
special establishment as were the air despatch companies, but were
each composed of a headquarters,
three transport platoons,
relief driver increments, a composite platoon,
and a workshops
platoon.
The drivers in the transport platoons and relief driver
increments were intended to drive to the airfields with their lorries
loaded with stores, to load aircraft, accompany the stores in flight,
despatch them from the air, and then return to their airfields and
their lorries and drive the latter 'home'.
This was a heavy day's
work, but even if it could be accomplished,
the strength of the
companies was insufficient to produce more than a maximum
50 four-man
crews.
The daily
maintenance
for
one
division
amounted to 270 tons, requiring at least 135 aircraft,
and so it
was obvious that these companies, by themselves, would be insuf.
cient for any big airborne operation.
Consequently, at the end of
June, 1914, DDST Airborne Troops asked DST for help from the
air despatch organization.
The first result of this was the creation
of a second CRASC Air Despatch to exercise, under DDST Airborne
each of
direct control over the two airborne companies,
which had a large five-day dump of packed stores.
The second
result was that the two organizations, which were performing almost
identical functions, were pooled, and placed under a local com
mander (colonel), known as 'Commander, Air Despatch
RASC.
The War Dome the underek, responsibility for
AIR DESPATCH
515
maintenance by air of all formations, ground and airborne, including
Special Air Service.
The new group consisted of 48 Air Despatch (the original organiza-
tion set up for ground troops), 49 Air Despatch (the headquarters
originally given to DDST Airborne Troops, to look after the two
airborne companies), and 53 War Office Transport Column (the
transport mentioned as necessary to carry ammunition, supplies
and stores from depots to air despatch's own 'cushion dumps' and
from these to aircraft).
The Commander was also made administra-
tively responsible for 17 Ordnance Beach Detachment, and had
under command 389 Company Pioneer Corps.
This was the final
shape of the organization which came into being on August 18th,
1944.
It will be seen, therefore, that it did not take many weeks for
the whole arrangement to be thought out, tried and given its final form.
The Story of Air Despatch in Europe
From the day it started, air despatch never had a dull moment.
There were emergency calls for supplies for liberated French
territories, special deliveries of fuel to the Americans, air maintenance
of forces in the operations in the Falaise Gap and on Walcheren
island, and stand-by jobs for the British and the Americans on the
German frontier. Finally, supplies were delivered by air to the
hard-pressed population of northern Holland when the Canadian
Army turned quickly north-west again to drive out the invaders
(this operation was cut short by the final surrender, but it still left
the need for air supply for hungry people). All these tasks, super-
imposed on the daily programme Yor 2 Army Group, the continu-
ance of the air drops to the Special Air Service Brigade and the
French resistance tros to and Spe shalt ir eic but slorious affair of
Arnhem, kept all concerned with air despatch constantly alert.
Towards the end of Augusth air as the campaign in France
developed, the demand for emergency supply grew very rapidly.
After the fall of Paris, a daily lift of 500 tons of flour and other food
was in operation for 14 days in ofder o feed the civil population.
The Transport Column was also called upon for provision of up to
300 vehicled at a time. at very short antee to transport specially
packed supplies to airfields for delivery by air to the French Forces
of the Interior and other patriot forces.
This was no new service.
For a long time air supply had been used for providing the resistance
groups with material, just as it had been used for parachuting the
men of the Special Air Service Brigade.
were arms and ammunition.
The main items of supply
One or two air despatch crews were
in the air every night on this duty.
Theirs was an exciting task,
and strangely enough the casualties involved were lighter than in
any other air supply operations,
mainly because the work was
