154
THE MIDDLE EAST I
Tripoli was located at Nofilia, 350 miles from Tripoli.
From there
reserves were drawn up for the final advance of this stage of the
campaign.
In general, the plan was that 5ist Division, having forced the
crossing of the Wadi, was to advance on foot up the coast route,
while 2nd New Zealand Division and 7th Armoured Division were
to cross the Wadi or get round it on the left and approach Tripoli
from the south.
In reserve was 22nd Armoured Brigade under the
personal control of the Army Commander.
The distance between
Wadi Zem Zem and Tripoli was 180 miles.
The administrative
plan was normal second line supply in the first place, together with
the rapid establishment by third line of 112 FMC at Beni Oulid,
south-east of Tripoli,
from which the final assault on the town
could be made.
Things rarely go according to plan, and still less
so when every formation, and indeed every unit commander, is
determined that his troops will be the first into Tripoli.
Everyone
galloped, including 5ist Division, and what devices they resorted to
in order to cover the distance are still somewhat of a mystery.
was
during
this
advance
with 5Ist Division that
Captain
T.
O'Connor, 25 Company RASC, won an immediate Military Cross.
The speed of this advance could easily have resulted in an administra
tive crisis had not the third line units been equally determined to
achieve the goal.
The speed at which 1I2 FMC was established
was one of the achievements of which XXX Corps Troops might
well be proud, particularly in view of the difficulty of the inter-
mediate terrain.
But
Tripoli had been captured Tripoli, the
dream for months and indeed years, of those veterans who so often
before had advanced half way to their objective, only to be thrown
back again to their starting point, if not farther.
For their part in
this victory the RASC drivers were commended by General Mont-
gomery in his special Order of the Day: 'I would like to make a
special mention of our RASC drivers; these men drive long distances
by day and night for long periods; they always deliver the goods.
The RASC has risen to great heights during the operations we have
undertaken, and as a Corps it deserves the grateful thanks of every
soldier in the Army'.
Tripoli and the build-up for the next phase
The Capture of Tripoli ended another phase of the campaign
A light coverine force with mobile long range patrols covered th
western approaches in the direction of Mareth.
The main tasks
for the moment were the reorganizing and re-equipping of the Arn
the opening un of Trinoli as a port, and the establishment of yet
another army base.
This re-equipping presented many a problem.
The distance from the great Middle Fast base of the Delta was
THE MIDDLE EAST I
155
considerable.
Maintenance by road was out of the question.
Supply by sea was limited by the number of craft available and by
the port facilities of the already heavily bombed Tripoli.
The wear
and tear of the RASC vehicles in all echelons in the advance from
El Alamein was very great. Apart from the distances and mileage
covered, sand was the great enemy.
The speed of the advance had
been such that any comprehensive engine changing programme had
been out of the question; cylinder wear had raised oil consumption
to a startling figure.
It was approximately another 1,000 miles to
Tunis.
There was no possibility of replacement vehicles becoming
available, but to Tunis the Army was going.
It was decided to
set up a repair organization at various civil factories in Tripoli to
which all RASC
workshops would contribute men.
Through
these establishments would pass every suspect vehicle to be doc-
tored'.
From the technical point of view, serious crimes were
committed.
Nevertheless all credit is due to the workshop platoons
and to the Chief Inspector Mechanical Transports' representatives
who were mainly responsible for the organization and supervision
of the undertaking.
Supplies of small parts were flown from the
Delta and Tobruk, others were collected from garages in Tripoli.
The proof of the pudding was in the eating.
Most of those same
vehicles eventually completed the African campaign.
If rumour is
correct, 5Ist (Highland) Division were so attached to these vehicles
that some of them are reported to have been taken to Sicily and to
have completed that campaign.
The base at Tripoli was a pleasant one, and it was good to see
something green again.
Tripoli harbour looked big
and well
developed even if it had been bombed.
There was a real town,
although there was precious little in it, and there was time to rest
and think. A cheering item was the sudden unexpected arrival of
and inspection by Mr. Winston Churchill.
It was during this phase of rest that an extraordinary incident
occurred which illustrates the uncertainty of war.
It entailed the
death of an RASC staff captain of Eighth Army.
Rear Army HQ
was situated under bivouac conditions on the extreme outskirts of
Tripoli-it was almost desert.
As a protection against the icy winds
at night some men had pitched their bivvies in a wadi.
Like all
wadis in the desert it was dry and dusty.
But one night a cloud-
burst occurred many miles distant, the wadi was apparently one of
the natural drains in this area, and by the time the water had
reached Eighth Army location it was almost a raging torrent, but
confined strictly to this one narrow little wadi.
All the bivvies of
the occupants of this wadi were washed away, and the unfortunate
staff captain, unable to disentangle himself, was drowned in the
middle of the desert.
