174
THE MIDDLE EAST II
attack launched at an early date.
March 21st had been fixed as
the date for the final attack.
To relieve the division would have
meant the cessation of dumping and the postponement of the attack
to a much later date-in all a vicious circle.
The weather was
becoming hotter, and the troops committed in this campaign were
sorely needed in the Western Desert.
It was therefore decided to
quicken the dumping programme and attack on March 15th.
This
decision called for drastic measures.
All possible ist and and line
vehicles of both divisions were used.
The move forward of 5th
Division was delayed as late as possible to enable it to free its
transport for dumping.
The camel convoy was increased, and the
turn round of vehicles between Kassala and the dumps was reduced
from four days to three and the consequent lack of time for mainten-
ance accepted.
It was only by a hastily arranged delivery of springs
by air from South Africa that the Cape vehicles were kept on the
road.
By these measures a difficult administrative problem was solved,
and by March gth the dumping programme was completed, with
the exception of 350 tons of petrol.
By
March 14th a 40-mile
extension of the railway from Kassala had been completed.
The
relief afforded by this link was considerable, and the rapidity of its
construction an outstanding feat of the Sudan Railways.
During this period special arrangements had been instituted for
the delivery of fresh fruit and vegetables to forward troops.
the distances involved the normal system resulted in such food, an
essential item of diet, rotting before it reached the troops.
provision of European
type vegetables was itself a considerable
problem in a country where previously only a handful of Europeans
had lived.
But this had been foreseen by the ADST HQ Troops
Sudan.
With the ever ready help of the Sudan Government many
acres of the Gezira, the area between the White and Blue Niles
south of Khartoum,
had been planted during the 1939-40 winter
with suitable vegetables under arrangements made by the Sudan
Agricultural Department.
Fruit and vegetables were therefore now
available from the growing area and were despatched, packed in
ice in special railway trucks, to arrive at railhead in
the early
morning.
They were then immediately off-loaded into Cape Corps
vehicles which ran direct to supply refilling points.
The average
number of lorries required for this task was five to six daily.
troops thus received the vitamina so badly needed in the climate in
which they were fighting.
Fresh meat-
especially male goats for
the Indians
-was fortunately available in sufficient quantities in the
area around Kamala and was provided by local purchase,
was baked by
an
bakery at Agordat.
Indian bakery unit in a former italian cil
THE SUDAN AND ERITREA
175
Between March ist and 28th some 16,000 tons of supplies,
ammunition, petrol, etc., were moved forward by road, that is,
550 tons a day. The transport available consisted of 480 Cape
Corps vehicles, of which at least one-third were always off the road
for lack of springs and tyres, the second line vehicles of 4th and gth
Indian Divisions, and part of the SDF MT Company.
There were
no replacement vehicles.
The men of a company known as S had
arrived in February from Egypt, the intention being for it to be
equipped with captured Italian vehicles.
This was a failure for
precisely the same reasons as a similar optimistic project failed in
the Western Desert most of the vehicles were casualties.
Out of
a 100 possibles only 14 were starters, and only one of these did not
have to be towed to start.
When this eventually broke down the
company had no runners.
The Fall of Keren
The battle of Keren lasted 12 days, from March 15th to a7th.
The battlefield was a tumbled mass of formidable hills swelteringly
hot by day and miserably cold at night. The enemy was superior
in numbers and fought well.
The issue was long in doubt, but the
British and Indian troops were not to be denied in spite of heavy
casualties.
positions
On March 27th white flags appeared in all the enemy
and the
victory was complete.
The fighting
troops
merited the highest praise; the administrative services could bo
proud of their achievement.
While forward troops were denied
luxuries, they at no time lacked ementials.
The policy was 'guns
not butter'.
With the fall of Keren the advance was immediately continued,
now only by 5th Indian Division, as 4th Indian Division was to
move back to Egypt, where it was badly needed,
The administra
live relicf afforded by the withdrawal of one division was balanced
to a large extent by the extended lines of communication and it was
vital that the port of Mawawa should be captured as soon as pomible.
After a short check at Ad Teclasan, between Keren and Asmara, the
advance continued.
leading troops of 5th Indian Division and
The Italians sent a party forward to meet the
declared Asmara an
open town.
The capital was occupied on April ist, while the rem-
nants of the Italian force vetreated east to Massawa and south on
two roads towards Gondar and Addis Ababa,
The news was
conveyed to Khartoum in a signal which read "Asmara captured,
this is nor repeat nor an April fool?
Although the maintenance of active operations againat Mama
was now the main administative commitment, the feeding of the
burde ropeans and 40,000 natives of Asmara was a serious aditat
Fresh milk had to be flown in from the Budan for the
