494
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
officers with little training were given a thorough, if rapid, course
of Corps duties, technical and military, and later, officer cadet
training units of the pattern familiar to all arms were set up, to
which promising potential officers were sent from the ranks of the
training battalions and of all units which had such men to recom-
mend.
The RASC OCTU soon established a name for itself, and
great credit is due to the initial propounder of the scheme, Colonel
H. R. Kerr (later Major-General Sir Reginald Kerr who was DST
at the end of the war), the Commandant, RASC Training Centre,
and to the early commanders of the Officer Producing Unit and
the OCTU: Colonels H. M. Hinde, E. S. Unwin, C. E. Browne,
J. E. Witt, R. H. Elliot, C. E. Bowden, and M. S. Farquharson-
Roberts.
These officers set a standard which gave the Corps an
excellent intake of officers at a time when all other sources of
training had ceased to function.
But there was still something lacking.
The Director of Organiza-
tion could find the men, the training brigades could lick them into
shape, the OPU could furnish a capable officer cadre,
but the
DiST of home commands ho were initially held responsible for
the preparation of complete units for war service were manifestly
in no position to do this indefinitely, with depleted staffs and
increased commitments in every direction.
The DST (Major-
General M. S. Brander) and the Inspector of the RASC (Major-
General R. T. Snowden-Smith) remembered the 'ASC Mobiliza-
tion and Training Centre' located at Bulford during the First
World War, where a picked headquarters and staff "processed'
forming units by allotting accommodation, arranging all services,
issuing them with training equipment and, later, full mobilization
equipment, and generally fathering them until they were fit to
stand on the own feet and eventually to proceed to a theatre of
There was little known precedent of which to build, but
AG 8 knew what was required and produced a scheme and a draft
establishment, authority being sought to set up one Mobilization
Control Centre, RASC.
The scheme was new ground' to the
War Fetahlichments Committee. who took much persuading to
convince them of its necessity.
Eventually a reduced establish-
Mobilization Control
ment of four officers and to other ranks was agreed upon and No. 1
Centre,
Ramsgate
RASC, was ordered to form at
Colonel E. C. Pinder.
on Novemher goth. 10g0, under the command of
The plan was for AG 8 to post small but experienced cadres of
officers and men for a maximum of 20 units.
These units would
gradually be comoleted to war establishment by postings from the
output of the training battalions.
Mobilization Centre,
The part of the Commandant,
was to
arrange for units' reception
MANPOWER
495
accommodation, to help them over their teething troubles and,
when mobilization was ordered, to ensure that they received all
their equipment and were fit to take their part in the field force.
These tasks, simple though they sound, concealed a potential morass
of problems, great and small, for every unit and, multiplied 20
times to cover all units on hand at any one time, proved far too
much for the small centre staff permitted.
The first difficulty was that all the important cadres had, for
lack of any other source, to be provided in the main from TA units
low in the order of priority.
The officers and NCOs, willing and
hard working though they were, just had not the experience to raise
successfully a unit ab initio.
In particular the CQMSs were com-
pletely at sea.
The Commandant and his one DADST valiantly
tackled the task but it must be freely admitted that AG 8 had no
conception of what was involved until the AAG went down to see
for himself. On return his first instructions were for a new Com-
mandant and a new DADST to be ready 'in case the present
incumbents went mad'.
Indeed, bitter experience showed that the original establishment,
even before pruning, was barely adequate, so that when the War
Establishments Committee was approached for increases, these
were granted almost without argument.
Demands from the BEF and the Middle East Command now
became so great that another mobilization control centre became a
necessity.
Later, the output from training units matured before
there were units in which to put them, so it was decided to raise
units in anticipation.
In all, three more centres were formed,
No. 2 at Burford (Colonel T. W. Richardson), No. 3 at Guildford
(Colonel H. A. Tapp), and No. 4 at Barry (Lieut-Colonel C.
Custance).
The last named centre was for supply and petrol units.
This locality was selected because excellent unit training facilities
existed at the Supply Reserau Depol, Barry, at Llandarcy oil
refinery, and at the oil berths in Swansea Harbour.
Mention has already been made of the difficulty of providing
experienced cadres for new units.
It was therefore suggested to
and agreed by the DST BEF (Brigadier G. K. Archibald) that the
force should supply from their trained resources a number of
capable officers and men and should accept in replacement private
soldier reinforcements from the United Kingdom.
This worked
well, except for the obdurate scarcity of trained CQMSs.
The only
solution was to run special courses to train many of these.
When the evacuation from Dunkirk began, mobilization control
centres were filled with men of all arms, most being separated from
their own commanders and officers.
These in time returned to
their own units, whee locate d, and were replaced by RASC men.
