70
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
ingenuity. It was a strange position for the RASC, as they were
called upon to do the very thing which the Corps had been created
to obviate—the army 'living on the country'.
On May 2ist the staff and services of GHQ at Wimereux were
ordered to join the QMG at Dunkirk.
Some of the ST directorate
reached their new destination.
But the appearance of enemy tanks
at Boulogne cut off the remainder who were evacuated to England
humiliating position for both directors and for the
DST at the War Office to have to accept that their combined
efforts to amass the 6o days' food for nearly 400,000 men and millions
of gallons of petrol and other fuel oils, which had been built up with
such difficulty on the lines of communication, were completely
stultified, and that they were powerless to make any fruitful use of
the reserves which were available in the home depots.
The vast stocks which remained in the depots on the lines of
communication were of course considerably in excess of the needs
of the few British troops left south of the Somme.
The story of how
they were disposed of must be left to later in this chapter.
Boulogne and Calais
General Weygand replaced General Gamelin in supreme com-
mand of the Allied forces on May 20th. Many discussions then
took place between the leaders of the three Governments regarding
the course of future action.
should stage a counter offensive to the south and that a fresh
regroupment of French
offensive from the south, across the Somme, came to nought, as it
was impossible to disengage sufficient divisions in time,
practicability of the plan for the French offensive was problematical.
By the 23rd the BEF were back to the frontier defences, the
original line which they occupied before the advance to the Dyle.
The new front was held by the 42nd, ist and grd Divisions, the
znd, 48th and later the 44th, being directed to stem the enemy on
the southern flank, the canals line.
The 5th and goth were still
near Arras, but on May 25th they had to be hastily moved up to
fill an impending gap on the left of the BEF, where the defence of
the Belgian Army was rapidly crumbling.
All hope of any counter
offensive had gone, and the next day it was decided that the Allied
Armies would have to withdraw to the coast.
Evacuation was the
only course left.
Meanwhile the War Office had lost no time in meeting the QMG's
request for emergency shipments to be directed to the three Channel
ports, as on the evening of the 2ist they were able to inform GHQ
that shipments of food, petrol and ammunition were already on their
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
way across the Channel and that these were being followed by
further consignments in ships, in the train ferry,
and even in
GHQ then issued a simple instruction for developing the
new hoped for line of supply, but made it clear to all formations
that for the time being they would have to rely on their own
Here it is of interest to record that the supply and petrol
branches at the War Office had many days before foreseen the
possibility of emergency shipments being needed, and had assembled
special emergency scales of food and stocks of petrol ready for
despatch to any port on the south coast.
Swift action had also been taken to reinforce the garrisons at
both Boulogne and Calais.
The 20th Guards Brigade and some
artillery left Dover for Boulogne on the 2ist, and a tank regiment
and brigade taken from the ist Armoured Division were hastily
despatched to Calais, but the enemy were at the very gates of both
Although both towns were gallantly defended and did not fall to
the enemy until the 24th and 25th, they were unusable as ports of
The first ships which approached
came under direct
enemy gun fire and, after some had been sunk or damaged, all craft
had to be diverted to Dunkirk or to home ports to await further
By the 25th the CRASC of most formations were already having a
struggle to keep their formations supplied, a struggle which can be
best illustrated by the short personal accounts which follow.
Corps Supply Column
effort.
*Once the Somme was cut, supply became a matter of individual
I sent out foraging parties under officers who were on the
go continually, and covered a considerable area,
results.
but with good
In one case, we found a local "Harrods",
where we
acquired everything which could be loaded on the vehicles available.
We also discovered a pork factory full of sides of dressed pork, and
other pig meats. By making a wide sweep we found parts of "ghost"
trains with some trucks still full of food.
No doubt some may have
been intended for the French Army, but they were abandoned.
If
we came across any supply dumps and the guards had no orders,
and as in any case they would have little future if they had remained
at their post, we gathered up the men and swept the stocks into
our larder.
'There were some wild goose chases too.
pick up an alleged dump of rations at the Merville airfield
We received orders to
which
were supposed to have been landed from aircraft, only to find on
arrival that the enemy had got there first.
On another occasion
we were directed to search a large wood for food dumps which were
