P827
Carrying Landing Craft
00
Carrying Buffaloes
BURMA
353
The same platoon towed into position the sections of the 1,000-foot
Bailey bridge built to span the river at Kalewa; and it also stocked
the bridgehead with thousands of tons of stores.
On December 2Ist, 2nd Division broke out of the bridgehead and
covered 130 miles in 20 days to reach its objective at Shwebo on
January 8th, 1945.
It had started with 150 miles of petrol for
each vehicle, besides the reserve carried by the RASC, and three
days' reserve rations.
In spite of this, the shortages in the air supply
drop, on which the division depended for its day-to-day maintenance,
were such that the division arrived in Shwebo with empty fuel
tanks, and was on half rations for three days.
Then an airstrip
was opened, and supplies and petrol came in fast; but ammunition
had to be fetched from the dump 125 miles back, and it took the
RASC lorries eight days for the round trip to make one replenish-
It was at this time that the Kabo weir, controlling the irrigation
of the whole Shwebo plain, was saved.
It was feared that the
enemy would destroy it and the problem was to get the troops there
in time to prevent this.
RASC lorries were emptied of their loads
of ammunition, and by driving through the night, two companies
of infantry
were conveyed to the weir just in time, for they were
hardly dug in before the tardy appearance of the enemy.
The Dukws earn their keep
Meanwhile the other dukw platoon was supporting zoth Division
in its advance down the river to Monywa, providing a river L of C
in conjunction with the outboard vessels and rafts of the Inland
Water Transport branch of the Royal Engineers,
which in this
theatre controlled the water transport.
On this run, the trip of
60 miles to Maukkadaw took three days because of the uncharted
sandbanks.
In February, this division crossed the Irrawaddy at
Myinmu, using dukws for towing rafts which carried vehicles over.
A few of the dukws also assisted in the crossing of IV Corps near
Pakokku.
As well as the perils of the waterways, the dukws engaged in these
operations had to suffer the attentions of the enemy.
Thus, when
Japanese aircraft came over to bomb the bridge at Kalewa, and
were put off by barrage balloons, they shot at anything else nearby,
and a dukw loaded with petrol was hit and caught fire.
The crew
swam ashore, to be greeted by their friends with the comment;
'Perhaps that will teach you not to smoke with a load of petrol?
Then, when one platoon was working with 19th Indian Division at its
crossing of the Irrawaddy, serving as second line transport one way
and evacuating casualties the other, the unit itself received some
casualties from a Japanese '75' that always opened up on the dukws
Z. RASG
