214
early in 1940, u
ordination of supplies was
set up under the chainu
cutenant Governor in August
of that year.
The main aims of une committee were to ensure that
there should be a common supplies policy so that the fortress's
reserves were evenly maintained and the effect of losses through
sinkings could be evenly spread.
It was fully recognized how vital
it was to reduce the sea freight required, and arrangements were
made to co-ordinate demands for essentials such as flour and sugar
and for fuels such as petrol and coal.
The committee, referred to
as COSUP, put forward bulk demands on home on behalf of the
services and civil population, each service keeping its own depart-
ment acquainted with the nature of the demands it had made on
COSUP and with the extent of its own stocks.
A co-ordinating committee at home also did their best to make
certain that the despatches made in response to the island's demands
were in the most economical space saving form and of the greatest
food value for the space they occupied.
But even these measures
could not solve the problem of safeguarding convoys through the
Mediterranean or prevent the heavy losses which were experienced
both in merchant ships and his Majesty's ships which were escorting
them.
Once the stores were landed safely, fortune seemed to favour the
supply service, bearing in mind that no special deep underground
storage accommodation had been
provided even
for the stocks
which were to be built up for the original war garrison.
A request
was made in August, 1939, for the construction of a new supply
depot, which was to be above
ground, but although the project
could not be agreed to, permission was given to put up six large
huts, which when built seemed to be singled out for attack by the
enemy air forces which demolished all six.
In April, 1941, plans
for an underground depot, to be located at St. Michael's bastion at
Valetta, were prepared.
War Office sanction for the project was
not received until April, 1942, when work on the pilot tunnels
began, but the tunnelling company employed on the work had to
he withdrawn to work on the more urgent project of an under-
ground hospital.
In October, 1942,
the Navy appeared in the field as a rival
claimant for the site and, as it was thought that the tunnels required
for the approach to the supply depot would weaken the structure of
the adjoining naval project, the plan was dropped.
Perhaps it was
a question of 'an ill wind', as the Malta rock tunnels are damp, and
the storage of anything but tinned supplies might well have been
the cause of even more concern for the harassed supply officer than
the method adopted which was the dispersal of reserves in litle
dumps all over the island to spread the risk of damage from bombing.
MALTA, G.C.
215
Just before the war, the garrison's food stock was held at one point
only, the permanent supply depot; in 1940 the reserves were divided
between three storage places, and in 1941 the stocks were spread
out over the island in no fewer than 100 different places.
It was
not an ideal arrangement, as it was difficult to safeguard the many
points from pilferage when food was scarce; but it worked and,
although 21 of the dumps were damaged by enemy action, the total
losses did not amount to more than about i6o tons of food.
Fortune also seemed to favour the Army's cold storage arrange-
ments.
The original peacetime store, which held about 1,000 tons,
had been constructed above ground, but happily the actual storage
chambers had been made by digging out holes of suitable size in
the ground.
The installation bore a charmed life until 1942, when
a bomb put part of the plant out of action and reduced the capacity
of the plant for maintaining the required temperatures by about
300 tons.
By this time, however, there was little or no meat to
store.
The provision of a fully protected underground installation
had been considered in 1926, and a site selected, but the subsequent
action, or rather deferred action, is indicative of the old principle
that if one waits long enough the need may not arise.
The store
was to hold joint stocks for the Navy and the Army but, when the
cost—
-£32,000—became known,
the Admiralty and War Office
could not sanction the project.
The Inspector, RASC, who visited
the island in February, 1939, recommended an immediate review of
the project, and approval was given to it in May, but by that time
the proposed site at Weid Kebir was considered by
the naval
authorities to be too far from the Grand Harbour.
In August,
1940, it was deemed that an alternative site selected would be too
near the adjacent coal yards, and the Navy suggested an alternative
site.
This in turn was considered by the Army to be too near some
ancient sewers which could not be properly sealed off.
By this time
it was July, 1941, and more urgent projects made it impossible to do
anything about the matter for at least two years.
The production of bread was also beset by various problems.
Both wheat and flour were imported as not enough was grown in
the island.
The Navy possessed a little mill installed about 50 years
before, the successor of an original stone mill dating from the occupa-
tion of Malta by the Navy a century before.
There were also
several civilian mills but, because of the increasing
damage by
enemy action, it was thought at one time that recourse would have
to be made to the old biblical method of grinding the wheat, by
hand, between two stones.
Various expedients had to be adopted to make the available flour
