604
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
the company came under the command of 4grd (Wewex) Division
and moved to Tessenderloo, where we loaded with ammunition,
ete. On the next day, 22 dukws from each platoon were attached
to 1g0th Brigade and thence to battalions, A Platoon to the 7th
Battalion, the Hampshire Regiment, B Platoon to the 4th Battalion,
the Dorset Regiment, and C Platoon to the 5th Battalion, the
Dorset Regiment.
For the next 10 days the company was to be split into three groups
consisting of 66 dukws from ABC Platoons, a new D Platoon hastily
formed from the remnants of the others, and company headquarters
and workshops with platoon administrative personnel. Returning
to A Group as it were, ie,, the 66 dukws with rgoth Brigade, these
left the Temenderloo area on the 17th and went to the Hechtel
area, where they wat for two days waiting for the Guards Armoured
Division to clear Eindhoven and the road to Nijmegen.
When
this was done, the brigade moved up to Nijmegen, taking two day»
in the procem. During this move the dukws were used as TCVs.
On arrival at Nijmegen one battalion went in to clear up the town.
The dukws were then attached for some 24 hours to the 101st
American Airborne Division and were used for conveying, troops
from the famous bridge of Nijmegen to a wood to the south east of
the town,
It was proposed that the dukws should remain the night
in the wood; but when it was discovered quite by chance that there
were still plenty of 'Krauts' in the woods, the officer commanding
this party decided to move the dukws from a spot which might prove
unhealthy,
He was quite correct in his amumption, as some shells
began to fall just where the dukws had been, as the last one pulled out.
This party buzzed around a bit more for the Americans and then
was very pleased to be re-attached to goth Brigade,
The next day
(the 24th) the brigade moved up slowly to the Driel-Valburg, area,
clearing the roads as they went.
It was a novelty to see the vehicles
at the head of the column stop, some infantry jump out of a duk,
double across a held, proceed to mop up a small pocket of resistance,
double aeroes a leo, proceeky and clamber on board once more,
That nicht six dukes sky by in case they were needed, when
some to a he Welsh Airbore Brigade crosed the river
fortunately they were not needed,
The next night was the night
of the attempt of the 4th Dorsets to get across the river and to
relieve the tet Airborne Division,
Six dukws of C Platoon were to
carry urgently needed supplies acrows the river three hours after
the amault had gone in.
Various things happened, and only
three actually yot in the water wider intense tre; these three goi
trek in the mud on the fee ride, er the drivers had no alterna
tive but to swim back,
Vor this episode two men of C Platoon were
awarded the Military Medal,
536 GENERAL TRANSPORT COMPANY (DUKWS)
605
The following citation won Cpl J. A, Varney the Military Medal:
'On September 24th this NGO was in charge of dukws crossing
the River Lek, carrying supplies to the airborne troops on the north
bank,
His dukw reached the opposite bank, but then became stuck
in the mud, and attempts to release it attracted enemy fire, and
they had to take cover,
At last the dukw was freed and headed
downstream to where the other two dukws were fast in the mud,
Under haraming fire from the enemy, one dukw was completely
unloaded and another partly unloaded,
By this time, first light
was approaching, and an officer from the Dorset Regiment instructed
RASC men to endeavour to free the unloaded dukw and transport
back wounded and notify brigade of the urgency for medical
supplies.
All efforts to free the dukws were of no avail.
'Cpl Varney and one driver thereupon decided to swim for help.
This they did, and eventually landed on the opposite bank several
hundred yards downstream,
A patrol from a battalion of the
Dorset Regiment was contacted, and Cpl Varney and the man who
had swum with him went to the battalion's headquarters to report
and thence to their platoon location,
This NCO carried out a
difficult task with great coolness and was an example to the drivers
in his charge?
The citation in Dvr Chilton's case was of a similar nature he
also received the Military Medal,
The following night the dukws carried the airborne troops back
from the river bank to the VDS at Valburg and then to Nijmegen.
This was an unpleasant job, because of the bad weather and the
state of the roads, which were narrow and muddy with deep
ditches on each side,
The dukws sat at battalion locations for a further two days before
koing back to company location, which by then had been set up at
Nijmegen,
C Platoon had had the worst time of it, as they were
subjected to shelling by 88 mm mortars and to a twice daily dose
of machine gunning by aircraft.
During the five days on the island
between Nifmegen and Amhem this detachment lost one driver
killed and five wounded, and lost five dukws.
Group Is was a conglomeration of the dukws left out of Group A.
It was under command of Captain Leith and was called D Plation.
This group did much the same as Group A in the push up to
Nijmegen, attached to 129th Infantry Brigade,
They stayed at
Nimegen until rejoining the company on September ayth, subjected
to the odd spot of bombing and shelling by which they lost one dukw.
or company headquarters and workshops,
, stayed in
the Tessenderloo Hechtel ares unil the suth, when they moved
to Nijmegen,
On their journey up the road was being shelled
between Uden and Zeeland, and near Veghel the tail of the column
