592
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
bones of worn-out transporters in 'returned vehicle parks' along
the way.
We carried New Zealanders, French colonial troops, the
Foreign Legion, Indians, not to mention the British, noteworthy
among whom were the Rifle Brigade, known to us for some reason
as the Hackney Gurkhas.
We met them all.
Perhaps you may have had a desert trip on a transporter, with
its hoisted ramps rattling behind you, and the tracks of your tank
rolling backwards and forwards ever so slightly but loaded with
menace, so that the truck drivers were always conscious of 20 tons
or so a few inches from the backs of their necks.
You may perhaps remember a transporter with a golfer calling
'fore' painted on the cab doors, with a worried-looking, usually
unshaven, overalled corporal forever helping an equally dishevelled
driver to change tyres, almost always 100 miles or so behind the
convoy and short of rations, water and petrol.
That was me, and
I've never got over it.
534 COMPANY (TANK TRANSPORTER)
This company began its career as the ammunition company of
the 54th Divisional RASC.
The division did not go overseas and
reverted to a beach role in 1941, with heavily eut transport resources.
The divisional supply company became the divisional composite
company, the petrol company became the Guards Armoured
Divisional Troops Company, and the ammunition company
was
eventually converted into one of the
earliest tank transporter
companies with a headquarters, workshops
and three platoons
equipped with Diamond T tractors and Rogers trailers,
for the
carriage of Churchill tanks. This glad news arrived in April, 1942,
together with an announcement that 66 of the new tractors and
trailers were awaiting, collection at Feltham.
No one could tell us anything about them no one seemed to
know, but someone must have driven them from the docks
Feltham.
We found it was the civvy fitters at Feltham.
So we
sent 20 men a week to Feltham to drive them around, get the feel
of them, and probe into them.
Then we drew 15 vehicles, and it
was denims for everyone.
We crawled over and under them, and
cursed because no maker's handbook was available to help us.
Then followed seemingly endless exercises, practising tank loading
with 36th Tank Brigade, when we hauled them to ranges, later
hauling 34th Tank Brigade and then 25th Tank Brigade:
We were the only Diamond I company, so we got codd jobs all
over England.
We reached a peak with our headquarters in
Somerset
Norfolk and jobs in hand in Luton, Doncaster, Scotland,
Moring
Forwand
