296
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
party for about 150 Greek children, many of whom were on the
verge of starvation.
Requisitioning a large café for the evening, he
enlisted the aid of his men to act as waiters and his young friends
then sat down to a big meal.
Tinned meat and vegetable ration,
a tin of peaches and as many army biscuits as they could eat consti-
tuted the fare, and it is said that one small boy of about six broke
all M and V records by consuming no fewer than six
before his hunger was satisfied.
platefuls
The Civil War Dies Down
By early in January the city was gradually being cleared of the
remaining insurgents,
and ships could be unloaded again at the
Piraeus, but the tragic war did not come to an end until February
12th.
The Army was then faced with the new problem of helping
to repair the ill effects of this unfortunate chapter in Greek history.
Many of the inhabitants were near starvation, and thousands had
been dispersed from their homes, and the civil economy was hope-
lessly disorganized.
Bread was the first need.
There was little
flour left in the civilian mills and bakeries, most of which had been
in insurgent hands, and there was no fuel or power.
Bread was so
scarce that a two-pound loaf commanded the equivalent of f2 to £3
in the black market. A committee under the presidency
of the
DDST was set up, and mill-owners, the Greek Ministry of Supply,
the Red Cross and other authorities were gathered together to make
a plan for immediate relief.
With the help of the Navy a grain
ship was unloaded, supplies of oil and petrol were provided by the
Army and, as soon as the mills were in action again, bread was
put on the market at a reasonable controlled price.
All available transport was also set to work to help in carrying
relief stores and supplies, and the 4th Divisional RASC spent a large
part of their time in carrying forward essential stocks into the out-
lying districts, where roads were roads in name only, and in helping
refugees, of whom there were thousands, and ex-combatants to
return to their homes and to more peaceful avocations.
The whole venture had been a strenuous test for the training and
teaching of the RASC, although they had suffered severe casualties
for their strength.
In killed, wounded and missing they represented
one sixth of the total casualties of the force.
Their work merited
the appreciation of their commander, Major-General Arkwright,
and for that reason it is quoted in full below.
'Now that the Athens/Faliron road has been cleared of the enemy,
I wish to express my profound admiration for all ranks of the
RASC companies operating in this area, who night after night have
run the gauntlet of enemy fire in order to maintain vital supplies
to the centre of Athens.
GREECE, 1944
297
'I fully appreciate the risk run by drivers, many of them with
loads of explosives, and I consider the accomplishment of their
tasks, almost without accident, to be a feat of the highest courage
I also wish to say how much I regret the losses incurred by
66 LAA Regiment and
331 Company RASC
attacked the infantry barracks, and to thank them for the gallant
show which their officers and men put up on that occasion.
'The supply services have borne far more than their usual share
of danger and fighting during these operations, and I cannot pay
high enough tribute to the bravery and cool efficiency which has
made success possible.'
In turn the RASC owed a debt to their comrades of the Royal
Artillery who operated a transport company on their behalf, and
who helped so much in the defence of the several installations.
The mutual feeling of the Royal Regiment was recorded at the
time by Lieutenant-Colonel W. Powell, RA, in the words: 'I shall
miss them (the RASC of No. 2 MPFC) very much on their departure
-they have set a fine example of first class co-operation and fought
with great courage and determination?
