268
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
been withdrawn from the Fifth Army in order to take part in the
assault on North-West Europe), the attack was resumed with X Corps
(46th and 56th Divisions and 201st Guards Brigade) and the United
States II Corps.
By December gth Camino was taken and, with
the capture of Monte Trocchio by the Americans on January 15th,
the stage was set for the great battles for Cassino.
coast.
Meanwhile the Eighth Army made steady progress on the cast
Termoli,
A spirited seaborne attack by the 78th Division secured
and soon
afterwards the River
Trigno was
crossed.
XIII Corps, with the 5th Division and the ist Canadian Division,
captured Campobasso and Isernia and fought their way through
the mountains to the higher reaches of the River Sangro.
At the
end of November V Corps, with the 78th Division, the 8th Indian
Division, the 2nd New Zealand Division and the 4th Armoured
Brigade, crossed the River Sangro, only to come up against increas-
ing German resistance.
In order to increase the weight of the
attack, the 78th Division relieved the 5th Division and ist Canadian
Division in the comparatively quiet central sector, and four divi-
sions-the ist Canadian, the
8th Indian, the 5th British and the
and New Zealand-were packed into the bridgehead across the
Sangro.
For the whole of December the enemy's defences were
hammered, but it became clear by the end of the year that further
attempts to break through in this sector would be unprofitable and
that a completely new plan would be required to defeat the enemy's
Winter Line.
This phase of the campaign introduced or foreshadowed most of
the difficulties of supply which the RASC was going to experience
during the rest of the Italian campaign: the extensive use of jeep
and mule tracks, of porterage and air supply, the delivery of great
quantities of gun ammunition to most awkwardly sited gun positions,
and the carriage forward of many tons of bridging material.
The United States Fifth Army was well equipped with jeeps lot
'bantams' as they were then called in
British formations)
1o-cwt trailers.
It was not long before & Corps was able to get
The 46th
some of these for the British divisions in the Fifth Army.
and =6th Divisione and later the eth Division. all had a jeen and
trailer platoon as part of the divisional column.
These platoons,
which had a carrying capacity of about 3o tons,
were invaluable.
With four-wheel drive. double reduction gear and chains, they could
go almost anywhere where a tracked vehicle could go.
They could
They
go around most obstacles and across the lightest bridge.
were mainly used fo delivering artillery ammunition to run sites
and for extending the VT link bevond the point where g-tonners
Without them a great deal more mule transport than
was ever likely to be available would have been required, and many
Bologna
Leghorn
Forl
Florence
Siena
Piombine
Elba
San stefane
Civitavecchia
Arezzo
Ancona
Foligno
ROME
Pescar
Anzio
assino
Can age ten dearest tes
mies between
Ports and Seaheads
60 MILES
Central Italy
Naples
