84
ORCE, 1939/1940
endeavouring
mur stocks as possible from falling
into enemy hands, in the limited time left to them before they were
ordered to evacuate their sites.
The RASC base units on the Seine were not withdrawn until
June 7th.
The Base Petrol Filling Centre evacuated their site that
evening,
but managed to collect and take with them sufficient
mobile equipment to operate again at Donges.
The main site was
subsequently destroyed by the East Kent Fortress Destruction Unit,
which was to play a considerable part in denying the stocks in bulk
installations to the enemy.
No. 3 BSD was ordered to cease all work at 1700 hours, but a
rear party was left to complete the loading of a ship and despatch a
last train before it withdrew to rejoin the main body the next day.
Their departure was preceded by a severe air raid, but there was
little left to destroy, as the unit had managed to evacuate more than
I1,000 tons of food in the preceding days by rail, and ship, and by
issues to the units remaining in the area.
After some adventures
from Bolbec reached Cherbourg,
they left France on June I2th with the knowledge that they had
fulfilled their task.
No. I Base Supply Depot at Redon had been working 24 hours
a day at taking in supplies which had been evacuated from the
depot at Le Havre when on the 15th it received orders that the
unit was to be evacuated in 24 hours.
There were still about
8,000 tons of supplies in the depot which they were instructed to
hand over to the mayor of the town.
The main body of the unit
then left for embarkation in the ill-fated Lancastria.
The ship, with nearly 6,000 souls on board, was heavily dive-
bombed after leaving port and sank in 15 minutes.
many other units on board, but the BSD was the only one able to
man its Bren guns.
2nd Lieutenant J. C. Medlicott kept his gun
in action until the angle of the decks of the sinking vessel brought the
water to his knees, and Sgt J. Clarke and Cpl J. Durrant, manning
their guns on an upper deck, also kept firing to the last.
gallantry earned them the awards of the Military Cross and Military
Medal respectively.
No. 2 Base Supply Depot, at St. Tregonnec, near Brest, did not
receive orders to evacuate until the 17th, and working up to the
day before their last despatch, was to send 700 tons of supplies by
road and rail to Brest for the troops and civilian refugees which
were pouring into that port.
Their remaining stocks, about 3,000
tons, were, under orders from the headquarters at Brest, handed
over to the French sous-prefet at the neighbouring town of Morlaix.
The fate of the big petrol depots differed.
Orders were received
on June I4th by the large petrol depot at Moult d'Angence, near
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
Caen, to pack all equipment at once and be ready to move the next
But as Beauman's force was still in the vicinity, a rear party
was retained at the depot to be ready to issue supplies to the force if
they required them.
On the afternoon of the 15th a French unit
arrived and asked if they could take over the remaining stocks on
the understanding that they would destroy any balance if they were
forced to withdraw.
After reference to
Sub-Area HQ, this was
agreed to, but the French had barely signed a receipt for the contents
of the depot when they reported that their higher headquarters
would not allow them to take the depot over, and in the early
hours of the i6th they announced their intention of retiring.
that time the enemy were getting closer, and orders were received
from the staff of Beauman's force to fire the depot.
stock was in tins and drums, but by 0500 hours the depot was
successfully alight, some 1,049,000 gallons of petrol and 60,000
gallons of lubricating oil being destroyed, little being left intact
to the enemy. The officer and small rear party then made their
way to embark at Cherbourg.
No. 2 Petrol Depot at Morlaix was prepared for destruction
preparatory to orders being received to evacuate, when it was
ordered at the last moment that the contents of the depot, some
7,000 tons of petrol, were to be handed over intact to the French.
The other depot, No. 1 Petroleum Depot at Blain, was heavily
stocked, but with the aid of a special detachment of Royal Engineers,
tins were punctured in each of the many stacks, and when the final
order to destroy the depot was received it went up in good style,
the quantity being approximately 10,000 tons of petrol and 660 tons
of diesel.
Had the war continued, the loss of these stocks, although
serious, would not have been irreparable, as by that time the factories
in Great Britain were producing more than 1,200 tons of packed
petrol a day in the 'flimsy' tins.
There had, however, been a loss
of more than a million returnable containers,
300,000 being des-
troyed in a single night's bombing raid on Le Havre.
There were also considerable stocks held in bulk, in addition to
the packed supplies in the various petrol depots.
Most of the bulk
stocks in ocean installations were held in French civilian storage
tanks, and as they would have been a military prize of considerable
value to the enemy, orders were given for their destruction.
work of destroying these bulk storage tanks at ports was not an
RASC responsibility, but an RE one.
But it may be recorded
with the thanks of their sister Corps that the almost will-o'-the-wisp
arrival of the RE Fortress Destruction Unit at port after port and
depot after depot was almost inevitably followed by palls of smoke
which nearly blotted out the sky.
On the whole the three main RASC MT base units, the HRS,
