CHAPTER XIV
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
A New Problem
TROM almost every chapter of this book it emerges that the
Corps was constantly faced, in the latest and greatest of al
wars, with the need to solve new and unforeseen problems
by
adapting old and well tried principles.
In
few cases was
adaptability stretched to such limits as in meeting the needs of the
completely new airborne arm.
Before the war, airborne forces had never been seriously thought
of as a part of the British Army.
Any suggestion that the technique
of maintenance of several airborne divisions should be worked out
or studied would have been considered eccentric.
Yet when the
need came to launch a whole corps of troops by glider and parachute
deep into enemy territory, a complete,
efficient,
highly-trained
RASC organization was ready to deliver its daily load from base
depots in England to the man fighting on the ground.
It was not until the middle of 1940 that the first few seeds of the
airborne army were sown.
In June of that year a handful of
officers and men assembled at Ringway in Cheshire to offer them-
selves as experimental material for parachute development.
Up to
then, parachutists were regarded as highly paid stunt heroes of the
Flying Circus', while mass
descents of soldiers arranged by the
Soviet Army were considered a rather feeble means of trying to
frighten other nations with a turnip-bogey.
German parachutists
in the Netherlands in 1940 had, however, shocked the British out of
such an attitude.
The airborne arm was seen suddenly to be not
only practicable, but powerful: indeed, for a nation isolated on an
island, it now seemed to the more perceptive to be a really essential
factor in any plan for resuming the attack on the enemy's territory.
At the same time, it was about the only type of force of which we
were completely ignorant, and for which we had not one ounce or
stitch of equipment, not one man with the most elementary training.
So the small band of volunteers assembled, and they jumped or were
'pulled-off", wearing relatively untried parachutes of various kinds,
They had
from unsuitable aircraft flown by inexperienced pilots. of course,
no guidance on how to fall or land.
There were,
casualties, and the first of these was Dvr R. Evans, RASC, of No. 2
Commando, who was killed when his parachute failed to open, on
July 25th, 1940.
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
borne forces as a whole from such small beginnings,
to say that by early 1941, parachute battalions were being formed.
They were soon to develop into brigades, which came together to
form the nucleus of the ist Airborne Division in April, 1942.
Soon
after this the RASC of the division began to take shape, but what
shape was by no means certain.
The armoured and
infantry divisional columns had dearly
defined and strictly limited roles: to draw in bulk their divisiona
daily requirements from a railhead, roadhead, or refilling, point,
to break down part of them into unit bulk somewhere on the road
forward, and to establish nightly points at which to refill first line
vehicles. The airborne divisional column, however, had to be
designed somehow to draw its daily loada from the airbore base,
whose position was necesarily decided by the locations of base
airfields (of which there had to be several, to cope with the traffic),
They had to take the loads to the airfields, fly with them chten
hundreds of miles, parachute them to a dropping, zone near the forwar
tion and within enemy territory, collect and wort them, and then effect
final delivery to APs, PPs and SPs.
If this was not a sufficient task,
the numerous special problema of detail made it so.
Por instance,
the RASC had to do its own packing of all kinda of mores to a wrier
weight limit into containers which could be conveniently handled,
These special containers had been developed after a series of trala,
The parachutes had to be attached to the aircraft wrong, pints.
The aircraft had to be loaded most carefully to preserve unext
balance and trim, while each container, if inside, had to be verted
fast.
on ia plywood base in the correct position on the runway, and made,
Other types of containers had to be hoisted outside the riveralt
into bomb-bays.
The imponsibility of securing, early demanda for replenishment in
detail from troops isolated by the enemy made it necemary to held
large stocks of prepacked panniers and other containen available
to make up exact loada immediately demanda did come in; in the
meantime, predetermined average loada were flown.
The problem of getting the airborne element of the chun on
to the ground in the divisional area, wether with vehicles and
equipment to collect, vort, handle, and distribute the mores ariving,
ty parachute, was itself a big, one,
The earliest arrivals had to be
parachute element of the column, who jurged with the entier
Rights of the division, vel ched and made ready the sugaly dreyine,
none, reconnoited dure positions and router to devasenal trite,
selected delivery
points, and collected ready for lase any
despatched by vettison dron frosa sirerate of the can bunts,
They would barely have time for all this before the whim gant en
