PRELUDE
withdrawal of all the new Albion lorries from the TA.
In the
end the force did not embark, but great credit is due to the column
concerned for the manner in which they assembled the required
number of vehicles during one weekend.
'Munich' led to accelerated military planning, so that early in 1939
a decision on the size and rate of despatch of the force for operations
on the Continent was at last reached.
The search for Manpower
Throughout the years which had passed since the first decision
to rearm,
one major
question had remained almost unsolved,
namely, the need for more men.
Ever since the first war there had
been dificulty in maintaining the Army at the desired strength.
Apart from public apathy, always a failing of the British people,
and a natural reaction after the years of strife from 1914 to 1919,
part of the fault lay with the British Government.
Not until the
carly nineteen thirties was it recognized that many of the conditions
of service
were out-moded and that pay, of all ranks,
was not
comparable with the rates which could be carned for the same sil
and effort
civil life.
Various changes were made including
improvements in feeding.
The Army still had a bad press, however,
for with few exceptions little heed was paid to military affairs, and
one may scarch in vain for a single book or play produced during
these years calculated to enhance the prestige of the Army or to
further its interests, though many denigrated its qualities and is
performance.
It was obvious that. if national service were to be introduced
and it seemed that this unnopular measure was the only solution
in the absence of a larre trained reserve) it would have to be
launched on a
better informed public.
The introduction of a
public relations
efforts of the then
department at the War Office and the personal
improving
the
situation.
Secretary of State for War went far towards
The natural anxiety
of many parents
was allayed by the publicity given to the conditions under which
their sons would be called upon to serve.
The decision to introduce
compulsory service (the new
'Militia' was not taken
until the
spring of 1939, when it was also decided to double the size of th
Territorial
These two measures,
threw a heavy additional burden on our small Regular establish
welcome as they
ments, particularly on the Training Battalion which had to provide
duplicates and the key men for them.
Apart from the lack of reservists which might, in time, be over
come partly by
the training of the conscript Militia,
the RASC
were faced with another serious mobilization problem.
the paucity of units on which to build. for a high provortion of the
Convoy on a Desert Road
Lorry dug in in the Desert
