CHAPTER IX
BURMA AND CEYLON
BURMA
Between the Wars
N the campaign against the Japanese on the eastern frontiers of
India, and in thema, the RASC, were the subsidiary partners
in the supply and transport services,
as the theatre was the
responsibility of GHQ, India, which
had its own Directorate of
ST services, performed by the Royal Indian Army Service Corps.
this Corps was originally modelled on the RASC it
differed in some respects
First, Indian racial
characteristics and abilities influenced organization and establish-
Secondly, the Army in India which it served had long been
organized for the purposes of internal security and defence of the
Frontier rather than for warfare with an external
enemy equipped with modern weapons.
Before the war, there were few links and little liaison between the
From 1916 to 1928 the RASC provided British officers,
we want ficers and non-commissioned officers to command the
motor transport organization of the Army in India and give it
After a proposal to merge the Indian MT
units with the RASC had been rejected, India set up its own MT
organization within the Indian Army Service Corps,* and the
RASC left India, though many of its members transferred in order
following Indian
Army Order, by General (afterwards
Field-Marshal Tard Pirdwood was published on that occasion:-
On its departure from India, H.E. the Commander-in-Chief in
India wishes to place on record the deep obligation of the Army in
India to the Royal Army Service Corps.
The members of the Corps
who came to India have worked with such loyalty that they have
brought into being a service which the Indian Army Service Corps
In doing this,
they have carried out
the traditions of their Corps at the cost of nine officers and 163
other ranks who have died in this country.
In saying farewell to
the RASC, H.E. takes the opportunity to welcome those members of
the RASC transferring to the IASC.
They are coming into a Corps
* The Indian Army Service Corps became 'Royal' in 1935-
which is embued with the same traditions as that which they have
Those traditions are "service for others", whatever the
risks that may be entailed.'
The transfer involved more than 100 officers and 800 other ranks
(about one-fifth of the strength of the RASC at that time) to fill
up the enlarged establishments of the IASC.
RASC was thereby retained, until, in 1939,
there came a new
development when the workshops of that Corps were handed over
to the Indian Army Ordnance Corps.
This had a most depressing
effect on the RIASC since most of the former RASC officers and
men who were still serving went with the workshops to the IAOG.
During the war these men were absorbed by the Indian Corps of
Electrical and Mechanical Engineers on its formation,
held most of the key appointments connected with the new corps.
Whatever might be the feelings
of individuals about the new
organization of the services for the repair of mechanical transport,
the RASC in India and South-East Asia Command during
war found themselves working with officers, many of whom had
been trained in the same school and shared the same basic ideas on
When war broke out in 1939, India was not at once directly
affected, and so was able to respond to calls for help from
A hundred RIASC officers were sent home to reinforce
the Regular element in the vastly expanding British Corps; and a
contingent of four animal transport companies of the RIASC were
sent to join the BEF in France to meet a requirement for pack
transport in the forward areas.
They were the sole representatives
of the Indian Army in the BEF and were very proud of the fact.
One company was captured by the enemy; the others reached the
United Kingdom and remained there until they were repatriated
in 1944 when India urgently needed men experienced in animal
These original animal transport companies had given a
good account of themselves during their short time in France and
Belgium, and, moreover, after their evacuation in 1940 to the United
Kingdom, the three surviving companies set an excellent example in
discipline, in the recovery of smartness in turn-out, and in the speed
expansion of the RIASC had made necessary the recall to India of
Indeed, the pendulum had now swung the other way, and it was
the turn of the RASC to help out the RIASC.
Large numbers of
