264
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
ST point of view the business of forecasting the strengths and
nationalities to be fed became something of an art.
As the campaign progressed the army began to assume an almost
international appearance as in addition to American,
French,
Brazilian and
British formations
there were
divisions
from
the
Canadian, New Zealand and Indian Armies and a Polish Corps,
and there were also single brigades of Palestine Jews and from
the Royal Greek Army:
When the Italian Army was reformed,
a number of 'gruppi' joined the armies.
The RASC, whose strength rose to almost the same as the total
strength of the pre-war Regular Army at home, had an even greater
diversity of nations in its
ranks,
with companies manned by
Ceylonese, Cypriots, Mauritians,
Basutos, and Arabs from both
Arabia and North Africa.
They also had a large number of units
• Italian co-operators,
former prisoners of war who
volunteered to serve with us, and later more companies were found
by
the Italian army.
It was a process of what was known as
'dilution', the replacement of British ranks by others,
the British
then being used as cadres to raise more units, as all units had a
cadre of British officers, senior NCOs and technical tradesmen.
Towards the end of the campaign the Corps had to give up many
men to other arms and in turn to take in men of lower medical
categories who were surplus to the requirements of their own arm.
In the last stages several RA anti-aircraft units were converted into
GT companies.
Many changes also had to be made in the role of units, such as
the conversion of surplus artillery companies into GT companies,
The RASC Training Depot which had to be formed in Italy was
an interesting experiment, as instruction had to be given to eight
different nationalities and 42 different courses arranged for giving
instruction to the various categories
of RASC men
which were
required.
The formation of new units and reorganization of others
were done by a RASC mobilization centre which was also formed
in Italy for the purpose.
The geographical features of the Italian peninsula had a consider-
able effect on both the operational and administrative plans,
country being divided by mountain ranges running from just south
There were
of the northern plains to the 'toe' and 'heel' of Italy.
few good lateral communications between the Adriatic coast and
the coastline along the Tyrrhenian sea.
In the initial advance the
Fifth Army made its way up the western coast and the Bishth Army
on the eastern. There had to be a common system of communications
one army was
for both armies as during the ensuing operations the weight of
the other,
transferred
from one
factors which were common to both road and rail communication
ITALY
265
were the almost complete destruction of every bridge, of which
there were hundreds, by the enemy as he withdrew to the north, and
vast damage to culverts, tunnels and road passes.
Docks also
were in many cases badly damaged, and the general result was to
create a never ceasing demand for road transport, for the repair
of roads, for carrying forward bridging material, and for dock
clearance.
The Italian campaign was administratively an engineer
and a transport battle.
The first principal administrative task was to repair the port
facilities which had been damaged and then to develop them to keep
pace with the desired rate of intake of the thousands of tons of stores
of all kinds which were wanted for the armies and for the civil
population, as the division of Italy by the opposing forces had left
the peoples in the south bereft of their main sources of supply of
manufactured goods and grain.
The main base ports were at Naples on the west coast and Bari,
Brindisi, and, to a lesser extent, Taranto on the east.
Port clearance
had to take first priority, and special organizations were set up to
co-ordinate the activity of the American and British transport
allotted for the task.
Owing to the extensive damage to the railways and damage to
road bridges and road works, the early capture of other ports, and
getting them into working order, as the army advanced to the north
were vital.
Even so, when Leghorn on the west coast, and Ancona
on the east, were taken, supply to the two armies still remained
partly dependent on the main bases in the south.
As the armies
moved up to the north, movement by rail was only possible in the
British sector from Naples as far as Arezzo, which lay to the west of
the great mountain range which divided the country, as it
found impossible to repair the main line which ran from Bari on
the east coast to keep pace with the rate of advance.
Consequently, in the later stages of the campaign, the armies had
to be maintained by three methods: by direct shipments, for example,
from home to advanced base ports and then by road or rail to army
roadheads; by coastal shipping (many RASC vessels being employed
on this task) from the main base ports to the advanced bases; and
by rail, where it was possible, from Naples and Bari.
Although every means of raising new transport companies was
employed, when the final advance to the Po was being planned,
the number of divisions which could be employed had to be
restricted, as there was insuficient road transport to keep all avail-
able divisions supplied.
good by water transport, and eventually four RASC water transport
companies were operating 13r vessels, most of which were chartered.
To some extent the lack of internal communications was made
