474
THE R.A.S.C, IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
replace the normal form of meat, and the ration contained an
anti-scorbutic in the form of ascorbic acid tablets.
The ordinary
type of match was replaced by flare matches which could be handled
casily and would remain alight in a wind.
The tin also contained
special fuel starters for lighting oil pressure stoves, which were the
accepted form of means of heating to be used under Arctic conditions.
During, September, 1941, and December, 1942, 2,800,000 of there
packs were produced.
The greatest achievement in the provision of the special packs
was undoubtedly the 14 men pack,
of which 10 million
were
produced between 1942 and 1945.
It was the succesor of the
simple 12-man pack, and was so generally used by all ranks in most
parts of the world that some details of its development and produc
tion may be of historical interest.
The requirements for this new
pack were laid down by the War Office and executed by CPO(FS),
The objective was to provide a good breakfast, a dinner, a substantial
evening, meal, and to include some items which could be used as
snacks on the march or during short halts.
So far as possible, the
contents were required to be in such a form that they could be
eaten cold, if no means of heating, were available.
Tommy cookers,
however, were usually issued with the packs.
At least six varieties of this type of pack were required to be
produced, so that troops could exist on it for several weeks without
the risk of monotonous diet,
There was no time to be lost in the
designing of the ration and organizing the production, because at
least one million cases (later increased to two milion), were required
for an impending operation later revealed as operation
"Torch',
Beven varieties of the pack were finally provided and stood up to
the test,
The only radical change which had to be made before
the end of hostilities was the result of experience gained in North
Africa, where it was found that biscuits tended to be wasted or not
used at all when it became known that bakeries were in operation.
Biscuits were then packed separately for use when circumstances
demanded,
Several new commodities were included in the packs, one of them
being, canned puddings,
The most popular variety was, strangely
enough, rice pudding, mixed fruit pudding being a second favourite,
Every effort was made to provide more varied meat dishes and the
co-operation of the meat canning industry was sought accordingly.
They rose well to the occasion, some of the firms even engaging
chets to prepare samples of every conceivable variety of tinned
meat dish,
While many new commodities were introduced, care
had to be taken to include, in some of the packs, the standard
An ampie
popular items such as red salmon and tinned fruit.
ration of cigarettes, matches and soap was also provided.
SUPPLIES
475
Designing the ration, once the food to be included was selected,
was not unlike solving a jig-saw puzzle, but it was the least part of
the task compared to the organization required for production.
The production of the various components was spread as far as
possible over the whole of the
United Kingdom, and packing
centres were established at suitable places in each main geographical
production
area,
Lieut-Colonel d. R. Appleton, who controlled
the organization, had more than 150 firms working, on producing
the commodities required, of which 6o were engaged in the produc-
tion of biscuits and meats.
To obtain the number of puddings
needed, 20 manufacturers were employed,
The organization had
to be highly balanced to control the production and flow of as
many as go commodities into 11 packing, centres, and the seene in
the control room of the headguarters of CPO(FS) was reminiscent
of a busy 'exchange', as the reports arrived of production movement
and packing progrems.
The numerous problems arising from the
supply of material, ete., were dealt with as they came in.
No sooner was the organization for production and packing
vorking smoothly, when an acute storage problem arose from the
fact that the two largest SR De being, used for storing the completed
packs had to be handed over to the American forces.
Alternative
accommodation was found, much of which had still to be cleared
of its existing plant, ete., before it could be taken into use as storage
space,
As the production increased, a dozen officers were specially
appointed to live in the factory areas to watch and amist in produc-
tion where pomible. Their task was to remove any local difficulties
which arose and to act as a link between industry and the central
organization at CPO(VS).
Even after the finished products had been safely stored in the
5KDs awaiting the day of shipment, some anxicty was caused by
the discovery that several large consignments began to show signs
of rust a few weeks after receipt. Although outwardly the wooden
cases appeared to be perfect, expert examination revealed that the
timber was not properly seasoned,
The general scarcity of timber
and especially seasoned timber, forced upon us (at the expense
i pilferage and other damage due to rough handling), the adoption
of fibreboard cases, strengthened with wooden battens.
As the enemy in Europe was being gradually encircled by the
Allies and the future coope of the war tuned from the West to
Past, the oroduction of oscke soecially desiened for use in tropieat
and jungle conditions berke a matter of time importance,
varietes were produced of a G-man pack for one day containing a
variation of some g9 foods.
The pack, a sectionalized wooden
cas, protected each tin from damage and weather. Both the case
