598
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
We will never forget the punctures, with 34 wheels a vehicle; how
we loved loose granite chippings on a hot road!
Every puncture
or blow out meant taking the tank off and jacking up either i1 tons
of trailer or 19 tons of tractor.
In the words of a Birmingham bus
driver who had been on the same vehicle since June, 1942: 'Perhaps
it's just as well we lost the asterisk Burma road; it's the only one
that could be worse than these.'
536 GENERAL TRANSPORT COMPANY (DUKWS)
On January 26th, 1944, 536 Company took over its first dukws,
having previously been trained in them at the Amphibious School
at Towyn.
From that day until May 26th, 1944, at Hursley Camp,
when we were 'sealed' and briefed, we did training and exercises
with the dukws until we were absolutely familiar with them and
knew just what we, as a company, could do.
These exercises of
course were always done in conjunction with No. 9 Beach Group
of which we were part, and consequently we came to know all the
other people in the beach group and began to appreciate their
problems and work as well as our own.
Naturally also,
these
exercises were on the kind of work we would do from D Day onwards
and on the actual landing itself, so that when the time came we
knew what we had to do.
We were given key plans and maps a short while before D Day,
showing us exactly where everything was to be— transhipment area,
initial dumps, dukw exits, etc., and also how everything was phased
in. We also had a scale model of King Beach and the surrounding
countryside. Everything was planned in the greatest detail.
On May 3oth, the company, which had
been split up into
various serials, went to the different ports and began marshalling
and embarking.
sailing.
The next five days were spent in embarking and
Then before 090o hours on D Day (i.e. H plus go minutes)
Major Hurman, with an advance party, landed on King Beach
and set up a headquarters at a prearranged spot near La Rivière.
At ogoo hours Lieutenant Day, with 23 dukws of A Platoon, came
in on the same beach.
These dukws were loaded with ammunition
and went to HQ 6gth Brigade, near Crepon, where they were
unloaded.
Then they returned to the beach, where they parked
while Lieutenant Day went to report to company headquarters.
The times of arrival of all parties were some 3o minutes late because
of the noor weather, a smoke screen laid by the Navy and the
number of other craft milling around in the water.
Later in the day, all the rest of the serials due in on D Day
536 GENERAL TRANSPORT COMPANY (DUKWS)
arrived, and only three dukws were damaged by mines or under-
water obstacles.
exceptions, had arrived by D plus 3.
Actually, the whole unit, with a few unimportant
On arrival, it was found
that the place reserved for a vehicle park was still occupied by
the enemy, so we parked in the initial dump area.
many Jerry snipers running about the whole area, and they were
not completely cleared up until June 10th.
Apart from the delivery
of the loads on the dukws, the only work we did on D Day was the
evacuation of casualties from the
The rest of the
beaches to the various craft.
time was spent in some very necessary digging in
and settling down.
That night we were bombed fairly thoroughly
by Jerry; but were fortunate to have only one casualty.
On D plus i the first coasters arrived, and we immediately began
to unload them into the initial dump area.
We soon found that
King Beach was practically unusable,
because of the amount of
clay in the sand.
Dukws were getting bogged everywhere; so we
moved over a little just into Love Beach.
During this day a dukw
ran over a mine, killing Sgt Skinner, of A Platoon, and injuring
Major Hurman, our commanding officer, who were standing nearby.
This particular incident was one of
many similar ones, and we proved time and time again that anyone
inside a dukw when it hits a mine will not get hurt, whereas anyone
standing near is pretty certain to catch a packet.
That night was
fairly peaceful compared with the previous one.
During the next few days, Dukw Control and a properly function-
ing transhipment area were set up at the beach exit.
days, the dukws had to take the loads right through to the dumps,
because there was not sufficient ordinary transport.
first time that it was realized that the dukws could be used as
normal GT, as originally it had been planned that the dukws should
operate purely in the sea and be scrapped at the end of go days,
when it was estimated that the need for them would have passed.
For one or two days the dukws also had to unload from beached
LCTs, again because of the lack of 3-ton transport.
also, we were given some pioneers to act as spare drivers, and thus
to provide some slight relief for the drivers who had been working
flat out for 24 hours a day.
Things were slowed up a bit by poor
traffic circuits and by the distance of the coasters from the shore.
On June roth two more platoons were attached to us, one from
633 Company and the other from 705 Company.
This was also
the day on which things were greatly improved and a definite pattern
established, to which we were going to work for the next two and a
half months.
In other words, the traffic circuit was improved, the
coasters were brought opposite Dukw Control, and we were given
some RASC motor launches to use for control at sea.
Off-loading
