14
PRELUDE
for the War Office staff, who were engaged increasingly in making
concrete plans for the impending war.
The brunt of this planning
fell on Major-General M. S. Brander, who succeeded Major-General
Macleod as DST in 1937, and whose place as Inspector of the RASC
was
taken by Major-General R. T. Snowden-Smith.
The two
branches dealing with RASC matters, QMG 3 under Colonel E. H.
Fitzherbert and QMG 6 under Colonel H. M. Gale, strove manfully
to perfect the plans for transport, supplies and fuel for an expedi-
tionary force, the form and strength of which was becoming more
well
defined
with
the
passing months.
It was not until
1938,
however, that the full requirements of the RASC on mobilization
were finally settled and that the Training Battalion could be given
firm data on which to build a mobilization scheme.
Outside the War Office, commands at home and overseas were
also making plans and preparations for war.
In each case the senior
RASC officer in the command had his own local problems to solve.
Those at home knew that they would probably be denuded of their
resources in units and
men, which would be required at once to
mobilize for service with the field force.
At the same time arrange-
ments would have to be made to cope with the influx of TA divisions
at full war strength, and to meet the needs of many new units which
would be formed to swell the organization and to reinforce garrisons
overseas.
The task in overseas commands was no lighter,
for few
did not
have
a local defence problem.
Their resources
were
meagre and their arrangements for augmenting them varied from
place to place.
Gibraltar and Malta were likely to face a siege,
possibly of long duration, before they could be relieved.
Both places
supported a civil population and were wholly dependent on imports.
Protected accommodation for essential stocks of food,
fuel and
Hong
ammunition was vital and would take time to provide.
Kong was faced with a similar problem, though posibly not of such
urgency.
The defences of Singapore were by no means complete.
The Middle East was, of course, the neve centre of our Imperial
communications, and the future attitude of Italy, now in a greadly
strengthened
position in North and East Africa,
was doubtful.
Many territories came within the orbit of the two commands then
responsible for the Middle East area, and vast frontiers had to be
watched and defended by a British garrison which was pitifuly
The main problems of the ABST at Cairo were how to
deploy his limited transport resources to the best advantage and
how to become, from a supply point of view, as self-supporting as
The defence of certain colonies rested solely on colonial troops
who were trained and equipped for little more than internal security
or punitive measures.
Their organization, based as
GENERAL SURVEY
15
RASC were concerned, on a tiny nucleus of officers and clerks with
a somewhat heterogeneous collection of civilian subordinates drawn
from the local populace, was quite inadequate to meet the conditions
arising from a war against a well equipped enemy.
Italian troops in Italian Somaliland and Abyssinia constituted a
menace to British East Africa and British Somaliland, while the
security of the West African littoral was essential for the safety of
convoys passing to the south or east by the Cape route.
territories (Somaliland, East Africa and West Africa) would have
to be reinforced and their administrative organization,
their RASC, developed and augmented by local recruitment of
both Europeans and Africans.
Every colony needed improvements
in its defence arrangements.
Even the western possessions, such as
Bermuda and the British West Indies, had to be prepared to deal
with attack from the sea and the possible onslaught of raiding
parties.
When war finally broke out, the RASC in stations overseas
did their best to reduce their demands for both men and material
from Britain to a minimum, to expand their organization to meet
all demands, and to inculcate the Corps spirit into the people of
many diverse nations who were enlisted locally.
The year 1938 was critical.
A general review of the military
position and future commitments took place early in the year and
was referred to as the New Conspectus'.
The security of Britain
and the safeguarding of Imperial interests still took first place over
the question of any Continental expeditionary force.
The necessity
for increasing the strength of the ADGB and for additional expendi-
might have been devoted to the improvement of the equipment of
the TA and increasing the effectiveness of the field forces.
While
the AGDB was being raised from two to five AA divisions the
Munich crisis occurred.
The increased responsibilities
headquarters ADGB and of the Anti-Aircraft Corps was recognized
by the formation of a separate Anti-Aircraft Command,
with its
own command headquarters, on which the RASC were represented
by an ADST and a small staff.
A few months before the Munich crisis deliveries of the new
Albion six-wheeled lorry had begun, and first priority of issue had
been given to the 1st AA Divisional RASC TA and had already gone
a long way towards bringing this column to a high state of efficiency
and readiness for war.
At one stage immediately after the crisis
there was a plan to send British troops to Czechoslovakia at short
notice.
This force, known as C Force,
was in
the nature of a
parade, which would come under the critical eye of the Führer's
troops.
The preparation of the RASC contingent necessitated the
