NARRATIVES
explained, but intorian on the G side was not forthcoming, an
omission which did not make the way easy for quick decisions and
intelligent anticipation during later events.
On April 18th the division moved from Beja to the Medjez el
Bab area, and the divisional RASC moved to Teboursouk, rather
far in rear of the division.
We had a certain amount of excitement
before we moved, because a German fighter, which had obviously
been hit in a dogfight with one of ours, suddenly flew very low over
21 Company's location.
The company opened up on it with nine
Brens and probably gave it the coup de grâce, for it crashed in a field
a few miles away.
On going to look at it I found it surrounded by a ravening crowd
of American soldiers, all armed with clasp knives, intent on getting
themselves souvenirs.
They were being kept at bay by a small
light-infantryman with a broad Yorkshire accent, whose language
cannot be described.
The Americans had to
be content with
taking snapshots of one another standing on the wings.
I then made for Teboursouk, turning off from the Medjez road
down a by-pass 'Whitehouse Lane'.
At the entrance to the lane
stood a military policeman with an oil lantern.
He asked us to
keep well to the middle of the road as the verges were mined.
replied that we should not mind keeping to the middle of the road,
for which he politely thanked us.
Feeling that the boot should be
on the other foot, we drove on and immediately met a very large
lorry.
The care with which we both slowed up and edged past
each other was unusual and rather funny.
I had taken Edge, a motorcyclist, with us, to follow behind the
car.
We had driven in silence for some way when suddenly
driver, Woolnough, let out a howl of laughter.
I asked him what
the hell he was laughing at, and he replied: I was just thinking
that if we did go up on one of the bloody things, I bet old Jacky
Edge would turn round and go home in a hell of a hurry? But
we got to Teboursouk safely and had a night's rest.
On April 19th, we started a heavy ammunition dumping pro-
gramme which went on over the
20th,
some 21,000 rounds of
25-pounder being involved.
At the end of this detail we had some
excitement.
We were dumping at night to the divisional artillery area about
two miles away to the south of Grenadier Hill.
The lorries, Peter
Milford in command, arrived on time, and dumping started.
The
area chosen was in a basin with steep approaches down
rough
tracks.
It would have been difficult in daylight, and the way in
which those drivers handled the Bedfords by night, with no lights,
surprised even me and made me feel extremely proud.
There were no gunner guides or loaders, which surprised us
Tank Transporter
