328
SOUTH-EAST AULA
plans for dispersing reserves of material and strengthening
the
landward defences were not completed, and a week later the forces
were compelled to capitulate.
Since it has been asserted that among contributory causes for
capitulation was a lack of food and petrol it is pertinent to outline
the position when the battle opened.
In fact the supplies and
transport
situation
was not
unfavourable.
The enemy's rapid
advance through Malaya had, of course, led to losses in both the
stocks of food and petrol held there north of Kuala Lumpur, but
it had been possible to back load most of the contents of dumps
and depots south of that town.
Some of this stock was, because of
a lack of labour, still on rail and part of it had to be dumped off
the rail trucks at any convenient point.
When the question of the division of the command reserves
between Singapore and the mainland was first considered, the DDST
had urged that not more than 3o days of the 180 days' supplies to
be held should be kept on the mainland.
But because of the
expected vulnerability of communications and the possibility of an
advance into Siam (plan 'Matador'), it was decided that a higher
proportion had to be held in the mainland depots.
However,
there were still substantial stocks available in Singapore when the
withdrawal to the island took place.
Main stocks were held at
the base supply depot at Bukit Timah, where there was also some
cold storage, a field bakery and the atta mills for supplying Indian
troops.
The principal cold storage depot and static bakery were at
Alexandra,
and there were several subsidiary stores at the Turf
Club, in a factory, in a cinema and in various godowns.
There
was a plan for putting down a number of other small dumps so as to
disperse the main reserves and to reduce the distance to be covered
by units' transport; and it was also ordered that all units were to
draw up nine days' preserved rations, but because of the speed of
events these arrangements were not completed.
Petrol supplies did not give the new DDST* any real cause for
concern, as the canned and bulk reserves held in Singapore were
backed by the large civil stocks held in the civil oil installations at
Pulau Bukum and Pulau Sambue.
When the campaign opened
there were
six million
gallons
stored in Malaya and further
despatches of about 100,000 gallons a week had been sent forward
from Singapore, but some of these had not been unloaded and were
returned intact.
A good deal of petrol had been lost on the main-
land in spite of energetic attempts to back load stocks at outlying
depots and dumps.
But because of the distance from the railway,
* Brigadier C. E. Davis had been withdrawn to take up a similar appointment with
the new HQ South-West Pacific Command and replaced by Lieut-Colonel C.
Richards, who had been commanding the RA C & replace sport units in Singapore,
MALAYA
329
and the large quantities involved, these attempts were not always
successful.
It is known that when the final withdrawal to the island took
place a million gallons were held in the main depot at Bukit Timah
and a reserve of another million close by; one and a half million
gallons were held in bulk at a civil depot, taken over by the army, at
Woodland road, and there were also smaller reserves of about
100,000 gallons each held at other points.
There was no lack of transport, as all the locally raised companies
which were operating in Malaya had been withdrawn and were in
good order and the RASC resources had just been reinforced by
the arrival of the four companies of the 18th Division.
In fact
there was so much transport on the roads in the relatively restricted
area that an embargo had to be placed on all but essential civil trans-
port and as distances were short there was no need for making use
of second and third line transport. If there was a transport difficulty,
it was caused by the time taken to carry out a given task as com-
munications became more congested and temporarily interrupted
in consequence of the enemy's bombing raids.
These raids caused
some losses, and the first serious loss was the destruction of garrisons'
mobile reserve of ammunition, which had been held under load in
an RASC platoon.
When the campaign first began the only RASC workshops for
repairing RASC MT vehicles were at Kuala Lumpur and at
Alexandra.
The former, the heavy repair wing of 28 Combined
MT Depot, was well accommodated but was never put into full
use, as the unit was the only large British unit at Kuala Lumpur
and, soon after its arrival was required for defence duties.
The
workshop at Alexandra was small and was a development of the
permanent peace workshops belonging to 52 Company.
The siting
of the main repair unit at Kuala Lumpur was governed by the
fact that the fullest possible use was made of local civil repair
facilities in Singapore.
Although it was possible to evacuate the Combined Depot to
Singapore and a good site in a reinforced concrete garage was found
for it there was no time to reinstal the machinery.
The men of
the unit were used to assist the various company workshops and
later to find crews for the WD vessels which had been deserted by
their civilian complements.
It can be safely affirmed that the general resources behind the
RASC when the offensive against the island began
were more
than adequate.
But the fighting strength of all formations had
been sadly depleted.
Orders were given about January 7th to the
18th Divisional RASC, the only RASC organization with a full
strength of British ranks, to form two companies for an infantry
