326
SOUTH-EAST ADIA
which took its place in the firing line and held it until the final
capitulation.
The progress of operations in the last week of January made a
withdrawal into the confines of the island inevitable.
On the 25th,
responsibility for the evacuation of all the remaining RASC depots
and dumps was handed over to the Officer Commanding RASC,
Johore, who describes the task somewhat lightly as a 'tedious' one,
mainly because of traffic congestion and the continued panicking
of the native labour on which he was forced to rely.
But by
January 3oth, 1942, most of the stocks and all MT had been cleared,
to such good account that when he withdrew at 0530 hours on
3oth he was able to report that the stores remaining were:-
Geram Choh SD, about 200 tons of rice; Galang Patah SD, small
quantity of rice; Senai SD, small quantities of food; 113 SPS, nil;
76 Petrol Depot, nil; 9 SPS (AIF), 100,000 rations.
The Battle of Singapore
The withdrawal of the British forces from the mainland to the
island of Singapore was completed by the morning of January 3Ist,
1942, when a gap was then blown in the only road link-the cause-
way—with Johore.
The future battle ground was not, as popularly
supposed, a fortress; it was only a large area of land and water with
permanent defences designed to meet seaborne attacks and with
reasonably good anti-aircraft defences.
The total area in which
our forces were concentrated only measured about 37 miles by 15,
but even so there were insufficient troops to man the perimeter in
any strength, and there were no tanks to support them.
There
was a huge Asiatic population, and even if the facilities had been
available, there was an almost insuperable civil defence problem
to be overcome.
On the completion of the withdrawal formations were so disposed
that the western coast was defended by the lath Indian Brigade
and the 22nd Australian Brigade, but the former consisted of untried
troops who had no practical battle training for the conditions they
were to face.
Northwards and to the east the perimeter was
defended by the 27th Australian Brigade and the III Corps, which
consisted of the reformed t1th Indian Division and the i8th British
Division.
The
southern coast lines.
Malaya brigades were disposed to defend the
A lull in land operations followed the withdrawal, but the enemy
lost no time in bringing the full weight of his air power and long
range artillery against the many targets which presented themselves,
and there was little respite or rest which was so badly needed by the
battle scarred and weary formations.
When the enemy resumed
the offensive on January 8th, the battle developed so quickly that
Bahru
ALSEWAY
Sembawang®
SELETAR
Bt. Panjang
•Tengah
PEIRCE RES
• Paya Lebar
Kallang-
INGAPORE
Alerandrao
Sembilan IS
P. Blakang Mati
?Bukum
Singapore
