560
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
track a few feet wide and of course in darkness. Normally
two
stretcher cases would entail the use of three men, one to lead the
mule and two to steady the litters, but this animal brought them
back alone and unaided.
Finale: Winter in the Apennines
It seems fitting that the last account of the adventures of our
pack units in Italy should not only describe the most arduous and
protracted period of the whole campaign, but should also recount
the work of a group composed of Italian companies strengthened
by a single company of one of the well tried units of the RASC.
There were two kinds of Italian companies,
those composed of
'co-operators', and those of members of the Italian Army.
Co-
operators were those who volunteered to throw in their lot with us
as individuals before the remnants of the Italian Army on the
Allied side of the lines could be officially recognized as Allies and
reorganized as an Italian army.
The co-operators were in fact
mercenaries accepting the British military system in all its aspects,
while the officers and men of the re-formed Italian Army were a
part of the Italian Army in all respects.
Theoretically the Italians
of the Italian Army were inter alia clothed and fed by the Italian
administration, although they were working for us, but in practice
the Italian Army administration was hard put to it to do this.
Thus came the extraordinary situation of the co-operator enjoying
all the advantages of well-made British uniform,
relatively good
rates of pay, and a substantial ration, and the Italian Army man
doing his best with such clothing and standard of food as could be
provided by the Italian Government from its meagre resources.
The group concerned in this last phase had five companies formed
between late 1943 and early 1944 and were drawn from Alpini,
Italian cavalry, a mountain regiment, and other Italian units.
Whatever opinions may be held about the part played by the
Italian Army in some phases of the Second World War, there is no
doubt that the men of the pack units led by their British cadres
displayed the greatest gallantry, night after night, under the most
appalling conditions.
The operations north of Florence before the
final breakout to the River Po were most protracted and trying,
starting as they did in the autumn of 1944 and lasting for 22 weeks.
This was to be the last drawn-out stand by the enemy,,
craftily encouraged the advancing American formations and the
Ist and 78th Infantry and 6th Armoured Divisions to pursue him
along the difficult Route 65 and then contrives on force them, still
in pursuit, to two axes-one the road leading to the Futa pass an
the other the track which led to Castel del Rio.
were both heavy.
Roads disappeared in a sea of mud so deep that
ANIMAL TRANSPORT
a jeep's bumper pushed the mud along like a snow-plough.
over, these roads wound up in a series of hairpin bends to a height
of about 3,000 feet. All the bends and parts of the mountain sides
had been blown up by the retreating enemy, and although they
were patched up by our sappers they were prone to disappear in a
long slide whenever too weighty a load
traversed them.
divisions, with their mules,
had floundered on over the top and
down to the valley until just after Castel del Rio, where they came
up against solid enemy resistance on the last range of hills before
This was exactly what the enemy wanted.
had about two miles of supply lines, whereas we had 35 over
desolate, wild, mountainous country crossed by only one
Motor transport managed to supply to divisions as far as just north
of Castel del Rio, but from there on everything had to be carried
This last range of hills, where the infantry were to stay
for some 22 weeks, was one of the bleakest spots in the Apennines
and-except for a rare farmhouse-offered no shelter at all.
The conditions for pack transport were miserable.
grotesque sight to see the columns lurching, splashing and flounder-
ing up steep muddy tracks, the mules sweating and grunting, and
the men with the mud over their rubber knee boots hanging on to
the odd strap to keep up and going.
Over it all shone the ghostly
light of the moon.
In the early stages of this operation an act of great courage was
performed by Major 'Tommy' Arnott, one of the company com-
manders. In the darkness and heavy rain a troop leader missed
the swept track and led his troop into the mines.
He himself was
Lying there, with a leg blown off, he ordered
his men to stay where they were until the rear section, not in the
minefield, could fetch a mine-sweeper.
His shout was heard by
Major Arnott, the commanding officer, who hurried back and
without a thought for his own safety ran to the wounded troop
leader,* picked him up and carried him to safety.
After getting
some tape, he then returned to the rest of the troop and, using
himself as a human mine detector, led the whole troop back on the
track, taping a lane as he went.
The End of the Campaign
The last phase came when the weather improved as the Eighth
Army entered Bologna and the Americans reached it from the
mountains.
The units which the pack companies were supporting,
having at last reached the plains, disappeared in clouds of dust, the
pack troops struggling to keep up with them,
and some even
at Florence.
* Lieutenant J. Niven; he died of wounds and was buried in the British Cemetery
NI RASC
