260
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
Pizzo early on the morning of September 8th in the enemy's rear
materially assisted the advance and the continued threat of similar
operations hastened the German withdrawal northwards.
It was seldom possible for XIII Corps to establish a FMC*
sufficiently far forward, and so CRASC were compelled to hold
and carry larger reserves than is normal.
These were moved for-
ward by ferrying, which placed a heavy burden on divisional second
line transport and would have been quite impossible if the column
had not consisted of 10 transport platoons at that time.
Operation 'Avalanche'
The landings at Salerno were planned to take place on September
gth, the morning after the armistice with Italy, signed on September
3rd,
was to be
made public.
It was hoped that the resulting
confusion would enable the assaulting troops to get well established
ashore without having to overcome strongly organized opposition.
Instead, they
met on the beaches strong and determined German
resistance.
Anticipating such an assault, the enemy had strength-
ened his defences, and at the time a German division was engaged
on an exercise in Salerno Bay.
Instead of being demoralized by
the defection of the Italians, the Germans redoubled their efforts
and fought
fiercely to annihilate the assaulting forces, to give
themselves time to reorganize themselves in Italy and to meet the
possible threat to their communications from their turn-coat ally.
For a week Fifth Army's position at Salerno was precarious.
During this period the RASC played their full part in keeping the
forces in the beach-head supplied.
By the evening of D Day, 519
Company and a detachment of 521 Company, part of the 46th
Divisional Transport Column,
division for the first week.
were ashore and maintained the
58 Detail Issue Depot was also ashore
on D Day in the 56th Divisional area, and the dukws of 239 Company
worked continuously from ship to shore.
Many immediate awards for gallantry were earned by RASC men
during
phase.
Dvr
Company (Motor
Ambulance Company) and Dvr R. Leese, of the ยง6th Division, were
both awarded the Military Medal for their gallantry in evacuating
casualties under fire on September gth, and Captain J. E. Johnson,
ammunition officer of Headquarters
CRASC,
X Corps
was awarded the Military Conse for his part in ensuring the vital
supply of ammunition under most difficult conditions.
During the
following days RASC drivers took their place in the line to help
repel enemy counterattacks, and three more ambulance drivers of
the 56th Division were
awarded the
Military
Medal: Dvr
Caudwell. Dur C. F. V. Bott and Dvr K. E. Shaw (who had already
* Fill Aintenance Centre not Looth as Corps Maintenance Area (CMA).
ITALY
261
won the Distinguished Conduct Medal in the Western Desert).
The same award was also earned by Dvr F. Shearsby, Headquarters,
94 Sub-Area.
By September I6th, when patrols from the 5th Division advancing
through Calabria linked up with a patrol of the Fifth Army at Vallo,
the beach-head was at last secure and the Germans began to
withdraw.
The Capture of Naples
The infantry divisions of X Corps opened the way for the 7th
Armoured Division to pass through.
This formation now consisted
of the 22nd Armoured and I3Ist Lorried Infantry Brigades, and
with it were 58, 67, 287 and 507 Companies, RASC.
Infantry Brigade fought i ts way into the plain of Naples against the
stubborn resistance of the German rearguards.
Dvr H. Woodason, of 287 Company, won an immediate award of
the Military Medal.
Naples was captured on October Ist; X
Corps, with the 7th
Armoured and 56th Infantry Divisions, pushed on rapidly to the
River Volturno.
The docks area of Naples had been heavily damaged by Allied
bombing and German demolitions.
Nevertheless by the full use
of beaches and small ports the capacity soon reached 9,000 tons a
day. Base supply depots were rapidly established, and field bakeries
were soon in operation; fresh bread was already being issued to
forward troops by the end of September.
Landings at Taranto
It had been appreciated from the beginning that, owing to the
lack of communications across the Apennines, an advance up the
Italian peninsula could not be maintained entirely from
coast ports in the Bay of Naples and that any forces following the
east coast would require maintenance ports in the heel of Italy.
It was not expected that the maintenance routes through Calabria
would be able to support XIII Corps's advance much beyond
Potenza; even before the advance had reached as far as this, it was
necessary to develop Sapri as a sea-head, in order to cut out the
long road haul from Reggio.
With a view to capturing the ports
of Taranto, Brindisi and Bari, operation 'Slapstick' was planned,
on the assumption that with the surrender of the Italian Navy
there would be no opposition at Taranto.
Elements of the ist
Airborne Division were embarked in ships of the Royal Navy and
on the evening of September oth captured the port and its neigh-
bouring airfields.
Among the first troops of the Airborne Division
to land were 136 all ragth of the divisional RASC. No army
