388
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
gunner's ammunition was exploding inside the fuselage.
The pilot
was thus enabled to crash-land in our lines without loss of life.
On the way back to the airfield in the TV convoy, the party from
the aircraft was attacked by four German tanks, and a number of
vehicles were knocked out.
Some soldiers, including Sproston,
took up a position in a house, and Sproston directed the fire of a
Bofors gun with great effect, although under heavy fire.
Air freight, which had not in the earlier stages exceeded 200 tons
a week, was used much more after the Seine had been crossed.
In September, 32 despatch crews were provided by 223 Company
for special air service missions, with food and stores for resistance
movements.
These involved such large quantities that at one time
300 lorries were at work, moving them in the United Kingdom.
Emergency supply by air continued on a growing scale.
After the
fall of Paris, 500 tons of food a day for a fortnight were supplied by
air for the civil population.
Incidentally, the first British soldiers
to enter the city at that time were the RASC drivers of the cars
carrying the French Military Governor and his staff, and they were
closely followed by a transport company with more food.
Early in
September, 432 tons of compo were lifted by air to Douai.
All told,
18,000 tons were lifted by air freight in five weeks at that period,
even though there were two or three non-flying days a week,
Supply Units
The supply units in the 'long flog' from Normandy to the Rhine
were constantly on the move as army roadheads and corps field
maintenance areas leapfrogged each other on the move forward,
Each army roadhead was allotted a CRASC supply units, who had
under command two BSDs, four DIDs and six mobile field bakeries.
Each corps was allotted two DIDs and a composite platoon for
holding and issuing supplies in their operating FMA, and making
the supply arrangements for establishing
another
one further
forward.
The DIDs were employed flexibly throughout the cam-
paign.
Sometimes they operated as small BSDs, at others as coal
depots or railhead detachments; 58 BSD, one of the army roadhead
units, handled an average of 1,400 tons a day for a fortnight.
represents one 3-ton lorry load every three minutes, night and day.
With the opening of the port of Antwerp in the third week of
November, it was no longer necessary to
depend on the RMA
round Bayeux as the source of maintenance for the forward troops,
The stocks there were used to supply the troops south of the Seine,
and were shipped up
to Antwerp or backloaded to the
United
Kingdom.
As a precaution against heavy air and sea attacks on
Antwerp, the advanced base supply denots were established in
three groups around the cities of Antwerp,
Brussels and Ghent.
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
389
There were 12 BSDs initially between the three groups, holding
35 million rations.
The calls on the smaller supply units were varied and often far
in excess of their nominal capacities.
No. 5 DID performed its
normal function in Brussels, but was for some months feeding between
50,000 and 85,000 a day with innumerable 'splits'.
No. 538
Composite Platoon was given the job of serving all the leave hotels
in Brussels.
A field butchery and cold storage depot which had
been working with portable cold storage plants in RMA, was sent
up to Brussels to take over large quantities of German supplies in
cold storage there.
It also collected and slaughtered 4,000 German
pigs for issue to forward troops, and its sausage factory produced
100 tons a week.
POL Units
A roadhead had two B type and three C type depots, which held
a stock of about 26,000 tons of packed petrol.
Where the roadhead
was within reasonable distance of pipehead, it also had three
filling centres. Bulk petrol was brought forward by pipeline, or by
road tank lorry, but bulk supply could not be much used during
the advance, because there were not enough road or rail tankers to
carry the quantities forward without undue waste of time on the
return
journey.
The road tankers of 37 Transport Column at
first delivered bulk fuel mainly to filling centres.
After the break-
out, they also delivered from pipeline and rail tankers to further
storage, airfields and consumer units.
With an extended line of
communication, an increasing number of more or less static units
took bulk supply, which they held in barrels, tanks and
civilian
petrol pumps.
This released jerricans for the use of formations.
The petrol units allotted to corps for FMA work were one petrol
depot and a composite platoon.
In the main, this period of the campaign was a petrol battle for
the armoured formations. As General Patton said of the American
armour: 'My men can eat their belts, but I must have gas.'
The
actual distance covered by the Guards Armoured Division was
495 miles.
During this advance, in the 18 days between August 28th
and September r2th, the petrol company of the divisional column
issued 6g2,000 gallons (more than 1,000 lorry loads) of high grade
motor spirit.
In one night it issued 13o loads.
The consumption of the petrol had doubled during the second
half of August, and stood at 4,000 tons a day,
During the early
stages of the advance, packed petrol was carried forward from
Bayeux,
Some 450 additional road tankers were issued to the bulk
petrol transport companies, about one-fifth above establishment,
By September 18ch, the pipeline had reached Rouen, and filing
