82
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
on the lines of communication was transport, as many of the units
normally employed there had either been cut off with the BEF, or had
incurred many vehicle casualties.
The reserves in the Vehicle Reserve
Depot were almost drained owing to the demand for replacements,
and the Heavy Repair Shop, although working to capacity with an
output of 3o vehicles a week, could not keep pace with the inflow
of damaged vehicles.
The demands for forming a company for the
Ist Armoured Division, for replacing losses by the 5 ist Division and
producing
transport
for the many mobile columns,
and small
forces (Beauman's force had to be provided with about 200 lorries)
left Colonel Tudor with little transport at his disposal, but even so,
when the 52nd Division arrived in June, ahead of their own RASC
companies, they also were provided with a temporary complement
of RASC transport.
5Ist Division- The Last Stand
On June 4th the 5Ist Division, with part of the Ist Armoured
Division and French artillery
and tanks under command,
was
committed to attack the enemy's bridgehead around Abbeville
and St. Valéry-sur-Somme, but the attack did not achieve success,
and the division suffered heavily.
The next morning the enemy
opened a full scale offensive against the thin Allied defences from
the Somme to the Aisne, and by June 7th the 5ist Division
been forced to withdraw to the River Bresle.
The direction of the
enemy attack made a gap in the French Tenth Army which soon
isolated the French IX
Corps,
of which the 5Ist Division formed
part, and by June 8th the
British and French forces were being
pressed back to the pocket formed by the coast and the wide estuary
of the Seine.
The 5ist Division still held their positions on the
Bresle on the 8th, but the remnants of the ist Armoured Division
and Beauman's force had been ordered to withdraw across the Seine
that evening when they were closely followed by the enemy who
reached Rouen the next morning.
In the withdrawal the RASC company for the support group of
the Armoured Division was nearly cut off, just managing to get
across the Seine before the bridges were blown, but losing their
supply and petrol points to the enemy.
From June 6th no further pack trains reached the 5ist Division,
and supply columns sent to Le Havre found that, although the
BSD had just been evacuated, there were still stocks of food at a
local DID, which they cleared just before an order was given to
destroy any remaining stocks.
Part of the column was unable to
rejoin the division, but the stock brought back by the remainder was
enough to help the division eke out its few reserves to last them until
their final stand.
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
83
There were continuous demands for ammunition throughout the
operations which at one time entailed an almost continuous ferry
service by the ammunition company-deliveries often being made
direct to gun sites.
Replenishment then became difficult, but a
lucky find of a fully loaded ammunition train helped to maintain
supplies until June 1oth. On June lith there were barely 500
gallons left in the petrol company when orders were received to
destroy the remaining vehicles.
Space does not allow of a descrip-
tion of the gallant stand of the division at St. Valéry, or the mishaps
which prevented the survivors from being evacuated before they
were forced to capitulate on the 12th, but during the operations the
RASC had successfully maintained their division and had also met
every demand for troop carrying.
They had their share of casualties,
especially when assembling on the beaches for the hoped for evacua-
tion.
Perhaps the best tribute is that of their divisional commander
who when addressing all commanders after the surrender said:
'The RASC never let us down.'
June 8th was a bad day for the Allies, as it looked as if the French
armies were gradually becoming incapable of putting forward any
concerted resistance.
was already threatened,
Allied commander, General Weygand, the only alternative seemed
to be to seek an armistice. The hope that a BEF could be re-created
in time to sway the issue was a faint one,* although the 52nd
(Lowland) Division had begun to land at Cherbourg.
Division was almost out of the battle, and the ist Armoured Division
and Beauman's force, through lack of equipment and casualties,
were incapable of taking any effective part in the operations which
The RASC of the f2nd Division did not beoin to land until the
I2th, when Ir7th Bricade had already been sent forward to join
the French III Corps, which was facing the enemy as he debouched
over the Seine. During the few days which the 52nd RASC spent
in France. they were primarily emploved in troop-lifting. as by the
I4th it had been decided that all British troops were to withdraw
The Ist Armoured Divisional RASC, after it crossed the Seine,
gradually fell back with its division.
There was no lack of stocks to
draw on, as they were withdrawing along the main line of supply,
so that their main occupation was one of maintaining contact with
the units they were still supplying.
base units on the lines of communication
The main task of the RASC
for establishing a new British base for the maintenance of a force of four divisions.
* As late as June 12th a
party of officers was sent to La Rochelle to make a plan
