330
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
role.
The order was carried out quickly by drawing on about
three-fifths of the available strength of 54 and 55 Companies and
men from two field ambulances and within 24 hours the two
RASC 'infantry' companies were on their way to take their place
in the future battle zone.
These two units did well and took their
full share of the fighting that followed and, although they suffered
many casualties, they came out of the fight with high morale—a
morale which they maintained during three and a half long years
as prisoners of war, in spite of being separated from their officers.
The Zapanese Advance
The respite from land attack was short.
On January 8th there
was much enemy activity on the opposite shores and late that evening
the enemy made a determined attack, with the aid of armoured
landing craft, across the straits of Johore against the positions held
the 22nd Australian Brigade.
After
gaining a foothold on
the Island the Japanese pressed forward towards the important
positions of the Tengah airfield and Bukit Timah.
The next day
the airfield was captured, and new attacks were opened on the
27th Australian Brigade, who were driven back by vastly superior
numbers, and reinforcements from III Corps were unable to restore
the situation.
The continued pressure of the enemy towards Bukit
Timah directly menaced the main reserves of both food and petrol
which were held in that area.
On the loth a large quantity of
petrol was destroyed, on the rith the main petrol depot fell into
enemy hands, and the same evening the base supply depot was
captured.
The staff of the base supply depot at Bukit Timah had been
withdrawn on February roth and ordered to take over dumps on
the racecourse, but were forced to withdraw from there to Farrer
Park on the IIth, and their final move thence, to No. 55 godown
in the harbour area on the 12th.
These moves did not take place
until the infantry were forced to concede the ground, so that the
RASC supply and petrol units were constantly in what might be
described as the front line, and transport units ordered forward to
clear a given dump often found it was already occupied by the
The siting and the loss of the main reserves at Bukit Timah have
been criticized, but any first-hand knowledge of the restricted area
around the confines of Singapore city itself amply confirms that no
suitable alternative sites were available and, even if they could have
been found in the city, they would have been an obvious target
from the air.
If there is a case for criticism it should be directed
to the lack of organized labour which prevented stocks from being
dispersed when the final withdrawal to the island took place, and to
MALAYA
331
the lack of adequate guards for preventing pilferage and sabotage
by the increasing number of lawless natives.
Yet it must be
recorded that the permanent Asiatic employees who had served
with the RASC for many years stuck loyally to their posts, and in
such establishments as the barracks stores went on working to the
last, knowing well that all hope of further resistance was getting
less day by day.
The enemy extended his offensive in the north on February iIth
by attacking in strength with a Japanese Guards Division against
the front held by III Corps.
By this time the causeway, being no
longer under our direct fire, had been repaired, and he had no
difficulty in following up his initial success.
On the next day,
III Corps were ordered to withdraw to a general line from Bukit
Timah road to Paya Lebar and thence to Kallang.
The 22nd
Australian Brigade were still holding their ground south of Bukit
Timah but, being in danger of isolation, were also ordered back to
link up with the 44th Indian Brigade to their left.
On the same
day it was decided that all shipping should leave and make for ports
of safety, and that as it was impossible to defend the main oil
installations at Pulau Bakum they should be destroyed so as to deny
them to the enemy.
Although the enemy made little headway on the igth, the
situation was already desperate.
It was decided that
certain
technical personnel and others with special qualifications should be
evacuated by sea on the grounds that they were already surplus to
the immediate needs of the garrison and that they
would be of
more use elsewhere.
As history relates, few of the ships of the
military and civilians who left Singapore reached their destinations,
and they were either captured or lost.
The city of Singapore was at that time in the range of field
artillery fire and the conditions due to constant
bombing were
such that pestilence might break out at any time.
Water was
already running short and all normal distribution of food and other
essentials was completely disrupted. Our forces were almost fought
to a standstill and were in such a position that further resistance
could only lead to unnecessary suffering
The depth of the enemy's advance into the island had led to
the loss of all our main reserves of food and petrol, and of the
many subsidiary stocks at various points which were already in
enemy hands.
As late as the loth the DDST, who had been in
constant touch with the Civil Food Controller, was able to confirm
that supply ships were still being unloaded by improvised labour,
as most of the regular civilian labour had deserted their tasks, but
it was impossible to tally what was landed because of constant air
attack and the need for pushing any stocks landed at once into the
