Vehicle Assembly
THE MIDDLE BAST 1
199
is an effective answer to those critics who think that General Wavell
missed a chance to press on to Tripoli,
What of the
M'T
companies arriving from Britain? The men
who could be made available were sent to the desert to equip them-
selves from the large number of vehicles left by the Italians.
But
there is a long step between seeing abandoned vehicles scattered in
the desert and in parks in Bardia, Benghazi and Tobruk and getting
them in running order,
Many had been damaged by our air and
ground action, and others by the careless driving of those who first
captured them.
Most were diesels of which the British had little
experience; the parks were frequently casualty parks.
In the event,
no really efficient units were formed, although much of the port
operation was effected by captured vehicles, and every credit must
be given to those who achieved even that result.
Retreat
The problem of the maintenance of 18 FSD and the build up of
reserves was solved, not by us,
but by the action of the enemy,
On March gist, 1941, Rommel advanced from El Ageila, and the
partially equipped elements of and Armoured Division and oth
Australian Division, which had relieved the better equipped and
very desert worthy 7th Armoured and 6th Australian Divisions,
were soon in full retreat, the former by the desert route to Mekili
and the latter over the Jebel,
As always during a retreat rumours and scares were not lacking.
Notable
among
the latter was an air reconnaissance over Maus
which reported enemy armour in that place and thus considerably
accelerated the withdrawal of Command HQ from Barce, In fact,
the reported Al/Vs were only some rectangular tanked water trucks
from a water tank company dumping water in bulk at Meus for use
of and Armoured Division,
The fate of the unfortunate and Armoured Division has been
related by many historians.
The divisional RASC fared as badly
as the other arms,
It was long before formations from home began
to realize that there was a vast difference between operating in the
desert and operating in well-mapped Europe with its highly deve-
loped road system.
At a later date, no unit went into the desert
without some desert trained officers, NCOs and men allotted to it
on arrival in the theatre, but and Armoured Division RASC was not
so provided,
The lesson took a long time to learn, and formations
continued to come from home full of the confidence born of ignore
ance, and convinced that their triumphs in some endurance exercise
under winter conditions in Britain qualihed them for immaculate
performance in the practically trackless desert.
Vortunately they
were not in the majority, It would be absurd to maintain that
K. HASS
