CHAPTER XVII
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
4 COMPANY (TANK TRANSPORTER)
'I Drove a Desert Dinosaur',
by
R. A. Richardson
(With acknowledgments to the Evening News)
S far as I know nobody has ever
written a saga about the
Eighth Army's tank transporter companies.
Yet who in
A that army can have failed to see them at one time or other,
trundling along the desert tracks, or have refrained from cursing
them for slowing up traffic on the coast road?
Nor have I seen any eulogies of the little men the army seemed
to believe in the principle, 'the larger the vehicle the smaller the
driver'-who manned those dinosaurs of the desert.
Permit me,
then, to say a word or two on behalf of the tank transporter units.
That tanks won't travel too far on their own tracks was discovered
early in the desert campaign where distances were vast and horizons
far.
Tanks had to be taken almost into battle and, if damaged, to
be taken out.
And who better to do this than the RASC (this
was before the REME really got going on recovery) ?
Now this should have called for men with some knowledge of
tanks, an appreciation of the problems involved in the loading and
off-loading of tanks and vehicles specially designed for the purpose.
But did this happy state of events obtain?
Take me, for instance. When I was posted to No. 4 Tank
Transporter Company at Gassasin in mid-June, 1942, I had never
been within 100 yards of a tank or Bren-carrier, and my driving
experience was limited to one or two training runs in a 3-ton lorry;
'Drive that transporter down to the petrol dump and fill up, said
the sergeant.
I climbed into the cab of the already war-worn
converted civilian truck and, faced with an array of gear and
winch levers and brakes and a dashboard with enough dials to do
credit to an aeroplane, my panic was excusable.
I started off in
top. however. and gradually made my way down the gearbox until
I got the giant rolling.
Perhaps I was fortunate in not being in
the heavy section with the new multi-wheeled trailer units.
4 COMPANY (TANK TRANSPORTER)
591
Experience of tank work came when we went to collect tanks
from the dockside at Suez, where we learned that tanks had brakes
and ought not to be secured to the truck with ropes. And how to
load: Stand on the platform, guide the RAC driver up the go-degree
ramps with hand signals, and then jump clear as the tracks crashed
down just where you had been standing.
Then to the desert, where the army stretched in retreat from
Alamein to Alexandria, to wait until they had all gone by and then
proceed up the empty coast road to recover what we could of
lamaged AFVs and whatever else was lying about; and, having
loaded them, to find someone who would accept delivery.
In
those days the workshops of one corps were decidedly chary of
accepting tanks not belonging to one of their own units.
With the line stabilized, we spent most of the time in the area
just behind the line Alamein-Qatara.
There, with maps and six-
figure references but with few compasses, we would collect damaged
tanks and deliver replacements.
From Burg-el-Arab past Hammam
and its flies we would jolt along the 'T" and 'Diamond' tracks,
using the wrecked Lysander as a signpost before launching out on
the mass of dusty trails which came into being, died and were born
again at the whim of each successive convoy's commander.
I remember the burned-out tank-with the dead driver still in
his seat that we had with us for three days; the experience of
being shelled by a newly arrived unit rather anxious about the
sight of our laden truck skylined on an escarpment; and at night
the Bostons of the RAF going over to disturb Axis dreams.
About this time I made the acquaintance of the 4th County of
London Yeomanry, whom I am prepared to swear had the heaviest
Crusader in the British Army,
My vehicle carried this particular
tank with its crew on several occasions during the campaign and
each time had trouble owing to tyre bursts.
The sequence of
events would be: 'bang' from the tyre or tyres, followed at once by
the rattle of the cooking tins of the tank crew and, almost before
the transporter came to a stop, the CLYs were preparing a meal.
I still wonder if there was any truth in my co-driver's firm belief
that the Tankies used to shoot down at our tyres whenever they
felt hungry.
There was no room for us at the front when the big show started,
but it was not long before we were following in the wake of the
advance; climbing Sollum Pass by night, loaded with reserve tanks,
without lights and fearful of our brakes, seeing Bardia like a jewel
in the first light of dawn, and then Tobruk, no longer the key to
the gates of Egypt.
From there until we reached Tunis, we shuttled backwards and
forwards, driving sometimes or a4 hours at a stretch, leaving the
