86
NARY FORCE,
1939/1940
MTSD and VRD, were able to withdraw without leaving any large
quantities of valuable equipment to the enemy.
The Heavy Repair Shop, while continuing to recondition as
many vehicles as possible, at the same time began to set aside and
pack all stores and movable plant not required for immediate use.
But a good deal of the heavier and expensive machinery could not
be moved without reducing the output of the depot.
After the
unit had been given 48 hours' notice on June 15th to move, 3o cases
of the more valuable equipment such as generators,
lathes and
drilling machines were ready packed and put on a train, and it is of
interest that 12 of the cases eventually reached home.
As much
heavy equipment as possible was buried and any vehicles awaiting
repair were rendered useless.
This unit also embarked in
the
Lancastria but, thanks to
the perfect discipline which prevailed,
many of the men of the unit survived the ordeal.
When plans for closing and evacuating the MT Stores Depot
were considered it was thought that at least a week would be
required to clear it, but within 36 hours of orders being received to
evacuate the installation, the greater part of nine months' accumula-
tion of engines and assemblies, machine and other tools were safely
removed to the docks at Nantes.
About 300 tons of stores could
not be moved, and eleven railway trucks loaded with tyres had to
be abandoned.
The notice for departure given to
the
Vehicle
Reserve Depot was, however, so short that, although the more useful
vehicles were disabled, many had to be left before the work was
completed.
No account of these days would be complete without some refer-
ence to the supply personnel companies.
It most cases the RASC
had to carry on until the very last moment with the issue of rations
and petrol.
When operations began, each of the three companies
were divided among at least a dozen different places,
the little
detachments usually being the arbiters of their own fortunes.
Some
were operating small depots in the BEF area or manning supply
and petrol railheads, others were engaged in the Field Supply Depot
at Doullens and the remainder were operating detail issue depots on
the L of C as far south as Marseilles.
When pack trains failed to
materialize, formations
invariably
began to look around for the
nearest DID, which also often served as the official centre of informa-
tion when detachments became separated from their parent unit.
A DID was essentially a command for the self-reliant,
the officer
commanding having to be prepared to use his own judgement in
meeting the many extraneous calls made on his resources.
The Climax
When the decision to evacuate the remaining troops in France
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE,
1939/1940
87
was made on June 14th, the 157th Brigade, Beauman's Force, and
the 3rd Armoured
Brigade were still employed with the French
Tenth Army.
On the i6th events moved to a climax when the
commander of that army ordered a withdrawal on the axis Alencon-
Rennes, which, if they had conformed to it, would have taken the
British troops (by that time the 157th Brigade) well off the line
of their ultimate withdrawal to Cherbourg.
Orders were therefore
given by the British commander to disengage the brigade, an
operation which was only carried out by the skill of the brigade
commander in extricating them from a most difficult situation.
This seems to be a fitting juncture to wind up the story of the
RASC south of the Somme, by recording that the final move of the
brigade over the 200 miles which lay between them and Cherbourg
was conducted by 226 Company RASC, which embussed the
formation at midnight on the i6th, and covered the distance before
them over roads encumbered with troops and refugees in 24 hours.
At 4 p.m. on June 18th, the last British troopship sailed from
