at about 1700 hours, maintained a cruising speed of some 20 knots,
Rhodes still occupied by
morning and arriving at their destination just before noon.
By 1944, the small craft commitments covered the whole coastal
Tripolitania to Palestine and stretched as far south as
Aden, much too large a parish for the one company.
Consequently
782 Company was disbanded and two new units were formed—697
Company RASC (water transport) based on Port Said, covering
the Mediterranean coast and eventually reaching as far north as
Piraeus, and 6g8 Company RASC (water transport), based at
Port Suez, covering the Suez Canal and the Red Sea ports.
Serving these companies was No. 3 Boat Stores Depot RASC,
formed towards the end of 1943 and originally located at Tahag,
Ceylonese who soon adapted themselves to this specialized job and
also became quite skilled in making fenders, splicing cordage and the
like. Incidentally, this unit was responsible for the design and
construction of the successful 'Howard' spray target, which replaced
the heavier Hong Kong target in those waters.
was moved to Alexandria, where it remained until the end of
hostilities, when it moved to Port Said.
Prelude to Operation 'Overlord'
new motorboat companies (Nos. 467, 571, 624, 625
and 626) had been raised for the invasion of Europe,
The first-No. 467 Company-was located in
April of 1943 at Rothesay.
This, by the way, was the first RASC
unit to receive the standard Admiralty 36 ft open harbour launches
which were then becoming available for issue to
the RASC Fleet.
They were sturdy, seagoing little craft which gave yeoman service in
every theatre, and rapidly became the 'maids of all work'.
would carry a platoon in full battle kit on an up-river or coastal
fighting patrol or a good three tons of cargo, and perhaps more.
due course, the four other units moved to the areas of Inveraray,
Irvine and Rothesay.
To further their training and to overcome the
lack of naval manpower, they took over from the Royal Navy the
manning and operation of assault landing craft used at the Combined
Training Centres (CTCs) in Scotland.
For this task they
placed under the command of CRASC, CTCs.
It was work which
really suited them, and soon they were handling ICTs, LCMs,
LCAs and the like with confidence and skill.
Early in the like wie units, vene the exception of 6) Overland,
wete required to re-equip and reform for operation
The assault landing craft were handed back to the Royal Navy and
the companies were gradually concentrated in the West
Mersea
THE R.A.S.C. FLEET
area, to which the central training unit, 246 Motor Boat Company,
had already been moved.
Such was the high esteem in which
these motorboat companies were held by Headquarters, Combined
Operations, that the Chief of Combined Operations wrote a personal
letter to the CRASC expressing his appreciation and thanks for the
way in which the military crews had carried out their duties.
The remaining unit, 467 Company, remained in Scotland and
acted as a continuation training unit under War Office control.
Re-forming and re-equipment for 'Overlord'
Nos. 571, 624,
625 and 626 Motor Boat Companies, RASC,
were then formed into 42 Water Transport Column.*
Companies were equipped with what were known as
They were, in effect, old
iron Thames dumb barges into which had been fitted large tanks
capable of carrying some 8o tons of bulk petrol. They were powered
by two Chrysler Royal petrol engines, and were perhaps some of the
most unwieldy craft that ever had to sail under their own power.
To say the least, their seagoing qualities were limited, and the crews'
quarters indifferent.
Yet, in spite of these shortcomings, they gave
valuable service.
No. 624. Company manned 48 ft fast launches
previously used for target towing and 4o ft launches of an RAP
air/sea rescue type.
twin-screw and
S6M diesels.
standard Admiralty 36 ft harbour launches.
Each company also
had its own unit vessels for headquarter and workshop duties.
Attached to the formation were many 45 ft motor fishing vessels,
for fire fighting.
were manned by the RASC,
and Army Fire Service teams controlled the fire fighting equipment.
Later these vessels were augmented by a number of converted ICVs.
Move to the Concentration Areas
The move of the column to the concentration area before D Day
caused the
CRASC 42 Water
Transport
Units much anxiety,
For example, he received movement orders ordering two of the
units to concentration areas on the Sussex downs.
Eventually this
was put right, and 624 and 626 Companies concentrated at Yar-
mouth in the Isle of Wight.
This meant that the craft had to run
the gauntlet of the Straits of Dover but all arrived safely by May
25th, 1944.
The two MOB companies did not take part in this
initial move and at the
equipped.
time,
only three of the fire boats were
The briefing of crews for the operation created its problems too.
* Groups of water transport companies were later designated, 'No. .. Water
Transport Unite,
