526
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
their unit arrived in gliders which contained also their jeeps or
armoured carriers and trailers, and often also a good weight of
ammunition, supplies, or other stores to start the airborne dumps:
and hardly would these be organized before the first supply drop
would begin, from which moment work—usually under fire—would
be continuous and heavy.
The term 'jettison drop' needs explaining. Many of the aircraft
carrying parachutists or towing gliders were also capable of carrying
a useful supply load in bomb-bays.
In order not to waste this
capacity, they were loaded with an assortment of stores which they
dropped immediately after releasing their load of men, even though
no organization existed then on the ground to collect it.
Although
some was inevitably lost, the rest was a useful insurance against
delay or failure of subsequent supply missions.
After many trials, a
endured for most of the war.
fairly firm organization emerged which
Under the control of headquarters
CRASC (of whom the first was Lieut-Colonel T. H. Jefferies) were
two so-called heavy
companies
(airborne
divisional composite
companies) and one light company.
The former were equipped
with 3-ton vehicles, and were expected to do all the packing of
stores into panniers, movement to and loading of aircraft, and the
provision of air-despatch crews.
All this was done at the United
Kingdom or base end of the lines of communication.
The light
company was provided with jeeps, each having two trailers, and
had also a parachute platoon: its role was as already described, to
collect and distribute the stores from the dropping zone, on to which
they had been parachuted by the despatch crews of the heavy
companies; and they themselves reached their stations either by
parachute or glider.
For a long time this seemed an adequate organization.
At any
rate, it was the best that could be done without making the tail of
the division too heavy.
While actual operations seemed likely to
be at long intervals, there was plenty of leisure in which to build up
pre-packed dumps; the hectic periods of actual operation would
certainly stretch every individual to the limit, but the duration
would be quite brief.
A series of exercises, however, together with
the experience already gained by carly operations based on North
Airborne
Africa, showed that these ideas were over-optimistic.
formations were not in fact withdrawn immediately afier action,
but found themselves fighting on for long periods in a ground role,
needing all their second line transport, which therefore could not
be left to repack and pre-pack in the Airborne Base: and the dumps
themselves were crowing da fast as to be bevond the capacity of he
divisional column to hold.
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
527
The Air Despatch Group
A completely separate organization was seen to be necessary,
and the Air Despatch Group, whose story is told in another chapter,
began to develop.
The heavy companies of the ist Airborne
Division were the predecessors of the Air Despatch Group, to whom
they handed over a complete technique, painfully worked out, for
packing, holding, loading, and despatching stores not only to air-
borne formations, but to any others requiring emergency supply.
The Airborne Column did not entirely relinquish its base work
There was always a heavy company of one of the divisions working
with the Despatch Group, concerned more particularly towards the
end of the war with the delivery of stores by night to Special Air
Service units operating on secret missions in France, the Netherlands
and Belgium, to individual agents, and to the underground organiza-
tions of those countries.
Besides this, the heavy companies of the
divisional columns retained the duty of mounting airborne operations
- that is, of moving their divisions to sealed camps adjacent to the
base airfields, and thence to their aircraft for emplaning, before
themselves travelling by sea to join up later in a normal second line
role. From these companies also came the steady flow of parachute
volunteers who replaced the casualties in the light companies of
their own columns.
In raising and training the ist Airborne Divisional Column from
scratch,
and simultaneously working out practicable
operating
methods, there was plenty to do, and there was none too much time
before the column left England by sea in May, 1943, for its first
taste of active service in North Africa, where the ist Parachute
Brigade, which had been operating there since the previous October,
was being joined by the rest of the division, namely the and and
4th Parachute Brigades and the ist Air Landing Brigade.
The
Noth African campaign was over by the time the column wan
established there, and about two months were spent in the comple-
tion of training, under somewhat difficult conditions.
There was little use for re-supply by air in the Sicily campaign,
in which, of the division, only the ist Parachute Brigade and wome
glider-borne troops were involved; and in the subequent Italian
operations, to which they moved from North Arica by wea, the
division was employed in an infantry role.
This, while it gave most
valuable experience to the column, produced no problems special
to airborne forces which might further its education in its proper
functions.
While the ist Division was away, the formation of a second
division which would be necemary to form the soearhead of as
invasion of Europe was begun. Early in 1943 the unit from which
