126
HE MIDDLE EAST I
As a transport load, water easily gave more worry and anxiety
than any other, not excluding petrol.
A simple calculation will
show that to deliver even one gallon a man a day requires for a
division,
say, 18,000 strong, about 27 additional 3-ton vehicles.
But as the 3-ton vehicle was seldom loaded to that amount in the
desert, the equivalent of more than a platoon was required for each
echelon.
This was something that had
never been taken into
account when planning transport establishments.
Desert Navigation
The difficulties of finding one's way about the desert have been
mentioned earlier.
It cannot be pretended that desert navigation
presents the difficulties of sea navigation.
Wind has little effect on
the direction pursued by a lorry, and there are fortunately no tides
or currents.
On the other hand, few sea going vessels operate with
a normal crew of one, and where anyone is expected to navigate at
sea he is usually provided with a compass.
Few compasses were available in the desert, and the ordinary
army prismatic compass, excellent though it is, will vary
points according to the position it occupies in a vehicle.
types of sun compass were produced, based on sundial principles,
and very helpful they were.
But they also were limited in number
and even in the desert there are dull days periodically, there are
frequent sandstorms and inevitably there are nights.
navigation difficulties, therefore, it was nearly always necessary to
operate transport in sub-units.
Indeed at one time the supply of
prismatic compasses did not even go to one for each officer.
Fortunately,
extraordinary sense of direction.
some people seemed to have,
or to develop,
On one occasion, in 1941,
an advance, when water was becoming scarce, a RASC sergeant
arrived at an FMC with one water cistern lorry in which he,
lack of any other vehicle, was riding passenger.
On being welcomed
with open arms,
he announced that he had nine more vehicles.
"Where?'-Over there'.
'On what bearing?'-I couldn't say,
Sir, I haven't got a compass'.
'Good heavens, man, can you ever
find them again-how far away are they?' _*Oh, about 10 miles-
I'll fetch them along.'
departed amidst gloomy forebodings
that he would never be seen again, but at any rate he was not likely
to die of thirst.
However, in an hour or so he was back with 3,500
gallons of precious water.
He could not see anything dificult
about it.
Plans for an Advance
The end of the first phase in the desert was marked by the advance
THE MIDDLE EAST I
127
of the Italians who reached Sidi Barrani in September; in conse-
quence the third line lift was considerably shortened. Soon, how-
ever, plans were afoot for a possible advance by our troops, and the
RASC had to support it with the limited transport likely to be
4th Indian Division was now forward, their RIASC
thoroughly desert-worthy in consequence of exercises in the winter
and of their gruelling experience acting as third line forward of
except for the
companies, there was
little available in the way of third line.
True, two British MT
companies, 345 and 346, had been formed in Cairo from reinforce-
ments, and others were beginning to appear from
United
Kingdom, but so far these consisted of men only: vehicles were not
yet available.
It was clear that an advance of, say, two divisions
could not be supported by normal transport echelons operating
from railhead.
During the earlier stage when we held the frontier, there had
been established here and there a number of reserve dumps of
ammunition, food, water and petrol, from which troops could have
been maintained for a short period in the event of the extended line
of communication between Alexandria and the forward troops being
cut by sea raids, parachute attacks, or other methods.
The dumps,
for lack of a better name, were called by the old 1914 war name,
field supply depots-FSDs-although they held much more than
supplies.
Someone had the bright idea of applying this system to an
advance.
Thus available transport would be used to establish
FSDs well forward. When the advance took place, second line
transport would switch to these FSDs and third line begin to build
up further depots as far in advance as was operationally desirable.
The rapid advance in December of the Western
Desert Force
(later known as XIII Corps) from east of Sidi Barrani to the frontiers
of Tripoli, where it arrived in about two months, put an enormous
strain on the system.
The attack went even better than had been
expected, and 7th Armoured Division (by which title the Armoured
Division (Egypt) was now known), made a rapid advance.
On
December gth, 4th Armoured Brigade cut the coast road west of
Sidi Barrani, and then went on to do the same west of Bardia.
This strained administrative resources almost to breaking point; 5
Company drove night and day without stopping,
collecting cap-
tured petrol from Sidi Barrani, and delivering it to the brigade.
Several RASC companies were working with 4th Indian Division,
61 as a water tank company, and 231 troop-carrying 16th Indian
Brigade.
The latter company was one of those locally raised,
composed of Cypriots and Maltese, with British officers and NCOs.
During the operations leading up to the capture of Sidi Barrani, it
