156
THE MIDDLE EAST 1
Throughout this period, the work of the MT companies on the
lines of communication was at high pressure.
The initial stocking
of the
Tripoli base was
from Benghazi by road.
As the port
opened and developed, this commitment was gradually reduced.
But the greatest weekly tonnage to the port of Tripoli reached the
figure of 36,000 tons.
This was the average figure for five weeks,
and all of it was moved by RASC transport.
In addition to this,
an army roadhead had to be established at Ben Gardane, 120 miles
west of Tripoli, with the minimum delay to enable further operations
to be undertaken.
It was on
this roadhead that the eventual
attack on the Mareth Line was based.
There was only one road
from Tripoli to Ben Gardane.
Much of it was in bad condition,
and a part of it was on a narrow causeway constructed across the
marshes.
It was estimated that this road would have to sustain an
average of at least 1,200 vehicles a day in each direction, and might
have to accept as many as 3,000 vehicles a day in one direction
during operational moves.
The strictest control was instituted,
Fixed block timings and traffic priorities were laid down; marshalling
areas and control points were established.
The slower traffic moved
by night and staged by day.
As an example, in one day 5,500
vehicles passed the control point at Ben Gardane.
The operation
was successful, but although the distances were considerably smaller
when compared with previous experience, the strain and fatigue of
the drivers were greater.
During this build-up
of the roadhead, news was received that
Rommel was pulling out of his attacks on the First Army, and there
was. the obvious possibility of a quick switch by him to attempt a
destructive blow to the Eighth Army.
Further, it was known that
some at least of his armour was now equipped with the new and
powerful Tiger tank.
It will be recalled that most of the Eighth
Army fighting troops were still in Tripoli.
It was questionable
whether they could be brought to Medenine to take up batle
positions before Rommel could complete his switch.
It was a vital
race for which the honours went to the RASC tank transporter
column under the command of Lieut-Colonel D. R.
three nights and four days those tank transporter units drove back
wards and forwards on this difficult road between
Tripoli
Medenine, loading and unloading,
and snatching meals and sleep
between turns at the wheel until the task was completed.
were so tired, after unloading for the last time at Medenine
that
they crawled under their transporters where they stood and fill
from the Army.
The CRASC received on return a complimentary message
Commander, and the tank transporter companio
received a special mention in an Order issued by Field-Marshal
Alexander after the battle.
THE MIDDLE EAST I
157
Although later than expected, the surmise about Rommel's
possible action was correct.
columns from the foothills only to receive, in spite of his Tiger
tanks, an even bloodier nose than he had been given a few months
previously at Alam Halfa, and to retire hurt behind the bastion of
Even the Donkeys helped
The build-up continued,
Eighth Army had their first, if somewhat unorthodox, experience of
the controlling and handling of animal transport.
mountains to the south of the Medenine position was located a gun
position from which occasionally the Germans would shell the rear
areas including the advanced fighter airfield.
decided that this irritation must cease and that the Gurkhas of
4th Indian Division must stop it.
Promptly to the RASC came the
call for donkeys.
To those with desert experience such a demand
would not appear to present difficulty as they were frequently to be
seen, but when actually wanted they were extremely hard to find.
CRASC XXX Corps Troops Column was ordered to produce 200.
Officers, NCOs and drivers were despatched far and wide in 3-
tonners, 15-cwts, and even cars in their search.
the MT column headquarters prepared a wire corral in a wadi and
arranged water and forage supply.
Some hours later delivery
In some respects it was not unlike seeing the conjuror
produce an unbelievable quantity of paper from
small 15-cwt would arrive.
The canvas flaps in rear would be
unstrapped and out would be lifted one,
donkeys but that was not all following them would come their
hooded, bearded, Bedouin owners.
It was unfortunate that this MT column headquarters had no
previous training in animal
Donkeys of all sizes,
shapes and sexes were hustled into this 100-yard square corral.
combination of flying heels, noise and movement presented an
unforgettable sight.
The CRASC ordered the rapid construction
of a second corral, on completion of which gallant RASC drivers
hurled themselves into the mêlée, seized a jackass and, with the utmost
danger and difficulty, conveyed him to the second corral.
Little
did they know that their companions were still arriving with yet
more donkeys and quite innocently were adding fresh reinforcements
to the battle from the far end of the original enclosure.
And all
this time sitting round the uppermost banks of the wadi huddled the
numerous Bedouin owners, no doubt wondering at the
form of
amusement provided for the British soldier.
Suffice it to say the
Gurkhas got their donkeys, the gun positions were eliminated, and
