272
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
Because of the delay in building bridges under enemy
fire, it
became a common practice to maintain the troops in a bridgehead
round the mouth of the river which had just been crossed.
was done on the Volturno, where 519 Company maintained units of
the 46th Division from a dump established on the south bank of the
river, using its dukws to carry supplies and ammunition
down
stream and round the mouth of the river to the beaches just north
of it, where an advanced dump was established. LCTs were also
used for the same purpose.
Similarly 385 Amphibious Company ferried stores in its dukws
across the mouth of the Sangro (an hour's journey by sea) after the
across tad risen seven feet and washed away the temporary bridges,
isolating the troops on the far shore.
This method of maintenance
continued for five days (mostly at night and in mist) until the bridges
were rebuilt.
Casualties and prisoners were brought back in the
returning craft.
During this period many RASC men won awards for gallantry,
among them Cpl L. W. Dickens, of 276 Company (V Corps Trans-
port) and Dvrs G. H. Jury and D. V. Pitcher, of the 5th Division,
Dvr F. A. J. Baker of the 46th Division, and Dvr A. Keir, all of
whom were awarded the Military Medal.
It was quite clear, by the middle of December, that all hope of
breaking through the German positions by frontal attack was gone.
Early in November a plan had been made for a sea-borne flank
attack in the Anzio area, in order to turn the enemy's position and
hasten the capture of Rome, but the main attacks had failed to
make sufficient progress in time.
Now the landing craft were to
be withdrawn for the projected assault on North-West Europe.
from a serious illness in North Africa, and on Christmas Day, 1943,
However, it happened that the Prime Minister was recuperating
he held a conference at which most of the commanders-in-chief in
the Mediterranean were present.
It was decided that the early capture of Rome was essential both
for political and other reasons; that the best chance of accomplishing
this lay in reviving the Anzio plan and staging the sea-borne attack
in conjunction with a new assault on the main German positions;
and that sufficient landing craft would be retained in the theatre
to meet the needs of the assaulting formations.
The plan involved the strenothening of the Fifth Army by the
move of the 5th Infantry Division from the Eighth Army to X Corps
and the formation of an Allied assault corps-
-the American
Corps, consisting of the American grd Division and the British ist
Division-for the attack at Anzio.
This first battle for Cassino began with the Fifth Army's attack
on the Gustav Line on January 17th, followed five davs later on
Hove Dump
nUVi
Supply Point
