66
THE
BRITIoN LTEOITIONARY FON
5J1 1940
followed every man who could handle a rifle and be spared from his
normal task was formed into small bodies to take part in stemming
the enemy's advance.
It is gratifying to record that the part played
by RASC men in these actions receive a special commendation in
the official despatches.
The Commander-in-Chief's first steps were to give orders for the
formation of an extemporary force, known as 'Macforce', based on
a brigade of the 42nd Division, to safeguard the line of the Scarpe
among other tasks; to establish a small garrison for the defence of
Arras; and to order the three Territorial divisions to the threatened
area.
Macforce was only the first of many temporary groupings which had
to be made and from that time onwards it became increasingly necessary
to detach brigades or other parts of divisions to meet each situation as it
arose.
All the extemporary 'forces' did magnificently, but most of them
suffered from the handicap of having no administrative organization of
their own.
The RASC had no pool of officers to draw on, and the few
general transport units were all heavily committed so that even if
time had been available it was impossible to provide any temporary
organization for them.
Macforce was fortunate in having a brigade
RASC supply officer whose total assets were a section of the 42nd
Divisional Ammunition Company, a large dump of petrol, and four
days' food 'to go on with'.
Yet he was able to report that his force
never went short.
In other cases the forces had to fend for them-
selves by drawing food, ammunition and petrol as best they could
with their own transport from other formations or local dumps or
depots.
frequency with which brigades and artillery units were
detached from their parent formation showed up a weakness in the
divisional RASC organization in that the companies were only
organized to carry a specific commodity, and the detachment of a
brigade involved drawing on three different companies to provide
the requisite complement of RASC vehicles.
The three Territorial divisions were soon on the move to the
north, the 46th being directed on Seclin, the 23rd to the defence of
the Ganal du Nord, and the i2th to protect Abbeville, Doullens and
Part of the 12th Division did not reach its objective but
took part in the operations which were to follow later in the south.
The divisions only had sufficient RASC transport one company
each-for carrying a day's food and some petrol.
reasons
which cannot be ascertained, two of the companies were retained for
general duties on the line of communication and the third, for the
I2th Division, was cut off south of the Somme but then reverted to
maintaining the remains of the division until the final evacuation
from Cherbourg in June.
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
67
On the evening of May 18th advanced units of the ist German
Armoured Division reached the Canal du Nord and occupied
Peronne, about 20 miles to the west of Amiens.
enemy panzer divisions began to arrive in full force. The battle
which ensued on May igth was a hopelessly unequal struggle and
left the Germans in possession of Amiens and Doullens and the last
railway link to the south at Abbeville.
It may be said, therefore, that on the 2oth the BEF was completely
cut off from its bases, and the enemy was in a position to begin to
strike against its rear.
The immediate threat to the rear of the main
front was met by the formation of another extemporary force,
Polforce, which was ordered to protect the main crossings of the line
of canals, from Gravelines to Béthune, supported by Macforce, and
by the move of the 5th and 50th Divisions and First Army Tank
Brigade to the region of Arras.
Portions of these formations attacked
the enemy with some success on the 2ist, and the part played by
RASC troop carrying companies in that operation and the subse-
quent withdrawal was the subject of special mention in the official
despatches.
By May zist the general situation was, however, such that a
further withdrawal on the main front of the BEF was imperative
in order to shorten the line and free troops for what was from then
onwards to be a fight on two fronts.
The operational situation was undoubtedly one for concern, but
the administrative position was even more serious, as the only
alternative line of supply trom the United kingdum was via the
three Channel ports, Boulogne, Calais and Dunkirk.
before communications were cut, the Quarter-Master-General had
asked the War Office to make immediate emergency despatches of
vital requirements to all three ports and he also
possibility of developing the three ports as a new line of supply.
But the outlook was not very hopeful, as it was doubtful if the ports
could be organized to handle the 2,000 tons of stores a day which
the force required for its normal maintenance,
and the railway
system in the area was disorganized. If this alternative line of
supply could not be organized, and organized quickly, the main
question to be decided was how long the BEF could remain an
effective fighting force with the few resources left to it.
When the break in communications occurred it is estimated that
about 220,300 troons were in the REE area mouth of the Somme
and about 113,000 left south of the river, most of the latter being
all those administrative units which constitute what is sometimes
referred to as the military tail. There are no accurate statistics of
