226
DINKANEAN
The secon
avoy, which was due to arrive on the fourth day
(D plus 4), was to carry a transport detachment for the striking force
(for Bladeforce), a troop carrying company, a tank transporter
company, four other platoons of various kinds, and five platoons of
general transport.
The rest of the second line transport for the 78th and 6th Armoured
Divisions and their third line companies was not due until the third
convoy, which was scheduled to arrive from D plus 14 to D plus 18.
All troops in the force were to be provided with a 48-hour mess
tin ration and thereafter with the new 14-man composite ration
until base supply depots could be established and the normal field
service ration taken into use.
Petroleum was to be provided in
packed form, although it was hoped that the existing bulk storage
facilities could be developed within a short time to allow of can
filling being done on the spot and distribution in
bulk where
possible.
Before describing the course of the campaign it may assist the
reader to know that it can be viewed conveniently in four phases:-
the original landing; the advance of the small striking force, which
arrived within a few miles of Tunis only to be delayed by the enemy
and weather; the winter period, when the army was forced into the
defensive; and the final period, when by the combined efforts of
the First and Eighth Armies the enemy was finally driven out of
Africa.
The Landing
The first slow convoy, carrying vehicles and heavy equipment,
left the home ports on the night of October 22nd, the time of its
departure almost coinciding with the secret landing, from a sub-
marine near Algiers, of the American general, General Mark Clark,
who was to negotiate with pro-Allied French generals and officials
to pave the way, it was hoped, for an amicable reception of the
Allied project.
The first of the fast convoys, which carried the
units for the amault, sailed from home a few days later and, after it
had joined up with the slow convoy, the combined armada passed
through the Straits of Gibraltar on the night of November 5th.
The destination of the force was then announced for the first time
by the convoy commander to the troops on board.
Their objective
had been a well kept secret.
At daylight the next day the convoy, which was ostensibly heading
for Malia, was attacked by JU 38s but received little damage, and
at one o'clock on the morning of November 8th our troops began to
land on the beaches around Algiers in the face of negligible opposi-
The commandos and rangers, who were to seize the docks,
met with fierce opposition, but succeeded in their purpose.
Progress
NORTH AFRICA
227
inland was rapid and decisive, some resistance offered by French
tanks
and artillery being quickly overcome.
Later in the day
Admiral Darlan was persuaded to surrender the city of Algiers
without further bloodshed.
Three days later he broadcast a 'cease
fire' throughout all French territory in North Africa.
This swift success allowed the ships which were standing off the
beaches to enter the harbour at Algiers for unloading, although
some difficulty was experienced in berthing and beginning the work
of discharge as labour was scarce and the sea, which had remained
calm during the first landings over the beaches, became rough.
It was a race against time to clear the ships before the second
convoy, which
was due in four days' time, arrived.
The first
task for the RASC was to get supplies of petrol to the airfield
at Maison Blanche and the airfield at Djidjelli, as it was vital to
refuel the fighters which
were arriving from Gibraltar. One
platoon of tippers, specially loaded with 100 octane spirit, was put
ashore in landing craft over the beaches, and made straight for
some minor
opposition.
Maison Blanche winh he day one which dea petrol depots which
had been landed with the beach maintenance parties was able to
begin passing more supplies up to the airfield.
The successful landing at Algiers allowed the floating reserve to
be directed on Bougie, on November roth, the plan being to land
one battalion and stocks of petrol at Djidjelli.
Because of rough
weather a landing was impossible, and the ships had to turn back
to Bougie, where a landing had been effected without opposition,
but the port was soon the target for heavy enemy air attacks.
On
the i2th the battalion made its way by road to the airfield at
Djidjelli in a column of charcoal burning lorries gathered together
at Bougie, and the petrol stocks were sent on by landing craft the
same day.
As an added precaution it was decided to send more
petrol up from Algiers by road.
A detachment of an RASC 6-ton
platoon drove over 210 miles of hilly twisting roads to arrive just in
time to back straight up to the waiting aircraft which were refuelling
on the spot.
The RASC detachment drove without a pause.
was a good omen for the future.
The first few days at Algiers were hectic ones for the few transport
platoons and the companies which began to land on the fourth
No vehicle companiest rest, as there were sufficient men to
provide a double shift, but even so it was difficult to keep pace with
the rate at which stores were being emptied on to the quays.
The
Workshops plaich stores were carrying company manned the winches
of the MT ships which carried their and other units' vehicles and
worked for two days and three nights without a stop to disembark
the vehicles, much to the surprise of the docks operating company,
