206
THE MID-
LAST II
initial RASC contribution was small, consisting of one DID, some
stocks of food and petrol, and later some assistance by water trans-
port. Land transport was to be obtained locally from the Italian
garrisons and from civil sources.
Towards the
end a somewhat ambitious higher headquarters
was formed in which it was intended to include the Italians.
On
this the Corps was represented by an ADST, but he had hardly
time to begin functioning before the campaign was ended.
The plan for landing in Rhodes could not be carried out as the
Italian commander was unwilling to co-operate and oppose the Ger-
man garrison in the island.
In the event the limited operations were unsuccessful.
Troops
were disembarked as planned,
negligible.
but support from the Italians was
The Germans attacked in superior numbers and over-
ran Cos and Leros in succession.
By that time there were insufficient
troops left to put up any resistance at Samos, and those who had
escaped from the other two islands were evacuated to Egypt, mainly
through Turkey.
The original maintenance plan was that Cos, Leros and Castel-
rosso (which was used extensively as a distribution centre for the
approach to the other islands) should be maintained by store ships
from Middle East ports and Cyprus.
Samos was to be provided
for by transhipments by caique or LCT from Cos and Leros or
from Kusadasi, in Turkey.
Arrangements were also made to meet
urgent demands by air.
The plan worked fairly well from the first
landings in the middle of September up to the fall of Cos on
October grd, but after
that it was impossible to get store ships
through, and reliance had to be placed on various methods which
included despatches by caique from Castelrosso and from Kusadasi,
by submarine from Beirut and Haifa, by destroyer from Alexandria,
and by air.
It was often a question of hit or miss, and it became
increasingly dificult to find local civilian caique crews to continue
to face the risky nature of their task.
The sole RASC DID had to be split between Leros and Samos
until an Indian DID arrived in Leros.
The British DID was then
concentrated in Samos.
No one went hungry, as most warships
which arrived brought some food, and although caique loads were
often pilfered, it was always possible to issue a full ration and to
supplement the stocks which came in by local fresh produce.
was enough petrol to keep going the limited amount of transport,
as supply had been organized through Turkey to Samos and thence
onwards to Leros.
Castelrosso.
A floating petrol reserve was held in caiques at
Up to the end of October the organization of the fleet
To replace
of small vessels employed was somewhat haphazard.
Local fishermen, the RASC crav some waised by calling for volunters
from units in the Middle East, and they eventually manned, among
other vessels, six caiques of 782 Motor Boat Company, which was
also running some other small craft for the same purpose.
by Greek civilians, who were well acquainted with the local waters,
these vessels had many adventures.
Their operations showed that
there was a definite place for a military organization to perform
tasks which were impossible by other normal means, and led to the
formation of a further two companies which did useful work when
the islands were re-occupied towards the end of the war.
The few RASC men on land also had their share of adventure.
The OC RASC and a part of the DID on Leros managed to escape
and reached Turkey, where, after a short internment, they were
released and returned to Egypt.
Part of the DID at Samos, which
was evacuated with the headquarters of the force, were brought
off from the blazing port of Vathi and, running the gauntlet past
Leros, arrived in Turkish waters at dawn.
movements through the occupied islands were followed by many
narrow squeaks, but they eventually landed in Cyprus a week after
Small and unsuccessful operations of this nature put a dispropor-
tionate strain on those responsible for their maintenance, in particular
the Royal Navy.
It was only because of the devotion of the Senior
Service that the RASC was able to accomplish its limited task.
ARABIA: THE LOCUST WAR
'All we want is 50 lorries here? So spoke the charming and
scholarly member of the Middle East Supply Centre, and 'here' was
in the middle of Arabia!
So great was the danger to the economy of the Middle East likely
to arise from the locust threat, and so heavy would be the resultant
demand on shipping for the importation of grain to replace that
devoured by these insects, that it was considered worth while to
divert military effort to their destruction, although the time was the
winter 1943/44 and transport was badly needed in Italy.
Middle East Supply Centre fell the responsibility for planning and
The MESC planner, with his civilian
probably genuinely thourht that the so lorries which be at fret
demanded to distribute poison for the destruction of the insects at
the hopper stage (before they take flight), represented the limit of
his demands on military resources.
How they were to be made
available in the Arabian desert, driven, maintained, provided with
poison, petrol and food, had just not occurred to him.
300 vehicles, some 400 British other ranks and 360 Palestinian other
