132
THE MIDDLE LI
Tripolitanean frontier became even clearer during the summer of
1941: the 'FSD' had become a focus of all maintenance and evacua-
tion traffic behind division and had, therefore, come to stay as part
of the administrative machine so far as the desert was concerned.
No longer could the RASC captain commanding the DID control
this centre and perform his own duties as well.
An FSD was not
merely an RASC organization, but a small formation dealing with
every
aspect of administration, including such diverse elements as
NAAFI and prisoners of war.
To meet the situation a small head-
quarters named
a 'Field Maintenance
Centre'
Was
evolved.
Although not an RASC responsibility, the first trial FMC was
formed by HQ 30 Company RASC, all of whose platoons happened
to be temporarily detached.
It quickly became evident that the
scheme would
work, and when
six FMCs were formed for the
impending operations, they were schooled by 3o Company.
The column headquarters were something quite new both to the
DDsST of the
Corps who were to handle them, and to the lieut-
colonels in command.
For forthcoming operations,
four column
headquarters were allotted to XXX Corps and one to XIII Corps.
It should be mentioned that in October, Desert Force Headquarters
had been replaced by HQ Eighth Army and Force HQ had reverted
once more to XIII Corps.
The first DDST Eighth Army was
Brigadier W. d'A. Collings.
Brigadier F. S. Clover took over in
November, 1941, and Brigadier H. A. Kelsall rather more than a
year after that.
A new
Corps, XXX Corps, had been formed
and was primarily
intended to command armoured formations,
The operations of XXX Corps involved a sweeping movement to
the south across the desert to outflank the frontier defences and
bring the
enemy armour to battle on ground of our choosing.
By that time the railway from Matruh and a water pipeline from
Alexandria
had been extended into the desert and had reached
rail and pipe heads in the vicinity of Mischiefa, approximately 30
miles south of Bug
troops would be based for the operation.
On this XXX Corps and certain army
The DDST XXX Corps assembled his four column commanders
and together they planned a method of operation.
It must have
been their lucky day
because the method which they
evolved
formed the basis of all subsequent operations of large bodies of corps
and army transport both in the desert and in the European theatre.
The idea was that one column headquarters would remain at rail-
head to supervise the loading and despatch of daily convoys to
Another column headquarters would be established in the
forward area to receive convoys and control them while at EMCs,
ensuring their speedy return to railhead to maintain turn-round.
A third column headquarters was stationed 'on the wire', that is,
THE MIDDLE EAST I
133
on the Egyptian-Libyan frontier in the area of which it was expected
companies might bivouac on their way forward or back.
In the
event this last headquarters proved unnecessary and was sent back
to railhead to assist in loading and despatching, and in the adminis-
tration of companies' headquarters which remained in the railhead
area.
The fourth column headquarters was given command of the water
tank companies and certain 3-ton companies carrying drums for
water.
This proved to be a mistake.
It was done because pipe
head was initially some distance from railhead, but it would have
been much better if the water companies had come from the begin-
ning under the operational control of the forward and rearward
columns controlling the remaining companies, the fourth column
commander serving as an administrative commander only, to super-
vise loading at pipe head.
and back, he had inadequate wireless sets, and so lost touch with
his companies, and the all-important water supply was inclined to
get out of step with other commodities.
If this story seems to concern XXX Corps to the exclusion of
XIII Corps, it will be remembered that the latter, which was
operating along the sea coast, had a limited transport problem in
the initial stages and only one column headquarters.
Never before
in history had an operation precisely like that planned for XXX
Corps on November 18th, 1941, been conducted and the operation
was never to be repeated on quite such a scale so far as RASC
transport was concerned.
The Corps was to be assembled in a
featureless desert, sweep forward more or less due west across that
desert, swing to the north and engage the enemy.
Allowing the
second line of armoured formations to operate to their maximum
range this involved FMCs being established some 100-120 miles
from railhead-or three third line echelons at 80
miles for each
echelon.
There could be no establishment of FMCs in advance,
and therefore all commodities for initial stocking had to go forward
behind the advancing troops.
The Corps (XXX), which consisted of 7th Armoured Division,
made up to three Armoured
Brigades,
and Ist South African
Division (less one brigade) was 'formed up' on the desert.
It was
centred some 50 miles south of Buq Buq covering a large area.
The method employed
was to allot a number
of map squares
running north and south to the various
echelons.
Thus
the
armoured cars, which were to lead the advance, were allotted the
most westerly squares, and in succession to the east were the fighting
arms, first line transport, divisional RASC of 7th Armoured Division,
and 'O' Services of ist South African Division and,
finally, more
than 20 companies of RASC third line (the water tank companies
