500
THE R.A.S.C, IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
this was found at Rothesay, to which place the wings moved.
In
early 1943 the Americans developed the now well known 'dukw'.
A considerable number of these admirable vehicles were provided
for the British Army, and American instructors trained RASC men
in their operation for the Sicily landings.
After the invasion of
Sicily, a nucleus of trained RASC men with experience of operating
dukws on active service formed the Amphibian Training Wing at
Towyn,
where training for the
Normandy
landings was done,
Some i1 amphibian companies, in addition to reinforcements to
replace wastage, were trained there,
Again, it became clear at the end of 1942 that the maintenance of
airborne forces once committed to the assault was a task beyond the
capacity of their second line formation RASC.
An air training
centre was then formed with the object of training members of
CT companies and DIDs of a1 Army Group in the packing of loads,
loading into aircraft and their final ejection from these to troops on
the ground.
By March, 1944, this training had been completed,
and a start was made in training air despatch companies, RASC.
This training was conducted in very close co-operation with the
Royal Air Force, and was most successful.
The manpower story from its provision and training aspect thus
pursued a moderately even way after the carly struggles to cope with
the first sudden influx of volunteers and the early call-up were over,
and after the teething troubles of the mobilization centres were
past.
There were always, however, a mass of administrative
questions and special considerations, such as compassionate postings,
the adjustment of medical categories (as the manpower situation
became increasingly tighter) and, later, the matter of compulsory
transfers to the
newly formed Corps of Royal Electrical and
Mechanical Engineers to keep AG 8 thinking hard.
The casualty
rate varied, too, from time to time.
Altogether, it was heavier (in
praportion to the casualies of other arms) than in the First World
War, largely because of the more fud nature of the fighting, the
increased range of arillery, and the incidence of bombing on our
lines of communication.
At times, in the Middle East, the Corps
had the melancholy honour of leading' the casualty lists for all
arms. But whatever the wastage was the steps taken by AG 8 and
their opposite numbers in the ST bra heat of the War Office kept
the ranks filled with trained men, with the one incalculable exception
of Arnhem,
Here, however, the operations came to an end before
the lack of surviving air despatch crews could be felt.
One final word on men should be stated in fairness to our sister
corps, the Royal Indian Army Service Corps.
There was consider-
able integration of the two Corps in South-East Asia Command,
with the REASO as the credominant partner, but what is not so
BARRACKS
501
generally recognized is the help, limited it is true, but of vital
importance to us at the time, of the RIASC supply men who were
lent to us by the 4th Indian Division in the Western Desert in
1940-41.
Because of the lack of RASC supply men, for the 7th
Armoured Division in particular, whose RASC companies were
allotted locally from transport assets in the theatre (there were no
assets anywhere else at this time), we should have been badly stuck
without the small supply staffs readily lent by the RIASC for
General Sir Richard O'Connor's operations.
Nor was this the
first help received from this Corps, for in the transport section of
the Prelude is recorded the work of the RIASC pack transport
companies in the BEF, and earlier in this chapter mention is made
of the help reccived from retired officers of the Indian service lent
to us at home during the early days of critical shortages.
BARRACKS
The branch of the RASC that is concerned with barrack services
is commonly referred to as the Barrack Department.
The title
dates from 1794, when the first large scale construction of barracks
was undertaken and woldiers ceased to be lodged in inns and ale-
houses. The Barrack Department has therefore, in fact, had a
continuous existence for some 160 years.
Harrack services is an organization that is found only in the British
Army. In other armies its services are generally performed either by
2 staffs, or are divided between the equivalents of Q (quarters)
RAOC (furnishings), RE (lighting,
sanitary, window cleaning,
chimney sweeping), and RASC (fuel).
It has been advocated
from time to time that the functions of the Barrack Department
should be taken over under some similar arrangement, and such a
proponal was, in fact, made by the Controller General of Reonomy
at the War Office during the war, in 1943-
But then, as on the
other occasions, the advantages of the coordinated day to day
service in mecting domestic requirements,
which the
Department can rive, affecting directly, as it does. the welfare and
consequently the morale of the troops, has turned the outcome of
the controversy in favour of the retention of the department.
the carly stages of a war this co-ordinated service that the Barrack
Department can give may be of particular value, for if the arrange-
ments for men to be housed, to have beds and bedding, and to be
provided with beating lichting and cooking faellities are not ade
quate, at a time when men have fust left comfortable homes.
morale can be adversely affected richt at the outset.
Before the
war, however, a deficiency existed in this element of co-ordination,
