A DIVISIONAL R.A.S.C.
625
until we heard that an enemy patrol had broken through and was
somewhere in the hills on our left, and that the gunners had gone
off with their rifles to drive them out.
We started to unload the
lorries ourselves, hoping the gunners would return soon.
The patrol, it transpired, was not at this time a threat to us, but
the enemy were on the move against us.
called "The horse who blew first',
I once saw a clever sketch
depicting a man trying to give
a horse a pill through a blowpipe, but the horse blew first.
That is
exactly what happened in our case.
The enemy got wind of an
attack and put in his own first, in an attempt to delay us.
I was at the bottom of the basin, unloading, when we received
the first indication that something was wrong, for a certain amount
of firing broke out on our left and tracer kept flying across our front.
We were working about 1oo lorries that night and Peter Milford
was at the top of the basin checking them in and out, so I did not
know the exact situation myself, as all the wagons split up into
small parties,
dumping their ammunition in different parts of the
area, according to the
battery locations.
However, I saw all the
lorries eventually gathered together into one convoy and checked
them out of the area.
I then began to walk back to my own car.
I had just reached some crossroads near a farm when another
20 laden lorries drove into the basin and vanished down a track to
my left, in the direction from which the tracer was coming.
thought there was nothing to worry about and went on to my car,
about 150 yards from the farm.
There I found Woolnough and Moulton lying in a most martial
manner on a bank, rifle in hand and tin hat on head.
They told
me that a gunner officer had told them the patrol, a strong one,
had broken right through and that they must help to defend the
location.
They had a 'last man,
last round' atmosphere about
them, but gave the impression that they had hoped I might be
coming home at any minute now.
At this point a lot more tracer came over from the direction of
my wretched 2o lorries, so I started off down the track again after
them, getting a pillion lift from a gunner subaltern on a motorcycle,
He took me straight to them, and we found the last half dozen still
unloading, not the least concerned at the cross fire but very much
concerned at the lack of loaders.
I gave a hand in the unloading,
and never had 25-pounder ammunition seemed heavier,
1 then
rejoined Woolnough and Moulton, who seemed pleased to see me
return, and we moved off after the empty convoy.
Once out on the road the convoy did not take its proper route.
Instead of turning left down a track called 'Red Cap Alley, it kept
straight on over the cross roads towards Medjez el Bab.
Eventually
I overtook it, halted with its head in an avenue of trees just short of
