412
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
general but changing situation at home resulting from the unexpected
course of the war.
It is therefore convenient to open this account
of the effort of the RASC in the
United Kingdom with a brief
description of those conditions, with special reference to the tasks
which fell on the home commands.
At the outbreak of war the United Kingdom was divided into
five home commands, Northern Ireland being classed as a separate
district, and all of these areas had to be denuded of their experienced
men to provide for the field force and for reinforcements for our
garrisons overscas.
It was left to the senior RASC officer in each
command headquarters, the ADST (later upgraded to DDST), to
carry on to fill the gaps in his ranks and at the same time to cater
for his increased commitments.
However, the gaps were filled and
the first rush was tided over.
It was intended that commands
should rely initially on extensive hirings of civilian vehicles and
drivers to replace those transport companies which had disappeared
almost overnight to join the field force, but this temporary arrange-
ment was found to be both unsatisfactory and costly.
Before long
new companies had to be raised on an equal priority with the
requirements of the field force.
These companies
were named
station transport companies'.
Six had to be provided before the
end of 1939, and a further 17 by April, 1940.
To economize in
man power they were not provided with the usual company work-
shops sections, but separate arrangements for repairs and inspection
were made by forming, at the wame time,
station maintenance
companies' which took care of all RASC units in their area except
those belonging to field formations.
As the months went by ATS transport companies took their
place beside the RASC units, and, later still, members of both corps
were merged into 'mixed transport companies' with great success.
To the station transport companies and ATS companies were
added various specialist companies, such as motorcoach companies,
water transport or motorboat companies, GT companies allotted
to ammunition carrying, a company for work with the Royal Navy
on the disposal of mines, and a host of other units.
Most of these
will be mentioned later.
The pre-war plan for providing, each command with a small
number of supply depots and complementary
NAAFI stores in
peace and for opening further new depots on mobilization sueceeded
n coping with the greatly increased numbers in the Army and the
Royal Air Force when mobilized, but lack of staff and some delay
in opening stores as the NAAFT had been denuded of many of their
experienced men who were army reservists, meant that for some
Weeks a large number of units, paricularly those of the Territorial
Army, had to rely on making civil meal contracts of on similar
GENERAL SURVEY
413
arrangements for their sustenance.
This eventuality had been
foreseen, and rates of monetary allowances had been settled for the
purpose before the war.
The experience of the first few weeks of
the war gave, however, satisfactory proof that the pre-war arrange-
ments for supply, through RASC supply depots, by the triple
agencies of the Army, the NAAFI and the new Ministry of Food,
were generally sound.
The
small ST staffs in commands had also many other pre-
occupations, with the barracks and transport services, and with the
supervising and assisting of units which were mobilizing, for at the
beginning of the war responsibility for the succewful mobilization
of RASC units in a command was that of the ADST.
It was, of
course, only natural that the people left in the home commands
had to take second place in reflected glory to those who were to
take the field, so this is, perhaps, a fitting place to record what
credit is due to the
many older officers and NCOs and former
civilian employees of the RASC who rallied to the flag in the time
of need.
The supply and transport organizations in home commands were
static, as indeed was the whole structure of the home organization.
Evolved over a period of many years, the home organization was
solely related to administrative considerations, such as the avail-
ability of accommodation and training areas, and its structure had
no bearing at all on defence requirements.
The only exception
was the newly formed anti-aircraft organization, later raised to the
status of a command, which, having to cover the whole country,
contained mobile units for deployment as occasion demanded, each
anti-aircraft division being provided with an RASC transport
organization of its own.
The AA Command relied, however, on
the home commands for its food and for any transport which could
not be found from its own resources.
Defence Policy
The whole question of the defence of the United Kingdom had
been carefully examined before the war, but the risks from enemy
action were assessed as being primarily from air attack, and to a
lesser extent from naval aggression.
The probability of enemy
troops being able to land in any numbers was regarded as remote.
There was a broad plan providing, in the event of invasion, for the
command of the military forces for defence to be vested in a C-in-C,
Home Forces, with a CHO Home Foret, and a unall nucleus
headquarters was formed on the outbreak of war.
The finut duty of this headquarters was to co-ordinate the planning
for the military defence of the country, but it was not until the actual
threat of invasion arose that the headquarters had any tangible
