602
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
During the period on the beaches, the company kept up a good
average of tonnage unloaded.
The record figure was 2,800 tons on
June 25th by 120 dukws working for 18 hours.
It must be remem-
bered that the factors controlling the daily tonnage were the labour
available for unloading in the transhipment area, the number of
lorries available in that area, the number of coasters to be unloaded,
and the distance of the coasters from the beach.
On August 26th we received orders to pull in all the dukws from
Arromanches and to stand by ready to move.
At 2300 hours we
moved by platoons to Liverot, a small town just south of Lisieux.
As this was the first long move by road that we had done for four
months, and as the visibility from a dukw at night is none too good,
it was, to be honest, rather a shambles as moves go.
Inevitably we
had a lot of punctures on the way because the dukw tyre is not
designed for long road trips.
At that time the company came under command of II Canadian
Corps.
Two pleasant days were spent at Liverot loading up
ammunition, supplies and petrol, and waiting for instructions to
take them to a forward dump on the other side of the Seine.
Liverot
itself had only just been liberated, and all the inhabitants were
pleased to see us.
In fact it was the first of many real welcomes
that we received.
On the night of August 28th we moved up to Fouqueville, about
three kilometres west of Elbeuf on the Seine, where we sat for a day
waiting for disposal instructions for our loads.
During the rest of
the day (the 29th) Dvr Waters, of C Platoon, distinguished himself
by finding a German paratroop officer and five other ranks in a
loft.
He got a small party together with Brens and Stens, and they
fired a burst into the loft.
The Germans surrendered immediately.
On the goth we delivered the loads on the dukws to a forward
dump on the other side of the Seine near Elbeuf, and then returned
and loaded up again and again, and went over.
We did quite a
few lifts at this crossing, carrying about 2,000 tons a day with 76
dukws.
This was the first time we had done much river work, and
we found that because of the current (about two and a half knots)
it was necessary to cross the river in a crabwise fashion.
This, of
course, put a big strain on the rudder cable, and the shearpin holding
the cable to the steering column often broke.
That the shearpin
should go and not the cable was intended by the designers; every
dukw is equipped with many spare shearpins, and the job of replacing
one only takes about three minutes.
Otherwise the crossing was
uneventful, apart from the dead horses and other things that were
constantly floating down the river.
We worked at Elbeuf for three days and then we were sent to
Caudebec farther down the Seine, where stores had to be lifted from
536 GENERAL TRANSPORT COMPANY (DUKWS)
60g
a temporary dump near the crossing to an FMC at Yvetot, fairl
near Le Havre.
The Seine at that place was remarkable for a
rather vicious 'bore' or tidal wave.
That happened, of course
the crossing could not be used for an hour after the wave because
of the fierce currents and eddies it caused.
The result was that
for four hours every day we were unable to use the crossing. Durin
these days it rained.
Another bad thing from the men's point of
view was the number of dead horses lying in lines in the fields,
where they had been shot by the Germans, and remained stinkin
to high heaven.
There
were platoons of several other dukw
companies working on the same job; but we were the only ones to
work the crossing at night, rather a risky business because of the
underwater obstacles.
Once again at this place the dukws lifted
sufficient stuff to ensure the success of the operation.
Information had been received that the next move was to be to
Dieppe, and we had heard that it was pretty badly knocked about.
Everybody was feeling very pleased indeed about this move, when
word came through that we were to move to Brussels.
This was done
on September 8th and gth, the night of the 8th being spent on the
road near Arras.
On the gth we reached Anderlecht, on the outskirts
of Brussels, having loaded up with petrol and lubricants at Hal and
delivered it at a forward FMC.
Altogether, this move, although
not so long (about 240 miles), was made remarkably well, with no
mishaps.
The company now came under command of XXX
(British) Corps.
We received a wildly enthusiastic welcome from the civilians
round our location at Zuen, and we could easily have billeted out
all the 400-odd bodies in the company.
People were clamouring
to have soldiers stay in their houses.
The next three days were
spent on an intensive maintenance programme which was somewhat
hampered by the hordes of small Belgian children who swarmed
round and over the dukws, to say nothing of their parents, who
seemed to take a pride in bringing all their friends and relatives to
view the phenomenon.
On September 13th all three platoons were loaded with petrol
at 160 FMC and took it to 161 FMC at Bourg Leopold. On the
way we were halted by the roadside near Diest, as there was still
some enemy
resistance between Beringen and Bourg Leopold.
Anyway, we delivered the petrol the following morning, once again
being the first transport to arrive at a FMC and therefore more or
less founding the thing.
On the 15th we repeated this performance
except that we did not halt the night on the road.
Ôn the 16th
