608
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
The whole of November and December passed by in this way,
the company doing transport details nearly every day with only a
few days for maintenance.
Needless to say, we worked right through
the Christmas period, and, also needless to say, the dukws were in a
pretty poor state and in great need of some concentrated mainten-
ance.
The great point about this seven weeks'
work was
that
although everybody worked hard at a necessary job, we all had
comfortable billets and plenty of good food.
On January 4th, 1945, we moved to Bourg Leopold and there
put all the dukws off the road for overhaul and refit.
The plan
was for six weeks of intensive maintenance and refitting, because
otherwise the dukws could not have kept going.
Workshops also
drew 20 new engines here.
As some new or reconditioned dukws
and new engines had been drawn at Vucht, by this time the com-
pany's vehicles had undergone about 60 per cent turnover.
On the
yth and afterwards we took over a total of 99 3-tonners to work as
ordinary road transport on local army details.
We put one driver
on each vehicle and found that each platoon could also put a
maintenance squad of approximately 20 men on the dukws which
had been put in a pool before going through workshops. For the
next four weeks we continued doing daily details and a few detach-
ments with 3-tonners, which, incidentally, were in a pretty bad
state when we got them.
On January 24th, 1945,
experiments
were conducted with two dukws in freezing water to find out whether
any damage was caused to the vehicle by the temperature.
It was
discovered that there was no damage.
The roads during the end of December and the beginning of
January were very bad indeed, covered with a layer of ice.
found that, curiously enough, the dukws held the road better than
other vehicles under these conditions because the tyres have a
smoother surface and are run at comparatively low pressure (only
40 lb), therefore a bigger area is presented to the road than in the
case of a normal tyre.
At this stage it was also found that the dukw
drivers were getting miraculously rapid at changing wheels.
Between January 2gth and February 5th, all the 3-tonners were
transferred to other units and the platoons took over complete
charge of the dukws once more.
On February gth the
three
platoons moved off at 1800 hours, at only half an hour's notice,
166 FMC at Veghel, where they loaded ammunition and petrol.
On the following day they went to Nijmegen, where they spent the
day waiting for orders to take loads up to an emergency dump at
Nutterden, near Cleve.
2000 hours, without lights of course.
They eventually moved
off at
about
It was found that 'Monty's
Moonlight' was a great help when night driving.
The dump at
Nutterden was not much more than 1,000 yards from the edge of
At Tobruk
