348
BURMA AND CEYLON
fight on, march on, and fly on, throughout the monsoon; and if
they were cut off they were to stay where they were, and would be
maintained by air.
When, after waiting and training, 2nd Division was told that the
ships which had been going to take it to Arakan were required to
transport the armies for the invasion of Europe, there was naturally
great disappointment, and the men wished that they could have
gone home in the ships.
But in the end the division was in the
fight two months before D Day in Europe.
The Japanese March on Delhi
The Japanese attacked in Arakan, and were defeated by the new
policy of 'staying put' and being maintained by air.
force was completely shattered, but in spite of that they used the
same tactics when they attacked in Assam in March, 1944.
cut the Tiddim Road, but not the Tamu Road.
They severed the
Imphal-Kohima Road early in April, so isolating IV Corps in
the Imphal area, and they attacked Kohima as a preliminary to the
capture of Dimapur.
The two forward divisions were withdrawn to
the Imphal Plain, 17th Indian Division being involved in hard
fighting.
In this, Captain I. G. Hunter, RASC, Staff Captain,
18th Indian Infantry Brigade, distinguished himself, earning the
immediate award of the Military Crom.
In the battle of Sahaung
Hill, he carried out a masterly administrative plan which made the
next phase of the operations ponsible.
It involved supervising the
delivery by pack transport of all the troops' requirements when not
200 yards from the enemy and under constant fire from mortars
and snipers.
The 2nd Division in Action
At Imphal and Kohima our forces stood firm and were supplied
by air.
Everywhere the administrative troops took their share of
the fighting.
At Kohima this was particularly nevere, and the siege,
which lasted 16 days, has justly become famous.
It was here that
2nd Division entered the battle.
Dimapur had to be protected
and the road to Imphal reopened.
The fighting troops
of the
division were flown in, and with them went the CRASC and his
staff and details of the composite platoons.
The transport companies
parted regretfully from the Bedfords and Fords which they had
brought from the United Kingdom,
and which
were still going
strong in spite of an enormous mileage, and obtained other makes to
take their place.
Then they set out by road for Calcutta, a distance
of over 1,500 miles, and from there went on by rail and road
When at last they rejoined the division, it was fully engaged in the
fighting to relieve Kohima.
This was more than the infantry could
BURMA
349
do unaided, and while two transport companies carried on with the
maintenance of the division, the other two were turned into defence
companies to make good the lack of fighting troops; 24 Company
took over the defence of FSD Ridge after its capture, and 387
Company a part of Aradura Spur.
Then casualties in the infantry
made necessary the attachment of go0 men of the divisional RASC
to battalions to fill the gaps in their ranks.
They carned the
commendations of the infantry commanders for their good work.
Without these men the transport situation became increasingly
difficult, and the two remaining companies were hard prewed and
had to
be helped by the RIASC.
Dumps were opened close
behind the line; deliveries to units were made by RASC pack-
mules, and even by man-pack.
Lorries carrying supplies to the
dump at Jail Hill got through at irregular intervals without too
much interference, though the road was closed to troops on account
of enemy sniping and machine-gun fire.
The work was not done
without casualties.
At last the Japanese began to withdraw, and the division pursued
them hotly up the road.
Troop-carrying and maintenance made
the greatest
demands on all transport.
Guns and all materials
had to be ferried forward, and this involved a double mileage.
Dumps were carried forward a few miles, but were no sooner
unloaded than the battle moved forward, and the loads had to be
lifted again.
Every available man in the transport companies was
continually loading and unloading vehicles, and drivers were often
driving for 24 hours at a stretch over the tortuous mountain road
to complete one delivery.
By the time the road
Imphal was
opened on June z2nd, the divisional RASC was showing signs of
the strain of the previous three months, culminating in the day and
night effort to keep the troops supplied during the last three weeks.
It had certainly earned the long rest which the division enjoyed
when the operations were over.
All ranks had the
satisfaction
of knowing that the tide had turned, and that the enemy had been
soundly beaten and was falling back.
The divisional commander expremed his appreciation of the work
of the divisional RASC during these operations in the following
terms: 'I want to send all ranks of the Divisional RASC a personal
mewage of thanks for the splendid service which it has rendered to
the division during my long period of command, and more especially
during the past three months when the resources of the RASC have
been strete past three monost, but have never failed.
The work of
the Divisional RASC has not always been spectacular, but it is an
emential part of the efficient working of the divisional organization,
could hot have carried out ita racid advance from Dimapur for the
and I go to far as to say that with a less efficient RASC the division
