366
BURMA
AND
CEYLON
to be exercised in the absence of refrigeration space in ships. A large
percentage of waste had therefore to be allowed for.
For the Indian troops forming part of the garrison, a consignment
of live goats was collected from the goat farm and duly embarked
on a small vessel with a Scotsman as master.
A certain amount
of fodder was placed on board which it was calculated would be
sufficient.
Unfortunately the ship was somewhat delayed on its
journey, with startling results.
The goats broke out of their pens
and roamed all over the ship. According to the master they ate
everything except the crew, and anything made of metal.
Only
one quarter of the goats reached their destination, and the captain
on his return, swore that whatever happened he would never take
goats to sea again.
The whole enterprise of setting up this staging post was a great
success, and a perfect example of combined operations.
The strip
was made, the petrol tanks erected and the bombers actually landed,
but the war against Japan came to an end before they could be used.
CHAPTER X
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST
EUROPE
Introduction
N Monday, November
26th, 1945, the Commander-in-
Chief, Field-Marshal Sir Bernard Montgomery,
visited
the Headquarters of the RASC Training Brigade, BAOR,
at Lippstadt, Westphalia, to inspect 1,500 men and 50 vehicles,
representing a cross section of RASC units which had maintained
the armies in the field during the North-West Europe campaign.
The Commander-in-Chief was accompanied by the DST, Major-
General W. dA. Collings, and the parade was commanded by
Colonel W. J. F. Eassie, who entered the theatre as DDST of XXX
Corps, and was soon afterwards appointed as DDST Second A way.
After he had taken the parade and decorated those who had won
awards for gallantry in the campaign, the Field-Marshal addressed
all those present, and he paid tribute to the Corps in the following
words: "T consider the work done by the RASC has been quite
magnificent. I know well that without your exertions behind — and
often in front we should never have been able to advance as we
No corps in the Army has a higher sense of duty than you
You have delivered supplies in all weathers and over all roads; you
have driven your vehicles in mud, rain, snow and ice, and you
have never once let us down.
Without your supplies, our battles
could never have been won.
be able to be here publicly to pay the RASC the tribute it deserves.'
It is a fine record, and I am glad to
The operations of the British Liberation Army in North-West
Europe in 1944 and Ious were conducted on a scale and over an
area which
prohibit detailed accounts of units' operations.
each phase of the campaign, therefore, episodes have been selected
from the histories if unite of varvine tupes and roles. with the idea
of giving a general but vivid nicture of the work of the Corps in
that particular phase.
picture and not to compile a historic record.
Throughout, the object has been to create a
Ever since the British armies left North-West Europe in the
summer of 1940, the main oficet in the minds of the planners had
been the re-entry into that part of the Continent, the liberation of
our conquered Allies, and the final subjection of the German armed
