THE MIDDLE EAST II
the maintenance of the whole force from the coast to H4.
continued to be maintained from roadhead at H4, railhead being
The Australian brigades had their own second line, and 4 and 5
British Reserve MT
Companies (50 and 97 Companies RASC
provided their troop carrying vehicles.
4 Reserve MT Company (50) was re-equipped with diesel engined
buses and Ford V8 scout cars, which latter vehicles, with a Lewis
gun mounting, were used as defence vehicles.
Habforce had 552
Company (late Cavalry
Divisional Supply Column), 3 Res
Company (51) and 543 Company RASC.
The opening phase, which began on June 8th, involved the advance
of the three left columns.
All went well at first, but resistance
stiffened on the second day, and thereafter until about June 22nd,
when it was checked by heavy air attacks in the open desert.
employment of one squadron of aircraft in the vicinity of Palmyra
was successful in countering the French air effort around that town
which was eventually occupied with little resistance.
the southern half of the country was in our hands, and General
Dentz, commander of the Vichy forces, asked for an armistice.
The maintenance system was similar to that adopted in
Western Desert and Greece.
all commodities as far forward as was safe from the operational
point of view.
and farther north had a limited capacity.
could not be relied on, as it was subject to interruption from
demolition by hostile retreating forces.
Up to three days' rations and petrol were held in first line trans-
port.
Water was limited to one gallon a head a day, and was, on the
eastern flank, obtained from local wells.
Habforce remained based on H4 until some days after the fall of
Palmyra, when maintenance was switched to Damascus.
from H4 were sent forward every few days, guarded by the Arab
Legion and by a few RAF armoured cars.
who, with his armed guerillas had been responsible for a considerable
force being tied up on line of communication protection ever since
the advance on
operations,
in consequence of which RASC convoys had several
casualties in men and vehicles in Syria as they had already had when
operating with Habforce.
The officer commanding s, Company, whilst on personal recon-
naissance in the vicinity of T2, a pumping station on the pipeline
IRAQ, SYRIA AND PERSIA
from Kirkuk to Tripoli, was captured. He got as far as Salonika,
but on the surrender of General Dentz, was returned to Syria, having
in the meantime travelled through southern Europe for embarkation
at Marseilles (see page 648).
On another occasion a convoy of 552 Company returning from
the outskirts of Palmyra, was attacked by a sortie of guerilla armoured
cars from the pumping station at T3. About 12 drivers were taken
prisoner, and some vehicles were captured, while others were
Subsequently, the bodies of four drivers were found, but
the remainder were handed over to the French and returned after
The mechanical condition of the requisitioned vehicles of 50 and
97 Companies was poor.
The tyres were inferior and this fact,
added to the inferior roads,
reduced availability
considerably.
Operating the troop carrying vehicles allotted to the Free French
under command of the 5th Indian Infantry Brigade presented a
problem as they were buses normally employed on roads and our
Allies quite justifiably took them into the most forward positions.
At the conclusion of the campaign, the unit received a well-earned
appreciation from the French,
who had been well aware of the
The great activity of the Vichy aircraft gave much practice to
our anti-aircraft gunners, who achieved some success, as was proved
by the award of Military Medals to L/Cipl A. S. Wragby and Dvr A.
The insistence of the Free French here, as later at Bir Hakeim in
the Western Desert, on taking the Hadfield-Spears Hospital into
battle, introduced a 'Beau Geste' flavour into the affair, as many of
the cars and ambulances of this unit were driven by women, some
The vehicles were RASC maintained.
Rations throughout the campaign were mainly tinned.
was provided where possible by the issue of fresh vegetables and
When these were available, supplies depended on whether
there was any spare transport to collect them.
The Free French
were issued with red wine in large barrels, which was obtained from
the French fleet in Alexandria.
Jordan Frontier Force.
Forage was issued to the Trans-
Petrol was supplied in 'flimsies', and stocks
in FSDs needed careful and frequent checking, because of the high
percentage of leakage.
establishment in technical vehicles.
platoons were seldom up
Sections worked independently,
usually being located at delivery and loading terminals.
munications were difficult.
There were few wireless vehicles, and
numbers did not permit of an issue to the RASC who had, therefore,
On the eastern flank there were no roads, and all traffic was over
