428
THE R.A.S.C. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
1939, the War Office quadrangle was filled with a large number of
civilians who had brought their private cars for presentation to the
War Office.
This was an embarrassment at a time when the three
officers in ST 3 who were in charge of the arrangements for provision
and issue of vehicles and MT stores for the whole of the RASC had
other things on their minds.
Remembering the experiences of the
First World War, one of these officers originated a system, at a
moment's notice, which was to prove its value throughout the whole
war.
Every potential donor was asked to leave his name, address
and particulars of the vehicle he wished to give, and it was explained
to him that all gifts would have to be 'outright' and that there
would be no question of attempting to return the vehicle to the
donor when the war ended, or of giving any form of compensation.
A letter of thanks was then sent to each one of them,
but only
vehicles of makes and types operated by the Army were accepted.
All donors were listed in a special 'record of presentations', which
covers some 14,000 vehicles and is still held by ST 3, War Office.
Mobilization: the CIST and Ministry of Supply
The mobilization plans worked smoothly and well, though of
necessity throwing great burdens on the few people on whom most
executive responsibility had to rest.
The first and heaviest loads
fell on the provision branch of ST 3 and on the Chief Inspector
of Supplementary Transport (CIST).
The latter found the civil
vehicles to swell the number of Army vehicles and 'new production'
vehicles available, and the former was particularly concerned with
the production of technical vehicles.
Some idea of the activities of
both these organizations is given in the Prelude to this history but
more notice is due to the CIST's work without which, even with
the help from the Ministry of Supply, it would have been impossible
to equip the Army to war scales in anything like sufficient time.
Once mobilization had been ordered, all eyes in the
RASC
transport world were focussed on the ability of the CIST to impress
from civil life the vehicles on which the RASC depended.
success of the impressment scheme was undoubtedly due,
in the
first instance, to the excellent plan drawn up during the four or
five years before the war.
One of the most important features of
the plan was the setting up of the peacetime inspectorate who
visited civilian owners of vehicles and to decide whether or not the
vehicles were of desirable types and mechanically sound.
of potential vehicles included none over two years old, and the
inspectorate were selective in choosing only those makes and types
impressment was a leral one and the owners were given one of
of vehicle which were considered to be of use.
The procedure for
four centres to which they had to deliver their vehicles when war
TRANSPORT
42L
came.
It was quite surprising to find out how few of these vehicles
failed to arrive at their proper destinations in time.
The four
vehicle collecting centres soon became scenes of great activity and
it was not many days before units were receiving their establish-
ments of vehicles at incredible speed.
The impressment machinery
stood up to its task and the officers and men who had been pre-
posted to the organization functioned with marked efficiency.
Although some may have had qualms beforehand about the suit-
ability of these civil vehicles for field force units, it was found that
there were very few indeed which were not sufficiently roadworthy
to take their place in the newly mobilized units.
The Ministry of Supply provision of wheeled vehicles was
managed at the start by a retired RASC officer, Brigadier K. M. F.
Hedges, who had left the Corps 'between the wars' but had retained
a clear memory of the problems which had faced us in 1914, and
who linked his own capacity and foresight with the productive
capacity of the motor manufacturers (the benefit of their recent
improvements in this respect being offset to a large extent by the
increased demands of our mechanized Army on them) to produce
an immediate flow of new vehicles.
These were, it is true,
'civilian' types and of an inconveniently large variety of models.
but the Army got the desired numbers and carrying capacity.
certain amount of criticism has been levelled at the Ministry of
Supply for the multiplicity of types introduced into the service
which led to an almost insoluble spare parts problem; but this was
inevitable because of the large number demanded and the many
different types in use.
New Commitments
Nevertheless, certain measures of self-help were still required of
the War Office.
The plan which had been compiled in peacetime
only covered the provision of transport for the field force units.
But the war had not been in progress many days before there were
claims for additional transport.
Such tasks as the equipping
the Territorial Army and the expansion of maintenance work in
the United Kingdom, which had of necessity been left for solution
until after mobilization day, brought a heavy and sudden demand
on our resources.
Furthermore, demands were soon received from
the newly established Expeditionary Force in France for units
over and above their original order of battle, and of these demands
some related to works MT companies equipped with tippers, and
also additional troop-carrying companies.
At that time the Ministry
of Supply had only recently been formed, and much of its time was
occupied in building up the big machine and in getting vehicle
production under way.
The formation of new units in addition
