50
THE BRITISH
IONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
force from two to four divisions.
The 'impressment scheme', for
procuring the vehicles wanted for the Army on mobilization, was
ready to be brought into action, and detailed plans had been made
for withdrawing all six-wheeled vehicles in service and refitting them
for special purposes.
The manufacture of reserves of spare parts and
packing them ready for issue on mobilization was proceeding apace.
The arrangements for petrol supply were well in hand.
Orders
had been placed, in America, for four petrol tin-making and filling
plants, and one factory was nearly ready for trial production.
Considerable progress had likewise been made with amassing the
large stocks of tinned and special foods which were required for the
field service ration, and a second large (supply reserve) depot for
storing reserves was nearing completion.
The one missing feature was the means of providing the additional
number of trained officers and men who would be wanted, but this
was not a problem peculiar to the RASC.
It was the result of the
policy followed since 1918 of 'no war for 10 years' which took no
account of the fact that trained officers and men cannot be produced
at short notice by merely increasing the official 'establishment' at
the last moment.
The RASC for the BEF were to take the field for the first time as
a completely mechanized Corps. Each division was to be provided
with a CRASC headquarters and three transport companies, one
for ammunition, one for petrol, spare blankets and anti-gas stores,
and the third, which had two echelons of vehicles, for food.
A
similar organization was allowed for corps troops, and each corps
was allotted two companies, designated by the old fashioned term
'park', for holding reserves of ammunition and petrol.
Separate
companies were provided for carrying the general needs of GHO
troops and non-divisional artillery, and five units were allotted
for the carriage of casualties.
Four companies were reserved for
troop-carrying,
and one
for bridging material, and there were
seven companies for general duties on the lines of communication.
The standard equipment was the 3-ton lorry but two of the lines
of communication companies were equipped with 6- and 10-ton
vehicles.
All the available six-wheeled vehicles held in peacetime
were to be converted when war broke out into ambulances and
workshop vehicles.
The 12 companies required for the four divisions were in existence
when the war broke out, but only in cadre form; the remainder of
the 50
companies on the order of battle had to be formed on
mobilization from unit which were normally engaged on routine
station transport duties at home.
There were no counterparts in peacetime for the supply units
required, so that all had to be formed anew on mobilization and
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
51
manned with officers and men drawn from other types of RASC
units.
There was to be one base supply depot, field bakery and
cold storage unit for each of the two bases.
All the other supply
units needed, such as small detail issue depots, railhead supply
detachments and advanced depots, were to be found from a single
supply personnel company.
No special organization for storing or
distributing petroleum was provided, as petrol, oils and lubricants
were to be handled throughout by the (food) supply organization.
It was an 'economy' organization designed to try and make good a
lack of manpower and of properly trained men.
The greatest problem which had to be solved on mobilization
was how to man the number of units required for the BEF and at
the same time meet the calls for RASC officers for reinforcing over-
seas garrisons, for expanding the home training
establishments
and filling the numerous ST staff appointments which would be
created when war came.
There were not enough regulars to go
around, and the experience of reserve officers who were liable to
recall was one of the dim memories of war in 1918.
The Territorial
Army could not be drawn on as they were fully occupied by the
sudden decision to double their number of divisions.
The gaps had to
be filled by officers who volunteered to join when war broke out and
were registered under the Army Officers' Emergency Reserve Scheme.
The result was that many'square pegs' had to be fitted in, and a policy
of posting the greater proportion of experienced officers to field
units left the base and lines of communication at a considerable
disadvantage. The shortage of officers and men who were trained
in supply duties was even more acute owing to the lack of opportunity
for practical training between the wars in the handling and issue of
a ration in kind at home.
The Administrative Plan
The general arrangements for the move of the BEF to France
were that most of the men of the force would embark at south coast
ports and, after disembarking at Cherbourg, would go to an assembly
area about 150 miles inland between Le Mans and Laval, which
were about 50 miles apart.
Transport vehicles and the mass of
ammunition, food, petrol and other stores were to be directed to
Brest, St. Nazaire and Nantes. Units' transport was to be collected
from these ports by parties despatched for the purpose from the
assembly area.
were selected for establishing the main base depots.
Stores were to be sent on by rail to the sites which
When units had
linked up with their transport, the two corps were to move forward
some 300 miles to the north to concentrate in the region of Arras,
their daily needs being sent forward by rail to convenient railheads
in the proximity of the concentration area.
