146
THE MIDDLE EAST I
aground', was a common one.
Three-tonners had to be used as
tenders to unload them and allow them to make their way out
when lightened.
The effect and cure were indeed exactly as in the
case of vessels run aground.
One undesirable result of these areas of soft going was that the
whole rearward services of both corps tended to be thrust towards
the sea as the area in rear of the left corps (XIII) was very soft
indeed.
The commander of XIII Corps directed that every effort
should be made to find suitable routes further south with a view to
the corps being maintained from the Cairo-Alexandria road should
the congested road and railway from Alexandria through Amiriya
westwards along the coast be out of action.
But although routes breaking off some distance south of Amiriya
had been reconnoitred before the war and one (the 'Barrel' track)
had actually been marked out, they were found impracticable for
regular use by convoys.
Small numbers of 8- and I5-cwt trucks or
indeed 3-ton lorries in first class running order and with experienced
drivers can, by keeping up a good rate of speed and picking their
way, negotiate going which will prove quite impassable to large
convoys of heavily laden 3-tonners driven by less experienced men.
After several fiascos the attempt was abandoned, and XIII Corps
was maintained exclusively from the coastal railheads.
a new régime and reinforcements in troops and equipment-had
arrived in
the Eighth Army, and looking over the shoulder was
officially discouraged.
Two new divisions, 44th and gist, were in
the field, and soon the desert was to be covered with boards bearing
the letters HD, many
of which are probably there to this day.
More armour was on its way.
A new morale had replaced the
universal depression which followed the retreat and the loss of
Tobruk.
All thoughts were now directed towards preparations of a new
offensive and a new swing of the pendulum in the right direction,
from which it was hoped there would be no return swing.
Alamein and after
The period was a busy one for the RASC. Many companies in
all echelons were in a battered condition after a long retreat and
This called
many months of previous campaigning in the desert.
for
re-equipping and reorganization.
New formations and units
including the gth Australian Division once more in the Wester
Desert resired concentrated training in all aspects of campaigning
in the desert; water discipline, control by wireless, dispersion, desert
formations and the like.
Transport was not alone in gaining new
experience.
Eighth Army was built up of a great variety of formi-
tions from all parts of the Empire and indeed outside it, -all on
THE MIDDLE EAST I
different ration scales, —Australians,
147
Africans, Indian Army, Greeks, and Free French.
commodities demanded even the 5ist (Highland) Division were
regarded by some as foreigners.
and
This
process of reorganization and training
was carried
out with a
general feeling
suppressed tension
expectation.
Rommel would attack everybody knew, but the Army Commander
had prophesied the lines on which this attack would occur and how
it would be met.
His prophecy proved to be accurate.
battle of Alam Halfa was fought and won.
Rommel had shot his
bolt, and the second phase of El Alamein began by the building up
for the attack.
Camouflage took a high priority.
one new field maintenance centre was formed on the site of an old
ruined desert castle and village.
Stocks were built up on partially
demolished walls and existing walls were demolished and rebuilt
with stocks.
All this was a very realistic disguise from the air, but
quite a headache for the individuals running the FMC.
There
were many artillery reinforcements, and ammunition of all types
had to be dumped in gun positions for the opening bombardment of
the Alamein Line and the subsequent barrage.
This bombardment
was to be on a scale unheard of by Eighth Army, and most of the
dumping had to be done at night.
A further interesting under-
taking was the siting of reserves for the armour to be drawn on after
the break through had been accomplished.
It was necessary that
these reserves should be well forward so that the second line of the
armoured divisions should not have long and difficult return journeys
to the area behind the Alamein Line.
The solution lay in the
gradual distribution of a very large number of vehicles widely
dispersed right forward immediately behind the forward defended
localities.
Over a considerable period the RASC went forward in
small parties at night, together with the camouflage experts.
Some
of the vehicles previously mentioned would be removed and a dump
of some commodity suitably disguised as a lorry substituted.
deception was amazingly successful.
Even from the ground at a
short distance away the dumps were taken for lorries
by the
uninitiated.
For the battle of Alamein, XXX Corps occupied the northern
portion from the sea half way down the Alamein Line and XIII
Corps the southern portion; behind, in reserve, was X Corps, now
the Armoured Corps.
The great evening arrived and never has
the desert been so shaken as by the thunder of that concentration
of guns; every pulse was beating a little quicker-
even the most
