PRELUDE
Belgian contingent. The political issue involved was whether the
Saar should remain German or become French, and the plebiscite
showed that the Saarlanders preferred to remain in the Reich.
Before 5
Company had
time to settle down at home after its
duties in
the
Saar,
the Near East 'Emergency' resulting from
Mussolini's invasion
of Abyssinia in 1935
and his subsequent
truculent attitude to France and Britain led to the hurried despatch
of reinforcements of all arms to Egypt for deployment on the
Libyan frontier.
threat to the
This move was to counter any possible Italian
Suez Canal zone.
This small desert force,
which
included five RASC companies, was centred on Mersa Matruh,
near the frontier, and here the companies were able to learn
invaluable lessons in desert operations, transport and maintenance
under practically active service conditions.
Some of these RASC
units did not see England again for 11 or 12 years.
In 1936, while the British Forces in Egypt were maintaining their
watch on Mussolini, the old Arab-Jewish troubles flared up in
Palestine as they had done in 1929.
During some of this time the
British garrison was able to maintain vigorous police action against
the Arabs by calling upon the services of the two infantry brigades
and their RASC units which had been hastily sent from Egypt.
However, as time passed and there was evidence of support for the
Arab cause not only from the Arab States and the Grand Mufi
himself, but also indirectly from German and Italian sources, it
was found necessary to make a demonstration of the firmness of
British intentions by the despatch of the
Ist and 5th Divisions,
under a force headquarters, to Palestine in September, 1936.
The
5th Division was already largely there, and the Ist Division, less its
gunner support,
was sent hotfoot from England, leaving its own
RASC companies at home, and picking up units already in Palestine.
disturbances
were rapidly
quelled but not without some
fighting, and RASC units, operating under their CRASC, had their
first opportunity of proving their value on active service.
Indeed,
in the carly stages of the revolt, when every convoy was a military
operation,
the Corps
had ample opportunity to develop and to
display its fighting qualities, being responsible for its own protection
and in many cases providing escorts for the force and for divisional
commanders.
Troop carrying was one of the main duties of the
Corps both in Palestine and in Libya, and this commitment has
remained an important one ever since.
Members of the Corps
earned several awards for bravery in the field, which did much to
enhance regimental prestige, and it may be said that in all these
minor but nevertheless necessary expeditions the Corps never failed
to gain the good opinion of the Army.
GENERAL SURVEY
Domestic Events
From now onwards the shadow of coming events in Europe was
spreading over the world.
Rearmament was in progress, and the
plans by which the Corps fitted itself for the coming ordeal were
taking firm shape
after
the long period
of retrenchment and
improvisation, but before discussing this new turn of events it is
necessary to turn for one moment to the period of the late nineteen
twenties.
While spearheads of the Corps were earning fresh laurels in the
lesser wars and campaigns, morale among units in other fields was
also high.
At home and in the stations overseas which were not
immediately affected by these unending crises,
officers and men
settled down to the routine of garrison life.
Units
had been
grievously cut and were largely operated on civilian establishments.
Nevertheless the Corps was well represented in individual Army
and inter-service sport, the RASC Training
College winning the
coveted Army Football Cup in the years 1923 and 1937,
and the
tug-of-war team of the Feltham depot,
together with their very
strong
boxing
team, winning several
service
and inter-service
competitions.
The Corps was also well to the front in international
events, contributing representatives to football, hockey, lawn tennis
and equestrian events.
Even the almost complete disappearance
of the horse failed to prevent them from taking part in
mounted
events, and they remained one of the
diminishing
number
of
regiments and corps to carry on the
military coach
tradition.
Furthermore even the Chanak crisis furnished the opportunity for a
team of six RASC officers to improve on classical history by swim-
ming the Hellespont en masse.
Mention should be made here of the Royal Army Service Corps
Regimental Association.
Its predecessor, the ASC Old Comrades
Association, was founded after the South African War, but it was
not until 1927 that the association obtained its more impressive
title, although in later years the word regimental was dropped.
This organization has indeed played a great part in bringing
together members and former members of the
Corps.
It looks
after, where necessary, their families and dependents,
and attends
to the proper administration of funds subscribed by members of the
association.
The Corps Band, raised on a voluntary basis in 18g2 and sup-
ported entirely by the individual contributions of officers,
was
resuscitated in 1g19 after its wartime quiescence.
It continued on
that basis until 1938 when,
thanks to the support of the War
Minister,
Mr. Leslie Hore-Belisha,
who had himself served as
an RASC officer in the Territorial Army, a somewhat reluctant
Treasury agreed to its recognition as an official band.
