72
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
reported there, only to find again that the area was already in the
hands of the enemy.
However, we did not do badly; our great
difficulty was to keep sufficient lorries, as they were being constantly
detached to artillery units,
and many did not appear again.
Eventually the situation became so precarious that we had to go
almost as far as Dunkirk to salve abandoned lorries which we manned
and had running again!'
The reference to supplies being landed at Merville refers to a
War Office request to the Air Ministry to fly more than 80 tons of
emergency rations and small arms ammunition.
The appeal was
promptly met.
Lorry loads of preserved meat and biscuits were
sent at once to Croydon airport, and 3o aircraft loads despatched,
but further flights had to be cancelled because of casualties and the
loss of the only airfield, Merville, available to the BEF.
The experience of the grd, 42nd and and Divisional RASC was
somewhat similar to that of the Corps Supply Column, as may be
judged from the three personal narratives which follow.
3rd Divisional RASC
'During the withdrawal from the Dyle, everything went well, and
I cannot recall any shortages.
When communications over
Somme were cut we were fortunately fairly well stocked up with two
or three days' supplies and another three days' stowed away in the
supply column.
and ammunition as well.
We seemed to have pretty good stocks of petrol
The only real grumble was the lack of
bread, but we had a windfall in discovering a large stock of flour
and an empty bakery. Our Q officer rose nobly to the occasion
and at once screened the ranks of the Guards Brigade for guardsmen
who had been bakers in civil life.
Within a matter of hours a
master baker and 2o bakers reported for duty, and we were able to
provide for the whole division.
All went well until we were back
on the frontier, when things became more difficult, and in the
withdrawal to the coast we lost the supply column- later to find
that it had been ordered to re-embark for home on the 25th.
the division did not starve.'
But
42nd Divisional RASC
'Generally speaking, there was not too much difficulty in produc-
ing some sort of ration scale, as Lille was almost deserted by its
inhabitants, leaving well stocked warehouses and shops behind
The orthodox commodity was requisitioned as well as the
unorthodox, so that delicacies such as tinned asparagus and tinned
lobster were solemnly issued to units as equivalents for the missing,
but plainer, items of normal army supply.
One of our sources of
supply was the well-known firm of Messrs. Felix Potin, so we called
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
73
our ration the "Felix" ration.
The last pack train from the Base
Supply Depot at Le Havre which was due to arrive on the 1gth at
Comines, was reported missing, but after a search it was discovered
some miles away at Choques, where it was duly cleared.
requisitioning was essential. Fresh meat was supplied with the aid
of an improvised gang of butchers, who for their trouble were
soundly bombed while at the work of dressing the meat, but remained
undeterred, determined to finish their task.
Bread was produced
by persuading a civilian baker to collect a few local men.
the division sufficient supply until the 26th, and the discovery of
a large stock of ready sacked potatoes kept them going until the
Even on that day, the day on which the division began
its final withdrawal, there were sufficient Felix rations to last up to
2nd Divisional RASC
When railheads ceased to function and our third line transport
units were diverted to other tasks, I realized that it was a question
of the old adage "those who help themselves", and acted accordingly.
It was a case of operation "scrounge", but we had a lien on several
dumps which we had found some time before and had placed under
We also collected large quantities of both petrol and
ammunition which constituted our main reserves for the rest of
the campaign. Later, we found that the NAAFI at Lille, which
was evacuated, was well stocked and could be drawn on.
same time we roped in abandoned cattle and were able to keep up a
fair supply of fresh meat.
Many of the animals which had been
abandoned were in a pitiful state, so when possible men with
experience of milking were set to provide a welcome addition in
fresh milk to the ration. Of course, there was no question of issuing
any regular ration scale, but units realized our position and gladly
accepted what we could give them?
The reference to the clearance of the NAAFI abandoned stocks
at Lille, which were also drawn by other divisions, had a sequel.
Tivo years later a CRASC heavily engaged in the heat of the
Western Desert operations received an important looking document
addressed personally to him from the War Office, and in it was a
bill- for several thousand pounds.
He was asked to verify it and
comment on the fact that his division had appropriated a stock of
cigarettes which appeared to be "in excess of normal entitlement)
The Search for Petrol and Ammunition
There was also a general hunt for canned petrol, but the position
up to the 26th was made easier by the existence of the large newly
constructed filling centre at Lomme near Tille and the nresence of
