THE
INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
types of equipment.
Perhaps the most spectacular achievement of
the petroleum planners was the provision and training of the units
required to operate the terminal installations of the submarine
petroleum pipeline known by the code name 'Pluto'.
Men were
specially picked and were trained for their task on a submarine
pipeline
running
from
Swansea
to Ilfracombe.
During
1943
more than 17 million jerricans and three million returnable con-
tainers of other kinds were produced in the United Kingdom.
In QMG House at the War Office was a room in which, by early
1944,
all information regarding supply and maintenance by air
could be found.
It contained, among other statistics, the availability
and locations of road transport and stocks of various kinds, and from
it all RASC air despatch activity
was co-ordinated.
The RAF
Air Freight Control Centre was in the Swindon area, and around it
the airfields used for air supply and maintenance were grouped.
The headquarters of the
RASC Air
Despatch
Organization,
commanded by Colonel S. W. Walsh, was located with this centre
and received orders direct from ST 3 at the War Office.
Colonel
Walsh's command consisted
of three
air despatch companies,
comprising 12 air-dropping platoons, each of 15 air-dropping crews
of four men.
These 180 crews had an approximate capacity of
g60 tons a sortie.
Two sorties could be flown daily in an emergency,
but not for any length of time.
A pool of six general transport
companies under CRASC War Office Transport Column divided
its services between the Air Despatch
Organization and DDST
Airborne Forces.
All RASC units in this organization were trained
with the RAF for emergency supply (in case of severed sea communi-
cations), for schedule supply (a daily service in which about 25 tons
of urgent ordnance stores, blood plasma, mail and newspapers were
carried), and for temporary maintenance of ground formations.
supply was affected by air landings and air maintenance by para-
chute dropping of pre-packed panniers.
The coralex Crossication for mounting operation 'Ourord had
been planned in great detail by the Directorate of Movements in
the War Office for more than two years in close co-operation with
commands
primarily
involved,
Southern
and South-
Eastern.
allotted
The War Office (in conjunction with HQ 21 Army Group)
extra resources
demanded.
to these commands as circumstances
The two DD. ST mainly concerned in the basic part of the
operations were Brigadier P. A. Arden (Southern Command) and
Brigadier
de B. Jenkins (South-Eastern
Command).
rationing of our own troops passing through the mounting machine
and of certain elements of the other two fighting services probabl
provided the greatest problems with which they had to contend.
THE INVASION OF NORTH-WEST EUROPE
371
Troops stationed in the United Kingdom received a messing cash
allowance and were supplied in part by the NAAFI.
As soon as
they entered the concentration area, they came on to the home field
service ration scale.
But in marshalling and embarkation areas all
troops fed on a 'hotel basis', organized by the Army Catering Corps.
In the marshalling areas every soldier also received two 24-hour
landing rations, a tommy-cooker and a bag ration, containing
biscuits, chocolate and chewing gum.
Special RASC staffs were
required in the embarkation areas to load rations in certain landing
craft and ships.
Men of the RAF travelling by sea, and air-sea
rescue launch crews had to be rationed, and ambulance trains, as
well as one large camp for the receipt of refugees from the invasion
area, had to be stocked.
Troop-carrying from the concentration to the embarkation areas,
ammunition-lifting from depot to ports, tank-transporting, and the
secret road delivery and collection of prefabricated mock landing
craft for the cover plan were some of the big transport commitments.
The War Office kept a pool of specialized and general transport
companies under theit own control during this period, and the Road
Haulage Organization helped in these tasks.
The refuelling of
many of the minor landing craft and the conveyance of water to
ships in the South Coast ports were other important and extraneous
commitments.
By the end of May, 1911, the Corps was ready to play its part in
the greatest amphibious operation in history.
The Amphibious Assault
The plan was to assault, simultancously, beaches on the Normandy
coast immediately north of the Carentan estuary and between the
Carentan estuary and the river Orne, with the object of securing a
lodgement area as a base for further operations.
This area was to
include airfield sites and the port of Cherbourg.
The left or eastern
flank of the lodgement area was to include the road centre of Caen.
The beaches weement area was to they offered a better shelter for
shipping and were less heavily defended than other possible areas
along the Channel coast.
They also satisfied the minimum require-
ments of the Air Forces, regarding distances from home bases,
the provision of air cover.
The absence of big ports was partially
overcome by the construction of two artificial ports in the United
Kingdom, which were towed across the Channel in sections and
erected, one in the American sector and one in the British.
provided for simultaneous landings
by eight equi-
valent brigades, of which three were British, two were Canadian,
and three were American combat teams.
Commandos and Rangers
also took part. The Americans assaulted on the richt because they
