SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
On October roth, part of the unit embarked in its old night-
mare, the Nevasa,
reaching Aden on October 17th and Port
Taufiq on October 25th, while the remainder travelled by another
ship.
C Section, meanwhile, left on its own since March, 1942, had
gone from Zubair to Baghdad, where it remained for six months
evacuating casualties from 24 and 25 CGH to the metre gauge RH
there.
In September, 1942, it moved into Persia via
Khanikin
and the Pa'i"Taq pass to settle at Kermanshah, evacuating casualties
from 5th British Division, which was resting there after the Mada-
gascar show, and watching with relief the end of the Germans'
progress in their direction through the Caucasus.
the unit came under command of the newly formed Persia and
Iraq Force (Paiforce), which moved it in October, 1942, deeper
into Persia to Qum, the 'city of unbelievable virgins'.
From October to December, 1942, the section evacuated casualties
of the occupying troops of Tenth Army northwards to Teheran.
Khanikin to Baghdad, whither the rest of the unit had come the
previous month by way of Palestine, Trans-Jordan and the half-
completed H pipeline road to Rutbah.
The unit was now reunited and moved to Al'Musaiyib, 20 miles
south of Baghdad.
marked by redesignation of the unit as 146 MAC, RASC (it had
begun its life as 15 MAC, RAMC). In spite of its changed designa-
tion it still had an RAMC commanding officer; assisted by an
RASC transport officer.
the company underwent a complete change.
On March 19th, 1943, a move was made to Middle East once
more to the RASC Mobilization Centre at Tahag via Rutbah,
H 4, Mafrak, Beersheba
officer was now appointed, further refitting was carried out and, to
the ge vera ox impent and satistaction, waterproofing of vehicles
got under way, while all ranks went under day-long instruction in
swimming in the Bitter Lake and the Red Sea.
On the invasion of Europe, an operation known as 'Bigot Husky'
to capture Sicily, the unit embarked piecemeal between mid-June
and july ist, 1943, at Beirut, Haifa, Alexandria and Port Taufiq,
the main body going aboard HM'T Almanzora at the last named
port on July ist.
The unit sailed westwards from Alexandria on Tuly oth, 1049, to
land at Syracuse on the 19th.
This port had been captured two
days cather and was the centre of an expanding beach-head.
wit was immediately and violently busy with the evacuation of
battle casualties of XIII and XXX Corps, these being put on board
146 COMPANY (MOTOR AMBULANCE CONVOY)
69т
returning LSTs for Malta until hospital installations could be set
up in Sicily.
A period of command by Eighth Army began here, which con-
tinued with minor breaks until the end of the war in Europe, and
was a source of pride to all ranks.
Sections of the unit worked for
XIII and XXX Corps, and a fortnight of daily and nightly air
attention on Syracuse,
the enemy still having the use of Catania,
resulted in the loss of four of the unit's ambulance cars by the sinking
of HMT Fishpool in harbour, while a great many more, together
with their crews, had the escape of their lives off one of the beaches
when a liberty ship, moored alongside them, exploded after a
direct hit. Other ambulances were damaged by driving into bomb
craters in the forward area at night.
On July goth, 1943, the unit moved to Villasmundo for the
Catania battle, and on August 12th into Catania, after which it
was withdrawn from operations for a short period to prepare for
the invasion of the mainland.
Between September grd and Septem-
ber roth it was ferried across the Straits of Messina to Reggio di
Calabria
and worked for the next six months under command
XIII Corps.
After the initial confusion of the battle, caused by
the conflict of military and political strategy on the surrender of
the Italian forces, the unit worked up the Tyrrhenean coast to
Sapri, evacuating casualties sustained in Eighth Army's push to
ull Fifth Army out of the 'Salerno mixture', and then on Septem
er 25th moved across to the Gulf of Taranto and up the Adriatic
coast with a week's stop at Altamura,
while the enemy around
Potenza were being cleared up, and thence to Foggia.
From Foggia, so wrecked by bombing that locations had to be
cleared laboriously of wreckage and bodies, the unit employed
detachments on the evacuation of casualties from the German
counterattack at Termoli, and then from the drawn out fighting
for the Trigno and Sangro river crossings.
On November 16th,
with commitments in ambulance cars in the central Apennines
round Campobasso as well as on the coastal sector, the unit moved
to Larino and, on December 27th, 1943, to Cupello for refitting
after the slowing up of the battle to a halt at Ortona.
Small detachments were operated in very severe weather, with
the roads at times snowed up, but by that time the change over to
Northern Campania for the spring offensive had begun, and the
time of waiting was used for training, first under XIt Corps and
then, temporarily, under V Corps.
and when the otte communications lengthened,
quarters had short stays at San Vittore, Aquino, and Caprano, and
