Supplies and Petrol at Tobruk
THE MIDDLE EAST I
113
why the unexpectedly successful advance in February, 1941, almost
to the Cyrenaica-Tripolitania frontier, was not continued to Tripoli.
Had this been done, they say, the subsequent troubles would never
have occurred.
However, even if we disregard the fact that Rommel
and the Afrika Corps were even then on the way, and that the 7th
Armoured and 6th Australian Divisions were almost exhausted,
there were simply not the lorries or the men to drive them in order
to maintain any appreciable force forward of the limits already
reached.
As will be found recounted later in this volume, lack of
transport also affected operations in other parts of the Middle East,
notably Iraq and Syria.
The chief difficulty was scarcity of trained men, and a big scheme
of 'dilution' was put in hand to eke out the limited number of
Britons.
In the early days, local Cypriots and Maltese had been
trained as drivers, and two MT companies were formed, with
British officers and NCOs.
One of these companies was employed
in the desert in the first battle of Libya.
But there were few such
men, and other sources had to be tapped.
Many companies were
formed, composed of Palestinian Jews, and these did good work in an
operational role.
Later Palestinian Arabs were trained as drivers,
and were formed into companies with British cadres for work at
the base.
The Sudan Defence Force provided many GT companies
with Sudanese drivers, and two of these units took part in the final
advance.
Ceylon was found to be a good source of supply, and a
RASC officer was sent there from Middle East to take charge of a
training school.
In consequence, several Singalese companies took
their part in operations.
A company was formed in Mauritius
and later worked in the desert.
East African, and later, West
African
transport companies were supplied.
Dominion
forces
provided third line transport, and there were Australian and New
Zealand companies, and also many RIASC companies.
After the
arrival of the South African division, third line units were made
available, manned by the Cape Coloured Corps.
Horse transport companies
were formed with civilian native
drivers, and were usefully and economically employed for short hauls
in base installations, on dock clearance, road and airfield construc-
tion, and on the building of the Haifa-Beirut railway.
Eight of
these companies were formed, and released a considerable amount of
mechanical transport.
By all these means,
transport resources were augmented, and,
with additional companies
coming
from Britain, it was at last
possible to visualize a campaign in the Western Desert with enough
third line transport.
This rather more happy state of affairs occurred in spite of the
losses in transport units when Tobruk fell and coincided with the
I RASC
