538
Alku
A.S.C.
whichever company seemed to need it most.
Rapid changes of
requirement had to be foreseen, according to whether the enemy
fought or fled, and according to the distances covered from day to
day.
In the meantime, replenishment continued to be drawn from
the Pegasus dumps until VIII Corps CMA was established east of
the river.
Not knowing exactly the scope of his task, the CRASC wisely
adapted the 'jettison drop' system normal to an airborne division,
and equipped every troop-carrying vehicle with 1o compo packs
and 36 jerricans of petrol.
This could sustain the whole division
for two days and 150 miles, while each unit also carried a day's
food and petroleum reserve; thus, however far the formation out-
stripped its normal second line system, the column would have
three days (which it never in fact needed) to catch up, and could
safely turn to its main preoccupation, ammunition supply. This
was a real, though imponderable problem.
So fast did the division
move that it was almost nightly necessary to put out ammunition
points in places far ahead which could not be reconnoitred, and
which were often in enemy possession almost up to the moment of
opening.
The same thing applied to supply and POL points,
since the division daily moved into areas beyond its planned objec-
tive, and could not be called right back to prearranged points for
replenishment.
The RASC had to think and move rapidly, keeping well up to
the forefront of the advance; on at least one occasion, near Lengerich,
an ammunition point reconnaissance party was urged loudly by a
platoon commander of a leading infantry battalion to get out of the
way, as they were obstructing the line of fire.
Naturally, the location of points established at such short notice
could not always be notified to all units; consequently, direct
delivery of commodities to battalion lines from the points was often
resorted to, which called for a good deal of intelligent work on the
part of drivers in tracing the different units.
It is often overlooked
that in circumstances like these, the whole replenishment system in
the end depends upon the stamina, endurance, and intelligence of the
ordinary lorry driver, who is frequently 36 hours or more at the
wheel, often quite on his own, before returning to his company
location.
Too often,
the company moves to an unknown
destination while the driver is away, and he then has to set off up
the divisional axis with his eye on the unit signs, to find his own home.
To avoid failure through excessive fatigue (and there was in fact
no recorded case of such failure) deliveries to units were kept to a
minimum.
The necessity was before long eliminated by selecting
12 hours in advance a point on the intended axis, well ahead, but
certain to be captured during the day, at which CRASC set up an
AIRBORNE R.A.S.C.
539
information centre.
The position of this point was notified to all
brigades and units early in the day, and to it they sent representatives
in the evening, by which time AP, Sup P, and PP locations had been
selected and notified to the information centre.
It was no easy matter for CRASC to keep control, especially as
he was himself constantly on the move with his headquarters.
Starting at Bislich on March 27th, he occupied 14 different locations
by April 24th, and of these eight were used for only one night, and
four for two nights.
From the Rhine to the well-known Steinhuder-
meer, near Hanover, he moved in 12 days, occupying nine different
nightly locations on the way; and of course the column moved in
the same manner.
Successful maintenance in these conditions is a
measure of the high degree of training and physical and mental
flexibility of this airborne divisional column,
which was never
intended or indeed formally trained for any such purpose.
To add
to the difficulties, the bad roads were often blocked by endless
streams of prisoners and refugees (which the column was sometimes
called on to clear); transport help had to be given in moving the
corps maintenance area forward; drivers ran the continual hazard
of snipers,
with which the plentiful woods abounded; and the
composition of the division as well as its location changed daily,
no fewer than 35 additional units being attached for varying periods
during the advance.
Later, this number was still further increased
by the responsibility for maintaining four huge prisoner of war
camps and two German hospitals.
To combat the sniper risk some armoured jeeps were obtained
for use instead of motorcyclists for intercommunication; of these
716 Airborne (Light) Company provided three for CRASC HQ
and for each company, and also three for each of the brigade
headquarters (3rd Parachute Brigade, 5th Parachute Brigade, and
6th Air Landing Brigade).
In spite of all difficulties every unit was supplied.
The next great obstacle was the River Elbe, and at first it was
considered that this could best be crossed by airborne assault; but
operation 'Audacious', planned to this end, was replaced by a
commando operation, Enterprise, in the exploitation of which two
brigades of the 6th Division were engaged, the third being held in
case a drop was still found necessary.
Most careful planning was involved, the main RASC problems
being, firstly, to establish a divisional dump area west of the river;
secondly, to transfer it across the one class 9 bridge available and
establish forward points as soon as the division was across (and as
the bridge traffic was one-way for two days, the total quantity to
