408
OTHER THEATRES
which had lasted some 40 years, came to an end. Responsibilities
were much increased as the Mauritian local forces,
which had
hitherto been fed under colonial government arrangements, were
now to be rationed in the normal manner, the change over taking
a little time.
This and other increased responsibilities involved
the enlistment of Mauritian other ranks.
There was nothing new
about this, as a Mauritian MT Coy (163) had already been raised
for service in the Middle East.
A water transport section was
formed to operate half-a-dozen motorboats requisitioned locally.
The total RASC strength, including those locally enlisted, amounted
at its height to two or three officers and about 100 other ranks.
The Seychelles Islands, off the east coast of Africa, had only a
small volunteer force in peacetime
and never became a heavy
RASC commitment, but one or two RASC officers and a few other
ranks were there from time to time.
The last remaining
RASC commitment in the Indian Ocean
was the Cocos or Keeling Islands.
The object of the presence of
troops here was to establish airfields for operations in
South East
Asia, and they did not arrive until early 1945.
The senior ST
officer was an RASC major and the small units were of the RIASC
except for 353 Petroleum
GT
Platoon, RASC, and a platoon of 8g8
Coy (Ceylonese) RASC.
The conditions were relatively
pleasant.
Before the war there was no RASC detachment in Aden, where
the garrison was maintained by the RAF.
During the war the
operations in British Somaliland and in the Sudan resulted in a
detachment from No. 7 Petrol Depot being stationed there.
All
other ST duties were performed by the RIASC.
BRITISH ARMY STAFF, WASHINGTON
At the beginning of the war, the Ministry of Supply was respon-
sible for the purchasing, management, and despatch of fuel, food,
lubricants, vehicles and spare parts in and from the United States
and Canada.
After September, 1939, the Ministry set up a pur-
chasing organization for trade with the two countries.
When the
United States in March, 1947, passed the Lease-Lend Act, under
which they would supply Britain with many of her needs in exchange
for the use of bases in
British territory, and other services,
arrangement still held good as long as the supplies and material
were shipped from North America to the United Kingdom.
Soon afterwards, however, it was decided that stores should be
sent direct from North America to theatres of war overseas, in order
to save shipping space.
As the maintenance of theatres of war was
BRITISH ARMY STAFF, WASHINGTON
409
one of the responsibilities of the Quarter-Master-General, a suitable
military staff was established in North America to take over the
material procured in Canada and the United States and to be
responsible for despatching it to the required destinations.
Later
on the staff established depots in the United States for holding
reserves.
The staff was amalgamated, with other British military
missions to the United States into a new headquarters which bore
the title of 'British Army Staff, Washington'.
The DOMG at
this headquarters was Major-General (then Brigadier) H. R. Kerr
and a DDST headed the RASC staff at the headquarters.
The functions of the ST branch of BAS, were to supervise the
business of obtaining vehicles, spare parts, food, and petrol, the
maintenance of reserves in North America, and the shipping of
these goods to the United Kingdom and various theatres of war.
They also had to effect liaison between the War Office, the British
Food Mission in North America, and the United States Service
departments; to ensure the co-ordinated action of the various
Ministries and other bodies concerned in provision and shipping;
to place War Office demands; and, as a sideline, to look after the
RASC maintenance of the Caribbean areas and Bermuda.
Before the establishment of ST branch, BAS, vehicles and spares
had been bought in Canada against orders placed by the Ministry of
Supply and, in the United States, on a cash basis by the British
Purchasing Commission.
These arrangements made any control
over the progress of supply difficult, and for several months the
transport section of ST branch was engaged in compiling an up-to-
date record of all vehicles supplied, and of orders outstanding and
not yet placed. Next the complicated method of arranging ship-
ments was simplified, and ST BAS eventually assumed greater
responsibility for the distribution and shipment of vehicles and
Another difficulty was that the United States Army vehicles
in their own country were serviced almost entirely by the manufac
turers.
This gave the United States Army authorities false ideas
about the scale of spares required in operational conditions, and
consequently the
provision of spares was inadequate.
After pro-
racted efforts, ST succeeded in getting larger supplies of spar
parts, and also persuaded the authorities of her supples for ther
being shipped with the vehicles, and not many months afterwards.
Soon afterwards the transport certion of QT RAS was transferred tr
Ordnance in accordance with the reorganization of vehicle provision
and maintenance, and the RASC then ceased to be directly con-
cerned with the business of provision.
By August, 1942, a supply section had been set up in ST branch.
Until toat, all foodstuffs accuired from the United States on Wa
Office account had been shipped to the United Kingdom, and then
