294
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
brigade and at the same time defending its location.
Some indica-
tion of the conditions experienced by the unit may be gained from
in its daily diary as-Monday,
December 4th:
Vehicles called out to carry two battalions to Constitution Square
and fired on repeatedly.
December 5th: Company location subject
to furious sniping.
December 6th: Location heavily mortared and
three Bren guns
despatched
to answer enemy fire.
December
8th: Vehicle maintenance impossible as barrack area swept by
SAA fire.
The corps car company, although principally used for defence,
also performed numerous transport duties in collecting vehicles from
the ordnance depot and running night convoys to Faliron.
The fortress area where the car company was located was, of
course, the hub of the British forces and also housed a large number
of the leading Greek pro-Government officials.
Although the area
was as far as possible wired in, an attempt to blow up the Grand
Bretagne Hotel was only spotted in time by an observant sentry.
Noticing that the wire around a manhole near his post appeared to
have been tampered with, he reported the matter, and it transpired
that ELAS had worked their way through a sewer and placed a
handcart full of explosives timed to go off at 7 a.m. when the staff
would be sitting down to their breakfast. It is related that for days
afterwards one staff officer found difficulty in sitting down to any
meal.
While the 4th Division were arriving and the enemy were being
gradually cleared from the Piraeus area, the work of building up
stocks went on steadily at Faliron.
By December 2ist it is recorded
that all depots were on the telephone and lighting was installed in
the temporary BSD.
Strenuous efforts had been made to provide
some bread in place of biscuit.
The 2nd Parachute Brigade were
able to extricate men of the field bakery who were set to work in
civil bakeries, and a lack of fuel wood in the fortress area was made
good by the corps car company, who improvised 'trombone' burners
which burned derv oil.
The larger formations which could not be
provided with supplies of bread in kind were given the materials and
started their own temporary bakeries.
The feeding strength had
been increased considerably as the large number of Greek police
Guard had no means of subsistence and had to be taken on the
British ration strength.
the
end of December the
original
figure of 16,000 to be fed had risen to more than 70,000.
During the first three weeks of hostilities the bulk petrol storage
at the Shell,
section and No , Mobile Patrol Filling Centre, which were located
Socony and Secombel plants, had remained at their
posts. All the civilian employees want worked the plant had
GREECE, 1944
295
left when a general strike was declared on December 3rd, and all
civil power lighting and telephone facilities had ceased.
Although the units were cut off by land it had been possible to
reinforce them with the 64th Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment by water,
and counter measures were taken as the enemy gradually encroached
on the adjoining areas.
No
direct attack took place until the
raising of the alarm by a RASC sentry 'at 0158 hours' on the
morning of December zist, which was immediately followed by
heavy fire from automatic weapons and rifles on the front of the
installations.
The small garrison of about go under the command of
Major A. S. Mackay, RASC, returned the fire with every available
weapon, and the enemy fire died down to sporadic bursts from well
selected machine gun posts.
After the first 10 or 15 minutes of the
attack, considerable help was given by a RAF aircraft which dropped
parachute flares and later this illumination was supplemented by
star shells fired from warships.
One of the main storage tanks which
held about 45,000 gallons of aviation spirit was holed, and as it'
was impossible to plug the leak, fitters broke the feed line at a flange
so that the main loss took place within the bund wall at a point
farthest from where the action was taking place.
The enemy
reopened his attacks at about 4 a.m., this time using incendiary
flares against the storage tanks, but in the interval between the
attacks the small band of defenders had resited many of their
weapons in the light of the enemy's location, and were again able
to beat down the enemy fire.
Small arms fire of varying volume
continued until daylight when the enemy withdrew.
In the second
attack a second, kerosene, tank was holed, but the puncture was
successfully plugged.
The next evening was without incident, but
on December 23rd and 24th the installations came under fire from
enemy 75 mm guns.
The only effective damage was one 10-inch
pipe completely fractured.
Major Mackay received an immediate
award of the Military Cross for his spirited defence and his personal
efforts in plugging the leaking tanks.
As the British strength developed, the systematic process of clearing
up the Piraeus and communications from Faliron to the centre of
the city continued over the Christmas period, which was marked
by a visit from the Prime Minister.
usual official Christmas festivities must be postponed,
It was announced that the
but it was
with some pride that the supply officer to Arkforce records that
a special ration was issued for that day.
It so happened that
the F type of composite ration included a fruit pudding, and an
extra tin of "variety'
steak and kidney pudding) meat, a
double icane of dried famit a frach arance and a fall icans of huand)
provided the day's fare.
At Faliron the brigade supply officer of
the 28th Brigade, with official connivance, organized a children's
