352
BURMA AND CEYLON
each able to carry 40 lb on his head. The West African divisions
depended largely on them for their transport, as wheeled transport
of any kind could not be used in the Kaladan valley.
Major E. W.
Childs was succemively adjutant, company commander and second-
in-command of sth Auxiliary Group during the campaign.
won the Military Cross during an enemy attack, when his command-
ing officer and the second-in-command were mortally wounded,
and he stood in the open under heavy fire to apply dressings to
their wounds.
The West African divisions also used river boats and a pack
bullock company was also tried; but it was not satisfactory, as the
animals were slow movers, and needed much time for rumination
and grazing.
It was also found difficult to produce a suitable pack
saddle for them. The two divisions were supplied by air throughout
the campaign.
These two colonial ASCe or their representatives in SEAC ren-
dered the same excellent service as their parent Corps.
Enough
has been written of the adventures of their RASC partners to
indicate what they were up against, and they were no less resourceful
or successful in attaining their objects.
The West African ASC
units with their divisions relieved one another in the fighting area.
The one 'out' resting and refitting in Amam or in Eastern Bengal
had the dificult chaung country to negotiate, where their route
was continuously interrupted by deep crossings over fresh, or more
often estuarine, waters with forested banks.
These necessitated
detours, ferries or transhipment of loads.
The East African ASC
was, as already stated, employed under IV Corps in the Fourteenth
Army, which moved initially against the grain of the country in the
difficult area between Tamu and Kalewa.
Excellent relations existed between the British, Asian and African
members of these units.
This was once demonstrated, somewhat to
the embarrasment of the officer addressed, when an askari, seeing,
off his commanding officer to the United Kingdom by aircrait,
remarked loudly (fortunately in Swahili): It will be nice for you
seeing all your wives again?
Beyond the Chindwin
The East African Division crowed the Chindwin in December,
The plan
1944, and established a bridgehead opposite Kalewa.
was for and Division to go throuch the bridgehead and make for
She lor ba tysion to go throne el the river was broken down
for several miles, and only pawable for light vehicles.
One of the
Auku clatoons was cotiod to and towar contoons, moved all the
troops, tanks, guns and transport of the division some eight miles
downstream to Shwegyin, where the road could be picked up again.
Waiting to Load
ASC AIR FREIGHT
Checking Air Freight
