220
THE WESTER, MIEDITERRANEAN
The huge consignment had to be picked over case by case, sorted
and dried out, and the process was watched with some anxiety until
the full extent of damage could be ascertained.
The high rate and virulence of rusting could not have been fore-
seen, but it was evident that special arrangements would have to be
made to provide some form of damp-proof and rust-proof containers.
The War Office took immediate action by unpacking all stores
destined for the fortress and placing them in strong 4-gallon petrol
tins which were impervious to damp and rust.
However, it was
found impossible to dry out the sawdust used for preventing internal
damage to tins, while the natural moisture content of other foods
such as flour still caused some deterioration.
Both difficulties were
eventually overcome, but the whole incident showed again that even
the seasoned supply officer may always have something to learn.
As events turned out, it was possible throughout
the war to
maintain a fair supply of fresh produce, although the existence of
such large stocks of 'siege' foods meant that the garrison had to
take a share of them.
A second bakery was opened, and later two
bakeries were installed in protected places in the Rock.
Bread on
the Rock assumed a special importance, for in Spain it was both
scarce and dear, and it was thus highly prized by the Spanish worker
in Gibraltar.
Arrangements were made permitting each worker to
purchase a specific ration which he bore back with him, to the
delight of his family and the envy of his friends.
Eggs, however,
were always scarce and the situation was only relieved by the arrival
in North Africa of the First Army, who arranged to fly over supplies
as a regular service.
It was whispered that a form of mutual aid
was instituted by small return parcels of sherry, which always seemed
to be plentiful in Gibraltar.
The growing strength of the garrison and the variety of material
to be moved soon led to increasing demands for transport, and every
vehicle which could be made available not only from the Corps
but from other arms was kept busy.
There was a special demand for
small vehicles capable of negotiating the hairpin bends and steep
inclines on the roads leading to new positions on the Rock.
Strong
heads and skill were needed for much of the work a miscalculation
might mean a fatal accident or the loss of a vehicle.
The small MT
company was gradually reinforced by locally enlisted men,
by a
loan of infantry drivers and later by two independent platoons from
the United Kingdom.
the day.
Speed of turn-round became the order of
Tunnelling for cover for batteries, ammunition, stores,
workshops and supplies went on by day and night.
It entailed a
constant race to remove the spoil blasted out inside the rock, as
any delay was looked upon askance by the tunnelling teams, many
of whom had spent their lives at similar tasks in various parts of the
The extension of the air-strip was also a continuous task.
Chains of lorries drew up at the north face to load the rock which
had been blasted and then made for the airstrip as fast as they could
to dump their load, returning at once to repeat the process in a never
ending stream.
As the strip grew foot by foot so did the competitive
spirit of all those engaged on the work, who eagerly awaited the
results, published daily, of tonnage moved.
The heavy nature of
the loads carried and the rough conditions of work led to a good deal
of damage to vehicles which kept the workshops of the company
fully occupied.
The RASC transport used in these projects was, of course, only
complementary to the main task, which was an RE responsibility,
but the strong liaison which grew up between the two Corps made
the RASC driver feel that as much depended on him as on his more
skilled comrade in the Royal Engineers.
There were certain parts of the Rock to which even a single track
road could not be successfully driven, but which were vital to defence.
This led to the formation of a small pack transport company of about
The company did not see any active service during its
life in the fortress, but gave a good account of itself later in North
Africa and Italy.
The little fleet of RASC vessels also played its part.
had to be requisitioned to keep pace with demands for the various
duties to be performed.
Craft had to be provided for inshore anti-
sabotage patrols for watching those parts of the coast that were
inaccessible from the land or difficult to keep under observation.
Other vessels took a share in air-sea rescue work, and the constant
coming and going of convoys led to many requests for ship to shore
Later in the war, the volume of work grew to such an
extent that a water transport company had to be formed (No. 726),
reinforcements being sent out from the United Kingdom for the
The supply of petrol and oils did not present any difficulty at any
time, thanks to the arrangements which had been advocated and put
into effect before the war.
Although the war receded from the western Mediterranean,
RASC duties on the Rock did not diminish, as it still remained the
first port of call on British soil on the route to the east.
NORTH AFRICA
Operation 'Torch'
The agreement made in the summer of 1942, between the British
and the cement made in tovesaments, to invade French North
Africa, was one of the most far reaching decisions of the war.
