Ammunition going forward
Ambulance Mules
NORTH AFRICA
229
were strongly opposed the brigade was to be drawn on to assist in
the struggle but if not required for that purpose the ships were to
sail for Bougie where a force was to be landed to seize the airfield
at Djidjelli, 40 miles farther down the coast from Bougie.
As immediate land based fighter cover was vital to the plan, five
squadrons of the RAF were to fly from Gibraltar to Maison Blanche
a few hours after the assault began, and one squadron of Spitfires
was then to fly on to Djidjelli.
Such was the confidence of the
RAF that when the day came the first fighters took off from the
airstrip at Gibraltar before news of the seizure of the airfield was
signalled to them.
Once Algiers was in our hands a striking force of the 78th Division,
less a brigade, the 17/21st Lancers Armoured Regimental Group
(Bladeforce'), and two battalions of paratroops were to be employed
in the dash for Tunis.
The chance of capturing Tunis was of course
largely dependent on whether the paratroops could reach their
objectives and with, it was hoped, the aid of local French anti-
aircraft gunners, hold the airfields and deny their use to enemy
airborne reinforcements.
The remainder of the force was to follow from home in a series
of convoys.
After the first four, convoys were to arrive at regular
fortnightly intervals, but the number of men and quantity of stores
and equipment to be landed meant that the full strength of the force
would not be built up for many weeks after the original landings.
The administrative plan for the initial period was largely based
on the hope that the striking force could be maintained through
the three ports which lay to the east of Algiers, thereby obviating
the need for transport for the long carry from Algiers over the main
inland road and rail systems, which led over the hills and mountains
through Setif and Constantine to Tunis.
There was little reliable information regarding the state of the
railways was which linked Algiers and Tunis and the intermediary
ports but it was expected that they would be in a poor state of repair
and there was known to be an acute scarcity
of coal. It was
estimated that at least 45 days would elapse before the railway could
be taken into catecast 45c, but even so shipping limited the amount
of transponto effective use be landed to a bare minimum officially
referred to as assault or light scales.
The RASC contribution to the assault force was detachments of
second line transport for the tith and g6th Brigades, a DID, a small
petrol depot, a transport platoon for each of two beach mainten-
ance groups,
and six other transport platoons,
which included
tippers, ambulances and one platoon for Bailey bridging.
A DID,
petrol depot and one platoon of transport was also included in the
floating reserve for the development of the port at Bougie.
RASC
