128
THE MIDDLE EAST I
was very hard hit, coming under heavy shell and machine-gun fire
and being dive-bombed and machine-gunned from the air.
Its
casualties were 15 other ranks killed and 14 wounded, while 14
vehicles were destroyed and 54 were damaged.
The unit did well
under fire and gave the infantry all the fire support it could.
Two
men were given the immediate award of the Military Medal in this
action: L/Cpl J. Zoumberis, a Cypriot, for saving three men under
fire, and L/Cpl W.
Sonnino,
a Maltese, for courage and coolness
under artillery fire and bombing.
After the attack on Sidi Barrani,
4th Indian Division was withdrawn,
and its place was taken by
6th Australian Division.
On the whole, the transport stood up to
it magnificently, mainly because of the strenuous efforts and notable
devotion to duty of the RASC drivers and artificers.
Improvisation
was essential, particularly in the FSDs.
Although originally re-
quired to handle RASC commodities only, they soon became traffic
centres through which passed all the requirements of the troops.
Neither RASC nor RAOC personnel of the correct categories were
available to man the ESDs fully, and on one occasion, for example,
RASC butchers from a cold storage unit handled ammunition, while
on another a FSD was manned by the borrowed QM staffs of a
brigade. But the system worked, and with minor modifications
had come to stay as that of the transfer of loads from third to
second line under desert conditions.
With little further change, its
final development was to be employed in the battle for Europe.
Not the least of the problems arising was that presented by the
unexpectedly large number of prisoners of war which fell into our
hands.
Enough supplies were captured with them to afford a
meagre ration.
The prisoners were taken to Egypt as quickly as
possible in all the ships available, but even so, more than 2,000 were
recaptured by the enemy when he advanced in April.
The arrival on the Cyrenaica/Tripoli frontier of 7th Armoured
Division and 6th Australian Division, whose fine second line did a
magnificent job in the advance, presented a third line transport
problem of no ordinary magnitude.
The farthest back that these
divisions, and their eventual replacements, and Armoured and gth
Australian Divisions,
could reasonably be expected to send their
second line, was 18 FSD near Ghemines:
From there to Tobruk
(the Navy finding Benghazi untenable in the face of enemy air
superiority), was about 350 miles.
To maintain the forward troops
and establish reserves, two 3-ton companies and one Io-ton company
were available.
Any RASC officer can calculate the extent of the
task presented.
In the event the troops were maintained during
February and March, but little impression was made on the reserve
The fact that it was only possible, by making use of all
available transport, to maintain a very weak force on the frontier
'Flimsies' in the Desert
Desert Roadside Pump
L4655450
