256
THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN
was necessary in order to raise local pack transport placed a heavy
burden on all those involved, and it would clearly have been much
better if a properly trained unit had been shipped across in the early
days of the invasion.
Two troops of a RASC pack transport unit
did actually take part in the final stages of the advance on Messina.
As soon as infantry brigades found themselves in hilly country,
they made sudden demands for pack transport.
Apart from the
78th Division, which had operated with pack transport in Tunisia,
the only
formations which had received any mountain
warfare
training at all were part of the 5th Division and 5 Ist Division, which
had a few men who had been through the mountain warfare wing
of the Combined Training Centre in North Africa.
These men were
lent to the ist Canadian
Division, which had the greatest need for
pack transport, but even so they were quite inadequate to meet the
situation.
For instance, in the carriage of one batch of 115 mules
to the forward area in 3-ton lorries, no fewer than 36 mules became
casualties; 15 jumped out of the lorries,
two arrived with broken
legs, and 19 others were unfit for work for one reason or another.
Most of the work of requisitioning mules fell on
CsRASC,
who
already had their hands full.
The animals obtained varied from
donkeys, yearling half-breeds, brood mares (in season) and jack
mules to first class mountain pack mules.
This requisitioning was
not popular, and Sicilian owners engaged to assist in looking after
the animals frequently disappeared with their beasts.
In all 600
mules were used, and 150 of these were later taken over by the
RASC Pack Transport Group.
There was no difficulty in obtaining
all the forage that was wanted in Sicily.
One other point on RASC supply is worth mentioning: in the final
stages of the 50th Division's advance on Messina the leading troops
could not be reached by road owing to the extensive demolitions
along the Corniche road.
These troops were maintained by embark-
ing six loaded lorries in a LT which plied between Riposto and
Scaletta, a distance of over 20 miles.
The Sicilian campaign taught us many lessons, which
we were
able to put to good use in subsequent amphibious assaults.
Perhaps
the lesson which struck home most forcibly was that many of the
expected difficulties and problems which had been a great source of
worry during
at all.
the planning stages, in practice never materialized
te the cares cancell those who had
taken part were supremely confident of the next step the invasion
of the mainland of Italy itself.
The Invasion of Italy
Owing to the promise of an early surrender by the Italians, after
their loss of Sicily, there was little time to plan for the assault on
Supply
Dump
at Anzio
