CHAPTER II
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY
FORCE, 1939/1940
HIS story of the RASC with the BEF is necessarily only a
be made available when war broke out, of the RASC of the
first divisions of the Territorial Army to take the field, and of the
many thousands of individuals, some of whom had no previous
military experience, who joined the Corps as soon as war was de-
It cannot be claimed that the campaign was a successful one in
the accepted meaning of the term, or that the RASC's particular
task of maintaining the Army with food, petroleum and ammunition
expectations.
Administrative complications
within the first few days of landing which nearly led to a breakdown
in supply and, when the battle opened nearly nine months later,
the essential functions of the Corps were almost negatived by
the BEF being cut off from its main bases within iI days.
I4 days which followed until the final withdrawal from Dunkirk the
RASC could only do its best.
Their record shows how difficulties, so inseparable from war, were
surmounted as they arose and how the Corps lived up to their
motto, Nil Sine Labore.
Pre-war Preparations
Although the need for rearmament was recognized some years
before the war, the Government's policy, which had to be largely
dictated by economic facts, was, so far as the Army was concerned,
one of limited liability—a liability for ensuring home defence and
the security of our overseas possessions.
The national contribution
to the defence of Europe was to rely on a strong navy and powerful
If a force had to be placed on the continent of Europe
for direct assistance in the defence of France it would have to be
a token one.
Administrative planning for the despatch of a field force to the
Continent was limited to the requirements of a force of two divisions
only.
It was not until the end of April, 1939, that it was decided
to increase the strength to two corps of four divisions* in all, a
* The ist, and, grd and 4th organized in two corps, I and II.
THE BRITISH EXPEDITIONARY FORCE, 1939/1940
49
decision which was preceded by the announcement that the Terri-
torial Army was to be doubled and national service introduced at
once.
These last minute decisions gave little time to provide the
increased number of trained officers and men who would be wanted.
The strategical plan which was agreed by the British and French
Staffs was a defensive one; French territory was to be held inviolable
while the Allies built up their military resources.
It was the only
feasible plan and seemed to have every chance of achieving its
object, as the main frontier of France contiguous to Germany and
Luxembourg was covered by the defences which were thought to be
impregnable, the Maginot line.
Westwards, from about Sedan to
the sea, neutral Belgium lay between the French frontier and the
potential enemy.
The role allotted to the BEF was to take its place
with the French armies which were to be disposed along the frontier
with Belgium.
If the strategical role of the BEF was militarily simple the
administrative plan was relatively complex.
the French coast and the shortest sea routes to the future battle zone
were the Channel ports, but owing to the expected risks of air
attack and the effects of air power, the choice of ports for landing
the BEF and for establishing the bases fell upon those in Normandy
and Brittany.
Cherbourg and Brest were to serve as ports of entry
for a northern base at Rennes, and St. Nazaire and Nantes were
those selected for a southern base.
everyday needs of the BEF would have to be carried forward by
rail over a distance of up to 400 miles; but the apparent advantages
of security from air attack outweighed every other consideration.
The administrative plan was a bold one, as it provided for nearly
170,000 men and their impedimenta, more than 20,000 vehicles
and many thousands of tons of stores of all kinds being landed in
France in a matter of three weeks.
Planning was a War Office responsibility which had to be done
mostly by staff officers who had many other preoccupations.
of these officers would see their plans put into effect, as they were
destined either to remain at the War Office when war broke out, or
to fill appointments not necessarily related to the work they had
been doing as planners.
The headquarters which would have to
put the olan into effect. GHO and the HO of the T of C Area, did
not exist in peacetime. but were to be formed on mobilization'.
RASC Preparations
The general war preparations of the RASC were well advanced
when the decision was made to increase the size of the expeditionary
