646
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
significant fact was that not one single written instruction had
Soon after this,
our own troops began to arrive in very large
numbers, from the more western parts of France, and the feeding
of these in transit and the rationing of ships for the return trips
became a very big undertaking for the supply depot.
Up to this time I had been, and for the next week or so remained,
without an assistant, and my surprise, not to say consternation,
can be imagined when the first intimation that the embarkation
side of my depot was to function to any great extent came in the
shape of a bundle of Army Forms G 980, advising me that 62 truck
loads of supplies containing a quarter of a million rations had
The storage space at the mobilization store at Fort Agaton being
quite inadequate and too remote for immediate demands for the
rationing of ships, I realized that storage with rail and road facilities
was essential, especially as I had to be prepared to receive and issue
supplies at the same time.
Having spent many hours that I could
ill afford interviewing civilian officials all over Plymouth, at 2000
hours on Sunday night, I think it was, I at last found a most helpful
person who said I might use the bottom floor of two granaries at
West Wharf, Plymouth, but only on the understanding that I
vacated them in two weeks' time.
From this time on, for about six weeks, it was a matter of going
The telephone was abandoned as it was useless to try to
make contact with Movement Control or the Naval Embarkation
Officer by this means, routine calls for instructions being the only
possible method.
My final call to MC was at approximately
2000 hours, when it was not uncommon to receive instructions to
ration another two vessels before midnight.
Whenever possible, troops were entrained immediately, a buffet
being run on the quay under direct control of HQ SWA,
where
men received a much needed snack and a cup of tea.
Train rations
were put on the trains.
Similar arrangements were doubtless
made at all ports.
Another side to the Embarkation Supply Officer's duties was the
rationing of troops on ships
Sound who could not be
disembarked owing to the bottle-neck in the railway system.
looked like being an almost insurmountable problem, but fortunatel
I received an assistant.
His first job was to go out in the Sound
in a small open boat with two issuers, scales, etc., and a stock of
paper bags to ration all the small boats containing a variety of
nationalities.
His first day he brought back a list of some 36 boats
rationed with quantities
supplied to each,
which miraculously
balanced with his 'remains', a very creditable achievement.
In addition to our own troops there was a polyglot assortment of
Poles, Czechs, Belgians, free and otherwise, who had to be fed and
the rations accounted for separately, and charged to various govern-
Additional fun was provided by a company of the RIASC,
which necessitated the purchase of live sheep and substitutes for
their normal rations until a supply of atta, ghi, turmeric, chillies,
etc., could be received from SRD.
After the first influx until
numerous mushroom camps were
instituted for the housing of all and sundry until units were re-
organized, names such as Pennygillam and Scarne Cross Camps at
Launceston came into being.
Unfortunately for the OC Supplies,
the Camp Commandant had invariably been replaced by another
when it came to obtaining a signature for rations and fuel supplies.
At that time, fuel for camps was the responsibility of OIC Supplies.
After a time, all these duties shook down more or less into a
matter of routine, but the difficulties were not lessened by the fact
that units, at this stage of the war, were quite unaccustomed to
home accounting and it is perhaps understandable that, after it
was all over, the Financial Adviser and Army Auditor had to bless
our efforts with a flood of observations.
waged for quite six months.
The sheepskin war was
The point at issue was as to who could
claim the value of the skins and "plucks' of the sheep supplied to
the Indian troops. In the end, the forces of the King Emperor
Throughout the whole period my small staff, both in the office
and outside, worked magnificently for extremely long hours, most
willingly, with not a murmur of a grouse and maintained a surprising
degree of accuracy in checking loads, sec, most of which work had
of necessity to be delegated to junior NCOs:
I think the peak was
reached when 150,000 rations were issued in one day.
ESCAPE FROM MALAYA
This is a story of 'general' RASC endurance.
It is one of the
few fortunate stories from South-East Asia at the time of its being
overrun by the Japanese.
sented in this little band of escapees'.
All branches of the Corps were repre-
Many officers and men with technical qualifications were ordered
to make their escape from Singapore on February 1gth, 1942, and
did so in the military vessels manned by the RASC men of the MT
depot.
The adventures of one of the parties of fitters, electricians,
clerks, and so on, are worth recording,
them throughout their wanderings.
Sheer good luck attended
making for Java, 500 miles away to the south-cast.
They went off in a launch,
A blazing
