636
SOME UNIT NARRATIVES
seemed that there was not in the whole of Italy a suitable pump
capable of lifting the necessary 25 feet.
Obviously we had once
more to find our own salvation, and although fire trailer pumps
were considered, it was thought inadvisable to risk
cooling the
engines by 100 octane, a point that could not be avoided because
of the construction of the units.
At last an Italian fire tender was found with the pump driven by
a shaft from the engine.
Certain modifications and precautions
were rapidly effected, special connectors made up, and a 4-inch
Victaulic line laid to a battery of 3o ft by 9 ft tanks which were
available. Pumping started, closely watched by the attending fire
section, but apart from a certain initial difficulty in picking up
suction from that depth the operation went smoothly and without a
hitch.
We now had the tunnels empty, but the concrete had
absorbed so much of the 100 octane that it was impossible to go
below without a breathing suit.
It was obvious that an entry had to be made into the cupola of
the defective tank, in the first place so that we had full control of
men working on the repairs, where also lifelines could be used,
and, secondly, to make an air inlet to assist in freeing the tunnels
of gas.
The captain (eng) made a careful reconnaissance, for there were
no plans available of these tanks, and a squad began to dig, at last
revealing the solid concrete wall which it was hoped adjoined the
cupola and was not the top of the tank.
The sappers were called
in to supply a pneumatic drill, and the tricky nature of the task
was explained to them. for with the amount of gas about a few sparks
from the drill might easily have caused much discomfort,
haired Palestinian volunteered or the job and stood beside the
captain (eng) who directed operations, and began to drill.
hack of them was the fire section olaving "for' over them on to the
concrete to damp it down and prevent sparking.
This was a
trying time for all concerned, and when at last the drill made a
complete penetration into a cavity, all stood back and waited.
the hole. When it was about o ft square, it was possible to see that
"No gas', said captain (eng), and instructed the driller to enlarge
a cavity wall had been pierced, and ahead, over a 2 ft dark chasm,
was the next wall.
Drilling now went ahead again but at a much
slower pace, and with frequent inspections and examinations
the concrete thrown out by the drill,
At last once again the drill
penetrated and the driller backed out over the plank upon which
le was standing,
"We're there!'
The captain (eng) had a look and announced,
The entry was to ft above the floor of the cuoola, which was
actually part of the roof of the tank, and the iron ladder, going
6 BASE PETROL STORAGE COMPANY
697
down to the base of the tank where the burst was, could be clearly
seen.
The hole was carefully enlarged and a ship's windsail
erected which sent a strong current of fresh air down below.
On
the morning after the inspection it was found pomsible to get a
fitter with lifeline and smoke helmet down below to get measure-
ments for a new blank.
This was prepared and fitted, and all
that now remained was to get rid of the gas.
It was thought that
this would be a long task, and it was to be undertaken by the
fitting and fire sections using high pressure water which was the
only means available.
So effective was their work, however, that
after about a week it was pomsible to go through the tunnels without
any breathing apparatus at all.
Thus ended a period when not a few people pawed many sleepless
nights.
The Taranto section stated that this incident completely
eclipied the fun and games to which they were regularly accus-
tomed, with their floating pipeline at the discharge berth; and this
had always had a remarkable name for going wrong, leaking,
breaking up, or becoming unanchored in the night,
Some of our exploite of course were in the lighter vein such as the
ime we were called upon to go to Italian heavy oil storage on the
Grande Mare,
Taranto.
They had a large
quantity of MFC
sudge which we were to get out, barrel at the rate of some 400 a
day, load into rail trucks, and wend to the north, where it was
used in the
making of air strips.
As only a temporary
machine was required, it was decided to use an electric rotary
pump with a aorine loaded bu naa valve dumbing direct through
a finch Victaulic line to a filling header containing
2-inch hoses with 2-inch trigger nozzles.
This all worked well,
but when the with zinch trient on or the last one went off, the
header and the hore in question were liable to jump about a bite
Italian male labour was being used for the filling, and as it war
a novel iob they were tumoind about and lauching, at was their
It should be explained that the trigger nozzles could be
locked in the 'on' position.
one particular moment were being filled, and as one barrel was
By some chance, only two barrels at
filled, the latin sent were heile rather sharply, which cauied
the header to jump.
The remaining hose being used for filling
aho jumped right out of the hand of the man holding it, and
locked in the 'on' position.
The scene can well be visualized: one
and the
moment, a chattering gang of happy Italian labourers
next, with a threshing hose squirting foul black sludoe in all direc
tions, we had a croud of wildly gesticulating, madly cursing black
labourers.
The sight was really too much for the British soldiers
turned off.
who could not help roaring with laughter until the pump was
