100
AY, 1940
history has already been published.
In its review of the book
The Times said that Allied action was 'flurried, ill-found, inadequate
and essentially amateurish', and that 'contributory and less uncon-
trollable causes (for failure) included bad planning, worse intelli-
gence, inadequate training, poor as well as sometimes unsuitable
equipment, and the lack of an interservice outlook.'
With such a background it could not be expected that the part
played by the RASC would be a very happy one, and we were
perhaps fortunate not to have a sadder tale to tell.
So ended an unfortunate expedition-by no means the last in
that category in which British forces were to be involved before the
war was over.
The fact that this was the first operational venture
in which the commercial ports available were inadequate for
disembarkation and maintenance was a contributory reason for
failure.
Apparently few steps had been taken to overcome the
deficiency.
Perhaps it was all part of the inadequacy of our intelligence of
which The Times complains, and little seems to have been known
about the
condition of roads or availability
of vehicles.
Other
factors making the work of the RASC difficult were the lack of air
cover and the fact that ships were not tactically loaded.
It is
comforting to learn that the compo ration stood up so well to its first
real operational trial.
CHAPTER IV
THE MIDDLE EAST I
Situation on the Outbreak of War
N
-O unified Middle East Command existed before
the
outbreak of war; British troops in Egypt, with Cyprus
Each of these
lines.
low peace establishments had to be supplemented by the employ-
ment of local civilians.
There were a dozen MT companies in Egypt and Palestine, most
of them having the standard establishment of 24 vehicles.
The
company (39),
which was stationed at Abbassia (Cairo), with
Repair Shop,
Vehicle Reception and MT Stores components,
served both Egypt and Palestine.
On the supply side, there were
four small depots in Egypt and two in Palestine, and each contained
a reserve of two months' supplies.
A few static field bakeries were
in operation. manned largely by native civilians, and cold storage
facilities existed at Port Said.
The peace-time rationing system was in force.
As elsewhere
petrol and oil were dealt with by the supply branch, RASC.
A
reserve of two months' fuel was held to meet initial requirements
in the event of war.
Civilian bulk storage for petrol existed at the
Suez refinery, at Alexandria, and
at Haifa, and plants
for the
manufacture of 4-gallon non-returnable containers were in operation
at these places, and also at Port Sudan, whilst considerable additional
tinning facilities existed at Abadan.
tion envisaged was by means of the 4-gallon tin.
The only method of distribu-
The lack of reserve bulk storage for petrol had caused anxiety
for some time before the war, but in January, 1939, a joint War
Ofce and Ai. Ministry miscion investicated the matter.
amined several schemes, and the one accepted was a joint Army and
RAF undertaking, known as the Jebel Dave scheme.
It entailed
the construction of buried storage to hold six months' reserve should
the Suez Refinery be put out of action.
The storage was to be
located in the Geneifa drea hetween Suer and Favid, and pipe lines
Were to connect it with a new tanker berth in the Great Bitter Lake
