120
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
worked on the wall's defences, often with only day off per month and on
12 hour shifts, 7 days a week. Some 700 designs for gun emplacements,
living quarters, observation towers and so on were drawn up by the
German planners and each strong point was built by selecting a specific
number of the available designs, and many embodied disguises to
dissuade enemy fire? Not all the guns positions were built by non-
German labour, primarily because Rommel recognized that there was
suf the too much work to do in too little time, for example, the positions
of the infantry Division's guns north of Caen were built by German
soldiers. 10
In the summer of 1943 Hitler issued Führer Directive No. 51 that
asserted that the western theatre was now the critical place to defend
Germany and that the enemy would not be allowed to maintain a
foothold on the coast.
The danger in the East remains, but a greater danger now appears in the West.
an Anglo-Saxon landing! In the East, th vast extent of the territory makes it
possible for us to lose ground, even on a large scale, without a fatal blow beins
dealt to the nervous system of Germany. It is very different in the West! Should
the enemy succeed in breaching our defences here on a wide front, the immedi-
ate consequences would be unpredictable. Everything indicates that the enemy
will launch an offensive against the Western front of burope, at the latest in the
spring, perhaps even earlier .... Should the enemy, by assembling all his forces,
succeed in landing, he must be met with a counter attack delivered with all our
weight. he buywafe and Kriegsmarne must go into action against the heavy
attacks which we must expect by air and sea with all the forces at their disposal,
regardless of the cost."!
Von Rundsted's reply to Hitler, which took several months to write,
posed that the detence of the west was an impossible ask given the
- a us state of the avallable resources and that without a strategic
reserve nothing could be guaranteed. a evertheless, Hitler promised the
esources and insisted that all the necessary bombers and tighters would
se switched from the east to the west as soon as the invasion started -
out even te should have known tia as an impossible task untess
accraft and training of aircrew was initiated imit
diately. Yet there were only 60 divisions allocated to the defence of the
west, while See remained elsewhere - If "the greatest danger was indeca
switched from east to west. 12
in the west, it is difficult to understand why more divisions were not
in fact, the Atlande wall only existed in sections but it was formidable
melet tid exist and took around 1/ million cubic yards of concrete and
1.3 million tons of iron to build it. The 15,000 strongpoints were
GERMAN STRATEGY: HARD SHELL, SOFT SHELL
121
composed of a network of related elements: reinforced heavy gun
emplacements (some with 13 feet of reinforced concrete) already zeroed
in on the beaches, machine guns with their sights fixed onto arcs of fire
across the beaches, minefields, barbed wire, anti-tank and anti-landing
craft obstacles, underground living quarters, communication tunnels and
radar stations. These all existed in places where the Germans assumed a
landing was possible. The supporting beach artillery was generally one of
• Heavy coastal defence anti-ship batteries composed of about four
122-155 mm guns in reinforced concrete housings up to two metres
thick and directed by forward observation positions
• Casemated (armoured compartment) field guns and howitzer batteries
of about four 105-155 mm guns in reinforced concrete housings up
to two metres thick firing directly onto the beach. The guns were
usually wheeled and could be brought out of the casemate for all-
• Open field gun and howitzer batteries of about four 105-155 mm guns
without a direct field of fire onto the beach and therefore directed by
forward observation posts
• Beach defence strongpoints (Widerstandnest, (WN) built around beach
exists or draws and comprising either:
° concrete (2 metre thick) 75-88mm gun emplacements, or
• concrete (2 metre thick) 50mm anti-tank gun shelters, and an inter-
connected trench system linking underground living quarters and
pill boxes with machine guns and mortar positions
° open 50mm and 75mm mortar positions
On average such a strongpoint would house around 30 troops with
ten machine guns, an artillery piece and an additional 50mm gun. 14
For example, the 352nd Division defending Omaha had twelve
105mm and twelve 150mm artillery pieces.
In addition, the beach
could be fired on by 60 smaller artillery pieces and had eight major
bunkhouses containing 75 or 88 mm guns, 35 smaller emplacements,
18 anti-tank guns and six removed tank turrets. WN 60 also had auto-
matic flame-throwers and, overall, at least
85 machine guns were
sighted onto the beach. Behind the bluffs were mortar and rocket pits,
all pre-sighted onto the beach. The heavier artillery behind the beach
was directed by forward artillery observers in WN 60, 62, 71, 73 and
But the Atlantic Wall was composed of more than just a physical sea
wall with concrete gun emplacements in places; it was also a defensive
