78
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
and up to ten miles inland. All the aircraft were controlled from the
Combined Control Centre at Uxbridge and thence through three
Fighter Direction Tenders operated just off the Normandy coast. 89
The naval gunfire spotting aircraft (two squadrons of Spitfires and six
squadrons of [RAF] Mustangs plus the Fleet Air Arm's own Seafire
aircraft) were in direct contact with their allocated ships.?ยบ For example,
HMS Glasgow, the British cruiser firing on St Laurent behind Easy
Green Beach on Omaha, was in regular contact with its spotter plane, a
Mustang flown by Flt Lt Weighill. But not everything went so well: an
RAF Mustang exploded in mid-air off Sword Beach at Lion-sur-Mer,
probably hit by one of the naval shells it was supposed to be tracking."
Overall, 394 spotting sorties were mounted on D-Day itself and between
6 and 19 June 1,318 spotting sorties were flown at the cost of five
We can surmise from this review that although it looked as though
Allied domination was inevitable, given the Luftwaffe losses in the previ-
ous months, in reality the political disputes between the Allied
commanders could quite easily have forced Eisenhower to resign or left
the invasion without adequate protection or possibly made an invasion
unnecessary. In hindsight air superiority played a major role in ensuring
a successful invasion but hindsight is blind to the precarious nature of the
unfolding of events. If, for example, the German Panzer reinforcements
had been allowed to reach the beaches within 24 hours of D-Day it is not
at all self evident that the Allies would have been able to resist them. But
depriving the German tanks of spatial freedom facilitated the Allies taking
advantage of time to build up their reinforcements instead. So weak was
the German reaction to the bombing campaign on the night of 5 June
that only 54 German aircraft took off and 53 of these stayed outside the
invasion area. Only 1 per cent of British aircraft that took part in the
night campaign failed to return. Indeed, while fears of heavy bomber
losses in the first two days after D-Day were rife, the numbers available
to the RAF's Bomber Command on 5 June were 1,795, by 7 June the
total strength was down by just one.ยบ3
3.6 Conclusion
This chapter considered the varying degrees of success with which the
Allies air strategy facilitated the invasion on D-Day. At the heart of the
issue lay significant political disputes between the various leaders about the
best strategy and so deep were the divisions that some vital aspects were
inadequately executed. Thus, for example, although the plan to destroy
ALLIED AIR STRATEGY
79
the Luftwaffe was carried out effectively, guaranteeing almost total air
superiority on D-Day, the bombing of coastal defences was inadequate at
best and almost fatal on Omaha Beach. Even when the military leaders
were bent into submission by their political overlords, there was still
significant dispute within the political leadership, especially over the
number of French casualties that could be inflicted by bombing raids on
the French transport system. But where the Allied political and military
leadership engaged in vigorous debates and disputes, some of which were
decidedly counter-productive, as we are about to see, the domination of
decision-making by Hitler and the German military leadership, against
the suggestions of their subordinates, effectively undermined the ability
of the Wehrmacht and what was left of the Luftwaffe to attack the
invaders with any degree of success. But if the hard power of the air
forces played a significant role in isolating the landing area and destroy-
ing the Luftwaffe what role did the soft power of disinformation play in
securing a respite for the soldiers clinging desperately to a thin crust of
the Normandy coastline?
