288
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
Albert Speer's claim that one Tiger II was the equivalent of 25-30
Shermans was undoubtedly exaggerated, but there were many US tankers
who estimated that a Tiger was equivalent of around 8 Shermans, while a
Panther was the equivalent of 4 Shermans. Or, as one German tanker
remarked: 'Why does the country of Detroit send their men out to die in
these things?' As Lawrence Butler remembered sceptically: We won the
war by losing more tanks and cluttering up the battlefield' 93
The Germans referred to the Shermans as 'Tommy-cookers' and not
to be outdone, the cynical Allies went one better, calling them 'Ronson
Burners' after the contemporary advert suggesting that a Ronson ciga-
rette lighter always "lit first time'? Research prior to the invasion
confirmed what many Allied tankers already knew from their colleagues
in North Africa: 60 per cent of Allied tank losses were caused by a single
shot from a high velocity 75-mm or 88-mm enemy gun and 66 per cent
of all Allied tanks hit 'brewed up' when hit. The consequential metal shy-
ers both killed and injured the occupants and these set the tank alight
either by igniting the 50-90 rounds of stored ammunition or severing
fuel and electrical cables and igniting up to 200 gallons of fuel. In fact, it
was more often the stored ammunition that started the fire rather than
the fuel. When armour piercing solid shot' penetrated a tank from long
range it often partially disintegrated showering the unfortunate occu-
pants with red-hot metal slivers that ricocheted around the compart
ment. The results could be horrific, as Major John Leytham, 82nd Re
Assault Squadron discovered when recovering a disabled Sherman in
once di armoured piercing shell enters the turret of a tank, it acts In a bade
similar to a domestic incinerator. The occupants of the turret are quickly smeared
around the walls of the turret. I had given orders after the recovery that none of
my men should look inside. A number whe foolish enough to disobey my orders.
It did not improve morale. Vehicles like this should be taken back to the rear
wor?" ops where the experts spray the inside with creosote. After a suitable inter-
val they scrape off the remains from the walls of the turret.95
From very close distance a solid shot mill it go right through the tall
without injuring anyone, though it would often disable the tank if it hi
important devices on its passage.'º Of course, if a shot hit the engine or
fuel tanks there was almost inevitably a fire and the heat was so intense
that it would often anneal the armour, making the tank irreparable. Yet
even though ailed armour piercing shot could not penetrate a dum
war from the front, American gunners were often taught to use high
explosive shells simply to kill any German infantry that supported to.
TECHNOLOGIES
289
The main offensive problem for the Sherman's original 75mm gun
was not so much its size as the muzzle velocity. At 2,050 feet per second
the Sherman's muzzle velocity was
greater than the original short
barrelled Panzer Mk IV's 1,500 feet per second but nowhere near the
replacement long barrelled Panzer Mk IV's 3,000 feet per second. Even
the up-gunned Sherman, the M4Al with a 76mm gun, still only had a
muzzle velocity of 2,650 feet per second. Between 10-15 per cent of the
Shermans on D-Day were M4Als and almost all replacements after D-
Day were of this up-gunned variety though many US commanders at all
levels remained sceptical of the new gun and focused upon its marginally
poorer High Explosive shell rather than its much better armour piercing
shell. 98
But why did the US insist on developing such a low velocity gun? The
ansver seems to be that the artillery demanded a gun that would equate
with their needs - that is a gun capable of firing at least 5,000 rounds
before being replaced. There was a parallel dispute over the barrel!
Performance of the artillery's own 105mm howitzers which had begun
to fire erratically after just 3 months in service.
These barrels were
supposed to fire at least 7,500 rounds before being replaced - but that
was at a rate of no more than 4 rounds a minute at any time. In fact the
guns were firing 10 rounds a minute and the consequent overheating was
distorting the rifling of the barrellie Thus the Sherman 75mm barrel was
resigned to fire like an artery pie maren though the me open ord
Sherman was markedly shorter than an artillery piece and the chances of
any tank firing 5,000 rounds without getting hit were negligible, espe-
cally when, overall, a new tank could look forward to surviving - on
average - no more than 7 days of combat. 100 That would mean a
Sherman would need to fire its gun every two minutes continuously for
all 189 hours just to warrant a new barrel! In effect, the Sherman's gun
velocity was sacrificed to long term reliability; the tank seemed to have
been designed by a committee composed of cavalry officers and artillery
oficers instead of tankers. Small wonder that the
US 3rd Armoured
Division lost 1,340 Shermans in Europe between -Day and the end of
he war - a total loss of 580 per cent of the original number landed in
Normandy. 101
The superior ruzle velocity of the Panzer Mk IVs, Panthers (Panzer
Mk V) and Tigers (Panzer Mk VI), should also be viewed in conjunction
ith their better angled and thicker armour. The Mk IV had four inches
or armour behind the vertical plate of ti" tank's glacis, the Panther had
3½ inches on a 38 degree glacis. Or y on top of the turret and from the
rear were German tanks red ar vulnerable to Allied attacks -
tom Allied 105mm howitzers. In contrast, the sherman das Just 72
35 BE
