14
LEADERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND COMMAND AT D-DAY
constituting of the problem as Critical in a way that Managers would find
more difficult and Leaders would find almost impossible. In turn,
Commanders who follow up on their constitution of the problem as
Critical by asking followers questions and seeking collaborative progress
(attributes of Leadership) are less likely to be perceived as successful
Commanders than those who provide apparent solutions and demand
obedience.
That persuasive account of the problem partly rests in the decision-
maker's access to - and preference for - particular forms of power, and
herein lies the irony of 'leadership': it remains the most difficult of
approaches and one that many decision-makers will try to avoid at all
costs because it implies (1) that the leader does not have the answer (2)
that the leader's role is to make the followers face up to their responsibil-
ities (often an unpopular task)35 (3) that the 'answer' to the problem is
going to take a long time to construct and that it will only ever be 'more
appropriate' rather than 'the best', and (4) that it will require constant
effort to maintain. It is far easier, then, to opt either for a Management
solution - engaging a tried and trusted process - or a Command solution
- enforcing the answer upon followers - some of whom may prefer to be
shown 'the answer' anyway.
The notion of 'enforcement' suggests that we need to consider how
different approaches to, and forms of, power fit with this typology of
authority, and amongst the most useful for our purposes are Etzioni 336
typology of compliance, and Nye's distinction between Hard and Soft
Power. Nye has suggested that we should distinguish between power as
"soft' and 'hard'. 'Soft', in this context, does not imply weak or fragile
but rather the degree of influence derived from legitimacy and the posi-
tive attraction of values 37 «Hard' implies traditional concepts of power
such as coercion, physical strength, or domination achieved through
asymmetric resources rather than ideas. Thus the military tend to oper-
ate through 'hard'
power while political authorities tend to operate
through ideological attraction - 'soft power'. Of course, these are not
discrete categories - the military has to 'win hearts and minds' and this
can only be through soft power' while politicians may need to authorize
coercion - hard power. Indeed, as Nye recognizes, The Cold War was
won with a strategy of containment that used soft power along with hard
power' 38
If we return to some of the early modern theorists on power, like
Dahl, Schattschneider, and Bachrach and Baratz, all summarized in
Lukes'39 Three Dimensions of Power', then we can see how the very
denial of Soft Power is - in itself and ironically - an example of Soft
Power - where certain aspects of the debate are deemed irrelevant and
PROBLEMS, UNDERSTANDING AND DECISION-MAKING
15
thus subordinated by those in power. In other words, and to adopt Nye's
terminology again, to deny that any other option exists (e.g. soft power)
is itself an ideological claim - e.g. soft power, and not simply a claim to
the truth. While Soft Power seems appropriate to Leadership with its
requirement for persuasion, debate and ideological attraction,
Hard
Power clearly fits better with Command, but Management sits awkwardly
between the two rooted in both or neither, because coercion is perceived
as inappropriate within a free labour contract, while ideological attraction
can hardly explain why all employees continue to turn up for work.
The limits of using an analysis based on Hard and Soft Power might
also be transcended by considering
Etzioni's alternative typology.40
Etzioni distinguished between Coercive,
Calculative and Normative
Compliance. Coercive or physical power was related to total institutions,
such as prisons or armies;
Calculative
Compliance was related to
"rational' institutions, such as companies; and Normative Compliance
was related to institutions or organizations based on shared values, such
as clubs and professional societies.
This compliance typology fits well
with the typology of problems: Critical Problems are often associated
with Coercive Compliance;
Tame
Problems are associated with
Calculative Compliance and Wicked Problems are associated with
Normative Compliance.
Again, none of this is to suggest that we can divide the world up
objectively into particular kinds of problems and their associated appro-
priate authority forms, but that the very legitimacy of the authority
forms is dependent upon a successful rendition of a phenomenon as a
particular kind of problem. In other words, while contingency theory
suggests precisely this (rational) connection between (objective) context
(problem) and (objective) leadership
style
(authority form), I am
suggesting here that what counts as legitimate authority depends upon a
persuasive rendition of the context and a persuasive display of the appro-
priate authority style. In other words, success is rooted in persuading
followers that the problematic situation is either one of a Critical, Tame
or Wicked nature and that therefore the appropriate authority form is
Command, Management or Leadership in which the role of the deci-
sion-maker is to provide the answer, or organize the process or ask the
question, respectively.
This typology can be plotted along the relationship between two axes
as shown in Figure 1.1 one with the vertical axis representing increasing
uncertainty about the solution to the problem - in the behaviour of
those in authority - and the horizontal axis representing the increasing
need for collaboration in resolving the problem. Again, it should be
recalled that the uncertainty measure used here is not an objective
