76
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
• Airfield - an upgraded ALG with permanent squadrons.
• All Weather Airfield - an airfield with hardened surface (these
included any captured enemy airfields that were either undamaged or
where the damage was minimal). The hardened surface was either
Square Mesh Track (SMT) - rather like large scale chicken wire) or
Pierced Steel Plank (PSP).
Dy early 1943, as a consequence of lest ns learned in the desert War,
a system for establishing tactical fighter squadrons as close to the front as
possible was developed and tested in England in March 1943 and
perfected within a year.81 It was assumed that three ELSs would be
required on D-Day itself, four RRSs by D+4, ten ALGs by D+8, 18
airfields by D+14, and 93 by D+90. Eighteen American and six Britishn
airield construction units were formed to build them and though no
ELS was built on D-Day here were three available by D+1 and by D-90
89 of the 93 planned airfields were built. 82 All the early strips near the
Case were but Parader to caed other to minimize collisions on takeon
and landing because they were often only a mile or two apart.
was aiso always assumed by the Allies, dire site the intense air war of
attrition to grind down the Luftwaffe in the run-up to D-Day, that at
least a week of intense air attacks upon the invasion forces was inevitable.
Hence the eU airtields within a 130-mile radius of the Norman coast line
note dildekee dong wit the loudl bombing attacks from 1u May. Doa
result between 1 April and 5 June over 2,650 German aircraft were
destroyed.
In the end the Allied air cover plan for D-ve cy itself, as opposed to the
Iransportation Plan, was not finally agreed until just 36 hours before the
invasion. that meant that many of the ships were actually at sea before
pace van place."* The air cover cement o
Urerule was desgued to attain and maintain an air situation which
vould assure Ircedom of action for our Forces without effective interter
Forces in the achievement of this objective' 85
nice by enemy air forces and to render air sIt port to our Land and Naval
the plan cared for severat phases. First, the interdiction of enemy
naval and aur assets in the Channel region. Second, the destruction of
angels associated Will the invasion (fort esses, naval facilites, radar
installations and all forms of communication and transport) - still With
an overwhelming emphasis on the Pas de Calais. Third, the move to
defend the invasion proper, with 54 squadrons covering the beaches,
statons prong te beet, so lighter squadrons on bomber escort
you bombe yuadrons providing land support to the land batte,
and sevele ghter squadrons providing fire-control.% The 2nd lactical Air
ALLIED AIR STRATEGY
77
Force also provided 11 rocket-firing Typhoon squadrons and seven
Bombphoon squadrons to attack beach defences 20 minutes before the
troops landed and to destroy any close target that came to hand. They
were first called on for help at 0734 to attack the HQ of the German
84th Corps near St Lô but no major request for concerted action came
until almost 1500 when the movement of armour towards Caen and
Bayeux was reported. In fact two major problems for the Typhoons were
their limited ability to communicate directly with the beach commanders
initially, as well as their limited range and time over the target. The latter
problem was more easily addressed than the former and a rapid switch
was made to reduce the payload of the aircraft and increase the number
of drop fuel tanks. On D-Day+7 reports came in from Port en Bessin that
Allied troops were being bombed by Typhoons but it was subsequently
determined that the Typhoon pilots were merely shedding their empty
In theory, the former problem should have been resolved by truck
mounted radar and radio equipment operated from the beaches to direct
fighter cover but much of it was destroyed, especially on Omaha where
The fragile
communication link from beach liaison group to Fire Direction Tenders
(FDT) to beach HQ ships to Portsmouth and then to Uxbridge simply
could not operate in the conditions that prevailed. Indeed, at one time a
request from a general on board the USS Augusta took 30 minutes to
reach Uxbridge. By 1315 on D-Day General Queseda delegated respon-
sibility for his 1,500 US planes over the beaches from himself down to
the two colonels operating on HQ ships directly off Omaha and Utah
and it was this switch that allowed the 358th Fighter Group to intercept
and destroy 80 per cent of the German 6th Parachute Regiment under
von der Heydte at Isigny on its way to the beach between Utah and
Omaha.88 Here was an unusual illustration of a formal leader ceding
Four squadrons of Lightnings (about 16 aircraft per squadron) were
allocated to cover the shipping lanes during daylight and six Mosquito
squadrons took over for night protection.
Given the propensity for
German air attack at dawn and dusk 12 US, and 12 British, fighter
squadrons operated at these times over the whole area. In daylight nine
fighter squadrons were allotted to cover the beach and assault areas: six
Spitfire squadrons for low cover and three Thunderbolt squadrons for
high cover. Two Spitfire squadrons covered the British-Canadian beaches
while a third covered the American
beaches.
Two further Spitfire
squadrons patrolled the eastern
and western
flanks
and the three
Thunderbolt squadrons were strung out across the entire invasion area
