134
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
suggested (for the last time) that the majority thought that the chance
for victory was now within German hands, especially in the absence of
any expected revolt by the 7 million foreign workers.?2 In fact, the
absence of widespread support either within the army or the civilian
population for the July bombers' assassination attempt on
Hitler
suggests that few believed Hitler was dragging the country to its doom
at this time. After all, food supplies remained stable - thanks to the
wholesale transfer of supplies from occupied countries, particularly the
Netherlands, - and working hours remained stable at 60 hours per week.
Only when this was increased to a standard 72-hour week in the latter
part of the war did absenteeism increase markedly, and it wasn't until
Cherbourg fell at the end of June that civilian morale began its slow
descent. As an SD report concluded: 'The enthusiasm of the first days
after the beginning of the invasion and the retribution against the
Allies] suffers a rapid slackening off everywhere. The initial great happi-
ness and hope that the military situation would decisively change and
nat it would again go torward with a at reugiven way to very sober and
sceptical reflections' 73
It would be tempting to conclude that the result of this strategic blun
at neur the German leadership led directly to their defeat in Normandy
and that at least here we have good examples of strategic leaders causing
strategic effects. But even this is difficult to maintain. The poor weather
on the morning of D-Day effectively inhibited not just Allied bombing
ot the beaches but Allied destruction of German armoured movements
towards the beach area. It would then, have been possible to move the
Panzer divisions and they would have provided a signiticant threat to the
precarious Allied landings. That such movements were made by subordi-
nate commanders, and then countermanded by various superordinate
caders, including Hitler, does not necessarily relieve the subordinates of
responsibilty they could still have overridden their superordinates
orders, as traditional German military philosophy implied and as subse-
quently happened when the redeat to Germany was ordered agams
titlers wishes, the problem for the Germans, then, was not simply tide
Hitler interered, or the stratesy noconfused, but that the flexibility o
esponse, so painstakingly embedded * to the German military for over a
leaders, Finally, what about the ground strategy of the Allies?
century, was destroyed by the decis's ns and actions of many German
6 Allied Ground Strategy
6.1 Introduction
All Allied
ground troops in the 21st Army
Group
were
under
Montgomery's direct command with the American
Ist
Army
under
Bradley and the Anglo-Canadians under It General Dempsey's British
2nd Army. On the eastern side Crocker commanded the Ist Corps
composed of the British at Sword (British 3rd Division) and the Canadian
3rd Division at Juno, while Bucknall (later to be fired by Montgomery)
led the British 30th Corps on to Gold (British 50th Division). This was a
25 mile sector of relatively flat land (except between Port en Bessin and
Arromanches on Gold), defended by the German 716th Infantry Division
in the east and the German 352nd Infantry Division in the west.
6.2 Anglo-Canadian beaches
Sword Beach, the most easterly of the beaches, from St-Aubin-sur-Mer
to Ouistreham, was defended by what were thought to be the 150mm
guns of the Merville battery (they were actually 75mm guns), just east of
Ouistreham which was the target of Otway's 6th Airborne Division. The
beach was attacked by the British 3rd Infantry Division supported by the
French Commandos and the British Ist Commando Brigade under Lord
Lovat. The latter's role was to clear Ouistreham and link up
British oth Airborne Division at the Orne bridgehead and by 1300 the
link up had been achieved (two minutes behind schedule).! The 3rd
Infantry Division was to capture Caen while number 41 and
Commandos were to establish a common link between Juno and Sword.
Juno Beach extended from La Rivière at the line linking the Juno and
Gold beaches in the West to St-Aubin-sur-Mer at the line linking Jung to
Sword in the east.
The aim of the Canadians was to reach the Caen-
Bayeux road and to link up with the British beaches on either side. Gold
Beach itself lay between Asnelles and La Rivière and it encompassed
Arromanches
Royal Marine
was to be taken by
Commando and used as a base for the BiSt sh Mulberry harbour.
135
