LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
Edmund Ironside on 20 July 1940 as Commander in Chief Home
Forces: Ironside had left before Brooke arrived and merely left a note
saying good luck!' and noting that the Rolls Royce was for his use 3
Morgan had been a task force commander in the 1942 invasion of
North Africa and had already finished the initial planning for the invasion
of Sicily. Operation Overlord (the invasion of France) was not a goal in
and of itself but the means to the goal, and that goal was the defeat of
Germany in Germany. Thus Morgan had to work backwards from estab-
lishing what would be needed to achieve the defeat of Hitler to arrive at
the requirements to establish a successful lodgement on the French coast.
Planning Overlord was Tame in the sense that there was a science to
it and routine processes already existed, but it was hardly a routine oper-
athen: it required plans to move a city the equivalent of Birmingham in
the UK across the channel, under enemy fire, and keep it moving until it
goos Betin. " Morgan and his team began planning Overlord on the
opposite basis to that employed by the Germans who were planning to
resist the invasion: to the Allies a port was the last place to begin an inva-
sive. Primarily this derived from the post Dieppe realization that the
level of bombardment necesary to induce the defenders to surrender
would all but eliminate the port facilities that were the very reason for the
atack. In the event all the ports were defended by first class troops who
were ordered not to surrender under any conditions and, as the post-D-
ut Section was to prove, the vast majority of major ports remained in
wad hands long dies tie sarounding territory had fallen to the
Allies.
Morgan's approach had been premised onofe available shipping and
he concluded that only three divisions could be carried by sea to assault
a 20-mile stretch of the Normandy coast, supported by two airborne
divisions. But
when Montgomery -
Eisenhower,
Montgomery claimed the changes were his - scrutinized the plan at the
chid of 1943 it was clear to them that only by increasing the amphibious
divisions to live, and the airborne divisions to three, to assault a 59-mile
stretch of coast, could the assault hour deglance of succeeding. Only
outta large scale assault would, it was arguea, prevent the Germans from
establishing the kind of effective concentration of fire against the over-
maoopy beach-head that Salerno had witnessed - when 15,000 Allied
troops became casualties." Thus two further landing arcas were added,
one area to the west - Utah Beach on the Cotentin peninsula - and one
to the east- Sword Beach up to the Orne River.
A conterence in January 1944 confirmed the postponement of the
invasion back from May to June 1944.86 The delay allowed two issues
to be resolved: first, the bullding or requisitioning from other areas of
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
45
additional shipping: 47 Landing Ship Tank (LSTs), 144 Landing Craft
Tank (LCTs), 72 Landing Craft Infantry (Large) (LCIL)s), 5 cruisers
and 24 destroyers. The extra warships were primarily US in origin but it
had taken all Bradley's persuasive skills to secure them from the US Navy.
As late as April 1944 the US Navy could only spare two battleships, four
cruisers and 12 destroyers. This force was eventually increased by a
further two battleships (ex-World War 1) and 14 destroyers.® Given the
significance of the latter in opening up Omaha Beach this was probably
a critical addition.
The second issue was the extra time for bombing: a further month to
facilitate the bombing of transportation centres in France would prevent,
or at least delay, the build up of German reserves. 88 By late 1943 the core
of the invasion force was in the UK: there were 1.5 million US troops,
1.75 million British troops, 150,000 from the Commonwealth and
40,000 from occupied Europe.89 The construction of the enhanced plan
began in December 1943 at Norfolk House, St James's Square, London,
and the first draft of the plan was issued on 1 February 1944 and the
following month SHAEF - now numbering 6,000 soldiers and 750 offi-
cers - moved to Bushey Park in Middlesex.ºº Since many of the planners
had already been through the experience of planning three previous
amphibious assaults, and since the planning had gone on almost contin-
uously for several years, the complexity of the operation did not provide
an insurmountable problem to G-3, the battle planning section of the
General Staff at SHAEE. 'The long time available for administrative plan-
ning', Admiral Ramsay commented,
coupled with the fact that the
resources of the United Kingdom were available to ANCXF (Allied Naval
Commander-in-Chief, Expeditionary Force) enabled most of these prob-
lems to be solved, but this exceptionally favourable situation is unlikely
to be repeated in another theatre??! Nevertheless,
12-hour days and
seven-day weeks became the norm for senior officers involved in the
planning - and thus the taming of the problem.º2
Merely securing information about the French coastline proved to be
a complex operation in itself and one that illustrates the way Wicked
Problems can in part be tamed. In this case the Wicked Problem was that
no one individual or organization had the information about the French
coastline necessary to plan the invasion. So the issue was: how to secure
collaboration of the many people necessary whose collective access to
knowledge could tame this aspect of the problem? The solution was
innovative: in March 1942 Commander Rodney Slessor,
Royal Navy
Volunteer Reserve (RNVR), delivered a radio broadcast in which he
explained that a successful commando raid on a radar station near Le
Havre had been accomplished using thousands of holiday photos and
