Ба іі
YULL
382
COMMANDING IN CRISES
You've got to remember that just as soon as we land, this business becomes prima-
rily a business of build-up. For you can almost always force an invasion - but you
can't always make it stick. 117
This is a crucial statement because it explains why Bradley was so reluc-
tant to use the 'funnies', the specialized assault armour, used by the
Anglo-Canadian forces: since the landing itself would be tough but
viable, the real problem was in getting sufficient conventional armour,
artillery and troops on-shore with a week. Thus to displace precious
space for armour and troops with 'funnies', that had a very limited role,
was perceived as counter-productive.
Bradley's summation of German strategy is also important because it
mirrors von Rundstedt's but inverts Rommel's - and it was Rommel who
was in control of the beaches. Hence Bradley's evaluation of the German
and his own strategy ultimately under-resourced the landings themselves
and, in part, made the Omaha assault much more costly than it need have
On D-Day itself, off Omaha Beach, Bradley sent his Chief of Stafi,
Major General Kean, to assess the situation personally. His report
supported this critical lacuna in Bradley's plan. When Kean returned to
USS Augusta Bradley asked him What do they need most.?"
'Bulldozers', Kean answered, 'bulldozers and artillery'. They're badly
pinched for both', 118 Given the colossal number of 'Funnies' available to
the Anglo-Canadian beaches, the Americans on Omaha had just 16 bull-
dozers available in the morning: of these only six reached the beach and
only three survived. By contrast, the two British beaches alone had 1%
'Funnies' in eight mixed groups with a combined total of 50 Crab tanks
(12 of which were destroyed), 120 AVREs (22 of which were destroyed,
eight Fascines, ten SBG bridges and eight bulldozers. 19 Chester Wilmor
was clear that the Funnies had played a crucial role on the Anglo-
Canadian beaches:
Apart from the factor of tactical surprise, the comparatively light casualties when
we sustained on all beaches except Omaha, were in large measure due to our
success of the novel mechanical continuances which we employed, and to the stuf-
gering morale and material effect of in: mass of armour landed in the leading
waves of the assault .... How many lives were saved on other sectors by the 79uh
Armoured Division nobody can tell bis if it had not been for the specialist armour,
the spearhead of the assault, progress on the British and Canadian beaches might
have been almost as slow and expensive as it was on Omaha. 120
The consequence for Omaha waisnot simply that the assault troop
and combat engineers had no protection in their movement off the beach
383
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
but that the initial paths across the beach were confined to the width of
the individual who removed the mines by hand. Thus on the Anglo-
Canadian beaches the infantry could move across the beach in relatively
dispersed form, providing a disparate target for the defenders. But on
Omaha the troops had to either risk falling victim to a mine or moving
in single file across the beach - a slow process that inevitably led to
bunching and providing an easy target for the defenders. And whatever
cise hampered the assault it was not a lack of bravery on the part of the
Combat Engineers who were trained to clear the obstacles: of the 272
Joint Army-Navy demolition engineers on Omaha Beach, 111 were dead
within 30 minutes.121
The only specialized armour employed on Omaha was the DD tanks
and the bulldozers.
But to use the amphibious Shermans the surface
wind should not have been more than 12 mph onshore and 18 mph
ofshore. Additionally, visibility of not less than 3 miles was needed to
facilitate the naval bombardment; and a cloud base of not more than
3,00 feet to help the bombers. Yet, according to Rear-Admiral Hall,
naval Commander, Force O, the sea was choppy, with wind force 5 from
the south-west. The sky was partially overcast with visibility about ten
miles' 22 That translates to between 17 and 21 knots or 20-24 mph; in
short, the winds at Omaha were between 10 and 33 per cent higher than
planned. Worse, the waves were up to two metres high which would
threaten the tanks and landing craft, the cloud base would partially
obscure the beach targets from the air; and although the ships would
a been tole to see their targets - that visibilly would only last that
the smoke from the initial shelling covered the area.
bradley was wed aware of the probid as he approached the coast in
the USS Augusta and recalled a conversation with "Tubby" Thorson his
G3 (Battle Planning Officer): 123
Thorson:
I don't like it General. The DDs are going to have one helluva time in
Bradley:
getting through this sea.
Yes Tubby, I'm afraid you're right. But at this point there's nothing
Any sign of a let-up in the surf?
Not yet. Kirk tells me the DDs may be swamped in these seas if they're
launched from the LCTs. Either the LCTs cart them ashore - or we'll
have to count with getting along without them. 124
the plan was relatively clear: a 4u-minute naval bombardment was
esigned to neutralize specific targets followed by a 30-minute air assault.
Once the initial assault troops had landed (the l6th RCT of the ist
Division and the 116th RCT of the 29th Division), the Ist Division
