MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
to stay deep in the water for protection. 39 Those that did attempt to
move inland found themselves unable to cross the shingle. 40
When the 741st Tank Battalion launched its 32 DD tanks to lead the
assaults by the Ist Division to the east on Exit E-1 and Exit E-3 at H-50,
allegedly 6,000 yards off-shore, 27 sank while 2 reached the shore under
their own propulsion and 3 others were landed directly on the beach after
their LCT damaged its unloading ramp. Actually at least two of the DDs
must have been launched a lot further out because they were subse-
quently found nearly mine miles (almost 16,000 yards) ott-shore.*
Admiral Ramsay had even warned Admiral Kirk that the 11 to 12 mile
launching distance from the beach at Omaha was an unnecessary risk, but
Kirk was clearly more worried by the German artillery that could reach
ten miles out to sea and sink his ships than he was by the significantly
increased risk of swamping to the amphibious vehicles. The problems this
left to the Ist and 29th Divisions were, of course, exacerbated by the
absence of compensatory armoured forces like the Funnies that led the
Anglo-Canadian assaults. 42
In fact none of the DD-tanks landed exactly when and where they
were supposed to on any beach and the post-invasion analysis by the nay
suggested that 'ordinary water-proofed tanks, landed on the beach in the
normal manner, would have served the purpose equally well. Had the
assault been conducted at dusk or in low visibility, on the other hand,
DD tanks might have achieved a valuable surprise, 43 Here, then, was a.
case where the Wicked approach to a problem failed and a Tame
approach might have generated a better result. But out of the water the
opposite problem developed - a Tame approach failed when a Wicked
one may have proved more successful.
the tanks that were used win wegarded as critical to the build up of
forces - as well as the initial landing - and it was decided by the
American Assault Force to limit eurously exposure in the first wave of
assault craft to just 15 LSTs (each LST could carry up to 12 tanks limit-
ng the total avallable to just 180).** Ironically, not only did this denude
the American assault infantry of vital armoured support - especially in
the absence of any other Hobart Funnies - but in the event, the
Sherman was to prove no match for the German tanks in any single tank
duel, for the German armour was stronger and the German gun more
powerful than almost anything the Allies had In fact, few German tanks
appeared on the beaches of Normandy on D-Day but many vere
involved just behind the beaches and some were involved in the only
partially successful counter-attack between sword and Juno beaches.
More importantly, perhaps, the Allies considered the threat of a German
armoured counter-attack with days of D-Day to be the most signincant
TECHNOLOGIES
275
threat to the landings. If the Allies could not hold off the Panzers
all would be lost. So why, given the superior material resources available
to the Western Allies, did they land with so few and such relatively
poor tanks? Again, the primary explanation can be traced back to
Management, or rather the failure of Management.
11.5 Tanks
Between the wars only the Germans, and to some extent the Russians,
had experimented radically with tank design and strategy and quickly
cognized that tank design had to be based on a balance between the
three critical issues: firepower, mobility and protection. However, like the
Russians, the Germans (who had been extremely lax in tank development
ag the First World War) had decided that the most significant
clement was the gun. For the British the most significant element was the
speed and the protection. 45 The Americans, Or at least General Patton,
The success of the Germans in France in 1940, particularly their
Panzer IV, sent shock waves through the Allied armies, especially the still
uninvolved Americans who were by far the most reluctant of all major
nations to engage in modern tank design or tactics.
American tank, the new M2, bean me obsolete over night and
an
gunned M3, the Grant, replaced it with an equivalent 75mm gun. This
was the tank which the British ordered in bulk - because almost all their
tanks were left in France around Dunkirk. In time the M4 (the Sherman)
became the major US medium tank, for all its weaknesses it was avalable
in large numbers (and it provided the base for more variants than any
Laumoured vehicle) but it was never a match for the best all-round
verman tank, the Panther, and its larger but earlier sablemate, the lis
produced in huge numbers and which outclassed all the Panzers devel-
mes were developed in response to the soviet
T-34 which was
oped up to 1942. More importantly, German success was rooted in tank
tactics as well as tank design, for while the Allies deployed their tanks
thinly to protect their infantry in long defensive lines, the Germans used
their Panzers Offensively in large concentrated pockets.
11.5.1 German tank development
verman tank (Panzerkampfwagen [PzKpfw]) development had contin-
a roughout the interwar period →-lespite the promoons mmo.
duced by the Versailles Treaty - thame: to cooperation from the UsSR
