290
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
inches of armour on a 45 degree glacis, 2 inches on the side of the hull
and between three and five inches on the turret and the gun mantle. This
was adequate to protect the crew against small arms fire but not much
else. Ironically, an Anglo-American meeting on 20 March 1942 had
discussed the need for a heavily armoured variant of the Sherman and the
decision to go ahead with it was taken in May 1942. But it was not until
June 1944, after D-Day, that the first of the 254 M4A3E2s arrived,
complete with improved engine and suspension, in addition to the
thicker and better angled armour (100mm at 60 degrees in front of the
driver),103 At 47 tons the Assault Sherman proved to be difficult to main-
tain and unreliable - but then it should only have been employed for D-
Day assault itself so neither of these problems was cause not to employ it
in the invasion. An alternative would have been the M4A35 which was
more heavily armoured than the
M4 but not as unwieldy as the
M4A3E2. In the event these were available in May 1944 but again they
were not delivered until the autumn of 1944.104
Although the M4 Sherman weighed 37½ tons (15½ tons more than
the Panzer Mk IV) it was massively outweighed by the Panther at 52 tons
and the Tiger at 56 tons. But although the Panther was heavier it was not
less mobile because its wider tracks distributed the weight better. The
Sherman produced about 7 Ibs. per square inch on the ground - about
that of the German tanks and hence decreasing the relative
manoeuvrability of the Sherman in soft ground. When the 3rd (US)
Armoured Division took part in the assault on the Siegfried hine in
November 1944 the mud literally stopped the Shermans in their tracks.
As a result, within 26 minutes of the assault beginning, 48 of the origi-
nal 64 Shermans had been hit - though 40 of these were subsequently
recovered and 35 refitted. 105
On the other hand, the tracks of the German tanks were made of steel
and rapidly wore out on road surfaces - hence their need to be trans-
ported by rail wherever possible - while the Shermans used rubber cover-
ings that could be reversed after wearing out thus providing for much
greater wear. For example, a set of Sherman tracks would last around
2,500 miles while a set of Gerrot in tracks lasted about 500 miles. 106
Bule f the Sherman failed to live up to its design specifications for a
highly mobile tank its legendary reliability was also questionable.
However rehable the Sherman may have been, to have travence te
-,£0U miles from Normandy almost to Berlin required over 10,000 or
the 17,000 troops in the division to be engaged directly (as mechanics)
or indirectly (as tank crew responsible for tank pertormance) on maint
nance and it was this huge support system that enabled such a poor tank
to cope with everything that the weather, the ground and the cema
TECHNOLOGIES
291
could throw at it. For example, Cooper calculates that an armoured divi-
sion involving perhaps 1,200 vehicles, half of which were tanks or other
combat vehicles, would experience as many as 200 breakdowns for every
60 miles travelled in an unopposed night march. 107 Thus, while break-
downs among all tanks on both sides were common, the difference was
that the Allies had a far more sophisticated system for recovery and repair
than did their enemy. The consequence was a long 'service tail and
Mitchell suggests that for every one soldier actually fighting at the front,
12 more were servicing' that soldier behind the lines. 108 But the tail' of
the Allied, and especially the American, forces was not simply composed
ot non-combatants back in the stores but a critical factor in Allied
armoured success.
The Pershing was the American equivalent of the German Panther: it
weighed 47½ tons, it had 4 inches of armour on its 45 degree glacis
Plate, with six inches on the turret and a five inch gun mantle. It
mounted a 90mm gun with a muzzle velocity of 2,850 feet per second,
it rode on Christy suspension, and, with its consequently wider tracks and
bigger engine than the Sherman, it was both faster and more manoeu-
wable than it. In short, the Pershing was the solution to the Panther
problem. So why did the Sherman survive?
When the belated development of the MZo Fershing neavy tank took
Pace it was all but too late but it need not have been so. Major General
George A. Lynch, the Chief of infantry in 1940, had proposed the estab-
ishment of heavier and more powerful tanks and suggested that tank-
destroyers lacked the mobility necessary to fight against mobile enemy
four but he had been overruled by McNair, Chief of Staff of General
Head Quarters who amongst other things, considered the provision of
problem of German armour.
mass tank-destroyers a cheaper, as well as a more effective, solution to the
But despite Opposition an M26 protardsap angallable in December
1941, just three months after the Sherman prototype was developed. In
the beginning it appeared that the heavier tank would displace its lighter
counterpart because an initial order of 5,000 M26s (250 a month) Was
quickly placed after the prototype was assessed. However, this order was
radically reduced to a total of just 115 in September 1942, and further
reduced to just 40 in December 1942 after an unfavourable review by the
Armoured Force Board (AFB). In the event 40 Pershings were built from
because General Barnes, supported by the Ordnance Board but in the
this initial order, all by Baldwin Locomotive,
but these only appeared
eeth of opposition from the AFB, dk-nanded them. Only in 1943 was
production actually started and another possible order
quashed after the Armoured Force Boale demanded that Shermans be
