360
COMMANDING IN CRISES
weather was too rough and their launch was delayed until 4,000 yards
from the beach. 14 of B squadron's 19 DD tanks heading for Nan Green
reached the beach before the AVREs and the infantry of the Regina Rites
at about 0800, roughly 15 minutes before the assault troops. This seems
to have been a result of B Squadron taking matters into their own hands
- that is recognizing a crisis and taking command of the situation - they
launched prematurely when an unsupported landing looked decidedly
unhealthy for the infantry. Sergeant Leo Gariepy's DD tank appears to
have been the first to land but the Regina Rifles still came under heary
fire from beach emplacements. Gariepy stopped his tank just beyond the
sight of one such German gun, opened a bottle of rum which the tanks
crew demolished at speed, then reversed towards the emplacement firing
12 rounds into it. The German gun did not fire again. 30
The preliminary bombardment had not eliminated the opposition but
the assault went largely to plan - though the delayed assault meant that
many obstacles were covered by the water by the time the enginee
inded to open up the gaps. As a consequence many troops were pinned
down on the beach, notably by machine gun fire and the two strong
points harbouring a 75mm and an 88mm gun. Eventually these were
both knocked out by DD tanks - ough not until the former gun had
already fired around 200 shells - despite the evidence of multiple - but
ineffective - hits from the preliminary naval bombardment.
the signting of the German beach artillenrt which restricted it to ent-
lading fire, made the defenders vig Superulnerable to long-range shell
are from the sea. but it simultaneote y made the defenders vulnerable to
head-On dosdurts from tanks precisely because the defenders could not
bring their guns to bear directly in front of them.
In the words of
Sergeant Gariepy leading the first DD tank onto Nan Green,
My target
was on the seafront. A 75mm whid 1 was in a position of enfilade fire
along the beach like all the guns. The hit ses along the beach were all full
of machine-gunners and so were the sand dunes.
But the angle of the
blockhouse stopped them firing on me. So I took the tank up to thể
emplacement, very close and destroyed the gun by firing at almost point-
blank range. The removal of strong points by this method proved
costy but effective. Sergeant Wood of C Squadron 22nd Dragoons on
sword Beach was involved with a pillbox housing mortars, as Major Birt
rishunted: This was fierce shooting at close range; like so much of the
fighting on this beach, tanks ran for the gun emplacements in a grim race
to put their shells almost point-blank through the mouths of the concrete
'boxes' before they themselves were put out of action', 32
After this the Crabs cleared the mines, the AVRE fascines filled the
anti-tank ditch, the armoured bulldozer cleared the path and by 0900
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
361
both exits to east Courseulles were open 33 Unfortunately, though, the
Regina Rifl's A Company, having suffered the most casualties in the
assault upon the beach strongpoint, failed to leave a defending force
behind when they moved south and it was reoccupied by the Germans
who resumed their attack upon the subsequent waves of Canadians.
that the DD tanks could not support the infantry moving inland for one
The exit on Mike Green was opened by 0930 but the delays meant
and a half hours. At H-Hour+2
beach remained completely
congested. However, by 1700 Courseulles was declared safe and the
keginas pusned south towards keviers, losing five of the remaining bi
anks on the way. Nevertheless some of the DD tanks of the reserve C
squadron of the oth Armoured Regiment led by Lt McCormick proba-
bly got the furthest south of any Allied troops on D-Day, approaching
their objective of bretteville-fOrguellleia-e before Pulling Dack. 34
Super squadron's tanks supports te Regina lines, the lanes
of A squadron were to lead the Royal Winnipeg Rifles onto Mike Red
and Mike Green after being launched only 1,500 yards out when enemy
tire was becoming more accurate. Only 10 were launched at sea, seven of
which reached the beach. Most of the rest were launched directly on the
beach but all of the DD tanks of ie is squadron landed after the infantry. 35
a other specialist armour, in the form of two bels can us aikes,
armoured bulldozers, Sherman and Centaur tanks,
was also
delayed and the troops landed first under heavy fire from the German
defenders in the French housisqo Joe der great threat from the under-
water obstacles. Many vehicles failed to reach the beach, unloaded in
water too deep and too rough, and one example typifies the ambiguity of
Command: a motorized mortar platoon of the Royal Winnipeg Rifles
was ordered off an LCT and the first vehicle plunged into four meters of
water, never to emerge again. The skipper of the LCT then ordered the
second vehicle off but the sergeant refused, even when threatened with a
ourt martial. Eventually the skipper acquiesced and landed on the beach
to disembark the vehicles safely. 36
The slight delay in the assault on Mike Beach also enabled the German
for the assault,
defenders to emerge from their bunkers and prepaced
though the official report suggests that, thanks to the determination of
the assault troops and the coxswains,
the accuracy of the supporting
artillery - including the eight LCTs Rocket,37 and the weakness of the
enemy fire, casualties were relatively small in the initial assault. 38 This was
helped through the absence of the Luftwaffe and the relatively little
shelling from inland batteries.
On Mike Red and Nan Green, the defensive fire really began when the
landing craft touched down. B Company of the Royal Winnipegs found
