226
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
many did not, and a large proportion of the ethnic German troops were
not Old and sick men' but veterans of the eastern front who proved more
than a match for their green opponents. Second, the position and speed
ot deployment of first rate infantry, SS and Panzer units ensured that the
lightening breakout' from the bridgehead turned into a prolonged
season of storms.
Since few Germans assumed Normandy would be the invasion area it
was generally regarded as a 'rest and recuperation' area for units on leave
from the eastern front (where a 3.3 million German army had suffered 3
million losses between June 1941 and December 1943) or a zone where
second rate troops could be left in control freeing up the better units for
defending the Pas-de-Calais or in Russia 61 By the end of 1941 Hiter
even began conscripting Russian prisoners-of-war into labour battalions
to tight the Red Army. However, they proved so unreliable that they
were transferred to the west at the rate of two Ost (East) battalions for
every one (native) German battalion.
The proportion of 'Russians' - that is it in-ethnic Germans - in the
west has always been disputed. Goldstein et al claim that by D-Day one
siXth of the German infantry in the west was non-German. 2 Von
Schweppenburg put the total proportion of 'Russians' at one third of
the entire 7th Army, though only 17 per cent of the infantry battalions
were actually formed from such troops, though there were several volks-
deutsche units made up of ethnic Germans from outside the 1939
Reich 03 Of the Ost battalions that Masters came across behind Sword
Beach almost all were infantry soldiers commanded by ethnic Germans
and do the artillery and mortar units were composed wholly or ethme
Germans. & The irony was that the ethnic diversity of the American
troops at Utah was probably greater than that of the defenders - but
the identity of the attackers was probably more solidaristic than the
Nonetheless, so great was the ethnic dive? y that eight different pay
books were necessary and the Nazi obsession with racial purity became
Aryan ously stretched to include Volksdersche (Racial Germans), non-
Aryan Freiwillige (volunteers) and Hilfwillige (auxiliaries). The 987th
regiment of the 2/6th Division had 34 diff nt Soviet language».
deutenant-General Karl-Wilhelm Von Schlieben, commander of the
cheroom sarnson, Justified its surrender on 26 June 1944 Party by
reterence to the quality of his troops: "You can't expect Russians and
Poles to fight for Germany against Americans in France? 65 But this did
not mean the defenders would buckle under pressure because fighting for
sure of these people nad been a Wi to are generations. Moreove,
the Ost battalions had been infor a ed that anyone retreating would be
MOBILIZING THE GERMANS: WEHRMACHT AND SS
227
Shot by his German NCO, while anyone captured by the Allies would be
shot as a traitor.66
Not that this necessarily implied that the Ost battalions would prove
to be poorer soldiers than their German colleagues.
Members of the
British 6th Airborne came across Russians fighting under German offi-
cers near Le Plein and had trouble subduing them - though the Russians
subsequently told their captives that they had been told that any Russians
captured by the Allies would be shot as traitors.67 The US Airborne
troops also had trouble dislodging a battalion of Georgians (795th
Georgian Infantry Battalion, from the 709th Infantry Division) from
lurqueville near St Mère-Eglise, though they eventually surrendered on
There clearly were some defenders desperately keen to surrender, but
not many. On Queen Red, Lance Corporal Flint witnessed five German
soldiers climbing out of their defensive trenches when he arrived with the
first AVRE but they were immediately shot dead by SS troops behind
them.69 General Cota's group ascending the bluffs at Les Moulins at
Dog Green, saw a group of five German prisoners being escorted back
down to the landing craft by a single GI when they came under fire from
4 to are iffs. Lt Shea, Cota's aide, saw what happened:
Their captor drove towards the protecting cover of the seawall, while two of the
remaining three sank to their knees ... they seem to be pleading with the opera-
tor of the machine gun, situated on the bluffs to the east, not to shoot them. The
next burst caught the first kneeling German full in the chest, and as he crumpled
the remaining two took to the cover of the seawall with their captor.?0
the Normandy coast itself was defended by the 711th and the 716th
Division. Most of the defences where the Allies were to land were held
y the 716th but there were relatively similar in structure and composi-
ion. The 71lth Division to the west was formed in April 1941 to detend
northern France as a static division and comprised older men boi
etween 1901 and 1913 - i.e., 31-43 years old. In the spring of 1944 it
moved to Deauville, on the coast 25 miles east of Caen and by D-Day
had between 11,000 and 13,000 troops in two infantry regiments and a
battalion of artillery. By this time 20 per cent of the division were veter-
ins from the eastern front who had suffered frostbite injuries. One battal-
on ot the / 3 Ist Regiment was composed Of Kussian troops, in total the
711th had 20 anti-tank
squadron of captured French Renault 35 tanks.71
60 pieces of field artillery and one
De the 716th Division, a static division we, only 40 per cent native
The unit facing the 116th Infant on Omaha Beach was supposed to
