310
COMMANDING IN CRISES
But the popular assumption that war is only possible because of efie-
tively coercive disciplinary systems runs contrary to the evidence which
suggests that many (though by no means all) soldiers enjoy' some or
several aspects of combat. Grey suggests that three reasons predominate
in trying to explain what might be called 'the irrational commitment to
stay: the spectacle, the comradeship and the destruction. 2 Since all
three provide 'attractions' that are seldom found outside war, at least not
logether, war embodies a magnet that holds soldiers to its chest in a
literal death grip.
For many combatants on D-Dayp-e spectacle of the vast armada of
ships and the realization that history was unfolding before their very eyes.
was incredibly powerful. 'Looking back on Normandy,' recalled Stan
Leech, a beach signaller, "the impression which remains is how inters
ing everything was, not how frightening.
I'm no braver or more
cowardly than anyone eise, but 1 was so caught up in the excitement or
it all. Everything was new'. 13
But there were probably many more tat fought on because they felt
it their duty to those with whom they had trained and fought. Stanty
Whitehouse, for example, remembers that:
Luckily the old Bucks Battalion platoon that had been together for more than thu
trass remained virtually intact, which was a tremendous fillip ... They were al
trusted mates who could be relied on when wOl vere in a tight spot. A platoon is
like a large family of about forty men, liviry eating and sleeping together for
month after month. They laugh and cryoyee tinged experiences, get drunk
boncher and fight the common enemy. Is it any wonder then that such poverti
bonds are forged between them, bonds stronger than even those between blood
brothers? Truly they are ready to die for each other -
when a member of the 'family' is killed or maimed the rest feel a deep anguish and
- and sometimes do - and
express a blind hatred for the perpetrators. 14
Hitler saL wn Weltanschauung or 'worldview' was, to some extent
tooted in his fond memories of taunutod les in the First World War and,
as shall become clear, there are several examples of soldiers joining and
remaining in an army because they manifestly enjoy killing
nutod fly exhibiting the characteristics associated with berserks. l This 15
hardly a novel idea; historically many societies have been framed around
warrior cultures that glorified war and Hitler's leadership was certainly
premised on this philosophy: exploiting the solidarity of soldiers.
need only return to the last hour of the First World War
And we
when the
armistice due at 1100 was common knowledge - to see both sides engas.
ing in militarily 'unnecessary' deaths. Many of the Allied gunners fired
right up until 1059 (though Captain Harry Truman stopped his shelling
311
COMMANDING
near Verdun at 1045). Elsewhere, Brigadier General Bernard Freyberg
led a cavalry charge at 1055; the Germans fired gas and incendiary shells
onto the hospital at Mézières until 1059; and at 1058 John Price, a
pivate in the Canadian army, became the last Allied casualty of war when
he took his helmet off to take some flowers from Belgian children and
was promptly shot through the head by a German sniper. Even as the
armistice began, a platoon of the 2nd Middlesex Regiment had to be
restraned from attacking a nearby German post where they wanted to
kill a few more Germans while they had the chance'. lo These are not
necessarily acts induced by any of the causes on Keegan's list; they may
be the acts of individuals who appear to enjoy war, who gain pleasure
from killing.
This in itself, may lead to subsequent acts of violent revenge where a
close comrade is killed or wounded. 'Good friends died at Mouen', wrote
Private Kings, a Brengunner with the Ist Worcesters,
I was both sad and angry, my hatred for the enemy had become very personal nows.
I felt no compassion at all; my one thought now was for retribution. I felt tharak
a Brengunner I had a special job to do; that was to reach one's objective as quick
as possible, dig in and be in a position to defend against counter-attack and kill as
many Jerries as possible. Tored end killing was almost an obsession. 17
When Brendan aner's ship came under an anack of the dormandy
beaches on D-Day+3, he was positively ecstatic: The thrill of opening up
at enemy aircraft was unbelisable. I found myself jumping up and down
with excitement and cursing the gunner for not bringing one down', I8
these cases suggest, as Bourke does, that some soldiers enjoy the pleas-
ures of killing', and there are cnough violent sports, violent games and
acts of violence to suggest that an adrenaline buzz from physical combat
15 not the preserve of the mentally unbalanced. 19
A more gentle man than Sapper ,f nderson of the british 655rd
engineers would be hard to find but when the war ended on o May ne
was not simply relieved: 'to be honest some of us felt a sense of disap-
pointment that we had come to the end of our exaiting adventure •
Under air attack on New Year's Day 1945 he and a corporal 'got hold of
a Bren gun with tracer bullets in the magazine, and when the next aircraft
came over us, we fired at it. It was very low flying and we could see the
aacer bullets go into the engine nacelle. IM ecately walte lames car
from the aircraft and the pilot straight away climbed up to a greater
height until he vanished over the horizon. At that time we rejoiced that
we might have killed him but now I hope that he got back to his side
without serious injury' 20
