YUL
384
COMMANDING IN CRISES
(known as the 'Big Red One' from the red numeral on their shoulder
flash and helmets) would move inland and east to link up with the British
at Port-en-Bessin, while the 29th Division (known as the Blues and Grays
from their recruitment across the old north-south dividing line) would
move inland and west to the Vire estuary. Of the eight sectors of the
beach, the 116th RCT, aided by C Company of the 2nd Ranger
Battalion, were responsible for the five eastern sectors: Charley, Dog
Green, Dog White, Dog Red and Easy Green. The 16th RCT took the
three western sectors: Easy Red, Fox Green and Fox Red.
The beach was a nightmare for attackers and a dream for defenders: it
was difficult to outflank, the bluff provided good views for the defenders
of the attackers, there were more mines here than at Utah and it was
more heavily fortified with 12 reinforced gun emplacements situated on
either sides of the five available "draws' or exit routes to the hinterland.
The five draws were also covered by Stützpunkt, strongpoints of mutu-
ally supporting Resistance Nests. For example, the Vierville Draw was
covered by 70 soldiers of the 3rd Battalion, 726th Infantry Regiment
and comprised six resistance nests. 125 Overall there were 21 Resistance
Nests overlooking Omaha Beach, though not all were concrete or bomb-
proof. Nevertheless, the entire beach was covered by a terrifying array of
defences: eight concrete bunkers with large calibre artillery (75mm +);
35 pill-boxes with smaller artillery and automatic weapons; four separate
batteries of artillery; 18 anti-tank guns; six mortar pits; 35 rocket launch-
ing sites; and 85 machine-gun nests. 126 Many of the machine guns were
targeted sideways to provide enfilading fire whilst being protected to the
front by concrete. Hence many of soldiers wading through the surf were
being fired at but could see nothing to fire back at: either the defenders
were in hidden bunkers or the solid concrete gun emplacements were
surply impermeable to rifle and ma dumn tre. And, since the DD.
tanks had failed to negotiate the rough sea, bullets were just about all the
attackers had. Indeed, the gun emplacements were often impenetrable 10
naval gunfire too. Major Pluskat took several direct hits on his bunker
from sea and air but when the shelling stopped not one of his 20 guns
was damaged and no single injury had been caused 127 Everitt Schulthers
from the 467th Anti-Aircraft Battalion watched as a heavy cruiser
pounded a concrete gun emplacement directly in front of his ICT but to
From our vantage point, the projectile(s) appeared to be about the size of a
domestic water heater. Every round fired struck nse target, but the shore batter
ontinued to fire. The navy ceased fire and we were able to see one of our GI
but works ts way up the cliff, dragging a long pole with satchel charges malt
385
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
..He stuffed his charges into the firing slit, then tumbled down the bluff.
Seconds later, dust and black smoke erupted from the gun emplacement, effec-
tively silencing the shore battery. 128
But before all the batteries were silenced around 2,000 attackers were
dead from the two divisions.
14.7.1 The 116th RCT of the 29th Division
In overall command of the 29th Division was General Gerhardt but his
stant, Brigadier General Cota, was to land first with 116th RCT and
assist the Ist Division's commander,
General Huebner, with the
combined assault by both RCTs until Gerhardt landed later in the day. In
fact Admiral Ramsay (Allied Naval Commander in Chief) and Rear
Admiral Kirk (Commander of the Western Task Force) were extremely
fduns other. Given we predominance of the British naval effort
in the invasion Eisenhower had accepted that there would be no joint'
naval command and that the US naval effort would be subordinated to
Ramsay's command, but there was a remarkably degree of personal
cnity between the two allies'. On 6 May Ramsay wrote in his private
diary about tWO hysterical letters from Alan Kirk ... he has quite lost his
sense of proportion besides being rather offensively rude. My opinion of
him decreases steadily. He is not a big enough man to hold the position
he does'. For his part, Kirk recalled how Ramsay "had become very testy
and very difticult about the Amencan effort'. The issue was not simply
ine of dittering personalities but rather a contradictory perspective en
panning. the Bntish had traditionally been very hierarchical with all
planning undertaken by the Admiralty, leaving subordinate commanders
o do little except execute the plans as required But the American haval
system was far more flexible, with the naval hierarchy issuing outline
plans and leaving their subordinates to fill in the details as they saw fit, 129
tose details for Omaha, for instancely vere incredibly complex. At H-
Hour minus five minutes 32 DD farks would swim aShore on Dog White
nd Dog ureen. At H-Houree o› LCI(A)s (Landing Craft
[Armoured)) carrying two or three tanks each with 95mm guns would
land having continued firing as they approached the beach directly from
heir landing craft At HI Hear the 4 ICIs of the let Kattalion's
Company 'A' were to land carrying "tank dozers' to clear the obstacles
prior to further landings and befot. I2he tide covered them again
The plan did not call for all of this Ist Battalion's four companies to
and at once but for one of the Ist Battalion (A Company), and three of
the 2nd Battalion (E,F, and G Companies). At H+1 minute Companies
