LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
spread through the delegates, the Americans were persuaded that an
immediate invasion of Italy was critical to take advantage of the crisis.
Recall that a crisis is both self-evident to those affected by it and effec-
tively inhibits the development of debate or dissent. Nevertheless, it was
only agreed by the Americans providing the British agreed to Overlord
taking place on 1 May 1944. The Combined Chiefs of Staff duly
accepted Morgan's initial strategy and authorized him to begin the
detailed planning. 27
Yet even Churchill's support for Overlord was never really apparent
until very late. As late as 26 May 1944 - just ten days before the intended
invasion date of 5 June, Churchill told Eisenhower that he was - at last
- 'hardening to this enterprise'. It was, according to Eisenhower, a
'painful discovery' that Churchill had not believed in the plan until that
point 28 Churchill subsequently insisted that he actually meant that he
was, by then, convinced that the operation should go ahead even if the
conditions were not perfect? Note that the implications of Churchills
conditions requirements were both a manifestation of a search for
certainty common to those seeking to tame Wicked Problems and simul-
taneously an impossible demand.
What about Roosevelt? In early 1944 three forces operated to cajole
Roosevelt to take action. First, the Presidential election was due on 7
November and Roosevelt had to persuade the voters that his 'Germany-
First-and-don't-start-winding-down-the-war-effort-yet' programme was
supportable (he won the election with the lowest of his four Presidential
victories on 52.8 per cent of the vote). Second, the Soviet Army, which
had defeated the Germans at Stalingrad in February 1943, and crossed
the Dnieper
Leningrad in early January 1944 and had begun the long advance against
Germany, entering Poland and Romania by 2 April. Third, the assault on
the Japanese was still proving extremely costly by US standards: the 72
hour battle for Tarawa in November 1943 for example, cost 3,319 US
casualties, while only 146 of the 4,700 Japanese troops and Korean
labourers (including 129 Korean labourers) had surrendered. At this rate
the war to subdue the Japanese was going to prove immensely costly, the
soviets were going to enter Berlin first, and he was going to have trou-
ble persuading the American voters that Germany remained the most
important problem. This was especially important when he could not
remove the prickly and pro-Pacific focus of General MacArthur, given the
latter's powerful Republican and media friends back home. 30
One response to all three problems was to pursue the amphibious
assault on Normandy irrespective of the cost. Indeed, one could argue,
paradoxically, that the last thing Roosevelt wanted was an unopposed
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
31
landing because that would confirm to the American voters that (a) the
European war was almost over, and (b) the tougher enemy - and there-
fore the most resources - ought to be funnelled to the war against the
Japanese in the Pacific.
That popular American optimism may have been rooted in a direct
comparison of the resources arraigned against Germany by the Allies.
Simply in terms of population figures the main Allies including the
dominions and colonies of the British Empire) 31 grossly outnumbered
the main Axis by around three to one. And if we compare the natural
resources, the Allies had almost twice the coal reserves of Germany, twice
triple the crude steel, and twice the
aluminium. 32 But the real differences were in manufacturing capacity
rather than raw materials. For example, in 1938 the US had 29 per cent
of the world's manufacturing output - Germany had just 13 per cent. By
the end of the war the disparity was even greater with the US accounting
for half the world's output, and it was this capacity that facilitated not just
D-Day and the campaign in Europe, but the Soviet campaigns too (the
US, for example, provided the USSR with 665,000 vehicles).33 This
imbalance did not guarantee victory for the Allies - if such a calculation
was possible it would have proved to be a classic Tame Problem - but the
conventional assumption seems to have been that, providing no colossal
errors were made, the Germans could not win in the long term.
about the utility of relying
simply on a massive advantage in war matériel: 'I believe we can lick the
Hun only by being ahead of him in ideas as well as in material
resources' 34 Given the potential role of new weapons, such as jet aircraft,
rockets and atomic bombs it should have been clear that having more
2.3 When?
The second problem was: when should the invasion occur? As early as
1941 the British made clear to the US that any invasion of France would
be - to quote Montgomery inverting Churchill - 'the beginning of the
end' not the 'end of the beginning' - as Montgomery thought the
Americans assumed 35 As Copp suggests, the entire British strategy was
framed around avoiding a head-on clash between British and German
troops and reducing the German resistance by whatever other means were
available. 36 The consequence was not just Montgomery's careful shep-
herding of British troops but the overall construction of an Allied strat-
egy that was always slightly deficient in the number of troops available,
