224
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
There is certainly some truth in this, but what Queseda missed was the
irony of the German military performance: it was partly because of their
personal devotion to, and identification with, Hitler that the elite and Ss
units fought with such tenacity; thus their strength was simultaneously
their weakness. Only if Hitler had been less irrational would their pover
have been adequately exploited by the Germans but it was only because
of their emotional - i.e. non-rational - allegiance to him that their pover
As the war turned increasingly against Germany, reports on the morale
of the German forces, while not suggesting anything like a collapse,
began hinting as early as December 1943 that a decay had set in. The
impression of many troops was that surrendering to the Allies was consid-
crably preferable to many of the other alternatives (fighting to the death
or surrendering to the Red Army) - hardly the kind of fanaticism that vas
visibly present on the eastern front where between November 1942 and
October 1943 1.7 million casualties had been incurred and which Hiter
assumed would consume the Allies in France. 55 Certainly the 55
remained loyal to the Führer and appeared to have fought to the bitter
end - some even leaping on Allied tanks with explosives attached to their
bodies, blowing themselves and the tank up to stop the advance. It was
these troops that incurred the wrath of the Allied troops whenever they
met up, but many Allied soldiers had little hatred for
Wehrmacht soldiers - at least until their close colleagues had been killed
or maimed in action against them.
Forsten- iggests that the motivational commitment that did prevail
amongst most Wehrmacht soldiers stemmed initially from the complete
miltarization of German society from 1933, manifest in blomberg
increasing ties with the Nazi state and his acceptance in 1935 that the
educational goal of the Wehrmacht was "not only the thoroughly trained
soldier and master of his weapon, but also the man who is aware of his
race and of his general duties towards the state?. As for the officers,
their role was to become both the political and the tactical leaders of thei
roops, unlike the Soviet system wheneypolitical commissars were distinct
flyn the military leader (though both countries adopted the other's
system as the fortunes of war were reverse from 1943). Thus although
much effort went into the construction of political indoctrinauo
antongst the Wehrmacht, the greatest relive ce was placed upon the act
role played by the local commanders. In other words, the motivational
trust came primarily from the military not the Nazis. The effects of this
ideological campaign, of course, lye much harder to establish,
perhaps we can get no closer to the 'average' Wehrmacht soldier than to
soest, following Schulte that there was no 'clear dichotomy between
MOBILIZING THE GERMANS: WEHRMACHT AND SS
225
fanatics fighting a religious war, or ideology-free and perhaps bored and
apathetic soldiers; but a continuum'.57
Even after capture many German soldiers remained fervent admirers
of Hitler and Nazism. In the POW Camp Grant, in Illinois, for example,
42 prisoners believed to be less than sympathetic towards Nazism were
locked in a building by other prisoners who attempted to burn them all
to death. At Camp Tonkawa in Oklahoma, one prisoner was beaten to
death by his comrades after 200 of them had accused him of being a trai-
tor and voted to murder him.58
For the average German soldier the future was much bleaker: either
the Red Army would wreak revenge on the German population for the
crimes of the Wehrmacht and the SS in the Soviet Union, or the Allies
would control Germany but on unconditional terms that could well see
the effective end of Germany as a state. The average German soldier was
more likely to survive if the Allies took control but he may not live out
his life peacefully with his family and he may not have even returned to
what was left of Germany at all. 59
Some Germans clearly believed that the Allied soldiers would show no
more mercy than their Soviet counterparts when taking German prison-
ers, even civilians. For example, Cooper recounts how a German woman
at Darmstadt worked at his officers' Mess immediately after the war. She
ad been married to an officer in the German army and was the daugh-
ter of the director of the Merck Chemical Works, a position only held by
Nazi members or supporters. As the war closed in on Darmstadt her
husband had been killed in Russia and her father and mother persuaded
her that the Americans were barbarians and would certainly torture her
and her daughters before they were killed. Thus she agreed that all five
hould commit suicide by taking cyanide tablets. Her parents had swal-
lowed their tablets and the woman had made her daughters take theirs
with some sweets and checked they were dead before taking her own.
However, she had regurgitated her tablet in a coma and was subsequently
revived by the very troops sanzoelieved would murder her.60
9.5 Identifying the 'Germans' on D-Day
Not all the troops in German uniforms int, rance were German and not
assumed that the presence of such soldiers would ensure a relatively easy
many of the Germans were first class soldiers.
The Allied planners had
assault. The real problem would come later, when the SS and Panzer
units arrived over the first week. The planners were
counts. First, although some hism-ethnic Germans proved unreliable,
wrong on both
