and 5
342
COMMANDING IN CRISES
the gliders were to land on top of the battery but in practice the radio
beacons to guide them were destroyed on landing and the signal flares to
guide them in were missing. Thus three of them landed some distance
away. The fourth, hit by anti-aircraft fire, landed within 200 yards of
Otway's assault position - having narrowly missed crashing straight into
them - and managed to keep German reinforcements away from the area.
the fifth glider had been over-laden and forced to land back at Bize
Norton. 60
Despite the crisis that faced the paratroopers, the assault was success-
fu, but the cost to both sides was high: 110 of the 200 German defend-
ers® and os Of Utways 155 attackers were dead or injured. some had
stepped on the mines because the pathways were not marked by tapes,
some had been shot by German machine-gun fire, some injured or killed
in the hand to hand fighting inside the four casemates, and others were
Ko are artillery fire laid down by the nearby Cabourg battery. I his had
been telephoned for by Raimund Steiner, the Merville Battery
commander, who was actually in the observation bunker on the beach
1.5 miles away at the time of the attack. 62
The guns turned out to be 100mm not 150mm, and there is still some
spute about whether all the guns were disabled - though even Without
exprose charges i seems tilat at least some were put out or acton with
gammon grenades. 63 The only thing left to do was to notify the Arethusa
prevent friendly fire. That noln a hould have come from a naval
Shaller but none had arrived so the first alternative was a carrier pigeon,
CArried by Lt Loring, which promptly flew off to England rather than the
Arethusa. Fortunately, the second alternative signal - yellow fares - were
spotted by a circling reconnaissance plane. 64
then Otway's troops withdrew from the battery it was retaken by a
unit of the German 736th Grenadier Regiment who, in turn were routed
by another British attack on 7 June by two troops of No. 3 Commando
under Major Pooley. The Commandos were themselves counter-attacked
no nail of them killed, mauding fooley, posthumously awaited the
George Cross and subsequently buried in Bayeux. The battery remaine
disputed territory until late June.65
13.7 The German response to the airdrops
The confusion that reigned amongst many of the Allied paratroopers and
glider troops was mirrored by the German defenders on the ground. The
Cramon assumption remained that the airdrop was merely a feint to
draw attention away from the real invasion at Calais.
And although
THE AIRBORNE ASSAULTS
343
reports of Allied troops in the area emerged soon after the landings, the
apparently random pattern of the drops made it exceptionally difficult for
the Germans to make an appropriate response.
Furthermore, since most
o the senior commanders were away, whatever the response was
and
contrary to traditional Germany military
philosophy of Mission
Command - it would have to await further orders from above.
Colonel Hans von Luck, CO of the 125th Panzergrenadier Regiment
part of General Feuchtinger's 21st Panzer Division) typified the dual
reactions of the German troops
ground on the night of the
arborne landings. First, an immediate willingness to engage the invaders
in response to the apparent crisis, but second a refusal to do so without
permission from above: 'I gave orders without hesitation, recalled von
Luck, "All units are to be put on alert immediately and the division
mormed. No. Il battalion is to go into ade on wherever necessary"
In the meantime, my adjutant telephoned the
division.
General
reuchtinger and his general-staff officer had not come
back yet
(Feuchting was seeing his girifriend in lans). We save the orderly off.
cer, Lieutenant Messmer, a brief situation report and asked him to Oblan
clearance for us for a concentrated night attack the moment the divisional
immander returned' 66 Von Luck, then, while willing to engage the
waders with his own local forces would not move in any concerted
manner until Feuchtinger agreed, and Feuchtinger was absent and had
forgotten to take a radio with him. Dollman (CO of the /th Army) was
also missing - at the war game in Rennes.
Even when Feuchtinger
returned, von Luck still had to wait because Feuchtinger had to wait tor
Rommel's clearance.
Since I had been told that I was to make no move until I heard from nommel's
headquarters I could do nothing immediately but warn my men to be ready. I
waited patiently all that night for some instructions.
• But not a single order from
a higher formation was received by me ... I finally decided at 6.30 in the morn
ing that I had to take some action. I ordered my tanks to attack the English this
Airborne which had entrenched itself in a bridgehead over the Orne.
To me this
constituted the most immediate threat to the German position.
Hardly had I made this decision when, at seven o'clock, I received my first int-
mation that a higher command did still exist. I was told by Army Group B that l
was now under the command of the Seventh Army. But I received no further
orders as to my role. At nine o'clock I was informed that I would receive orders
from 84th Infantry Corps and finally at ten o'clock I was given my first operational
instructions. I was ordered [by General Marcks] to stop the move of my tanks
towards the Allied airborne troops and to turn west and aid the forces protecting
astonishing progress and had
Caen
By this time the enemy ...
already occupied a strip of high ground about ten kilometres from the sea. From
