4 Planning to Mislead
Great part of the information obtained in War is contradictory, a still
greater part is false, and by far the greatest part is of a doubtful charac-
ter ... This difficulty of seeing things correctly ... is one of the greatest
sources of friction in War.!
4.1 Introduction
In theory Overlord could well have failed: despite the planning expert:
ise available to the Western Allies the invasion remained untameable: It
remained a Wicked Problem simply because it was not possible to
predict whether the German response would be scissor, paper or stone.
The Germans had more troops and armour in the area than the Allies
would be able to land for several weeks. The German defences would
have - and indeed had - several hours' notification that the invasion vas
on its way and had known that an invasion was imminent for long
IL ough to move submarines, E-boats and aircraft near enough to cause
havoc with the armada, Even a suc red nitial landing could well have
been repulsed within 48 hours by the movement of Panzer and infantry
forces close to the beaches o' a4.L a week by the movement of
German reinforcements from the 15th Army encamped around Calas.
That the Allies succeeded was the result of both luck and skill on their
red articularly involving relatively junior officers and troops, and
ineptitude on the part of the German High Command Who were no
rescued by their senior officers. This chapter considers the role that
information and misinformation played in leading the defenders astray.
In short, leadership was critical not just in successfully leading the Allies
to and across the beaches of Normandy but also in misleading We
defenders away from those same beaches. owever, the successful lead-
ershier that made the most difference was not that deployed by
Churchill or Eisenhower but by an array of leaders doing small things
on the ground; and if Hitler's role in bungling the German response
was important, he was not alone because it was a collective failure of
leadership that encouraged the German forces to be deceived. And that
80
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
81
collective failure implies that there were several opportunities to turn
events around, but few were taken.
Five aspects of intelligence gathering and distribution were critical to
the success of Overlord:
• Operation Fortitude
• the double agents
• Ultra
• the French Resistance, and
• the German responses.
4.2 Operation Fortitude: a bodyguard of lies
Of the problems facing the planners the most Wicked was how to prevent
the Germans from moving reinforcements to Normandy from elsewhere
in north-west Europe, especially northern France. The Germans had
long regarded the region directly opposite Dover, the Pas de Calais, as
the most obvious site for an invasion because it offered the shortest sea
route and provided the optimum air cover for the Allies.
Wehrmacht stationed the bulk of its forces in and around this area and left
a much weaker force defending Normandy. They remained committed to
this false assumption, and refused to redeploy elements of the 15th Army
south to Normandy for weeks after the landings, thereby denuding the
resources of the hard pressed 7th Army and allowing the Allies to secure
a local advantage in troops and matériel. As we shall see, the Germans
were well aware of this possibility but chose to tame their side of the
problem by deferring to superordinate - so called - experts rather than
securing collaborative efforts from lower down the military hierarchy -
though it was here that the warning voices were loudest and the evidence
Falsehoods have always been common practice in war. For example,
on 16 September 1940, when the invasion of Britain was a very real
threat, the Germans mounted Operation Herbstreise (Autumn Journey)
which was a fake invasion of the north-east coast of Britain between
Edinburgh and Scarborough to deflect attention away from the real inva-
sion zone and to release German naval vessels into the North Sea.? And
in early 1942 the Germans mounted Operation Kreml to fool the Soviets
into thinking that an attack would soon be launched against Moscow,
rather than Stalingrad where it actually occurred. Early in 1944 a body
identified as Major William Martin of the British Royal Marines was
washed up on a Spanish beach carrying documents
