LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
as she rode the coastal bus, others like Duchez, alternated his daytime
painting job with a voluntary night job, patrolling
Oustreham, allegedly watching for air attacks but actually marking out
the street defences for Lord Lovat's commandos. Léon Dumis, who ran
a garage at ifs, just south of Caen, used his part time job checking milk
production on the surrounding farms to mark out the 40 anti-aircraft
Positions surrounding Caen. However, tragedy struck on 16 November
1943 when the Gestapo raided the Centurie-Caen arresting many agents,
though Thomas and Duchez managed to go into hiding until D-Day!"
That also restricted the ability of the resistance to monitor changes and
may well explain the lack of information about the Merderet River flood-
ing and the movement of the 352nd Division up to the beaches.
Alerting the 85,000-100,000 members of the French Resistance
(though Allied intelligence assumed that only 10 per cent of these were
armed) to the imminent invasion involved the BBC who transmitted vari-
ous lines of poetry and prose to 350 Resistance cells. The first warned
them that the invasion was close and the second told them to execute
their allotted tasks. 100
André Heintz, for example, heard his first line:
*L'heure du combat viendra' on 31 May and the signal to go, 'Les dés sont
sur le tapis, 101 on 5 June at 2115.
Over 1,200 targets were listed for Resistance attention: railway attacks
were covered by Plan Vert, bridges and roads were dealt with by Plan
Tortue (tortoise), electricity supplies came under Plan Bleu, and Plan
Violet concerned the communications systems. And to co-ordinate the
attacks, as well as provide arms and ammunition, were 5,000 Allia
agents and soldiers 102 Between 2115 and 2215 on 5 June, 325 messages
were transmitted initiating attacks on 571 French railway stations and
switches, 30 main rail lines, as well as innumerable smaller rail lines, tele-
phone and telegraph lines and bridges. 103 In June 1944 the main railway
line between Paris and Toulouse was cut 800 times by members of the
Resistance and on D-Day itself 950 railvay lines were attacked 104 The
rail lines between Cherbourg, St Lô and Paris were dynamited by the
Cherbourg team, led by Yves Gresselin, a Cherbourg grocer. In Caen
station, the stationmaster himself, Albert Augé, led a team in smashing
steam injectors on locomotives and water pumps in the yards. At Isigny,
40 members of the Resistance in eight teams of five people, led by Andre
Farine, a café owner, cut the telephone lines between Cherbourg and
Isigny in eight places. 105
In some cases the Resistance had no time to inform the Allies of signif-
icant changes to German troop deployments. On the afternoon of 5 June
Jean Marion, the Resistance sector chief around Grandchamp, noticed a
troop movement that was to prove disastrous to the American airborne
105
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
landings: a 2,500-troop, 25-gun anti-aircraft artillery unit, Flak Assault
Regiment No. 1. This began digging in on the precise flight path of the
82nd and 101st paratroopers - a flight path that had been altered to
minimize the risk from exactly this kind of defence system. Marion also
noticed that the guns destined for Pointe du Hoc were still two miles
from their destination. Marion sent the information to Léonard Gille, the
Resistance's deputy military intelligence chief in Normandy by courier
but Gille was already on a train to Paris and that train was later delayed
by the aerial bombardment; the news did not reach London in time to
alter any plans. 106 Yet Marion had also informed London that a single
artillery piece had been situated on the sea wall at Grandchamp, between
Omaha and Utah beaches and a destroyer duly manoeuvred opposite the
town and destroyed the gun. 107
Both the Resistance and the Germans took the invasion as a declara-
tion of unrestricted war. All 92 male prisoners (there were many female
members of the Resistance) suspected of being in the Resistance in Caen
jail were shot by the Gestapo, though only 40 had any links to the organ-
ization 108 Some elements of the Resistance subsequently returned to the
information-gathering it had concentrated on up until the time of the
invasion. For others, the bloody reprisals simply hardened them to their
new primary task: unhinging the German communication systems wher-
ever possible. For example, the Ist SS Division was unable to complete
its tank-driver instruction in Belgium because of the activities of the
Belgian resistance, the so-called White Army', 109
In particular areas the Resistance was remarkably successful and
important. For instance, the 2nd SS Panzer Division (Das Reich) was
stationed at Montauban near Toulouse in April 1944, having
there in January 1944 after two years on the easten front. But between
March and D-Day over 100 soldiers had been kidnapped or killed by the
local Resistance so it was not a rest camp by any means. As an elite unit
it comprised 20,000 troops, 99 Tiger and Panther tanks, 75 Jagdpanzers
(self-propelled assault guns), and 64 assorted other tanks.110 The tanks
were fitted with steel tracks that wore out on roads and, since they were
400 miles away from Normandy, they were ordered to be transported to
the battlefield by railcar - normally a three-day Journey. Members of
the French Resistance managed to siphon the axle oil from the rail cars
and replace it with abrasive powder parachuted in by the SOE (Special
Operations Executive). 112 u sno sult was that when D-Day occurred and
Das Reich was called to Normandy by Rommel, their three-day rail jour-
ney became a 17-day road journey.
When they began to move, on 7 June,
the Maquis laid the SOE's
cyclonite mines (that looked like cow pats) and even up-turned soup
