236
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
and weapons. In short, because it just kept replacing lost matériel it could
minimize the amount required but still keep the necessary divisions in
the field continuously? The Arsenal of Democracy was going to destroy
Nazism but it was not going to enervate itself in the process. Indeed, it
was going to win by managing the process of production better than its
enemies could lead or command the process of destruction.
Patterson, the Secretary of State for the US War Department, tried to
rouse America to action but with little initial success, especially before
Pearl harbour when the war seemed so distant and so irrelevant to most
Americans. Even Patterson's own War Department workers reminded
him that they were not obliged to work more than seven hours a day or
to work at the weekends, under an Act passed in 1895. And may
employers were reluctant to engage in war contracts, especially when the
prices were held down and their opponents and competitors threw the
spectre of "war profiteering' at them.® In truth, few Americans at home
suffered economically as a result of the war. Indeed, one poll suggested
that 70 per cent admitted that they had not had to make any real sacn-
fices'. Between 1941 and 1945 average hourly wages rose from 66 cents
to 51.02 while prices (many of which were frozen in 1942 by the Office
or nice Administration) only rose 25 per cent, and per capila constr
werchases ended the war between 10 to 15 per cent higher than the
Were in 1939. In contrast, British consumption per capita consumption
finished the war 16 per cent below pre-war levels?
that in lal managerial inertia also prevailed in the development of
weapons. In 1940 the Us heavy weapons programme did not exist and
there were no anti-tank guns or even tanks to speak of. Worse, when
ratterson asked General Hap Arnold how many aircraft the Us could
rUlistically muster against an aggressor, Arnold's reply was 'only 300, 10
The original solution to the lack of equipment was to order in bulk at a
"cost-plus-fixed-fee' but even this failed to generate much interest.
Juring November and December 1940 - when the US military capabu-
ity in the air amounted to just 96 bombers and 193 fighters -
and Lockheed produced just six extra military aircraft - in addition to the
20 commercial aircraft that seemed to have priority. Patterson promply
ordered the National Defense Advisory Commission (NDAC) tO 100k
into the matter. They did and declared that civil aviation should have
priority; after all, Who was going to attack the US by air? Nevertheles,
by the end of the war 300,000 military ircraft had been built. 12
economic levers through which the prod em of war production was to be
The American government then acquired an array
of influential
amed, mist, i toto, the right to provide operating capital to thos
engad d in war contracts; second, the power to force contractors to
MANAGING LOGISTICS: 'BAG, VOMIT, ONE.'
237
prioritize war work; third, via the 1942
General Maximum Price
Regulation and the 1943 Revenue Bill, the power to impose a price ceil-
ing on companies whose war business exceeded $500,000; and fourth,
the right to renegotiate prices if 'excessive' profits had been achieved. 13
All this was supported by a budget for the army of $6 billion,
approved by Congress on 30 June 1940, and buttressed by an agreement
that the 40-hour week was the norm and that all the traditional safe-
guards of labour would be maintained by the National Labor Relations
Board (NLRB). The initial implication - that the government would
withhold contracts from anti-union companies like Ford - was refuted,
but the Selective Service Act of 1940 enhanced the government's power
to requisition any property deemed essential to the war effort.
But just as industrial production under
guidance of the War
troduction board was gearing up to mass produce everything the armed
forces wanted, the lessons of the German Blitzkrieg slowly sank in: most
of the matériel on the order books was inadequate. The dilemma was
whether to press ahead with the production of existing weapons in the
nope that the quantitative superiority of the 'Arsenal of Democracy
would suffocate the enemy, or whether to go back to the drawing board.
This vould produce a qualitative superiority but it would take time, and
thereby reduce the quantitative advantage of the greatest production
system in the world.
A contingent analysis of this general quantitative approach would be
to suggest that it was the right one, especially in the light of the subse-
quent Allied victory. However, as I shall demonstrate below, the specific
hoice of weapon or transport system or logisucal approden was often
one that remated contested by experts and was libat reserved
through all kinds of cultural measures: political networking, risk avoid-
ance, the dead hand of tradition and so on.
1o some working people, though, the war seemed too good an
opportunity to forgo an advantageous position, especially after the disas-
trous years of the depression. In all, something like 20 million people
moved to find employment in the US during the war. 14 By early 1941
industrial disputes were already beginning to restrict war production and
a National Defense Mediation Board (NDMB) was established to try
the American Federation
and resolve the burgeoning number of disputes. Even this failed to stop
of Labor (AFL) from calling a strike at
Boeing's Seattle plant making the Flying Fortresses in an inter-union
spute with the Congress of Industrial (N ganizations (CIO) in Apri
1941. By May, Major Doolittle c!" med that 'strike fever' was every-
nuere and suggested that communist agitators were the root cause
(Germany had not invaded the Soviet Union at this time). In the spring
