130
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
However, in favour of the soft shell approach was von Rundsted,
with the support of von Schweppenburg (Commander of Panzer Group
West), and
Guderian
(Inspector
General of
Panzers).
Von
Schweppenburg was convinced that although Rommel had suffered from
the effects of Allied air domination in North Africa, he had learned the
wrong lesson.53 Normandy was not the North African desert and the
Bocage provided opportunities for armoured movement that simply did
not exist amidst rolling sand dunes. Von Schweppenburg, von Rundstedt
and Guderian collectively demanded that the
pooled in a central area further away from the coast - where the Allied
armoured divisions be
battie ships could not destroy them. such a deployment would then facil-
itate a significant counter attack inland, where German tank superiority
would deliver a knockout counter punch to the Allies.
After all, the
concentration not the dispersal of force is how German victories in the
Past nad been achieved.* This was certainly what Churchili assumed
would happen because he had expressed astonishment in 1940 when
France fell, for the French had no mobile armoured reserves. As he
remarked at the time: No one can defend with certainty so wide a front:
out when the enemy has committed himself to a major thrust which
preaks the my one lad diways have, one must always have, a midss of div
sions hich marches up in vehement counterattack at the moment when
the first fury of the offensive has spent its force'. 55
won Kunasteal and Geyr von schweppenburg were also concerne
about Allied airdrops just behind the coast which could jeopardize any,
armour placed there in line with Rommel's plans, especially by cutting off
fuel supplies. In this instance Rommel's argument was very clear: "To my
mind, as long as we hold the coast, an '" emy airborne landing of an
the troops who have landed
Perational nature must, sooner or later, tnish up in the destruction or
... I have disagreed very violently with
veneral Geyr over this question and wn only be able to execute my ideas
if he is put under Army Group command early enough' 56
komme eventually sought Hitler's peed ission to use Panzer Lebr and
12th Ivier as mobile reserves close to the coast but Hitler, as ever,
voided a deusion and, way of Kommel's increasing pessimism,
promised by spiting the seven available Panzer divisions into two
ops. the largest group of tout, the Ist; Panzer Corps, including
anzer Lehr, the Ist Ss Panzer Division, the 17th SS Panzergrenamer
ind the Ich SS P'anzer, was stationed near Paris as a mobile reserve leo
by General Sepp Dietrich but under Hitler's personal command. Indeed,
it could not be deuvated without his persor order so convinced was he
that part of the invasion would involve a feth in one direction to draw
his resep away from the main site, and that only he would recognize the
GERMAN STRATEGY: HARD SHELL, SOFT SHELL
131
difference between a feint and a real assault. Anyway, when he did deploy
them 'Their part is to get killed behind the fortifications. So they've no
need to be mobile'.57
As D-Day approached Rommel drove to Paris on 3 June to buy his
wife some shoes for her birthday (on 6 June), remarking that the poor
weather meant that the invasion would not occur while it held (though
he had previously warned his troops not to assume precisely this). Even
the Anti-Aircraft crews around Paris were stood down, so poor was the
weather. Ironically, Rommel had also been away, in Rome, when the
Alamein offensive started and this time was intending to go on from Paris
to see Hitler at Berchtesgaden to ask for two more Panzer divisions to be
moved to Normandy. Like many senior commanders, Rommel assumed
that the Allied invasion would coincide with, or start a little later than,
the expected Soviet summer offensive. And since the Soviet attack could
not begin until the late Polish spring it was widely accepted that late June
vould be the earliest date for D-Day.58 In the event D-Day predated the
Soviet Offensive by a couple of weeks and, once again, the German forces
assembled their strongest defences in the wrong' place, fooled by a
Soviet campaign of disinformation equivalent to
Dollman, Commander of the 7th Army also thought the invasion
would be delayed a while yet, especially given the weather forecast from
the Cap de la Hague on the Cotentin peninsular which had warned of
"Rough sea, poor visibility, forces 5 to 6 wind, rain likely to get heavier.
Major General Falley, Commander of the German 9Ist Air Landing
Division near St, Mère-Eglise was equally convinced. As he told his Chief
of Operations on 5 June: Nothing's going to happen in this lousy
weather' 60 Within 24 hours Falley was ambushed and shot dead by
American paratroopers.
But an invasion might come in Normandy, hence Dollman ordered his
commanders to attend a Kriegspiel (war game) in Rennes at 1000 on 6
June - based on the possible invasion of Normandy! General Marcks
"They will go to
church on Sunday, they will land here in Normandy on Monday? 61 Only
the 24-hour delay surprised him. Yet Marcks also left for southern
Germany and did not return until the afternoon of D-Day. At about the
same time - now 1600 - Hitler finally gave permission for the two
armoured divisions in Normandy (Panzer Lebr and 12th SS Hitlerjugend
under Fritz. Witt) to move towards the coast - by which time the Allies
had consolidated their slender foothold and the improving weather
wowed them to unleash waves of fighter bombers upon the verman
armoured columns.62
