16
LEADERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND COMMAND AT D-DAY
element of the situation but the way the situation is constituted by those
in authority. Of course, that authority and problem may be disputed by
others but the model assumes that successful constitution of a problem
as Wicked, Tame or Critical provides the framework for particular forms
of authority. The model also represents the most likely variant of author-
ity model, but note again, that while, for example, Commanders may use
the resources more commonly adopted by Leaders, or Managers, the
most prevalent is likely to be that of coercion.
What might also be evident from this figure is that the more decision-
makers constitute the problem as Wicked and interpret their power as
essentially Soft or Normative, the more difficult their task becomes, espe-
cally with cultures that associate leadership with the effective and effi-
cient resolution of problems. In other words, a democratic contender
seeking election on the basis of approaching the problem of global
terrorism as a Wicked Problem - that requires long term and collabora-
tive leadership processes with no easy solutions, and where everyone
must participate and share the responsibility - might consider this a very
problematic approach because they may be less likely to be elected.
Hence the Irony of Leadership: it is often avoided where it might seem
most necessary.
Where no one can be certain about what needs to be done to resolve
a Wicked Problem then the more likely decision-makers are to seek a
Increasing uncertainty
about solution to
problem
WICKED
TAME
CRITICAL
LEADERSHIP:
Ask questions
MANAGEMENT:
Organize process
COMMAND:
Provide answers
COERCION/
PHYSICAL
FORCE
CALCULATIVE/
RATIONAL
PROCEDURES
NORMATIVE/
EMOTIONAL
INFLUENCE
Figure 1.1 Typology of problems, power and authority
mcreasine.
requirement for
compliance/
resoluliett
PROBLEMS, UNDERSTANDING AND DECISION-MAKING
17
collective response. For example, a road traffic accident is usually deemed
to need rapid and categorical authority - Command - by those perceived
to have the requisite knowledge and authority to resolve the problems:
usually the police, the fire service and the ambulance service.
Those who
are uncertain about what to do in a road traffic accident should - and
usually do -make way for those that seem to know what they're doing,
especially if they are in an appropriate uniform.
We will, therefore,
normally allow ourselves to be commanded by such professionals in a
crisis. However, when the problem is not an emergency but, for instance,
the poor phasing of an urban traffic light system, we are less likely to
comply with a flashing blue light than with a traffic management expert
- at least as long as the procedures work.
Even more difficult is rethinking a traffic strategy that balances the
needs of the environment with those of rural dwellers, those without
private transport, and those whose houses would be demolished if private
roads or public railways were to be built. In effect, as the level of uncer-
tainty increases so does our preference for involvement in the decision-
making process. The implication of this is that political leaders might well
seek to construct political scenarios that either increased or decreased
assumptions about uncertainty in order to ensure sufficient political
support. For example, it might not be in the interests of political leaders
to equivocate about the threat posed by terrorism but to imply that the
threat was obvious and urgent such that any necessary measure was taken
- including pre-emptive strikes and internment without trial.
The shift from Command through Management to Leadership also
relates to the degree of subtlety necessary for success. For instance, a
sergeant with a gun standing over a squad of soldiers facing an attack
does not need to be very subtle about his or her Command to stand and
fight. Similarly, a police officer coming upon a train crash need not spend
a lot of time, effort or rhetorical skill in persuading on-lookers to move
away; she or he may simply Command them to move. However, for that
same police officer to operate as a Manager in a police training academy
requires a much more sophisticated array of skills and behaviours in order
to train police cadets in the art of policing; and many of these techniques
and processes are already well known, tried and tested. But to develop a
new policing strategy for Iraq might mean more than Commanding civil-
lans and more than simply training up Iraqi cadets through Management
processes; instead it might require a whole new framework for constitut-
ing
a post-Baathist society
and that may necessitate
sophisticated
Leadership.
In what follows I take this model of problem-solving and apply it to
aspects of D-Day to try to understand why some aspects seemed to fail
