YUL
400
COMMANDING IN CRISES
believe I was the first in my group telling Private Walfred Williams, my
Number One gunner, to follow', 185
At 0809 a control craft radioed back that 'All of DD tanks for Fox
Green Beach sank between disembarkation point and line of departure'.
At 0849 the report suggested the troops were 'Held up by enemy MG
(Machine Gun) fire. Request fire support'. An hour later it was that
'Firing on beach Easy Red keeping LCI's from landing'. Within minutes
the situation had worsened: many wounded at Dog Red Beach need
immediate evacuation. Many LCTs standing by buoy but cannot unload
because of heavy shell-fire on beach'.
Captain Joe Dawson, commanding officer of G Company and part of
the l6th Infantry RCT thought that he clearly was in what Sun Tzu
would have called 'Death Ground' for there was 'nothing I could do on
the beach except die'. And this fatal pessimism seemed to immobilize
many. But Private Shroeder, who had already spent an hour at the sea
wall and was similarly frozen to the ground, suddenly saw an ordinary
rifleman stand up and run for the bluff, zigzagging as he went. 'He made
it to the bluff. So we all felt a little better to see that we had a chance, we
were going to get off' 186
Similarly, Anthony Stephano came ashore at 0830 with C Battery of
the IIth Field Artillery and was quickly followed by his commanding
officer It-Colonel Mullins who had already been wounded. As Stephano
recounts: Mullins 'saw immediately that the beach was no place for
artillery - in fact the 16th Battalion lost all six of its howitzers as the
DUKWs carrying them were swamped by the waves 187 Then,
Mullins began to put some fight back into the little knots of stunned, inert rife-
men along the sea wall. Most of them had lost their weapons or dropped them in
the sand. Lt-Colonel Mullins crept along. Talking to one man after another. While:
he was urging one small group to clean their guns and start returning the fire from
the bluffs, a sniper's bullet drilled through his hand. Mullins ignored this second
wound as he had the first one, and started moving a pair of amphibious tanks into
decent firing positions... a third bullet hit him in the stomach... and he died, 188
Harley Reynolds of the Ist Infantry Division similarly witnessed a
soldier pusing a bangalore torpedo under a beach obstacle while under
constant fire:
te punce the sting to the fuselighter and pushed himself backward. The first
didn't light. After a few seconds the mane almly crawled forward, exposing himsel
"gan, the removed the bad light asy sty ed it with another, and started to repeat
his first moves. He turned his head in my lection... when he flinched ... and
closed his eyes looking into mine. Death was so fast for him 189
401
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
But despite the efforts of individual and isolated groups of soldiers to
fight their way directly up the bluffs, no exit routes had been cleared and
as the tide crept up the beach the jumble of vehicles and the remains of
the 5,000 soldiers landed so far grew worse by the minute. At 0830 the
commander of the 7th Naval Beach Battalion, without informing
Bradley, ordered the suspension of vehicle landings (though not troops)
and the removal of all beached landing craft that could move. As a result
hundreds of craft began milling around just out of range of the defend-
t' fire. It looked to the invaders that they had failed and the defenders
thought so too - as Private Franz Gockel recalled: 'we believed the
Americans were initiating a withdrawal'. 190
By 0915 the conditions were so bad that Bradley considered calling off
the invasion and landing the rest of the troops at one of the British
beaches. Man suggests that Bradley actually asked permission from
SHAEE to suspend the landings at Omaha and move them elsewhere but
that the message did not arrive in the UK until the afternoon - by which
time it was irelevant.l91 The delay seems incredible but when
denhower eventually met uoteam and Normandy on U-Day+l, he
admonished Bradley for not keeping him in touch:
Eisenhower:
Golly Brad, you had us all scared stiff yesterday morning. Why in
Bradley:
the devil didn't you let us know what was going on?
Eisenhower:
But we did, we radioed you every scrap of information we had.
Nothing came through until late afternoon - not a damned word.
Bradley:
I didn't know what had happened to you.
But your headquarters acknowledged every message as we asked
them to. You check it when you get back and you'll find they all
it subsequently turned out that Bradley had indeed sent all the messages
but the transcription service simply became overloaded and eventually
neured a I2-hour delay leepeporting messages, 192
Bradley wrote later, 'as the morning lengthened my worries deepened
.. From (the) messages we could piece together only an incoherent
account of sinkings, swampings, heavy enemy fire, and chaos on the
eaches. 93 In fact there was no method or sense in stopping the inva-
sion: to return across the beaches would have massively increased the
casualties and anyway there were not enough empty landing craft to take
people off, to say nothing about contacting those who were already
mand. Nor could he seriously consider his alternative of sending the
remainder elsewhere to another beach for this would have left the landed
troops too vulnerable to a German counter-attack.
At 0930 Bradley sent Colonel Bere min Tallen to assess the situation
