COMMANDING IN CRISES
Ten minutes later General Cota and Colonel Canham landed under
smoke amongst Company C and a few wayward Rangers. Within 30
minutes soldiers were moving up the bluffs. 156 Cota had landed with
Colonel Canham on LCVP 71 which struck a mine on the way in; luck-
ily the mine fell harmlessly into the sea, though Major Sours was killed as
the occupants ran for the sea wall.
As Cota's aide-de-camp described it: 'Although the leading elements
of the assault had been on the beach for approximately one hour, none
had progressed farther than the seawall at the inland border of the beach.
They] were clustered under the wall, pinned down by machine-gun fire,
and the enemy was beginning to bring effective mortar fire to bear on
those hidden behind the wall. I57 Cota was faced with a motley collection
of troops from different companies of the 29th Division, interspersed
with some misaligned Rangers and communication was almost impossi-
ble in the noise and because the beach was divided by wooden "grons"
that ran perpendicular to the sea wall straight back to the water at about
every 50 feet. The shelling was intensifying by the minute and, accora-
ing to Captain McGrath, 'so many shells were ranging along the crest of
the hill that a man standing there felt as if he could reach out and pick
them out of the air', 158 Those that remained at the water's edge at high
water were now just 50 yards from the seawall.
At this point in time the organization on Omaha had simply ground
to a halt: troops continued to unload into the surf, and continued to be
shot or blown apart by the defenders and those that reached the beach
or the sea wall or the bottom of the bluffs, simply stayed put, unable or
unwilling to take the next step. That next step would only come when
sufficient numbers of people had decided to take it. 159
When Brigadier-General Cota ge to the wall, and realized that attack-
ing the draws directly was suicidal, he decided to move straight up the
bluffs through the minefields. In the face of such a growing crisis, Cora
allegedly stood up to leap the wall, and personally directed the bAA
(Browning Automatic Rifle) to fire at the bluffs whilst fixing a bangalore
torpedo to blow a gap in the barbed wire. Three men were killed and two
wounded by mortars in the action but the first breakthrough had been
made. Behind them, the next waves were piling in on the shore and, at
last, provided such a largen were or the defenders that their fire could no
longer be concentrated against isolated pockets of invaders.
Dy U900 Cota had made it up the bottom of the bluff where little fre
occurred because most of the defender's fire was zeroed in on the beach.
He moved up via Les Moulins above Hamel-au-Prêtre where he headed
toward Vierville to attack the German detences from the rear. Also enter-
ing the village were several members of Company C and at about the
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
same time the USS Texas fired six 14 inch shells into the draw, making
the pavement rise in the village according to Lt Shea who was accompa-
By the time Cota got to the beach at D-1 on the border of Charlie and
Dog Green (sometime after 1230 when the naval bombardment had
stopped), he had only five soldiers with him but they took the surrender
of the German forces, forcing one of them to lead the way through a
minefield, and began the task of moving the rest of the 116th RCT, soon
to be reinforced by the 115th RCT (which began landing from 1030),
through the draw and up towards St Laurent. The village held out until
the following day.
But first Cota had to clear the exit at Vierville, then blocked by an
anti-tank wall and the troops close by explained that there was insuffi-
cient explosives to blow it up. Cota, replicating his commander-in-a-crisis
mode of earlier, then, allegedly, went down to the beach to a bulldozer
pled high with TNT and, eventually, managed to command a soldier to
dive it up to the anti-tank wall for the engineers to use. 160
Colonel Canham played a similar role. Though wounded, and with his
right arm in a sling, he carried his pistol in his left and railed at his troops
- and especially his subordinate officers - to get moving;
murdering us here, he allegedly yelled, 'let's move inland and get
murdered' 161 Private John R Slaughter of D Company 116th remem-
bered him not shouting at the ordinary soldiers but at their officers who
were just as frozen to the beach as everybody else was:
tanham then led his followers up the bluffs to the east of the Vierville
traw on Dog Green and proceeded into Vierville where he met up again
with Cota. Cannam then moved eastwards to take the German defences
at Les Moulins from the rear.
Further along the same beach Private John MacPhee struggled to the
beach to find: "officers sitting there, stunned. Nobody was taking
command, 163 This was hardly surprising: I Company had taken over 33
per cent casualties; F Company, which had been on the beach for 45
minutes and had taken 50 per cent casualties, no longer existed as a fight-
ung unit, 164 Samuel Morison, one of the authors of the official US history
of the campaigh noted: "All along Omaha there was a disunited, confused
