LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
92
Here, captured perfectly, is the essence of a Wicked Problem - no-one
knew. However, British Counter-Intelligence had every intention of
keeping it that way. There seems to have been little improvement in intel-
This was primarily due to the success that British Counter-Intelligence
had in detecting, turning or executing German spies but in almost every
case the initial failing was one of detail not of strategy. Some were caught
almost immediately: two were caught when they were eating German
sausage on a beach after being landed by submarine; one asked for a pint
of cider at 0900, not knowing that the pubs did not open until 1000.
One used a ration coupon to pay for a restaurant meal, and one paid £10
and six shillings for a rail ticket when the clerk had asked for 'ten and six'
- ten shillings and sixpence.48 All 40 turned agents in Britain were
members of the Abwebr, the German Military Counter-Intelligence
Service, and the British Counter-Intelligence Iwenty Committee XX:
double-cross) met weekly to decide what information should be fed to
the Germans through each controlled agent's Case Officer 4) Colonel
Thomas Robertson ran the Twenty Committee, ably supported by a
double agent of a different kind, Anthony Blunt, who was exposed as a
Soviet agent in 1979.50
At the beginning of 1944, 15 such agents still existed in Britain, seven
of whom had wireless transmitters.51 Lily Sergueiev, a Russian woman,
recruited by the Abwebr to watch the West Country ports - since this was
self-evidently where any invasion of Normandy or Brittany would be
launched - had a particularly important role to play for the Iwenty
Committee, for if no reports emanated from her area it would seem far
too coincidental and arouse German suspicion. Thus Sergueiev sent
messages that did indeed speak of troop movements, but in such a
confusing way and in such a minimal format in invisible ink on envelopes
to Spain, that the Abwehr dismissed her accounts.52
German agents in Eire were more forthcoming, so much so that in
February 1944 the US insisted that the Irish government close down the
German and Japanese embassies in Dublin to stop the leakage of Allied
classified information; if this did not happen serious consequences could
result'. Whatever these words meant - and the US threatened to send
troops stationed in Britain to storm the embassies and arrest all the
Germans and Japanese found therein - de Valera, the Irish prime minis-
ter, put the frish army on full alert, but the crisis eventually died away. 3
Nonetheless, civilian travel between Ireland and Britain was suspended
on 9 February 1944.54
The turned agents were managed by the London Controlling Section
(LCS) which co-ordinated the deception efforts and operated under
93
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
COSSAC and the Supreme Headquarters of the Allied Expeditionary
Force (SHAEF). LCS dealt with what was called Special Means - that is,
the controlled leakage of information, as opposed to physical deception
and almost the entire plan was conducted through three turned agents,
Schmidt, Garbo and Brutus. In 1944, 208 references in the German mili-
tary logs to the (false) landings were made, 86 from Garbo and 91 from
Brutus (real name: Roman Garby-Czerniawski) was a Polish officer
who had escaped to France after the German invasion of Poland where
he worked for the Allies until his arrest in November 1941. In the spring
of 1942 Brutus persuaded the Germans that he would work for them as
a double agent and he was sent to Britain in July - where he immediately
contacted his former British controllers and began working for the Allies
again - not as a 'double' agent but as a 'triple' agent. Brutus was given a
job' with FUSAG helping to recruit Poles for when the First Army over-
But by far the most influential double agent was Garbo. Juan Pujol, as
he was really called, was a liberal spanard who had allegedly rought for
Franco in the Spanish Civil War, but then apparently spied for the
Germans after British Ml6 officers rejected his offers of help. Garbo,
however, always maintained that his quest was the downfall of anti-liberal
forces, and Russell57 claims that Garbo operated as a freelance spy, always
working against the German interest but not always employed by the
By the end of the war Garbo had received £20,000 from the
In 1941 he provided information to Germany that was, according to
- probably because he fooled his
verman controllers and was not in britain at the time, instead works
n Portugal from an Ordnance Survey map, a Blue Guide to Britain and
a Portuguese book on the British fleet. So poor was his knowledge of
oritain that he insisted that there were men to be bought in asgow for
'a litre of wine'. Nevertheless the Germans trusted him and his German
controller, Karl Erich Kühlenthal, wrote to him in glowing terms: "Your
activity and that of your informants gave us a perfect idea of what is
taking place over there. These reports have ... an incalculable value. 5o
influential did Garbo become that he was allegedly turned by Cyri Mills
a5 carly as February 1942 when he was brought to Britain, having fooled
the Germans into planning an assault upon a convoy from Liverpool to
Malta that did not exist.
A ring of imaginary sub-agents whom he employed on behalf of
German intelligence enabled Garbo to deny responsibility it the infor-
mation proved false, and then to employ a alfferent suo out do d
