264 55
1Fª
14 The Amphibious Landings
14.1 Introduction
Une of the essential aspects or a crisis is its unanticipated nature, anu
the shock to the Germans of the armada's sudden appearance vas
colossal, for the sheer size and scale of the operation seemed over-
wieming. here were so many vessels, recalled sergeant sichara
Heklotz of the German 110th Field Artillery, 'so many ships, that there
was nowhere on the horizon that you could look and not see some type
Mteoen mn 1 cm me ms cprowe, surprise did tetene
usem aaussary but not stincient to secure the landings, that requieu
Command too.
Ihe Allied policy of the assault teams had been that an officer shouia
be the first off the landing craft and, as in the assaults from the trenche?
in the First World War, this was partly
responsible for the junior
officers wo castany tate. dithough they comprisca just uoder a pe
ent of the total numbers in the army, they made up 3 per cent of the
casualties. But the reason for requiringusuch a heavy sacritice
elite troops,
refiects back upon the general Allied assumption amongst all except ii
that without Command from
soldiers couia not be persuaded to go forward. Turner is certainly clea
the front the ordinary
that getting the troops off the beach was only secured through one
particular phenomenon:
The dec I: factor proved to be leadership. Where did they go from there? No
one could see how to advance straight over the toje Then a young lieutenant and
a sergeant, already wounded, suddenly stood up, disregarded the frequent firins
and calmy waned over to look at the wire beyond theechibankment. Somenow
they were not tit the deutenant returned anc I lands on hips, lookea down it
the men lying behind the shingle. "Are you going to lay there and get killed, or
Bel up dud do soled o about it: he called across to them. None of them
mod ed, so, with the sergeant, he got the explosives, walked back to the obstacles,
and lasted a way through the wire. At last the men stired, and the lieutenant
ted the way tsuge ti dnder contuous fre up a path pricking with mues.
beaches. 3
slowly, they got to grips with the enemy defences which covered the
350
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
351
But the related consequence of an over reliance upon formal
commanders was that when those leaders were incapacitated, the rest of
the group often moved into learned incompetence' - they only knew
an lo lodow. eavale Jonn Mathel, a comdat engleer wao cicareu d
path up the bluff, came across one group
of soldiers where
scuchan was tymg lo persuade his company commander to tor
torward. But 'the CO was in a state of shock; he had lost half his men.
te looked like hell and was very dispirited. I asked the Leutenant if
ere wasn't something we could do but he couldn't get the co to take
acion. So we sat in our holes and listened to the sound of the mortars
nushing overhead and watched the tide go out' + It is also important to
note that the commanders who seemed most successful on the day were
the kind that embodied rather than simply
articulated the action
tequired. In other words, if commanders wanted followers to do some-
wing other than what they were currently doing, then the commanders
had to show them how to do it not just tell them what needed doing,
1 aad command from the front. Sergeant John euery certadny en
this way:
I read about a number of generals and colonels who are said to have Wandered
about exhorting the troops to advance. That must have been very inspirational. I
pet, however, that the men were modeee e te t
junior officers and NCOs who were willing to lead them rather than having some
general pointing out the direction in which they should go. I didn't see any gener-
als in my area of the beach, but I did see a captain and two lieutenants whe
aemonstrated courage beyond belief as they struggled to bring order to the chaos
around them ...
I don't see how the credit can go to anyone other than the
Company grade officers and senior NCOs who led the way. 5
McManus is equally adamant that it was the NCos that made the difter-
ence, rather than
the officers:
With surprising
frequency combat
soldiers looked to their sergeants for leadership
day and day out in
combat. A major reason for that was the turnover in officers. Another
reason was that NCOs were usually closer to the men', Indeed, the
closer one got to the front line the greater the respect for the offiners
Who actually fought there became.
And since casualty rates amongst
combat officers were extraordinarily high, many units fought without
officers under the command of NCOs, or whoever took control if there
Were no NCOs left alive." But were the experiences of the troops on
different beaches identical?
