TUL
390
COMMANDING IN CRISES
purposes they had 'failed' and the plan that should have tamed the prob-
lem of the landing had disintegrated; they were now in crisis.
On time, at 0700, Company B landed directly behind what was left of
Company A, led by Captain Zappacosta on the command boat. SLA
Marshall
claimed in an article in
Atlantic Monthly in 1960 that
Zappacosta drew his pistol on the British coxswain after the latter refused
to take the boat into the beach on the border of Dog Green and Charlie
opposite Exit E-1, the Vierville draw. The coxswain, in Marshall's
account, changed his mind but Zappacosta had his terminated as he was
shot leading the charge off the boat. Only one soldier made the shore-
line alive and uninjured, that was Private Robert Sales who slipped on
exiting the boat and fell into the water before the machine gun raking his
boat killed or injuring all his companions. It took Sales two hours to get
from the boat to the beach and he remained behind a floating log with
two wounded companions until nightfall, 146 Sales, however, suggested
that Marshall fabricated the whole story - as he had with his earlier claims
that few soldiers fire their weapons in action. 147
It Walter P. Taylor of B Company 116th Infantry, leading the boat
next to Zappacosta's, landed in a relatively quiet area - he only lost four
dead and two wounded to machine gun fire in the run across the beach
and led his team straight up the cliffs into Vierville and on to the Chateau
de Vaumicel (the most southerly point achieved by US beach forces on.
the eastern flank of Omaha on the day) where they captured 26 Germans
before being counter-attacked and being ordered to fall back to the
beach area. Staff Sergeant Price, one of the assorted individuals who
joined Taylor's team on the beach, recalled why he had chosen to follow
him: We saw no sign of fear in him. Watching him made men of us.
Marching or fighting, he was leading. We followed him because there
was nothing else to do'. Marshall subsequently called Taylor one of the
47 immortals of Omaha who, by their dauntless initiative at widely sepa-
rated points along the beach, saved the landing from total stagnation and
disaster, l48 Note here that this would fit well with Marshall's predilection
for heroes as the explanatory factor in military success and should be
taken as a warning against the assumption that success can only be
achieved through such individual acts of bravery - when in reality much
of the success on D-Day was probably down to the mundane acts of the
many as much as the heroic acts of the few.
Private 1. R. Slaughter of D Company 116th also experienced a les
than enthusiastic British coxswain calling out that he was lowering the
ramp at 300 yards as the landing craft came under direct fire.
sergeant wortleet demanded that the boat go further in the coxswain
tensed thul woreet took out his pistol and held it to the cosswain s
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
391
head. 49 Given the hundreds of landing craft involved it is probably more
surprising that the majority of Coxswains unloaded their troops at the
appropriate spot without the need for such coercive 'encouragement'
from the local commander. As Admiral Ramsay wrote afterwards the vast
majority of the landing crews performed admirably and he praised the
courage and devotion to duty on (their) part ... the assault proceeded
to plan not necessarily because it was a good plan, but because every
single individual taking part had confidence in it and was determined to
achieve his objectives' 150 One such individual was the Coxswain of LCA
786, Corporal George Tandy of the Royal Marines, who had his steering
wheel shot away long before he reached the beach but he steered the
remains of the rudder with his foot for four hours as he delivered his
soldiers to Sword Beach. 151
Worse still, the self-evident confusion and death on the beaches made
the coxswains of the second wave of landing craft much more wary about
landing than had the previous wave. There had been some discussion
about who had the authority to order a launch at sea - the captain of the
landing craft/ship or the captain of the tanks - and it was eventually
agreed that the latter would be responsible - though this did not prevent
some LCT captains from demanding premature
launches when the
turmoil on the beaches became apparent, nor did it cover the launch of
troops from landing craft, 152 In fact, the rule was that the naval officer was
in command as long as the boat or ship was at sea, but once it hit the land
the army officer was in control. In practice this did not always clarify the
responsibilities because it wasn't always clear whether the boat or ship was
permanently in contact with the land or just floating on and off 153
Yet for many troops anywhere was better than staying out at sea. For
as sergeal benjamin Mckinney, a combat engineer with C Company
recalled: 'I was so seasick I didn't care if a bullet hit me between the eyes
and got me out of my misery ... it looked as if all the first wave were dead
on the beach' 154 At 0641 Patrol Craft 552, which was completing the
Ist Division's operations journal as it happened, noted:
Wave Foundered'. 155
The second wave of the 116th (Companies B, C, D, H, I, K, L and
M) began landing from 0700. Zappacosta's Company B had been deci-
mated on Charlie, but Company C was relatively unscathed thanks to the
moke across the beach on Dog Green. Company D suffered casualties.
from mines, and Company H was caught on the boundary of Dog White
und Dog ked by machine gun fire. But Companies i and K on Easy
Green, and Companies L and M on Easy Red (Ist Division's designated
beach) arrived a little later at around 0720 and managed to cross the
beach without suttering huge numbers of casualties.
