260
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
British called them - were used on 1 November 1944 by 41, 47, and 48
Royal Marine Commandos, supporting the Ist Canadian Army in clear-
ing the Westkapelle end of the Dutch island of Walcheren which blocked
the route to the sea from Antwerp. 116 Thus the poverty of naval and air
bombardments against deeply entrenched beach artillery and the advan-
tages of Amtracs over unarmoured personnel landing craft were never
earned by the military leaders - except by those who became casualties
on the Normandy beaches on D-Day.
10.8 The Armada
With the initial 'assault formations and the 'pre-loaded, follow-up.
formations' on board in their harbours by 3 June (the subsequent
formations were held back further inland), the ships began leaving by
early morning 5 June. 'U' (Utah) left from Torquay region,
(Omaha) left from around Weymouth and Poole, 'G' (Gold) left from
Southampton, T' (Juno) left from Portsmouth, and 'S' (Sword) left
from Shoreham. Force "U was the furthest from its destination, the
most dispersed and the least prepared. There is no large port in wester
England so the embarkation took place from nine small ports, and, since
the landing craft for "U' were the last to arrive in England, many people
had received little or no training in them. 117 Paradoxically, the American
landing at Utah Beach incurred the least casualties of any Allied landing
on D-Day.
They all headed for their rendezvous point in the channel just south
of the Isle of Wight, Area Z, to the Admiralty but colloquially known as
'Piccadilly Circus'.
The commanders of the ships opened sealed
envelopes once clear of the harbours, which revealed their true destina-
tions for the first time and headed south through the night in the ten
swept channels - one fast and one slow lane - towards Normandy. Such
was the combined effect of the tide and the wind that some ships had to
allow a 40 degree directional compensation to maintain their direction -
usually due south. 18 The leading minesweepers reached Barfleur at
2000 on 5 June and by 2200 it was possible for those on board to pick
out individual houses on the Normandy coast though no German gun
opened fire until first light the following morning.
But getting the minesweepers in position was relatively easy; sweeping
1u paths in the dark, and in radio silence, was a much tougher job, espe
ally when entangled or cut mines would themselves be difficult to see.
to ensure a co-ordinated movement, all the minesweepers had to chang
direction simultaneously and that required someone on each ship to look
MANAGING LOGISTICS: 'BAG, VOMIT, ONE.'
261
out for and see a signal light from the central ship. The first full-scale
rehearsal for this complicated operation took place on 15 March 1944
when it took 90 minutes to turn the ships around and sweep in the oppo-
site direction. Two weeks later a second rehearsal was cancelled for 24
hours due to bad weather - just as on D-Day - but when it was resumed
on 30 March it was supposed to take place ahead of a bombarding force.
Several breaks in the sweeping wires prevented that but the exercise did
include laying smoke screens and anchoring along a perimeter boundary
to defend the assault forces, just as required on the evening of 6 June.
When the minesweepers got to D-Day the average turn round time for a
weep was 68 minutes. 119
In fact, a line of extra mines was laid parallel to the coast in the carly
part of 1944 but the Germans were concerned about their own shipping
requirements and assumed that the danger would have passed by the
summer of 1944; hence the mines automatically flooded themselves and
sank to the bottom at the end of May. There were additional mines
Teady to be laid in Le Havre but the German minelayers had been sunk
by the Royal Navy and the mines remained on land. Conventional
contact mines - of the horned buoy variety still in evidence in British
seaside towns as charitable containers - exploded when the acid filled
glass tube inside each horn was struck, releasing the acid into a central
battery which completed the necessary circuit to detonate the explosive.
they were usually anchored to the seabed by a thin wire so that it
floated' just below the surface. Thus 'sweeping' such mines involved
curing the wire with a wire hauser towed by the minesweeper that was
deflected away from the ship a little. The cut mine would then float to
the surtace where it was destroyed by surface gunfire. Sweeping an
entire area required a serried array of mine sweepers operating on over
apping sweeps, tollowed by "dan (buoy) laying ships, usually trawers,
which would mark the limits of the sweep. It may have been one such
rawler that Brendan Maher's minesweeper came across winching a jeep
officer, Lt Hutchins,
out of the water off Sword Beach on D-Day. Maher's own commanding
declared 'expendable' to prevent people from stopping on their way to
aware that almost all matériel on D-Day was
the beach, hailed the trawler's captain: 'You don't have to rescue that
you know, he shouted. T'm not rescuing it, repled the trawler skippe.
ve never had a car in my life, and now i'e. Sot one. This ones coming
home with me!'120
Besi'&; the more unusual magnetic mines, which could be cleared by
wooden minesweepers or metal ships fitte P vith a degaussing band to
neutralize its magnetic properties,
magnetic mines which only exploded after the twelfth ship had passed
the Germans had also developed
