220
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
thereby institutionalizing the freedom of
movement and decision
making, but simply changing the words was not enough - the action of
subordinates had to be facilitated and supported from above, and that
became the task of von Moltke (the elder), chief of the Prussian and the
German general Staff 1858-88. Aware of the utility of the railways to
move troops six times faster than they could march, von Moltke quicky
recognized the implications of this for a more mobile and faster form of
warfare. That, in turn, had implications for battlefield planning and
control for, No plan of operations can look with any certainty beyond
the first meeting with the major forces of the enemy ..... All consecutive
acts of war, are, therefore, not executions of a premeditated plan, but
spontaneous actions, directed by military tact' 37 Or, in his rather more
pithy phrase: "in the case of tactical victory, strategy submits'. 38
Thus the German army had long practised what the Allied armies
generally found inconceivable, indeed, directly contrary to military
common sense: individual initiative rather than deference to formal
Leadership.
In 1887 the German field regulations were explicity
supportive of this policy: " This regulation intentionally leaves freedom or
action in the field, which will develop initiative in officers of all ranks.
This initiative is absolutely necessary, and must not, under any circum-
stances, be limited by more precise orders'. 39
In the First World War the Germans had evolved an organizationa
technique that embodied this combat philosophy, rooted as it was ill b
knowledge that no battle plan lasted beyond the opening shots. Initaive
was therefore encouraged, military education and learning was promoted
at all levels, and weak officers were removed - all in strong contrast to
the philosophy and practice of Allied armies. The British emphasis On
discipline and control, compared to the German emphasis on initiative,
is a further contrast between the Management and/or Command
approden of the former and the Leadership approach of the latter. On Lie
other hand, the subordination of Management to Leadership by the
German approach to war also undermined their ability to fight prolonged
wals or support strategic assaults that did ot achieve rapid results. mi
Lm-r words, Where the Allied armies resembled rhinos - slow to starl,
lots of armour, inflexible, and difficult to stop once they got going - the
German armies were closer to large cats - very rapid, flexible and fero-
cious in attack but with a tendency to run of steam.
Paradoxically, the background of the Gerill in army was not dissimilar
to the British: they were both leeply rooted in the aristocratic land
owning classes. Yet while thend ritish army persisted in regenerating an
aristocratic culture within the cavalry and nfantry officer corps, their
Prussiaon ounterparts adopted radically different practices and ideologie
MOBILIZING THE GERMANS: WEHRMACHT AND SS
221
that, in some ways, inverted the conventions of the aristocracy: the hier-
archy and authoritarianism so prevalent in Britain was displaced by a far
more egalitarian and individualist orientation. As Kier argues, it was not
a case of mechanically relating the class origins of officers to their profes-
sional culture because the class backgrounds of the British and the
German army were similar but their professional cultures markedly
dissimilar. 40 Indeed, the German navy was less aristocratic in origin but
more aristocratic in culture than the German army, and even when the
British army became less dominated by the aristocracy, it still maintained
its aristocratic culture. US army culture was, if anything, closer to the
British than the German traditions.
This shift in policy from the traditional Befehlstaktik (an uncompro-
mising order) to the new Auftragstaktik (mission command) also
embodied the essence of the division between the German and the
Western Allied armies for, ironically, it was the liberal democracies that
most clearly relied on Befehlstaktik not Auftragstaktik. As Lucas suggests,
the Befchaktik principle was clearly present when the US forces landed
at Anzio in February 1944, under orders to land and prepare for
defence. 4l They did precisely as ordered, even though the German
defenders were caught unawares, leaving an opportunity for the exploita-
tion of a local contingency that most German commanders would have
found impossible to resist had they been the invading force. As Churchill
concluded, the Allies had intended to throw a 'wildeat' into the belly of
he enemy but instead they had discharged a "beached whale'. Such
"da minded inactivity' was not a consequence of anything other
han a culturally conditioned response to what appeared normality. With
sarming candour John Hogan, from the US Army's 9th Amphibian
Force, captured this perfectly: 'If you haven't got stripes, you aren't
wing anything.. Every day I see the das n mounting and more and
more maladjustment building up? 43
of argest, an acute analyst of the Allied armies, was also clear about the
difference between the German and the Allied armies. It was certainly
not lack of courage that distinguished them because the casualty rate of
those that led the Allied troops
high. But that was the point; if the Allied officers did not lead from the
- their field officers - was alarmingly
front and expose themselves to enemy fire little could be achieved. 'On
the German side, on the other hanof since they were fighting in some-
what different circumstances to ourselves and as you say had more reason
to fight desperately, they were capable of carrying out their tasks without
sued presence of immediate leadeu up'.** Moreover, the tam
system adopted by the German armm-- in Sharp contrast to that of the
stitish and American armies - required junior officer cadets to train as
