LEADERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND COMMAND AT D-DAY
In effect, I want to suggest that the temptation to explain the success
as an inevitable consequence of superior Allied strategy and matériel
should be resisted in the same way that we should avoid explaining
German defeat simply through their inferior strategy and matériel. We
often attribute success and failure of organizations, armies and countries
to the role of individual leaders, often in terms of their brilliant or flawed
strategy, but the precise connection between strategy and result is often
very unclear. That is to say that whether a strategy will be successful or
not is seldom predictable and usually uncertain.
Thus if the strategy
works, we will assume it's the consequence of individual genius; if it fails,
it's because of stupidity. Yet there are many reasons for organizational
success and failure and to retrospectively attribute success or failure to
the role of individual leaders is a step too far: from correlation to causa-
tion - we know the result and retrospectively we assume (without robust
evidence) that certain actions determined it. We know, for instance, that
the invasion succeeded, but it was not just because the Allies fooled the
Germans into thinking Normandy was a ruse and it was not just because
Hitler refused to release the Panzer reserves until it was too late to push
the Allies back into the sea. Both of these are true but they don't account
for success and failure. For this we would need to be able to evaluate the
effect of every decision, action and consequence before and during the
event, but this is never possible - we simply do not have the resources to
do this. What we can do is avoid the deterministic approaches that imply
inevitable consequences flow from single decisions or actions and try to
understand not just the enormous complexity of the situation, but the
enormous contingency therein. In other words, we need to bring the
subjunctive mood back into the narrative that retains the doubt or uncer-
tainty of an action and is often used in conjunction with if': if Hitler had
ordered, rather than because Hitler ordered ... The implication of this
is not only that we can never be certain that another outcome was impos-
sible but that the explanation for the outcome must remain tentative. For
example, despite Hitler's refusal to release the Panzer divisions until late
in the afternoon of D-Day it would have been possible for subordinates
to order their movements under the conditions appertaining at the time.
That this did not happen, therefore, is not just a consequence of Hitler's
erroneous and erratic strategic leadership but of many other people's
theoretically contingent compliance. In short, it need not have happened
thus. Hence, when we are trying to understand events on the day we
should always bear these contingencies and uncertainties in mind: conse-
quences are seldom determined by single decisions of formal leaders -
even if it produces a much tidier version of history and places all the
responsibility onto specific individuals.
PROBLEMS, UNDERSTANDING AND DECISION-MAKING
Yet a contingent approach is not the equivalent of micro-determinism
- that is where a small chance factor determines what happens next to the
point where a war is lost or won because of some equivalent of chaos or
complexity theory where, in Gleick's famous account, a butterfly over
Peking causes a storm over New York three weeks later. Intriguingly the
seepage of some complexity approaches sometimes seems to have gener-
ated an apparently novel concentration on chance factors - that subse-
quently determine
what happens next,
thus managing to smuggle
determinism back in through the back door of naïve complexity. For
example, Durschmied suggests that the military halt by the German army
at Dunkirk operated as a 'Hinge Factor', that would have altered - nay
determined - the course of the war.* Tsouras has a few more variables to
change but the consequence is equally
determined by these small
changes: Germany defeats the Allies in 1944.5 Even Ambrose suggests
that if the weather on 6 June 1944 had not improved enough for the
Allied landings to have occurred then all kinds of inevitable effects would
have occurred: 'There would have been no air cover and no paratroop
support as the air-drops would have been scattered to hell and gone ....
No supporting bombardment from the two- and four-engined bombers
... Eisenhower would have had no choice but to order the follow-up
landings cancelled ....
The Allied fleet would have pulled back to
England in disarray ... Eisenhower would have certainly lost his job ....
A climax would have come in the late summer of 1945, with atomic
bombs exploding over German cities'.6
Thus to summarise, the contingent or subjunctivist approach I am
suggesting here, like complexity theory, implies that managing dynamic
conditions requires us to abandon mechanical strategic planning and
work flexibly with the chaos that emerges.
However, some versions of
this suggest that we can now act like Greek gods looking down from
Mount Olympus on the poor mortals whose fates are altered by the
smallest change in initial conditions that, in turn, set off chains of conse-
quences that somehow escape that very same dynamic complexity. Rather
than Gleick's butterfly, we now have Ambrose's storm causing a mush-
room cloud over Berlin a year later.
What is intriguing about this scenario is the precision with which the
future rolls out: the weather changes and everything else changes. But
the 'everything else' is not affected by any other altered variables because
these variables are held in place by the determinism of the observer. Thus
the 'chaos' of small things - any small change in the initial conditions
may have a significant impact - degenerates into the determinism of one
thing. But this can only occur because once one variable has been altered
all the rest must remain in place.
