198
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
8.7 Amphibious assault training
Experience derived through constant practice is a hall mark of a Tame
Problem approach and it was clearly visible at the main Assault Traming
Centre
at Woolacombe near Slapton
Sands (originally used by
Montgomery's 9th Brigade in 1938), where the entire beach area was
dedicated to replicating the typical defences to be found in Normandy"
"We enacted this scenario', remembered Colonel Van Fleet, Commander
of the 8th Infantry Regiment of the 4th Division, 'countless hundreds of
tumes from 1941 through 1943, often with live ammunition? So
detailed were some of the replicas that when Sergeant Plumb of the
Royal Winnipeg Rifles hit Juno Beach near Bernières-sur-Mer he realized!
that "it was identical to the beach we had been training on in Invernes,
Scotland, right down to the exact locations of pillboxes.?
As D-Day approached, the exercises giev larger and more integrated
while the level of realism increased each time, including the use of live
ammunition. On 3 January 1944 Exercise Duck I occurred, a landing the
29th Division at Slapton, followed by Duck II in February where Rhino
Pontoons were used for the first time. Operation Fox in March saw t
US 5th Corps practising with DUKWs for the first time and Operation
seaver withessed the first combined air drop and beach assault. New
teams were trained in wire cutting and demolition, followed by company
exercise and battalion assaults. Weekly exercise throughout the first third
1 1744 were develope in April and May to dress rehearsals, include
anarkalion, Salling, disembarkation and assaults, all covered by detai
and Have vom barament of the beaches. D-Day itself was the twelfth time
that the entire assault had been executed from the beginning.
72 Between
3 and 6 May Exercise Fabius I was the US V Corps last chance to prac
tise the Omaha landing and simultaneously the British XXX Corps landed
on Hayling Island in its final simulation for Gold Beach in Fabius 2 while
the Juno-bound Canadians landed at Selsey Bill in Fabius 3 and thos
reading for Sword landed at Littlehampton in Fabius 4. Fablus 5 Was d
full-scale embarkation exercise.? 3
The sea landings were extremely detail" with each individual allo-
dead dos an ander suet instructions that no one was to stop to noy
the wowed or bury the dead unless they were medics or grave gistra
don drews. One member of the 29th Intery Division recalled later:
Loading and unloading landing craft, exiting,
forware, crawing under barbed wire with live machine? n fire just inches over
peeling off, quickly moving
Ded dare explosions, suasically placed, detonated all around. We were
schooled in the use of explosives: satchel charge and bangalore torpedoes were
MOBILIZING THE AMERICANS: TECHNOLOGY AND ICEBERG
199
excellent for blowing holes in barbed wire and neutralizing fortified bunkers ...
Poison-gas drills, first aid, airplane and tank identification, use and detection of
booby traps and more gave us the confidence that we were ready. I believe our
division was as competent to fight as any green outfit in history? 4
In short, the temptation to regard the invasion as a problem that could
be effectively tamed by constant practice must have been strong, but the
real issue was whether the problem could be tamed like this, or whether
significant elements of the problem would always remain Wicked - thus
requiring a different approach where collaborative effort and decentral-
ized decision-making would be required. For example, although
Operation Fabius was deemed a success initially because everything was
rolling out as planned, it was halted on the third day (4 May) after the
wind rose to force 6 and threatened to damage the landing craft.
Ironically, this was the same wind speed that many troops landed in on
D-Day itself.75 Thus the very element of the problem that could never
be tamed - the weather - was effectively removed from practice.
What the American assault troops of the US V Corps did not know at
this time, and what those in the VII Corps had not expected, was the
other element of the plan that could not be tamed through practice: the
German intervention in Exercise Tiger.
8.8 Exercise Tiger
exercise tiger (<4-20 April) was the first and last full scale exercise dus
the US VII Corps heading for Utah and it was watched by the top brass:
hisenhower, Montgomery, Tedder, Ramsay and Bradley - all in separate
landing craft to limit any possible danger from enemy attack. In Apri
14t 20,000 troops, primarily from the Us 4th infantry and me does
lind (its originating division) the 82nd American Airborne divisions,
linked up to "invade' Slapton Sands in Devon.
The operation was a total failure and did not bode well for D-Day; the
Typhoon aircraft destined to rocket the beach failed to arrive on time,
persuading Admiral Moon to delay the invasion one our to dhow
them to arrive. Unfortunately they remained absent but this then cut the
naval gunfire practice to a minimum. Worse, the DD tanks, though they
managed to stay afloat, landed where their commanders felt dae lar
than where they were supposed to, and the troops simply ignored the
designated 'minefields' and walked straight through them. Eisenhower's
daval alde, Captain H.C. Butcher, was appalled at What he saw. the
young American officers seemed to regard the war as one grand
