68
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
riled Spaatz was Leigh-Mallory's insistence that the defeat of the
Luftwaffe was not a prerequisite for Overlord because it would occur
during Overlord. In other words, Leigh-Mallory assumed that dog-fights
Sver the beaches would be the place where the Luftwaffe was destroyed.
Spaatz was adamant that this would be too late and too dangerous -
though he admitted that many battles over Normandy were expected.
Spaatz was also convinced that since there were fewer oil targets than
railway targets, and since they both required the same tonnage of bombs
for destruction, it made more sense to go for oil than for transportation.
Moreover, since only a fraction of the traffic on the railways was military,
even the destruction of most of it would not necessarily hinder military
dansportation. But at the final meeting on 25 March Eisenhower sided
with the Transportation Plan over the Oil Plan and Spaatz and Harris
were forced to come into line.
To assuage those who remained doubtful about the viability of preci-
sion bombing of rail centres, and those who remained concerned about
the effect of civilian casualties, the Chief of the Air Staff, Air Chiet
Marshal Tedder, proposed a test raid on Trappes, west of Paris, which
took place on the evening of 6 March. The rail centre was inoperative for
a month afterwards but the raid on Le Mans on 7 March resulted in 3!
trench civilian deaths and the sudden appearance of anti-British grafhti.
Despite this, a further 78 rail centres were bombed between then and D-
Day with s1 rendered out of action, s regarded as severely damaged but
ryans a lurther raid, and four considered to be still fully operational
requiring an immediate second attack. The most significant losses
occurred in an attack upon the rail centre at Lille by over 500 aircraft in
which too richer cilhans died, at voisy-le-sec (north-east laris) where
464 deaths were recorded, and at Ghent where 428 Belgians were killed.
Subsequent attacks used 'Master Bombers' who marked the target ano
who sometes aborted raids if the marking flares were inaccurate. Most
in and some were extremely accurate. For instance, the attack upon
Chambly (north of Paris) on the evening of 1 May by 120 aircraft
resulted in 500 bombs hitting thient and only five reported civilian
ucats. Where rauway centres were situated in heavily populated arte
(for instance at Le Bourget) arcas adjacent to the centres were sometimes
targeted instead. But to ensure that no indication of the invasion area was
given away by the pattern of bombing every target within the invasion
zone was matched by two attacks outside the zone. 51
3y then the transportation Plan wasun Aging to take effect. In May
1944 von Rundstedt was informed that only 32 out of every 100 German
military trains was getting through the disrupted French railvay system,
ALLIED AIR STRATEGY
69
though only four of the 80 targets in France had not been hit. 52 Equally
important, on 8 May the German military supreme command -
Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW) - approved the withdrawal of
10,000 members of the Todt Organization from construction duties on
the Atlantic Wall to repair duties on the French railways. A further
18,000 were withdrawn just before D-Day.53
at this point Spaatz
suggested that, contrary
to
Zuckerman's analysis of the Mediterranean attacks, it was possible to
destroy bridges from the air, albeit with tactical fighter-bombers not
strategic heavy bombers. Such an approach would also minimize civilian
casualties while achieving the same unhinging of German transportation
that the original Transportation Plan sought. On 7 May, just less than a
month before D-Day, Spaatz plans were tried out on the Seine Bridge at
Vernon with great success. Thereafter bridge attacks became an essential
component of, rather than a replacement for, the Transportation Plan. 54
Most of this activity was undertaken by the Allied Expeditionary Air
Force (formed to co-ordinate the 'immediate and direct support of the
land battle'),55 either in the form of the 2nd Tactical Air Force (TAF) or
the Air Defence of Great Britain (ADGB). The TAF was an offensive-
oriented body, designed to concentrate on cross-Channel actions. The
ADGB's primary task was defensive, protecting the airfields,
bomber
bases and shipping of the Allies.56
Fighter-bomber attacks against trains and locomotives in France and
Belgium, as opposed to medium and heavy bomber attacks upon railway
lines and centres, were inaugurated on 21 May 1944. On this single day
504 Thunderbolts, 233 Spitfires and Typhoons and ten Tempests of the
AEAF claimed 67 locomotives destroyed and 91 damaged. The 8th Air
Force Fighter Command sent 131 Lightnings,
135 Thunderbolts and
287 Mustangs and claimed 95
locomotives destroyed
and
134
damaged. 57 In these two weeks before D-Day the 'Chattanooga Choo-
Choo' missions of the 9th Tactical Air Command's fighter-bombers
under Major-General Queseda wrought havoc: the first mission on 21
May 1944 involved 617 fighters, 27 of which did not return.
But the
damage caused to the Germans was considerable: 225 locomotives were
attacked and 91 destroyed, 83 aircraft were destroyed on the ground and
20 shot down in the air. By D-Day they had destroyed 475 locomotives
and cut railway lines in 150 places.58
Sealing off the invasion area from the south and east was also regarded
as critical for two different reasons. First, it would prevent the build up
of reserves and reinforcements.
Second, it would cut off the existing
German troops within Normandy and enable the Allies to destroy a
significant proportion of them.
Initially attacks on bridges were deemed
