MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
174
7.5 Training the Commandos
The Commandos75 were amphibious troops specially trained to spear-
head the invasion and act as raiders but the first amphibious training was
undertaken by the Inter-Service Training and Development Centre
(ISTDC), established in 1938. A British Landing Craft Mechanized
(LCM) existed in 1926 and by September 1939 the ISTDC had already
established the standard format for the Landing Craft Assault (ICA) for
carrying 35 soldiers and four crew members; subsequently updated, the
LCM could carry a single tank.
Five companies of Commandos - Or Independent Units as they were
first called - spent two months training in Scotland before being sent to
Norway in 1940. It was in the Norwegian campaign that the first LCTs
(Landing Craft Tank) and LSTs (Landing Ship
Tank) were used -
though the successful German invasion of Norway was achieved without
specialized amphibious craft? But the continuing inter-service rivalry
between the army and the navy persuaded Churchill that a completely
independent
unit needed to be constructed and so
Combined
Operations acquired the status of the fourth service, alongside the Royal
Navy, Royal Air Force, and the army.
The remit of Combined Operations under Lord Louis Mountbatten
was tole -ordinate raids on the continent and test invasion methods.
From July 1940 Combined Operations became established at Inverary,
Scotland and this remained the main training centre for amphibious
operations until 1943, though much work on landing craft was carned
out at Hayling Island near Portsmouth. In fact, the Royal Marines were
somewhat tardy and only organized the first of their nine Royal Marine
Commando units (Nos 40-48) in February 1942. The Royal Navy
formed "Beachhead Commandos' to take control of the beaches during
amphibious landings. At this point a Cort: ando Depot was opened at
idhnacarry to standardize the rapidly diverging training of the various
The first Royal Navy or Beachhead Commando operation was during
Operation Ironclad, the capture of Diego le arez in Madagascar in May
1942. They were trained at Ardentinnd and adopted the motto Imprimo
Excult (First in last out). They were used at Dieppe, North Africa, Iray,
and the Balkans, but the largest singlehe peration was Normandy. There
nine parties of around 75 mem 82rs, known by letters (E,J,L,P,Q,R.S,T
and the Canadian W), operated as beach control units and were present
until mid-July.?8
In contrast to the rest of the services, and indeed the initial recruits to
combined Operations, the initial ten independent companies of (army)
MOBILIZING ANGLO-CANADIANS, COMMONWEALTH, VOLUNTEERS
175
Commandos were all volunteers, and Commando officers were permit-
ted to select their own troops. By March 1941 there were 12 battalions
of (army) Commandos, each with between 250 and 500 soldiers. No. 10
Inter Allied Commando was composed of two troops of Free French
forces, one of Dutch, one Norwegian, one Polish, one Belgian, one
Yugoslav, and one (No. 3 Troop) of German-speaking anti-Nazis, mainly
Jews from Germany and what had been Austro-Hungarian Empire,
though there was one Irish and one British member?" Many of the
Jewish émigrés in No. 3 Troop had been in England for several years but
had been interned or, when allowed to join the British Army, had been
restricted to the Pioneer Corps that was used for labouring duties, clear-
ing mines, building roads and ammunition dumps and so on. Those who
managed to secure entry to No. 3 Troop changed their identities and
Anglicized their names to protect their work and themselves. For exam-
ple, Peter Arany became Peter Masters and Max Lewinsky, destined to
die on D-Day, became Max Laddy.80
Commando units were normally composed of five troops of about ou
Commandos plus a heavy weapons troop armed with mortars and
medium machine guns. Because the Commandos were only intended to
act as raiders, they were lightly armed but they carried a high proportion
ot automatic weapons, were very mobile, and highly trained in combat
skills. Their general role was to lead amphibious landings and hold on
until relieved by conventional infantry. As with the German elite groups,
discipline in the Commandos was seldom as coercive as in the armas
Indeed, when Alan Angus volunteered for No. 4 Commando, he was
informed that there would be "no unnecessary fatigue duties, and there
would be no punishments - other than RTU, or return to unit? 81
raining seemed to depend on which Coed nando unit one was with,
but fitness played a particular role in them all. The voluntary status of the
lite units became a significant factor in their heavy casualties - lo the
extent that "volunteers not to go was often an easier way of selecting
people for missions - but was also a means for rewarding some of them. 82
Peter Masters began his Commando training with No. 3 Troop,
Commando, in March 1943 at Aberdovey in Wales. In their initial train-
they took part in one "speed march' over roads and one assault march"
across the countryside every week, both in FSMO (Full Service Marching
Order: full uniform and weapons). As Masters was told When he arrived:
hey run us within an inch of our lives. There s nobod t li
there's no punishment for any infraction, but if you can't hack it, or you don t hit
in for any reason whatsoever, you get An RTU.
.. It's the worst thing that can
happen to you. But the beginning is the toughest, 83
