242
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
the new construction. Some of that cost was swallowed in the 170 miles
of extra railway track laid down to transport the incoming material, some
50. used to build almost 75 million square feet of storage space for the
50,000 vehicles and almost half a million tons of ammunition. Some was
used to purchase 124,000 hospital beds and a large - but unspecific -
number of coffins. 34
By June 1944 the Allies had 3.5 million soldiers (of whom 1.73
million were British and 1.5 American),
16 million tons of supplies,
15,000 arcraft excluding 3,500 gliders, 4,200 tanks and 3,500 articly
pieces ready for the invasion - including 54,000 cooks - and the whole
ensemble prompted Eisenhower to claim that only
number of barrage balloons kept Britain from sinking. 35
Attempting to deploy, servidio and supply so many troops required
the facilities of huge numbers of ships but German U-boats were still
sinking more tonnage than the Allies could build every month, and the
American Pacific forces attacking Japan had priority over thei
European forces attacking Germany for landing craft. The overal hp-
ping problem was partially resolved through the construction of 2,5U
Liberty ships' - 7,000-10,000 ton prefabricated cargo vessels welded
sue from thiee preoricated sections using "unskilled abou
ust ten days. So fast was the production that, at last, the Allies wer
bullding ships faster than the U-boats could sink them. But problems
or various kinds continued right up to the last minute: in April 1941,
for example, all the landing craft were modified to take the new radio
Yupment and have their doors redesigned. By that time so dei
was the shipping that the Commander in Chief Portsmouth Suggested
It is a (ot imonplace expression to say that an anchorage is "full of ships, but in
the case que le East and West Solent with an available area of approximately
square miles in which to anchor ships, it was literally true. On 18th May, the
Admiralty offered the C.-in-C. Portsmouth, thee rvices of HMS Tyne, but it was
Portsmouth till D-Day, which gave one berth in hand 37
accept her because HMS Warspite was not being sent to
The stockpiling of the assault troops themselves just prior to the inva-
10i, goes with their immediate supplies and equipment, Look plau
through the so called 'sausage f achine'. This took its name from the 17
assault in specific areas prior to embarkation.
sausage shaped assembly areas marked o, the maps to locate the initia
example, was put on final alert to move on 23 March and actually begai
The US Ist Division, for
relocating south on 7 May. By 26 May they were in the final marshalle
yards at the ports and the final fed barkation onto the ships was
MANAGING LOGISTICS: 'BAG, VOMIT, ONE.'
243
completed, on 3 June. Only at this point were the junior officers and
NCOs notified of the targets. Ordinary troops generally remained igno-
rant until they were on board and sealed in. That sealing was also associ-
ated with the sudden arrival of food stuffs that many, especially the
British and Canadians, had not tasted for months. 'It was', as Norman
Phillips recalled, 'as if we were being fattened like Christmas turkeys. 38
And with training now finished, the 'holiday' spirit prevailed: the troops
were entertained by films or entertained themselves with sports,
gambling, reading and writing. Indeed, for many troops waiting in their
boats and ships to cross the Channel, fanatical gambling seemed to
develop into a new religion. 39
The amount of supplies necessary to maintain the Allied troops in
Normandy were enormous. On the American beaches alone the plan
assumed almost 200,000 tons of matériel would need to be landed by
D+14 days. In the event only 134,000 tons were landed. Some 5,200
tons were supposed to land on D-Day itself on Omaha and Utah but
neither beach unloaded anything other than the first day's fighting
troops and their immediate equipment, with Omaha unable to land more
than a seventh of its requirements by D+3 days. to
Each division was allocated 1,600 tons of supplies per day, and this was
calculated - in the European Theatre of Operations (ETO) - down to
the individual soldier whose requirements included 7.7lb of rations (of
which 0.426lb was of clothing and equipment), 7.8 12lb of constructor
materials and 3.64lb of ammunition.4 And just to ensure that the
Dureaucrane requirements were fully compace wi did testos,
ach sea-borne sOldier was issued with a seasickness bag marked on the
lists as: 'Bag, vomit, one? 12 To ensure that such lost fluids could be
replaced in the first three days of the invasion, the planners loaded
300,000 gallons of fresh water. 43
the initial requirements for an individu: US paratrooper to carry into
normandy were also very demanda g, and included the following:
1. 45 calibre pistol and ammunition belt with 30 rounds of ammunition
2. 30 calibre lOlding stock rifle with 100 rounds of ammunition
3. small switch blade knife
4. 10-inch knife
5. canteen with two pints of water
o. combat first aid kit containing two shots of morphine, sulphur drugs and
7. Mk IV anti-tank mine (weighw ra lOlbs which was a last minute addition,
8. equipment bag with raincoat, blanket, toothbrush, toilet paper and six meals
of emergency K rations
9. combination shovel and pick
