280
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
tanks were equally poorly armoured and gunned. Indeed the French
Somua S 35 - despite overburdening the commander with gunnery
responsibility - and British Matilda - despite its poor gun and slow speed
- were equal to the Panzer I, II and III in their 1940 format. But the
German Panzer Mk IV quickly adopted a short barrelled low velocity
75mm gun, and by the time the British had up-gunned to the olb
(57mm) gun in 1942 the Germans were already using long-barrelled
75mm guns with much higher velocity. Even the Report by the Select
Committee on National Expenditure on 26 August 1942 recognized the
error:
The decision to go into large scale production of 6-pdr guns ought to have been
balanced by a plan so timed as to produce tanks to carry the guns when they were
ready ... The story of tanks and six-pounder guns seems to show lack of decisive
direction, division of responsibilities as between tanks and guns, and failures to
consult manufacturers until a late stage in the work on the design have led to fail.-
ure to make full use of manufacturing resources. 60
In short, a failure of Management led to a failing tank. Seventeen months
later the same committee bewailed the avoidable waste of time, money
and material resources ... the British manufacturing effort of 1943 has
fallen short of realizing expectations or being fully effective ..
British
tanks issued to British troops have gained a bad reputation both for
mechanical reliability and fighting arrangements' 61
Leslie Hore-Belisha, the new Secretary of State for War, did at least
make some moves in a constructive direction by forming the Royal
Armoured Corps, and by the end of the war the number of AFVs
(Armoured Fighting
Vehicles) had grown tremendously to 31,927
(9,994 armoured cars; 21,933 tanks) - and that was excluding the loss of
17,801 AFVs (1,957 armoured cars and 15,844 tanks). Of course many
of the tanks were American in origin (Of a total of 37,777 tanks, 24,670
65 per cent) were American built) though there were some britisn
Even if the tanks had been effective the Dunkirk debacle effectively
put British armour back by years: 700 tanks and 850 anti-tank guns were
lost in Belgium and France in 194 ut soe 63,000 other vehicles. 0° Such
was the desperate haste to re-equip in late 1940 and 1941 in the face or
a possible invasion that all thoughts of a new or improved design were
rapidly abandoned and the largest possible quantities of the existing
models took priority over anything qualitatively better. Thus the British
Army were persuaded to re-equip with what was most quickly available,
rather than what was preferable. That meant using 2lb guns even though
the olb gun was ready for production, simply because the 2lb guns could
TECHNOLOGIES
281
T17895
Photo 11.3 Churchill Tank
be produced more quickly.64 And even though the 2lb armament was
totally inadequate, the 6lb gun replacement still had no high explosive
munitions for use against infantry. As Graham concludes, 'British tank
deficiencies were the result of pre-war neglect followed by post-wartime
the main British medium or cruiser tarh, the Covenanter, and later
the Crusader, provided the equivalent of the heavy cavalry, which would
have been fine had the Germans been working on the same pre First
World War tactical principles, but they were not and the Covenanter was
designed in the maximum speed with the minimum care. As a result over
1,800 Covenanter tanks were built but none entered service because of
their notorious unreliability. Its replacement, i
regarded as mechanically unreliable and insufficiently armoured. Despite
the Crusader, was also
all these problems, Oliver Lyttelton, the British Minister of Production,
those of the enemy
It sot that by September 1942 'British weapons were now better than
.... Defects in our tanks had been cured'. Indeed,
the War Minister, Sir John Griggs argued, at the new Churchil was the
best in the world' 66 It was this kindre f unwarranted optimism that led
to the destruction of so many tanksrind tankers in Normandy. As
