The first 200 LSTs to land in Normandy also carried emergency medical
kits which were dumped ashore before any hospitals were set up (from
D-Day+2). LSTs also ferried casualties back to England, some of whom
were operated on in transit within a small operating theatre at the back
of the tank deck. By D-Day+9 air transport for the critically wounded was
available from Normandy. By 26 July 38,581 casualties were evacuated
by sea and 7,719 by air. 3
In fact, the precise loading capacity was critical. Admiral Ramsay was
appalled to see what he regarded as the army overloading some of smaller
Landing Craft (Tank) LCTs destined for Sword Beach and the following
day one capsized in Portland harbour, having been loaded with 12 tanks
and 70 soldiers instead of the D-Day regulation of 11 tanks and 55
LCLs (Landing Craft Large) were the next largest specialist vessels at
110 feet long, capable of carrying about 200 troops or up to 8 tanks or
75 tons of material. These were also capable of direct beach unloading.
Wherever possible "balanced loading' was adopted which ensured that, for
example, guns and their ammunition went together to avoid the probien
encountered in Norway - where anti-aircraft guns were shipped separately
from their ammunition and the loss of one disabled the other."
Some 245 LCIs (Landing Craft Infantry - Or 'Elsies' as they were
nicknamed) were the next largest, and the second variant of the latter
could also carry 210 troops (rather than the original 182) which
discharged them on two ramps on either side of the conventional bow
that allowed them to travel at 14 knots. Thus the trip across the Atlantic
for American built LCIs - loaded with extra food for the hungry troops
and civilians in Britain - could take three weeks.96 Lieutenant Charles
ayan of the sour regaten tol endon, decaded the Dos do. and
box designed by a sadist to move soldiers across water while creating in
them such a sense of physical discomfort, seasickness, and physical degra-
dation and anger as to induce them to land in such an angry condition
as to bring destruction, devastation, and death upon any person or thing
In siga be aang. i, in me same meet sacene words or copos
Hughie Rocks of The Queen's Own Rifles su Canada: "I don't care if
there are 50 million Germans on the beach; iust let me off this goddam
boat! But the seasickness was hugely debilitating for many, including
Francis Lambert of the US 4th Infantry:
Everyone got sick. The vomit bags filled. It was'o possible to empty them over-
board into tricky winds. The chemic: Sy impregnated fatigues chafed our necks
and wrists. Crunts and groans pre-empted conversation. Our officers tried to
boost morale, but gave up. Each bore the misery in his own way!"
MANAGING LOGISTICS: 'BAG, VOMIT, ONE.'
In descending order of size, then, came 911 LCTs, which had first
been used in November 1940 and by the time of the Dieppe raid the
third - stretched - variant was in use. In June 1942 the first of 787 Mk4s
was in use and the American built version (built in three sections for re-
assembly in Britain) was known as the Mk5.100
Some 481 LCMs (Landing Craft Medium) were next in order of size,
followed by 1,089 LCVPs (Landing Craft Vehicle
and Personnel
Higgins Boat]), with some armour plating on the British version - the
LCA (Landing Craft, Assault) - after the Dieppe fiasco where plywood
craft had been used. The Anglo-Canadian LCAs carried 20 soldiers and
were crewed by two Royal Marines, one to operate the ramp and the
other to operate the engine and steering. LCAs were built across Britain
in numerous factories, many of which had previously built furniture. The
largest single producer in Britain was J. Bolson & Son's shipyard at Poole
that had previously made leisure boats and yachts. At the height of
production Bolson's produced one LCA per day and adopted what was
- for then - a revolutionary production strategy: the assembly line and
specialized division of labour was replaced by single work squads who
produced a complete boat. 101
Of a different order were the Rhino ferries - 176-foot pontoon barges
that could carry 40 vehicles under tow by LSTs until the run in, when
outboard motors were used. One of their purposes was to off load the
LSTs which were considered too fragile to land directly onto the beach,
but the Rhinos proved far too slow and, after it was established that LSTs
could, after all, beach safely, the Rhinos were deployed as floating
In addition to these landing craft there were also LCRs (Landing Craft
Rocket), LCG(L)s (Landing Craft Guns, Large), which carried two 4.7
isnoue manned by Royal Marines), LCES (Landing Craft Flak) 03),
and last - but definitely not least - the LCB (Landing Craft Bakery)
which cooked fresh bread offshore throughout D-Day. A whole range of
variously sized merchant and passens Anoue were also reconfigured for
carying troops and materials to be unloaded out at sea by winch or
down scrambling nets etc., and delivered by the smaller landing craft. But
auplex drive 2. ton-truck that could manage 30 mph on land and 0.5
mph on water. 104 The US also provided 60 US Coast Guard patrol boats
to operate as rescue boats. So effective was the air-sea rescue system that
at least one fighter pilot, a Norwegian Wing Commander, was shot down
in the Channel in the carly hours of 5 June and was rescued, returned to
wut perhaps the most pressing problem as far as the actual landings
