370
COMMANDING IN CRISES
some undergrowth, so we followed him in fear, but he seemed to know
what he was doing' 75
Later in the Normandy campaign the same problem recurred. Jim
Fiske of the Ist Gordon Highlanders was being led inland when our
lieutenant got hit not far from us; he shouted at us to keep going so we
did .. We reached these houses with fire coming at us from all directions
There was a high grey wall and I huddled against it with my mate
Tommy and we waited. We had no orders and didn't know which way to
move'. Not far away Angus Jones of the Glasgow Highlanders faced a
similar problem: 'As soon as we reached the ruins we set up for detence
and waited for orders, but none came until a sergeant-major we didn't
know lan up and said, "Don't hang about lads - get on. so we did."
suward Devlin, a member of the Koyal scots, was also critically depen
ent on his officers and NCOs: 'Our officers had vanished long before
among some ruins and only our sergeants kept us going?"
The
Ist Special
Service Brigade Commandos under Lord Lovat,
responsible for fighting through the defences to reach the oth Arborne
troops at Pegasus Bridge and over the River Orne, landed at the extreme
cast of Queen Beach in 22 boats, five of which were destroyed on the
Tin. Lovat was impressed by the actions of a certain Monsieu
Lefêvre, a Resistance leader, who had braved the shell fire at Ouistrehan.
to cut off the cables that would have initiated static flame throwers on
the beaches.
Loval, though, nad httle respect for the orcision Loops that
secued nim barely clear of the creeping tide, soldiers lay with heads
clown, pinned to the sand. Half way up the beach others dug themselves
into What amounted to a certain death-trap'. When the Commando
a masters, can yao dis usual materials plus a 200-foot hemp rope did
a blycle clambered down the side of his LCT on Queen beach on swor,
"was astonished to see ordinary soldiers digging in on the beach itselt
I even saw two men trying to dig in - in the shallow water.
a classic case of risk-taking: despite the undoubted desire to dig for cover
nose who did seemed much less likely to survive than those who took
the apparent risk of running across the beach. 80
the difference between the comman Genor that instilled a
ense of tigency and movement to minimize casualties and, and the army
Matty bars, that focused on minimizing casualties by cautious
idvance - and even that only under direct orders - is manifest in the two
different approaches taken to the mined beaches.
While the infantry
stayed on the beach waiting for the all-clear from the mine-clearance
units, the Commandos were more likely to risk the mines — thereby avoid
ing the artillery and small arms fire on the beach. Again, this is not about
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
371
alfrent levels of bravery but about different training and different
dumpions about where the greatest danger lies - and that was usually
trom trillery and small arms not from mines. That became most trans-
parent when the 3rd Division moved inland.
Tivo strong points lay south of Sword at Colleville-sur-Mer between
the invaders and their target, Caen. Codenamed 'Morris".
, comprising
tour 105mm guns, three of which were casemated, and 'Hillman' with
pa un emplacements, defended by 150 soldiers. The 67 defend-
(root Morris quickly surrendered, apparently having suffered enough
rom the attentions of the Allied navies and air forces in the previous
lays. the attack upon Hillman, however, was stymied from the outse
when the Forward Observer (Bombardment) was killed with his called
scinally meaning that no external artillery fire could initially be callea
own. The Ist Battalion the Suffolk Kegiment, which landed at 1100 or
-Jay, was responsible for taking Hillman and it took a seven-nour
assault with 40 casualties, < of which were deaths. Eventually, 270
winds surrendered at Hillman. The delay then reverberate vacavars
o the Norfolks and the Shropshires So widt all the sroups concer
trated on digging defensive positions smu han maintaining the assault
By 0930 Hermanville-sur-Mer, a couple of miles inland, had been
captured but the lst South Lancs who led the advance on Caen came up
on the cast tankers at Périers, a couple of miles shoo
they stopped and dug in, waiting
King's Shropshire Light
tantry (ASLI) to support them, w, were a couple of miles benin
wem at Hermanville waiting for the 65 tanks of the Statfordshir
Yeomanry, who were a couple of miles back, stuck in a traftic jam on the
ach itself for over an hour. Indeed, the th reserve Brigade did nor
land until 1200.
eventually the tanks caught up and progress was made as far as Bieville
y 1600 where the British dug in at the approden or east lancer
Division. The Germans mustered around 90 tanks and two regiments of
Canzergrenadiers in total and, wrongly assuming that their own 8o mm
guns still held the ridge,
around 40 tanks charged headlong into the
defensive screen thrown up by the Staffordshire Yeomanry's tanks, the
20th Anti-Tank Regiment's I7Ib Self-propelled anti-tank guns, and 6ib
anti-tank guns of the Shropshire light infantry. Four German tanks were
quickly destroyed and the attack broke off, to be repeated twice
that afternoon, each time suffering significant casualties to the British
anti-tank guns.
By nightfall the German commander of the 21st Panzer
Division, who had started the day with 124 tanks, had only 70 left. 8l By
nightfall the leading elements of the KSLI had also reached Lebisey, just
