204
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
on board were killed. We were under intense fire from machine guns, nies,
mortars and artillery and all from both flanks as well as from dead ahead. Our
heavy gun support from the battle ships was halted because they could not tell
how far our troops had advanced ...
• We could hear the machine gun shells
hitting the ramp and side of our boat. We knew when we lowered the ramp ve
would walk into a death trap, but there was no other way.º4
Members of the Ist Division insisted that the US Army had become
"the Ist Division and eight million replacements' 95 It was the oldest ay:
sion in the US Army, it had been on active service since 1917, and it vas
one of the few units that had already seen combat, in North Africa, Sidly
and salerno, and few of the troops relished the prospect of a third
amphibious landing but, as Bradley noted: Although I disliked subject:
ing the Ist to still another landing, I felt that as a commander, I had no
orize choice ... I felt compelled to employ the best troops I had, to min-
mize the risk and hoist the odds in our favour in any way that I could'.
That responsibility was probably made a little easier by the US replace-
ment policy ('Repple-Depple': Replacement Depots) which had gener
ally been to distribute recruits between units so that no locality would
suffer the high level of casualties that occurred in the First World War (as
naced the "Tals battalions' in the British army did - hence the bits
spilt their regimental battalions up to ensure that at least half would
survive irrespective of the other). The system, in theory, also ensured no
just that the replacements were provided as fast as possible but that the
replacements embodied the same degree and form of skill as the casual
Miltary Occupational Speciality (MOS), as it was called. Not surpris-
ingly, the most frequent MOS number was MOS 745 - a rifleman. And
when units like the 29th Division were constantly in the line (44 days
from D-Day) the requirements for replacements were very high and
soldiers and officers were often killed before those they were commanded
by, or commanded, even knew their names.?6
Unusually, on Omaha Beach, y ome elements of the US 29th Division
were drawn primarly from local communities and these suffered as a
consequence: Company A of the 116th RCT lost 22 men from Bedford
a Villags or 3,000 people, including three sets of brothers. Sergeant
brothers going in:
john slaughter, a member of Company Disremembered seeing two of the
Reumond cod Palal Halluck tom billed Raumond was mounded and huan
the beach. Then when the tide came as , he was washed out to sea and drowned.
They ty er found his body .... On the Saturday (10 June) their family gol
Raymond was too.?8
telegram that Bedford was killed and then offSunday they got another one saying
MOBILIZING THE AMERICANS: TECHNOLOGY AND ICEBERG
205
But the consequence of the general policy of regional dispersion was
that little spatial loyalty existed and the identity of any soldier with any
unit, except perhaps the elite units, became precarious. However, provid-
ing the replacements lasted long enough they would soon become part
of the 'brotherhood' simply because so many of their comrades were also
replacements.
Such 'Greenhorns' typically made very common mistakes on entry to
combat: bunching together, making too much noise, shooting too early,
not seeking cover properly and freezing under fire."9 As one Desert Rat
from the British Eighth Army said: 'An old soldier is a cautious soldier,
that is why he is an old soldier, 100 In fact, few Americans had experi-
enced combat before D-Day (the exceptions were the
Ist Infantry
Division and the 82nd Airborne) but this almost universal naiveté prob-
ably helped as much as it hindered, for, as many troops were later to recall
-if they had known what it was going to be like they would never have
gone. Private Carl Weast, 5th Rangers, certainly agreed that the use of
alen troops was probably the right decision 'because an experienced
infantryman is a terrified infantryman, and they wanted guys like me who
were more amazed than they were frozen with fear, because the longer
you fight a war the more you figure your number's coming up tomor-
row, and it really gets to be God-awful 101 Another such green soldier
was John Pulliam, a glider soldier with the 82nd Airborne who
responded to his company commander's call that 'somebody better
shoot the German approaching them in Normandy. Belleve it Or not 1
didn't hesitate a bit. They told me to quit shooting, you've got him. You
think it would really bother you. It didn't. You're psyched up', 102
that flood of adrenalin could often compensate for the nervousness of
the greenhorns. Lieutenant Bikner of the 2nd Ranger Battalion, for
instance, suggested that D-Day was positively welcomed: when we went
into battle after all this training there was no shaking of the knees or
weeping or praying; we knew what we were getting into; we knew eatle
one of us had volunteered forson unidardous duty; we went into battle
confident; of course we were tense under fire,
but we were intent on
getting the job done. We were actually looking forward to accomplish-
ing our mission'. 103
Strangely, many were warned of what we likely to happen - and a 30
per cent casualty rate was commonly expected - but it did not necessar-
ily deter them. Many were supremely confident like Private Lindley
Higgins, especially having seen the materiel which supported them
compared to the shortages which he knew the Germans faced: We really
thought we had only to stop off the beach and all the krauts would pu
up their hands' 104
