240
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
tyres? In fact these gestures by political figureheads seem important.
For instance, the petrol ration operated as follows:
•A' category car: (non-essential) 4 gallons per week (subsequently 3)
A prohibition on 'pleasure driving' was adopted but dropped afer it
was found to be unenforceable.
B' calk gory: (essential) 4 gallons + additional allowance (travelling
sales reps etc.)
etc.)
unlimited amount (doctors, minister, posal dinern
'T' category: (truckers) unlimited
'X' category: unlimited - members of Congress and VIPs
an A' category.
Almost inevitably, the result of ramping up the war economy was a
tremendous pressure on all forms of resource - and there were plenty of
resources required: the supplies inventory for D-Day added up to
700,000 separate items.28 At the specific level the problems could be
unitical, for example, the new bazookas (hand-held anti-tank weapons)
there only issued to the troops on the Torch landings in North Africa as
they boarded the invasion ships. Later on, the British Guards Division
did not receive their Sherman tanks until they were actually in the
"sausage' concentration areas, and therefore had little time to practice
either the handling, firing or communications systems. Worse, as Graham
reedied, heard nothing before D-Day about its [Sherman tank weak
nesses When facing the Mark V Panther and the Mark Vl liger. Its rela-
its 75mm gun were not discussed.29
tively soft armour, its tendency to burn and the penetrative denciency o
Generally, the rise of the American army was mirrored by the rise of
Amenican industry. In 1939 the US produced 800 military aircraft
against a background of 20 per cent unems yment and a factory output
downs per cent on its potential maximum. By the end of 194o not only
was unemployment negligiblere ut 10 million new jobs had been found
and filled and aircraft production was running at 8,000 per month,30
and, in all, the Us produced around ak nillion vehicles.? At last, the
Allied supply problems were being resolved and the
and Japan.
Democracy was truly turning the management screw against Germany
Arsenal of
But conterminously the Allied planners were wondering
MANAGING LOGISTICS: 'BAG, VOMIT, ONE.'
241
precisely how they were going to get all the matériel across the Atlantic,
then across Britain, and only finally across the Channel.
10.3 Stockpiling the Arsenal of Democracy
The organizational requirements for D-Day and the subsequent invasion
of Normandy (or 'Liberation' as de Gaulle insisted) were immense and
primarily organized by G-4 section at SHAEF. The Normandy beach-
head would be the conduit for the 3 million soldiers who would bear the
brunt of the fight against
Germany.
That meant generating all the
supplies and equipment necessary to sustain them for the campaign and
all the shipping necessary to transport them across the channel and on to
Berlin. The plan called for eight divisions to be ashore in the initial assault
on D-Day against the four German divisions assumed to be present. By
the second day there would be 13 Allied divisions facing an assumed
seven German divisions and by D-Day+ 12 there would be 21 divisions
ashore 32 A crucial but still Tame Problem in the main for the Allies,
therefore, was the depth and breadth of the support facilities, either in
terms of combat support units or simply the logistics system underpin-
ning the invasion.
Britain's logistical infrastructure was hardly designed to cope with
such demands. As one Us officer responsible for logistics remarked at the
time, the task looked impossible, after all, Britain was so cramped and
small, the railroad equipment so tiny, the roads so small and crooked, and
methods so entirely different'. With the average age of the Liverpool
dockers at 52, with some trade union restrictions requiring some Belfast
dockers to unload ships as slowly as possible, with railway tunnels too
mall to take tanks on flatbed wagons, and with British civilian imports
delaying Us military imports in the docks, it began to look as though the
invasion would choke itself before it even began.
As the winter of 1942 approached, Ope tion Bolero - the build up
of the US forces in the UK - had still only landed under 35,000 troops,
and the numbers hardly increased over that winter as most GIs were
averted to the invasion of North Africa. However,
thereafter the
umbers mushroomed so that by April 1944 the monthly peak of
216,00D ad been reached. By this time 1.5 million US troops, accom
amed by s million tons of supplies, 0,000 aeroplanes, 1,000 tram
gues and 20,000 railway wagons had arrived. All these troops were
quartered either in the 400,000 prefabrichs/d bulldings, or the 280,000
., or the 110,000 British buildings occupied by the American forces.
The total cost of Operation Boltoo was estimated at $644 million just for
