LEADERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND COMMAND AT D-DAY
only to be expected for even by the end of D-Day only 1,100 of the
6,600 soldiers of the 101st had assembled.
In short, whatever the significance of the weather, it did not determine
future events any more than it ensured the defeat of the Germans and the
victory of the Allies: there is, therefore, no invariant line between Gleick's
butterfly and Ambrose's mushroom cloud.
Casualties, cogs and contingencies
To say that the weather did not determine subsequent events is not to
suggest that it was irrelevant; indeed, it may well have played some (inde-
terminate) role in reducing Allied casualties by encouraging the Germans
to relax their guard. But despite the casualties remaining radically lower
than many experts feared they were still significant. The Allied planners
for D-Day calculated that on D-Day itself the initial assault divisions
would suffer 15 per cent casualties, with the actual first wave Regimental
Combat Teams (RCTs) suffering 25 per cent. Some 70 per cent of these
would, they assumed, be wounded, 30 per cent would be dead, missing
or Prisoners of War (POWs). The follow-up divisions would, they
assumed, suffer 8 per cent casualties overall, with the combat regiments
taking 15 per cent (Hall, 1994: 138). Casualty figures are notoriously
unreliable: there are no official German figures for D-Day itself, and of
the three main Allied forces only Canada collected data from individual
soldiers. Overall Allied casualties seem to be somewhere between 8,443
(4.3 per cent) and 10,865 (5.5 per cent) depending on whose figures are
accepted.
Roughly one-third of these were deaths. 18 Whatever the
number it was still far smaller than the 29,500 the planners had assumed.
Churchill had feared 70,000, and the generally expected number had
been half this at around 35,000. In fact the Supreme Headquarters Allied
Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) secret prediction had been the most accu-
rate at 10,000 dead.lº Ambrose estimates that perhaps 10 per cent is a
more accurate account.20
One particular reason for the casualties and tardiness of progress on
the ground was that the Allied superiority in matériel and numbers was
rendered of marginal significance against an enemy that was well dug-in,
well armed and prepared to stay put. Ironically, then, it was in some
respects a rerun of the First World War - most of the advantages lay with
the defender and it might seem that only the ability to win a bloody
battle of attrition ensured a victory for the invaders - though events on
Omaha suggested otherwise. Furthermore, for all the information made
available for the assault on the beaches - and this aspect was markedly
PROBLEMS, UNDERSTANDING AND DECISION -MAKING
successful in general - it was in sharp contrast to the very problematic
information available about the defences and deployment of defenders
behind the beaches. And even when the Allies correctly identified their
enemies they almost always underestimated the skill and tenacity with
which these enemies held their ground or counter-attacked when their
ground was lost. For all that Montgomery was the great planner, the plan
really only covered the beaches; after that there was neither a coherent
plan nor were local commanders empowered to use their initiative
because the great planner, allegedly, already had an infallible plan; if only
the Germans had allowed it to unfold.
For Field Marshal Slim the issue was closely related to the metaphorical
clock:
A Clock is like an army .... There's a main spring, that's the Army Commander,
who makes it all go; then there are other springs, driving the wheels round, those
are his generals. The wheels are officers and men. Some are big wheels, very
important; they are the chief staff officers and the colonel sahibs. Other wheels are
little ones that do not look at all important.
They are like you. Yet stop one of
these little wheels and see what happens to the rest of the clock!21
The value of small cogs is also represented in Carell, quoting the official
Canadian account of the war:
The allied operations were better co-ordinated at the supreme command level
than were the German; but one cannot say that of events on the battle field. There
the German soldiers and their troop commanders were the better practitioners.
The German front-line soldier was brave, determined and skilful. At times he was
fanatical, occasionally brutal, but he was always and everywhere a formidable
fighter, even under such difficult conditions as in Normandy. Seen from the point
of view of the men and the fighting front, one cannot say that we won the Battle
of Normandy through tactical superiority.22
The implication of the latter quote suggests that the Allied superiority lay
in strategic not tactical terms; success came through the superior planning
of the senior leadership and the superior production of senior manage-
ment, but even if this was true it was almost negated by the better fight-
ing abilities of the defenders. Although the strategy ultimately worked it
was not successful because of some inherent logic within the plan itself
but because those on the ground made it work after they discovered - and
paid for - the strategic errors that the Allied senior leadership made.
The poverty of Allied tanks in particular is a case in point. Out of water
the Shermans were no match for German tanks and in water the DDs
could only survive in swells of less than three foot without being flooded:
