48
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
Gold Area - 50th (Northumberland) Division:
Initial assaults by:
23 1st Infantry Brigade on Jig Green
69th Infantry Brigade on King Green and Red
47 Commando to take Port en Bessin with 23lst Infantry Brigade
Juno Area - 3rd Canadian Division:
Initial assaults by:
7th Canadian Infantry Brigade on Mike Green and Red and Nan Green
8th Canadian Infantry Brigade on Nan White and Red
48 Commando to clear east area with 8th Canadian Infantry
Brigade
Sword Area - 3rd British Division:
Initial assaults by:
8th Infantry Brigade on Queen White and Red
41 Commando to clear west area with 8th Infantry Brigade
4 Commando to clear Ouistreham
6th (British) Airborne Division (x 5th Parachute Brigade):
To land east of Caen across the River Orne to secure eastern flank
The overall plan also envisioned a three phase assault:
Phase 1: The softening of beach defences with pre-H-Hour air and naval
bombardment
Phase 2: Beach assault to create lanes through the defences to allow
vehicle exits
Phase 3: Landing of reserve battalions 00
Detailed plans operated from the top down in vertical sequence: first
army, then corps, division, regiment, battalion, company, platoon and
squad, but it was decided early on that each subordinate level must
resolve its own problems in its own way. At each horizontal level plan-
ning was a tortuous political negotiation: Who controlled the bombers?
Should they land on Utah given the flooding behind? Should they
attempt airborne drops to seal off the stidgehead and facilitate the move-
ment off the beach? Who should take the decision where to land for each
individual landing craft and so on?
Of particular import were the "Beach masters', designated in control
of their own beach area and tasked with simply making the beach work,
to generate some order out of the chaos that would otherwise descend
on the sand and gravel of Normandy. To that end - and in one of the few
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
49
cases of heterarchy (a flexible hierarchy where control shifts with the situ-
ation) on the Allied side - they were able to overrule officers that would
otherwise outrank them in matters concerned with beach movements.
The precise temporal aspect of planning for D-Day involved detailed
deployments, broken down into minutes, for the first 4 hours of the
assault from 0630 for Utah and Omaha, 0725 on Gold, 0735 on Juno
and 0725 for Sword (the different times related to the tidal movements).
Over 350,000 men and women were involved in the meticulous planning
and preparation for D-Day alone and between January and June 1944, 9
million tons of supplies and 800,000 soldiers had been shipped across the
Atlantic to Britain for the first wave assault. Such an operation clearly
required detailed planning: Admiral Ramsay's five-inch thick planning
document for Operation Neptune (the actual assault on D-Day, as
opposed to the overall plan - Overlord) contained 700 pages of instruc-
tion with a subsequently issued preface explaining which sections were
relevant to whom. There were over 31 pages that simply listed the 1,400
American units. There were also 280,000 charts of the invasion area
distributed and 65,000 operational booklets. 101
2.6 Normandy: the Allied decision
Normandy is opposite Southampton - the largest British passenger port
with its unique double tides - and Portsmouth - the leading naval base
- and this area of Hampshire was to become 'the largest naval and mili-
tary base the world had yet seen'. 102 Two thirds of the Anglo-Canadian
troops embarked through Southampton for D-Day and by the end of the
war 3.5 million troops had passed through it. 103 The invasion target area
was between the ports of Le Havre and Cherbourg which would eventu-
ally provide the facilities for the drive on Berlin but, in the meantime, the
Allies would solve the initial absence of a port in Normandy - surely a
Wicked Problem at the time for the planners -
- by taking one or two with
them in the shape of artificial harbours.
The Calvados coast from the River Orne to the River Vire also offered
another advantage: a wide, relatively flat (except between the River Vire
and Arromanches) and sandy coastline sheltered from the worst Atlantic
gales by the Cotentin peninsular. Normandy was still within air cover, it
could be isolated from the rest of the country relatively easily, and it
provided relatively good beaches and close ports. Since the reinforce-
ment time was critical for both sides Normandy was proposed and at the
Trident Conference in May 1943 US and British planners formally
agreed to land on the French coast in May 1944.
