200
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
manoeuvre in which they are having a happy time. Many seem as green
as the growing corn'? Eisenhower was already worried even before ths
episode because he had seen the significance that combat experience had
for developing leadership skills amongst his officer corps and had been
distraught that he could not use all of the troops with prior battle expe-
rence for the Normandy invasion.77
With three days to land and evacuate tie: troops and their a, ou ven-
cles, the exercise became really live' when German "E boats infilrated
the manoeuvres of a convoy of nine LSTs, slipping past the single escort,
HMS Azalea. The LSTs had a very shallow draft and were, allegedy,
immune from submarine torpedoes which travelled under their hulls, but
they were not immune to the shallower travelling E-Boat torpedoes. In
an area known locally as Dead Man's Bay, the E-boats sank two LSTs and
damaged three
others, apparently
killing
749 and wounding 300
others? The following day, as the rescue ships arrived in the area, the
water was covered in bodies, most of whom had died of hypothermia
(many had removed their outer clothes and boots), though some
drowned because they had not laumomructed on how to wear and
inflate their lifejackets (many wore them around their waists rather than
under their arm pits) and had either been knocked unconscious in the
jump from the ship and drowned or simply been unable to operate the
life jacket and drowned. 80 Julien Perkin on HMS Obedient recalled that:
the sight was appalling. There were hundreds of bodies of American
servicemen in full battle gear, floating in the sea. Many had their limbs
o be a Of all those we took on board there
were only nine survivors' 81
The participants were forbiddehe to mention the tragedy to any civil-
lan and threatened with court martial if they did. - But perhaps the most
disturbing element of Operation liger was not the tragedy out at sed, or
even accidental killing of troops by either the LCRs (Landing Craft
Rocket) or naval ships whose rockets and shells fell either short or late
onto 'invading' troops (resulting in around 50 casualties to 'friendly
fire'). Rather it was the apparently deliberate killing of the 'invaders' by
the defenders. Between 400 and 500 American troops were dug into
uMorand sand at Slapton and ordered to use live ammunition and fire
over the heads of the invaders to simulate real battle conditions.
attackers were not all informed that live ammunition would be used
(small, 1999: 14). In fact, as many as 150'5 tacking troops were killed b
derenders when the latter tired is nor than over the troop
asembarking from the landing craft. Attempts both American and
British observers to stop the mistakas were firmly rejected by the local
ground commanders who claimed they were under orders to
MOBILIZING THE AMERICANS: TECHNOLOGY AND ICEBERG
201
firing', though there was a radio communications breakdown because the
same single mistyped letter that had prevented the E-boat attacks being
reported also caused the timing of the live firing and the attack to run
over. The possibility that the killing was planned seems very unlikely:
real' invasions under fire had already occurred so it was already apparent
what 'green' troops would probably do. Even if more information on this
issue was necessary, the sight of American troops killing their fellow
Americans - so that the commanders could see what would happen - was
unlikely to do anything except persuade most Americans that this was a
war that they should not be involved in and could not survive. The
defenders would have known that they were firing live ammunition into
their own troops and it seems likely that the responses of the local
ground commanders leaves one to conjecture that the event was both a
mistake and an act of gross stupidity and or a crass lack of concern for the
lives of ordinary soldiers. And these 'ordinary' soldiers were about to face
one of the most effective armies of modern times.
8.9 Gun-fodder and gunmen
According to Hastings, that US infantry rifle companies would be called
upon to fight Hitler's Wehrmacht, "the most professionally skilful army
of modern times" with men who were, in all too many cases, the least
impressive material America had summoned to the colours. 8t Despite
this, General Marshall was unconcerned with the quality of the troops, at
least officially. We will have no trouble', he suggested, if the men there
selves understand what they are doing and the reasons why they are
The reality of this claim runs byrectly counter to the assumption that
the American civilian population should also understand what was
going on. For example, not until September 1943 were photographs of
dead Americans released for publication, initially of bodies on buna
Beach in New Guinea. This was not to protect the population from the
sight of death, since photos of dead Germans, dead Japanese and dead
black Americans lynched at home in the southern states were common-
place. But the sight of dead Gils was considered too shocking unti that
time. 8 Indeed, it may be that the government became convinced that
a dose of really was necessary to shake the population out ors appa.
ent complacency.
xet, pale loxically, the troops who made up the rifle companies knew
that they were regarded as simultaneously the scum of the army and its
primary asset.87
As one such GI recalled his lieutenant saying during
