146
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
Photo 6.2 Typical road in the bocage, near Balleroy
Particularly potent was the German sanzerfaust, a shorl lange and
nand held anti-tank weapon, the equivalen df the American bazooka or
British PIAT but much more formide sle 23 The Panzerfaust 60 could
penetrate 200-250mm of armour while the Panzerfaust 100 had similar
penetrative capabilities but a longer ange of up to 150 metres.* The
only way to avoid such deadly ambushes was to go through the hedgerow
but when Shermans tried to go straight through the hedges they invari-
ably reared up, lost all momentum and exposed their unarmoured under-
bellies to enemy fire, so explosives were used to blast holes in the hedges.
that, oldtourse, alerted the defenders to where the next assault would
come and enabled them to concentrate their fire upon it. 25 So here was
te other Wicked Problem: it had not been faced before, there were no
experts to solve it because those experts that planned the campaign hac
not assumed that the hedges would por ide any kind of probiem becaus
the Germans would already have retreated inland. Many Allied casualties
ter foul to the German method of defending each field and only a
chance of progress.
Ko ourse to the tried and tested method of explosives seemed to oner any
One way of taming certain aspes ts of Wicked Problems is to stand the
to be made by engaging those at, 1o pr end of the organization rather
147
ALLIED GROUND STRATEGY
than those engaged at the refined upper levels of the hierarchy. In other
words: to look down not up for the answer? In this case the answer
came from Sergeant Curtis C. Culin Junior who improvised a set of tank
'teeth' out of scrap German coastal obstacles that, fixed to a Sherman
tank (the renamed 'Rhino') could uproot the hedgerow and allow the
tanks and attached infantry to fight cross-country rather than along the
country lanes. Culin had cleared hedgerows with a similar device fixed to
a bulldozer back home on the family farm and though bulldozers could
pierce hedgerows without the
'Rhino' there were few of these available.
Importantly for us, this also highlights the nature of problems: for Culin
it was a Tame Problem - he had done this before and knew how to fabri-
cate the solution; but for others it was either a Wicked Problem - because
they did not know how to resolve it, or it was a crisis because they were
suffering the effects of the planners not having a solution already
constructed.
When the Rhino was demonstrated to the US top brass, including
Patton, on 22 July, the US 3rd Armoured Division immediately
demanded 57 Rhino attachments - for the following day's operation.
Each Rhino took an estimated 40 hours to complete but even with a 48
hour delay to the operation and no sleep the engineers still only managed
to complete under half the required number. Nevertheless, the Rhinos
Were a great success and significantly reduced the problem of the bocage.
As Cooper concludes, 'Previously, it had taken twelve days to penetrate
cight miles. Including the operation around Villiers-Fossard, our (US
3rd Armoured Division) total tank losses had been 87. In the first phase
of operation Cobra, from the morning of 26 through 28 July, the div-
sion moved forward 17 miles to Coutances with a loss of only two
tanks'27 It was just this kind of improvisation that impressed - and
unnerved - Rommel: What was astonishing was the speed with which
the Americans adapted themselves to modern warfare. In this they were
assisted by their extraordinary sense for the practical and material and by
thebs omplete lack of regard for tradition and worthless theories.-8
It seems incredible to think that all the planning had omitted to
consider this problem in advance and that it had to rely upon a junior
leader to solve it. In fact, a SHAEF planning document had noted the
ditticulty likely in moving through the bocage, but it underestimated the
advantages it provided to the defending side and merely suggested that
"The tactics to be employed in fighting through bocage country should
be siven considerable study by formations to be employed there il
Unfortunately this was not done.
where the
Ironically,
American forces were stationed just prior to the invasion, that is, south-
west England, has many areas where very similar high hedged landscape
