252
Second, even when supplies could not be landed onto the Mulbernes,
their presence enabled the landing of supplies directly from the ships
onto the beaches. Indeed, the Americans landed almost twice the
amount landed through the Anglo-Canadian Mulberry directly onto
Utah and Omaha beaches 82 Charles Wales, a DUKW driver with the
RASC, recalled that while the seas could be as high as 15 feet outside the
breakwater, inside the surface was just very choppy, 83
Third, the very existence of the Mulberries seems to have been crucial
in giving the planners confidence that supplies could be handled in the
necessary bulk. Perhaps more significantly, the secrecy surrounding the
harbours also persuaded the Germans that the landings must occur at a
major port: as Albert Speer, Germany's Armaments and War production
Minister suggested after the war, the artificial harbours were the single
brilliant technical device that swung the balance of advantage decisively
in the Allies' favour 84 Yet Lord Haw Haw (William Joyce) had boasted
on German radio on 21 April 1944 that 'We know exactly what you
intend to do with those concrete units' 85 He was almost right, though
the Germans had guessed that they were self propelled floating quays for
use within a captured port to compensate for the damage that would
inevitably be done to any existing facilities by bombardment or sabotage.
tude misunderstanding cost the Germans dearly and may wed dar
persuaded them that there was no desperate rush to remove the Allies in
Normandy; since the Allies had no hope of capturing Cherbourg in the
immediate future they would be vulnerable for weeks not just days -
wouldn't they? 86
10.6 Landing craft
Actually getting to the beaches, neur mind the right part of one parti
ular beach, proved immeasurably more difficult than the planners had
originally anticipated but all of this could be resolved through the use of
pre-existing lame procedures. With the US Navy heavily involved in the
racine Ocean against Japan, the British navy took prime responsibility fol
Sueous portation, and the operating procedures had been established
for many years through the experience of previous amphibious opera-
tions: HWOST (High Water Mark de Ordinary Spring Tides) marked the
aviding the above which the navy's roof ceased and the armys respe
Responsibilty for actually providing thef nding craft mainly tell on
American shoulders, since mosle British capacity was involved in the repair
and cOF struction of merchant ships and warships. However, Admiral
MANAGING LOGISTICS: 'BAG, VOMIT, ONE.'
253
King remained wedded to the Pacific theatre and ensured that most
American built landing craft were diverted there: on 1 May 1944 only
31,123 existing US landing craft were destined for
Overlord 87 Eventually, General Marshall intervened to force Admiral
King to release some of the landing craft being stockpiled for the Pacific
campaign but only on 15 April did King release a number of naval ships
for support (3 battleships, 2 cruisers and 22 destroyers).88
Paradoxically, then, one of the most critical factors in determining the
date of the invasion was the provision of such landing craft, allegedly
because the difficulties of design and production ensured that not until
20 March 1944 were the theoretical numbers settled, and not until May
1944 were sufficient numbers of such craft actually available. Yet the
numbers available in the Pacific were more than adequate for both
theatres so the most significant problem was not the technical problem
of production but the political problem of distribution. The numbers had
to be huge because Eisenhower required 175,000 troops (of whom
2,000 were allocated just to provide record keeping), 1,500 tanks, 3,000
artilery pieces and 10,000 vehicles to be on French soil in the first 24
The naval plan required 4,126 landing craft (of which 98 per cent
gun sailed on the day), / 36 support ships and 864 merchant ships.
All of these were to be protected by 1,213 warships of various sizes. Of
he latter, 189 minesweepers would sweep the channel of mines (29
fines were swept) in the biggest minesweeping operation of the war to
provide 12 safc lanes initially 15 miles wide broadening to 30 miles
nearer Normandy.ยบ There were also six battleships, two monitors (neay-
ily armoured gunships), 23 cruisers and 56 destroyers that would provide
ire power to destroy beach defencin au gun-emplacements that might
chdanger the landings. Specialize Suedu g craft and transport vessels
were also required in large numbers, and from the base line of just six in
1939, owned by the largest navy of the time, the British Royal Navy, the
requirements were clearly large.
the 229 Landing Ship Tank (LSTs) were the largest, at 4,000 tons
nd 327 feet long with a maximum speed of 10 knots. Depending on the
precise size (the British built versions [the Mk1 ] were 288 foot long, the
us built versions [known as the Mkz sligntly shorter) they could carry
between a dozen and 18 tanks, or between 500 and 1,400 tons of stores,
or 2o 3-ton trucks. And since the ships were flat-bottomed they could be
anded directly on shallow beaches, usually grounding in a metre of
water. Of le American version carried traffic lights for unloading instruc-
as, red - unhook your vehicle from thor chains it was held by for the
amber - start your engine; green it ow doors open and 8o!"
