208
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
Wehrmacht was doing to their buddies (and there is little
evidence that such GIs in Europe distinguished much between the Nazis
and the Germans; even if the US Government tried to maintain a distine-
tion), but few seemed to adopt this attitude: less than 10 per cent admit-
ted that they would really like' to kill a German (the numbers rose to 50
per cent when the Japanese replaced the Germans in the question).
However, almost 90 per cent thought that killing Germans was a neces
sary but unpleasant task and 65 per cent thought that after the war only
the leaders should be punished (though 25 per cent thought that the
whole German nation should be "wiped out" 117 This was particularly
the case with troops who had been involved in liberating the death
camps. Donald Lembeke was one such soldier deeply affected by his
Shooting is too good for them. Thr should be starved, beaten and then shot the
same way as they had been treating these other people. Maybe I shouldn't have
written this but the people over there (in the U.S.) know so little about what goes
on over here. They still think the Germans are civilized. They aren't even
But by the time these camps were liberated the war was almost over.
Most American soldiers thought that most German soldiers were profes-
sional, well trained, well armed, and well led. Indeed, the army magazine
Army Talks suggested that Fritz Müller, the German equivalent of GI
Joe, was not 'a goose stepping mechanical automaton .... He has been
in the army longer than you; he is by nature an eager beaver and
extremely anxious to be a good soldier; his officers have carerumy instilled
in him a spirit of independent action' 119
One member of the 29th Infantry Division in Normandy was quite
clear that ideological concerns about fascism were the last thing on most
front line soldiers' minds: "Ask any dogface on the line. You're fightil.
for your own skin on the line. When I enlisted I was patriotic as her.
There's no patriots on the line. A boy up there sixty days in the line is in
danger every minute. He ain't fighting for patriotism' 120
And this may explain why Patton appfars to have been popular with
his troops - he did not seek to justify the ar with political analysis nor
explain why it was their duty to halt Hitler. 121 Instead, Patton located his
troops back in their own cultural origins and told them what they prob-
ably r'S arded as the truth: the best way to survive was to win the war and
that meant killing as many of the enemy"Sis quickly as they could. But
Patton usually demonstrated a passit a for killing that went well beyond
abf notion of professional soldiering. "We won't just shoot the sons 'a'
MOBILIZING THE AMERICANS: TECHNOLOGY AND ICEBERG
209
bitches', he informed his troops, 'we're going to cut out their living guts
and use them to grease the treads of our tanks'. 122
To most American combat soldiers, then, the war was not a crusade
against Nazi Germany it was an unpleasant 'job' that had to be done; in
this vein it manifested the problem as one that could be pragmatically
managed, rather than one that needed ideological Leadership.
The US
Army pamphlet, 'Army Talks' devoted just one page to the ideological
crusade against the Nazis and the CO of the 2nd battalion the 1l6th
Infantry (29th Division) was clear that what most of his soldiers and
fellow officers were fighting for was not ideals but rather an overwhelm-
ing desire to kill Germans, to avoid being killed oneself, and to achieve
the terrain objectives we had trained so hard and long to reach' 23 Even
those elite troops who were more ideologically involved than their ordi-
nary infantry colleagues were frequently motivated to return the situa-
tion to the status quo ante rather than create some new 'utopia' or more
likely dystopia'. As one Commando with the Inter-Allied No. 10
Commando suggested: We may not have known what we were fighting
for but we sure as hell knew what we were fighting against'
That the task was a "job' both rationalized the killing and retained
ome form of link with their pre-war normality - though again for ¼ of
the employable population the previous decade had seen unemployment
as the nearest thing to a job. Hence, however unpalatable the "job' of
soldiering was, it was at least a job of some form and it provided both
financial resources and the source of pride for many that had previously
lost everything. In the words of Henry Giles, an American soldier since
1939, Nobody knows what the army meant to me - security and pride
and something fine and good .... (For) the first time in my life I was
The notion of a job also enabled those not in combat roles to feel that
they too were helping the war effort.
'Drivers, supply clerks, cooks,
mechanics', wrote Captain Earl Nelson in 1944, are all winning the war
simply by doing their job' 125 That many took pride in their achieve-
ments can be related to the extent to which those not involved in combat
have often sought to "reinterpret' their past so that they could present
themselves to the world as legitimate veterans. But few Allied soldiers
had been through what most German soldiers went through.
8.12 Conclusion
this chapter explained why an iceberg approach was taken and what that
meant for those on the ground in Glormandy. It then considered the
