376
COMMANDING IN CRISES
morning the bulldozers cleared paths through the dunes. St Martin de
Varreville was in US hands by 0745. By 1000 the infantry was pushing
inland from the beaches and by 1300 they had linked up with elements
of the Us 10lst Airborne who, of course, had confused the enemy and
prevented any major strike against the beaches. By nightfall the 4th
Infantry was eight miles inland.
The only real problem at Utah was the overcrowded beaches with
23,000 troops and 1,700 vehicles all trying to get off the beach.?9
However, much to General Collin's disgust, Admiral Moon unilaterally
suspended unloading that night on Utah after losing a small number of
navy vessels in the initial assault. Collins apparently exploded at Moon
and told him 'Let the navy expend its ships if that's what it takes. But
we've got to get the build-up ashore even if it means paving the whole
damn Channel with ships', 100 The unloading resumed.
By the next day the 4th Division reached St Mère Eglise and advanced
towards Cherbourg. That advance proved very difficult and the division
was ordered to halt until reinforcements arrived. Eventually the division
entered Cherbourg and was also the first US unit to enter Paris. As a
whole the 4th Division's landing at Utah was remarkable for the limited
number of casualties (around 200 including 60 lost at sea), indeed, it had
lost 20 times more in the disaster of Operation Tiger at Slapton Sands.
By D-Day+1 32,000 soldiers had landed on Utah. But their luck would
not hold: a year later, in May 1945, the 4th Infantry Division alone had
suffered 34,000 dead and 22,000 wounded in the final campaign against
Germany. 101
14.6 Pointe du Hoc
Between Utah and Omaha lay the Pointe du Hoc where the cliff osten-
sibly housed concrete bunkers containing six 155mm guns that could hit
both American beaches.
Companies D, E and F of the hit/S 2nd Ranger Battalion, led by their
Commanding Officer, Lieutenant Colonel James Earl Rudder, had been
given the task of landing on a narrow shingle beach, scaling the 30 metre
cliffs with 200 Rangers, and destroying the guns. As Rudder admitted
later to Bradley, First time you mentioned it lin January,
Bradley's London HQ - damag aston Square], I thought you were
trying to scare me'? 102
Later, Admiral Hall's Intelligent officer had also suggested the task
was impossion, in his words to Rudder, Three old women witho
could keep the Rangers from climbing that cliff". 103 The remaining
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
377
Photo 14,4 Pointe du Hoc, gun emplacement
he 14.5 Looking east from Pointe du Hoc along baker Sector
It Colonel Max Schneider, were to wait off-shore until Rudder signalled
umpanies of the 2nd Battalion Say nd B), plus the 5th Battalion led by
tre ad taken the Pointe du Hoc. If that signal did not appear by H-
the Pointe du Hoc overland.
Omaha at Dog Green and make his wall via the Pointe de la Percée to
mar-beneral Huebner had responded with alarm to his request to do
In fact Rudder was not supposed to have led the assault and his CO
