368
COMMANDING IN CRISES
defenders. 64
Although the sea was deemed too rough to launch the DD tanks - it
was blowing a force s - s= out of 40 tanks were in fact launched 5,000
yards out (one DD tank tore its canvas surround and the rest from the
LCT were landed directly on the beach half an hour late). Three of the
DD tanks sank (one rammed by a passing LCT carrying AVREs) but 31
made it to the beach, along with the AVREs and Flail tanks - all ahead
or D0 andy who had been ordered to stop and anow the tanks
through - a decisive factor in the success of the assault' according to
Rear Admiral Talbot and another example of the decisive role a
commander can make in the midst of a Critical situation.65 Five DD
tanks were quickly swamped by the rising tide but critically, these tanks
destroyed three or four 75mm guns, four or five 50mm guns and many
20mm guns. All of these had been reported destroyed after direct his
from the destroyers but, again, the German fire was enfiladed onto the
beach and they were almost immune to seaward fire. On Sword Beach,
then, the possibility of heavy British casualties was limited not just by the
prevalence of technologies that the American forces were denied through
poor Leddersnip, but also through the decision of the assault commander
to delay the troop landings until that technology had already landed and
dealt with as many enemy positions as possible.
By the end of the beach
sattle 25 of the 31 DDs were still running, but only 3 of the original !.
The leading companies of the South Lancashire Regiment landed on
seen White at 0720 and by 0810 had taken control of the beach,
suffering 37 dead or missing and 89 wounded. Dennis Cartwright was
probably typical in his reaction to enemy gunfire: he hit the deck. But his
reaction to local commanders is also typical:
a bit of a twerp I followed.67
Charlie Hansen had a similar experience, lying on the beach criss
crossed by fire. "After about ten minutes our NCO got us to move', 68
Many would have been suffering in front of WN 20, the German strong
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
369
point marking the boundary between Queen Red and Queen White
Beach, WN 20 was not a single casemated gun but an array of 20 well
constructed defences and weapons, including: a 75mm gun, two 50mm
anti-tank guns, three 81mm mortars, and six machine gun posts of vari-
us calibres, some with multiple guns. WN ZU was eventually overrun by
infantry from four different units after three hours and after sustained
atack from the navy, from tanks and from self-propelled artillery 69
the second wave on Sword Beach, the 185th Brigade, comprised the
a battalion kings Shropshire Light Infantry, the 2nd battalion the
Royal Warwicks, the
Ist Battalion
the Royal Norfolks
and the
Staffordshire Yeomanry's 6 pounder Sherman tanks. The latter, however,
was very delayed both at sea and on the beach. Even seasoned sailors like
Brendan Maher, who had been at sea for the best part of two years, found
de sea too much and was violently sea-sick./ For Albert Pattison,
atoon sergeant with the Ist Suffolks, it was the worst to hours or my
lte ... worse than swimming 2 miles off the Dunkirk beaches in 1940' 71
Rex Wiliams with the Shropshires also found disembarking very difficult
atter the sea-sickness and with the 40'll weight he had to carly.
we were so overloaded with gear I almost overbalanced into the water. Dutt mate
it. My legs felt like jelly through nerves. I tried to run up the beach but it was no
use. I just couldn't. So I said out loud, 'Fuck it!' and simply walked until I was
with a bunch of the lads lying down near a Sherman ... we kept our heads down
as there was stuff flying about. Then a lieutenant i didn't know told us to set off
the beach and into the grass and sand dunes.??
Note here, once again, the temptation to tay down is only transcenaed
by a direct command from someone in higher authority. Moreover, this
was not simply a response to the terror on the beden out had dedly beca
embedded in the
training because
when Williams followed the
Lieutenant off the beach they came up against a German machine ou
Post which they knocked out but the officer was killed in the attack. The
Corporal looked around for another officer ... We had no idea what to do
next and we couldn't see our own sergeant. But then a sergeant major
ran up, sized up the situation and told us to follow him'? 73 As Blandford
surmises: Those first British shock troops surviving the actual landing
did indeed lie up on the beach in great relief and thankfulness, most
unwilling to leap up and face acute danger again at once.
The relieving
lethargy that followed miraculous survival was strong and inevitable...
Even some of the Commandos seemed unable to act in the absence of an
officer or NCO. Tim Holdsworth with 41 RM Commando lay immobi-
lized behind a burning Sherman just off the beach.
'After a few minutes
an officer appeared and showed us how to get behind the wall and into
