2N49 5
336
COMMANDING IN CRISES
13.5 The British 6th Airborne and the River Orne
and Caen canal bridges
By the end of D-Day the British oth Airborne on the eastern flank of the
Normandy beachhead had more than a third of its troops still unac-
counted for, while a tenth of the paratroopers were casualties.
main targets for this group were the bridges over the Canal de Caen and
the river Orne, and the Merville battery. 30
The plan to capture the bridges over the Canal de Caen and the river
Orne called for a coup de main, a surprise attack, and that required the
instant appearance of around 75 troops. In effect, an attack by glider
troops who could
arrive simultaneously and directly at the spot.
Paratroopers, in contrast, were likely to be seen descending, would
inevitably be scattered on landing, and this would enable the defenders
Questly the briages with the pre-laid charges before the anackers coul
Wrest control from them. The plan, therefore, was for six gliders led by
Major Howard to land close to the bridges (three by each).
Jany of the air assaults required numerous rehearsals across the coun
try? Geoff Barway, for example, one of the six glider pilots involved in
the attack upon the Orne river and Caen canal bridges, began general
glider training in August 1942.
But like the rest of the British 6th
Airborne (formed in April 1943) he was not given any specific training
until February 1944, and for most of the time the landings were prac
tised on airfields to facilitate the recovery of the gliders. From then, witn
the 6th Airborne now operational, he practised the landing on the bride.
forty-two times by day
and night from March 1944,
flying front
Netheravon, Wiltshire. Initially, the pilots flew empty gliders and then
progressively heavier loads until they contained the equivalent of the
top tay would carry to Normandy; they even wore coloured soggies
Lo simulate different light conditions and used St John's bridge ar
Lechlade to practise the actual assault in Operation Mush.
Another of the six pilots, Staff Sergeant Roy Howard, also practised at
Netheravon, but did not begin specialized training until 21 April 1944.
From then until D-Day he made one landing a day from 6,000 feet first.
in daylight, then at night using lights, and finally at night without lights.
After the first drop, the glider pilots were expected to get back to the
beaches for a return trip to England, from where they were to take part
in subsequent airdrops.38
The final training involved a large-scale model of the site down to
details as small as the position of individual trees. The model was updated
continuously by the daily photographing of the area, and it even included
337
THE AIRBORNE ASSAULTS
Photo 13.2 St John's Bridge, Lechlade, Site of Exercise Mush by 5th Airborne "
preparation for assault on Pegasus Bridge
a cine film of the landing using a camera slung from ropes above the
model for the pilots to use. In fact, Major Howard himself did not know
of the model until a week before the invasion. Morrison's No. 5 Flight
watched the film three times. 39
Even all this training and intelligence was likely to prove inadequate
because on 17 April 1944 British intelligence were shocked to discover
that anti-glider poles were being erected all over the destgnated guding
landing areas. This made it necessary to clear landing zones of 1,00
yards by ou yards and to illuminate them with lights. Ine oth airborne
Vivision then felled 100 trees in the New Forest and erected them tie
same pattern to establish the best way to clear them. In the end it wa
decided that the best clearance involved aband out a hole found the
base 6 inches deep and 12 inches out for the pole, laying a bicycle inter
tune filled with olb of explosive in the hore and six squads on twent
soldiers could clear the necessary number of poles in the time anoted: 90
minutes. On D-Day the times were bettered, despite being under fire,
because the poles were of smaller diametoO han had bech assumed. +o
The sudden appearance of anti-glider pfes around the bnages just
days before the invasion, then, did not deter the plots and four ot the
Blders landed to plan - one landed by the wrong river eight miles away
but these four were exactly on target.
One authority+l suggests that
Howard's glider hit the ground 47 yards from the canal bridge and one
that he was 47 feet away? While Howard himself thought it was about
50 yards - and his descent had required two people to far to tie back of
