176
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
Note again the disciplinary system used here for elite units - the only
punishment is the worst one imaginable - being sent back to a non-elite
unit. Intriguingly then, having broken with the conventional disciplinary
system - the Tame approach used by the rest of the army - these elite
units then developed their own processes for training elite troops.
Once No. 10 Commando had been formed, on 31 May 1943, train-
ing just got tougher: on three consecutive days No. 3 Troop marched 26
miles, 19 miles, and 23 miles - and after each march several individuals
went to the local dance to demonstrate their incredible fitness to their
instructors.84 Each Commando unit trained independently but daily
marches of ten miles carrying a 901b load were not unusual. 85
Realism was also induced by dropping the Commandos near RAF
stations and requiring them to infiltrate the camps through live mine-
fields and then report back. On such exercises the RAF guards were not
informed that the Commandos were present and were quite likely to
shoot first and ask later. When Tommy Farr (real name Thomas Freitag),
managed not just to gain access to RAF Towyn, but to steal a WAAF'S
Women's Auxiliary Air Force) uniform hat, he was ordered to return it
- again unseen! Similarly, when training for an attack upon German VI
installations, Commandos of No. 3 Troop were parachuted into Sussex
without informing the Home guard or local army units of their where-
abouts or mission 86 In fact, so tough was the training that a 70 per cent
casualty rate was expected - not in combat but in training. However,
much of the time of this specialist unit was spent in learning about the
German military organizations, their command systems, their weapons
and even their slang, so that when the invasion occurred No. 3 Troop
(some of whom had already served in the Wehrmacht) would be able to
interrogate prisoners and operate behind enemy lines on reconnaissance
When D-Day loomed No. 3 Troop was divided into eight teams of
five Commandos and each was attached to one of the eight Commando
Battalions involved either in No. 1 or ho. & special services (os)
Brigades. In line with their general remit, it was assumed by many that
the Commandos would spearhead the invasion and then be withdrawn
for further special duties. After all, their official orders suggested that
they would stay for a week or two at most, then return to Britain while
redular Army troops replace you'. Not everyone was persuaded. As one
old Africa veteran from No. 6 Commando - to which Masters was
attached - told him, 'Don't you fuckin' believe it. What general is going
to let go a couple of elite Commando brigades in the middle of a fuckin
invasion? Two weeks
you're lucky' 87
not bloody likely. More like two months, if
MOBILIZING ANGLO-CANADIANS, COMMONWEALTH, VOLUNTEERS
177
7.6 Mobilization in Canada, the Commonwealth,
and of the volunteers
Like all the Commandos, all of those serving in the Canadian and
Commonwealth units on D-Day were volunteers. Historically, the peace-
time Canadian army was small, comprising only three permanent regi-
ments - including the Royal Regiment of Canada from
Toronto that
literally bled to death on 19 August 1942 at Dieppe (95 per cent casual-
ties including 227 dead).88
Nevertheless, from a call up of almost
500,000 soldiers the Canadians sent around 125,000 overseas. But the
inter war Canadians had mirrored their larger southern cousins in the US
by adopting a policy of relative isolationism. Concerned that the internal
Anglo-French hostilities might boil over if war was declared, Prime
Minister Mackenzie King had promised not to conscript any Canadian
tor overseas military service and refused to engage in any joint training
With the British until 1939. The Militia Act also prevented conscripts
trom serving for more than a year. However, with the outbreak of war on
1 September 1939 King asked Chamberlain how Canada could assist
Britain, and by 10 September had itself declared war on Germany and
agreed to send one division of volunteers overseas. When France fell,
canada became Britains most significant ally, though that any sun
remained reluctant to engage in strategic planning for the war.
Six weeks after the Japanese struck at Pearl Harbour on 7 December
1941, King organized a referendum to seek support for conscripting
diers for overseas duty, but while 80 per cent of the English speaking
Canadians supported him, 73 per cent of the French speaking Canadian
did not. Ultimately, French-Canadians comprised 10 per cent of the
Canadian army with 50,000 troops by January 1941. But emme treesty
was tar more complex than any simple Anglo-French distincuon, for
amongst the Allied armies the Canadian Army was second only to the Us
forces in its composition of French,
English,
Ukrainians, rinns, Swedes and many others besides. Moreover, the
conflicting opinions did not rest wholly between the English and French
speakers: there was also conflict between French Canadians who did
wanteer and the Free French Commandos training In brital. On tae
ecasion a fight broke out in Easiebarne in whith not, lives and ever
mortars were used. Only un oNovember It, when caster.
proved unsustamable, was conscription for disrseas service madn
duced. Even then not every volunteer was teen - one 76 year old who
had blackened his grey hair with boot polish was rejected.
In all, 11050 Canadian soldiers died in the European war, thoug
