82
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
impending invasion of the Balkans: after the Germans had buttressed
their defences in that region the Allies promptly invaded Sicily?
At about the same time the Allies began to plan an equivalent pea-
tion to ensure that German forces would not be concentrated at the
intended invasion site in France; this was 'Operation Fortitude and upon
its successful communication to the Germans hinged the entire invasion
programme. As the Chief of Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander
(COSSAC) admitted: 'If the enemy obtains as much as 48 hours' warn:
ing of the location of the assault area, the chances of success are smal,
and any longer warning spells certain defeat'. +
Planning Fortitude did not commence until the initial Overlord plan
was complete in July 1943, but it was accepted that such a huge accumu-
lation of matériel could not be kept from the eyes of the enemy. Thus the
orginal deception - Plan JAEL - to persuade the Germans that their
defcat could be brought about solely by bombing - was dropped. Ran.
COCKADE suggested that moves against Boulogne,
Brittany and
Norway were intended but the Germans remained unpersuaded by thes.
However, the Allies did not want to alert the Germans to the fact that
an assault on Normandy was actually in preparation so the amount of
intormation leaked had to be carefully controlled. Even if Normandy was
not the main landing there was nothing to be gained from alerting the
Germans to its imminent arrival. Indeed, it was also decided that too
much mention or concentration on the Pas de Calais might persuade the
un spys that something else was afoot, so blatant might be the leaks,
as a mention of landing sites was decreasingly used as wa
approached. After all, if the double agents were to be believed after D-
Day by the Germans it would be necessary for them to have some infor-
mation that did not automatically point to the Pas de Calais.
O00 ration Fortitude was initiated by Roger Hesketh. Fortitude North
was the pre-Normandy deception, 'ou spig that Norway was the targe
of a feint with the seven divisions of the British 4th Army stationed in
Scotland and Eastern England, while the Pas de Calais was the real target.
The plan allegedly involved using two divisions in a northern landing
Stavanger.
with Soviet assistance and a single divisional attack upon the artields at
Within three months six divisions would be landed and
Sweden would be 'persuaded' to allow Allied aircraft to use its airfields
to facilitate the invasion of Denmark. Although the Fortitude North plan
was the is successiul of the two deceptions nevertheless the German
had moved a large number of U-boats to southern Norway for D-Day."
ironically no German forces were sent orth during the apparent iv
sion of Normandy to defeat the illusory British
4th Army
German observation of scotland was ver imited. Indeed, two divisiom
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
83
were entirely fictitious (US 55th Infantry Division and British 58th
Infantry Division), in addition to three imaginary US Ranger Battalions
and none of the real 4th Army Divisions was ever dedicated to the largely
imaginary unit. Most of the 'work' of the army was undertaken by 20
British officers and a few wireless operatives ensconced in Edinburgh
Castle. In late spring 1944 radio traffic simulated the arrival of three
bomber squadrons, in addition to eight real and eight dummy Spitfires.
In fact, the German radio operators covering this area were all listening
to the manoeuvres of the Red Army further east so no apparent troop
movements were noted but this handful of soldiers tied down 12 or 13
German divisions in Norway (about 200,000 soldiers) during the inva-
sion of France. This was distributed leadership in action - a far cry from
images of heroic leaders battling alone against impossible odds - but far
more effective. The pretence was maintained until 30 September 1944,
by which time no significant reserves were left in Norway anyway.®
Although the Allies regarded the Pas de Calais as an impossible inva-
sion site, given the defences constructed there, this did not mean that it
could not be used and Fortitude South suggested, initially, that the Pas
de Calais was the primary target and no forces would be landed in
Normandy. Of course, once the invasion of Normandy had occurred the
ruse would rapidly be uncovered but as D-Day approached it occurred to
General de Guingand that a second phase could be added, in which the
deception would be extended to persuade the Germans that the main
landing would still occur at the Pas de Calais, thus holding the German
15th Army in that region for as long as possible. Hopefully, the pretence
over the 'main' invasion could be maintained for at least two weeks after
the Normandy invasion to allow sufficient reinforcements to land before
the Germans had moved troops south.
Fortitude South rested on the 'ghost army' of the First US Army
Group (FUSAG), nominally under Patton's command, and theoretically
landing a larger force of troops along the Pas de Calais than actually
landed in Normandy. In fact,
the code
word for
Fortitude
'Bodyguard' after Churchill's suggestion that: 'In wartime truth is so
precious that she should always be attended by a bodyguard of lies'? It
is clear that upon this deception rested the success of the landings for no
amount of leadership would have been able to guarantee a successful
landing against forewarned and prepared German opposition.
It might seem strange, then, that Patton - the army commander most
feared by the Germans - was first, not involved in D-Day and second,
responsible for maintaining a critical hoax to mislead the Germans. The
removal of Patton from the D-Day landings had derived from several
reprimands from Eisenhower, the most serious for slapping a soldier in
