96
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
second blow .... The whole of the present attack is set as a trap for the enemy to
make us move all our reserves in a hurried strategical disposition which we would
later regret. 64
In short, it was self-evidently an attempt to draw German forces away
from the real target, which was the Pas de Calais. By the morning of 10
June the information had persuaded the German High Command to
stop and reverse the movement south from Bruges - towards Normandy
- first of the Ist SS Panzer Division which was already on its way. Then,
after a phone call from Keitel to von Rundstedt, a 'State of Alarm' was
issued for the 15th Army in northern France and Belgium and the initial
movements of three further divisions (116th Panzer Division, 85th
Infantry Division and the 16th German Airforce Division) towards
Normandy were halted and they were diverted towards Calais. And, as a
further direct consequence,
seven new German divisions were sent
immediately to the Pas de Calais instead of to Normandy. Indeed, in the
first few days when the Germans struggled to hold back the flood of
Allied matériel with diminishing resources, three Panzer and two infantry
divisions stood idly by within 100 miles of Caen but on the wrong side
of the Seine and unable to move because of the fear of a further attack
near the Pas de Calais 65 The Ist SS division did not leave for Normandy
until D-Day+11 and by that time the landing was secure. As Eisenhower
remarked in his report to the Combined Chiefs of Staff:
I cannot over-emphasise the decisive value of this most successful threat [to invade
the Pas de Calais), which paid enormous dividends, both at the time of the assault
and during the operations of the two succeeding months. The German 15th
Army, which, if committed to battle in June or July, might possibly have defeated
us by sheer weight of numbers, remained inoperative throughout the critical
period of the campaign, and only when the breakthrough had been achieved were
its infantry divisions brought west of the Seine - too late to have any effect upon
the course of victory.66
On 29 July Garbo was awarded the Iron Cross by a grateful Hitler,
and subsequently with an MBE by the British! He was the only individ-
le to be decorated by both sides. Garbo is a perfect example of the
leadership of individuals from outside formal hierarchies and his effect is
also a classic case for the role of "small things', because this one individ-
ual seems to have stymied the movement of thousands of German rein-
forcements.
At face value this successful conclusion of a Wicked Problem by the
Allies seems to undermine the collaborative efforts that conventionally
comprise the necessary approach, however, on closer examination it
97
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
should be clear that success also rested upon the secrecy of millions of
British civilians and Allied soldiers, rather than just one or two double
agents. By January 1944 virtually the whole of southern England had
been transformed into a giant training and transit camp for the 2 million
troops of the invading armies. Large sections of the southern English
coastline, especially those areas that resembled the Normandy coast, were
requisitioned by the military authorities for assault training and, as the
time for the landing approached, the port and final transit camp areas
were sealed off with barbed wire and armed guards to ensure no civilians
got in and no military personnel got out - at least in theory. No prior
warning was given to the troops about the sealing and many were discon-
solate at the 'captivity'. As Gunner Ernest Brewer wrote to his mother on
28 May 1944: It seems a rotten trick not to tell us beforehand so that
we could let you know that it might be our last time at home .... We are,
so far as I can understand, kept here for security reasons, though I myself
can't see what we would give away. We don't know anything'®
Ironically, this was the day when the date of the invasion was released to
those with a 'need to know' and from then until D-Day not only were
the troops sealed in their various camps, but so were their letters. Even
when mistakes were made rapid recoveries were possible. For example, all
he tugs were issued with maps of the Seine bay area rather earlier than
intended and, to cover the problem, a subsequent issue provided detailed
maps of Boulogne marked Immediate. Top Secret? 69 But some lapses
did oceur. Soldiers of the British 3rd Division, locked up inside West
Ham's football ground in London were less concerned about their
sudden incarceration than the equally sudden disappearance of the beer
and cigarette ration. They took it upon themselves to cut the wire
surrounding them and spent a night in the Fast End where at least two
landlords accepted their French invasion money. They were subsequently
- and peacefully - returned to 'barracks' by the local police.?0
Even as the Allied troops boarded their landing craft most did not
know their destinations. They had been trained to identify their target
areas using the detailed maps and photographic panoramas taken by
reconnaissance planes and made into books, but the place names for the
villages ere likely to be Brazil', "Cairo' and "Dresden' as anythingo te
so that any overheard radio communications would be of little use to the
Germans. Only those privileged by membership of BIGOT security clear-
ance were aware of the real targets, though this information was passed
down to army, corps, divisional and regimental commanders as D-Day
mayed closer. On 25 May all ships' captains were ordered to open their
scaled orders at precisely 2330. Three days later the date for D-Delive
then fixed for 5 June - was announced to them and H-Hours for the five
