142
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
Photo 6.1 Bluffs opposite Dog White, Omaha Beach
allowing a great concentration of defensive fire at these points. In partic-
war, each exit had a pair of Wiederstandsnest (Resistance Nests) which
provided deeply protected cover for the defenders. Second, the bluffs or
cliffs rising 30 metres behind the beach provided perfect defensive cover
and thus a very difficult approach for the attackers.
Third, the line of shingle, often two or three metres high would prove
virtually impossible for the attacking it licles to traverse. Fourth, a sea
Yor offered the defenders (and the attackers if they could reach it)
further cover. Fitth, the area of marshy land between the wall and the
blufts left an open killing tield for the defellers to cover at their leisure
and the attackers to cross at their peril.
What made the beach a necessary target was the impossibility of bridg-
in the sa can critical for capturing Cherbous, did te
eat eates cate for preventing German reminens
a central and northern France reaching the arca) by any other way.
What made the beach a plausible target was the fact that only one battal-
ion of 800 soldiers from the 716th Infantry Division, most of who
wat Poles and Russians, defended it against 40,000 troops and 3,500
vehicles audering it. this colossal imbalance of force, supported by tie
ur and naval bombardment which should have eliminated or unde
been like Utah, a Tame Problem.
mined many of the defenders, essentially meant that Omaha should have
the US 7th Corps troops destined foth Jtah were under Collins while
the Us our corps heading for Umaha were led by Gerow. Major General
sow had served in the us army in France in the First World War. Ma
detailed strategy for Utah Beachf involved the American 4th Infantry
143
ALLIED GROUND STRATEGY
Cherbourg - and without Cherbourg the attack upon Germany itself could
not be entertained because the supply problem would simply be too great.
Utah had none of the bluffs behind it which made Omaha such a difficult
target but it was crossed by two rivers, the Merderet which ran north-
south, and the Douve which ran east-west. The rivers met at Carentan and
generated an area of marsh land that had been recently flooded by the
Germans, leaving just seven exit routes which could be defended relatively
casily by well entrenched troops. A concrete sea wall divided the beach
from the hinterland but the movement of sand over time had reduced its
height from eight to four feet in many places. Behind this lay sand dunes,
some 10 to 20 feet high, interspersed with seven German strong-points, of
which four overlooked the designated landing beaches, Uncle Red and
Tare Green. The attacking force, primarily the 4th Division, was to be led
by 57 year old Brigadier General Theodore Roosevelt, eldest son of the
former President and cousin of the contemporary president, 1ยบ Again, the
Planners assumed the landing would be relatively simple but the counter-
6.4 Planning for casualties
But not everyone was going to be alive long enough to worry about the
ranzers. The planning for casualties assumed that overall, including all
operations and the battle for Normandy as well as D-Day itself, at least
10 per cent and possibly 25 per cent of those involved could expect to be
killed or wounded - though many of the ordinary soldiers seemed
temeun of the casualty figures expected by the top brass. Cossack
certainly planned for 10 per cent of the landing craft to be lost and a
turther 20 per cent to be damaged. Churchill thought that 1i or 12
per cent (about 20,000) from the i aremeun it units was probable. a Lt
Hammerton of the British 22nd Dragoons' Flail tanks supporting the
Canadians on Juno was expecting two thirds of his 'Crabs' to be put out
of action on the beach. 14 Reg Edwards, skipper on LCT 2436 with the
106th LCT Flotilla was told to expect 70 per cent casualties. 15 Some
were only too aware of the dangers: Private John Gale of the Ist South
Lancashire Regiment was told that, in all probability, all the first wave
would be wiped out. No. 4 Commando was told to expect casualties as
'high as 84 per cent'. 16 Leigh-Mallory thought that barely 30 per cent of
the American Airborne Divisions would survive unscathed. !7
