186
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
8.3 On officers and soldiers
The reliance on such a small proportion of the population to carry the
burden of actual conflict, combined with the selection policies thar
placed all those not assigned to a 'skilled trade' into the infantry, led the
US to replicate an approach to training riflemen that would not have
looked amiss under Wellington. It was designed to destroy the resistance
ot the individual in order to rebuild that person in the image of the mili-
tary establishment, but, as often as not, it bred work-avoidance routins
that made Sergeant
Bilko's
antics look dull by comparison.
As
Linderman's review
of subordinate resistance and insubordination
concludes, 'Soldiers thought these reasonable responses to unreasonable
orders' 19 None of this would have been news to Patterson at the US War
Department. Already, in 1941, he had written that four things were caus-
ing morale problems in the army: (1) the lack of a sense of urgency; (2)
dissatisfaction with officers; (3) a lack of meaningful work; (4) the lack of
opportunities for promotion. General Marshall also knew the probicn
rested with the leaders because, in his words, 'Soldiers will tolerate
almost anything in an officer, except unfairness or ignorance. 20
Like the UK, the US had proportionately twice as many officers as
Germany ( per cent and s per cent respectively) and the Airborne m
particular was very heavily populated by officers, with a ratio of officers
to ordinary soldiers of almost one to five. 21 But the relationship between
officers and ordinary GIs seems to have been worse among the American
than the German army. American Officer training took place in Sincer
Candida Schools and lasted between three and four months and /s per
cent of US officers came directly from civian life with less than 5 per
cent from any form of previousf nilitary background. The primary crite-
rion for officer selection in both the USA and in the UK was education
lad, by and large, the closer a unit was to the front line - and particut-
larly where officers were directly inv 2)ved in combat - the better the rela-
Lionships between officers and sol drston le Gl suggested, "regardiess
stan ion, men turn to the officer for Leadership, and if he doesn t
give it to them then they look to the str gest personality who steps
forward and becomes a leader' 23
Eisenhower was certainly adamant tha)f heavy burden would fall on
the young officers who comprised the leaders in the field of all the Allied
nations. As he said to a passing out - trade of British officers graduating
from Sandhurst:
you young tieh have this war to win. It is small unit leade hip that is going "
win the ground battle and that battle must be won before that enemy of ours is
MOBILIZING THE AMERICANS: TECHNOLOGY AND ICEBERG
187
finally crushed. It is up to you men to give your units — whether it is a tank crew,
platoon or becomes a company - leadership, every hour of the day, every day of
the week. You must know every single one of your men. It is not enough that you
are the best soldier in that unit, that you are the strongest, the toughest, the most
durable and the best equipped technically. You must be their leader, their father,
their mentor, even if you are half their age. You must understand their problems.
You must keep them out of trouble; you must be the one to go to their rescue.
That cultivation of human understanding Dewcel you did you del lo die one
art that you must yet master and you must master it quickly 24
However, relations between the ordinary troops and senior officers -
whom they would seldom even know let alone see - were rarely good. In
one survey of US troops, although 19 per cent of officers thought that
"eadership and discipline' were critical in determining the action of
soldiers, only 1 per cent of the soldiers shared this assumption. 25
Nevertheless, contemporary surveys suggested that around two-thirds of
the infantry thought that most or all of their officers were good. "Good'
in this context usually meant being willing to share any risk that an offi-
cer asked of the soldiers, not using rank to avoid danger and discomfort,
not patronizing soldiers, successfully accomplishing a mission at least cost
and explaining the reasoning behind all missions. Moreover, 'good' offi
cers recognized that they were often as green as their soldiers and were
therefore willing to ask the advice of anyone who had more experience
than they did. William Ruf of the 6th Infantry recalled the terms spoken
by his immediate officer, Sergeant, you let me know when I'm ready for
the Job'. Indeed, Jason Byrd, a combat engineer with the ist Intantry
Division, remembers one officer who was quite different from the rest:
- = wasn't like the OCS (Officer Cadet School) officers we had. He would get us
together. He said, "Now men they told me we've got to go out and secure this
area, I want to ask your ….. opinion of how many men I should take ….. and if I
could have a volunteer to go with me'. I volunteered right off the bat. He was
dead honest. te was a man who you knew was a good leader because he asked
your opinion.27
But the training provided many officers with little that they would find
really important once in combat. Lieutenant Leinbaugh was appalled as
he experienced combat for the first time: "You know nothing when you
enter combat' 28
some of the knowledge that was useful, like distinguishing between
different sounds of incoming shells and assessing the likely impact point,
2 buld have been difficult for any army to provide. However, the dispute
about the utility of 'bullshit' paled into insignificance when combined with
