192
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
'experimental' desegregated infantry division with black and white volun
teers but nothing came of it. 45
By 1944 even George Marshall had recognized the problem of direct-
ing the best recruits away from the infantry and of keeping African-
American soldiers out of combat and he reversed the policies.
D-Day there were African-American units of combat engineers clearing
the beaches for the 4th Infantry Division on Utah and at least one unit
of tank destroyers. But how did the US authorities allocate the white
recruits into the various arms of the US forces?
8.5 Recruitment and selection
In 1940 the total US Army strength stood at a mere 170,000. By 1943
the US army (including the Army Air Force) had grown to 7.2 million
and was, at that time, probably the best equipped of any in the world.
Most of those who served in the US Navy, the Marines and the elite Unis
such as the Rangers4 and the Airborne were volunteers but the majorty
in the Army were conscripts. And since conscripts are usually more diffi-
I pare lead than volunteers, the toughest leadership positions were no
aun uin those officers who had the greatest Leadership sail or poten
tial, but those who had not got, or could not get, into the Marines, Lie
Rangers, the Navy, or the air force. This uncoupling of the Leadershp
link between level of difficulty and level of skill was to bedevil the army
as its initial leadership became casualties of the war. Patterson, for one,
was certain that here the General Staff had been 'asleep at the switch, 47
When the end of the war looked certain, in early 1944, Marshall began
closing down the aviation cadet schools and the specialized training
programmes and, as a result, the quality of recruits entering the army
began to rise. Thus the army divisions brought on stream towards the
nin of the war tended to be more effective than those used at the begin-
the 1. Or, as O'Neill puts it: 'A peculiarity of the American Army was that
the longer the war lasted, the better it became' 48 The same could not be
exhausted their reserves by 1945.
said of either the British or the German armies, both of which had
the Us Army was certainly one of the fittest. The basic requirements
1g ere to be at least 5 foot tall, at least 105lbs in weight, at least 32 natu-
ral teeth, correctable vision, no flat feet, hernias or venereal disease. *9
That list led to the rejection of one nig rd of the draftees, though on aver-
age a Us soldier was 5 8" and weighed 144lbs. Not all the examinations
were card: Howard Melvin of the 82nd Airborne recounts how his
special medical examination to join the parl oopers (he was inexplicably
MOBILIZING THE AMERICANS: TECHNOLOGY AND ICEBERG
193
rejected 24 hours earlier as unfit by the army) involved jumping success-
fully off the medical examiner's desk!50
Yet, the recruit who ended up in the typical US infantry battalion
performed less well, physically and intellectually, in the selection tests
than the equivalent individual serving behind the front line or in the air.
Indeed, the lower the socio-economic background the more likely an
individual was to end up carrying a rifle. Of course, some people managed
to evade the draft, initially by having missing teeth or a criminal record
or - in Frank Sinatra's case - a perforated eardrum. 51 This may have
reflected the universal assumption that the war would not be a replica of
the First World War but a war of rapid movement and sophisticated tech-
nologies: that is, one where quick brains
and powerful machines
displaced slow brains and weak machines. As Wilson put it: anyone who
met the army's minimal IQ requirements could learn how to load and
fire a rifle and the factory model adopted by the US army treated
recruits as 'raw material to be transformed into finished products. 52
Thus two forms of problem taming were at work in the US forces: first
to win a war of technology.
required Management rather than
Leadership; second,
even the infantry could be turned into killing
machines through effective management processes.
In fact, even basic training involved a considerable amount of work
beyond firing a rifle. Most GIs had to know how to operate up to a
dozen weapons, how to use camouflage, detect and defuse mines, how
to mount guard and patrol, read maps, recognize vehicles and aircraft,
understand military discipline, deal with prisoners, execute basic first aid
and hygiene, survive in atrocious conditions, and operate as a team.23
The hygiene lesson may have been overplayed: Lt Cooper, with the 3rd
Armoured Division wore the same sy au uses and no was wear for
51 days in Normandy.54 But the more important lesson - learned by the
Germans but not by the British (except general sum) or Amenicans, was
that the infantry required the best not the worst soldiers because the war
was no longer fought in mass formations where obedience was the most
important criteria for success.55
For the elite groups in the US Army, such as the Rangers, or suicide
squads as some called them, training was - and skill levels were - equiv-
alent to those of the British Commandos. Two battalions of Rangers
were avallable in June 1944, the 2nd and the 5th. Both had been init
ated 12 months earlier and were paipt very much like the british
Commandos for small-scale amphibious and raiding operations. Colonel
lames Rudder was in command of both battalions,
united as the
Provisional Ranger Group. Sigurd Sundby had been allotted to a clerk's
JoD because of poor eyesight in one eye but atter he memonized the eye
