MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
replaced the - once again dismissed - von Rundstedt after the bridge at
Remagen fell into American hands. Guderian also frequently rejected
Hiter's demands and was dismissed in 1941 for organizing a retreat, then
reinstated in 1943, only to be ordered to take six weeks' leave on 28
March 1945. Had he taken it and returned he would have been back just
in time to celebrate VE Day. Lastly, Manstein did what Paulus should hare
done: he refused to obey Hitler's order not to withdraw when he led the
escape from the Cherkassy salient and saved 20,000 troops in the process,
though he was subsequently dismissed. 10
The result of this polarity in the German command system was that
German trys unield almost always proved more than a match for
most of the Allied units facing them. As one SS officer recalled: T fit.
always win, not because of superior bravery but through better methods
which I assure you were always - ALWAYS - designed to preserve lic,
or at least to win a battle with fewer casualties? "l And since SS casualies,
as a proportion of SS troops (25 per cent (253,000 of I million) ver
remarkably similar to those suffered by regular Wehrmacht units (24 per
cent (2.9 million killed from 12 million called up)), we can assume that
the stores of so suicide actions were las surrent from day Ou
Wehrmacht unit overall. 12 But that deep strength in the field was fatally
undone by the catastrophic weaknesses at the top.
The 40 divisions [900,000 troops] of the Waffen
SS [literally
soldiers feared most and wanted to eliminate quickest, though almost an
The ano or an worried we candy breen score te
anna tope ver opera of the ngneto seantes of ten b
and British enemies and Colonel i revor Dupuy, an American, suggested
in 1977 that 'On a man for mator basis, the German ground soldier consis-
tently inflicted casualties at about a 50 per cent higher rate than they
curred from the opposing British and All erican troops UNDER Al
CIRCUMSTANCES. 13 This was true when they were attacking and
when they were defending, when theyerd a local numerical superiority
and when, as was usually the case, they were outnumbered, when they
had air superiority, and when they did not, when they won and when
they lost'.* Church suggests that Dupuy's data is skewed - both the
Hastings concurs with Dupuy, calling the German army:
British and German samples are verl- small and unrepresentative bul
the finest fighting army of the war, o mof the greatest the world has ever seen.
this is a simple truth that some soldiernethe writers have been reluctant to
acknowledge, partly for reasons oing dional pride, partly because it is a painful
MOBILIZING THE GERMANS: WEHRMACHT AND SS
215
concession when the Wehrmacht and SS were fighting for one of the most obnox-
ious regimes of all times. The quality of the German weapons - above all tanks -
was of immense importance.
Their tactics were masterly: stubborn defence;
concentrated local firepower from mortars and machine guns; quick counter-
attacks to cover lost ground. Units often fought on even when cut off, which was
not a mark of fanaticism, but of sound tactical discipline, when such resistance in
the rear did much to reduce the momentum of Allied advances, as in GOOD-
WOOD. German attacks were markedly less skilful, even clumsy... Their junior
leadership was much superior to that of the Americans, perhaps also to that of the
However, Hastings also admits that the situations were different: the
Germans were fighting for the survival of their country whereas the Allies
were undertaken an unpleasant but necessary task; the Germans did not
have an apparently unending supply of troops or supplies which ensured
that sooner or later victory would be achieved and therefore there was
lile need for heroics. And, most significantly, from 1943 the Germans
were primarily fighting a defensive war where most of the advantages lay
with the defenders - though clearly this had proved irrelevant for the
French army in 1940 or the Soviet forces in 1941. Ambrose insists,
however, that when the Germans went on the offensive against the Allies,
at Bastogne and through the Ardennes in the winter of 1944, the
American troops in particular proved more than a match for the German
chte soldiers. 17
This is probably accurate, though by that time most of
the elite German soldiers had already died, either in Russia or in
Normandy.
It iserorth considering the historical context for this: in the First
world wat the Central Tower matted at the very let to percent mor
casualties upon the Allies than vice versa and when the comparison is
made between German and Allied troops the disproportionate success of
the former increases. For example, Dupuy suggests that German trices
Were 20 per cent more effective than either the British or the American
troops 18 The implication is that even before the SS and the Nazi ideol-
sy took hold, the German troops were more effective than the Allied
troops - and had already demonstrated ut is in the previous war.
whatever the truth of the situational suctions may nave been there
Is nue doubt that, uttere the test of the wearner, the Do we ontar
rentation Manifested itself in many ways, not kit in the appearance
of the SS. The 12t/-, Panzer Division Hitlerjugend (Ff) that fought so
effectively in Normandy were ald wed to wear their hair much longer
