328
COMMANDING IN CRISES
carriers had obviously not trained under 'realistic' conditions because these
could not be reproduced without endangering the lives of all concerne.
Thus, once the anti-aircraft flak started, many of the pilots increased speed.
from the 90-mph they were supposed to drop the paratroopers at, to
around 150-mph. They also began flying as erratically and as low as poss-
bie to avoid being hit; often lower than the 600-700 feet regarded as the
minimum safe height. Additionally, fog, low cloud cover and inexperienced
plots all contributed to a very wide dispersal pattern across the cotentin
peninsular, not helped by the pathfinder groups, which were to guide the
main body of troops in, often being off course in the first place. For
instance, only one of the 18 US pathfinder teams landed on their targets,
with one landing in the channel." The consequence, of course, was that
neither the pilots nor the paratroopers knew where they were any longer,
Jump patterns minored the chaos and many of the weapons and
ammunition bags attached to the paratroopers broke loose.
Some soldiers from the 82nd Airborne Division, who were supposed
to land further east of the 10lst Airborne Division, were dropped in the
wrong a completely, landing amongst troops from the toast did nee
indeed it has been claimed thatman per cent of the 15,000
susan Paranoopers landed so far from their targets that they playe
no effective part in any of the planned attacks. 12 Many landed in the
flooded areas, particularly behind Utah Beach near the Merderet River
which although often little more than a metre deep in water, was deep
cough to drown many paratroopers weighed down by up to 100lbs of
equipment and smothered by their own parachutes.
The intelligence
report in April 1944 had merely suggested that the ground was "proba-
bly soft' but the area had been flooded in July 1943.
Major-General Ridgeway was always well aware of the chaos that
attended an airborne landing - and hence the need for strong command-
infantry unit:
compared to the managed order accorot anying a conventona
The infantry unit goes into battle with its commteications and its command struc
ture at its best. The radios are all functioning, the command chain is intact. The
commander knows where all his people are, and what's happening to them, and he
ecrese an excellent degree or control. the exact opposite is true or an airport.
division. When its people hit the ground they are individuals, and a two star general
and Pfc [Private first class) are on exactly the same basis. You have no communica-
tions whatsoever for some little time, particularly when you have jumped at night.
You don't know where you are. You don't know who's around you, friend or foe.
Similarly during the Sicily drop on 9 July 1943 the 3,400 paratroop-
ers under Brigadier-General James M. Gavin (later second in command
THE AIRBORNE ASSAULTS
329
of the 82nd under Ridgeway) landed in a random pattern that did little
to assist the main assaults on the beaches.
Indeed, in a prequel to the
Normandy drop, within 4 hours of the airdrop on Sicily only 20 para-
troopers had arrived at Gavin's rendezvous point. The result confirmed
to Eisenhower that airdrops were
inherently problematic.
As he
concluded in September 1944, just three months after the drop: I do
not believe in the airborne division ... I seriously doubt that a division
commander could regain control and operate the scattered forces as one
unit' * Marshall, however, could not have been more enthusiastic, a be
siegesting at one time that the main Normandy attack should be
arone, while the amphibious assault should be merely supplemen-
tary 5 The hazard were not necessarily restricted to the high casualties
wat Leigh-Mallory expected but meusurfly in that the drops would
not be able to achieve the accuracy they needed to execute their respec.
ave missions. For many, though not for all, this proved to be the case. I
the 505th PIR was supposed to land around eight miles south of ste
Mere Eglisc, but some of them landed right in the middle of the towne
including Private John Steele whose famous landing on the steeple of the
church is still commemorated today. Steele was a member ofF co. sust
rik and six or seven of the others were killed in the air or immediate
of landing, Private Kenneth E Russell also hit the church and was
stranded on a lower part of the root, though he managed to cut himself
free and escaped. 17
In fact only one battalion sized unit remained intact from the
American drops - Vandervoort's 2nd Battalion of the 505th - and with
he help of this unit the 3rd Battalion under Lt-Col. Krause took ste
Mere-Eglise at 0400 from German defenders who had assumed the
initial assault was all that there was. The first French town had been liber
ated. The Americans went on to culothe Cherbourg Carentah road.""
Meanwhile Ridgeway had landed alone and the first person he mer was
Captain Willard Folmer - the same
person he had met first when
Ridgeway had jumped in Sicily. As Ridgeway himself later commented
aDout his own position near Ste-Mère Eglise (which was almost exactl
where he had planned to set it up): "The Germans were all around us, OF
course, sometimes within 500 yards of my command post, but, in the
herce and confused fighting that was going on all about, they did not
launch the strong attack that could have wiped out our sooner peame
ter defence'. "Command post' is probably something of an exasocia
tion: according to Sergeant Leonard Lebenson, when he arrived, there
Were only six people for Ridgeway to command.
Ridgeway's scattered troops from One 82nd were unable to mount
any major attack upon German positions but tronically the ver the
