286
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
evident in France but despite the role of the Panzer Mk Is with their
75mm guns, a deal was signed between Knudsen (ex-General Motors),
the head of US military production, and Keller, head of Chrysler, for
1,000 M2Als - a marginally improved variant of the already obsolete
M2s; fortunately Chaffee cancelled the order with almost his first deci-
sion. Chaffee replaced the order with one for 1,000 M3s (called the
Grant in the USA and the Lee in Britain), an up-gunned variant of the
M2A1, now carrying a 75mm gun. But the only comparison between the
US and German 75mm was the calibre, for the American version was 2
low velocity gun based originally on the 1897 French field gun and its
penetrative power was limited. Nevertheless, over 6,000 M3s were built
between 1941 and 1942.
Chaffee recognized the M3 was only a stop-gap vehicle and he simu
taneously ordered the design for what was to become the M4, the
Sherman. But so much design work was required to turn the M3 into an
acceptable tank that designing the M4 did not formally begin until April
1941. Given the obvious necessity to develop the M4 at speed, as many
elements of the Ms as possible were incorporated into the design and
that limited the possibility of up-gunning the vehicle easily because the
turret ring remained basically the same size. But by May 1941 a wooden
mock-up had been built, by September 1941 it was in prototype form,
and by July Me production began delivering the first of 40,000 finished
The M4 also provided the gun carriage for many variants of vehicles.
throwers (not used until July 1944 on Guam) and mine-
clearers to the M10 Gun Motor Carriage Or Tank Destroyer, or the M36
90mm up-gunned variety, the Wolverine. However, the tank destroyer
also symbolized the confusion on the part of the US as to the role of
tanks, for it set in aspic the assumption that the main effort should be
spent on developing the Sherman and this was never designed to engage
enemy tanks. 86
-Production facilities were certainly not the problem for Detroit could
- and did - churn out tanks faster than the Wehrmacht could destroy
Altogether the US produced 88J5,0l tanks during the war, the
British produced around 30,000, and the Soviet Union about 105,000,
against the German production tgeal of 62,000.87 So the Tame
Problem of production had indeed been resolved by the Allies. Nor was
the inability to make and execute quick decisions the problem: the conver
sion of ordinary
Sherman tanks to their amphibious DD format was
ordered and organized by the British in July 1943. Yet by January1944
British factories had converted so few that Hobart arranged a demonstra-
tion of their abilities to Eisenhower. On 27 January 1944 Eisenhower
TECHNOLOGIES
287
watched the demonstration and the following day an engineer left with
the drawings for the USA. Within a week US factories were converting
their own Shermans as they came off the production tracks, and within
two months 300 DD Shermans were completed. 88 The failure was more
one of politics, imagination and Leadership.
It is a commonplace to assume that, irrespective of the cultural
predilections of the US military and its search for a mechanical horse
rather than a tank-buster, the Sherman led the invasion on D-Day
because it was the only tank available at the time. Thus, although the
M26 Pershing proved to be a superior tank and the only Western Allied
lank capable of taking on the Panther and Tiger with equanimity, its
design came too late. This, as I shall suggest, is simply wrong. The
Sherman was chosen for political and cultural reasons at a time when the
Pershing was already available and could have been produced in large
numbers to lead the Normandy invasion. It was not an inevitability, then,
that the D-Day troops landed with inadequate armoured leadership in
the form of tanks, it was the direct result of Leadership decisions.
Forty certainly suggests that the Shermans were designed to cope with
conditions that would involve crossing 'innumerable rivers on temporary
bridges because the original ones would be destroyed. Thus their tanks
could not be too heavy' 89 Moreover, he continues, the US used tanks in
long range penetrations of enemy lines to destroy their lines of supply, for
which speed and mechanical reliability were more important than
strength and shooting power.? But this smacks of rationalization for the
Sherman was designed when there was little in US strategic planning
osest that they were ever designed for western europe after brug
destruction. Anyway, even if this were the case, one wonders why the
Germans never realized the utility of such lightweight tanks, and why the
Us eventually decided to put the heavy M26 Pershing into production
cowards the end of the war and managed - by the ready siple
process of lashing large
Allied tank across water fontoons together - to get even the heavies
Since the M4 Sherman was spece-cally designed not to fight enemy
tanks it had just 75 mm of armour plating, and usually had a low veloc-
ity 75-mm gun that could not penetrate the frontal armour of a German
Tiger tank at all. Nevertheless, because the Sherman was designed to race
through enemy lines it was fitted with a gyro-stabilizer enabling the gun
to be fired accurately whilst on the move - something no German tank
could do. But being able to hit targets on the move was irrelevant it
either the target wasn't moving or the rounds simply bounced off - as
wust rounds from the Sherman's 75mme un did, It was not, untortur
nately, the same the other way round.
