154
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
7.2 Leadership and mobilization in Britain:
tardy but total
It is often said that, with the exception of the American War of
Independence, the British have never lost a major war. That is probably
true, but it is also true that the British have never won a major war on
their own either. They have always had to rely on alliances and European
armies, usually paid for by British finance. The reason is primarily to be
understood through an acknowledgement of the British establishment's
paranoia about a standing army, such as that which ruled England under
Cromwell's republican Commonwealth in the 17th century. British
Surements an of pontical persuasions had long accepted Luat a stand
ing army was a political threat and hence unacceptable. It was abo
considered to be economically ruinous.! That historical tradition
pervaded right through to the twenticth century and hence any changes
in modern warfare were always subjected to attack by the other three
ams of defence: the Royal Air Force, the Royal Navy and a strong econ
omy. The consequent combination of financial rectitude by the govern-
Jun ane political weakness of the British army ensured that the army
was always last in the line for funding. In turn, that pushed the army lio
adopting a defensive strategy?
really envisage being able to wage war on the continent of Europe. And
without a continental commitment there had been no necessity for any
of the plants or battig that should have accompanied it. 1 his cultural
deters /eness, supported by the tradition of defending the Empire rather
system of joint battalions (one at home'S id one in the Empire - often
naid, where 0,000 british troops were stationed in the 1950s) 01s5l*
pated whatever strength the British tr, my ever had. On the other hand
the shits terntonals or reserve organizaties, first created in 1y0s,
ensured - le like their US equivalent, the National Guard units - that
part-time soldiers were linked to, rathsh than divorced from, their profes
sonal equivaient. Thus many british rees ments during the Second WOr
Vish r comprisca battalions of Regulars and Territorials, though as the wa
progressed the division between them evaporated. Sometimes battalions
or the same regiment served togetricbut often they were separated.
For the two years after Dunkirk on four British divisions were
engaged in war with the Germans, hence experience and learning by
oops and their leaders was minimal. It was not really until the battle
r, cle in May 1yt1 that any signiticant casualties were intlicted by the
MOBILIZING ANGLO-CANADIANS, COMMONWEALTH, VOLUNTEERS
155
British on the Germans. Then, almost 4,000 German paratroopers were
killed and 2,000 injured, and despite fewer Allied
casualties (3,479
British, New Zealand and Australian troops), the island fell. Crete was
the last time the German army deployed large numbers of paratroopers
from the air but it also marked a familiar pattern of superior German
tactics and morale.
Royal Air Force had acquired considerable political and financial support
for its offensive bomber doctrine. But that offensive spirit did not prevail
in the army and it still did not envisage fighting a war on continental
Europe, despite all the evidence that this was probably inevitable given
Hitler's ascent. Thus the "Ten-Year Rule', passed every year from 1919
to 1933, forbade any preparation for landing an army in Europe, and
government approval from Prime Minister Chamberlain for such an
expedition did not arrive until March 1939, by when it was far too late
to expect the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force alone to ensure peace
The British government need not have been caught so unaware
because from 1925 onwards the General Staff of the British Army had
warned its political controllers that a European presence was the only way
to guarantee British not just French security. After all, ran the argument?
if the Germans occupied Belgium they would have just 40 miles of
hostile air space to navigate their way to London while the RAF would
nave three times as far to go to German territory. the consequence of the
failure to consider the strategic necessity of a European presence was that
virtually no preparation work was carried out by the time the BEF were
sent to France in 1939. Indeed, only three divisions were ready and in a
prequel to the Dunkirk evacuation by civilian ships, the soldiers had to
be transported by 14,000 impressed civilian vehicles because the army
had virtually no transport of its own.® In 1914, in contrast, the BEF had
managed to send five divisions.
A parallel case can also be made by comparing the expenditure
deployed towards social services and the military in 1913 and 1933. In
1913, 30 per cent of government expenditure went to the social services
and 30 per cent to the military; by 1933 the corresponding figures were
17 per cent and 11 per cent. Just after the First World War the govern-
ment had spent £760 million on defence, by 1932 the figure had sunk to
£102 million? This inadequacy north aney itself most clearly on the
ground in terms of the parsimony that paralysed the army: between 1955
and 1938, when every other European country was mobilizing for war,
