128
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
by the Luftwaffe's Iuftflotte 3, led by Hugo Sperrle under Goering. In
May 1944 Rommel tried to persuade Goering to move the 88mm guns
of the 3rd Flak Corps closer to the beaches but - fortunately for the Allies
- he
failed. * The division, nay the confusion, of command reached
absurd levels in some areas, for example, control over the coastal batter-
les remained in the hands of the German navy but only as long as the
invading troops remained at sea, once they had landed responsibility
passed to the Wehrmacht.
Yet the division of responsibilities was not the only issue - what
mattered was how the forces were to be deployed, and here there was a
sharp difference of
opinion between those favouring a hard shell
response, such as Rommel, and those favouring a soft shell approach,
such as von Rundstedt. As we shall see, the bocage areas that so bedev-
illed the American advance through Normandy, also made German
armoured counter attacks problematic. Indeed, Copp (2006) argues that
te needed datare of derman responses to lost ground - a mined
ate counter attack - demonstrates how little German tactical thought
developed in mommandy because it was always predictable and ustay
met by an ailed arulery barrage. However, the philosophy or an imme
diate counter attack at least allowed relatively low-level commanders to
ate sued a respise without rele eo superior commanders - as
Major Fans von Luck did during Operation Goodwood (Melvin, 2000.
in tact the countryside was ideal for defence but not for attack Dy
ce sae - did even it the German armour could be concentrated there
was no signitant Lufwaffe presence to defend it from Allied air attack.
let the close support of armoured divisions to support the derenders
wherever the Allies landed was vital, for Rommel assumed that howeve
strong his defensive wall was it could only delay but not prevent an Allied
landing. However, this delay would allow the concentration of armoured
divisions to defeat the invasion not inland as von Rundstedt insisted, but
on the beaches, for Rommel assumo'I that Allied air superiority would
render the mobilization of armour from ped tions beyond the reach of
the Allied warships impossible. For Roner el, the enemy's weakest
moment is when he lands. The men are urd ertain, possibly seasick. The
terrain is unfamiliar. Sufficient heavy weapons are ot yet available.
must defeat them at that moment ... The invasion will be decided on the
each and in the first twenty-four hours'.* Thus Rommel became
rosessed with streng lening the coastal dels ces, even at the expense of
tated leper an asion and even if it meant - as it did - taking
almost! tank crews out of their tanks to pour cement into bunkers, with
the excepton of the 2ist Panzers who insisted on offensive training not
GERMAN STRATEGY: HARD SHELL, SOFT SHELL
129
defensive building. 46 As far as Bayerlain, commander of Panzer Lebr, 47
was concerned he was at one with Rommel for:
There is a real danger that when the invasion does come we will be caught in the
wrong place ... Rommel insists the Bay of Seine is the most likely spot for a land-
ing. I am sure he will be proved correct ... I fear if they [the Allies] are allowed
to build up sufficient strength in matériel and manpower they will overwhelm us.
They are capable in time of fielding a huge army on the continent. As to the
British, I know them from experience. We are in for a tough fight. Even though
For their part, the British had already assumed that Rommel's strategy
would be rooted in a hard shell style. Montgomery accepted his Chief
Intelligence Officer's (Brigadier Williams) assessment that Rommel
would try to hold the Allies on the beachhead for 'he is too impulsive for
the set-piece battle'49 and more importantly, because his intention is to
deny any penetration: Overlord is to be defeated on the beaches'. If that
talled Rommel would try to 'rope us off' in the Bocage." Unfortunately,
Montgomery does not seem to have considered what the latter remark
entailed. Nevertheless he was convinced that Rommel had neither
enough good quality soldiers to hold up the invasion on the beach, nor
did Hitler allow him enough tanks to support his strategy, nor did the
Rommel had spoken to Bayerlein on 12 May 1944 about the problem,
You have no idea how difficult it is to convince these people (at OKW). At one
time they looked on mobile warfare as something to keep clear of at all costs, but
now that our freedom of manoeuvre in the West is gone, they're all crazy after it.
Whereas, in fact, it's obvious that if the enemy once gets his foot in, he'll put every
anti-tank gun and tank he can into the bridgehead and let us beat our heads
against it, as he did at Medenine. To break through such a front you have to attack
slowly and methodically, under cover of massed artillery, but we, of coursc, thanks
to the Allied air forces, will have nothing there in time. The day of the dashing
cut-and thrust tank attack of the carly war years is past and gone. 51
The 21st Division's Lt General Feuchtinger was another adherent to
has cause, concerned that his unit had lost too many good soldiers
in Africa and Russia.
But he was also concerned,
ironically, that the
Patchwork of farms and villages in Normandy prevented his unit from
realistic tank training. Thus he had been unable to practice large scale
nanoeuvres, even though such tactics were extemely unlikely in the
region. Nevertheless, he too was certain that the invasion must be
defeated on the beaches'. 52
