162
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
neither of the latter two divisions worked well in Normandy. As General
Roberts surmised: I think there can be no doubt whatsoever that
Monty's principle of including experienced formations and units in the
invasion force was unsound; much better results would have been
achieved if fresh formations, available in England, had been used in their
place'. 20
Sometimes a change in leadership appeared to resolve a morale prob-
lem amongst a veteran unit. For instance, the CO of the 51st Division,
Bullen-Smith, was dismissed in Normandy by Montgomery in the
middle of July 1944. At that time Montgomery even considered sending
the entire division back to England for retraining.
Bullen-Smith was
replaced by Rennie who managed to bring the division back up to
scratch, though Rennie was subsequently killed in 1945, the only British
divisional officer to die in the 1944-5 European campaign. Even the
50th Division which performed adequately in Normandy (it lost 6,630
casualties in the entire Normandy campaign - the second highest of any
British division (3rd Division suffered the most)) had suffered from pre-
invasion problems: in its New Forest encampment just prior to D-Day
over 1,000 soldiers had gone AWOL (absent without leave).27
For his part Hitler was unimpressed by the British or the Americans.
Even the Americans regarded the British as preferring to exhibit parade
ground discipline over martial qualities, and of displaying an arrogance
towards their American colleagues that was rooted in class snobbery but
never professional superiority. The feelings were often mutual: the British
did indeed consider the Americans as crass, as unprofessional and as over-
reliant upon the matériel of war. To the British, the American Gils were
betweensy rewarded - though this also reflected the greater differentials
between soldiers and officers in the British Army. The standard pay of al
US soldier was twice that of the British equivalent, and at the level of
private with three years'
service an American earned £200 per year
compared to the British private's €55. An Ordinary Seaman in the British
navy earned even less at £33.28 Equally significant, a British lieutenant-
colonel carned 14 times the pay of a British private; the equivalent
American lieutenant-colonel earned just 4.5 times the pay of an American
private.29 In effect, A British lieutenant-colonel -
normally the most
senior 'combat' officer (actually leadiras troops in the field) - received 86
percent of the US equivalent. A British private received just 28 per cent
of the US equivalent. It was not, thof, that all US soldiers and officers
were overpaid but rather than all British 'other ranks' were grossly under-
paid. The real problem lay in the British class distinctions as much as the
Abode abond asanenons. Nevertheles o the average Drust
squaddie, the Americans really were: 'Ig er-paid, over-fed, over-sexed and
MOBILIZING ANGLO-CANADIANS, COMMONWEALTH, VOLUNTEERS
163
over-here' 30 The GI response was that the British were: 'Under-paid,
under-sized, under-sexed and under-Eisenhower'.
The sexual competition to British men from male American troops,
and indeed, the general relaxation of moral codes of conduct, proved to
be a constant source of concern in the private letters of the male British
troops (as read by their censoring officers). One consequence was an
eight fold increase in the divorce rate, partly linked to another conse-
quence: over one third of all births in England were illegitimate during
the war 31 As Reveille (24 May 1942) pleaded with British service
women: "Do be discreet. Even if you paint the town red with Harry on
your last 48-hour leave, don't write and tell Dick about it'. But the fears
of many British service men - that the Americans would 'make off' with
their women - were not totally unfounded: 70,000 British women went
A related issue was the social distance between the officers and
soldiers, especially those in the intantry regiments - the most likely to
become casualties. While the senior officers were in all probability the
products of public school, the riflemen came from the opposite end of
sayue spectrum. Because the ranks of the kar, the signals, the
tankers, the artillery and any other specialized branch of the mintary
dways had first choice of the new recruits, what was left over joined the
mantry. Brigadier Bidwell remeng soyur ing told by a fellow orcer
about the problems of controlling such people: 'Look, all that I can do
With my men, the sort of men I have, is to persuade them to get out of
their holes in the ground, march up to the objective, dig a hole there,
and get into it' 33 Under such circumstances, he insisted, fraternizing
With them or assuming they would be able to use their initiative was
simply a recipe for disaster. Discipline, rather than battle traming
then, was the only thing that could guarantee success. Ine same hier
archical system occurred in the American army but it was, paradoxically,
an inversion of the approach that drove the Wehrmacht, and a great
irony that the democratic nations should generate such a hierarchical
army while the authoritarian nation generated a more heterarchical
Above all, the British Army relied on contrr-and preparation because
that was what it deemed essential to victory. This was not novel; indeed,
part of the lame approach is to rely upon precedent that appeas to mave
worked before: in 1926 a training manual had emphasized that anything
which lessened control was counter-productive. And victory relied upon
traditions that had won the last war: the tank would operate primarily as
of alry or in support of infantry held up by enemy infantry. Thus all the
lessons of the mobility and independence movement achieved by tank
