246
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
there were some particular headaches that veered towards the Wicked
end. For instance, the immense amount of fuel that would be needed and
the carly assumptions about the danger of air attack, jeopardized the
conventional use of oil tankers. The solution was the PLUTO project
(Pipe Line Under The Ocean). A three inch pipeline - codenamed
- was unravelled from a huge
floating drum called
Tweedledum, and the initial construction involved a 12-mile pipeline
being pulled by HMS Conundrum and a tug from Poole Bay to a pump-
ing station on Shanklin, the Isle of Wight, in March 1944 to test its feasi-
bility.53 This armoured pipeline supplied 600 tons of fuel per day
through Port en Bessin and was subsequently supplemented by four
pipelines from the Shell-Mex/BP storage depot at Hamble, through
Lepe to the Isle of Wight, and on to Cherbourg. 54 Eventually these were
2. Splemented by 17 lines between Dungeness and Calais that supplical
2,500 tons of fuel per day.55 Such vast quantities were certainly needed:
during July the AEAF used almost 1 million gallons of fuel a day. ° Late,
fiel could be unloaded as far away as Liverpool and pumped directly to
Cherbourg but initially the mine fields and the destruction of Cherbours
harbour prevented the direct pumping of fuel until 18 September, and by
20 September Ostend was opened for direct unloading of fuel by tanket.
in all, 112 million gallons of fuel were piped through
The heaviest user was probably the 3rd US Armoured Division. lis
4,200 vehicles driven by 17,000 soldiers swallowed 300,000 gallons cach
time it prepared for combat and that meant re-supplying the entire Allied
army required a rolling refuelling › leum ure. In effect, endless lines or
trucks with 200 five-gallon cans struggled between the pipelines and the
ront lines. But for all the technical ingenuty involved in supplyne
liquid fuel, the really Wicked Problem lay in unloading the millions of
tons of venicies, ammunition, food, guns and supplies in Normandy. i,
as the Dieppe raid suggested, and as turned out to be the case,
cherbours was going to be rendered inoperable for several months, no
on earth were the Allies going to maintain the logistics chain?
10.5 The Mulberries
morgan had calculated that it would take at least two weeks to capture
Cherbourg after landing in Normase, ly and that a further two to three
months would be required to repair tler facilities. With storms in the
channel a common occurrence, an a with good weather for more than
four days at a time an unlikely edent, the Wicked Problem was how could
MANAGING LOGISTICS: 'BAG, VOMIT, ONE!'
247
the troops and supplies be supplied and reinforced across open beaches?
the answer was to take one or two ports with them - an idea that was
greeted with hoots of laughter
when it was first broached by
Mountbatten in the spring of I942.59 These were the artificial Mulberry
The problem of building artificial harbours tall enough to accommo-
date ships, and cope with the 24 foot tides off Normandy, was resolved
by developing floating harbours from the original ideas of Lt
Commander Robert Lochner and Commodore Hughes-Hallett (leader
of the successful St Nazaire raid). Churchill also claimed to have
proposed the idea first in 1917 for an amphibious landing in Flanders.60
in fact, the idea of a floating caisson, or "floating dock', which could be
lowered to suit the size of a ship was already in circulation in 1811, when
plans for a Wrought Iron Caisson' weighing 350 tons, 220 foot long, 64
feet wide and 30 foot deep, were made available in the British Naval
Chronicle. 61 The plans even involved constructing the dock in smaller
sections and transporting them abroad. So much for original thought.
• neum appear to be original, though, was Churchill's addition to a
note concerning the piers by the Chief of Combined Operations, dated
They must float up and down with the tide.
The anchor problem must be
mastered. The ships must have a side-flap cut in them, and a drawbridge long
enough to overreach the moorings of the piers. Let me have the best solution
wost d out. Don't argue the matter. The difficulties will argue for themselves. 62
in tact, we lea of anchoring these noats harbours to the sed was
drawn from the experience of the dredger Lucayan which had survived a
hurricane in the Banamas by using three 8y foot legs, called spuas' to
anchor the vessel to the sea floor.63
initially the War Office took charge of the product but the decision Lo
buld two complete artificial harbours was not made until September
1943. That was after Professor John Bestial, one of Mountbatten's scien-
ufic advisers, and Lt David Grant of the Royal Navy, used a Mae West
ficial harbour. 04
bound for the Quebec conferenof, to demonstrate the viability of an arti-
lifebelt, some paper boats and a bath tub on board the Queen Mary liner
commence until December 1943.
The conference approved the idea but work did not
With less than seven months to
se, pete the task (on the initial assumption that 1 ay was b-bay) tie
building began before the designs were completed.
As the design work progressed the complexity increased. The system
was designed to unload 12,000 tons of stores and 1,250 vehicles through
