122
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
›stem in depth. The German army in the First World War had developed
'Defence in Depth' tactics in which, rather than provide a thickly popu-
lated and defended front line - a hard shell — they installed an array of
between four and seven increasingly well defended lines - sometimes as
much as ten miles deep. This soft shell made the possibilities of a clear
"breakthrough' increasingly difficult and costly. 16 In Normandy,
although less than a quarter of the materials devoted to the Pas de
Calais region were used to build up the defences, similar German tactics
were adapted to the local conditions: the 'thin' German front line
would allow the allies past them and only when they had reached the
second or third line would the ambush from the first line begin. As
Reynoldsl7
concludes, 'this type of innovative thinking made great
demands on the German troops, particularly in terms of personal disci-
pline, but it had a devastating effect on the Allies. The defence in depth
approach also ensured that whenever the Allies came up against any
German opposition it was never clear to the attackers whether it was the
first elements of a deep soft shell or simply a few isolated defenders;
whatever it was, the Allies tended to halt and call up an artillery barrage
di ground-attack aircraft to clear the defenders rather than to push
through them.
As Badsey18
suggests,
'Defending
hedgerows and farmhouses gave the Germans a massive advantage in
close-quarters fighting, and as casualties rose so did the temptation to
rely on firepower: "never send a man Where you can send a bomb or a
bullet" became the motto of many'
While von Rundstedt was responsible for overall military control in
Normandy, on 31 December 1943 Rommel was appointed Inspector
Sieneral of Defences in the West, thus adding a third element of contur
sion to the one that saw von Rundstedt and Hitler in competition for
contro. Rommel submitted a highly critical report after his initial inspec-
tion of the wall and suggested that The focus of the enemy landing oper-
area will probably be directed against the 15th Armee sector, largely
because it is from this sector that much of our long range attacks (the v-
1) on England and central London will be launched 1' Rommel was also
convinced that the invaders had to be destroyed on the beachhead if they
were to be beaten and certain about the nature of the problem. I have
only one real enemy now', he told his aide Captain Lang,
"and that is
time' 20 Given the refusal of Hiter to allocate all the available Panzer
units to him, Rommel felt he had little choice but to concentrate on
strengthening the static defences and he imn a liately instigated several
improvements to the
Atlantic Wall. These included: mining
beaches, flooding of the surrounding areas, ne proving coastal fortifica-
tions, especially concrete bunkers oid resistance nests', constructing
GERMAN STRATEGY: HARD SHELL, SOFT SHELL
123
beach obstacles to impede armoured landings, and constructing field
obstacles of tall poles to prevent glider landings ('Rommel's asparagus' as
it became known). But two months later, in March 1944, Rommel's
report on the defences remained pessimistic: 'Our defence line, thin as it
is at present, will suffer severely from the enemy bombing and artillery
bombardment and it seems very doubtful whether, after this battering, it
will be capable of beating off the enemy, whose forces will be approach-
ing over a wide front, in hundreds of armoured assault craft and landing
craft and under cover of darkness or fog' 21
Rommel's original plan called for 50 million poles and 1,000 metre-
deep minefields around the entire coastline using 20 million mines,
sometimes with 10 mines per metre22 and although by D-Day only 4
million mines were in situ, along with 500,000 anti-invasion obstacles,
Rommel had already suggested that by the middle of May he was more
confident than ever before'. Indeed, in April he had admitted that he was
satisfied with the beach defences along the coast at the Pas de Calais -
but he not happy with those in Normandy. Nonetheless, the erection of
beach defences forced the Allies to reconsider the assault. Ironically,
given Rommel's assumptions about the problems he would face with a
night time or fog bound assault, he also forced the Allies to switch from
a night to a dawn attack to minimize the casualties caused by the new
defences. The defences also persuaded Montgomery to move the timing
of the landing from high tide - which would minimize the run across the
sand to the defenders - to a midway point between high and low tide.
This would allow the landing craft to see the otherwise submerged
defences while limiting the length of the run across the beaches.
Furthermore, there would now need to be large numbers of combat
engineers who could disarm the defences before the main assault was
carried out and the whole invasion would be led - rather than followed
- by armoured assault vehicles.23
The depth defensive scheme in Normandy involved three lines and
extended up to six miles inland from the beach. The first line was the
beach itself complete with its obstacles, mines, anti-tank ditches and
beach defenders. The second was the network of strong-points up to six
miles inland, sited to over look
- and hold-up- any infantry breaking
through the first line of beach defences. This network was incomplete
by D-Day - despite Rommel's attempt to spur on the work by giving
out prizes of harmonicas and accordions to any unit completing its tasks
ahead of schedule. For example, none existed behind Omaha while the
Brêche d'Hermanville.
nvaders at Sword Beach had to get past Hillman, two miles inland of la
built still astonished the Allies: in just four days over 2,000 yards of
But the speed with which the defences were
