182
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
lives were likely to be the only ones that were expendable. This seldom
generated a politically motivated desire to rid Europe of Nazism but it
did encourage two important explanations for the eventual motivation of
the Gils: to get the job done and go home as fast as possible, and to
protect those individuals in their particular "band of brothers'. That cata-
pulted the local combat Leadership to a critical point for it was the
ergeants and the captains that kept these bands going and we shal
examine this in the final part of the book. But it also important to note
the crucial role of the national leadership,
not just Roosevelt and
Marshall, but also the Secretary at the
Department,
Robert
Patterson, in constructing the strategy. In effect Leadership was mos
significant at the top of the hierarchy where the construction of the strat-
oy occurred and Command was most important for the executi
of tactics at the bottom of the hierarchy. In between day the role o
Management in mobilizing the resources.
A furthos issue to consider is, once again, the role of experience, ori
the American case the lack of it, on D-Day. This had two consequences
and both were important for the tactical level: first, few combat offices
or sergeants had accumulated the experience to improve their command
skills but, second, those troops that had experienced amphibious land
ings in North Africa and Italy were, if anything, more fearful than their
greenhorn' colleagues. As a result, the novice troops performed rela
tively well in their baptism of fire but the novice leaders were often less
successful - assuming they survived the landing, for the Germans quickly
recognized just how vulnerable Alliere troops were to the loss of the
formal leaders and concentrated their fire upon them. As a result there
was often not enough time under combat conditions for the othcers and
sergeants to learn how to lead.
8.2 Mobilization: the 10 per cent rule
Churchill recognized very early on the war that for a successful assault
upon Germany the material strengtin of the USA was necessary - but
America was even worse prepared tn n Britain was. In 193), When war
broke out, the Us was what Forty describes as a third rate military
power. It had 174,000 troops in only (livisions? of which only thie
existed beyond good intentions and paper. Historically, like the brus
Army, the American Army had been limits to minimal significance for
Olitical reasons. But while the British establishment had feared the
pde er of a standing army ever since Cromwell's republic, in the US, any
armed group was considered a threat to every citizen.
Thus in 1894
MOBILIZING THE AMERICANS: TECHNOLOGY AND ICEBERG
183
When an attempt had been made to increase the size of the army the bill
had been easily defeated by the 'deep seated assumption that 30,000
men, enlisted from citizens of the Republic, would be a menace to
70,000.000 of their fellow citizens? + Supporting the army were 200,000
troopers of the National Guard whose training involved one evening a
week and a fortnight's field exercise a year, using rifles even more
outdated than the 1903 Springfield rifles used by the regulars. Beyond
these were the 100,000 members of the Organized Reserves, primarily
graduates of the Reserve Officers Training Corps. Beyond these there
was nothing.
President Franklin D. Roosevelt declared a limited national emergency
on & September 1939 and authorised the expansion of the regular army
to 227,000, and by May 1940 the first Corps strength manoeuvres took
pace. The Selective Service and Training Act of 1940 introduced the
basic conscription requirements into the US - the first US peacetime
draft - and by 16 October 1940 16.4 million men between 21 and 35
were listed. Initially, they were on the draft list for one year's service
(extended to 18 months in August 1941).
Each of the 6,500 local draft boards was authorized to defer call-ups
to all those deemed to fall outside the primary catchment area. These
deferrals comprised older men, men under 20 (though 18 and ! year
Olds could volunteer), those with disabilities, and those working in 'crit-
ical occupations'. The results for a unit like the 29th Division was that
Older guardsmen and those with critical civilian jobs were retired and the
division was formally mobilized on 3 February 1941 for a 12-month
period of duty (extended in July 1941 through the Services Extension
Act by a further six months). By the time the division was operative, over
half of the previous members had been retired.5
Besides the 100,000 army reserve officers that had been trained to
some degree there were 242,000 in the National Guard, of whom 14,500.
were officers and these were called up for one year on 17 August 1940.
The existing numbers of officers were supplemented by those selected for
Officer Candidate Schools from 194l after six months in the ranks.®
By January 1941 the US could muster 75,000 combat troops ready
for action but this increased rapidly so that as July arrived so did the
maximum total permitted by the legislation at that time: 1.4 milion in
36 divisions. The attack on Pearl Harbour on 7 December 1941, in
which the US suffered 3,581 casualties and lost 18 warships, boosted the
› purpgreater and quicker expansion of the armed forces. Indeed, IL
was not until Pearl Harbour that the L puregation fully threw its weignt
behind calls to gear up for war. That it eventually did, owed much to the
Under Secretary at the War lans ›artment, Kobert Fatterson.'
