LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
86
attack would be at the Pas de Calais and that 70-80 divisions would be
involved - precisely what the German High Command suspected and
precisely wrong.!2 All this was supported by 'helpful' photographs
published in the National Geographic showing soldiers with fictional
shoulder badges. 13
The persuasive utility of the ruse can be gleaned not only from the
action - or rather inaction - of the German forces outside Normandy in
June 1944, but in the planning that explained this. In May 1944 a
German map (captured later in Italy) marked the British order of battle
almost exactly as Fortitude South predicted. The ruse was supplemented
by the information provided by the double agents Garbo and Brutus that
we shall consider shortly.
The attempt to confuse the Germans even involved some British units
being issued with coupons to draw tropical clothing. This, it appears, was
just to persuade any German informants in Britain that many of the land-
ing craft on the move prior to D-Day were heading to the Far East or to
the Mediterranean rather than to France.14
The first plan for Fortitude was delivered on 4 September 1943 and,
after seven revisions, it went before the British Chiefs of Staff on 20
November 1943. Once the Teheran Conference had agreed the overall
strategy the final plan was accepted on Christmas Day 1943. 'Bodyguard'
was the codename for the overall strategic deception and Fortitude was
one element of this, albeit the main element, and was accepted on 26
February 1944.
The alleged assault on the Pas de Calais was planned to occur in July.
Thus the German troops in Norway would be delayed there until it was
too late to intervene in Normandy (it was calculated that the journey
would take at least three weeks) and the 15th Army would have to
reman in northern France irrespective of what happened in Normandy
on the assumption that when the assault in Normandy occurred it would
To persuade the Germans that the main assault would occur at the Pas
de Calais radio traffic was conducted to stimulate the activities of the
divisions allegedly involved. In February 1944 the British No. 5 Wireless
Group the War Office (Signals 9) was formed. All signals were recorded
in advance and a device was developeckio multiply the number of signals
six-fold. Thus a single truck could represent the signals traffic of an entire
division. The following month the US 3103 Signals Service Battalion
used mobile communications units to simulate traffic.
Between the two groups the radio traffic for nine divisions was gener-
ated, and three naval signals units representing radio signals between and
within the naval assault units. In fact only 256 dummy landing craft were
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
87
deployed in support of Fortitude South, in addition to a few dummy
aircraft. The rest of the deception comprised the false information - and
that included explaining why so few landing craft were ready for the 'real'
assault. Usually that involved suggesting that industrial relations disputes
in America would put back the invasion date yet again and that the inva-
sion would probably be delayed until after the expected Soviet offensive
in late summer 1944.15
As we have seen, Wicked Problems, and the leadership required to
address them, necessarily involve a large dose of humility on the part of
decision-makers and an admission that they may not know the answer to
such problems. Yet despite the literal fog of war the arrogance of the
German intelligence system also played a major role in its own downfall.
For example, a report from the double agent Brutus dated 23 April 1944
claimed to have established the location of the (imaginary) 7th English
Army Corps in Dundee. This was actually the first time that anyone had
mentioned such a unit but the Abwehr intimated that it was useful to
confirm their position.16 Indeed, 'according to "Johnny" Jebsen, a
double agent, Admiral Canaris [head of the Abwebr], 'did not care if all
the agents in Britain were fakes as long as he could go to Field Marshall
Keitel, the head of the German high command, and report that he had
12 agents in Britain, each of them writing a letter once a week? 17
The major Allied effort concentrated upon the build up of imaginary
forces in the south-east oriengland. Much of this took the form of inflat-
able tanks and vehicles, stockpiled amongst plywood fighter aircraft on
illusory airfields scattered around the south-east, in addition to canvas
landing craft tied up in the ports of Kent. There was even a fake oil dock,
occupying three square miles of Dover,
which German reconnaissance
aircraft were 'allowed' to photograph by the apparently negligent RAF. 18
The same level of 'negligence' was not permitted for German aircraft
attempting to fly further west to where the real' build up of the invasion
forces continued throughout early
1944. Here,
cooking was only
allowed from smokeless stoves and white towels were replaced by khaki
ones.l9 Yet even when the Luftwaffe managed to fly over the bulging
to take the action that could have devastated the armada of landing craft.
In contrast, the Allied strategic bombing of Germany was regularly
involving raids of between 500 and 1,000 heavy bombers. In all, only
129 sorties were flown by the Luftwaffe in the six weeks up to D-Day,
and the level of intelligence-gathering from these was poor 20 Indeed,
Rit-mel's report for the week ending 21 May simply stated: 'There are
no results of air reconnaissance of the island for the entire period. 21 The
Allies, on the other hand, flew 4,340 st-ties just against German U-boats
