LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
40
113). But Le Havre and Cherbourg were very heavily defended and
airfields would be difficult to build in the bocage countryside, where a
patchwork landscape of high and virtually impenetrable hedges bordered
sunken roads along small fields. The small fields had allegedly resulted
from the dispersal of property between several sons over many genera-
tions and the stability of the system, linked to natural erosion over several
centuries, had created hedgerows that were up to eight feet high and ten
feet thick. Moreover, the Cotentin peninsular would allow the Germans
to cut off the invasion at the base and hold the Allies indefinitely.
Another alternative invasion route would have been north of Calais
through Flanders, but the area was subject to flooding and had already
proved itself a killing ground in the First World War.
Eventually the Allies reversed positions: the British wanted to attack
the main German army defending the Calais region and the territory
north of the Seine but the Americans preferred the flanking attack
through Normandy; again the US domination of strategy and the provi-
sion of matériel prevailed. But before Normandy there was still a lot of
learning to do. The failure of Dieppe, in association with the power of
the German U-boat menaces? and the lack of available landing craft,
enabled Churchill to persuade the Americans that a landing on French
colonial territories in North Africa was a preferable option to an imme-
diate landing on the French mainland and thus was born 'Operation
Torch'.
Brigadier-General Dwight D. Eisenhower was chosen to direct the
Torch landings just as Rommel, commander of the Afrikakorps was
recalled to Germany and appointed commander of Army Group B, with
responsibility for defending the Normandy coast against Allied invasion.
Eisenhower assembled a team of four subordinates to oversee Torch:
Clark, an American, as second-in-command, and three British deputies:
Tedder to control air operations, Ramsay for sea operations
Alexander for land forces.
January 1943 at Algiers, Casablanca and Oran with minimum resistance
from the Vichy French forces.
One consequence of the British concern to avoid a head-on clash with
Germany, and to weaken German forces elsewhere before attempting a
landing in France, was that the Americans still doubted whether the
British were serious about Overlord and organized a meeting with
Churchill, Stalin and Roosevelt in Teheran in November 1943, ostensi-
bly to discuss the Far East and the Mediterranean campaigns that
Churchill favoured. However, on 26 November 1943, shortly after arriv-
ing in Teheran, Roosevelt was whisked away from the US Embassy and
transported to the Soviet Embassy after a 'security scare' that allegedly
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
41
involved a threat to assassinate Roosevelt. This also gave Stalin the
chance to discuss the Balkans with Roosevelt and it provided the
President with the excuse for his preliminary meeting with Stalin to
thrash out the importance of Overlord - and all without Churchill's pres-
ence. As Brooke said later, on hearing of the meeting: 'This conference
is over before it even begins' 68 When Churchill heard of the meeting he
first tried to see Roosevelt - who told him he had another meeting to go
to; this was true, but Churchill did not know it was another meeting with
Stalin. When Churchill then secured a meeting with Stalin he explained
his concern that Overlord might cause thousands of unnecessary casual-
ties, he had talked of 'the beaches of Normandy choked with the flower
of American and British youth', 69 and said he still preferred wearing
down the Germans through smaller scale attacks upon the periphery of
the German empire, in Greece, the Balkans, Italy and North Africa. Stalin
was unmoved; indeed, he explained, the Soviet Union had already
suffered 4 million casualties and, as one Russian put it, on being told that
the US had already suffered 200,000 battle casualties in the war, We lose
that many each day before lunch' 70 This may have been a wild exagger-
ation though if the German claims about Soviet casualties are accurate
then the 12,593,000 dead and wounded between the outbreak of war in
June 1941 and the collapse of the German eastern defences in February
1945 equate to almost 9,000 for every one of the 1,400 days of the war
until that point. Put another way, the Western Allies' casualties on D-Day
(around 8,600) amounted to less than the average daily loss for the
Soviet forces throughout the war. Relatedly, when the Soviet offensive
began on 20 June 1944 the Germans lost approximately 300,000 troops
in just 12 days, a daily rate of 25,000 casualties - almost three times the
D-Day rate for the Western Allies.7]
To the Soviets and sometimes the Americans,
British prevarication
looked uncomfortably close to a strategy of allowing the Germans and
the Soviets to exhaust themselves against each other so that the British
could mop up at the end and reassert control over the Mediterranean and
the Balkans.72 Hence, Stalin continued, if Overlord did not take place in
May 1944, then the Soviet Union would have little option but to 'do
business with Hitler' 73
Churchill appeared to have been outmanoeuvred, for Stalin dismissed
Churchill's
concerns
and
his
counter-proposal
for
further
Mediterranean invasion, and insisted that the main operation for the
Anglo-American forces in 1944 must be Overlord and that he would
Plan a simultaneous invasion by Soviet forces from the east. The date was
agreed at 1 May 1944, as was the proposal that the Supreme Commander
be American 4 Originally it had been assumed that General Marshall
