110
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
At 0430 Pemsel informed Speidel that his artillery was shelling enemy
warships but Speidel refused to inform Rommel, suggesting that the
invasion' as Pemsel had called it, was merely some 'localized encoun-
ters' 135 Nevertheless von Rundstedt ordered the movement of the 12th
SS and Panzer Lebr up to the coast - an order that would require Hitter's
confirmation. That confirmation process required the initial agreement of
Jodl, Hitler's Chief of Operations, but Jodl was allowed to continue
sleeping until 0630 and even then refused to wake Hitler. When Jodl
awoke he immediately cancelled von Rundstedt's order for the 12th SS
and Panzer Lebr to move north. A little earlier, at 0615 Pemsel reported
that the naval bombardment had begun but still Speidel did nothing. Not
until 0730 did Speidel eventually agree that the invasion was on and he
subsequently informed Rommel - that was at least 30 minutes after
Goebbels had announced the invasion on German radio! Two hours later,
at 0930 on 6 June, Rommel was back at his HQ at La Roche-Guyon and
at the same time John Snagg, the BBC radio presenter, announced an
Allied landing 'on the northern coast of France' in Communiqué No. 1
(originally written on 22 May 1944),136 Precisely where in northern
France the landings had occurred was still unclear to both the Germans
and the average Allied citizen. Two days later, a map in the Daily
Telegraph, based on German information, revealed paratroopers dropping
on the Channel Islands and directly around Cherbourg, 137 But wherever
the landings were the problem for the defenders was that, in Napoleon's
words, lost land can always be regained, lost time cannot. Treating the
invasion as a Wicked Problem - where decisions should be delayed while
a consensus was sought - instead of a Critical Problem - where decisive-
ness was the key - effectively undermined what chance the defenders had
for repulsing the invasion.
The poor weather and the overriding assumption that Calais was the
arget, associated with a recent spate 1 false alarms, had undermined
German faith in their own intelligence system. Anyway, as one of
Rundstedt's intelligence officers responded, when Sergeant Reichling
intercepted the second line from Verlaine's poem and warned his superi-
ors, would the Allies be so crass as to announce the invasion on the
BBCI?138 In fact von Rundstedt and his Chief of Staff Blumentritt were
surprised when nothing happened immediately and were preparing to
call off the alert at 0200 when first news of paratroop landings began.
When that came in von Rundstedt was uncertain whether it was the main
landing or not, but on one thing he was clear: with three recognized
airborne divisions in Normandy there had to be seaborne landings to
support them because the Allies would not leave their airborne troops
isolated and therefore open to imminent destruction.
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
111
What had proved crucial in the success of Fortitude was not persuad-
ing the Germans that the Pas de Calais was the vital target and everything
else diversionary but confirming that the Germans were right to believe
this. Even the Oberkommando des Heeres (OKH) Intelligence Report for
6 June 1944 appeared to confirm to the Germans that all they faced was
a large ruse and not the invasion.
The enemy landing on the Normandy coast represents a large-scale undertaking;
but the forces already engaged represent a small part of the total available. Of the
approximately sixty divisions at present in the south of England, it is likely that at
most ten to twelve divisions are at present taking part, including airborne troops
.... Within the framework of his group of forces Montgomery still has over twenty
divisions available .... The entire group of forces which makes up the American
First Army group [FUSAG], comprising about twenty-five divisions north and
south of the Thames, has not yet been employed. The same applies to the ten or
twelve active divisions held ready in the Midlands and Scotland. The conclusion
is, therefore, that the enemy command plans a further large-scale undertaking in
the Channel area, which may well be directed against a coastal sector in the central
Channel area. 139
The next day the Germans knew precisely what the Allies, or at least
the Americans, intended because the entire American invasion plan for
Omaha was washed up. As Ziegelmann recalled,
I have never been so impressed as in that hour when I held in my hands the oper-
ation order of the American V Corps. I thought that with this captured order, the
German 7th Army and Army Group B would reach a decision - the decision. I
learned later that this captured order lay around for days at 7th Army headquar-
ters and only reached the high command much later. Even then it did not get the
attention it deserved ... As a young general staff officer, my impression was that
the high command looked but did not leap'. 140
Despite this, a report on 8 June suggested that because no elements
OF FUSAG were engaged in Normandy there was all the more reason to
assume a further attack was imminent. That no FUSAG units were
involved because there was no FUSAG was not to have been considered
as an explanation for their absence - at least by the higher commanders,
though at a junior level it was already obvious that the Normandy land-
ings were not a ruse but the real thing. As Major Wiegman reported from
the Caen area on D-Day, 'The British 3rd and Canadian 3rd Divisions
had been identified by about noon. We know that the 50th London and
7th Armoured Divisions are also there. All that's missing is the 5lst
Highlanders and the Ist Armoured Division
