11 Technologies
11.1 Introduction
Setting across the beaches in Normandy ock wears of planning taning
and production. That 24 hour period, which Rommel referred to as the
Longest Day', proved for many to be their shortest day. In theor lied
material strength, especially that which derived from the arcal d
Democracy in the USA, could more than compensare for the allege
superiority of the German soldier. And since those soldiers tong the
invaders were supponedly second rate the invasion shorald have been reli-
tively easy. In fact, and with the exception of Omaha, it was, for fine
Mised soldiers ched on d-Day than on many of the subsequent days of
fuhling But while Allied technology in the form of superior antrat and
artillery, supported by the dominance of the Allied navies, ensured simit.
want advantages for the Allied troops, the latter's poor landing crat.
tanks and machine 8 proved very problematic. In the main, as the
Meyious chapter suggested, the disadvantages were a product of culture
and politics, rather than contingency or misfortune or poorer technolo
bies or inadequate science, because there were alternative and superior
boats and tanks that could well have reduced the invaders' casualties even
more. That the invasion succeeded is a tribute to those who worked
around and against such unnecessary disadvantages.
11.2 The beach defences
Having ensured a method ton: supply through the mulbernes,
secured a protected passage across the channel, the only' remaining task
was the most difficult of all - breaching the beach defences. Precisely
how the invasion force was going to pull off the most complex single
operation ever attempted was, to some extent, dependent upon the tech-
nologies that the Allies carried with them. Dieppe had revealed the weak
tress of Allied technology compared to its German counterparts but to
What extent had the Allies caught up and surpassed their enemy? As far
Churchill was concerned: 'This war iy tot ... a war of masses of men
TECHNOLOGIES
265
hurling masses of shells at each other. It is by devising new weapons and
above all by scientific leadership that we shall best cope with the enemy's
superior strength'?! Churchill recruited Frederick Linderman, Professor
of Experimental Philosophy at Oxford University, Millis Jefferis, a major
in the Royal Engineers, and Percy Hobart, a recently retired General of
an armoured division, to his 'toyshop' and between the four of them
many of Britain's 'new weapons' evolved in response to the beach-cross-
The first problem facing the initial assault troops was the obstacles and
mines that littered the beach area itself. Any attacking amphibious force
vould have to face row upon row of defences even before landing on the
beach. First, at around 225 metres from the high-water line, 3 metre
high iron obstacles tipped with Teller anti-tank mines were supplemented
Dy an occasional example of Element C': an array of large steel girders
Weded together to form a mined obstacle 15 foot long and 12 foot high.
Second, at around 200 metres, there were rows of logs, supported by an
A frame and tipped with mines ar, to en into the sand at 45 degrees.
Third, at 120 metres, were deployed rows of 'hedgehogs' - constructions
of mely rods designed to rip open the bottom of the landing craft.
If the invading troops got through this deadly maze they would then
face rows of concertina barbed wire interspersed with minefields and trip-
ad nes of various kinds. Rommel had 6.5 million land mines laid
along the French coast (1 million a month for four months between
February and D-Day), though he had
originally wanted 20 million.
Photo 11.1 Anti-tank 'hedgehog'
