206
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
A Public Relations Colonel had even told the 116th that he expected.
100 per cent casualties in the first 24 hours, while another suggested
two-thirds would not return, and 30 per cent was the proportion
suggested to Harry Parley of the 116th. 105 This might appear to have
made the task of the leaders significantly more difficult but soldiers
generally rationalized the likelihood of personal injury in the manner akin
to Charles East of the 29th Division (Omaha Beach) who, when told by
his commanding officer on the eve of D-Day that nine out of ten men
would become casualties, looked at the man to his left, then at the man
to his right, and thought to himself, You poor bastards', 106 The utility of
belief in fate, so common in the First World War107 was also pervasive in
the Second 108 Yet a belief in fatalism also acted as a shield against fear,
because if there was nothing you could do to avoid your fate, that abo
meant that until that appointment was reached you could not die. For
Example, Joseph O'Connell, a soldier with the US 4th Infantry on Utan
Beach was on one of the few landing craft to take heavy casualties an
reached the beach as the lone survivor, but: to reach the safety of a farm:
house meant crossing an area under machine gun fire: 'I lie in the grass
pondering whether to take the chance. Yes-no-yes-no. My brain kep
whirling ... I must go on, for I'll be killed only when my time comes', 10)
scemed destined to survive no matter what
happened. bagar A. Schroeder, a glider-borne soldier suggested as mi
Thid as the day I became a firm believer that if it ain't your time, you ain't going
to get it, no matter what. One of our officers took a round through the side of his
helmet, it went up and over between the liner I the outer steel helmet cippins
his ear on the opposite side. This same gid threw a grenade that hit a tree and
bounced in his lap - a dud. 110
Some soldiers seemed to have ced with the fear by accepting
traditional Samurai fashion - that they were already dead and thus 'living'
on borrowed time. Indeed, since they were already dead, they had notn-
ing to lose and therefore nothing ten ear. 'Death doesn t worry you
more' recalled Private Wingfiel as he listened to a talk by his corporal,
en'e have little hope of survival. We accept that and spin it out as best"
can. We don't have any distractins like comfort ... We're as good as
dead. A slit trench, after all, hethe nearest thing to a grave we'll be in
while we're alive' I1l Nevertheless, few actually courted death by expos-
ing themselves to enemy fire or noass tigging fox-holes so that fatalism
became as much a ritual to ward off fate as one of accepting it 112
Moreover, as time elapsed, the boundarie of the individuals making up
MOBILIZING THE AMERICANS: TECHNOLOGY AND ICEBERG
207
a unit melted and refroze them into a collective where everything was
shared including the most important thing of all to a soldier: mail from
home. 113 In the words of Sergeant Marsden in the US Army:
You just share your life with the men in the barracks. This has been going on for
twelve weeks. Twelve weeks ago if someone had even suggested that I drink out
of the same cup that someone else had taken a drink from I would most likely have
retched, but that was twelve weeks ago. Now, five of us drink out of the same
canteen. We share a bottle of Coke, taking turns guzzling, eat a box of ice cream
with the same spoon. We even wear each other's drawers and socks and shirts. 14
But consequently and coterminously, anyone outside the small circle
of brotherhood was just one of the 'others', not one of your 'own'.
Hence those entering veteran platoons as replacements would not always
receive the kind of care that Bradley hoped they would receive. Sergeant
James Jones with the US Rangers recalled receiving eight replacements
at Anzio on one day, and the following day all eight were dead - but no
veteran had died. As he explained: We weren't going to send our own
guys out on point [lead position] in a damn fool situation like that ...
We were sewed up tight. And we'd been together through Africa, and
Sicily, and Salerno ...
How are we going to send our own guys into
that: 115 So did the ideological battle between Nazism and Democracy
play any part in the minds of US soldiers?
8.11 Ideology, normality and death
In early 1942 the US forces began compulsory lectures twice a week for
13 weeks to explain why the US was at war, what the enemy was like and
what was expected of the troops. 116 But they had only marginal impact
and we can be more certain that the average US soldier was probably not
driven by ideological commitment than that the German soldier proba-
bly was. If anything, the US went Ou Snow; way to avoid generating di
anti-fascist ideology because it so clearly contradicted the cultural mothe
of the typical soldier; for these people the heroic Us cinema icons of the
day were not John Wayne (too many children to be conscripted). The
uSnowyle was Humphrey Bogart, whose sardonic, disinterested and
even cynical machismo embodied none of the emotion or attitudes
thought necessary to construct a passionately anti-Nazi ideology - DuL
would nevertheless provide the necessary effort to do what had to De
the Gis may, of course, have been driven by hatred of what the
