304
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
usefully deployed across the beaches on D-Day to deal with the German
emplacements. But, thanks to doctrinal cultures, and Patton's disastrous
decision-making, the Pershing did not arrive in Europe until the war was
almost over. Fifth, the inadequacy of Allied automatic small arms, espe-
cially in numbers, left troops immensely vulnerable to equivalent sized
German units. Once again, someone had failed to learn the lesson of the
last war and had conflated mobility with light weapons. Paradoxicaly,
where lightness was critical - for the initial assaulting infantry - the Allies
them to have reversed their initial logic and weighed them down so much
that many could hardly move and many drowned in the tide, pulled
under by three days of rations on a day when the majority of survivor
did not even eat.
In sum, the three main problems: getting to the beach, getting across
the beach, and getting off the beach, were all resolvable - had vanious
leaders made appropriate decisions - but only in small sections did the
solutions arrive. And in each of the cases where errors were made, it is 2
cultural explanation that provides the better understanding of Leadership
decisions than a contingent rational approach.
Treating problems a›
Tame rather than as Wicked, and assuming that superordinates always
knew best doomed many soldiers to unnecessary deaths or injuries,
Sometimes, as in the provision of a breakwater for the floating harbour,
the subordinate's case succeeded, but more often than not the subord-
nate was over-ruled and dire consequences usually followed. Fortunately
for the Allies, they had sufficient f! sompty elsewhere, notably in the
I sainthe navies and the artillery, to compensate for these Leadership
Part Four
Commanding in Crises
Introduction
If the primary Wicked Problem for the political and military leaders of
the Allies on D-Day was where and when to invade, and the Tame
Problem was how to build and supply sufficient matériel to get the
troops to the beach, what happened when the troops actually got to the
beaches or dropped out of the planes? At this point it is worth reconsid-
cring the third category of decision-maker -
the Commander.
As
suggested in Chapter 1, Commanders operate when a self evident crisis
occurs and there is general uncertainty - though not ostensibly in the
head of the Commander who provides an 'answer' to the crisis.
There is
no time for discussion or dissent or worrying about Management proce-
sures' if they delay resolution, and thus a crisis legitimizes coercion do
necessary in the circumstances for public good. Of course,
Management of Tame Problems has been successful then few crises will
actually occur, but in war there are always likely to be crises. So how good
Were the commanders and how could Command be instilled into the
commanders?
In what follows I compare the way this developed for the three
primary groups involved: Anglo-Canadians,
Americans and Germans.
But first let us consider the theoretical role of the commander in general.
305
