LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
Morgan's original plan had called for a three-divisional assault under a
combined task-force HQ, but Montgomery's enlargement of the assault
to five divisions also embodied the separation of responsibilities so that
the two American divisions would be virtually self-contained, as would
the three Anglo-Canadian divisions. The plan was to land 11 divisions
ashore on D-Day itself, three airborne divisions, six infantry divisions in
the initial assault and two reserve divisions in the immediate follow-up.
There would then be two more the following day, 21 divisions by D+12,
26 divisions by D+20, 31 by D+35 and 39 by D+90.104
Using the Normandy beaches offered a shallow gradient that would
enable troops and vehicles to land directly onto the shoreline, and a large
tide that would expose the beach obstructions at low tide and facilitate
their dismantling by gunfire, bombing and engineers. However, the low-
tide line on the Calvados coastline meant up to 500 yards of exposed
beach for the troops to cross, so the decision was taken to run in at the
midpoint between high and low tide so that most of the obstacles would
be visible but the distance to the high-tide line would be shortened. 105
Taking all this into consideration meant a run in between three and four
before high water and 40 minutes after 'nautical twilight'.
When extensive underwater obstacles were laid the US
demanded a change to allow the troops to clear them at low tide, though
Juno Beach was protected by a rocky reef that could only be crossed at
Lie nalf-way point between low and high tide. Given the associated
requirement for a simultaneous assault (which was impossible given the
different times of the tides across the landing zones) the compromise
times were set between 0639 for the Western Task Force and 0745 for
Juno Beach. 106
At one point a night-time assault was considered to protect the troop
but the overwhelming superiority of air and naval forces (and the need to
provide accurate bombardment and bombing) persuaded most - though
not all - commanders that a daylight attack was preferable. This decision
was taken before the Normandy beaches became heavily mined and
defended but when the defences were strengthened it was decided, on I
May, that the landings would occur three to four hours before high tide
so that most of the defences would be exposed. Even then there were
two subsequent attempts to switch to a night assault. 107
Finally, Normandy provided a relatively easy area to isolate, assuming
the crossings over the Seine could be destroyed by bombing,
presupposing that the bridges over the smaller rivers could be held
against attack. Normandy also provided moderately close proximity to a
port (Le Havre, Cherbourg and the Brittany ports) without having to
land at the port itself. Furthermore, since the Pas de Calais was the
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
51
assumed invasion spot this was also the best defended, it terms of quan-
tity and quality of fortifications and troops. Normandy, on the other
hand, was much less well defended in terms of concrete and artillery and
the troops there were deemed by the Germans to be of a lower fighting
ability.
The invasion also needed three minimal natural conditions:
1. a surface wind of not more than Force 3 (8-12 mph) on-shore and
Force 4 (13-18 mph) off-shore to protect the landing craft from
2. visibility of not less than 3 miles to facilitate the naval bombardment;
3. a cloud base of at least 2,500 feet to facilitate the air transport, at least
1,000 feet for fighter cover, 4,500 feet over the target for medium
bombers and 11,000 feet over the target for heavy bombers. 108
The chances of all of these occurring together were put anywhere
between 60 to l at worst to 12 to l at best for the whole of May and
June but the precise conjunction of moon and tides limited the actual
invasion to just three days in June, between the 5th and the 7th and that
was estimated to be a 50 to 1 possibility. 109 Given the odds against such
an occurrence one might have thought that the planners would have
reconsidered the possibility of the plans not taming the problem of the
initial assault; that is, of not landing the amphibious tanks or not engag
ing the bombers in close level support for the ground troops. But for
whatever reasons this seems not to have happened. Hence when, as we
shall see at Omaha Beach, neither the amphibious tanks nor the bombers
played a significant role in the initial assault the troops were exposed to
withering fire from the defenders.
SHAEF began the detailed planning of the invasion in early 1944 but
the original D-Day of 1 May was postponed to June because of the
scarcity of landing craft and 5 June was not chosen until 8 May 1944.
This was exacerbated by the decision to expand the initial invasion from
three to five divisions and to extend the landing zones west of the River
Vire to enable Cherbourg to be captured more quickly - hopefully by D-
Day+40.110 The expansion of the intended assault from 25 miles to 50
miles also required a reorganization of the air assaults, for the troops
landing on Utah would need support inland to prevent the flooded inte-
and the consequent narrow exit points - from inhibiting their
progress. Thus one US airborne division, originally marked to drop over
Caen, was switched to land behind Utah Beach. Ill On the other hand it
enabled a closer co-ordination between Overlord and the Soviet Summer
