272
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
The DD tank was a Sherman fitted with twin propellers and a remov-
able canvas 'skirt' that ensured the 33-ton vehicle could float - as long as
the sea was not so rough that the waves could swamp the three feet of
canvas "Skirt surrounding the top of the tank. Driven by two contra-
rotating propellers, the tank could manage about 5 knots in the water
and was steered by a detachable tiller. The detachable screens, inflated
with carbon dioxide, raised the tank's height from nine to 13 feet. 30
Sea trials of DD Shermans began in the summer of 1943 off Stokes
Bay near Portsmouth, and by 15 July 500 had been ordered by the
British. As soon as Montgomery saw the trails he decided that DD tanks
would lead the invasion, and DD tank crews ashore practised underwa-
ter escapes in converted swimming pools. After 30,000 practise launch-
ings at sea had resulted in only seven losses he was probably confident
that they would survive the sea launch. Thus the conventional assault
pattern of infantry supported by tanks would be inverted to one where
the tanks would lead and be supported by the infantry. 31 In the event,
of the 122 DDs that were sea-launched on D-Day, 39 sank before they
beached (many more were landed directly on the beaches) 32 At least
one DD tank crew member had to get out of the tank and hold the
screen up as they approached Juno Beach on D-Day, so rough was the
water. 33
Despite the secrecy surrounding the DD tank they were not always a
surprise: a captured German document revealed that Rommel had fore-
warned his troops that, when the invasion came the Allies would use all
sorts of weapons, including an amphibious tank that actually would float
with its body beneath the surface' 34 Nevertheless, some defenders were
surprised. SS- Obersturmführer (Lieutenant) Hansmann, on reconnais-
sance for the 12th SS Panzer Division on D-Day behind Gold Beach near
Arromanches reported seeing strange sights on that day: 'Imperturbably,
other tanks emerge straight from the sea. Is this really happening? At first
all you see are the turrets and then the whole tanks emerge like dinosaurs
from the primordial deeps' 35 Relatedly, Sergeant Gariepy commanding
the first DD tank to land on Nan Green in front of the Regina Rifles on
Juno recalls the effect:
I was the first tank coming ashore and the Germans started opening up with
machine gun bullets. But when we came to a halt on the beach, it was only then
that they realized we were a tank when we pulled down our canvas skirt, the
floatation gear. Then they saw that we were Shermans. It was quite amazing. I still
remember very vividly some of the machine gunners standing up in their posts
lookie at us with their mouths wide open. To see tanks coming out of the water
shook then rigid. 36
TECHNOLOGIES
273
The British and Canadian beaches received a far heavier bombardment
than the American beaches partly because the tide turned at the US
beaches first, giving less time for a naval assault, and partly because of
assumptions about the accuracy of the air bombardment and the quality
of the defences and the defenders. Sword received the heaviest bombard-
ment of all, though many of the assault troops there were also surprised
at the absence of significant damage. The DD tanks for Sword Beach
were launched relatively easily although those that survived the rough
weather were overtaken by the infantry landing craft that landed first.
But it was not long before the 31 DD tanks and AVREs arrived, and the
fail tanks, in particular, quickly cleared a path through the mines.
By
0800 there was relatively little firing from the beach area but this had
only been achieved at a considerable cost; for instance, only six of the
onginal 20 tanks in A Squadron of the 13th/ 18th Hussars survived and
only two from the 20 of b squadron left the beach. 3
Un Omaha Beach the two companies of DD tanks (Co. C and Co. B,
743rd Tank Battalion) that were supposed to cover the infantry failed
miserably. The 56 Sherman tanks of the 743rd Tank battalion were
supposed to lead the 29th Infantry Division ashore to the west of the lst
Division. Some 32 of these were DD Shermans to be launched 6,000
ards from the shore, and 24 were 'dry' Shermans to be beach landed.
Eight of the dry Shermans were fitted with dozer blades to help the
140th Combat Engineer Battalion blow holes in the beach defences. 38
The DDs were supposed to 'swim' to the edge of the water by H-5
minutes where they would cover the initial troop landings. But when the
S DI were launched all but three sank before they reached the beach.
Some sank immediately but others were eventually swamped, not just
because of the six foot swell that co uoz 1 off Omaha without the protec-
07 offered at Utah by the Cotentin Peninsular, but also because the
strong current and long distance to the beach required the crews to steer
the tanks south-west rather than south thus exposing the canvas skirts to
he heaviest waves; very few of the crews survived. the three that made
it to Easy Green Beach were on LCT 600 where the skipper, Ensign H.
, Julivan, having Witnessed the first of his tanks aisappear under the
waves, abandoned his orders and drove :0 e LCT straight onto the beach
the LCTs covering the western sidr of Omaha were under the control
of Captain Elder, whose converle tion with Lieutenant Rockwell, the
otta skipper, persuaded him to do like ie. the foulla, excluding an
LCTe i by a mine, landed at 0629 on Dog White and Dog Green sectors
under furious attack from the defenders. The first two tanks were imme
Lately hit by German 88mm artillery and this prompted many of the rest
