38
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
some time before the full details of the plan and the immediate and
remote objectives are made known. The losses on the side of the Allies
will soon be declared but it is the German fashion to pretend they are
perpetually inflicting tremendous losses on the Allies at the cost of quite
negligible casualties to themselves'. In this instance the German propa-
ganda, not the British, was more accurate.
Mountbatten subsequently claimed that every Allied casualty at
Dieppe saved ten on D-Day because of the learning and improvements
that were made as a consequence, but a large element of rationalization
seemed to emerge in the justifications for the raid. Almost everything had
gone wrong but little of this was completely unforeseeable and not every
lesson seemed
to
have
been learned by the D-Day planners.
Communications between the landing parties and the off-shore force
were virtually non-existent, the plywood landing craft obviously offered
no protection against German guns, and there seems to have been no
prior experimentation with tank movement on sandy beaches or against
concrete anti-tank obstacles. 2 Less obvious, perhaps, the balance of
force between defender and attacker had to be radically reconsidered
because the
advantages
secured by the defenders against attackers
thing over open beaches were overwhelming. This was irrespective of
the quality of the defending troops because the Dieppe defenders were
not a first rate German unit - an issue the D-Day planners quickly forgot.
More problematic still, somehow a mechanism had to be constructed for
discharging heavy equipment and supplies in very large numbers at great
speed to provide support for the initial groups. Finally, a weapon to shat-
ter the beach defences immediately prior to the assault was required.
It could be argued, then, that the leadership could still count Dieppe
as a success - because the results have to be gauged against D-Day rather
than just Dieppe. However, even if the losses at Dieppe may have
reduced the casualties on D-Day they may simultaneously have increased
casualties in the subsequent battle for Normandy. After Dieppe, the focus
of attention switched from concentrating on the battle with German
forces after the landings (on the prior assumption that the landing would
be relatively easy), to concentrating on the landing itself (on the assump-
tion that the landing was the most difficult task) and after this was
achieved the weight of forces would ensure the defeat of the Germans.
Field-Marshal Karl von Rundstedt, the supreme German Commander
in France, Belgium and Holland (Oberbefehlshaber West [OB West):
aew a different conclusion from titler about the significance of Dieppe:
"It would be an error', he noted in his battle report, to believe that the
enemy will mount his next operation in the same manner .... Next time
he will do things differently. Indeed, this should have been relatively
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
39
obvious given the German High Command's assessment of the raid, for
it was an
"amateur undertaking ... carried out in opposition to all good
military sense' 63
Von Rundstedt was right: the Dieppe fiasco had persuaded the Allies
that a head-on assault against a port was too dangerous and thus some-
thing different was necessary - in this case, a beach area was essential -
but it had to be close to a port or ports to ensure eventual re-supply. The
area also had to be within fighter-cover distance of Britain - which
restricted the possibilities to a beach area along the French, Belgian or
Dutch coast within around 150 miles. Finally, the area had to be easily
isolated from counter-attack and reinforcements. That meant using some
form of natural barrier to inhibit German troop and armour movement
and using air attacks to disrupt road and rail transport networks.
So extensive were the defences at the Pas de Calais that even the most
aggressive American commanders regarded an invasion here as impossi-
ble, or at least extremely costly in human and material losses. Moreover,
the Allies were certain that the Germans would move some of their
Normandy divisions north to support an invasion in Calais but they
would be reluctant to move any of the divisions guarding Calais in the
opposite direction. 4 Anyway, the Pas de Calais contained high cliffs,
narrow beaches and few beach exits, making an assault even more precar-
ious. Additionally, the port facilities of Calais, and the adjacent facilities
of Boulogne, were regarded as inadequate in themselves to support an
army all the way to Berlin. For that, the Allies would also have to assault
and take Antwerp or Le Havre, themselves very heavily defended. And if
there were doubters left, it soon became apparent that the small ports in
southeast England - besides Dover itself - simply could not accommo-
date the number of landing craft and naval vessels envisaged for a Calais
based invasion.65 Ironically, despite all this, the German High Command
still believed that Calais would be the prime target, if for no other reason
than that it was the direct route to the Rhine,
the Ruhr and Berlin.
Moreover, although the landing would be very difficult and the German
15th Army defending the area was very strong, many Germans knew that
in the words of General Blumentritt, the land behind the 15th Army was
practically free from troops capable of fighting' 66
Since port facilities would be necessary to re-supply an invasion two
other alternatives
were Le Havre,
or the Cotentin peninsular and
Cherbourg; certainly there were few other ports worth considering. As
an 1811 edition of The New Seaman's Guide and Coaster's Companion
suggested, 'The bay formed by Cape de Caux and Cape Barfleur is about
7 leagues deep: on the south and west part of it are several small
harbours, of which description is unnecessary' (quoted in Maher, 1996:
