a 4 (1)
13 The Airborne Assaults
I have to announce to the House that during the night and the carly
hours of this morning the first of the series of landings in force upon the
European continent has taken place .... So far the commanders who are
engaged report that everything is proceeding according to plan. And
What a plan! This vast operation is undoubtedly the most complicated and
cifficult that has ever taken place. It involves tides, winds, waves, visibil-
ity, both from the air and sea standpoint, and the combined employment
of land, air and sea forces in the highest degree of intimacy and in contact
with conditions which could not and cannot be fully foreseen.
Churchill, 6 June 1944
13.1 Introduction
this chapter focuses on the air assault. It begins with a review of the
strategy and then details the actions of the three Allied elements (US
oth and luist Divisions and the British 6th Division) and the responses
of the Veers to dese milal attacks. It will become clear that much or
the plan went awry early on the morning of D-Day for the Allies as para-
pers and gliders landed in the wrong place and generated an array oi
Critical Problems for all concerned. Nevertheless the scattering of troops,
while it inhibited the execution of Allied assaults on specific targets, also
confused the German defenders. Most of the goals of the air assault were
achieved on the day but a critical element in their achievement was the
Catastrophic failure of the German command system. Historically the
German army had moved a long way from its authoritarian and hierar-
chical Prussian origins and developed
a system
mission control - that replaced Befeblstaktik-
of Auftragstaktik -
an uncompromising order.
This inversion had been in response to Prussian defeats at the hands of
Napoleon and the subsequent displacement of 'direct orders' by 'mission
goals had proved the basis for the success of the Blitzkriegs in Europe:
However, Hitler's increasing interventions in miliary decisions, esper
cially from late 1941, undermined the value of Auftragstaktik and over-
laid it with a new form of Befehlstaktik. This, as we shall see, effectively
322
THE AIRBORNE ASSAULTS
323
compromised the efforts of the German field commanders to respond to
the first developments on D-Day and provided the Allies with enough
ume to establish a foothold on the French coast which proved to be the
bridgehead to Berlin. In effect as the crisis developed for the German
their commanders failed to provide the directive orders that might well
have undermined the invasion. On th sodoo, de as the scattering of the
paratroopers itself generated a whole series of local crises, the Allied
commanders on the spot generally reacted well to the situation and tran-
sended the potential catastrophes that faced them.
13.2 Strategy
decision to launch an assault on Omaha with the Ist Division
factised upon use carterne troops to minimize the chances of
German reinforcements reaching the beachhead and there were some on
de british side who regarded such a plan as bou folly and as typical or
the American's desire for a head-on clash with the Wehrmacht that would
prove extremely bloody. Leigh-Mallory in particular advised against the
American drop: the anti-aircraft artillery (AAA or Flak) was untense
hence the decision to fly across the Cotentin peninsular from west to east
rather than down it from north to south - plus the flooded areas, posed
considerable dangers. In mid-April 1944, at St Paul's School, Leigh-
Mallory had demanded the cancelling of both American airdrops behind
Jtah Beach telling Bradley that Your losses will be far more than what
your gains are worth'. Very well sir (Bradley replied) 'it you insist or
cutting out our airborne attack, then I must ask that we elminate the
Utah assault. I am not going to land on that beach without making sure
our airborne people have the four ceseway cats behind it.
Mallory - with the stakes now at crisis level because the capture of
Cherbourg depended upon the Utah landings and the success of the
entire invasion depended upon the capture
of the port, turned to
eisenhower and said: 'If General Bradley sists up Some duede, he
will have to accept full responsibility for the operation. This response
was an error because
Bradley's
reply captured the essence of his
command and undermined Leigh-Mallory's chasm: thats perrectly
UK, said Bradley, T'm in the habit of accepting full responsibiny for my
operations. So, despite Leigh-Mallory s warning or a super cent
casualtv rate (50 per cent of the parachutists and 70 per cent of the glider
troops) the mission went ahead.
As Bradley had noted, the airborne strategy was directed at denying
he Germans control over the space immediately behind and to the flanks
