MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
160
huge numbers. However, while the British Army in Normandy was short
of 35,000 troops there were 115,000 troops and officers still in Britain,
either in uncommitted units or in training centres and so on. While some
of these were undoubtedly necessary for the defence of the country, the
rest of them were inexplicably missing from the calculations that seemed
to show how desperately short of soldiers Britain was in 1944 and 1945.
D'Este implies that Churchill could not have been unaware of these
troops and that he may have had a hand in keeping them back - just in
case Normandy failed or for some other unarticulated purpose - perhaps
expecting further conflict with the Soviet Union 16 Thus the Americans
could have recruited more troops but chose not to, and the British did
recruit more troops than were officially available but chose not to deploy
them. In essence, then, the British had successfully tamed the problem of
recruitment but how did the British soldiers approach the war?
7.3 The British approach to war: squaddies, officers,
and the Full Monty
The average British soldier seemed to see military service as very much a
temporary interlude before resuming civilian life.
Army's own morale reports, 'the majority of soldiers .... were not inter-
, nor the stirring speeches that political leaders
made but were simply concerned that they should return to a decent
house and secure employment in the post-war world' !7 Indeed, it
seemed that the average British soldier was only interested in three
things: 'football, beer and crumpet'? 18 That said, the vast majority of the
civilian population remained supporters of the coalition government - ar
least after the nadir of 1942 when a further string of defeats appeared
By D-Day British army morale was said to be at its peak. A letter from
Captain Alistair Bannerman, a British platoon commander, to his wife
summed it up: "To soldiers ... Churchill's radio rhetoric sounds a bit
They have no great faith in the new world; they have no
belief in any great liberating mission. They know it's going to be a char-
herhouse. All they want is to put an end to it all, and get back to Civy
Street, to their homes, their private lives, their wives and loved ones?, In
this they were little different from their American colleagues: Private
Branham in the US 1l6th Regiment thought along precisely the same
hes. We wanted to go. ms sounds crazy, but we had come tus far,
ve a been siting in england so long, we waeed to get this thing or
with and get the hell home. A more general reluctance by the british
MOBILIZING ANGLO-CANADIANS, COMMONWEALTH, VOLUNTEERS
161
troops to identify themselves with any allegedly glorious military past or
heroic future was also apparent and this is understandable. While the
British army had been at war since 1939 (though few of the D-Day
troops were veterans of any prior campaigns), their record of achieve-
ment was not impressive. Defeat at Dunkirk had been turned into a
national icon of heroic resistance by Churchill and the British media, but
many of the soldiers involved saw it in rather less positive terms.
Montgomery was scathing in his analysis of the BEF in September 1939:
the British Army was totally unfit to fight a first class war on the conti-
nent of Europe ... The field army had an inadequate signals system, no
administrative backing, and no organization for high command; all these
had to be improvised on mobilization' 21 Churchill was scarcely less vitu-
perative, particularly in light of the 1918 victory: 'If mortal catastrophe
should overtake the British nation, historians a thousand years hence will
never understand how it was that a victorious nation suffered themselves
to cast away all that they had gained by measureless sacrifice? 22 And
there was little heroic about the inglorious defeats in Singapore and
Tobruk against ostensibly 'inferior' Japanese and German forces.
Yet since 1942 British fortunes had improved considerably, and many
it those soldiers involved in elite units in particular appeared keen to get
on with the job after all the effort of training.
On the Motor Launches
that would lead the mine laying operations there was a decision to be
made about who should go to Normandy and who should take part in
the 'mock' attack on Calais. In the end the junior officers tossed a coin
and the losers' went to Calais23 «If an officer had said to me,
cannot go," commented Private W.E. Elvin, a member of the 7th battal-
ion destined to support Howard's troops, on the eve of D-Day, 'I would
nave cried my eyes out, and so would mally of my mates. we were all
steen, having never been in action before, but we all wanted to have a
go'.* The 'but' in the previous sentence might justitably be replaced
with '"therefore' because most of thatubsequent research suggests that
the use of green troops was essential to thudas; of the invasion; had
rasoned troops been used they may not have been so willing to step off
the landing craft into what was a 'clear and present danger'.
This is an
ntriguing issue for the assumption that experience 'tames' the fears of
troops. For example, Eric Codling with the 8th Battalion, the Middlesex
Regiment, known as the 'Dichards', recalled how 'Our lack of experience
allowed us to take great risks, like standing up to watch the nearby truck
beingtudas d, or taking great pains to dig the mortars in and then
sceping on top of the ground!' Certaily Montgomery locu mis veteran
50th (Northumbrian) Division, 7th Armoured Division (Desert Rats)
and the 5lst (Highland) Division to bolster the untested rest - but
