250
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
structures failed when one section sank and could not be refloated on 20
May - three weeks before D-Day. The Admiralty Salvage Department
also took over this element and completed it just days before 6 June?
Even the Mulberry crews were not ready until 4 June - just 24 hous
before the original D-Day. But building the devices was just the first of
three problems. The second was where to put them off Normandy, and
the third was getting them there.
The resolution of the second problem began with the formation of the
British navy unit 712th LCP(SY) Flotilla (Landing
Craft,
Personnel
(Survey)), because there were no hydrographic surveys in existent,
apart, that was, from the last French survey of the area - in 1836. As a
consequence, several secret operations were carried out to map and meas
ure the seabed.?? The nine members of the 712th LCP(SY) trained in
hydrographic surveying in Southampton
waters in 1943. Using a
wooden hull - to avoid distorting the magnetic signals - the boat was
equipped with an echo sounder and a depth measuring device, and it
began charting the Normandy coast in minute detail. The ICP(SX) was
towed across the channel by three MGBs (Motor Gun Boats) and made
no own way to the beach area where the surveying work and beat
sampung were carried out between midnight and 0400 am from
November to December 1943. One particular problem (a potential peat
bog) required one more trip over New Year's Eve 1943 when unfort
nately an auger (the boring tool) was lost. Luckily, it was picked up by a
French civilian who realized its significance and hid it?8
the third probiem invoived towing the 'phoenixes across the channe
parately. this required 100 tugs - almost all there were in the posses
sion of the Allied nations - plus 40 related vessels and 10,000 personnel
o bolt them all togetner. the American construction, Mulberry A, Dull
off Omaha Beach by No. 108 Construction Battalion (Sea Bees), Was
lestroyed in the great storm of 19 June which reached force 7 (29-30
a to then unt the open french ports bo supples were
dea directy on the beach. Unlike the British Mulberry at on Detes,
he American design included a 200 foot gap within the phoenixes to
allow small craft through; this also let the storm waves through that
1ncd the entire harbour. Such was the destruction that there wer
not enough spare sections to rebuild the American harbour and, sti
Cherbourg was about to fall anyway and beach landings were viable, l
vas decided to abandon the US Mulberry.80 In fact the British Mulberr
also dau a temporary 40 foot gap but is was a consequence of having
ship Courbet, arrived.
to sink eight of the nine block shie: before the ninth, the French battle
A misjudgement on the size left a gạp that was
eventually filled by a small tenth ship from England. 81
MANAGING LOGISTICS: 'BAG, VOMIT, ONE.'
251
Photo 10.2 View over Arromanches from St Côme
Photo 10.3 Remains of floating harbour at Arromanches
a nose three problems were balanced by I r advantages embodied ill
he Mulberries. The first was the amount of materies landed: after the
great storm, when the British Mulberry b Of Arromanches on told
Beach returned to full operations, it carried 11,000 tons a day. By the
and of August the British had landed 830,000 troops, 203,000 vehicles
and 1.2 million tons of stores, and half of the had come directly throus"
mulberry b, built under the guidance of Kear Admiral Wilham LenDan
who had been prominent in evacuating British troops from the East Mole
(a concrete breakwater) at Dunkirk.
