168
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
for the enemy officers 51 The selection of leaders for killing seems to have
been standard policy from the very first minute on D-Day. For example,
the official history of the 29th Division's landing on Omaha suggests that
within 7 to 10 minutes after the ramps had dropped, Company A had
become inert, leaderless and almost incapable of action. The Company vas
almost entirely bereft of officers .... Every sergeant was either killed or
wounded. It seemed to the others that enemy snipers had spotted their
leaders and directed their fire so as to exterminate them' 2
Brigadier Hargest, the commander of New Zealand's 5th Infantry
Brigade who was captured in Libya, was of the same opinion - British
officers were easily recognizable, especially by their shiny map folders,
and without officers British troops were often unable to move forward or
take the initiative on their own:
The English soldier ... demands leadership by officers. I notice that, as soon a8
seen lose their officers, they lose heart. Today, the 16th, I met several Bren gun
sections coming back and in reply to my enquiries Why?', they said the fire was
heavy and they got out of touch ... It did not occur to them to go on .... This is
not suggesting that they lack courage, they don't.53
the consequence of the German policy to eliminate the orcers first
led many British officers to beg making themselves ds inconspicuous as
possible, alTy to paulettes and discarding binoculars, clipboards and
other tell-tale signs of authority and carrying rifles instead of revolvers' 54
References to ranks were also removed by the adoption of codenames.
For example, the leader of any formation - of any size - was referred to
as SUNRAY and the second ito command was SUNRAY MINOR.55
Saluting, calling officers si', and so on, alfell by the wayside in many
US units at the front too, as officers learnet hat survival was preferable
to status.56 American army combat ofill ers often removed collar insignia
and the stripes on the front of their helmet - which id proved so usefu
to enemy snipers - but they retained a vertical white stripe down the back
of their helmets to aid identification for their own troops without draw-
ing the attention of enemy snipees. However, some officers even covered
the back stripe with mud when it became clear that German snipers were
often left behind departing verman troops to harass the Americans from
the rear.57 Likewise, Allied tank troop commanders initially led from the
lead tankit iten with their heads out of the turret. But the ablity of the
Germans to destroy the lead tank - andoS piit the co-ordination of the
troop - quickly led to all tankerit operating with the hatch closed and
will the commanders travelling in the second or third tank with every
other tank taking it in turns to haavel at the front, on 'point' duty,58
MOBILIZING ANGLO-CANADIANS, COMMONWEALTH, VOLUNTEERS
169
Replacement officers for those killed, wounded or promoted were by
no means assured of a respectful welcome and simply had to earn the
respect of their subordinates by their actions rather than
assume it
through their badge of rank. Lt Geoffrey Picot with the Ist Hampshire
Regiment was certainly concerned that the death of ten company and
Platoon commanders in Normandy left the regiment bereft of accepted
leaders. 'It is surprising that the battalion continued to fight so well,
although I doubt whether it ever again performed so superbly as it had
done on D-Day'. 59
The importance of maintaining and reinforcing divisions between offi-
cers and soldiers - intended to ensure that the latter only did what the
former told them to do - was remarkably successful and remarkably
counter-productive.
Initially British Army officers were recruited and
trained locally in small groups but the policy altered in 1941 when the
emphasis on physical training and technical efficiency was seen to gener-
ate a very heterogeneous
thereafter, Officer Cadet Training Units (Obuy tore established which
group without any common
trained young officers for between 17 weeks for the infantry to 30 weeks
for the Royal Engineers. From 1942 the School of Infantry was formed
to develop common training programmes for platoon commanders (28
days), company commanders (21 days) and commanding officers (COs)
lof battalions) (21 days). By the end of the war the average age of COs of
infantry battalions had dropped from 40 to 30.60 But even the influx of
"grammar school boys' did not, in and of itself, necessarily generate a
greater respect for their officers on the part of the ordinary soldiers.
For related reasons most infantry soldiers seem to have preferred to be
led by someone with a battlefield commission - that is someone who had
enlisted as an ordinary soldier and been promoted after combat experi-
ence - though many of these were regarded with suspicion for changing
sides. Yet they were, according to Richard Kirkman, a tanker in the 2nd
Armoured Division, 'more efficient and practical than those from mili-
tary college and officers' training school' 61 However, Montgomery all
but abandoned field commissions in Europe soon after D-Day because 'it
nates - as opposed to ordering them to do something - was regarded as
a heinous crime; after all, if the Germans did that it must have been inet-
acient. Fortunately for the Royal Marine Commandos, formany wider
Royal Navy control and therefore beyond Montgomery's paranoia, field
commissions were still available. 62
thos portant because it underlines an important issue: the probien
or formal Leadership (for most recognized its functional requirement), but
