372
COMMANDING IN CRISES
simile short of Caen's northern suburbs but under attack from both
sides, without reinforcements, and having already taken 113 casualies,
the KSLI pulled back to Bieville just before midnight. 82
Many have insisted that such 'defensive posturing' by the British
troops landing on Sword cost the Allies the momentum that might have
taken Caen and it may be significant that this Division had no experience
ot a sea-borne assault.83 Belchem, for one, blames the officer corps, but
not the troops, for the limited success on this front, and Lovat had litte
time for either group. Montgomery - who sacked It General Bucknal,
the CO for Gold Beach - had originally claimed that Caen was the
primary British objective for D-Day, though it took six more weeks to
achieve in conjunction with a break out to the west by the American
forces that moved rapidly south from their beachhead. However, it is aso
the case that this sector faced the only serious armoured counter-attack
of the day - and held it off. Von Schweppenburg was very clear from his
position as the organizer of German defences around Caen about what
was possible:
The Dits de cardad boops were magnincent rowevel, we a wille
began to think, rightly or wrongly, that the command of these superb troops way
not making the best use of them. The command seemed slow and pedestrian. If
seemed that the Allied intention was to wear down their enemy with their enor-
mous material superiority.84
The Germans also began to suffer critical losses in their leadershp
through air attacks: on 11 June von Schweppenburg's HQ at La Caine
Was bombed (by 17 Mitchell bombers of the RAF's 320th Squadron
butchy owns a Cild tercept, and though von swepperous
was only injured, about 20 other staff including his Chief of Staff were
killed, are the co-cramation of the fanzer divisions dis upted for two
weeks. The following day, 12 June, General Marks was killed in an all
attack, and two days later General Witt, CO of the 12th SS, was killed by
naval guntre at his FiQ at Venoix near Caen. In short, three of the
action within a week of the invasion.
at enders' most important commanders had been killed or put out of
Nine days alter D-Day (15 June), thehe jermans regained control of the
east bank of the River Orne and began shelling Sword so accurately that
all landings there were halted and transferred to Juno Beach. Conditions
anal ad to deteriorate for the Allies and on 1 July Sword was officially
'closed' and all activities transferred further west.
But this was not
regarded as a signiticant problem because the date also marked the end
of Operation Neptune - the naval aspect of Overlord, and with five more
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
373
days (5 July (D-Day+29) the millionth Allied soldier had stepped
ashore 37 By 18 August 1.9 million soldiers, over 400,000 vehicles and
2,5 million tons of supplies had been landed in France.88 Of those that
anded on D-Day, by far the easiest assault occurred at Utah Beach.
14.5 Utah Beach
Utah was to be attacked by the US 4th Infantry Division, minus all those
alled in Exercise liger of course, and supported by one battalion of the
suth Infantry Division. They were to be followed up by the ith and the
th Intantry Divisions. The confusion at Utah Beach was as great as
anywhere else. At about U555, around / ,soon ards off-shore, re fratrol-
cart) 1261 destined to act as primary guide for the and Battalion, oth
Infantry Regimental Combat Team (RCT -
an oversized regiment)
heading for Uncle Red Beach was sunk, and the secondary PC was still
suck in the transport area with a fouled propeller. The two PCs guiding
the Ist Battalion 8th Infantry then led all the landing craft in but in the
reorganization, and the confusion caused by smoke on land and just off
shore, the majorty of the landings occurred at bao - about two dards
of a ase south of the intended target (Exit 2). This was a most fortu-
nate error for several reasons. First, Exit 2 lay opposite a sand bar that
would hal made the landing more difficult and the run deross t
beach area longer - though why it was chosen in the first place is not
obvious. Second, Exit 3 had received thelS eaviest bombardment and the
defences here were in a markthos poorer shape than at Exit 2.
With greater protection from the Cotentin peninsular than at Omand,
Wo squadrons of DD tanks were successfully launched 3 klometres of
Utah Beach and 28 of the 32 made it ashore, although they were 15
minutes behind the infantry who wert just one minute behind schedule
when they landed. As troops of the Ist and 2nd Battalion, oth Infantry
made a relatively easy run across wong! with no small-arms fire and
relatively little artillery fire, they cheered at their successes - only to
discover that they had, by chance and in a smoke screen, come ashore not
On Tare Green and Uncle Red beaches respectively but almost 2,000
yards further south than planned, on Uncle Red and Victor respectively.
There could have been many more casualties on Utah. The area actu-
ally had 28 German resistance points along the beach itself, with 111
medium to heavy calibre guns, and subsequent analysis suggested that 75
Per cent of these guns were still operational at the time of the assault;
indeed, half were still working after the assault.?0 67 of the 360 heavy
bombers that targeted Utah failed to release their bombs because of the
