374
COMMANDING IN CRISES
aNgE
Photo 14.3 Utah Beach, near Exit 5
poor visibility and one third of the medium bombers also missed their
targets."! However, it appears that the air and sea bombardment effec-
tively neutralized the vast majority simply by killing or wounding the
gunners or by paralysing them through shock. Luckily, Exit 3 was also
the spot where the B-26 Marauder bombers had done the most damage.
Certainly Lieutenant Jahnke of the German 709th Infantry Division's
strongpoint W-5
was, like most of his troops, devastated by the
bombardment, and only one 88-mm gun and one old French tank turret
was left in working order as the Americans hit the beach. The 88-mm
jammed after firing one round and the turret was quickly destroyed, as
was the rest of the bunker.ยบ2
Not only were there less beach obstacles at Exit 3 but it was further
from the four 210mm guns at Crisbeq (St, Marcouf), and the four 105
mm guns at Azeville. More important than the extra mile of safety, there
were lewer artillery observers here so the long-distance shelling was less
accurate. Moreover, the removal of the artillery spotters immediately on
the beach by the pre-invasion bombardment meant that the German
artillery continued to fire on pre-planned targets on the beach area where
he invaders might have been expected to land - not where they actually
anded. Thus for three hours the German guns fired safely into the sand
where they should have landed, while the American invaders continued
Potts donore 1,000 yards further alois, the beach. Even where the
lefenders guns were accurately zerd d in on the position at which the
375
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
arackers landed, their guns had been set to fire on the high water mark,
in in fact the landings began just an hour after low water.?3
Despite this apparent good fortune, the 'luck' of the Americans was as
much to do with German command errors and Allied skill as anything
te ery early on the morning of D-Day 19 members of the 2nd battal-
on, 506th PIR, 101st Airborne, were captured by members of the W5
Resistance Nest under Lieutenant Jahnke at Exit
3. At 0245 the
american prisoners asked what time it was and, when being told the
sover, suggested that they should be evacuated - precisely why was not
pained but it should have been enough to confirm to the German
cupants that W5 was a likely target - and soon. 4 Ninety minutes later
the first shells began landing around Janke and he immediately tele-
phoned an order for a barrage on the beach from the gun battery situ
in three klometres behind him. However, the naval shelling had
uestroyed the telephone system by then so he sent a motorcycle despatch
ner with a very clear message: beach barrage to be laid down on my
nal of two green flares. When the landing craft arrived Jahnke fired
we green flares but no barrage arrived because the despatch rider had
been killed by a marauding fighter-bomber." Jahnke's inability to
11 Io reushy the paratroopers were so nervous in his bunker and his
went delay in ordering a barrage, coupied with that single nighter
attack, probably saved hundreds of American lives but the actions of
General Roosevelt were also important.
General Theodore Roosevelt, son ofa he late president, had originally
been refused a place in the landings because of his age (he was 56) and
il-health. However, he had taken part in more amphibious landings than
almost any American fighting in Europe
(North Africa,
Sicily and
arsica). in contrast to the indecisive comiss nd of Lieutenant Jannke,
General Roosevelt rallied the "lost' troops,
1 itical nature of the situation declared "We'll start the war from right
and quickly assessing the
nere" and ordered the follow up trops to land where he was, not
where they were supposed to. Harper Coleman, from the 2nd Battalion
vi the 8ith Infantry RCT, remembers being
harangued by General
seveltss i we were afraid of the enemy, we were more afraid of him,
1 I could not have stopped on the beach had we wanted to'." A month
ater, on 6 July - and the day before Eisenhower was to announce he
had been given command of the 90th Infantry Division
Theodore
Koosevelt died of a heart attack. He was awarded a posthumous Medal
i tonour and is buried in the Ameridea Cemetery above Umaha Beach
ext to his younger brotherbilio died in France in 1918.
The first gaps in Utah's beach defences were opened up by 0715, and
by 0930 the entire beach area was declared free of obstacles.
Later that
