LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
32
especially the numbers of infantry soldiers; it was 'the ninety division
gamble'. 37
By the end of 1943 the political and military leadership of the Allies
had indeed achieved some success - as measured by the results. They had
made three relatively successful amphibious landings: in North Africa in
November 1942, Sicily in July 1943 - where the US designed amphibi-
ous vehicle or DUKW38 and the British designed LSTs (Landing Ship
Tank - or Long Slow Target as their occupants called them) were
deployed - and at Salerno in September 1943. But unlike the Dieppe
raid, the three invasions were against unfortified coastlines. Moreover, the
Sicilian invasion provided clear warnings of what might happen in
Normandy. First, the US 82nd paratroopers were scattered in the high
winds right across the island and many of the second wave were dropped
at the same time as a Luftwaffe attack and consequently shot by US forces
by mistake. Second, many of the British Ist Airborne's gliders were lost
in the sea as they were cast off too early by their tow planes. Several
DUKWs also proved themselves unseaworthy in any kind of swell - as
much because the seasick soldiers' vomit blocked up the bilge pumps as
because of any inherent design problem in the vehicle itself that subse-
quently proved invaluable in the absence of port facilities for unloading. 39
The gradual realization that the troop numbers were insufficient for a
full scale European invasion led to a radical reduction in the relatively
rigorous selection policies of the American forces in 1942. For example,
the dental requirements were reduced from having all your own teeth to
having enough - natural or artificial - to survive on army rations 40 Even
the Rangers' Colonel Rudder ignored the requirement for having your
own teeth after a relatively toothless Private William Petty appealed
against his rejection: 'Hell, Sir', he is alleged to have remonstrated to
Rudder, 'I don't want to bite 'em, I want to fight 'em' 4l But for the
British the luxury of dental sufficiency never entered into the equation;
by the middle of August 1944 - just two months after D-Day
Montgomery informed Alan Brooke that 'My infantry divisions are now
so low in effective rifle strength they can no longer - repeat, no longer -
fight effectively in major operations', 42 Furthermore, he knew very well
that the Second Army in France was the last he could send - as far as he
knew there simply were not enough replacements left. 43
The US had been keen to go in 1943, especially since the Soviet posi-
tion had looked very weak during 1942, and Stalin (who had sent Ivan
Maisky, the Soviet Ambassador to plead for British help the day after 186
German divisions involved in Barbarossa began the invasion in 1941)
may have been forced out of the war if there was any delay in opening a
second front. Within a month Stalin requested 25-30 British divisions
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
33
either to land in France and draw off German reinforcements or to fight
with the Red Army on the eastern front. 44 Churchill, however, wanted
to delay as long as possible, primarily because it would take time to
assemble the necessary troops and their associated war materials, but also
because he still hoped that the German war machine would be ground
down by - and in turn undermine - the Soviet war machine.
Indeed,
Stalin suspected that the Western Allies would not enter Europe against
Germany unless they thought the Red Army would reach Berlin before
them. 45 For Churchill, as for Stalin and Roosevelt, the post-war era was
as important as the war itself and would facilitate Churchill's secret
agenda first to dominate Europe and, if necessary, to continue the war -
but this time against the Soviet Union using some reassembled German
forces. 4 In the end the delay until 1944 was more a consequence of the
time required for preparation and planning than anything else.
2.4 Testing the strategy: taming or compounding
the problem?
A crucial aspect that differentiates Tame from Wicked Problems is the
utility of practice. Problems become tamed through successful experience
- and they remain Wicked if such practice fails to resolve the problem.
On the other hand, with Wicked Problems it is often the case that the
problem itself is not always apparent until the search for a solution clari-
fies exactly what that problem is. Thus practising the invasion - through
rehearsals and through related but isolated assaults against German posi-
tions - provided the essential test of the category of problem faced.
Preparation for the return could not simply be a paper exercise because
there were so many unknown factors that needed to be tested in practice.
That practice began with a landing by a small party of British comman-
dos near Boulogne on 23 June 1940, the day after France signed an
armistice with Germany and Hitler boasted that the British had been
'driven from the continent forever' 47 There were supposed to be 200
commandos involved but there were only enough boats for 12 and the
force took with them 20 Thompson sub-machine guns (Tommy guns) -
that was half the number currently in existence in Britain. Somehow the
vast armada of boats that had saved 339,000 British and French troops
at Dunkirk, and a huge quantity of small arms, had mysteriously disap-
peared. 48 The contrast between the mass evacuation and the first return
raid was completed when, on the latter's return, one group of comman-
dos landed at the wrong port and was promptly arrested by the British
Military Police for desertion.
