380
COMMANDING IN CRISES
defenders had temporarily disappeared, except for those manning a rein-
forced Observation Point who were quickly silenced.
Another irony was that the 155mm guns were not in their bunkers -
telephone poles had replaced them. The guns had been moved to a
nearby apple orchard three days earlier to avoid the recent air raids in the
area and were aligned to fire on Utah Beach. Once discovered, however,
the three guns that had not been damaged by the bombardment were
disabled by thermite grenades - just as the gun crews lined up for inspec-
tion at 0900 - the first mission accomplished by American ground forces
on D-Day. The Rangers then moved on to the complex of bunkers until
reinforcements arrived. In fact, at midday Rudder's message back to
General Huebner via the Satterlee read: 'Located Pointe du Hoe (sic) -
mission accomplished - need ammunition and reinforcement - many
casualties'. Huebner's reply reflected the tragedy unfolding at Omaha:
No reinforcements available? 110
Those reinforcements should have been the 5th Rangers Battalion,
which diverted to Dog Green on Omaha while Company C and the rest of
the 2nd Rangers attacked Pointe at Raz de la Percée - where Rudder had
been inadvertently led at first. They were awaiting a signal from Rudder
that would call them over to reinforce him should he have trouble - which
he did. Unfortunately Rudder's delayed landing and consequent bitter
struggle up the diffs meant that by the time the signal for help was sent
they were already committed to Omaha. Thus the reinforcements that
Photo 14.7 Pointe du Hoc from west showing Rangers Memorial
381
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
were due at 1200 on D-Day did not arrive until 1200 D-Day+2. At that
point Rudder's Rangers had fought off five counter-attacks, with the help
of naval gunfire from the ships offshore, and only 50 of the 200 Rangers
were still capable of fighting.l!1 Even then some of the tanks involved
began shelling the area on the assumption that all the Rangers must have
been killed. I2 Having just driven off Omaha the tankers could be
forgiven for that assumption.
14.7 Omaha Beach
Omaha Beach is the 7,000 yard crescent of beach encompassing
Colleville-sur-Mer and Verville-sur-Mer, linking Utah in the west with
and in the cast a ou yard beach exists at low tide with a very gentle
gradient (1:188) rising to 1:47 at the high water point and 1:8 to the
shingle beach (now disappeared) 113 Beyond the beach is a marshy area
running up to the bluffs that are not accessible to vehicles. Five "draws'
or valleys provided the only access for these and only one metalled road
existed at the time, through Vierville-sur-Mer.
If death on the other beaches and on the Pointe du Hoc was a
"random harvest', on Omaha it was a 'grim reaping? l14 The total casu-
alies for Omaha on D-Day itself were about 2,000 (almost 40 per cont
of the total invasion casualties of about 4,900). In effect, Omaha took
Trice the number of casualties it should have done if the numbers were
even distributed between the five beaches, though proportionately it was
only marginally more than the Canadian casualtics on Juno. General
bradley, speaking su years after the event, called it 'a nightmare' 115 In a
"pically plain-speaking conclusion Ambrose suggests that The plan had
called for the air
and naval bombardments, followed by tanks and
(bull)dozers, to blast a path through the exits so that the intantry could
march up the draws and engage the enemy, but the plan had fallea,
utterly and completely failed' 116 What made it particularly ironic was
that Bradley had always assumed that the major probiem was not forcing
a landing but securing it. As he told the journalists on board the USS
Augusta on the 4 June - what should have been the eve of D-Day:
were going to face three critical periodd in this invasion. The first will come in
setting ashore. It'll be difficult - but we're not especially worried about that part
of it. The second may come on the sixth & seventh day when the other fellow gets
together enough reinforcements for a counter-offensive. I his counter-attack will
probably give us our greatest trouble. Then, once we hurdle the counter-attack,
our third critical period will come when we go to break out of the beach-head ...
