LEADERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND COMMAND AT D-DAY
For example, to claim that a worsening in the weather would have left
the Allies exposed to air attack assumes both that the Luftwaffe could fly
in conditions that the Allied air forces could not, and that the Luftwaffe
existed in sufficient numbers close enough to the beaches to inflict signif-
cant damage on the Allies: but neither of these claims holds true.
Indeed, German fighter aircraft losses were running at over 2,000 a
month just prior to D-Day - twice the number of Allied losses in aircraft
at this time and twice the rate at which new German fighter pilots could
be trained? In effect, in the first five months of 1944 the pilot turnover
in the Luftwaffe was 99 per cent.® Between January 1944 and D-Day the
Luftwaffe lost 6,259 planes in combat and roughly half that number in
non-combat accidents? From an average force of 2,283, the deaths in
that six months amounted to 2,262. In the first two days of the invasion
200 fighters were moved from Germany to France, but the pilots had
been trained for air defence not ground attack so within two weeks the
Germans had lost another 594 aircraft. 10 On D-Day itself the Luftwaffe
- which had promised to have 1,000 fighters in the air for the invasion -
had only 319 operational aircraft within flying distance of Normandy: 88
bombers, 172 fighters and 59 reconnaissance aircraft to attack the inva-
sion beaches. 11
Similarly, to claim that the air bombardment would have been
cancelled implies that it made much difference - but we know this not to
be the case, and its failure was one critical factor in the problems on
Omaha. For instance, at 0000 hours 6 June, 1,333 heavy bombers began
attacking the coastal defences, and as the light progressed so the shift to
the medium and light bombers of the USAAF occurred. The final bomb-
ing plan was agreed so late that only ten major batteries were targeted by
the heavy bombers, each receiving 500 tons of bombs on the evening of
5 June. 12 Even
this agreement was wrung from General Spaatz,
commander of the US Strategic Air Forces in Europe, with deep fore-
boding because heavy bombers simply did not have the capability of
hitting such small targets from the great heights they operated from.
Spaatz, ever-concerned to minimize 'friendly fire' casualties, insisted that
the first waves of landing craft delay their approach to give the bombers
a chance to do their work accurately but the ground commanders insisted
on the original timings. Thus the American bombers were instructed to
delay their drops until certain that no Allied troops would be hit - and
as a consequence almost no troops of either side were hit where that
delay was compounded by the low cloud cover over Omaha Beach. 13
All told, over 5,000 Allied bombers and nearly 5,500 Allied fighters
were in the air on D-Day; none was shot down by the Luftwaffe though
113 were shot down by anti-aircraft fire. If the light was good the
PROBLEMS, UNDERSTANDING AND DECISION-MAKING
bombing was due to stop five minutes before the first landing; if the light
was bad it was
extended to ten minutes.
Neither the sea nor the air
bombardment was as thoroughly planned as they should have been. First
because the air forces were reluctant to commit themselves until very late
in the planning timetable and second because the responsibility for decid-
ing what was necessary lay with the army but the responsibility for how
that was executed remained with the navy and the airforce. The result
was a generally weak and poorly executed plan. For instance, at Omaha
Beach, each B-17 Flying Fortress was to drop its sixteen 500lb bombs
from 20,000 feet, a height that made accuracy through cloud cover virtu-
ally impossible. They were followed by B-24 Liberators due to fly at 500
feet and drop 1,285 tons of bombs to destroy and bewilder the defend-
ers while leaving plenty of craters and debris to protect the attacking
troops.
In the event the B-26 Marauders that attacked Utah proved
much more effective than the B-24 attacks upon Omaha, Gold, Juno and
Sword and in general the air attacks were disappointing. 14 Particularly
ineffective were the attacks upon 13
critical defensive positions on
Omaha for the poor visibility dissuaded the pilots from dropping their
bombs until they were well past their own troops - in fact 3 miles inland.
Likewise, Ambrose's suggestion that the paratroop drops would have
been massively dispersed is precisely what happened anyway.
Some
soldiers from the US 82nd Airborne Division were dropped in the wrong
zone completely, landing
amongst troops
from the
10lst Airborne
Division and vice versa. Indeed it has been claimed that 75 per cent of
the 13,000 American paratroopers landed so far from their targets that
they played no effective part in any of the planned attacks. 15 Ridgeway's
scattered troops from the 82nd were unable to mount any major attack
upon German positions but ironically the very same distribution led the
Germans to assume a much heavier airborne attack than had actually
occurred, not just because the 82nd seemed to be everywhere but
because they cut every telephone line they found, making it very difficult
for the Germans to verify the position and density of the paratroopers.
The experience of the other American Airborne Division, the 101st,
was very similar. The 101st was due to land in four concentrated groups
but instead they were spread over 300 square miles of Normandy with
35 'sticks' (plane-load) outside their designated drop zones, and some
people 20 miles from their drop zone. 16 This was partly because only 38
of the 120 pathfinders were themselves put down on target. 17 Once
again the Germans were unable to take advantage of the situation
because the scattered troops, the use of dummy paratroopers, and the
effective cutting of many telephone lines by the French Resistance, left
them unable to assess the picture with any accuracy. The confusion was
