70
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
difficult because experience in Italy had demonstrated that at least 600
tons of bombs were needed to destroy any bridge using medium or heavy
bombers. However, Leigh-Mallory's fighter-bombers of the ABAF had
demonstrated in experimental attacks that a bridge could be destroyed
using around 100 sorties and 100-200 tons of bombs. To avoid arous-
ing suspicion the bridges over the Loire sealing off Normandy from the
south were not attacked until after D-Day but from 21 April bridges in
France and Belgium received particular attention. 59
The overall results of the shift from the Oil Plan to the Transportation
Plan were significant. By D-Day 76,000 tons of bombs had landed on
French railvay targets alone, destroying 12 rail bridges and 12 roa
bridges across the Seine (though not, inexplicably, barge traffic along the
Seine), reducing the rail traffic west of Paris by almost two-thirds, though
only about 10 per cent of the rolling stock had been eliminated, 60 In fact,
until the Transportation Plan was implemented, the French Resistance
were much more effective at destroying trains (808 between January and
March 1944) than any strategic bombing from the air, 1 though much
of the most effective destruction was wrought by the fighter-bombers
under Leigh-Mallory's overall control. 62
By mid-May 1944 rail traffic between France and Germany had fallen
by 50 per cent; rail traffic inside France was reduced to 20 per cent and
between March and June 1944 1,500 French locomotives were
destroyed. Perhaps a good example of the significance of the bombing
campaign can be gauged from the actions of the 9th SS Panzer and lOth
$5 Panzer, forming the II SS Panzer Corps, which was intended to form
the speared of an armoured counten aun against the Allies. since the
tracks of German tanks wore out five times quicker than the Allies equiv-
dient, they were always transported by rail where possible, and on 12
a sung left the Polish-Russian border to head west. I hey travelled
detoss fond and Germany to reach france in four days - but it took
another ten to get across France. 64 Although German tank production
remained high, and could have replaced the losses suffered in Normandy,
it was simply impossible to transport the tanks there.65 Thus by the
middle of June only is per cent of German dally expenditure of fuel and
inititions was arriving at the front and by the end of June only just over
one third of munitions that had been sent had actually arrived.6o
3.4 Coastal defences
Attacks upon the coastal batteries began on 10 April, and by D-Day all
49 of the known installations in the assault area had been bombed, as
ALLIED AIR STRATEGY
71
well as twice that number outside the area, as far north as Ostend. Leigh-
Mallory was not optimistic that bombing would destroy the already
completed batteries - since they had been designed to withstand precisely
the kind of attacks he planned - but luckily those close to Cherbourg
were the last to be completed and many were damaged or destroyed
before they were completed. By D-Day 8,765 sorties had dropped
23,049 tons of bombs and fired 495 60-pound rockets. Of the 40 batter-
ies allocated to the AEAF, 38 were attacked and 23 received direct hits
on one or more emplacements. The largest guns were at Le Grand Cos,
near Le Havre, which was designed to house three 15-inch (380mm)
guns with a range of 55 kilometres - that is capable of firing on all the
Anglo-Canadian beaches. Fortunately only one gun had been installed by
D-Day. 7 In fact, Bomber Command was well aware of the difficulties of
destroying casemated gun positions. The 12,000lb "Tallboy' Deep
Penetration (DP) bombs, capable of penetrating to great depths before
exploding, were just becoming available but they were in short supply
and very expensive, thus the decision was made to use conventional high
explosive bombs to 'discourage' the German defenders, even if the guns
could not be destroyed. Subsequent interrogation of German gunners by
the RAF suggested that conventional bombs could never have penetrated
the strongest casemated gun positions. 68
Precisely what guns were in position in which battery remains a peren-
nial controversy. For example, according to Dunphie and Johnson, the St
Marcouf battery housed three 210mm guns with a range of 27km in 13
feet of reinforced concrete, one 150mm gun, six anti-aircraft guns and
four 20mm guns, all operated by 287 soldiers, 7 NCOs and 3 officers. 69
Holt and Holt, on the other hand, suggest there were two 155mm, six
75mm guns, three 21mm and three
20mm guns? Whatever the
weaponry involved, the battery sank one destroyer and damaged several
other warships before being bombarded from the sea. Nevertheless, the
garrison held out until 12 June.
The adjoining battery at d'Azeville was
captured on 9 June by Private Riley, 22nd US Infantry Division, whose
flame thrower assault ignited ammunition inside the building,
forcing
169 Germans to surrender.
Besides the gun batteries there were also 92 radar stations operating
along the coast and between 10 May and 5 June Typhoons carried out
604 low-level sorties and fired over 4,500 rockets, while Spitfires and
'Bomphoons' (bomb-carrying Typhoons) had launched 759 attacks.?]
By 3 June the 12 primary radar sites of the 39 within the invasion area
were extensively damaged, as were the two navigation sites at Sortosville
and Lanmeur. On D-Day only 18 of the 92 radar sites operated normally
and none of these were within the invasion zone.?
