66
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
demanded the dispersal of vehicles to minimize air attacks - but since the
chances of these were so small the armour and transport simply used the
area as a gigantic overnight tank and vehicle parking lot. 39
In contrast, so effective was the Allied air force that, providing the
weather was suitable and communications operational, an Allied air
attack could be called within minutes. For example, Cooper recalls
during an early phase of the St Lô breakout suddenly finding his unit,
armed only with a 57mm anti-tank gun facing a Panther tank. 40 The unit
commander immediately called for an air strike which his air force liaison
officer organized. Within 45 seconds two P 51 Mustang fighter-bombers
arrived and destroyed the tank.
Nevertheless, the Allied fighter bombers which did so much damage
to the Wehrmacht were themselves very vulnerable to ground fire and
often at a considerable disadvantage when attacked by their lighter-
loaded Luftwaffe opponents. Some 248 American pilots were lost in the
month after D-Day, including 30 out of 70 P 47 pilots from one forma-
tion. Of the 280 RAF Typhoons lost between June and September 1944
only 25 were known to have been shot down by German fighters; the
rest are presumed to have been hit by ground fire. 41
3.3 The Transport Plan
Getting the bomber chiefs to agree amongst themselves about strategy -
a Wicked Problem - was hard enough but getting them to switch from
attacking the Infiwaffe to attacking the French transport system was far
more difficult. Initially,
since neither the American nor the British
bomber groups were under Eisenhower's formal command at SHAEr,
he could do little to persuade them to change, and he wrote to Marshall
that he was tired of trying to arrange the blankets smoothly over several
prima donnas in the same bed' 42 Nor was he helped by Churchill of the
British Cabinet who refused to countenance the handover of RAF
bomber command to SHAEF. Thus on the one hand the Oil Plan was
condemned (primarily by the British) because of the difficulties of reach-
ing the targets, many of which were in the heavily defended Ruhr or
Transportation Plan, on
the other hand,
condemned (primarily by the Americans) because the French and Belgian
railvays were not being used to their full capacity by the Germans
anyway, hence the elimination of some elements would merely remove
excess capacity 43 And because the French railway system was so dense,
cict successful bombing would have difficulty in completing the inter-
diction. As one Allied intelligence report insisted: Hitler had three times
ALLIED AIR STRATEGY
67
the rail capacity needed for military traffic, four times the required
numbers of cars, eight times the required locomotives, and ten times the
required servicing facilities'. 44
Eisenhower, exasperated by the actions of his so-called allies, threat-
ened to resign his 'command' saying: 'I will tell the Prime Minister to get
someone else to run this damn war. I'll quit!'45 Subsequently, both air
commanders acceded to his demands - though they replaced the word
"command' with 'supervision' in an effort to limit Eisenhower's control
which effectively ensured that they would accept Eisenhower's require-
ments but not release their planes to his air commander, Leigh-Mallory.
On 22 March Eisenhower told Churchill that he wasn't threatening to
resign this time, he was actually going home. Only on 14 April, six weeks
after Leigh-Mallory had planned to take control over the strategic
bombers, and only seven weeks before D-Day, an agreement emerged,
and the word 'direction' magically appeared to replace the word "super-
vision' on the final agreement. But the compromise ensured that the air
interdiction of Normandy by heavy bombers remained in the hands of
Spaatz and Harris. Spaatz also threatened to resign if he was not allowed
to continue attacking German oil installations. 46
Even then Churchill refused to agree to the bombing if it meant
killing large numbers of innocent French civilians - which the British
government estimated at between 80,000 and
He also
remained unmoved by Eisenhower's pleas, demanding instead an alter-
native plan that would limit the French casualties to around 100 per
target (having revised the total possible casualties of the original plan
down to between 10,000 and
wrote to
Roosevelt suggesting that the plan be ditched because of the slaughter'
(a word used four times) of French civilians that would result. 47
Roosevelt's reply on 11 May was uncompromising.
'However regret-
table the attendant loss of civilian lives is, I am not prepared to impose
from this distance any restriction on military action by the responsible
commanders that in their opinion might militate against the success of
'Overlord' or cause additional loss of life to our Allied forces of inva-
sion'.48 Even General Koenig,
commander of the French forces in
Britain, accepted that the inevitable French casualties would be the price
the French would have to pay to escape their bondage, and with that
Churchill finally acceded. 49
The strategic bombing leaders, then, were not simply engaged in a turf
war over control of their own resources, or simply in a competition to win
the war single-handed. Spaatz, and particularly Harris, insisted that the
kinds of targets Zuckerman required to be hit in the Transportation Plan
were simply beyond the capabilities of strategic bombers. What particularly
