LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
was the responsibility of Air-Marshal Trafford. Eisenhower recom-
mended to Marshall that Bradley (the only senior commander he really
trusted) be appointed to command the US forces in the field for
Overlord, that is the US lst Army, and he was duly appointed on 23
is the US 1st Arm
December 1943. Bradley, no fan of Montgomery's idiosyncratic personal
style, was nevertheless clear that Montgomery brought two things to
Overlord that would be critical to its success.
First, Monty's incomparable talent for the 'set' battle - the meticulous
planned offensive that he had created after he witnessed the chaos and
bloodshed of the First World War as a divisional commander - made him
invaluable in the Overlord assault. For the Channel crossing was patterned
to a rigid plan; nothing was left to chance or improvisation in command.
"Until we gained a bridgehead we were to put our trust in The Plan'?
Second, Montgomery was one of the very few British commanders
who had actually been successful against the Germans, a rare quality at
this time and something which propelled him to hero-status in the eyes
of the British. 1ยบ Bradley recognized Eisenhower's diplomatic skills in
maintaining the alliance, but these were not the kind of qualities neces-
sary to encourage troops in battle. In contrast,
Psychologically the choice of Montgomery as British commander for the Overlord
assault came as a stimulant to us all. For the thin, bony, ascetic face that stared
from an unmilitary turtleneck sweater had, in little over a year, become a symbol
of victory in the eyes of the Allied world. Nothing becomes a general more than
success in battle, and Montgomery wore success with such chipper faith in the
arms of Britain that he was cherished by a British people wearied of various
setbacks ...
Even Eisenhower with all his engaging ease could never stir American
troops to the rapture with which Monty was welcomed by his. 11
Later,
Eisenhower
was to tire of Montgomery's idiosyncrasies and
proclaimed that 'Monty is a good man to serve under; a difficult man to
serve with; and an impossible man to serve over'. Eisenhower was prob-
ably right about Montgomery's insubordination.
As Montgomery's
brother in law, General Hobart, insisted, 'the secret of success in the
general in the war'. 13
Indeed, one of the reasons Montgomery survived so long in command
of the British was that his Chief of Staff, de Guingand, was able to
prevent some of his master's errors or at least mitigate their significance.
This was probably just as well, for as Alan Brooke suggested in his diary
a year before D-Day,
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
27
errors due to lack of tact, lack of appreciation for other people's outlook. It is most
distressing that the Americans do not like him. ... He wants guiding and watch-
ing continually. 14
Manny Shinwell, Secretary of State for War between 1947 and 1950, was
equally split on Montgomery's merits, for he was, 'as a fighting general
... supreme ... but as a politician - quite infantile', 15
Certainly, Montgomery was besotted by planning - always the mark of
a decision-maker whose default was to assume all problems were either
Tame or tameable - and much less concerned with exploiting initial
success through the use of initiative by subordinates. As one of his
Brigadiers pointed out, when he wanted to know what would happen
next in a battle he would look it up in the exercise! 16
2.2 Where first?
British planning for the return to France began on the night of 22 June
1940, a mere two weeks after Dunkirk, within hours of the Franco-
German armistice being signed and 18 months before the Arcadia
conference. However it was not until the latter, on 20 December 1941,
two weeks after Pearl Harbour,
that Churchill met Roosevelt in
Washington to set up the Combined Chiefs of Staff, a joint Anglo-
American command structure that would liaise with the Soviet Union
about the strategy for the war effort.
That strategy was to attack
Germany first, since Germany was regarded as the strongest opponent -
much to Admiral King's disdain, who, as Commander-in-Chief of the
US Navy, preferred to attack Japan first in the Pacific.17 The 'Germany
First' strategy was not a new idea because a 'Europe First' strategy was
already in existence in the 1930s US war plans. 18 However, in 1942 the
US had 460,000 troops in the Pacific and only 380,000 in Europe and
North Africa combined, and the Japanese remained the most hated
enemy throughout the war as
far as most American citizens were
concerned. 19
The comparative significance of the Japanese and the German enemies
should not simply be seen in the military short term - there was also a
long term political agenda to consider at the same time. The US felt rela-
tively secure in the Pacific as the only significant Allied power that would
inherit the post-war situation. But the European dimension was much
