180
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
battlefield to the Allies that it brought them close to failure on several
occasions. As we shall see, Hitler's own predilections for authoritana
control undermined the advantages embodied by the German army and
allowed the combatants to fight on more equal terms, but it was a close
run thing.
8 Mobilizing the Americans:
Technology and the Iceberg
8.1 Introduction
The USA became renowned during the war as the Arsenal of Democracy
in the profusion of material supplies of all kinds but it began the war as
the least prepared of all major combatant nations. What role did the
management of Tame Problems play in reducing the US to a state of
military inertia in the first instance and then turning it around to the
point where it seemed that the number of troops, tanks, trucks and
assorted technologies of war stationed in the south of England in early
1944 might actually sink the entire country?
That dependence on technology rather than human flesh to win the
war (reflecting Henry Ford's approach to car production problems in
Detroit) was both a deliberate choice and has significant ramifications for
the selection and training of those who entered the armed forces in the
war and, as ever, the cultural predilections of the political and military
leadership resulted in a particular kind of military philosophy. Like the
British, but for different reasons, the US chose an iceberg' approach to
combat - a very small proportion of the entire population were to serve
at the front supported by a very large proportion engaged in production
and in support functions. And those at the very sharp end - in the rifle
companies - were overwhelmingly the least educated, the least skilled,
the least trusted to take their own decisions, and the most likely to
become casualties.
in contrast, the German army reversed the ronty both in terms of the
proportions engaged in combat and in terms of the quality priorities:
where the Allies armies selected the best qualified out of the infaniry.
combat units, the German army tended to select them into combat units.
The response of the American military leaders to the perceived quality or
their recruits tended to be one where resort to rigid command and control
systems was automatic. For these combat soldiers the recent past had often
been associated with unemployment and the experience of suddenly find-
ing work' in the army was quickly tempered by the realization that their
181
