126
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
5.3 The German command structure and the
fatal compromise
The German army was theoretically strong enough to deal effectively
with any Allied threat from the west - after all, it had 1,873,000 troops
there but the defence was only viable if it could move a sufficient concen-
tration of forces to the invasion area faster than the Allies could. By June
1944 von Rundstedt had 58 divisions, including 10 Panzer divisions, as
set out below:
15th Army:
Ist SS Panzer Division: Belgium
2nd Panzer Division: Amiens
116th Panzer Division: Pontoise
7th Army:
21st Panzer Division: south of Caen
12th SS Panzer Division: Dreux
Panzer Lehr Division: south of Chartres
Ist Army
17th SS Panzer Grenadiers: north-west of Poitiers
11th Panzer Division: east of Bordeaux
19th Army:
2nd SS Panzer Division: Toulouse
9th Panzer Division: Avignon35
Allied planners assumed that by D-Day+7 all three of the 7th Army's
ranzer divisions north of torew would have arrived in Normandy
(116th Panzer on D-Day+1, 2nd Panzer and Ist SS Panzer, plus 2nd SS
Panzer and 11th Panzer Division by D+7). It was also assumed that three
8 fantry divisions (84th, 85th and 331st) would supplement the armour
by the end of the first week. 36
forty-six of the 58 divisions were deployed to defend the entire
French coastline but only 36 divisions were under Rommel's control and
the vast majority were still bungrthern France, Belgium and fiolland."
Moreovur he actually had fewer tanks than had been used to invade
trance tour years earlier. 38 In Normandy itir f there were just 20 divi-
sions and 14 of these were static divisions.39 These
Germans called bodenständige or si-round-holding' divisions, which, in
were what the
he absence of any motorized transport and the presence of many
middle-aged troops taverage age 30) - was probably accurate.* The
GERMAN STRATEGY: HARD SHELL, SOFT SHELL
127
total only amounted to one division for every 120 miles which, given the
shrunken state of the average German division by then, meant that each
soldier had to guard around 19 yards of coast. 41 Thus, however much
concrete and wire and however many guns defended the coast, the co-
ordination of the defences lay in the rather more fragile hands of humans,
and therein lay a fatal weakness for the Germans.
Hitler had appointed himself Commander in Chief of the armed forces
in the office of the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW) but in
December 1941, as a consequence of the stalled invasion of the Soviet
Union,
Hitler appointed himself as head of the army
as
Oberkommando des Heeres (OKH). The division of responsibilities was set
such that OKH fought the war in the east, OKW fought the war in the
west. There was, then, no military equivalent of Eisenhower's Supreme
Commander. And though Eisenhower set out the strategy but seldom
interfered at a tactical level in the decisions of his commanders, he ulti-
mately controlled them by remaining in control of the allocation of
resources between different armies and army groups. Von Rundsteat's
view on this is nicely captured by his comment, 'You see the guard posted
outside? If I want to post him on the other side of the house, I must first
ask permission of Berchtesgaden' 42
Army Group B contained two armies, the 7th and the 15th. The 7th
Army was responsible for the area west of the River Orne (basically
Normandy and Brittany), while the 15th guarded from there to the
Dutch border with the 88th Corps protecting the Dutch coast. Von
Rundstedt had no formal authority over the Luftwaffe (OKL) or the navy
(OKM). Not that this really mattered since it was widely believed on the
German side that the Luftwaffe would be outnumbered 50 to I and the
naval forces were virtually non-existent. 43 The confusion over responsi-
bility also prevailed within von Rundstedt's own forces in Army Group
B, which were commanded by Rommel but under von Rundsteat's
general responsibility. General Geyr von Schweppenburg's Panzer Group
West, stationed near Paris, was under the formal control of von
Rundstedt not Rommel, though even here Hitler took overall responsi-
bility for it and it did not become operational until 1600 on D-Day. Thus
the chain of command set Hitler,
von Rundstedt, Rommel and von
appending an with commeung ropesolomeo.
In March 1944 Rommel managed to secure control over three of the
armoured divisions within Panzer Group West but the other three,
including Sepp Dietrich's Ist SS Panzer Corps, remained with Hitler's
personal control as OKW commander. To complicate matters further, all
the Parachute and Air Landing Divisions in the area, including all the
88mm guns used for anti-aircri uwg8 anti-tank artillery, were controlled
