194
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
tests he was allowed to volunteer for the Rangers, which he did along
with 500 other soldiers. Only 17 of the 500 were chosen. Their tran-
ing began with speed marches of seven miles a day, leading to regular 25-
mile jaunts' and 50-mile 'hikes'. The training was, according to Robert
L. Sales, who trained as a Ranger in Scotland with Lord Lovat's No. 4
Commando, 'the toughest battle school in the world. The discipline was
unbelievable and we were on British rations up there ...
if you don't
think you'd ever starve to death you should try that!57 Sales would
probably have already experienced such an approach in his initial training
with Rudder in the US. Rudder was famous not just for holding gnpe
sessions where anyone could openly complain to him about anything or
(g ofe, but also for threatening to fight every single soldier in his battal-
ion after a poor parade. He also pulled his troops out of a First Clas
Diner on a Pullman train and made them run back to camp, banishing
them all to the local woods for 24 hours without any food to make them
live off squirrels and nuts.
Not all Ranger recruitment and td ining was quite so severe. When
Colonel Reeder wanted Lt Mills, one of his Rangers, to procure some
extra weapons for his unit, the lieutenant reminded Reeder that the
Don Coates map eating exam took place that night acc
promptly decided to examine the lieutenant's skills himself: "What's the
declination of the compass in Nome, Alaska?' was the first question - to
which Mills replied: Sir, I don't know'. Reeder then asked the second
question: 'Well, what is the exact distance in inches from San Francisco
to brisbane, Australa? Mills offered a similarly negative reply. So Reeder
asked the final question: 'Can you tell me the exact location of Hitler's
headquarters?' 'No sir' replied Mills.
three questions. I know you know the rest. I am awarding you a grade of
"Well', said Reeder, you missed
per cent. Now go get those gunsit. Ironically it was Lt Mills who
subsequently recognized from Reeder's map that he and the Colonel had
been landed two miles south of their intended position on Utah Beach
on D-Day.
But t" Rangers volunteered for their positions, unlike most combat
soldiers who were placed into pr le units because they were deemed to be
the most expendable by the Army Cheneral Classification Test (AGCT).
hd = AGCT consisted of 150 multiple choice questions with 130 being
the necessary minimum to aquaur a grade one (officer minimum Wa
115). It was well known that the higher the result the more likely the
candidate was to end up in the air forcee the preferred option for most
- and the bottom two categories (c5; is IV [*slightly below average to
barely functional'] and class V ['mentally do cient'] made up most of the
infantry divisions in the first years ofCO le war. In the event the US Army
MOBILIZING THE AMERICANS: TECHNOLOGY AND ICEBERG
195
Air Force received only 20 per cent of its replacements from classes IV
and V while the infantry received 44 per cent of its replacements from
these two groups.58 Initially the US Air Force restricted flyers to those
who were 21 or over and had pursued two years of college training, but
it soon reduced the age limit to 18 and accepted that Sergeant-Pilots,
with just a high school education, could fly in an emergency. 59 Indeed,
here was a case where formal Leadership qualities in fighter-pilots may
have been counter-productive. As Cooper recalls, 'these young men were
full of piss and vinegar and had enough hot-rod instincts to make excel-
lent pilots. Men beyond their mid-twenties were supposedly no longer
foolhardy enough to make good fighter pilots'. 00
8.6 Regulars and the National Guard
Such was the scale of the expansion of US army that divisional training
was to be completed within 44 weeks from scratch: 17 weeks basic train-
ing and establishing the new organization, 13 weeks for unit training;
and 14 weeks for tactical training. 61 Basic training included a 25 mile
road march in full equipment but the precise format depended on the
division. The 35 lst Division, for instance, marched 62 miles in full geek
in 29 hours. raining generally tossug opurs over six days in every week
and every day started at 0610 and finished at 2145.62
As the war progressed the division between the regular US units and
the National Guard units also blurred but at the beginning the regulars
had little faith that the guards would ever be fit enough for combat. A
Life magazine article in August 1941 described the 2/th Division,
National Guard unit from New York as on the brink of mass desertion
and further newspaper investigations showed similar problems amongst
many equivalent units, even claiming that the non-commissioned oficers
of the 29th Division had been 'recruited from the sewers of balumore.
General McNair proposed the immediate demobilization of the cute
National Guard organization to General Marshall and a purge of the
National Guards officer corps followed. But the real problem had been
he absence of purpose: the self-evident lack of an enemy to fight against.
With the attack on Pearl Harbour in December 1941 all that appar-
ently changed. But the first real tests for the American army were the
battles of Sidi-Bou-Zid and Kasserine Pass in carly 1943.63 They were
unmitigated disasters: 6,000 US casualties were blamed on the poor
deployment of troops (in self-contained and isolated battalions), poor
equipment and poor leadership. In the words of one Gl: "Never Were so
few commanded by so many from so far away!'64 The defeats soured
