LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
100
enabled the Allies to predict the movements of the submarine wolfpacks
and reduce the monthly sinkings from 200,000 tons to 50,000 tons. A
change in codes brought the monthly sinkings back up to 627,000 in
March 1943 but the new code was cracked by May and after that point
the battle for the Atlantic was all but won.82
Some 10,000 people worked at Bletchley in pursuit of German intel-
ligence and weekly decodings suggested that the Germans never guessed
that the invasion would not be at Calais. Of course, this also meant that
the Allies had to 'allow' certain failures to occur by not warning their
own forces of German intentions to ensure that the Germans would not
realize the extent of the information leakage - including, for example, the
invasion of Crete.83 Furthermore, since there were ten times as many air
raids over the Calais region as the Normandy region, there was little to
indicate otherwise.84 Even when mistakes were made they seemed to
favour the Allies: in May 1944 a member of a beach survey party was
captured - but he had been operating in the Somme area, thus giving
credence to an invasion other than in Normandy.85
Nevertheless, by D-Day Ultra had secured information on the identity
of over half of the German garrisons in Normandy and all the armoured
divisions, but the whereabouts of many infantry units remained uncer-
tain. For example, the 352nd Infantry Division was mentioned once on
22 January but it was not known that the unit had moved to the
Cotentin in March and on to Omaha Beach just before the landings.
The main problem for the Allies was that most of the Ultra intercepts
were limited to those originating with the Luftwaffe because most
German army signals in France were transmitted by landlines that were
obviously impervious to Allied intervention.
On D-Day+2 an
Ultra intercept suggested that the 17th SS
ranzergrenader Division woultafazuy Normandy via a tunnel at
Saumur, south-east of Angers, and on the evening of 8 June Leonard
Cheshire's 617 Squadron of Lancaster bombers duly dropped several
'Tallboy' 14,000lb bombs on it.87
It was not reopened until 1948,
though the delay to the 17th SS seems to have been minimal.
Three days after D-Day an Ultra intercept mentioned the location of
the P'anzer Group West. This group had been made operational at 1600
on D-Day and made responsible for the invasion area by OB West on the
morning of 7 June. But it could do little until 9 June because its journey
from Paris to Normandy was hindered by air attacks in which 75 per cent
oh its radios were destroyed. The same day, its location was discovered in
the chateau at Le Caine, a hamlet south-east of Villers-Bocage.
To have
attacked it immediately would have roused German suspicions so a mean-
dering Allied aircraft wandered over the site on 9 June until it had been
101
spotted from the ground. The next day, 10 June, the building was
attacked by 61 Mitchells and 40 Typhoons. In under an hour the primary
command and control centre of the Wehrmacht in Normandy was
destroyed. Eighteen Germans were killed in the attack, including the
Chief of Staff of the Panzer Group West, Major General Dawans, and the
control of the Panzers moved from Panzer Group West to the First
Panzer Corps. So great was the confusion that Rommel was inhibited
from co-ordinating an armoured counter-attack to split the Allied land-
ings. 88 In fact Hinsley, one of the Bletchley officers at the heart of the
Ultra project, has always denied that it won the war but accepted that it
shortened it and it also provided the Allied commanders with the confi-
dence to go ahead with D-Day. It might also be added that Ultra was
the consequence of many people's actions, and not all of them heroic and
many of them almost invisible examples of distributed leadership so
common to addressing Wicked Problems. A similar conclusion can be
drawn about the final element in the Allied information arsenal: the
French Resistance.
4.6 The Resistance
In February 1943 the Vichy government passed a forced-labour law,
requiring all French men of mobilizable age to work for the Germans.
Many men refused and some, especially in the unoccupied area of south-
cin France, took to the countryside and formed the French Forces of the
Interior (FFI) better known as the Maquis, a Corsican term meaning
'scrubby undergrowth'. This army of resisters eventually became on
Army of Resistance and fought both the Germans and the 40,000
members of the French collaborationist police force, the Milice. Betwend
the Germans and the Milice, 25,000 French people were executed, and
150,000 killed in action. In the weeks after liberation about 11,000
French collaborators were summarily executed, 39,000 jailed and 40,000
had their civil rights revoked. Many of those executed had supported the
Germans but many of those that benefited from the occupation went
unpunished. As onc Parisian saying went, 'a collaborator went free if he
built the Atlantic Wall but went to jail if he had written that it was a good
By no means, then, were all the French happy to see the Allies, Some
were pro-German, some anti-British or Anti-American or
distressed by what the Allies were doing to 'liberate' them. Over 390,000
buildings were destroyed or damaged in Normandy alone.' Maher, for
example, recalls how the little harbour of St Vaast-la-Hougue on the
