LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
46
postcards to map out the area. In preparation for the future invasion of
Europe he then asked everyone - everywhere - to send in postcards and
photographs of the entire French coast to facilitate planning. Thirty-six
hours later 30,000 items had been delivered and within two years 10
million items were duly handed in. Some 150,000 were then recon-
structed into maps of the French coastline by cartographers at Oxford
University working for the Inter-Service Topographical Unit.?3 Even
assuming that some people sent multiple photos and postcards it is appar-
ent that planning D-Day took the individual acts of thousands of people.
On the other hand the military could and did have enough resources
of their own to tame the problem of contemporary photographic data.
Reconnaissance flights over the coastal waters secured updated data by
the day, and between 1 April and 5 June 1944 the Allied Expeditionary
Air Force (AEAF) made 3,215 photographic sorties. Most of these were
at medium or low level because the weather conditions were often too
poor for high altitude photography and because oblique photographs
were essential to reproduce the view from sea level for the assault
troops.4 In the two weeks prior to D-Day alone, a single RAF photo-
graphic section made 12,000 prints of the Normandy coast.95 On the eve
of the invasion 40,000 copies of the French coastline were printed off for
the assault troops - a production process that used up 730 miles of
photographic paper and 10 tons of chemicals every other day. Despite the
detail, though, the photographs often failed to establish that many of the
beach fortifications were constructed to provide enfilading fire onto the
beaches with their seaward side almost invulnerable to all but the largest
shells? This remains a puzzle because many of the training beaches had
- and in parts of Devon still have - replica defences built to mirror this
entilading fire. Indeed, Devon contains many topographical aspects that
Knor those in France, including the high hedges and narrow roads
known as the bocage in Normandy. Thus some aspects of the subsequent
invasion that
manifested themselves as Wicked,
especially to
American troops inland of Omaha Beach, were only Wicked because so
little notice had been taken of their equivalent on the American training
areas in the West Country of England.
Where the Allies were much more successful was in inhibiting the
movement of German troops in Normandy up to and just after D-Day.
The Allies became aware that the Germans were using secondary roas
to replenish their coastal forces rather than main roads but British maps
could not always distinguish main from secondary roads.
Brigadier
Belchem, Montgomery's Chief of Staff, solved the problem by simply
buying a Michelin map that marked all main roads in red and the
secondary roads in yellow - as indeed they still do. The planners then
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
47
established which sections of these roads were the most difficult to back-
up or circumvent and these became primary fighter-bomber targets just
before, during and immediately after D-Day. As expected this caused
enormous problems of supply and reinforcement for the Germans.'7
The overall plan for the Allied armies' landings for the first day divided
the task between the US Western Task Force and the British/Canadian
Eastern Task Force. This division reflected the initial establishment of the
units in Britain and perhaps more significantly the source of the post-
invasion forces and the source of the breakout: that would occur in the
west using American troops and most would come directly from the
USA, hence it made sense to deploy the American troops on the western
side. On the other hand, since the shortest route to Berlin was from the
east it might have been just as useful to deploy American units to the
eastern beaches.?9
The American first line ground assault forces were encamped in south-
west England, with the Ist Division (Omaha) around Weymouth and
Blandford, the 4th Division (Utah) around Torquay and Dartmouth. The
follow-up forces were in Cornwall (29th Division), Bristol (9th Division),
and in south Wales (2nd Division and 90th Division). The Anglo-
were
encamped around
Southampton (British 50th Division, Gold), Portsmouth (Canadian 3rd
Division, Juno), and Shoreham (British 3rd Division, Sword). The follow-
up forces were in East Anglia (British 49th Division (Polar Bears)).
For the initial assault eight 'overweight' brigades or Regimental
Combat Teams (RCTs) were deployed, three American, three British and
Utah Area - 4th US Division:
Initial assaults by:
1st Battalion 8th Infantry on Tare Green
2nd Battalion, 8th Infantry on Uncle Red
Rangers to capture St Marcouf Islands
Omaha Area - Ist US Division (including elements of the 29th Division):
Initial assaults by:
116th Regimental Combat Team (29th Div) (RCT - the equivalent of
a British brigade) on Dog Green, White and Red
16th RCT (1st Div) on Easy Red and Fox Green
Three Ranger companies at Pointe du Hoc on Charlie
82nd and 101st US Airborne Division:
To land behind Utah and prevent German reinforcements linking to
coastal troops
