108
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
But the 7th Army, covering the Normandy coast, did not go on alert.
General Jodl, Chief of Operations at OKW assumed von Rundstedt had
given the order and Ryan suggests von Rundstedt assumed Rommel had
given it. 123 Carell, though, claims that the 7th Army was specifically
ordered by von Rundstedt not to go on alert. l24 This seems unlikely
given that he guessed the seaborne landings would occur at daybreak on
the Normandy beaches and that he immediately ordered the 12th SS H)
and Panzer Lebr to move towards Caen. However, Rommel's Chief of
Staff, Lt General Speidel (who had been hosting an anti-Hitler party in
Rommel's absence on the evening of 5 June) was alerted to the second
part of the poem, and its implications, at 2200. Speidel advised the intel-
ligence officer who had telephoned
with the
information (Oberst
Staubwasser) to ring von Rundstedt at OB West for advice. That advice
was allegedly that the 7th Army should not go on alert - though there is
no written evidence to confirm this.
But if the evidence and advice of subordinates in the security service
were disregarded, supplementary evidence from German radar should
have provided confirmation one way or the other. The huge Allied
armada that had begun sailing well before 6 June was picked up and
traced right across the Channel by the US Radar station at Start Point in
Devon. So what happened to the German radar? In theory German radar
covered the entire coastline from Norway to Spain and there were 92
radar stations operating along the French west coast alone - a station or
substation every ten miles. These sites were located by the Allies using a
triangulation of bearings measured from three mobile ground direction-
finding radars (Ping Pongs) sited on the south coast of England, supple-
mented by aerial photography. Forty-two sites (involving
106
installations) were designated as primary targets and by D-Day-3, 14
entire sites had been destroyed in the 2,000 sorties targeted at them. At
that point the 12 remaining critical sites (involving 39 installations) were
argeted. In all 1,668 sorties were made against radar sites by the AFAF
alone, primarily flying low level attacks in Typhoons firing 60lb rock-
ets 25 and Spitfires dropping 500lb bombs. Only 18 sites survived the air
and naval attacks of the previous month unscathed and no radar was
operating between Le Havre and Barfleur - the destination of the inva-
sion. 126 However, the radar at Ch burea,was operational (though the
HO of the German Signals Intelligence at Urville- Hague just west of
Cherbourg had been flattened on 3 June) and on 5 June it showed a
arge formation of ships assembling just before Allied jamming put it out
of action. The naval commander, Konteradmiral Hennecke,
persuaded of the accuracy of the information,
was not
especially given the
weather forecast and the cancellation of a German convoy to brest
109
because of the expected storm. Since the Germans knew that the next
possible invasion period was the middle of June the vast majority
concurred with von Rundstedt's assessment: 'There is no indication that
the invasion is imminent'. 127
The huge Allied fleet was spotted at 0145 and Naval Group HQ in
Paris informed at 0150 and despite concerns that it could only be sea-
gulls, so many were the targets, the coastal alarm was raised and the 22nd
Panzer Regiment of the 21st Panzer Division went on immediate
alert. 28 At 0309 German E-boats were ordered to make a visual confir-
mation - primarily because the normal surface patrol vessels had been
ordered to remain in harbour because of the bad weather - and the
Landwirt group of 36 submarines were put on immediate alert. By the
tume the E-boats reported back the invasion was on. 129
But had the German land-based lookouts been doing their jobs a little
better they would have known something was going on the previous day
because at 1957 on 5 June the British 14th Minesweeping Flotilla was
in sight of the Normandy coast and could pick out individual houses
ashore. Yet, despite the risk, no alert was given 130 Even when the
warships anchored off the Normandy coast in sight of the German
gunners there was no immediate attempt to engage them because many
defenders were unsure whether they were German or enemy ships. At
Port en Bessin, for example, the German coastal artillery fired recogni-
tion flares and did not commence firing until no appropriate signal was
received back. 131
At 0130 a clerk at von Rundstedt's HQ was alerted to take down any
reports coming in but he suggests that the reports of landings along the
Normandy coast were all regarded as feints, as yet more 'Dieppes'. After
all, he suggested: 'The situation map of England showed only a few units
along the S.W. shore, but heavy concentrations in the S.E? 132
The 7th Army eventually went on alert at 0140 after the 716th
Infantry Battalion had responded to the airborne landings. Yet the 7th
Army's Chief of Staff, Major-General Pemsel quickly decided that the
airborne landings consisted of dummies and baled-out air crews. At 0255
von Rundstedt decided that this was not a ruse - even though just six
hours earlier he had suggested that an attack was not imminent
told General Zimmerman, his operations officer, to telephone Flitler. los
By 0350 Pemsel had also changed his mind to suggest to General
Blumentritt that the width of the sector under attack shows that this is
no operation of purely local significance'. It was also at that time that
Pemsel apparently remembered a report that had arrived that afternoon
from an agent in Casablanca, informing him that the invasion would take
Place in Normandy on 6 June 134
