LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
28
more complex. Assuming the Allies won, the US still faced competition
from its erstwhile allies, Britain and the Soviet Union, and it was consid-
ered vital to America's political interests to ensure that it ended the
European war in a dominant position vis-à-vis the British imperial inter-
ests in the Mediterranean, and the Soviet imperial interests in Eastern
Europe and the Balkans. As Roosevelt said just prior to the Cairo confer-
ence,
there would definitely be a race for Berlin. We have to put the
United States' divisions into Berlin as soon as possible' 20 That meant
both prioritizing the German war and dissuading the American populace
from perceiving the Japanese as the major threat or considering that the
war against Germany was assured of victory.
The US asserted that a single frontal assault to eliminate the main
German forces (the karateka option) was greatly preferable to the British
predisposition for a series of smaller attacks on the periphery of the Third
Reich (the boxer's option), which, the British argued, would minimize
casualties for the final assault. For his part, Churchill persisted in his
attempt to secure indirect ground attacks on Germany - through Italy or
the Balkans in particular - or continuing the policy of massive air bomb-
ing on Germany itself. His justification often involved the notion of
"grinding down' the enemy but avoiding a head-on clash wherever possi-
ble. Partly this related to a concern for the limited numbers of British
troops available as the war progressed but, like the Americans, Churchill
had one eye on the post-war settlement. And that suggested that Britain
could dominate post-war Europe if, and only if, the Soviet Union could
be held in place by a dominant Western alliance. In other
words,
Churchill was more concerned about Eastern Europe than Western
Europe and that meant driving a wedge along North Africa and up
West.2 taly or the Balkans to reach Berlin from the south, not the
To the Americans,
Churchill's strategy resembled what
Admiral
Nimitz called (referring to his arch-rival in the Pacific, General
MacArthur) a 'hit-'em-where-they-ain't' strategy.22 In contrast,
American preference for a head-on clash with the Webrmacht was best
summed up by Eisenhower in a letter to his son Elliot: 'the way to kill
the most Germans with the least loss of American soldiers is to slam them
with everything we've got'. Where the British saw calculated attrition,
suggests Overy, 'American soldiers saw action that was piecemeal and
indecisive, 23 The US view prevailed, not because it was a more rational
choice but because politically the US had become the dominant war part-
ner of the British by this time and, as in all Wicked Problems, collabora-
tion is more important than rational analysis and the search for the
scientific solution.
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
29
It is obvious now that neither the strategic vision of Roosevelt nor that
of Churchill was realized: the Soviet Union entered Berlin alone in April
1945 but 12 months earlier the Americans began to doubt British resolve
to take the war to the heart of Germany via a mainland assault from
Britain. At the same time the British began to worry that the Americans
were more intent on destroying Japan before Germany. As Lt General
Morgan, the British officer responsible for much of the detailed planning
of D-Day between April and December 1943 wondered: Were we really
only taking part in a gigantic plan or hoax?'* He had good reason to
worry: in November 1943, only six months before the original date for
D-Day in May 1944, no US senior commander had received a directive
concerning the operation, and a month later there was still no Supreme
Commander appointed. The indecision reflected the political negotia-
tions rather than military difficulties, though all sides tried to pretend
otherwise. Indeed, it is a common manifestation of a Wicked Problem
that few are prepared to admit that there really is not a scientific answer
to the problem, and fewer ready to admit that the most important thing
was to facilitate collaboration by appointing a wise and politically astute
Supreme Commander rather than seeking out the military commander
with the greatest array of military successes.
That is not to say that the problem of strategy did not have self-
evident technical - or tame - aspects or prerequisites.
As the British
General, Alan Brooke, had insisted at Quebec in August 1943 the three
preconditions that were necessary before the invasion of Europe could
occur were: (1) reducing the strength of the Luftwaffe (2) preventing the
Wehrmacht from bringing reserves to the landing area, and (3) solving
the problem of re-supply. However, with a not so subtle trick of the hand
Brooke then concluded that the only answer was the obvious one - attack
through Italy. Admiral King - never a great supporter of the Germany
First plan - had heard enough and proceeded to deny all of Brooke's
points. Non-plussed by the British tactics, Marshall hinted that if the
British did not fall into line [with a direct invasion of France first] 'the
entire (Allied) strategic concept would have to be revised'. 25 That meant
only one thing: the
US would shift their priorities to the Pacific. As
Brooke later commented on Marshall's performance: 'the only real argu-
ment he produced was a threat' 26 Threat or argument it was enough,
Churchill had lost in his attempt to control post-war Western Europe and
Brooke had lost what he assumed was an assured position as Allied
commander for the invasion of Europe. None of this, note, was rooted
in rational analysis of a Tame problem but rather it was the unenthusias-
tic but resigned collaboration of the junior partner at the table.
However, the following
day, when rumours of an Italian collapse
