166
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
and rash in the extreme. 42 Eventually the British Army's "Training in the
Army' pamphlet recognized this for, as it put it, actual combat is the best
way to learn how to fight 'everything else is make believe, 43 In fact,
Eisenhower suggested to Marshall Louussta 44 that combat command-
ers - that is any officer in the field of battle - should be given a green
stripe around the shoulder loop of their uniform to distinguish them
from non-combat officers. 44
The important question here is whether such an amateur, class-bound,
hierarchical and authoritarian culture provided an appropriate environ-
ment for the kind of war that was about to be unleashed by the German
military? According to the British Army's assumptions, that war would be
fought out from static positions where absolute obedience to an omnipo-
tent central authority - Command - was critical. Furthermore, loyalty
was to be directed at the regiment not the army, and where the morale
of the troops - formed by hours on the parade ground and led by
amateur gentemen - was more important than weapons or training a
suuastace this approach seemed to have tamed the Germans 1 191o
what could go wrong? What the Germans intended, unfortunately, was a
war of unprecedented movement where decentralized control was criti-
cal to ensure the full exploitation of local opportunities by low level lead-
ers, and where combat-trained troops were provided with the best
proressional officer corps, small arms and tanks of any army. One could
be forgiven for assuming that the whole of the British army officer
cure between the wars was d creet product of a erman conspidey w
chervate British military capabilities. 45
in fact, at the beginning of 1944 many of the 'old-school' officers 111
the british army were replaced by the neto influx of younger men, and
training took on a new our and rigour. This was the orga mi
Monty' as it was called, partly bti-ause Montgomery was known to prefer
youth and brains to mere longevity in a jol And Monty himself had as
little admiration for many of his subordinate officers as Naval command
did for those elderly officers manningh, he Plymouth base and responsibi
lor colopy protection through the Channel. As Montgomery wrote to
1, alf our corps and divisional commanders are totally unfit for their appointments. It
I were to sack them, I could find no bal er! They lack character, drive and power of
cadership. The reason for this state of affai ne go be found in the losses we sustained
in the last war of all our best ofts, 's who should now be our senior officers. +7
Nevertheless, 25 per cent of the officers still had a private school back-
grount while almost all the rest were ex-grammar schoolboys. Even this
MOBILIZING ANGLO-CANADIANS, COMMONWEALTH, VOLUNTEERS
167
marked a radical change, though, because four years earlier, at the begin-
ning of the war, almost 85 per cent of existing officers were from private
schools.48
In marked contrast to the way the class-bound amateur officers of the
pre-1940 British Army operated, those officers of the elite 'professionals,
such as the Commandos, that were promoted through the ranks often
undertook a very different trajectory with their subordinates. When Peter
Masters had lost every single officer from his Commando unit after a few
weeks in Normandy, a replacement was sent for. It turned out to be a
previous member of his own No. 3 Troop, No. 10 Commando who had
been withdrawn for OCTU (Officer Cadet Training Unit). When Lt
James Griffith (aka Kurt Glaser) arrived, rather than attempting to 'pull
rank on his previous colleagues - who were now much more experienced
in combat than he was - he embodied the opposite tactic. He admitted
to them all that he knew less than them, he appealed to them to help him
catch up, and he volunteered to go with every possible patrol and opera-
tion to gain as much experience as possible. According to Masters, 'in no
time [Griffith] gained the respect of both subordinate and superior?. 49
But whatever most British soldiers thought about their officers they
tended to assume that the role of officers was critical - positively or nega-
tively. By far the greatest criticism was reserved for the senior staff offices
whose lives were assumed to be - and probably were - a great deal more
comfortable and safer than either the ordinary soldiers themselves or
their first and perhaps second line officers
field. Stanley
Whitehouse recounted a typical example of the kind of positive Leader-
ship by his platoon lieutenant that encouraged soldiers to take risks
themselves. As part of No. 6 Beach Group in the Ist Buckinghamshire
Battalion, his unit's task was to organize and defend a fuel and ammuni-
tion dump just off Sword Beach. When a German plane bombed the
gump many of the shells - which were encased in individual cardboard
cylinders - began burning and Whitehouse's junior officer, Lieutenant
Soulsby, demanded that Whitehouse and his colleagues strip off the card-
board to save the shells. At first nobody moved but then
‹ Lieutenant
Soulsby set an example by ripping open the packaging and can ying the
shells to safety. There was no way out; we had no alternative but to
help' 50
In fact Allied officers - British and American - were prime targets for
verman snipers throughout the European cal pag because, do a deta
report recognized: the other ranks, especially, but not only the British,
were so dependent on their officers - and their NCOs were so rarely in the
big picture - that if the officer became a casualty, they were unable to act
in accordance with the main plan ... The conclusion is: as far as possible go
