188
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
the gross inequities that made the bullshit seem all the more insane to the
average soldier. Not only did few soldiers ever see their superior officers
from Brigade or Divisional headquarters, institutional systems existed to
ensure this was the norm. For example, when the US 100th Division
embarked for Europe in the US the enlisted soldiers outnumbered their
officers 17:1 but the officers took over half the ship's accommodation and
issued orders that enlisted men were not allowed in 'officers' areas'. Quite
where this space went to was unclear, particularly to junior officers like
Dick Shrefler who travelled to Britain on board the Queen Elizabeth and
found himself sharing a stateroom designed for two people with 15 other
officers. Yet, when Shrefler reached Glasgow, he was himself upbraided
and threatened with a court martial by a junior officer for fraternizing'
with a non-officer: they had gone to a concert together?9
On ship and on land American soldiers were not allowed alcoholic
spirits though officers were - and officer monopolization of visiting
women was notoriously despised by the GIs 30 Even visiting the toilet in
Europe involved an institutional divide that would not have looked out
of place in the South African Apartheid system, or the equivalent in the
southern US. American officers used private stalls and used holes cut in
boards, the ordinary soldiers straddled slit-trenches in the open. In some
units de was a court martial Orence for an enlisted soldier lo use an oth
cers tollet. The British Army was little different, to the extent that we
latrines in the pre-D-Day sausage' enclosures were noted by many occu-
pants because they were - unusually - unrelated to status.31
When Corporal Rev Ehrgott landed in southern France in December
1944 he was astonished when he was ordered to lay out the bedroll of his
Lieutenant; he reused - a response that Ehrgott felt his sergeant secreuy
approved. Bill Mauldin (Whose cartoons Patton declared were designed to
wee many and who was only prevente from subjecting audit
a streamce abuse by Eisenhower who stepped between them)32 captured
Lis sue most crearly. "It is a citizen arn" and it has in its emsee di
many men who in civil life were not accusttimed to being directed to the
back thor and the servants quarters. To take orders, yes; Dut to lanc
indignities, no'. 33 But it was not just indignities that troubled the GIs, it
was sometimes their very survival. IrOn Shaw's Captain Colclough mus
surely represent the archetype of this leadership affront to the Gils:
When this batte is over Leaptain Colclough told them I expect to be promoted
to Major. And you men are going to get that promotion for me ..
Company is going to kill more Krauts than anyCe her Company in the Divisio
PI I'm going to make Major by this July fourth, and if that means we're going
to have more casualties than anybody else, all I on say is: see the Chaplain.**
MOBILIZING THE AMERICANS: TECHNOLOGY AND ICEBERG
189
Since Captain Colclough could not have been promoted had he died
he clearly did not envisage himself as being amongst the casualties that
he so carelessly accepted - and it was this 'duty of care' or rather its
absence, that so clearly distinguished between what the ordinary troops
regarded as good and bad officers. Given the irrelevance of any demo-
cratic impulse here, let alone any fragment of equity, it was hardly surpris-
ing that so few soldiers seemed to be motivated by higher notions of
democracy versus fascism, equality versus inequality - these were simply
absent ideas. Indeed, as Lindeman puts it, the term 'democratic army'
was actually an oxymoron. 35 Worse, it soon became clear to anyone fight-
ing in the Allied armies that their enemy fought extremely tenaciously for
an ideal that most Americans and British troops considered radically
worse than their own ideals - but they still fought well. And had they
known it, the Germans usually fought in a far more participative
command structure than did the Americans or the British.
But there were plenty of ways for ordinary GIs to resist any perceived
injustice from the leadership of the officer class. These ranged from the
harmless to the lethal. In the former category came reconstructing the
requirement for all soldiers to salute their officers in a tame parody of
discipline. Usually this was executed as a unit: everyone would salute
simultaneously. But when a despised officer was spotted the soldiers
began to disperse, marching just far enough apart so that the passing off-
cer had to salute almost continuously as a platoon passed by in single file.
In the lethal category came the routines in which unpopular officers on
their irregular visits to the front line were exposed to enemy fire.
example, Kurt Gabel, a US paratrooper recalled how one lieutenant had
primanded them for not seeking 'action'. At this slight some of the
paratroopers insisted on accompanying the officer into the open, know-
ing precisely how long it would take for the nearby German artillery to
site them and launch a barrage. At a signal all six paratroopers scattered
lor safety leaving the lieutenant as the sole remains larget for two o
shells, though he was only shocked rather than killed by the explosions. so
cor many junior officers who actually led their soldiers into battle, the
mantenance or a strict status apartheid soon proved to be sudal. Not
just because their own survival depended so much on their unit operat-
" cohesively, but also because the Germans soon recognized the mist
tutional dependence the Allied system created on officers.
officers, Allied units often ground to a halt. In battle conditions, strict
discipline often relaxed and this sometimes exposed the differenc
between ofticers actually accompanying their troops and those simply
dening others to go forward. For instancot corporal Ehrgott recalled d
sergeant rope facing off a full colonel (a staff offcer withou die
