34
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
Three other significant tests were executed, in the Loften Islands, at
Saint-Nazaire, and at Dieppe. The first was in March 1941 when 1,000
British Commandos landed on the Norwegian Loften Islands. The raid
was of marginal value to the immediate war effort, merely destroying
9,000 tons of enemy shipping, but more importantly it encouraged the
Germans to maintain 300,000 troops in Norway when they could have
been redeployed to help staunch the invasion in France. 49 In October
1941 Churchill decided to formalize the raiding organization and
appointed Lord Louis Mountbatten to head the Combined Operations
Command with a remit to 'start the preparations for our great counter-
invasion of Europe. Unless we can land overwhelming forces and beat
the Nazi in battle in France, Hitler will never be defeated'.50
The second test occurred on the evening of 28 March 1942, when
630 Commandos and
sailors drove an old American Lend-Lease
destroyer, the Campbeltown, into the gate of the dry-dock at Saint-
Nazaire, the only dry-dock large enough to take the German battleship
the Tirpitz. The subsequent explosion put the dry-dock out of action,
preventing the Tirpitz from using its facilities, and killed several hundred
Germans. But despite this relative success, and despite the large numbers
of casualties sustained by the British, the raid had one very problematic
consequence: it suggested - wrongly - that surprise was all that was
needed to launch a successful attack upon a well defended port.51
In January 1942, just after the Arcadia conference, the Allies met in
Washington D.C.
to co-ordinate the strategy under the Combined
Chiefs of Staff. Perhaps co-ordination is too strong a word and 'glue' is
more accurate because the Combined Chiefs of Staff had very different
ideas. As we have seen, Churchill was still keen to attack Germany
through what he called its 'soft underbelly' - somewhere in the
Mediterranean- and to delay any attack across the Channel until the
following year. The USA, deeply concerned at the apparent collapse of
Soviet forces under ferocious German attack (and the potential redeploy-
ment west of some of the 3 million German soldiers there), preferred to
organize an immediate cross-Channel invasion to draw German troops
away from the East.52 The US Army staff, in particular, was certain that
the USSR would be defeated by the summer of 1942 and that would
1943. Thus July 1943 was set as the latest date for an Allied invasion of
France.53 In the end they agreed to a small scale landing in the late
summer of 1942,
'Operation Sledgehammer' which was to seize
Cherbourg with 12 divisions (ten British) and break out during the
spring of 1943 with American support (Operation Roundup).
However, while the planning for that went ahead, a request was made
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
35
to Combined Operations for a third test. This was the inaugural raid by
the Anglo-American planners - the Combined Commanders - to insti-
tute an attack upon one of a list of ports supplied, 'to persuade the enemy
to react as if he were faced with actual invasion', 54 Dieppe was chosen and
the Canadian Army in Britain, then numbering 150,000 and deployed
primarily on anti-invasion duties, was chosen to lead the way. The choice
of Canadians had more to do with political than military requirements
for the Canadian Prime Minister, William MacKenzie, had complained to
Churchill on a visit in September 1941 that recruitment was tailing off
because of the perceived irrelevance of the as-yet undeployed Canadian
forces in Britain. The Canadian 2nd Division stationed at Horsham in
Surrey, for example, had been there since December 1939 and had not
seen active service in the 22 months since then. 'I don't know', implored
MacKenzie, 'how long I can go on leading my country while our troops
remain inactive' 55 Throughout July 1942 the Canadians' routine of
training suddenly changed as they were shipped off to Freshwater on the
Isle of Wight to prepare for the Dieppe raid.
The attempt to seize and hold Dieppe in August 1942, to evaluate the
strategy, tactics and technologies for such an invasion, was a disaster. The
11 mile assault front was considered difficult but not impregnable by
Combined Operations, after all, the defending troops comprised either
very old, very young or very Polish men. And against the flower of the
Canadian Army and the British Commandos what could such a ragtag
army hope to achieve? In the event this was a lesson that the Allied lead-
ership failed to learn: planning the raid on the basis of assumed expertise
and superiority over the enemy - that is on a Tame basis - is viable
providing you have successfully achieved an equivalent operation before
and the operation is a replication of the original. If that is not the case
then the problem is likely to manifest itself as Wicked, that is where
decentralized collaboration not centralized expertise is the most likely
key to success. In this case the difficulty lay in not recognizing that the
quality of defenders was a problem.
The raid was to last for nine hours only, involving five hours ashore
and four hours for the withdrawal. Some
10,000 troops
and 100
Churchill tanks were to be involved in this operation, originally code
named 'Operation Rutter', and six separate beaches were to be attacked.
On the extreme flanks the British commandos were to destroy coastal
batteries, leaving six Canadian infantry divisions and one regiment of
tanks to assault the beaches around Dieppe itself. They were to move
through the town, capture the port intact,
and destroy the German
airfield at St Aubin and the radar station at Pourville, before returning to
the port to embark for home.
