the two harbours and their piers for the 90 days they were designed to
last. » This was no more than one third of the total amount required for
the post-assault operations - partly because by the time the assault force
was raised from three to five divisions it was too late to increase the size
or number of artificial harbours. There was then an additional require-
ment to ensure that small craft would be able to compensate for the
to planned extra supplies by ferrying stores directly from the supply ships
to the beach and not via the piers..6
Rear Admiral Tennant had remained dubious about the ability of the
harbours to withstand any significant wind and the necessity of small raft
traveling back and forth across them led him to suggest that the harbous
be constructed inside an artificial breakwater or Gooseberry of 60 scup
Pered ships.67 When Admiral Tennant and Captain Hickling first suggested
their requirement for 60 ships to sink to the Admiralty they were,
nearly thrown out', because the German U-boats had sunk so much ship-
Ping it was becoming desperately short. As Admiral Cunningham (who
had replaced Admiral Found as the lst Sea Lord) retorted: You have Inc
ertrontery to come here and calmly ask for 65 merchant ships just to take
then across the channel and sink them? ... Never heard such damnea
nonsense. lennant compounded his effrontery by noting that "We came
nere to get a gooseberry and all we seem to have got is a raspberry. This
could have been the end of the project but it was saved by an interjection
from Air Marshall Portal to his superordinate Admiral Cunningham. Portal
did not try to argue the point with Cunningham - a strategy almost
inevitably doomed to disaster - but put his point in the form of a question
- a classic technique for addressing a Wicked Problem:
Suppose one of those infrequent summer gales blows up and suppose all the land-
ng craft are driven ashore. The army could be driven back into the sea. Are we
preparon to face the country and say: 'The invasion has failed because we did nor
give the navy sixty-five old merchant ships'?68
cunningham reluctantly gave way, notis ecause Portal had "proved' him
Wrous, Dut because Cunningham was made to face the consequences,
st; head of the Admiralty - of his initial decision. In contrast, as we shall
to prevent their leaders from making errors.
see in similar circumstances, neany other subordinates on all sides failed
Again, the notion that Wicked Problems are best addressed through
collaborative effort rather than a reiteration of an already successtul
Process is matened here in the importance of the eventual soluto
requiring the ideas of many people. Thuon for example, the outer breas
water a mile beyond the floating harbours - the Bombardons - were the
MANAGING LOGISTICS: 'BAG, VOMIT, ONE.'
original idea of Lt Robert Lochner who had experimented in his own
trout pond in Haslemere, Surrey, and then got Dunlop make three giant
rubber lilos, 200 foot long and 15 in diameter to test his ideas about
wave suppression. Eventually they were fabricated in steel and tested to
survive expected wind conditions, which they did. But they did not
survive the gale of 19 June.70
Thus each Mulberry harbour comprised an outer floating breakwater,
anchored to the seabed, then an inner breakwater of sunken block-ships
and concrete phoenix caissons (designed initially by Brigadier Bruce
White), and finally the floating piers and pier heads. The pier-heads were
200 feet long, 60 feet wide and 11 feet deep and they sat on movable
legs, or spuds' which were 89 feet tall and 4 feet by 4 feet square. The
design and prototype for the pier head took four months; the construc-
tion time for the real thing was just four weeks.?
The overall size of the project was also astonishing - linked together the
units would form two artificial harbours the size of Dover harbour: one for
the US and one for the British beaches. Some 150 floating concrete cais-
sons - called phoenixes - in six different sizes from 25 to 60 feet high with
some weighing 6,000 tons were required, and the entire project consumed
half a million cubic yards of concrete, 30,000 tons of reinforcing steel, and
20,000 tons of timber for shuttering. All of this material was in short
supply and even the 25,000 people working on the project had to be
supplemented by another 40-45,000 draftees, mainly working on the
River Thames where two thirds of the caissons were bult. They were
developed across Britain in great secrecy, to the extent that even those
building them were unaware of their purpose.
Building them in separate
sections in individual dockyards enhanced the secrecy. Furthermore, When
the project was completed, the builders were given a day off with pay and
choved from the dockyards when thee caissons were floated off.'
wespite all this research, planning and construction, admiral Kansay
vas still sceptical, and in January 1944 spoke of the artificial harbour as
in the realm of fairyland ... [it] may or may not be a practical proposi-
tion' 74 Ramsay's scepticism appeared to be well founded when it became
clear that the design had failed to consider the mechanisms for towing
the elements across the channel, so the Admiralty took it ode.
Being so large (Cornelius Ryan suggested they resembled "a five story
lock of flats lying on its side') these units had to be towed by sea
weeks before the invasion and hidden in harbours around the south
Dast by flooding them. The whole system was sea-tested on 1 April
1944 when a gale hit one of them in Weymouth Bay but the test - unlike
we real thing - was a success. But this was by no means the end or the
problems, for the pumping gear supostied by the War Office to raise the
