112
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
Montgomery's entire 8th Army from Africa at our throats! If this isn't
the invasion what are they going to come with?' 141
Five days later another German intelligence report argued that no
evidence equalled certainty. 'To sum up, despite the absence of any
concrete information about the enemy's actual intentions it can only be
said that there is no serious evidence against the early employment of the
American Army Group [FUSAG] and that our own measures must there-
fore take this possibility into account', 142 Indeed, as the weeks wore on
it became less and less important for the Allies to provide the Germans
with false information as to the precise target of the illusory FUSAG,
simply keeping German reinforcements out of Normandy for as long as
possible was all that was necessary.
By 13 June of the nine German divisions that the Allies had expected
to reinforce Normandy (six from the 15th Army; two from south-west
France, and one from the Mediterranean) only two had moved (2nd
Panzer Division from Amiens and 17th Panzergrenadier Division from
south of the Loire). The 2nd Panzer was ordered to move on 9 June but
the blown bridges across the Seine meant that the division had to travel
through Paris. It took three days for the first troops to arrive to support
Panzer Lehr but a further six days for the first tanks to arrive. By then it
was too late to co-ordinate an armoure oo sew-attack to push the Allies
back into the sea. 143
Within a month an extra three infantry as isions had arrived - though
the numbers of troops was probably reduced given the casualties inflicted
- and an extra six Panzer divisions. But ironically, most of the reinforce-
ments had been sent to support the loth Army not the 7th Army. It was
at Calais that the Germans still expected the next assault to occur and
they were certain that Calais would be the graveyard of the main Allied
assault and, at last they were able to explain - and take advantage of - the
fact that all the veteran units were in Normandy. At a conference in Berlin
on 3 July Jodl made it clear that, since most of the experienced Allied
troops were in Normandy, Patton obviously had to rely on untested
troops, and in the face of strong German defences, we have every conti-
dence of defeating them' 144 On 10 July, almost five weeks after D-Day,
Rommel's HQ sent a despatch to von Rundstedt still warning of the
likely second invasion:
The enemy has at present 35 divisions in the landing area. In Great Britain 60 are
standing to, 50 of which may at any moment be transferred to the continent ...
We shall have to reckon with large scale landings of the Ist US Army Group in the
North for strategic co-operation with Montgomery's Army Group in a thrust on
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
113
The Allies, keen to continue the confusion now had to begin to find
reasons for explaining the appearance in Normandy of the few divisions
from FUSAG that were real. A rationale was concocted which spoke of
to carry out the delayed Calais invasion.
By the middle of July, although the Germans still believed that 30
divisions existed in Britain, they were no longer certain that Calais was
the target nor that the attack was the stronger of the two. However, the
change was interpreted as a consequence of the attrition rate inflicted
on the Allies in Normandy and thus when Jodl assumed that the threat
to Calais was finally over, in the middle of July, it was because of
German success not German ignorance. Even on 27 July a German
Intelligence report insisted that although Patton's FUSAG was gradu-
ally losing its potential strength for large scale operations ... it will be
held ready to attack a sector of the Channel coast when such a sector
has definitely been laid bare', 146 Not until Operation Cobra and the
American breakthrough at St Lô at the end of July did elements of the
15th army in the north begin large scale movements south, and by then
it was too late.
On 5 August a broadcast from Berlin finally announced: 'Large scale
landing operations by the Allies need no longer be reckoned with ...
The intentions of the Allies are now quite clear, and that is an advantage
to the Germans' 147 After this ten divisions left for Normandy. On 31
August Garbo announced to his apparent German controllers that the
Plan to attack the Pas de Calais had definitely been cancelled. On 21
October Brutus announced to the Germans that FUSAG had been
disbanded. As Hesketh concludes: When all is said, one is left with a
sense of astonishment that men is such responsible positions as were
those who controlled the destinies of Germany during the late war,
could have been so fatally misled on such slender evidence. 148 This is
the crucial point for analysing the role of German strategic leadership on
D-Day: despite all the evidence put before them, despite the subordi-
nates' counter-claims that Normandy was the target, and despite the
captured plans, the German leaders chose to ignore it all. Had they
chosen to approach the problem as if it was Wicked, that is, where they
"oo see the answers but those around them might have, things
might have turned out radically different. But to admit to not knowing
was a step too far: better to be decisive and wrong than indecisive and
