Photo 14.12 WN-64, Exit E-1, Omaha Beach
YUL
404
COMMANDING IN CRISES
Photo 14.13 Exit E-1, overlooking WN-64 from the north
benind the blufts onto the beaches remained intense, severa machine
guns had been silenced by the destroyers.
fit about the same time as the destroyers moved in so did the 18th
RCT of the Ist Division, this time onto Easy Red sector of Omaha
Beach. I his sector should have received the largest number of invading
troops out the cur cats and contusion meant it was almost untouched as
the 18th Rel moved in - much to the dismay of the coxswains who had
been ordered not to land on the sector because of the unexploded mines
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
+05
and obstacles. In the attack that followed, 22 LCVPs, 2 LCIs and 4 LCTs
were lost to mines or artillery fire and casualties amongst the invading
troops mounted rapidly: F Company, for example, lost all its officers and
half its NCOs on the first day. On the beach itself the demolition engi-
neers had by this time cleared 13 lanes and removed one third of the
obstacles.
The 18th RCT was still under fire from WN65, on the western edge
of Exit E-1 (still) housing a 50mm gun. Two half tracks of the 467th
Anti-Aircraft Artillery Battalion engaged the strong-point from the water
with their 37mm and .5 inch machine guns but to little effect. Then
destroyers were called in to shell the position as ground troops moved
forward but their movement off the beach was held up by mines, barbed
wire, anti-tank obstacles, sand and shingle. Eventually, and under intense
fire, two bulldozers, driven by Private Vinton Dove and Private William
Showmaker, both from C Company, 37th Engineer Combat Battalion,
cleared a path through the shingle and filled in the anti-tank ditch
between WN65 and the beach E-1 after 40 defenders of WN65 had been
killed, the 20 survivors surrendered by 1200 to members of E Company
Lóth RCT. The two drivers were later awarded DSCs for now Exit B-1
was secure (Fowle, 1994: 216; Ramsey, 1995: 359). By 1300 Exit E-1
(where several of the gun emplacements were still incomplete by D-Day)
was open - and at this precise time General Marcks dictated a note to
Army Group: "Landing near Viervste as good as repulsed'. It was not.
With D-3 also open by 1130, two exits were now dear, though Easy
Red became the primary exit beach and most of the vehicles getting off
Omaha Beach that day went through f-1, including the third of the Ist
Division's RCTs, the 115th which landed as the 118th were moving out.
it veral advance units were now making significant headway and had
atready cumbed the blutts and penetrated the detences roughly midway
Detween Exits D-1 and D-3 (three Companies of the 16th RCT),
between Vierville and Les Moulins,ie nd between Exits t-1 and B-3 (tive
Companies 11 6th RCT), between St-Laurent and Coleville, and also just
to the east of Coleville (three Companies of the 16th RCT).
At 1500 Bradley sent another staff officer ashore to assess the situa
tion, who returned to note that jes ogress, albeit slow and bloody, was
being made, 200 Half an hour later off nmand posts were being established
on the beach and by late afternoon some of the delayed tanks had arrived
e i gradually the Americans inched their way up the cliffs and over the
sea wall to the road that ran parallel to the beach. Exit E-I was open to
wacked vehicles by mid-afternoon yid three tanks from the 74 lst Tank
Dattalion attacked St-Laurent. By 1700 exit D-i was opened after
destroyers had eliminated the casemated artillery at the Pointe de la
