90
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
Glimmer' involved six motor launches simulating an assault at the Pas de
Calais, each of which towed two 29-foot balloons, one in the air and one
on a raft. Each balloon carried a nine-foot reflector that simulated the
movements of a 10,000-ton troop transport ship. 37
Elsewhere, 'Operation Ironside' sought to keep the German First
Army stationary in Bordeaux where an invasion was expected. 'Operation
Taxable' moved towards the Cap d'Antifer - and the 13 small ships
persuaded the coastal defences to open fire on the 'invasion' force, no
doubt certain that a large force was approaching because Leonard
Cheshire led 16 Lancasters of the 617 Dambuster Squadron to drop
bundles of window' every 12 seconds to simulate an approaching force
14 miles wide 38 This was no easy task since the aircraft had to maintain
precise distances between each other and had to manoeuvre at exactly the
same time and speed every seven minutes to create the illusion of a
seaborne convoy through a field of fluttering aluminium foil 16 miles
long and 14 miles wide.39 "Operation Vendetta' did the same for the
German 19th Army in Marseilles; 'Operation Diadem' kept the Germany
army in Italy in its place; 'Operation Zeppelin' threatened an invasion of
the Balkans; and finally, 'Operation Big Drum' feinted towards Cape
get into the air were misdirected away from the invasion by German-
speaking British radio transmissions on the Luftwaffe frequencies. When
German ground controllers noticed the mispronounced words they
immediately began alerting their pilots but to little avail. At one point a
German operator swore into the microphone and was immediately
Followed by a British operator telling the Infiwaffe pilots that it was the
British operator that was swearing. The response from the German
operator was equally swift: 'It is not the Englishman who is swearing it
is me!'41 Further confusion was supplin i by electronic jamming missions
squiod r eastern France and these were so successful that no single
plane or parachute carrier was attacked by a German
Another elaborate plan was 'Opdation Titanic', executed by soldiers
of the British SAS,43 The overall plan was to drop dummy parachutili!
bonds players carrying recordings of soldiers' conversations, and pintail
bombs which released a Very light on landing thus drawing attention to
the drop, whating the padroopers in the air and give the ded
landiof an Allied force already on the ground. Each dummy exploded on
landing to simulate airborne landings away from the actual drop zones.**
tate sundated the dropping of an entire airborne division notio
the Seine with 500 dummy parada squog three parties of three SAS
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
91
soldiers between Doudeville and Fauville-en-Caux. Titanic 2 dropped 50
dummies around Bois de Villers. Titanic 3 dropped 50 dummies to the
south-west of Caen to draw German troops away from the British 6th
Airborne attack to the north-east of the city. Finally, Titanic 4 dropped
200 dummies and two parties of three SAS troops near Isigny to draw
the Germans south, away from the landings by the US 101st Airborne.
The SAS involved were told to attack only lone despatch riders and to
allow them to escape - thereby confirming that the drop was real. They
were also provided with empty weapons containers that were to be scat-
tered across the area to simulate a large body of troops. t
All the landings caused consternation amongst the defenders, and
some for the SAS. Lt Poole, the mission commander for Titanic 4,
tripped on exiting from the plane, somersaulted and knocked himself
out. The other officer, Lt Fowles, dropped wide with the 'real' heavy
equipment container, and this left the four remaining soldiers with just
20 Lewes bombs to attract the attention of the mass of German defend-
ers. Perhaps fortunately, only a single bicycle patrol passed. All six were
later reunited and subsequently captured on 10 July. Despite this 5th
operation was successful. For instance,
2,000 soldiers of the 915th
Grenadiers, the reserve Regiment of It General Kraiss's 352nd Infantry
Division, spent the night searching the woods south-east of Isigny for the
airborne landing of the six SAS members of Titanic 4 instead of moving
towards the beaches. 46 But dummies, firecrackers and aluminium foil
would not have worked unless the Germans already believed what these
devices suggested, and to that end, little was more important that the
misleading activities of 'turned' German agents.
4.4 The double agents
Before the war, Hitler had always assumed that the British would comply
with German demands and not until 1939 was a large deployment (27
individuals) of Abwebr spies sent into Britain, by plane or sea. But they
were largely unsuccessful: in 1940, when Operation Sea Lion, the inva-
on
von
Rundstedt's staff, was well aware of the problematic nature of German
intelligence:
No one knew whether there were any coast defences or field fortifications on the
English coast, or where they were if they existed. It was not known which bedenes
Were mined. No one could say exactly what forces the British had available for
defence ... Our maps were inaccurate .... Naval charts were little better. +7
