378
COMMANDING IN CRISES
SO, saying that "You can't risk getting knocked out in the very first
round'. Rudder was unimpressed: 'Y'm sorry, sir', he allegedly replied,
'but I'm going to have to disobey you. If I don't take it - it may not
go: 104 In the event Rudder did lead the assault but only because the offi-
cer who was supposed to have led it got drunk on board the transport
ship and Rudder had to take over. 105
ine Kangers nad prepared by scaling equivalent cliffs on the Isle of
Wight and practised the climb using the three rocket-propelled grappling
lines or rope ladders fired from each of the ten LCAs involved. Their
other specialist equipment included 100 foot extension ladders from the
Merryweather Company, suppliers to the London Fire Brigade, mounted
on four DUKWs, and ten hand-carried 112 foot extension ladders in 16-
foot lengths, four of which were not for scaling the cliff but were fitted
With two Lewis machine-guns mounted on the top, attached to the LCIs
and designed to provide 'high wire' support for the climbers.
In early April 1944 the area was bombed, and then on 15 April and
22 May. Since the Allies did not want to draw too much attention to the
area it was not bombed again until the evening of 4 June - when the RAF
dropped its heaviest tonnage of bombs on any night of the war - and at
0550 on 6 June the USS Texas bombarded it with approximately 250
14" shells. 107 At 0610, just for good measure, 18 medium bombers from
the 9th USAAE bombed it. By the time the Rangers landed the equiva-
lent explosive power of Hiroshima had been dropped on the Pointe du
Hoc, and much of the damage remains to this day.
Photo 14.6 Pointe du Hoc, shattered gun emplacement
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
Defending Pointe du Hoc from the 200 Rangers were 210 soldiers of
the 716th Coastal Defence Division, of whom 125 were infantry from
the 726th Infantry Regiment protecting the 85 members of the 1,260th
Coastal Artillery Regiment.
Typically for the day, nothing went to plan. The rangers approached
in ten LCTs guided by three small British gunboats. Even before they
landed 10 per cent of their group were already heading back to
England after their boat sank, as did one of the two boats carrying their
equipment and ammunition. The remaining eight boats eventually
landed at 0708, 38 minutes late after the coxswain of the lead British
gunboat (of three) had mistaken the Pointe-de-la-Percée for the Pointe
du Hoc. As a result two things happened. First, the bombardment had
stopped, allowing the defenders to return to their guns and fire upon
the attackers, at least until 0710 when Satterlee moved back in and
resumed the bombardment. As US naval staff admitted afterwards,
"naval gunfire support should conform to the movement of the landing
boats rather than adhere to a pre-determined time schedule'. In fact,
Rear Admiral Vian had stated before the assault that 'fire (should) not
be checked or shifted at the pre-arranged time of touchdown unless the
craft have, in fact, arrived at the beach', 108 Second, the delay meant
that the main group of Rangers waiting off Omaha never received the
signal to divert to the Pointe du Hoc if the attack was successful until
it was too late. This group, assuming a failed attack - which would
generate a heavy naval bombardment on the Pointe, landed on Omaha
The rocket-propelled grappling hooks generally failed to operate
properly, probably because the attached ropes were wet and thus too
heary but all but one of the landing craft managed to get at least one
rope up to the top. The Rangers had managed to climb up by situating
sections of the scaling ladders on top of the 40 feet mound of debris
brought down by the bombardment. They then gradually added addi-
tonal sections through individual Rangers cutting out standing positions
in the cliff face and holding a ladder section while the next Ranger
climbed up it and repeated the process until they worked their way up to
the top. But within 2u minutup an uding beneath the Pointe du Hoc
the first Rangers had reached the top of the cliff.
As ever, macabre humour was remembered. Pte Harry Roberts
was apparently the first Ranger to the top.
Sergeant Gene Eider who called down to those tollowing him: 'Boys,
ep your neads down, because headquarters has fouled up again and has
issued the enemy live ammunition', 109 In fact most of the immediate
