156
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
the British army's budget was never more than one third of the percent-
age rate allocated to Germany's army. Still, as long as Hitler was
persuaded by the logic of the British Minister for the co-ordination of
actence, Inksip, that sound finance was as important as military divisions,
Britain would no doubt remain unscathed. And as the Chancellor of the
Exchequer reminded the House of the Commons:
It is not part of my job ... to put before the House of Commons proposals for the
expenditure of public money. The function of the Chancellor of the Exchequer...
is to resist all demands for expenditure ... and, when he can no longer resist, to
limit the concession to the barest point of acceptance.$
With Management of this calibre it is a miracle that the British managed
to defend themselves at all.
Chamberlain was no more construct :: as a master of double talk
when it came to providing resources for the British Army, he declared,
first, that the RAF was the real deterrent and only if that failed would the
army be needed - hence there was no point in wasting resources on it.
Second, that spending on the Army was politically unpopular, ergo, if the
government spent too much on the army, the electoral consequences
would herald a new government that would spend even less. Thus, it was
in the Army's interests to have almost no resources!
the results of this philosophy were vas:ar for all to see. First, the Army s
claim for t145 milion to moderto Kury e face of Hitler's election and
likely aggression was trimmed to £20 million. Second, only tiz milon
was to be spent on the BEt - primarily because no continental role for
the dimy could be envisaged by Chamberlain, or by his Secretary Of State
for War, Hore-Belsha, or by the latter's personal adviser at the Wa
Office, Liddell Hart - architect of mechanized warfare but arch oppo-
nent of a continental deployment? Such parsimony even included the
Regimental Debts Act of 1893 - only challenged in November 1942 by
James Hollins in the House of Commons -
against the estate or any service personnel to be the provision of funds 10-
that required the first charge
their own coffin. 10
But the problem was not simply toat the government refused to
provide the resources for the developmen ,f a suitably offensive strategy
cue 10n tity of influentia army leaders actively stymied all such mich
for example, in 1937 each of the 38 studal ts at the army's cavalry schoo
recept d t526 in support, while the 550 tank school students received.
Gras (erage, Just dot. Even when trained tank officers existed, the estab
lishment was reluctant to give them canmands. For instance, the control
of tar experimental Mechanised Force in 1927 (established only becaus
MOBILIZING ANGLO-CANADIANS, COMMONWEALTH, VOLUNTEERS 157
Liddell Hart had publicly asked why it did not exist) went to Colonel
Collins, an infantry officer. Ten years later the command of the Mobile
Division was steered away from Hobart, Broad and Pile, all senior offi-
cers with tank experience.
Nonetheless, the army's leadership had only themselves to blame in
the inter-war period for the serious lack of funding because it so seldom
complained about the miserly budgets it was allocated. The army went
out of its way to ask for little, even when the Cabinet had questioned
whether they could provide for national defence on such limited budg-
ets. The Foreign Office in particular warned that the Army and the Air
Force were underestimating the strength of their German adversaries but
to no avail. When Air Marshall Ellington claimed that the Iuftwaffe
would not reach parity with the RAF until 1945 the temptation to lower
their collective guard was all too clear - as was the danger of assuming
the Luftwaffe was a Tame Problem. Yet the RAF did not even begin
assessing the potential damage it could inflict on Germany through
strategic bombing until 1937 (though it had maintained since 1919 that
strategic bombing would serve as the offensive weapon in such a war).
That same year, when Hitler's army marched into Austria, the cabinet,
egged on by the RAF, decided that there was a problem - but it was of
ar attack. The correct response, therefore, was to enhance the searchlight
and anti-aircraft capabilities of the country, even though this led the cabi-
net to cut the army's budget by 50 per cent for two years to pay for the
lights and guns. In 1938, after the Munich crisis, Chamberlain went on
the record to calm frayed nerves: there would be no conscription because
ive are not now contemplating the equipment of an army on a continen-
tal scale' 11 The nerves he calmed most were not those of the frightened
British but of the frightener of the British: Adolf Hitler. Not until 22
February 1939 did the British cabinet finally support the sending of nine
divisions to France. Three weeks later the Germans entered Prague and
a fortnight after this, on 29 March, and without consulting the army's
chief of staff, Hore-Belisha announced the doubling of the territorial
army, followed shortly by conscription and an unequivocal support for
Poland's national integrity.
By the outbreak of war, on 3 San ember 1939, the British Army
numbered just over 1 million. Three days later the National Service
(Armed Forces) Act was passed, making all hit men between to and +1
Kurry military service. The upper age limit was extended in 1941 to
51 years of age for men, and women were also included - though no man
over 45 was called up. By 1940 just over 4 million men had registered
and the following year the number reached 6.3 million. By D-Day one
third (just under 5 million) of all the cligible men were serving in the
