5 German Strategy:
Hard Shell, Soft Shell
5.1 Introduction
While the alled strategy was bullt up soupeang the invasion battlefield
and persuading the Germans that the real invasion would occur at the Pas
de Calais, the German strategy was to hold the invasion up long enough
to push the invaders back into the sea. Ironically this inverted both sides'
general approach: the prior German successes had been rooted in rapid
forward movement of armoured divisions in Blitzkrieg fashion, or, alter-
natively, in prolonged and skilful fighting retreats on the eastern front;
the Allies' successes, such as there were any early in the war, had been by
maintaining strong defensive positions. In this sense the Germans, repli-
cating the distinction between exogenous and endogenous skeletons,
switched from their traditional softuous pproach to a "hard shell"
approach and the Allies did the reverse. The soft shell approach embod-
ies flexibility at the cost of sustaining reparable damage.
In effect, like
animals, the surface tissue is casily damaged but repairs easily too.
However the "hard shell'/exogenous skeleton form is much tougher tO
crack in the first instance because surface damage is easily resisted.
However, once the surface is shattered then the integrity of the entire
body disintegrates as the shell/skeleton ruptures.
In this chapter we focus on the hard shell German defensive strates)
embodied by the Atlantic Wall and once again highlight the extent to
which the strategy was a consequence of Leadership decisions, rather than
being determined by the situation or a matter of chance. Those decisions
were often confused and contradictory, partly because the command
structure was so bureaucratic and dysfunctional and partly because the
tivo leading figures charged with defending France, Rommel and von
Rundstedt, could not agree upon the most appropriate defensive stratesy,
The end result was to reproduce the fatal weakness of a Wicked approach
morad much as a delayed decision to weigh up all the options but two
contradictory decisions. Thus Hitler placed Rommel's Army Group B,
with specific responsibility for defending the northern coast line of
116
GERMAN STRATEGY: HARD SHELL, SOFT SHELL
117
France and the Netherlands, under the overall command of von Runstedt
- Commander in Chief West. The strategic Panzer reserves available,
Panzer Group West,
were
in turn
under the command of von
Schweppenburg who was subordinate to von Rundstedt. Rommel, fear-
ful of the overwhelming power of the Allied air forces, proposed a hard
shell' system rooted in strongly defended coastal positions and supported
by tanks positioned very close to the beaches. Von Schweppenburg,
supported by von Rundstedt, preferred the traditional 'soft shell' strat-
egy, allowing the invaders to land but then deploying the tank reserves in
large numbers to destroy the Allies as they moved inland. This was actu
ally very close to Brooke's own strategy for the defence of Britain in
1940, as he wrote,
'To my mind our defence should be of a far more
mobile and offensive nature.
I visualized a light defence along the
beaches, to hamper and delay landings to the maximum, and in the rear
highly mobile forces trained to immediate aggressive action intended to
concentrate and attack any landings before they had time to become too
well established'.1
Hitler, by this time convinced that only he would be able to distin-
guish between the expected Allied feint and the real invasion, reserved to
himself control over critical tank reserves thus denuding both Rommel
and von Rundstedt of the forces necessary for either of their alternative
strategies. The resulting 'fatal compromise' was more akin to a tactical
farce than a strategic force and it provided the Allies with sufficient time
and space to secure a lodgement in Normandy that proved impossible to
remove. Moreover, the 'fatal compromise' that ensued limited the possi-
bilities of successfully resisting the invasion because now the forces at the
coast were still too weak to resist the invaders whilst the greater dispersal
of concentrated armour further inland limited the scope for an effective
counter-attack. As a result, the normally mobile defensive units in
Normandy became static units so that the lower quality of the troops
could be compensated for by providing better defensive protection and
by encouraging them to develop in-depth knowledge of the local terran.
And although the Allies were extremely mobile in their ability to land
when and where they wanted to, the advantage of mobility would rapidly
ebb towards the German defenders as soon as a landing had been made.
Moreover, since there would only be five Allied divisions landing on the
saupeage first wave on D-Day - and because the German forces had
50 infantry and ten armoured divisions in France to defeat them - the
ltimate victory would go to the side Who won the race for reintorce-
ments rather than simply the race for the beach. Indeed, the Allies only
had forty-two other divisions to commit to the carly stages of the battle
Just so the prospects for victory were not high. Fortunately for the
