316
COMMANDING IN CRISES
Bunce, a sergeant with the 3rd Monmouthshires recalls one of his fellow
sergeants asking him how to say: 'Do you speak French?" Bunce assumed
he meant 'English' but told him what he wanted to know. Next day, alter
Bunce had heard the man practising the phrase, he witnessed him wak-
ing up to a French farmer:
'Parlez-vous Français?', asked the sergeant.
'Oui Monsieur', replied the farmer.
"OK then', continued the sergeant, 'Let's have some bloody eggs?' 46
combat commanders who remem os livious to these problems were
unlikely to get the best efforts from their subordinates.
Major D.).
Matterson, 2nd Army's Adviser in Psychiatry, suggested that by August
1944 the stalemate in Normandy was reaching a crisis:
The high optimism of the troops who landil- in the assault and early build up
phases inevitably dwindled when the campaign for a few weeks appeared to have
slowed down. Almost certainly the initial hols and optimism were too high an
the gradual realization that the "walk-over' to Berlin had developed into an
infantry slogging match caused an unspoken but clearly recognizable fall in morale
.... [bly for every man breaking down there were certainly three or four effec-
tive men remaining with their units. 47
The problem was not simply beirrs under fire but the very high level
of anxiety generated by the uncertainty of war - about where the enemy
was, about when they would fire, about what would happen and so on -
the classic conditions of a long run crisis. Indeed, where green troop
eed orten do not to be driven on by curiosity, veterans were ten det
uncertainties: over half the troops
back by uncertainty. Manifestations of stress were not limited to mental
questioned in one questionnaire
sested that they had, on at least one occasion, been unable to perform
adequately through extreme fear. Twenty per cent even admitted to
wetting or soiling their pants. Yet it was this very fear that drove many
on, for the fear of appearing cowards in front of their comrades was even
Greater than the fear of injury or death. 48 Phillip Brown, in combat in
France noted that everyone was afraid almost all of the time,
"no one that
I have ever talked to has admitted to being unafraid. Whatever requisite
a man must possess to be known as a brave man, the absence of fear 15
certainly not one of them' 4) In effect being brave meant being able to
operate even when scared, it did not mean being unafraid, and being
afraid did not mean being a coward.
This fear often seemed to generate a dreamlike state amongst troops
so that nothing seemed real and that very trance would enable them to
317
COMMANDING
switch off and operate automatically as their training had taught them
and as the disciplinary system always intended. Frank Burnett captured
this strange life of an infantry soldier after a long exposure to combat:
The infantryman becomes supremely indifferent; his intellect only records events,
it makes no decisions for him. Drying his feet becomes as unpleasant as getting
them wet. Standing in the rain is of no more consequence than sitting in a shel-
ter. Cold food provokes no more excitement than no food at all. Mechanically the
bady tries to do what instinct tells it is best. But there is no reality; everything is
done in a ... monotonous dream.50
Under such conditions John Stirling, a captain in the Royal Dragoos
guards, was certain that only the completely insensitive had no fear. Inus
what marked out a combat commander was the 'person whose men never
bless that he is as much afraid as they themselves and therefore follow
eun ose present danger instead of following their natural inchnation.
to safety and self-preservation? 52 In fact, the pretence of bravery often
generated a collective strength amongst groups as each frightened inal-
vidual masked their fear with a surface bravery that others took as
genune bravery. Everyone subsequently tried to emulate the Diavery
they saw around them and the result was, collectively, a 'brave' unit of
Inghtened individuals. Hence Ellis suggests that while individuals went
wrough personal stages of terror, the collective morale of a unil tended
to rise and fall collectively.
Indeed, there are several examples where units from
all armies
panicked and fled the battlefield or refused to engage with the enemy
though they were very rare in comparison to the numbers of troops who
aid go forward when required to do so. Three Australian Battalions of
the 22nd Brigade in Singapore 'deserted' or "escaped' depending on
one's definition of their action in Singapore in 1942. In February 1943,
in Tunisia, elements of the Ist US Armoured Division panicked in the
ace of an attack by Rommel's Afrika Korps- as had the British lot boses
kegiment in November 1940 at Metemma. And in May 1941 the -ena
New Zealand Battalion were one of the few units to remain discipined
enough to control the frenzied evacuation from Crete by British troops,
Particularly two platoons of Marines near maleme who rerused to stand
and fight. On the Salerno beachhead 700 replacements for the sist
(Highland) Division (who had lost two thirds of their original members
in France in 1940 and were now due to return to england, were
reposted to different units and refused to go.
192 were tried as muti-
neers and found guilty but returned to their original units. 53 In the same
area tanks and troops of the US 5th Army fled before a German attack,
