20
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
To remind ourselves let us reconsider the nature of Wicked Problems.
They tend to comprise the following attributes:
1. They are often novel and complex
2.
They often have no stopping rule - thus no definition of success
They may be intransigent problems that we have to learn to live with
4. They are often embedded in other problems - their 'solution' often
generates another 'problem'
5. They have no right or wrong solutions, but better or worse develop-
ments
6. Each stakeholder may have a different approach and understanding
7. Understanding the problem is developed through the construction
of the solution
8. Securing the 'right' answer is not as important as securing collective
consent
9. They are problems for Leadership not Management
10. Collaborative not Authoritarian processes are more appropriate for
Wicked Problems.
This part of the book looks at the various strategies constructed and
adopted by various parties and one aspect of this that suggests the whole
arena might be framed by a Wicked Problem approach is to consider why
strategies do not fit naturally under the Tame Problem approach. This is
best illustrated by reference to the game called Scissor, Paper, Stone'
that embodies a fundamental dilemma for strategic leadership.
game the winner of each round cannot be predicted because it depends
on the relationship between the two hands': a hand that mimics a
"stone' beats a hand that mimics 'scissors' because the stone crushes the
scissors, but loses to 'paper' because the paper wraps around the stone;
scissors beats paper because it cuts paper. Where the same hand is used
a 'draw' is declared. The simplicity of this game should not allow us to
escape its critical lesson for strategic leadership: it is relative in both space
and time. The same hand used consecutively may not win because the
second time your opponent may have changed his or her hand.? If your
strategy to beat your competition is rooted in, say, driving down prices
- and they do the same - you may have a price war that benefits neither
side. But if your opposition moves to a strategy
grounded in a niche
quality market then you may both prosper. If you devise a military strat-
egy that seeks to knock out your enemy by bringing their main force to
battle, your success will depend upon them not disengaging and adopt-
ing guerrilla tactics. In effect you cannot construct a 'winning' strategy
in isolation because its utility is dependent on the strategy deployed by
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
21
your opposition. There is, therefore, no objectively correct strategy for a
particular situation - and hence it usually falls outside the Tame Problem
approach - because the situation is likely to be in permanent flux as both
sides adopt and adapt to what they perceive the opposition to be doing.
Naturally, where leaders are impaled by their own hubris they may
assume that a strategic plan is fated to succeed by dint of their superior
intelligence or genius or luck - as Hitler often seemed to assume after
1941. Indeed, one of the Wicked issues that unhinged Operation
Barbarossa, the German invasion of the USSR in 1941, was that the strat-
egy had no stopping point - was the invasion to secure land? - if it was
where was the stopping point? Was the invasion to secure a Soviet surren-
der? - if it was what would happen if Stalin refused to comply? As we shall
see, then, developing a successful strategy - both against your enemy and
with your allies - depends upon recognition that success is not foreor-
dained. In short, if the problems facing both sides are known and quan-
tifiable, and they have been faced before so that a body of experience has
been accumulated, then the problems are probably Tame Problems. If
that is so then they are open to a scientific, or at least a rational, analysis
and they fall within the remit of Management. If the problems are criti-
cal and there is no time for debate let alone dissent, then the Commander
takes precedence. But how, precisely, the Allies were ever going to return
to France and how the Germans were going to defend against that inva-
sion, was not something that either side could work out by reference to
the past or to science. The two sides of the strategy problem, then, might
appear Wicked in nature, that is, where problems have no clear 'rational'
solution and instead they require some
form of collaboration.
Thus
Wicked Problems exclude coercion
they are intransigent and irre-
deemably political in that many voices demand to be heard but no voice
holds 'the answer' because there may not be a single 'correct' answer.
On the other hand, if some of those involved perceive the problem as
Tame, that is, open to scientific and rational solution based on prior
successful efforts, then the 'correct' solution is indeed the one that needs
to be sought. In this case, for example, the prior 'invasions' at Dieppe, in
Italy and in the Pacific might provide all the necessary data for the Allies
to compute the solution. On the German side, the equivalent prior expe-
riences of resisting invasions or raids in Europe might have persuaded
them that the coming invasion could indeed be planned by recourse to
existing expertise. However, on the German side there were two contra-
dictory sets of experts with some seeking to halt the invasion on the
beaches (such as Rommel) and some wanting to concentrate on the
subsequent inland counter-attack using the armoured reserves (such as
von Schweppenburg, and von Rundstedt). This mirrors a Tame Problem
