218
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
as Meyer recounts, the Hitlerjugend was no ordinary army unit and its
model of Leadership was quite different from the conventional units of
the Allied armies:
There was no dominant superior relationship, recognizing only orders and uncon-
ditional obedience. The relationship between officers, NCOs and other ranks wa
that between older experienced and younger comrades ... The boys were educatedl
to a sense of responsibility, a sense of community, a willingness to make sacrifies,
decisiveness, self-control, camaraderie, and perception .... During their trann
square bashing was frowned upon ... Everything focused on training for batle
Captain Hans Dischke of the 12th SS HI disclaimed any interest in
serving Hitler, though he was keen to fight for Germany, and his assump
tion was that the combat skills of the division were developed through
training, not indoctrination:
Then there was the question of militarly raining, which was all that mattered to
us officers: how to teach these boys to survive in battle.... Our special kind of So
esprit de corps was a fact, and as far as we were concerned instilled by mutual confi-
dence and real comradeship which produced absolute trust between officers and
men to a degree unknown in the German army ....
Of course it is impossible to
say to what degree they were fighting for 'Führer and fatherland and the az
wac but I do believe that in the main they had been instilled and inspired by our
teachings of comradeship and absolute trust. 32
even conventonal Wearmacht units minimized distinctions betweet
enlisted men and officers - unlike on meanerican and British armies in
particular. In the Wehrmacht everyone was encouraged to salute everyone
ise, irrespective of rank - in sharp contrast to the Anglo-American force
where soldiers were required to salute officers. Indeed, while the term
soldiers covered everyone in the Wehrmacht, there was no term for
ly eryone in either the American or British armies, there was just 'soldiers'
and 'officers'. Could it ever be imagined that British or American officers
ever involved themselves in something that German ofticers regularly di
- despite the obviously and radicallyn abversive consequences for military
discipline - singing 'Happy Birthday' to their 'common' soldiers? Since
both the British and Americane fficers were formally warned against frat-
ernizing with their own soldiers we can rest assured that such a thing was
unlikely. 33
Training for SS troops was tough, and'- Il officers were expected to
serve for two years i the ranks before becoming officers, but the enor
mous casualty rate incurred by most SS (and indeed most Wehrmacht)
MOBILIZING THE GERMANS: WEHRMACHT AND SS
219
units led to a rapid turnover in staff and a consequently very young offi-
cer corps. In fact, so rapid had been the construction of the H] that when
it went into battle just after D-Day in Normandy over half of its soldiers
had been members of the division for less than one month and most had
been in possession of their weapons for less than this time. 34 In effect,
the H/ was no battle hardened or even trained unit - but it was ideolog-
ically committed and it was extraordinarily effective.
A considerable part of the explanation of that effectiveness in the Waffen
SS then, lay not just in the devotion to Hitler but also in the devotion to
each other and the limited role of formal Leadership. In effect, followers
wanted to follow their leaders rather than being coerced into following -
ironically, a typically Wicked response to a problem rather than a Tame
response. Soldiers were not expected to address their officers as sir' but
by their formal rank and comradeship was institutionalized both in the
tradition of calling each other 'Kamerad' off duty, and in the culture of
mutual trust, such that no locks were allowed on private lockers - and
anyone caught stealing could expect very severe punishment. For exam-
Pe, when two members of the elite Leibstandarte SS were caught steal-
ing both were shot and their entire company subsequently trampled on
their graves 35 But where did this approach to formal Leadership come
9.3 The paradox of hierarchy
Training for non-SS troops comprised 16 weeks of elementary training
oned more weeks of combat training but the whole thrust of that
training was to reinforce the importance of using
Truppenführung (Troop Leadership) manual insisted: "Orders should be
binding only in so far as circumstances can be foreseen' (quoted in
Balkoski, 1999: 68).
The original German, or rather Prussian, army of Frederick the Great
(1740-86) (Hitler's hero) had been rooted in a social system not unlike
the British: "amateur' aristocratic officer corps, coupled to a primarily
mercenary force of soldiers kept in line by brutal discipline. But after the
defeats at Jena and Auerstadt in 1806 the Prussian army was recon
structed under the guidance of Scharnhorst (1755-1813) and von
Gneisenau (Chief of Staff of the Prussian Army 1813-15). Some 800
officers were dismissed, conscription as a duty to the state was invoked
