MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
aerial barrage and the troops engaging the enemy on the beaches,
exposed the first assault waves to great danger.
Montgomery, Paget and the COSSAC planners decided that as many
gins, mortars and rockets as possible should be deployed on the landing
craft themselves to provide covering fire right through the initial assault
period. This was to take a Tame response - to assume that more of the
same would solve the problem rather than to consider whether the prob-
lem itself needed rethinking.
General Brooke was also of the opinion that only a heavily armoured
assault could ensure a secure lodgement, and he organized the 79th
Armoured Division into an experimental unit, under General Percy
Hobart. Hobart was Montgomery's brother-in-law, who at the time held
the honourable rank of Lance Corporal in the Chipping Campden Home
ren tolobart was rescued from oblivion, having been removed y
General Maitland Wilson with Wavell's support, and he was put in
command of the newly formed 11th Armoured Division. However, at 57
he was considered too old to fight and that unit was subsequently led by
Major-General Brocas Burrows while Hobart was given a new job: to
design and equip with revolutionary weapons the new 79th Armoured
Division: 'Hobart's Zoo' as it became known. 13
Hobart's innovations were as popular with the D-Day troops as he was
unpopular with his peers and superordinates. He even admitted as much,
for as he wrote to his wife: "Now I'm damned bad with my superiors. *
More importantly for D-Day, Hobart realized that the Dieppe failure had
partly been created by the heavy casualties amongst the engineers whose
job was to blast a way through the anti-tank obstacles for the tanks.
Hobart decided that tanks should clear their own paths - in other words,
the leadership would be provided by the tanks not the infantry. It was
also important to remember that the Anglo-Canadians were more likely
to face an immediate counter-attack by German Panzer forces than the
Aircreds because of the dispositiue unlost German armoul at the cast
ern end of Normandy. 15
back in command, Hobart designed and developed a series of vehicles
on tank platforms - known as H. •orenzunnies - which the British and
Canadians deployed in large numbers and to great effect: in the first five
nours on the Anglo-Canadian beaches, 25t lanes were cleared by "Crabs
These were Sherman tanks carrying a rotating flail to beat the sand and
detonate mines at a safe distance, the '(dab' or 'Flail' tank used 50 chains
ets. Aed around a rotating drum at the front of the tank on to sprock
ets. A vals, on had been used at the battle of El Alamein and the Shermai
Crab was ordered in June 194ad Although effective, the flailing kicked up
so much sand that visibility was strictly linh ed and the gun could not be
269
fired during flailing. The German response to the Crab involved distrib-
uting different versions of their main anti-tank Teller mine so that a
second weight or impact was needed to detonate them. Thus the flail
would act as the first weight but as the tank moved over the mine it
would explode. A larger bar mine was also deployed in Normandy which
both caused more damage and had an integral booby-trap device. 16
But while Crabs may have been lifesavers for the infantry they were
deeply unpopular with the tankers who operated them. Those chosen to
operate the Crab were seldom enthralled by it, not simply because of the
dangers but also because of the status of the technology. As Major Birt
of the 22nd Dragoons recalled, 'instead of going into battle in the pride
of a cruiser tank formation, we were to crawl into action
appeared to be the menial task of scavengers and road sweepers, creeping
along at a mile an hour' 17 Indeed, so under-powered was the flail that it
had great difficulty operating on a slope of any significance. Leading
the way was one thing but there was also a way of leading to think about.
But if the Crabs performed their unglamorous task of mine clearing on
the beaches well, far less effective were the rocket-firing boats (LCT (R))
which, on Omaha Beach, loosed their 1,000 rockets at 3,500 metres. In
theory the total firepower of the rocket ships was equivalent to 150
reces trom a destroyer. A full load involved 1080 loaded and 1080
reloads but only the single load was fitted on D-Day because the forecast
had suggested 50 per cent of the LCT(R)s would be lost. Each rocket
weighed 56 lbs, half cordite propellant and half explosive. That made up
4 tons of warhead per LCI(R) but so powerful was the effect that in
training only a few rOCkets were fired at any one time. Indeed, D- Day was
the first time that many LCT(R)s had fired a complete salvo. As they fired
tlooked as though all the LCT(R)s had caught fire but actually the deck
became so hot from the firing that a sprinkler system was fitted to wash
we deck. Inibally, that water turned to steam makins i appear that all
the LCT(R)s had caught fire! The directional effort was also hampered
by the fact that both engines on the LCTs were right-turning screws as a
onsequence of the rush to produce them. Thus the LCI (K)s were both
unstable, difficult to steer and difficult to aim. 9 It was hardly surprising-
hen, that more damage seemed to be do, to the rocket ships them-
selves than to the German defenders. Most of rockets landed harmlessly
in the sSt as the German gunfire forced the ships to fire prematurely.20
Indeed, I in the 4-inch rockets carried by the Typhoons seemed to
ase mod fear than actual damage. Only a direct hit could knock out a
- and the RAt estimated that, at most, a rocket had a o per cent
chance of hitting its target, so unstablas vas it. Many rocket firers claimed
inordinate success rates but the RAY began to assume that only 20 per
