276
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
which allowed testing of German 'agricultural tractors' at Kazan between
1926 and 1932. With Hitler's accession to power the secrecy stopped.
Given Hitler's aggressive instincts it was probable that German tank
design would be built around firepower rather than mobility or protec-
tion. However, German tank design mirrored the British division
between light, medium and heavy. The Mark I, developed in 1935 was a
5 ton light tank armed with machine guns and the first of 2,000 Panzer
Is emerged in 1934. This was followed by the 10 ton MK I, again armed
With machine guns. But Guderian's strategy called for tanks that could
knock out enemy tanks and for that a heavier gun was required. This
emerged in 1937 with the Panzer IV, complete with a short 75mm gun
and then in 1938 in the form of the Panzer IIIs, designed by Daimter
Benz, with a 37mm high velocity gun. Both tanks also carried radios -
something which Allied tanks omitted until later in the war.46
By 1939 the Mk III weighed 15 ton but its final version in 1943
weighed 22 ton, in all 5,650 units were made. The original 37mm gun
was gradually replaced by a 50 mm. However, the Panzer IV was
resigned to accommoddie du conanced gun when i became avanable
and it did in the form of a 75mm gun just in time for the invasion ot
France. The latter gun formed the stock weapon of the Mk IV Panzer,
designed by Krupp in 1939, and the self propelled, turretless version, the
heavily armoured Sturgeshitz (assault gun). Some 8,500 of the Mk IN
were produced by 1945 with the highest monthly production figures
(344) - ironically - occurring in June 1944. However, as a consequence
of meeting the Soviet T34 in action in July 1941, the Germans sought
out a much heavier and better armed tank and the search resulted in tiro
First, was the 56-ton Mk VI, or Tiger, developed by Henschel witha
88mm gun and five anti-personnel S-mine throwers to keep enemy
infantry at bay. At 23 mph this was not a quick vehicle but it was heavily
armoured and could drive across rivers up to 13 feet in depth, 'breath-
ing' through a snorkel. However it had a limited range of movement
(about 40 miles) and was so wide it needed to have its tracks changed in
order to nit onto railway wagons. Some 1,354 ligers were produced an
again the maximum monthly production (104) occurred just in time for
D-Day, in April 1944. Tigers, though impervious to most Allied tan.
shells, could be disabled by grenade attacks to the engine compartment
and hence they were usually protected by infantry.
the ger, armed with a high velocity 88mm gun, could destroy a
Sherman at 4,000 yards and it was not uncommon for a single German
tank to destroy four or five Allied tanks before being stopped itself.*/
Admittedly, the German tanks were less mechanically robust than the
TECHNOLOGIES
277
Allies and usually considerably slower, but since the battleground was
not the open steppes of the Soviet Union but the densely farmed,
hedged and populated country of Western Europe, the problems of
German tank mobility were minimal compared to the problems of Allied
tank vulnerability.
the first Allied notification of the existence of the Tiger came in a note
on 5 December 1942 and by 11 December 1942 a photograph in the
National Zeitung had appeared. This was duly distributed throughout
the military intelligence and armoured
communities.
By 30 January
943 the Daily Mail announced the arrival of the 62-ton 'German land-
battleship' in Tunisia featuring the 88mm gun and up to seven inches of
armour in places (a captured German 88-mm gun was shipped to the US
in May 1942). Within the week a secret report on a captured but disabled
Tiger in Tunisia suggested that its turret armour - which was only four
inches thick - was vulnerable to the 6lb British anti-tank gun at ranges
up to 500 yards. The news was carried with slee by the Daily Telegraph
and the Daily Mirror on 5 February, and Brigadier T. Lyon-Smith
confirmed that in his opinion a second Tiger had been disabled at 800
yards by a frontal shot from an anti-tank gun. Clearly, the Allies had little
to fear from the monster after all. Subsequent analysis of the tank discov-
cred that it had been hit ten times and five of the shots had penetrated
the armour. When trial shots were fired at the tank from 300 yards both
penetrated through some of the armour but failed to enter the inner
alber and the thal report suggested that, in really, no monta did
was likely to succeed. The only real chance was in shooting from the flank
against the lesser armoured sides; the 2lb anti-tank gun was only viable
mom very short range and only against the tracks, and the PlAt (hand-
held rocket launcher) was of no use against the Tiger at any range. In
effect by March 1943 the Allies knew that the Tiger was immune to their
Primary anti-tank gun - which was itself superior to the usual armamens
on Allied tanks - except from the side and at relative short range. It was
no suggested that the tank's 88mm gun, or at least the flak so version
which is the only one the Allies had tested at this time, could penetrate
the typical Sherman's 3-3.5 inch armour of the turret and gun mantle
from almost a mile away. 48
just how confused the 'truth' abdut the liger was became most clearly
manifest when reports began
filtering back to London about the
espatch old 2 ligers from 3 Squadron 506th Heavy lank battalion
nose 10 ligers were ordered to hahe the Allied break out from anzio
waras kome (which fell almost simultaneold y to the o-bay landing
but despite the evidence of several hits, the Tigers - none of Which
penetrated - the main causes of thein defeat had been unreliable tracks
