330
COMMANDING IN CRISES
distribution led the Germans to assume a much heavier airborme attack
accord actually occurred, not just because the 82nd seemed to be
everywhere but because they cut every telephone line they found,
making it very difficult for the Germans to verify the position and density
of the paratroopers.
But the post-jump crisis also left the Americans very short of troops
and bereft of any heavy weapons, such as the 57mm anti-tank guns. In
theory, the guns were due to accompany the 4,000 reinforcement glider
troops, the first wave (of four) being due to arrive at 0407 in 52 Waco
gliders. But 15 of these were lost before landing, only 24 landed in the
drop zone, and many of those sposanded broke up against the
hedgerows of the bocage. As a result, Ridgeway still had no communica-
tions with the beaches or with England or the floating HQ ships off the
thest. Even by 8 June there were still only 2, 100 available troops from
the ond Airborne, though over 6,000 had left England (the official
casualties totalled 1,25%), and German radio quickly reported that the
What Ridgeway found most galling was that he could do so little
about any of the situations his troops found themselves in as they tried
to take and hold the causeways against German movements towards the
Coast because he could ory communicate in person and because the area
commander in a crisis:
was so vast, fis comments personity the critical role - and hmits - Or tic
There was nute i could during that first day towards exercising division control.
could only be where the fighting seemed to be the hottest, to exercise whatever
Personal influence I could on the battalion commanders as they drove on towards
the causeways ... Far in the night I was roule by someone shaking me. It was a
messenger from one of the battalions fighting towards the river crossing. The
Germans, the ud, were counter-attacking in strength across the causeway. I could-
n't see what in the hell I could do abore that single handed. So I sent word back
ttle the battalion was to hold if it could. If this was impossible then it could pull
back. Then I turned over and went back to sleep. 21
Ridgeway may have been responsible for the 82nd Airborne at this point,
but he was not physically leading them.
On 9 June Ridgeway ordered a combined unit of the 507th and 508ch
PIRs to retake the bridge over the Merderet River at La Fière, one of the
few routes west across the flooded base of the Cotentin peninsular.
The bridge had been taken by 400 soldiers from all three of the 82nd's
regiments but lost when the 12 paratroopers left to guard it were over.
trid by a German counter-attack. It took four days to win back the
bridge 22 By D-day+3 contact had been made between the 82nd and
THE AIRBORNE ASSAULTS
331
Photo 13.1 Bridge over Merderet River at La Fière
forward units of the 4th Division who had landed on Utah but the fight-
ing to control the four main causeways across the flooded land was
extremely bloody. It was another three days before Ridgeway managed to
integrate the isolated units under his command and dispose of the
derman SIst Air Landing Division ws a Ch was defending the dred.
In Ridgeway's opinion,
American success:
command
critical to the eventual
The place of a commander is where he anticipates the crisis of action is Some to
be, and it was obvious to me that these cayle way crossings were the spots of great
est hazard. Each time, therefore, before we attempted the crossing, I would go
down, preferably at dark, by day if i had to, personally tone connoite cact cross-
ing before I sent any element of my division across. There were four of these cross.
ings and by far the toughest was the causeway across the wide and suggish
Merderet at La Fière ...
We lost a lot of men there and I think the final assault
on June 9 unquestionably would have failed if all the commanders from division
to battalion had not been there in person to shove the troops across ...
men came down to the rossing, shoulders hunened, leaning forward do i the
vete moving into a heavy wind. Some of them began to go down, and the others
hesitated. Then they turned and started back, instinctively recoiling from the sheer
blasting shock of the concentrated enemy fire. I jumped up and ran down there.
The men were milling around in the cut. Jim he vin, my Assistant Divisional
Commander, whom I had put in charge of bes operation, was there, with the regr
mental CO ... and the battalion commanders. And there in the cut at the head of
the causeway, we grabbed these mine red them around, pened, soo
led them by hand until we got them started across, 23
