10
LEADERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND COMMAND AT D-DAY
these were errors of management that need not have occurred. That they
did, and that unprotected infantry had to assault heavily defended
beaches with little more than rifles, then begs the question of how
success was snatched from the jaws of defeat, for defeat was surely likely.
On D-Day it was often the tactical actions of Allied junior officers, NCOs
and ordinary soldiers that snatched victory from the jaws of defeat where
their leaders' strategic plan was failing.
In contrast, the strategic failures of the German leadership were not
rescued by the more junior leaders - even though many such officers
knew what needed to be done and could have acted differently. In short,
the poor bloody infantry of the Allied side made up for the errors and
limits of their senior commanders; the poor bloody infantry on the
German side were generally able but usually unwilling to do the same for
their leaders.
There are already many narrative accounts of D-Day and this book is
not designed to replicate these. Carlo D'Este' s23 account is one of the
best and he suggests, in contrast to Neillands, 24 that the over-cautious
nature of the Allied commanders (Montgomery and Bradley but not
Patton) unnecessarlly extended the fighting, while Max Hastings
approach is to highlight the way the superior combat skills of the
German
army
gradually worn away by the Allies'
superior
matériel. My intention here is to offer an alternative understanding of
the battle, or rather elements of it which I will use to illustrate the
issues 26 My argument is that the success and failures of D-Day, on both
sides, cannot be explained by comparing the competing strategies of
each side because this implies a level of determinism that is unsustain-
able either theoretically or empirically. Instead I suggest that we might
provide a more robust but still tentative account of the battle through
the overarching nature of the relationship between leaders and follow-
ers. In short, the way a very large number of individuals on both sides
took and enacted decisions on the day amidst the fog of war. This
bottom-up approach is still not a deterministic approach because so
many of the decisions and actions could have been otherwise and so
many that must have occurred were not recorded. Thus we can only
ever reconstruct a partial account and explanation of what happened and
why it happened.
To help make sense of these decisions and actions I will suggest that
our understanding of the invasion can be facilitated by a typology of
problems: Wicked Problems, Tame Problems and Critical Problems. In
order, I take these
as cases where Leadership,
Management and
Command occur and I suggest that the way the combatants approached
these problems, and the way they had learned to address them, holds the
PROBLEMS, UNDERSTANDING AND DECISION -MAKING
11
key to improving our understanding of how the invasion was won and
lost. Let us briefly divert into the theory to set the background to the
book.
Tame, Wicked and Critical Problems27
Much of the writing in the field of leadership research is grounded in a
typology that distinguishes between Leadership and Management as
different forms of authority - that is legitimate power in Weber's concep-
tion - with leadership tending to embody longer time periods, a more
strategic perspective, and a requirement to resolve novel problems.28
Another way to put this is that the division is rooted partly in the context:
management is the equivalent of déjà vu (seen this before), whereas lead-
ership is the equivalent of vu jadé (never seen this before).29 If this is valid
then the manager is simply required to engage the requisite process to
resolve the problem like the last time it emerged. In contrast, the leader
is required to reduce the anxiety of his or her followers who face the
unknown by facilitating the construction of an innovative response to the
novel problem, rather than rolling out a known process to a previously
experienced problem.
Management and Leadership, as two forms of authority rooted in the
distinction between certainty and uncertainty, can also be related to
Rittell and Webber's typology of Tame and Wicked Problems. 30 A Tame
Problem may be complicated but is resolvable through unilinear acts
because there is a point where the problem is resolved and it is likely to
have occurred before. In other words, there is only a limited degree of
uncertainty and thus it is associated with Management. The manager's
role, therefore, is to provide the appropriate processes to solve the prob-
timetabling the railways,
nuclear plant, training the army, planned heart surgery, a wage negotia-
tion, enacting a tried and trusted policy for eliminating global terrorism,
Or in our case planning the naval bombardment of coastal fortifications.
A Wicked Problem is more complex, rather than just complicated, it is
often intractable, there is no unilinear solution, moreover, there is no
"stopping' point, it is novel, any apparent 'solution' often generates other
'problems', and there is no 'right' or "wrong' answer, but there are better
or worse alternatives. In other words, there is a huge degree of uncer-
tainty involved and thus it is associated with Leadership. The leader's role
with a Wicked Problem is to ask the right questions rather than provide
the right answers because the answers may not be self-evident and will
require a collaborative process to make any kind of progress. Examples
