148
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
occurs. Instead, almost everything focused upon the initial assault - and
When the final briefings for senior commanders were made in April
and May 1944 at St Paul's School in Hammersmith, London, the lea-
ets appeared to exude confidence that their strategies would deliver the
expected results. US Rear-Admiral Deyo was one participant siting
behind Churchill and King George as Eisenhower took the stage in front
of a 30 foot scale model of the Normandy beaches: 'It had been said that
his (Eisenhower's) smile was worth 20 divisions. That day it was worth
more. He spoke for ten minutes. Before the warmth of his quiet conf-
dence the mists of doubt dissolved. When he had finished the tension had
gone. Not often has one man been called upon to accept so great a
burden of responsibility. But here was one at peace with his soul'. Then
Montgomery painted in the details and finished with a reminder of the
importance of the soldier's attitude: 'They must see red. We must get
them compietely on their toes, having absolute faith in the plan; and
imbued with infectious optimism and offensive eagerness. Nothing must
stop them. Nothing. If we send them into battle in this way - then we
shall succeed. 30
1 hat success depended, in Montgomery's mind, on a very quick move
Eding seized the initiative by our initial landing, we must ensure that we keep it.
The best way to interfere with enemy concentrations and counter-measures will be
1 push forward fairly powerful armoured force thrusts on the afternoon of D-Day
.... I am prepared to accept almost any risk in order to carry out these tactics. I
is not really possible. 31
wollid risk even the total loss of the armoured brigade groups - which in any event
6.6 Conclusion
Alled strategy was a relatively straig'd forward affair, in theory. Unce
viable as landing areas were either Calais or Normandy.
Germany was prioritized over Japan ae only two areas that were really
then which one to choose and how to secure a successful lodgement. The
The issue was
latter was the most difficult issue - an archetypal Wicked Problem -
because it required a complex aftalgam of unrelated issues to be held in
place for long enough to get the troops onto the beaches and ready to
ace the expecieu ranzer counter-attad. But the chances of secure
propitious weather, surprise, eveth Allied unit landing at the right place
and time according to the plan, and of the German response being
exactly as predicted must have been astronore sally unlikely. iven that,
149
ALLIED GROUND STRATEGY
for the Allied military leaders, D-Day could never have been a 'walk-over'
and was always likely to degenerate from a Tame Problem into a Wicked
Problem at best and a Critical Problem at worst.
But for the political leaders D-Day was just one part of a much wider
jigsaw that encompassed political in-fights within the Western Allies and
between them and the Soviets. At stake was not only the liberation of
France and the destruction of Nazi Germany but the reconstruction of
post-war spheres of influence. In the end despite all the efforts of
Churchill Britain did not finish the war dominating Europe but retreat-
ing from its Empire and beginning the long decline under US predomi-
nance. But Roosevelt failed to keep the Soviets out of Berlin. Of course
both leaders secured their most pressing overall strategic objective: the
defeat of Nazi Germany. But it is not self-evident that this success can be
laid at their feet because there were so many other people involved in the
result, including the Germans. That is not to say that strategic Leadership
is irrelevant but it is to suggest that we retain a jaundiced view of claims
that Churchill or Roosevelt won the war or that without them both the
Allies would have lost; it simply is not possible to prove these claims, even
if they do make the deployment of the Allied strategy simpler to explain
as causally determined by strategic Leadership.
As to the value of adopting the Problems perspective, it should be clear
that, although problems do not emerge neatly packaged as Tame, Wicked
or Critical, there is some utility in using the typology to try and under-
stand why the Western Allied strategic planners did what they did. The
planners seem to have begun by assuming that Dieppe was a Tame
Problem but after it turned into a Critical Problem they then over-learned
the lesson and focused so much on the initial assault that they overlooked
the problems involved in moving off the beaches and through the bocee.
For the US forces in particular that movement became a Wicked Problem
that was only removed when a sergeant who had experienced the issue
back home knew how to fabricate a f›lution. And while lessons from
Anzio were there for all to see it seemed that the planners went back to
their default assumption that the Germans in normandy would, unhke
those in Italy, retreat to the Seine when pushed, rather than stand and
bfit. Again, assumptions that smacked of a Tame approach but which
actually failed to learn from experience. On the wider front it is worth
recalling just how few decisions seem to have been made on strongly
rational grounds and just how many were political decisions and compro-
mises that emerged from the need to collaborate.
