BERNA
YUL
412
COMMANDING IN CRISES
largest number of relative casualties.228 The Americans at Omaha were
less than one and half miles into France but they had secured that against
the heaviest absolute casualties. The Utah attackers had reached the
airborne divisions but had not taken the roads at Carentan to cut off the
Cotentin peninsular.
At the gap between Sword and Juno, at 1600, the Germans launched
their only significant counter-attack of D-Day but the expected German
counter-attack in force never came. The Panzer groups were either too
far away to intervene, or held back for the 'real' invasion at the Pas-de-
Calais, or immobilized by the confused and dislocated command struc-
ture or the information to mount such a co-ordinated attack was simply
not available - the telephone system had been badly affected by the air
and naval attacks and the Resistance sabotage and, in the absence of the
Luftwaffe, no aerial reconnaissance was possible. As an American fighter
pilot quipped: 'the Luftwaffe had Leftwaffe'. 229 A Wehrmacht equivalent
was that if the plane was silver it was American; if it was blue it was
British; if it was invisible it was German. 230 All the Germans could really
be sure of was that the Allies seemed to be everywhere, and in the
Cotentin peninsular where the US Airborne had dropped, they were
everywhere and nowhere simultaneously - how could a counter attack be
organized if there was no known concentration of troops to attack?
It is often suggested that a critical success factor in the Allied landings
on D-Day was surprise, yet just after D-Day von Rundstedt claimed that
this was of marginal significance. Indeed, in his perspective, there was no
The enemy hoped to take us by surprise! In that attempt he failed ... [the)
aurborne landings failed to achieve surprise because officers and men had expected
them for weeks and had made appropriate preparations. As a result enemy para-
chute and airborne troops suffered heavily, even extremely heavy casualties...
They did not succeed in breaking up the coastal defences from the rear..
However) the enemy succeeded, by concentrated and ceaseless attacks from the
air, in disorganizing our supply to such an extent and to cause such losses of rail-
way rolling stock and vehicles that supply has become a serious problem ... It is
all a question of air force, air force and again air force.231
In retrospect there were clearly errors on the Allied side; the night
airborne landings had achieved little for the cost in lives yet the previous
airborne attacks on Italy had already demonstrated airborne landings
were extraordinarily difficult to deploy accurately.
proved all too vulnerable to the choppy waters they were
launched into but then the maximum strength of the wind in training
had been force four while on b-Day the wind was between force five and
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
413
force six. The planners had over-concentrated upon D-Day itself to the
extent that the task was restricted to a successful landing, rather than the
landing being a preliminary event to the main task - the invasion of
Europe and the destruction of Nazi Germany. At a local level the result
can be seen by the large numbers of troops for whom surviving the land-
ing itself was the primary task of the day, rather than moving inland to
drive the German defenders back.
At a strategic level the problem
became more evident as the troops were forced to fight through the
bocage countryside, metre by metre rather than across the more open
plains of central France. A war of movement may have rebalanced the
disadvantages of the Allied tanks against their German counterparts but
a battle of almost static attrition was always going to favour the Panthers
and Tigers of the Wehrmacht and the SS. The planners had also assumed
that the Germans would retreat to regroup and counter-attack but this
had not happened in Italy and Hitler's order not to retreat had prevented
any change in strategy; the result was a much tougher battle for the
beaches and the immediate hinterland than the Allies expected. But once
the crust of the German opposition was broken the movement through
central France itself proved to be relatively quick. And despite the pleas
of both Rommel and von Rundstedt, Hitler refused either to release the
20 divisions of the 15th Army for a counter-attack or to allow the 7th
Army to retreat to build up reserves and counter-attack itself. The beach
landings were, in the end, won
and lost through
Leadership,
Management and Command.
