Thi
298
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
11.7 Other weapons and support systems
In fact, just as the Sherman's successes were deeply rooted in the support
services that followed them, so the critical advantage that the Alliea
armies (as opposed to air forces or navies) had over their German coun
terparts tended to be in the more mundane spheres of logistics rather
than conventional gunnery. For example, each American infantry diVisiOn
was accompanied by a field artillery battalion comprising approximately
a dozen howitzers and 100 soldiers. This was not remarkably different
from its German counterpart - but the latter had usually to rely upon
horse drawn transport for munitions, while the American battalion could
rely upon a two and half ton truck ('deuce and a half") and trailer for each
gun, and another 100 plus vehicles of various kinds to ensure that neither
running out of ammunition nor mobility was usually a problem except
in the early part of the European campaign). In the German static battal-
ions, such as those attached to the 716th Division there was no motor-
ized transport and no horse drawn transport either. 129
Despite this, the basie neid artillery guns of the thes, the brush 25-
tronder and the American 105-mm, had very limited impact upon
Moops that were dug in, even in conventional slit trenches in the carth.
most of the evacute suosested that a o8reional shell (that is nOt di
air-burst exploding in the air before impact) had to land within a me
or all ddequately dug in position to transmit a shock wave sufficient to
«ill or disable the occupant. " Most of the European conflict was fougi
using time-fire fuses that could be adjusted berope firing to explode at a
predicted time after firing. Achieving an airburst over infantry required
sighting of the
explosion but a proximity, VT or pozit, fuse existedl
that egst the Allies' arsenal which carried a battery powered radar system
that ensured an explosion at a preset height above the ground. The pozit
fuse had been used in the Pacific war by the US navy for two years before
it found its way to the European land war and it was first used in the
counter-attack
against German forces in Houffalize on 3 January
1945.131 Allied commanders were always concerned less the Germans
should manage to secure and copy proximity fused munitions and Spaat
certainly thought that German flak units had used them in the Autumn
of 1944 when Allied air losses suddenly increased. 32 A cheaper and
unofficial alternative was to delay the explosion of a conventional 75mm
high explosive shell by turning the "delay' screw with a sixpence or screw-
anver the shell was then fired into the ground a little way in mont of the
target and it would ricochet aboutus fou above the ground over the
target before exploding. 133
the most frightening weapon for mostre llied infantrymen in the ETO
TECHNOLOGIES
299
seems to relate to the noise rather than the lethality of the weapon. For
example, the wailing of Stuka bombers and the screaming
of the
"Moaning Minnies' (Nebelwerfer),134 - multiple-barrelled mortars whose
walling sounds in flight generated very high levels of anxiety amongst
Allied troops. In fact, one of the ways that veterans managed to survive
unscathed longer than replacement troops was the ability they developed
to distinguish between the sounds of different incoming shells. Some
shells, however, were literally inaudible to those they were about to hit.
For example, the German 88mm shell, in a flat trajectory, travelled about
300 yards ahead of its sound. Or, as one British veteran explained to his
new troops in Normandy: "The shell explodes, you hear it coming, and
only then do you here the report as it's fired, 135 The ability to distin-
guish such sounds also told the listener whether the weapon was German
or Allied and the direction from which it was fired. 136
In terms of lethality even machine guns were being displaced in the
Second World War by artillery of some form as the primary cause of
injury or death, and one survey suggested that less than a quarter were
killed or wounded by a bullet. I37 In fact, at the level of machine guns the
Alied weapons were markedly inferior: the American Browning
Automatic Rifles fired between 300 and 600 rounds per minute depend-
ing on the model from a 20 cartridge box magazine. The British Bren
gun, based on a Czech ZB 26 design, fired 500 rounds per minute from
a 30 cartridge magazine, while the German MG-42 Spandau fired at
1,200 RPM from a 50-round belt. 138 Allied soldiers frequently referred
to the German MG-42 as sounding like cloth being torn, so quick was
we fou, whereas their own guns chattered. Mot my was the
bring rate so much faster, the MGs seldom seemed to run out of ammu-
nition - primarily because many ordinary infantry soldiers carried spare
boxes of MG ammunition. 139 Such a firing rate did tend to overheat the
barrel of the MG-42 quickly and this led to the bullets spinning wildly as
they emerged from the barrel - but being hit by a vertical bullet was still
lethal. The consequence of the accuracy, range and rate of fire of German
machine guns was that a single MG42 could effectively cover around 30y
yards of beach from a position on the bluffs above Omaha, 140 So why
didn't the Allies develop similar weapons?
Once again the question is best answered by reference to cultural
considerations - in this instance because the Allies' infantry doctrine was
wedded to the notion of mobility rather than firepower,
and since
nachine-guns were heavier weapons than rifles, and required some rifle-
men 139 reunition rather than a rifle, the mobility of units armed
with machine was clearly hampered by the presence of machine guns. 41
indeed, British infantry sections comprised just eight soldiers - one bren
