308
COMMANDING IN CRISES
discipline amongst massed ranks of soldiers to cope with this, in fact, the
chaos of battle ironically requires the radical deployment of initiative -
relatively unconstrained by any notion of hierarchical discipline. It is the
resolution of this paradox that defines the better performance in battle-
and distinguishes most German
units from most Allied units.
Nonetheless coercion was most certainly available to the commanders of
all sides in compelling their subordinates to stay put. Stanley Whitehouse
experienced this when digging in off Sword Beach and told to expect an
imminent German counter-attack: We were startled by a big brawny
military police officer who crouched along side us. "Orders are - there s
to be no Dunkirk this time ….. You must stay here and fight it out. My
men are between you and the beaches, with orders to shoot anyone lear
ing his post. OK?"* Though there are no records of anyone being shot
by the British military police in this way - and in this case the attack never
came - it is unlikely that such an 'execution' would be recorded should
a crisis have developed and the military stepped in to prevent another
Dunkirk.
It is also worth pointing out the desire Caf many subordinates to fight
for commanders - at any level - whom they regarded as being able to
maximize their chances of survival by their personal reputations as ein-
cient and effective commanders. For Whitehouse, Corporal Smith, "was
do sume of an infantry NCO... he led from the front, yelling and
cursing, waving his tommy gun, and shooting and coshing everyone
sight. I heard other squaddies say: "I wish i could get in Smudgers
section. He's a useful bloke and would look after you"'?
in the Wehrmacht on the Kussian freuet, Private Sajer had parallel
thoughts as his company commaida aupke to his comrades: "I woud
burn and destroy entire villages if by doing so I could prevent even one
of us from dying of hunger ... We are trying to change the world, nopme
to revive the ancient virtues buried under the layers of filth bequeathed
to us by our forbears ... life is war, and war is life. Liberty doesn't exist.
Upon hearing this, sajer reports, "we loved him and felt we had a truc
leader, as well as a friend on whom we could count'?
Similar sentiments were sometibyes developed about Allied field off-
cers (very seldom about staff officers who seldom 'strayed' into the front
line). For example, Private Albert J. King from the Ist Worcesters served
with the 43rd Infantry Division, and his company was commanded by
Major Grubb. When a group of replacements arrived in France, NNg
overhead one of them question his colleagues about Major Grubb's
sanity. The reply reproduced that same bonding that
Whitehouse
witnessed: "Grubby? He is mad, mad as an effing hatter, but his company
will follow him anywhere. If you're not prepared to do that, piss off to
COMMANDING
309
some other company'? Grubb was surprised by some of his own reat-
tions to battle:
It may now seem rather an incomprehensible thing to say, but it fighting) could
be great fun. What was really tiresome was when the shells came, then you had no
chance ... but a little gentleman's war was a great deal of fun ...
You really were,
you became a little elated, unbalanced even. On reflection it appears odd that you
could enjoy such a thing, but it is an example of an extraordinary reaction of the
body that I think is largely due to the generation of adrenaline. In moments of
intense danger, one became elated to such an extent that it bordered on insanity.8
Grubb was eventually sent back to Britain to run a Battle School and
leaders like him rapidly became thin on the ground, causing considerable
problems for senior commanders.
Lt Colonel Hart Dyke,
Hallamshires, the British 49th (Polar Bear) Division, regarded himself as:
Fortunate to have so many men with the stuff of leadership in them. They were
like rafis to which all the rest clung for support. It was these men, the pre-war
territorial nucleus of our battalion - the Hallamshires - who provided the warrant
and non-commissioned officers with the exception of course of the officers...
as now getting most difficult to find men to accept the added responsibility and
danger of leadership. There was little to offer in return for what one asked of
them. Rank and money meant little these days. A dozen times they had escaped
improbably. Long ago the few surviving men in the rifle companies had and
bound to realize the odds against them remaining unharmed. But the honour and
good name of the battalion meant much to them?
This respect for commanders who took a positive interest in their
subordinates seems to have been universal but rarely extended higher
than a captain, for as one US sole e ueu umed: "A lot of guys don t
even know the name of their regimental commander' 10 And in an army
eueun arned' respect for hierarchy was almost always subordinated
to earned' respect for what was regarded as inspirational Command, war
was not something that necessarily engendered a positive regard for the
officer corps.
Clearled not everyone involved in the fighting was driven by an ideo-
logical desire to fulfil their commander's desires, and there were proba-
bly few on the Allied side chat were politically motivated and fomany
specifically to rid the world of fascism.
There were,
however,
committed troops on both sides, especially the German ss units, and
there were also many that were turned into inveterate haters of the
enemy by witnessing the deaths or injuries inflicted upon their close
friends and colleagues. "1
