FUL
302
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
or Tigers. Indeed, at least one member of the 116th Infantry Regiments
anti-tank company who landed in Normandy and fought right through
to May 1945 never saw a German tank. 151 But "Tigerphobia' - the
assumption that every German tank was a Tiger, and thus unstoppabie,
was common. 152
Fortunately, the superior development of field communications on the
Allied side ensured that immobilized infantry could call down artillery or
aerial bombardments with relative ease. Using either the hand held si
pound SCR-536 (Signal Corps Radio) Walkie-Talkie sets with a range of
a mile or less, or the back packed SCR-300 weighing 32 pounds with a
range up to five miles, these FM (Frequency Modulation - static tree
ine-or-sight radios were god-sends to under-gunned infantry units. each
rifle company carried six walkie-talkies or carried miles of telephone cable
for phone connections back to their HQs. However, there was a price ro
pay for this - and it was the ability of the Germans to eavesdrop on US
radio communications that cost a considerable number of Allied lives.
onetheless, within to hours of H-›your, two submarine cables had
been laid from the command ships off shore to the shore-based units.
Most of the Forward Observations Officers (FOOs) spotting for arillery
on land used High Frequency devices but the multi-channel very righ
was incy radios - which were less susceptible to atmospheric conditions
- had just been developed and some were deployed with the invasion
forces, along With civilan technbuer uo ort. By o June a une of sig
connection had been established between Omaha Beach and a watch
tower on the Isle of Wight (originally used to watch for the spanish
Armada) and this allowed aerial photographs to be developed in englan
and transmitted by radio facsimile to Normandy for rapid assessment and
decision-making. To that effect, once a photo plane had landed in Brian
and its film had been developed, the results could be at Omaha Beach
within seven minutes. That basically provided an hour by hour update on
the state of German defences and troop movements.
In contrast German field communinitions, which had been dependent
upon the new 1,000 mile underground cable along the French coast,
were quickly reduced to using the outdated and frequently sabotaged
French telephone system, and the Wehrmacht's own mobile radio system.
I hese vehicles became a primary target for the Allied fighter-bombers in
Normandy: both von Schweppenburg's and Sepp Dietrich's units lost /3
per cent of their radio vans in the first few days of the invasion, making
co-ordinated counter-attacks difficult, and cutting off the beach head
from the Cotentin peninsular. That also necessitated German command-
ers physically moving between areas to co-ordinate developments, and the
inevitable result was a greater expolere to Allied air attack: both Rommel
TECHNOLOGIES
303
and Marcks were attacked in this manner and the loss of both these
commanders severely inhibited the ability of the German army to
respond. 153
11.8 Conclusion
Iris often assumed that D-Day was successful because the preponderance
of Allied technology made such a victory inevitable or because a series of
lucky breaks undermined the German defences and facilitated the Allied
attack. Certainly many Allied soldiers seemed to have felt an enormous
confidence in the veritable cornucopia of technology. Surely no-one
could resist the Arsenal of Democracy? But this optimism was premised
upon a conventional notion of US material superiority and an inordinate
and naive faith in the utility of machines to tame the opposition.
This
chapter, however, has suggested that the material strength of the Allies
was far from self-evident once the technology was deployed in the water
or on the ground. Just a few examples will re-illustrate the problems that
the scientists, technologists and abg was ulitary leaders, left the Allied
soldiers to deal with in Normandy.
First, the landing craft that the initial assault waves landed in were
simply inadequate to the task. This was already obvious from the Pacific
assaults and, in that theatre of war, a partial solution - the Amtrac - had
already been deployed to resolve it. Only two Amtracs were available for
Day Off ormandy and the consequence was a many of death on
Omaha. Moreover, subordinate officers had appealed to the command-
ers to reconsider the issue but had been overruled by leaders who should
let to l better. Second, the Pacific war - to say nothing of the entire
First World War - had also demonstrated that naval and acrial bombard-
ment of reinforced defensive positions was unlikely to succeed, either in
destroying the detenders or even undermining their ability to resist
third, the Funnies that so ably assisted the British and Canadians on the
castern beaches were noticeably absent from the American beaches - as
are reasons for their absence. The consequence of this trage oversight by
Bradley was the bodies littering Omaha on D-Day. Fourth, the tanks that
were to lead the charge through the German defences and strike terror
into the heart of the defenders, instead struck terror into the hearts of
he users and form a considerable part of the explanation for the
Normandy stalemate. Worse, the poverty of Allied tank design - and
british tank designs were worse than US tank designs in the main - was
all so unnecessary. A tank capable of withstanding the attacks of the
ligers and Panthers in Normandy was available and could have been
