356
COMMANDING IN CRISES
Petards began mortaring his emplacement in the sanatorium at the same
time as his ammunition ran out in the early afternoon. Only when the
situation appeared hopeless did the German captain, in consultation with
his sergeant, accept that surrendering was acceptable. 13
In other areas the plan went awry almost immediately when conditions
at sea were so rough that it was decided not to launch the DD tanks ar
sea from where they were supposed to spearhead the infantry, but to land
them directly on the beach, behind the infantry. The original plan had
been to deploy three squadrons of DD Shermans from the 4th/7i
Royal Dragoon Guards but the Y ntroduction of five Fireflies to A
Squadron, left B Squadron's DD Shermans to land 5 minutes before the
oth Vicen Howards on ling treen, and squadron s tanks to land o
minutes before 5th East Yorkshires on King Red. A Squadron's Fireties
plus the conventional Shermans would land directly on the beach at
atol alties dr sude the third infantry battation for fing sector, the
ith Green towards. in the event all the tanks were landed on the beatl
or a few hundred yards offshore because the local naval commander
decided the sea was too rough to launch the DD Shermans out at sea: in
sffect, recognizing the beginnings of a crisis, the commander took deci-
sive action in contravention of the plan. As a result only two tanks were
lost in the water; both had sunk in shell craters. A Squadron's tanks,
followed by 7th Green Howards, then pushed inland past Crépon,
throuft. Creully and into open country - where they were attacked by
German anti-tank guns and by 'friendlitire from HMS Orion and a
passing American Thunderbolt plane.
were destroyed by the fire of the ship. 14
The plane missed but four tanks
Once ashore the flail tanks in particular served to beat paths through
te minenelds allowing the assault engined's to clear and mark the paths
Y i infantry to leave the beach area relatively quickly in most places. Each
of these clearing operations was to be carried out on the Anglo-Canadian
beaches by a Composite Beaching Team of Flails, AVREs, and Assault
Engineers. "To the best of my knowledge'
Pearson of the Assault Pioneer Platoon of the 2nd Devons,
wrote Lieutenant Frank
and against
all that the history books say, most of the 23 Ist brigade and the forward
elements of the 50th Division followed in the wake of that one fail
tank. 15 Turner suggests there were three fail tanks initially involved but
whatever the numbers the flailing appeared to be successful. 16
The importance of individual tanks is replicated in the command dech-
sions of individuals. For example, on Jig Sector the Hampshires, Dorsets
and Devons estimated their casualties at 171 out of the initial assault
involving 4,000 soldiers until 0820.17 Corporal John Melaughlin with
the Ist Battalion of the Hampshires landed at around 0730 and found
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
357
himself at the head of a group as machine gun bullets killed three of his
comrades. They were stopped half way up the beach and McLaughlin
motted a gap in the sea wall. "So I shouted "Come on!" and started
moving towards it; the others followed reluctantly, 18 Similarly, when Lt
Colonel Hastings's (Green Howards) landing craft hit the beach nothing
happened. The ramp stayed up and no-one moved to open it in the light
or the heavy fire that was coming in their direction. However, as the craft
swung slowly towards an obstacle with a teller mine attached, the ramp
tas kicked open by a soldier. Still no-one moved. So Hastings walked to
the front, sat down on the prow, edged himself slowly into the water and
walked towards the beach - followed, slowly, by the rest of the unit. l9
Further along the coast, on King Beach, two Flail tanks and two AVRES
had been knocked out by a casemated 88mm gun built into the seawall
(WN 33) and supported by an anti-tank gun, three machine guns and a
mortar pit which had held up the East Yorks on the beach. After hits
trom a destroyer and an LCG(L) the guns were eventually put out of
action by a Sherman from the Westminster Dragoons at around 1000.20
La Riviere proved an equivalent probleman King beach for the 5th
battalion East Yorkshire Regiment. A fortified position on the front at La
Rivière was decimating the AVREs with an 88mm gun, and the infantry
with machine guns, as they came up the beach.
Not until one AVRE
managed to approach it from the blind side, and fired directly into the
aperture, was it put out of action.
The 50th Division as a whole suffered around 1,000 dead, wounded
and missing -
though this was considerably lighter than had been
expected 21 The capture of the four 122mm gun battery at Mont Fleury
by D Company of the Green Howards was one example where casualties
should have been high but were actually very light.
Company Sergeant Major (CSM) Hollis, having shot up an apparent
Pill box on the run into the beach at King Red - which turned out to be
a tramcar shelter
made good his practice when he single-handedly
Captured between 25 and 30 Germans in the two real pill boxes guard-
ing the approach to the
battery. But the manner of his doing
again
reflects on the more traditional British soldier's conventional penchant to
wait for orders. Moving off the beach with Major Lofthouse of Company
HQ, Hollis came under fire from a machine gun post behind them and,
in the words of Dunphie and Johnson, 'Not waiting for orders he [Hollis]
charged the pillbox alone' (my emphasis). 22 Hollis successfully routed
the occupants and did the same for another pillbox, capturing as many as
30 prisoners on the way. 23
When the two platoons reached the Mont Fleury Battery they found
it abandoned, apparently as a result of the air and sea bombardment,
