314
COMMANDING IN CRISES
American Private Eustis, for example, was not concerned about possibi-
ity injury or death but with something far more personal: how well!
acquit myself when I come up against the real thing, 30
12.2 The stages of combat
that reality of combat' suggested that most soldiers went through a
three phase experience as frontline fighters and the different phasing
wigests that successful combat commanders may have been the ones
who recognized the phases and acted appropriately.
First, there was an 'adventurous' stage where youthful ardour and the
novelty of the situation propelled soldiers into situations that others
wild have shirked. At this stage many individuals seemed to have
believed themselves destined to survive even if - and perhaps because -
so many fell besides them. Stanley Whitehouse, recounting his expen-
ences from D-Day to the German surrender captures this well for:
Naively, I still regarded the invasion as a big adventure? 31 Ells abo
suggests that the first few days of combat tended to generate both ves
high levels of stress and of a consequent selfishness in most individuals. 2
second, for the first weeks and perhap a couple of months tollowing
the initial experience of combat, a sharpened sense of effectiveness and
efficiency exists
as individuals learned from their own and others
mistakes about how to survive and perform under fire as a team rather
than as an individual. At this stage soldiers became very aware that luck
was in finite supply and that survival depended upon skill - Often man
fest in the ubiquitous "infantry crouch'. I wasn't scared until the third.
on aled Lieutenant Elliott Johnson from the 4th US Infantry
Division. Untortunately it did not take much longer to realize that skill
was almost redundant - and hence so was avoiding making a mistake; In.
only thing that mattered was luck! 34 Ernie Pyle had certainly come to
that conclusion as he left the European war, admitting that I feel that
I've used up all my chances'. He had; in the middle of April 1945 Pyle
was shot on le Shima, Okinawa. 35
Third was an almost universal stage, variously known as battle weari-
ness or battle fatigue, 'bomb-happiness" or 'shell-shock', 36 At this stage
the stress of continuous combat or simple exposure to uncertainty sapped
the confidence of soldiers and inverted their initial optimism to fatalistic:
pessimism: they knew they would die if they did not get out soon. As
out of a battle was
troops of the Ist Canadian Army reported: the only way one could get
death, wounds,
self-inflicted wounds and going
"nuts' 37 General Bradley concurred, 'behind every river, there's another
315
COMMANDING
till and behind that hill another river. After weeks or months in the line
ony a wound can offer him the comfort of safety, shelter and a bed' 38
At this point soldiers adopted what was known as the death wish walk,
or the "two thousand yard star', often appearing completely oblivious to
the dangers around them. After six months of continuous combat Stanley
Whitehouse approached breaking point: the gnawing, bong rearrul-
less that filled my waking, and often sleeping, hours' 39 He was not
alone, for perhaps as many as one in five non-fatal casualties were suffer-
ing from some form of shell-shock; and the longer troops stayed in the
combat zone the more likely they were to succumb. Indeed, had it not
been for the continuous replacement of wounded or dead troops, Elis
suggests that many units would not hate been able to continue. +
It should also be noted that it was unusual to get leave more than once
every 0-o months in the British army and complete rotation out of
combat altogether was not practised by any army at this time
nose beyond the European theatre who could be abroad for we as
ur more.* Any of those soldiers diagnosed as suffering from combat
fatigue were simply sent to the rear for a few days 'R&R' (rest and recu-
peration), and then returned to the front line to resume their role.
Indeed, this seems to have worked and there is some evidence that
suggests that troops sent too far from the front, or for too long, were
more unable and unwilling to return to duty. 42
The US Army suggested that the average Gl could take between 200
and 240 days of combat, though many ats recognized the "stare arter
just two weeks. A team of psychologists following the US Army through
Normandy suggested that after a month the
soldier's effectiveness
declined markedly and that within 6 weeks they were "close to a vegeta-
trough the war in the Pacific and their European theatre comrades
could look forward to about 60 days of continuous combat before relief,
compared to about 12 days in the British Army. The results are relatively
clear: in Europe fully a quarter of all Us combat soldiers apparen
suffered some form of nervous medical condition.**
The temporal change between the -laïve but excited rooky and the
Old hand was particularly obvious to the dear to sure lot
the first time next to the experienced British troops in North Africa.
Cooper recalled a friend telling
difference between the
Americans, who had been in combat only a short time, and the brush,
who had been there for two years, was that the Americans foug toddy
so they could go home tomorrow, and the british fought today and
noped and prayed that they would be alive to night agantonow.*o
Sometimes the stress manifested itself in bizarre behaviour.
