332
COMMANDING IN CRISES
The division continued to move west and enabled the US 9th Infantry
Division to cut off the peninsular. It was eventually withdrawn after 33
days on 9 July. 24
13.4 The 101st Airborne
The experience of the other American Airborne Division, the 101st, was
very similar but that of the commander quite different. The 101st, was
aue to land in lour concentrated groups but instead they were spread
their 300 square miles of Normandy with 35 sticks' (plane-load) outside
their designated drop zones, and some people 20 miles from their drop
ane." This was Partly because only 38 of the 120 pathfinders wer
themselves put down on target.26
some of the 10lst paratroopers jumped from a height so low that
their parachutes could not open; others survived, but only just. Ken
voray remembers the jump sequence thus: I was dumped out, hit wi
ground, and then got the opening shock of my chute'.?? Private Donald
gett dropped from 300 feet and just managed to get nis chute o
before he landed but the rest of his comrades were not so lucky: 17 other
paratroopers aropped into the same field as he did but none with thei
Parachutes open. 28
the 10ist was to due to drop behid Utah Beach, destroy the coastal
cary aloe martin-de-varreville, capture the exits from the beach, an
ink up with the sea-landed troops and the 85th Airborne a little further
land. Only exit 1, the most southerly, at Poupeville, caused any prob-
els due tat was taken when troops from the 2nd battalion, oth malty
Division from Utah Beach attacked the village from the seaward end.»
Unce alen the Germans were unable to take advantage of the situa
because the scattered troops, the use of dummy paratroopers, diu
the effective cutting of many telephone lines by the French resistance, left
them unable to assess the picture with any accuracy. The confusion was
only to be expected for even by the end of D-Day only 1,100 of th
6,600 soldiers of the 101st had assembled.
field - though he did have a cow for company which at least meant that
Taylor, in command of the 101st, like Ria geway, found himself in i-
the field was not mined. Like Ridgeway, Taylor also found himself trav-
elling to the front line, but intriguingly he appears to have been doins
the trips for the opposite reason:
In my experience, the history books that depicted the role of the general as being
that of galvanizing his men into action were all wieng. I found more often than not
that i went up to te front lines not to urge on ze troops but to escape the worne
THE AIRBORNE ASSAULTS
333
of the command post where all battle noises sounded like the doings of the isit to
and where it was easy for the commander to give way to dire imaginings. A visit to
the men of the 101st under fire never failed to send me back to the command post,
assured that the situation was well in hand, and that there was no cause for worry 30
This is intriguing because it implies that perhaps command as tradi-
tonally understood - heroic individuals commanding from the front -
vas less relevant than we may imagine. Ridgeway embodied this but
laylor's approach was both the opposite and equally erfective. Indeed,
this is much closer to what Heifetz calls 'getting onto the balcony' now
and again to get a strategic perspective on the dance floor.31 Perhaps,
wer all, it is What the soldiers and local commanders at the front di
doing that makes the difference, not what the formal commanders are
doing. As Taylor continued, the scattered distribution of troops also left
the 10lst with command problems but these seem to have been solved
on the spot: "In the course of the day the men had shown remarkable
mitative in forming small task forces under the officers or non-commis-
sioned officers who happened to, to sint ana then bedding for the
nearest division objective. 32
Carentan was defended by von der Heydte's 6th Parachute Regiment
2nd Paracnute Division), and after three days, on his own mudave, he
decided to pull out of the city. On 13 June a counter-attack by von der
Heydte's paratroops,
supported by
ranzergrenader Division, came close to retaking the town but they wer
eventually stopped by tanks from the US 2nd Armoured Division. It was
prising that the 17th SS managed much at all: one third of the motor
zed' grenadiers had bicycles, and most of the division was stranded near
Vers for two days from 10 to 11 June through lack of tuer von der
Heydte was certainly unimpressed by their performance (as they were by
his), and they were so short of ammunition for their heavy weapons that
my a desultory barrage preceded their attack upon the ound and forst
Airborne Divisions on 13 June, 34
landed within their allotted drop zones; many of the rest were killed or
About 6,600 paratroopers of the US 101st dropped but only 4,000
captured on landing. By the end of D-Day there were still only 2,500
troops assembled properly and only one of the three senior omeers was
Present, nevertheless, by the afternoon some troopo mad dieday mince up
With the 4th Infantry Division who had landed on Utah early that monit
ing. By the end of June, 4,670 casualties had been taken and though i
chtually accomplished its missions, including ling Calend on
June, its most significant battle lay six months after D-Day when it made
a successful stand at Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge.*»
