72
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
At 0000 hours, 6 June, 1,333 heavy bombers began attacking the
coastal defences, and as the light progressed so the shift to the medium
and light bombers of the USAAF occurred. The final bombing plan was
agreed so late that only ten major batteries were targeted by the heav
bombers, caen receiving sub tons of bombs on the evening of s June. 3
Even this agreement was wrung from Spaatz with deep foreboding
because heavy bombers simply did not have the capability of hitting such
small targets from the great heights they operated from. Spaatz, ever-
concerned to minimize friendly fire casualties, insisted that the firs
waves of landing craft delay their approach to give the bombers a chance
to do their work accurately but the ground commanders insisted on the
original timings. Thus the American bombers were instructed to delay
their drops until certain that no Allied troops would be hit - and as a
consequence almost no troops of either side were hit where that delay
was compounded by the low cloud cover over Omaha Beach?*
All told, over 5,000 bombers and nearly 5,500 fighters were in the air
on D-Day; none was shot down by the Luftwaffe though 113 were shot
down by anti- aircraft fire. If the light was good the bombing was due to
stop five minutes before the first landing; if the light was bad it was
extended to ten minutes. Neither the sea nor the air bombardment was
forces were reluctant to commit themselves until very late in the plannino
as thoroughly planned as they should have been. First because the al
timetable and second because the responsibility for deciding what was
necessary lay with the army but the responsibility for how that was
executed remained with the navy and the air force. The result was a
scherally weak and poorly exccuted plan. For instance, at Omaha beach,
the B-17 Flying Fortresses were to drop their sixteen 500lb bombs from
20,000 feet, a height that made accuracy through cloud cover virtually
impossible. In theory this was less an attempt to destroy the concrete
bunkers than to kill and bewilder the defenders.?5 They were followed by
3-24 Liberatols due to fly at 500 feet and drop 1,285 tons, many or
them small 100lb bombs over the beaches to leave plenty of craters and
debris to protect the attacking troops. In the event the B-26 Marauders
that attacked Utah proved much more effective than the B-24 attacks
upon Omaha, Gold, Juno and Sword and in general the air attacks were,
disappointing,?% Particularly ineffective were the attacks upon 13 critical
defensive positions on Omaha for the poor visibility dissuaded the pilots
in fact 3 miles inland.
from dropping their bombs until they were well past their own troops -
The naval bombardment that took up when the bombers had left was
itsel a complex pian or operations, the targets, the timings and the
number of rounds fired were all established in advance, and once the
ALLIED AIR STRATEGY
73
landings commenced the bombardment would move inland and then
provide fire support for the assault troops. Thus it was designed to
achieve three aims. First, to neutralize whatever inland batteries the
bombers failed to destroy. It was always assumed that the heavy concrete
emplacements would protect the defenders from all but a direct hit but
it was also assumed that a shocked gun-crew and a disrupted ammunition
supply would provide the attackers with enough time to get ashore rela-
tively unscathed. Second, the ships would concentrate their fire on the
beach strong-points. Third, just before the landings themselves, the
ships, including the destroyers and particularly the rocket ships, would
provide "drenching fire' to deter any defender from firing upon the
attackers. The destroyers were allocated to specific beach areas and given
relative freedom to fire upon whatever targets of opportunity arose.
Rather different approaches to beach-firing
were adopted by the
American and British forces. The US tended to provide what might be
called a short 'thin' drenching by air and sea over the whole of Utah and
Omaha Beach, whereas the British opted for a long thick' drenching at
specific strong-points, leaving some areas virtually untouched.
Rear-
Admiral Vian subsequently accepted that the problems at Omaha were
partly a consequence of the failure of thin drenching fire."7
Rather more effective seems to have been the bombardment from the
warships that opened up after the bombers had left to silence whatever
was left of the German strong-points, which unhappily for the approach-
ing troops on Omaha was just about everything. Inland, for example, at
Longues-sur-Mer, four 155mm cannon strongly encased in concrete had
withstood the 1,500 tons of pre-invasion bombing and began shelling
the Allied battleships at 0557 without success, though the first salvo
straddled the HMS Bulolo - the flag ship of the Commander of Assault
Force off Gold Beach, Commodore Douglas-Pennant.
Within 23 minutes HMS Ajax silenced the battery from 11 kilometres
off-shore - about the same distance that the British troops reached in the
other direction by the end of D-Day. Later that morning the battery
resumed shelling and was finally silenced by HMS Argonaut, and then
captured by C Company, Ist Battalion
The Hampshire
Regiment.
Subsequent inspection revealed that 150 six-inch and 29 five-and-a-half-
inch shells had fallen around the target area, two of the four guns had
received direct hits and the casement of a third had been hit.?8
The accuracy and distance of the naval fire (targets 17 miles inland
were hit) was primarily assured through the activities of the 104 spotter
aircraft and 39 Forward Observer Bombardment parties (naval personnel
with radio communication for shore to ship). Indeed Rommel subse-
quently accepted that our operations in Normandy (were) tremendously
