YUL
402
COMMANDING IN CRISES
and he returned within the hour to report the general chaos and confu-
sion and that only on Easy Red had the obstacles been cleared but that a
line of traffic at this exit made an easy target for German artillery!94
Bradley now had three assault waves bunched up behind the initial one
and he had a further 25,000 troops and 4,400 vehicles waiting.
Here indeed was a crisis in search of a decisive commander; in this case
the metaphorical cavalry arrived, not on waves of horses but the backs of
the waves: the destroyers were moving in. The destroyers standing off
shore had been ordered to cease firing directly on the beach as soon as
the first waves landed at 0630 until ship to shore communications was
established. But 75 per cent of the 116th RCT's radios had been lost in
the water. But by 0810 it was clear to some destroyer captains that the
situation on the beaches was intolerable. The destroyers began shelling
identifiable targets and were then ordered by Captain Sanders,
commander of the destroyer group on the USS Frankford, to move
closer still. His order was reinforced by a message from Admiral Bryant
on the USS Texas. 'Get on them men, get on them. We must knock out
those guns. They are raising hell with the men on the beach, and we can't
have anymore of that. We must stop it', 195
So close were they that the USS Shubrick even fired four of its 5 inch
shells at a lone German officer believed to be spotting for his own
artillery in the area. Charles Murphy was just one of hundreds pinned
down by fire from a pillbox when a destroyer moved in: "He couldn't
have been 200 yards off the beach. He pumped four rounds right into
that brazier (of the pillbox). Boy that was the end. Then things started
moving fast. I loved the Navy from then on'. 196
Opposite Dog Green, where the 29th Division were landing, the US
warmick spotted sherians pinned down by a gun bult into the chitt.
The tanks fired at the cliff but their shells could not penetrate the
emplacement. However the destroyers much larger guns could and
taking their lead from the tank the destroyer quickly silenced the German
position and then tracked the tank shells marking out the next target, 197.
The casemated 80mm gun on the eastern side of bxit 1 on Easy Red.
(V Nos) was another destroyer target. It had been pounding the landing
craft and troops all morning and eventually an army-navy beach team.
landed with radio contact to the ships. Don Whitehead takes up the
we saw the destroyed tute racing towards the beach and swing broadside, expos
ing itself to the fire of the batteries on the bluff. One shell from the destroyer tore
a chunk of concrete from the side of thi% ›lockhouse. Another nicked the top. A
third ripped off a corner. And then the s yunype smashed into the gun-port to
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
403
silence the weapon. Always, in my mind, the knocking out of this gun was a major
turning-point in the battle in our sector .... As I saw it, that was when the battle
of the beach was won - seven hours after the first wave hit the beach. 198
WN64 and WN65, covering Exit E-1 on Easy Red proved a formida-
ble obstacle and several destroyers began shelling the area from 1000.
The USS Frankford began shelling the beach first and by 102l it had
destroyed a pill box on the beach. 15 minutes later a mortar position on
the bluffs above E-1 was located and destroyed after five salvos. The
destroyer then located and destroyed the site of two machine gun posi-
tions. Meanwhile, the USS Harding, a little further east on Easy Red,
spotted fire from WN62 and demolished it at 1050 -
just as its
commanding officer, Lt Frerking ordered its evacuation because of the
accuracy of the naval gunfire. 199 Under this covering fire from the
destroyers off the beach Lt Spaulding's Company E soldiers from the
L6th RCT outflanked WN64 and stormed it from the rear, taking 21
prisoners and killing 40 defenders in the process.
Indeed, it was just at the time that several small pockets of soldiers had
reached the top of the bluffs and were beginning to flush the defenders
out of the trenches and the pill boxes that infested the entire area that
Bradley was informed that the situation on Easy sector was critical.
Vierville had been taken and units of the 18th Regiment were beginning
to land behind the initial assault groups. Such was the success of these
small groups that by 1200, although mortar and artillery fire from
Photo 14.11 Exit E-1, Omaha Beach, looking south
