158
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
forces, including 3 million in the army. That army comprised 47 div-
sions: 11 armoured, 34 infantry and 2 airborne. Only i1 divisions 12
armoured and 9 infantry) were not called into action - a point I shall
return to later.
In addition there was a massive force of British
Commonwealth troops, numbering a further 5 million, half of whom
were Indians. 12
Despite the tardiness of British mobilization, the history of total war
had at least provided Britain with the necessary management process
for engaging the population once the threat was recognized and Britain s
political leadership managed to achieve astonishing levels of civilian and
military engagement during the war; in short, the labour resource pror-
lem was suitably tamed. By 1941 Britain spent over half its GNP on th
war effort (as did New Zealand after 1942 and Canada after 1943) and
the British remained the most mobilized of all the warring nations. In
1941 as many as › per cent of eligible males between the ages of 14 and
64 were mobilized and by D-Day, of a working population of 22 million,
just under 5 million were in the armed services, and almost 4 million
were making military equipment. The number of women working
outside the home increased dramatically by 4z per cent from pre-wa
levels to just over 7 million, of whom half a million were in the armed
services, 500,000 in the civil service and 200,000 in the Women'S Land
Army. Tartly as a consequence of the latter, land under cultivano
increased by 40 per cent during the war. But productivity remained low
and production actually peaked in early 1943. Only 60 per cent of its
munitions needs were manufactured in Bd ain, the rest coming mainly
from the US ($19 billion) and Canada (S3.7 billion). 13
conscription into the armed forces was initiated on 20 May 193)
through the Military Trainingitsict, and the National Service Act passed
on 1 September 1939 introduced universal compulsory service. It might
seem that the political and military leadership of the country achieved
miracles: by October four infeditry divisions were in France led by
General Gort and seven months In er another eight infantry divisions had
arrived. However, the assumption they any coming conflict would be
relatively same was quickly undermined " en the only armourea av-
Joy- Or rather half armoured division - arrived in May I, and Was
casembarking on 21 May, just in time to leave almost all its armour at
fications for the rearming of the armoured divisions.
Junkirk. This was a catastrophe and, as we shall see, had significant fals
iter Dunkirk, conscription proceeded 3 ace, and between June and
august 1940, a quarter of a million Britbe civilians were called up.
was just the beginning, for by the end of the war there were
armoured divisions, 35
manly divisions, & airbed le divisions and y
MOBILIZING ANGLO-CANADIANS, COMMONWEALTH, VOLUNTEERS
159
'County' divisions for beach defence. In addition to the Indian,
Australian, New Zealand, South African and Canadian national divisions,
there were also five colonial divisions. The political leadership's extraor-
dinary fear of air attack was visibly present in the huge force deployed
into anti-aircraft units
- the equivalent of 12
The RAF
employed around 1 million people in total, while the army engaged 2.7
million. 14
British Army strength did not peak at 2.9 million until victory over
Germany in June 1945 with a gradual displacement of infantry units (60
per cent of the total just after Dunkirk) by armoured and especially
artillery units. By the end of the war the artillery was the largest arm with
22 per cent of all personnel. By D-Day the British and Canadian armies
were expected to provide 16 divisions between them - but there was,
apparently, precious little left and it was estimated that by the end of
1944 there would be a shortfall of up to 35,000 troops. The shortfall
problem was twofold.
First, it was not equally distributed throughout the army but almost
wholly located where most of the casualties always occurred: in the rifle
companies of the infantry divisions. By late July 1944 not only were the
Anglo-Canadians having problems compensating for the expected casu-
alties, and not only were they now realizing just where almost all those
casualties were being taken, but they now conceded that casualty rates in
the Normandy Bocage were far higher than had been predicted. heis
While the first ten days in Normandy had proved to be relatively light in
casualties, thereafter the figures were relatively heavy and increasing all
the time. By the end of June 1944 the Anglo-Canadians of the 21st Army
Group had suffered 24, 698 casualties but the US casualty rate was 50 per
cent higher at 34,034 (the Germans had taken 80,783), and by the
middle of July 37,563 casualties. By the end of July it was clear that the
infantry had taken 70 per cent of the casualties but only 15 per cent of
the replacements were infantry soldiers.
In August Montgomery was
forced to disband the 59th Division (the most junior) and redistribute its
members to fill the depleted ranks of the rest of the army, and by
November the 50th Division followed suit. Fortunately, British casualties
peaked in September 1944 and thereafter the system became relatively
Montgomery was careful to avoid unnecessary British casualties, not
The second problem was
the overall availability of troops.
simply because he had witnessed the needless slaughter in the first World
War at first hand, but because, after five years of war, Britain was running
A dusops." This was partly because the nature of war had changed,
so that the KAF and the air defences, and the support services, swallowed
