118
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
Allies, as we have already seen, the Germans believed the number was
between 75 and 89 in total (thanks to Operation Fortitude). Thus the
five division landing in Normandy was even more obviously just a ruse to
conceal the much larger landing - of possibly 20 divisions initially - that
would come at the Pas-de-Calais later. Indeed, the Germans assessed the
shipping accumulating in southern British harbours to be capable of
transporting 20 divisions in the first assault wave - four times the number
actualy involved? Montgomery certainly assumed that the Allies would
face five divisions in Normandy on D-Day itself, and that within five days
a further seven would arrive; he also assumed that five of the 12 divisions
would be armoured. By then he assumed he would have 13 divisions
ashore, excluding the airborne divisions, and within 20 days there would
be between 23 and 24 divisions ashore.3
5.2 The Atlantic Wall
With the failure of the German invasion of Britain and the switch to the
cast, it became obvious that eventually the Western Allies would attempt
an invasion, but the two problems for the Germans were where that
would be and when? The 3,500 mile coast from Spain to Norway was all
a potential target for the Allies and Hitler implied that the entire length
of coastline would form an impregnable Atlantic Wall', but in practice
the possibilities were much narrower. Nevertheless, in December 1941
Hitler ordered the construction of a new West Wall to assure protection
of the Aretic, North Sea and Atlantic coasts ... against any landing oper-
ation of very considerable strength with the employment of the smallest
number of static forces'. It was to be 2,400 miles long,
with 15,000
strong points and 300,000 troops. It was designed to be impregnable
against every enemy? * That impregnability was already apparent in 194-
when the Calais defences were shown to include 16-inch naval guns
encased within 23 feet of concrete.
German knowledge about the Allies' strategy - and therefore their
own counter-stratesy - Was premised upon two assumptions, only one or
which as accurate: the Allies would have to invade within fighter cover
tate dom england. That in onuen ttack to an area mom the
Netherlands down to the Cotentin peninsular and in this assumption the
Germans were right. The second assumption was that any sustained inva-
sion would need the facilities of a major port - here the Germans were
Wrong, Thus although the whole coastline was deemed to be part of the
atep all it was assumed that any Allied attack that was not focused
upon a port would be a diversionary movement designed to draw
GERMAN STRATEGY: HARD SHELL, SOFT SHELL
119
German armour and reinforcements away from the 'real' target. Even
though von Rundstedt's own maps showed the potential threat from
Normandy and even when a 'war-game' in February 1944 revealed how
vulnerable Germany was to a Normandy landing, the High Command
chose to ignore it. In May Hitler 1944 himself suggested that Normandy
could be the spot but, for once, and fatally, he allowed himself to be
dissuaded from strengthening the defences there by Rommel and von
Much of the explanation behind the preoccupation with defending the
ports can be located in the failed Dieppe raid in August 1942. It was
heralded by the British as an important learning experience - a euphe-
mism for a poorly planned and executed disaster. Nonetheless, to the
Allies Dieppe proved a port could not be taken by force and that an alter-
native must be found. But perhaps more importantly its effect on the
Germans was to confirm their assumptions rather than challenge them:
since the German leadership could not countenance an alternative to an
assault upon a port, it confirmed that all ports needed to be the focus of
The most important port was also the one covering the quickest route
across the channel, that is from Dover to the Pas-de-Calais, as the French
called it, and since the time at sea was also the time of maximum vulner-
ability to air attack, the quickest and safest route across was there. After
all, the British could fly to Calais in just 20 minutes. This line of attack
was also the shortest way through Belgium to Berlin and for a long
For exactly the same
reasons the Germans fortified it from early 1942. It was also logical,
therefore, for Hitler to situate his 'terror' or 'vengeance' weapons, the
V-1 and V-2 rockets, in this area since this also minimized their flight
time and would encourage the Allies to attack a position that Hitler
considered impregnable. In fact, had the Germans concentrated on the
V-I and launched them in hundreds against the coast of southern
England in May 1944, Or the coast of Normandy in June 1944, it may
well have proved disastrous for the Allies?
Hitler's personal preference for the hard shell strategy became mani-
fest in his Führer-weisung (Führer Directive) No. 40, issued on 23 March
1942. In this he admitted that even enemy landings with limited objec-
tives can interfere seriously with our own plans if they result in the enemy
Baining any kind of foothold on the coast ... Enemy forces that have
anded must be destroyed or thrown back into the sea by immediate
counterattack'& Hence, between 1942 and June 1944, with a rapid
acceleration in the last six months, 250,000 labourers, 90 per cent of
whom were conscripted foreign labourers - little more than slaves -
