346
COMMANDING IN CRISES
continue'??6 In fact, the gap between the beaches remained in German
hands for a short while but it was not to become the spring board for a
major counter-attack? and by the end of D-Day the 2lst Panzer
Division had lost 54 of its 124 tanks.?8 The only German division that
was moved to Normandy from outside, the 346th Infantry Dision
stationed west of Dieppe, was ordered to Sword Beach area but it was
too little and too late.?9
General Bayerlein, commander of the Panzer Lehr division at Le
mans, 130 miles from the coast, was also informed of the invasion at
U2UU and was also ready to move against the invaders by 0500. Since it
was already starting to get light by then any movement would be vulner-
able to air attack - but the low cloud that existed on the moris of.
Day would have effectively rendered the movement invisible. However,
anzer Lew was unabie to move until personally released by filled
1940. Given the improved visibility and the clear presence of Allied
arcraft, Bayerlein then requested a delay until dark. I his was denied and
Ion division Was ordered by Fitler himself not just to move immediately
but to ensure that the invaders were repulsed by that evening. Lane
Lehr began its move north as ordered by Dollmann, commander of the
7th Army, and from Chartres to the beaches Panzer Lehr's Captain
Hartdegen, General Bayerlein's orderly officer, recalled being attacked
on ted separate occasions from the air. By the end of the day lanzer
so had still not reached its destination but had lost 40 fle tucks, ou
other trucks, five tanks, and 84 half-tracks and self-propelled guns.
Not far behind Panzer Lehr's stahe of readiness was the 12th SS
Hiterjugend (HJ) Division. At 0230 the 12th SS HI made a reconnai
sance to the cast of the Dives river but was ordered at 0545 to concen-
trate around Lisieux - almost 40 miles east of Caen by road and in the
wrong recdon- despite lie fact that the commanders Of the fl) already
Knew where the invasion had occurred. Unable to contact the ist ss
Panzer Corps commander, Dietrich, to suggest a change of direction, the
) duly obeyed orders and set out at 1000 hours. At between 1500 and
1600 the orders were changed and the division redirected to where they
should have been going in the first place, west of Caen. By the time the
1) wert in the right place to attack the Allies they had spent almost 2*
hours in a fruitless movement across Normandy.
Wit's 12th SS HI and Feuchtinger's 21st Panzers had just 160 tanks
between them and less than one third of the 12th SS's infantry had
arrived, so great was the air pressure on German movements.
Wanted to wait for Panzer Lehr's arrival before mounting a three-division
one didek but were ordered to ensure that carpiquet alpon
remained in German hands and attacked at 1600 on 7 June. Three hours
THE AIRBORNE ASSAULTS
347
pnor to this Canadian infantry from the Nova Scotia Highlanders and
ans from the Sherbrooke Fusiliers began approaching Carpiquet airport
and ran straight into Kurt Meyer's 25th SS Panzergrenadier Regiment
part of the 12th SS HI) waiting for the German counter-attack to take
place. In the ensuing 6 hour battle the Canadians lost 302 casualties
induding 110 dead) and 128 as prisoners and 21 tanks; the Germans
lost 300 casualties (including 73 dead) and 9 tanks.
By D-Day+3 the
12th So f, had suffered 725 casualties, including 180 dead.04,05 1nc
uermans had prevented the Allies reaching either the airport or caen but
the Allies had prevented the Germans from reaching the coast. Panzer
Lehr had been delayed by the destroyed bridge at thury-Harcourt and
eventually reached Caen in the mueuwon to June.* But the willingness
of the German troops to commit themselves to battle could not compen-
sate for the farcical nature of the German higher command.
In the event Von Rundstedt was the only senior officer around at the
time of the invasion (Rommel wasn't even informed of the invasion until
one hour after the Allies issued the official communiqué at 0930 - eight
hours after the first capture of Allied paratroopers).85 Within two hours of
being notitied von Rundstedt had ordered Panzer Lebr and the ruth so
h) to move Lowards Caen. Von Rundstedt was well aware tide formal
permission from Hitler was necessary for such an order, but since the
movement made good military sense his request Ob west was most d
was of fulfilling the bureaucratic niceties father wah lottery wond
whether he could mobilize the Panzers. But that order was countermanded
by Jodi, head of the OKW (Oberkommando der wehrmacht, Cented big"
command) at about 0600 on 6 June - at the same time as a message
aud UD West from Normandy reporting very neare dietro sea-
borne landings. Jodl reminded Von Rundstedt that fitler alone could
order their movement - and Hitler had only gone to sieep at 0400 and
would remain asleep until 1030 - giving the Allies tour and a halt hours of
extra freedom. 'According to repd ts I have received, insisted Jodl
could be a diversionary attack ... part of a deception plan. Ob West has
sufficient reserves right now .... UB West should endeavour to clean up.
the attack with the forces at their disposal... I do not talk tiss to ame
to release the OKW reserves ...
We must wait for further clarification'.
That decision to avoid a decision - so important for Wicked Problems
- was manifestly inappropriate what Licing a Critical Problem
Zeitzler, Chief of the General Staff of the army, clearly thought Hitler'
response to the invasion news was just such an inappropriate response,
*that was typical. The invasion has begun. Time is of the essence, Instead
of rushing officers to the front in an aircraft, instead of flying to the west
immediately in person,
instead of taking
decisions or giving your
