230
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
artillery regiment, had been in position since March 1944 when it was
moved from the division's location at St Lô by Rommel to take over a
30-mile coastal stretch between the Vire estuary and Arromanches 86
That stretch of coast had already been declared unbreachable by Admiral
Krancke, the naval commander in the west, with the possible exception
of the area that was to mark Omaha Beach - though the steep bluffs and
pooraccess for vehicles made it an unlikely spot for an invasion force
The 352nd were commanded by Major General Kraiss from his HO
in Molay-Littrey, nine miles south of the centre of Omaha Beach. Krass,
at 54 years Old, had fought as CO of the 168th Infantry Division and
then the 355th Infantry Division in the Soviet Union for over two yea
and was thus thoroughly experienced. And his new command, the 352nd
Infantry Division, had been equipped with a new anti-tank battalion
containing 12 Sturmgeschutz (assault guns or tank destroyers) which
were often better armoured and gunned than conventional tanks, as well
as 4 conventional anti-tank guns and 12 anti-aircraft guns. Just after D-
Day the 352nd was reinforced by a Luftwaffe regiment of anti-aircrat
guns: 60 20mm and 48 88mm guns.88
Fortunately for the Allies, although Kraisse allocated one of each of his
three 352nd Division regiments to the west (Pointe du Hoc to the est
ary), central (Pointe du Hoc to St Honorine) and castern (St Honorine
to Arromanches) sectors, he was more concerned with protecung the
western sector towards the Vire estuary than the central or eastern sector,
so certain was he that if an invasion came to Normandy it would aim to
over the Contention peninsular so that Cherbourg coud be taken a
soon do possible. Yet that coastine was the one area where an amphibi-
dis landing was virtually impossible and the Cotentin already had three
divisions to defend it.
I hus facing the Americans at Omaha Is not a single regiment of the
716th (the second was behind Gold Beach and the third held in reserve
at Bayeux), a regiment of static troops whose ages, fitness and identity
allegedy rendered them poor opposition), but this plus the two infantry
Dalianons and one artery battalion of the 916th Regimen of the
sand Division. It could have been much worse. Kraisse man just do
per cent of his avallable troops facing the Allied invaders and his reserves
vere a full 12 miles behind the coast - a point that even Rommel chu
cized when he visited Kraisse in May 1944. Moreover, occupying the
each defences themselves were, indeed, troops from one battalion of the
26th Regiment of the 716th Division. At Omaha there was a battalion
ik loth Regiment of the 352nd Infantry Division but they had beer
reployed back from the beach by KraisK and were not committed to the
coast until the first waves were already landing.
Over one third of
MOBILIZING THE GERMANS: WEHRMACHT AND SS
231
Kraisse's troops, including over 2,000 soldiers from both battalions of his
Division, and 700 from his
352nd
Fusilierbataillon in the Kampfgruppe Meyer, had moved west towards the
Vire estuary at 0310 to prevent what Kraisse assumed to be a parachute
drop in numbers trying to separate him from his neighbouring 709th
Infantry Division (who had been patrolling with blanks as the Americans
landed). In fact the paratroopers were members of the US 101st
Airborne who had dropped well outside their designated zones. At 0550
Kraisse realized he had erred and halted the Kampfgruppe. They were
immobilized for two hours and only at 0735 was a single battalion
detached and sent to Omaha, where it was expected to arrive at 0930 -
it did not get there until early afternoon, and by then it was too late. In
short, when the first waves landed - and were decimated - they were
destroyed by one battalion of the 716th Division, the 'poor' troops that
the US High Command had talked so disparagingly of for months. Had
Kraise, the leader on the ground at Omaha, not deployed his reserves so
far behind the front line, and deployed them erroneously, the situation
may have proved much worse on Omaha.90
9.6 Conclusion
the alleged fanaticism of the Waffen SS and the utility of their identifi-
cation as elite soldiers dedicated to Hitler is hardly novel but it remains
of critical importance to explaining the difficulty the Allies had in driving
the German army out of Normandy. The Waffen SS and the HI units
were ethnically probably identical to the average Wehrmacht soldier but
the former groups almost always fought longer, harder and with less
compassion than the latter and this may relate both to their loyalty to
titler and their radical embodiment of heterarchy rather than hierarchy
as a primarily Leadership principle. However, the SS played little active
role on D-Day itself, except in being unable to mobilize properly or
sage the invaders. Their role was crucial in two other ways. First, their
rapid deployment prevented the Allies from either securing Caen or
breaking out of the bridgehead. Second, their reputation, in stark
contrast to that of the 716th Division, persuaded the Allied planners that
the real fight would not be on the beaches but in the subsequent
counter-attack by the infantry and tanks oityne SS and Panzer divisions
And that real fight was not necessarily abhorrent to all beyond the
has aty e Waften SS, for many soldiers positively enjoyed their expe-
of war, elther in terms ofem to sure, its excitement or simply te
adrenaline buzz of actual dangehe ind combat. For the rest, and probably
