136
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
OPERATION "NEPTUNE"
Landing in Normandy, 1944.
ARROMANCHES ARTIFICIAL • PORT •
(MULBERRY .. B*)
*at z0m t!
rom chart produced by the hydrographer of the Nav
Corrected to October, 1944
Arromanches that 49°20'20' N. Long O°3720" Wi.....
Natural Scale, 27,s00
Western 2 Ener
Map 6.1 Arromanches Artificial Port (Mulberry B)
Like the other two anglo-Canadia ayres, Juno and Sword, Gold
beach comprised small holiday hamlets and seaside towns, not at all like
the empty bluffs at Omaha or the bare expanses of beach at Utah. It
stretched from Port-en-Bessin to La Riviere and the main assault was to
be undertaken by the 5th Battalion the East Yorkshire Regiment on King
Ked, the oth Green Howards on King Green, the Ist Battalion the
Dorset Regiment on Jig Red andIt he Ist Battalion the Hampshire
Regiment on Jig Green.
the hital fole of the angio-Canadians was to move south and east or
eden and to hold off German reinforcements until the Americans had
compieted their imital task and to press south themselves beyond Laen.
The task of the 35,000 Americans was to cut off and hold the Cotentin
Peninsular and to capture Cherbourg in 15 days. They were to land the
us oth Corps under verow on Omaha and the US 7th Corps wite
won Collins on Omaha, though the Omaha debacle prompted
ayrt dier the thing of the Cherbourg assault so that mitially t
137
ALLIED GROUND STRATEGY
7th Corps moved south to support the 5th Corps, rather than the other
way round? The American beaches (Utah and Omaha) were hit first
because of the tidal difference between the western and the eastern
beaches, and because the units involved in the most westerly beach were
situated in the most westerly part of the UK they had been at sea the
longest - for as many as 60 hours in some cases.
6.3 American beaches
Bradley had taken command of all US ground forces in October 1943
and by D-Day he had over 700,000 troops in 11 divisions. But only four
of these had combat experience. On Omaha, the Ist Division had taken
part in the amphibious landings in North Africa and Sicily but the 29th
Division had not. The Big Red One, as the Ist Division was known,
comprised three Regimental Combat Teams (RCTs) and, as far as
Bradley was concerned, this division was critical to any successful assault
- despite the grievances of the troops that they had already undertaken
their share of combat by D-Day. In Bradley's post action report: Had a
less experienced division that the Ist stumbled into this crack resistance,
it might easily have been thrown back into the channel. Unjust as it was,
my choice of the Ist to spearhead the invasion probably saved us at
Omaha Beach and a catastrophe on the landings' ? This may have been
the case - but it implies that the 29th Division was the weaker of the two
elements - and there is little evidence that this was the case. The day's
objectives were to move roughly five miles inland to link up with the
British to the cast, the Pointe du Hoc Rangers in the west and the
airborne troops inland.
The first phase of the assault on Omaha planned for 34,142 troops
and 3,306 vehicles to be landed, rapidly followed by the second wave of
25,115 troops and 4,429 vehicles. On D+I and D+2 a further 17,500
and 2,300 vehicles would land and by D+15 another 32,000 troops and
9,446 vehicles would provide a total paper strength of almost 110,000
soldiers and nearly 20,000 vehicles. Primary responsibility for Omaha On
D-Day rested with the Ist Division's l6th RCT and the 29th Division's
116th RCT, the latter under the temporary control of the former.
Between Omaha and Utah beaches lay a spur of land called Pointe du
Hoc - or Pointe du Hoe as it was initially known after a typographical
etror on the Allied maps At 0251 hours, 11 miles off the coast - the
minimum distance that would keep the fleet safe from the 155mm guns
that were allegedly in place at the Pointe du Hoc -
- the large ships began
anchoring. The Pointe du Hoc was the priority target for the US Ist
