244
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
10. escape kit with a magnetized brass button that could act as compas when
balanced on the head of a needle, hacksaw blade, map of France and 200
11.
French Francs44
12.
identification (dog) tags
13.
metal cricket' for identification (the British troops carried a duck wist is
five grenades: two fragmentation, one phosphorus, one smoke and one
Gammon (21b anti-tank grenade)
14. emergency rations kit: 4 pieces of chewing gum, 2 stock cubes, 2 Neat
instant coffees, 2 coffce creamers, 2 sugar cubes, 4 Hershey bars, I pack of
Charms candy, a pack of pipe tobacco, 1 pack of water purification tableste
15. four blocks of TNT
It was little wonder that many individuals could hardly stand up with
an extra 60-100lbs in weight. Some individuals were even more over-
weight: Sergeant Louis Truax of the Ist Battalion, 506th PIR, increased
his weight from 130lbs to 250lbs,47
while Frank Brumbaugh, a
pathfinder paratrooper with the 82nd Airborne weighed 137lbs
pony but jumped weighing si5lbs. so great was the weight that
most paratroopers had to be assisted into their planes by two helpers.*
in theory, the ground assault trodeo ried a maximum of 44lbs of
equipment, in order not to bog them down in the water and to allow
them to move inland quickly. But in practice most carried much more
than this, primarily made up of extra ammunition or weapons of one
form or another. It was a mistake because many soldiers dropped their
weapons and ammunition if they were unloaded into deep water and
because many soldiers that wergsnessed on the beaches were too
weak to lift their extra weight and subsequently drowned as the tide
Again, let me reiterate the point the the decision to provide a
specific item to the troops, and the decision to load as much as possi-
ble onto them, was not automatic, rooted in contingent logic tha
analysed the best option available in the situation. Many had called for
the lightening of the initial assault troops' load - and even the Germans
were surprised at how much material the invaders had to cope with.
Indeed the principle of using light assault troops in the initial assaul
had been part of the German infamsry traditions since the latter stages
of the First World War - buterhe cultural predilections of the Allied
comat nders transcended such concerns: since the 'shock and awe of
the Allied acrial and naval bombardmelat would - in theory - debilitate
scienders the probiem was not georng to or off the beaches Du
defending the beaches from the wpected German Panzer counter-
MANAGING LOGISTICS: 'BAG, VOMIT, ONE!'
10.4 Embarkation
245
But the logistics were by no means simple. So dense was the road traffic
in Hampshire in the run up to D-Day that many of the roads were desig-
nated one-way to facilitate military planning.
which served the primary loading area, over a thousand trains a week
were reserved for military use as D-Day approached. 49 At Dunbridge
station, near Romsey, 15 miles of sidings were built just to store matériel
for the American Army, increasing Dunbridge's monthly throughput of
freight wagons from 182 in 1938 to 5,246 in July 1944.50
The large scale embarkation of troops themselves onto the flotilla of
landing craft was first simulated in July
managed to get 11,000 troops on board on each one of its four high
tides; by D-Day this had been increased to a daily total of 54,000 troops
and 7,000 vehicles, while Portsmouth managed 29,000 troops. But to
do this another 23 slipways or 'hards' had to be built in and around the
Solent and a similar number elsewhere. 5l Additional support for loading
and landing heavy vehicles onto the sand was developed through the
construction of 'chocolate concrete' or beach hardening mats'?. These
snesdete slabs that were laid onto the beach directly and held in
place by iron hooks. The remains of one such mat is shown in Photo
These kinds of problems were evidently Tame - in the sense that there
was a science of planning and construction to solve most of them - but
Photo 10.1 Beach-hardening mat, Lepe, Hampshire
