202
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
training: "You ain't nothing but gun fodder, but you are essential and
nobody can take your place, 88 In the US Airborne the prevalence of
death was channelled into marching songs like "Blood upon the riser'
that revelled in death and made light of the gore:
There was blood upon the risers, there were brains upon the chute
Intestines were a dangling from this paratrooper's boots
They picked him up, still in his chute and poured him from his boots,
He ain't gonna jump no more
Gory, gory, what a helluva way to die
Gory, gory, what a helluva way to die
Gory, gory, what a helluva way to die
He ain't gonna jump no more. 89
But the issue that really aggravated the ordinary combat soldier vas
not the distinction between the army and the paratroopers or the army
and the air force, but between combat troops and those in the safety of
the rear areas. In fact, only a small proportion of the huge number ol
army personnel ended up carrying a rifle in Europe or the Pacific. let the
curious consequence of this was also an inordinate pride in the exclusiv-
ny Of the combat solider: they would take the brunt of the casualties and
hey would suffer the worst imaginable conditions - and complain voci-
cousy about both - but the very reasons that the service troops arrac
combat were the ones that became embedded in the identity of the
combat troops: they were the hard men of the army and were proud of
it. Moreover, life on the front line removed all the messy compromises
that so sulled normal life. Only there did real comradeship appear w
flourish, though when the war was over that comradeship sometimes
disappeared as quickly as it had come. 'We yearned for the association
with men of great differences, wrote Orval Faubus after the war, yers
devoid of prejudice and so imbued with loyalty that we could go out
together and fight and die, for each other and for the common cause of
freedom. We longed for the spirit of men of combat - a spirit motivated
by bravery, honour, compassion and sacrifice, with the absence of petti-
ness, envy, jealousy and falsehood.?ยบ
This was especially significant within the US culture of individualism
rooted in the 'code of the West' where the heroic icons were not chival-
rous knights or monarchs or rone antic groups nor disciplined masses but
the lone individual intent on preserof ig life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness'?1 Transposed from the 19th century (Wild) West to the 20th
centu. American Army, the reconstructed icon of a real soldier' was, as
on hounded veteran put it: a guy - he'll drink and swear -
- but he relies
on himself; a guy that can take care of hi self' 92 As a consequence, any
MOBILIZING THE AMERICANS: TECHNOLOGY AND ICEBERG
203
officers who put their own lives and careers ahead of their soldiers were
unlikely to receive much co-operation from ordinary combat troops.
Unfortunately, and despite all the evidence concerning the importance of
group loyalty and cohesion to soldiers' morale, the US army was swayed
by contending concerns for group casualties into undermining that
morale through its own replacement policy: the Repple Depple.
8.10 Greenhorns, veterans and the Repple Depple
The German army had learned and embodied the value of group cohesion
for many years: its army units (Feldheer) operated in tandem with a replace-
ment unit (Feldersatzhataillon) from its local recruitment area. The Feldheer
managed all the combat troops on the active front, the Feldersatzbatalon
organized training, replacements and administration. Those recuperating
from wounds and so on would rest at the Feldersatzbataillon before return-
ing to the Feldheer. New, replacement and convalescing troops from the field
unit were trained and grouped together (Lucas, 1998: 12). This usualy
meant a much stronger identification between the replacements and the
host unit than occurred in the American system, but it also inhibited the
tactical flexibility of the German field commanders. Moreover, the dearth of
German replacements towards the end of the war often meant that reserve
units were not fed into their parent' combat unit but deployed directly as a
group elsewhere. For example, although the German 352nd Infantry
Division had a Feldersatzbataillon training in Hanover, it was never used to
fil the gaps in the 352nd in Normandy but deployed as an independent
unit: there were no replacements for the 352nd in Normandy; it was simply
deployed until it was destroyed. Ironically, it was also difficult to use the
Weldersatzbataillon of any adjoining unit - even if it was available - because
the troops were usually only committed to replacing those casualties from
their own Feldbeer unit.?3
simply being amongst fellow veterans d not always equate with hign
morale. As we have already seen with the seasoned British troops on D-
Day, being a veteran did not make the landing necessarily easier. Ray
Lambert with the 16th RCT certainly did not think it did:
I had been with the 16th in North Africa in 1942 and in Sicily in 1943. Nothing
of ad seen in all those battles would compare with what we encountered at 'Easy
Red on June 6, 1944. 1 wassic lion the time I was loaded into the Higgins boar
from the LCI as was everyone else. There were so many men throwing up all over
the boat and each other that we could harde reog our boat to our len sount
and burst into flames... The boat on our right blew up and most of the troops
