LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
replacement. And since all the activities of his sub-agents were highly
dangerous Garbo - obviously - could not reveal their real names to the
Germans. Hence they could never establish whether these sub-agents
were real or fake. However, when Garbo failed to warn the Germans that
Operation Torch was underway with an invasion force from Liverpool
bound for North Africa, the Abwehr were obviously uneasy about their
"master spy'. Garbo responded by announcing that his sub-agent in
Liverpool had been ill - and then died - thus no reports had filtered up
to him to pass on.59
A critical problem for Garbo was how to persuade the Germans that
he was a reliable agent when he did not tell them that the landings were
imminent and heading for Normandy not the Pas de Calais. If the orig-
inal deception plan (which limited Fortitude to persuading the Germans
that the Pas de Calais was the only target) had been pursued this would
not have been a problem since Garbo would have achieved all that he set
out to achieve. However, since the extended plan now called for delay-
ing tactics to be in place to prevent immediate German reinforcements,
Garbo
with
faced another problem.
In the end the solution
Eisenhower's explicit permission - was to copy a report by a fictional
waiter in Otterbourne, Hampshire, of massive Canadian troop move-
ments, complete with vomit bags. The landings were obviously imminent
but equally obviously neither Wilhelm Leisner, the Abwehr chief in
Lisbon, nor Karl Erich Kulenthal, in the German Embassy in Madrid was
awake at 0300 on the morning of D-Day. When the message eventually
got through at 0608 Garbo could claim that he sent the first warning
hours earlier but now it was too late to matter. Just to add a further dose
of realism, Garbo then complained bitterly to his German contacts about
the ineptitude of Madrid and threatened to resign; he was persuaded not
to by his German handler.60
Having covered his back, two of Garbo's other messages were to
prove of inestimable value to the Allies. The first followed the speeches
by the Allied leaders on D-Day itself. To ensure that no-one compro-
mised the Fortitude deception, all the leaders were warned to use
phrases like 'the first in a series of landings' to maintain the illusion that
the Pas de Calais was next in line. However, de Gaulle spoke of
Normandy
as "the supreme battle'
and the
Abwehr immediately
contacted Garbo for clarification and to examine the possibility that
everything but Normandy was just a feint. Garbo concocted an official
memorandum, which had purportedly been issued on the eve of D-Day
warning all leaders to talk as though there was only one landing because
the others were so imminent. De Gaulle, explained Garbo, was the only
Allied leader not to be sucked into the success of the day and he was the
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
95
only one disciplined enough to remember not to mention the other
landings. The double bluff worked. 1 Perhaps it was just as well, because
Churchill ordered Desmond Morton, Churchill's personal intelligence
adviser, to have de Gaulle deported to Algiers, if necessary in chains. He
The second message was to be Garbo's initial assessment of the land-
ings - which was to be delayed for 48 hours so that he could establish a
"realistic' assessment of the situation. Nevertheless, by that time (8 June)
some preliminary movements from northern France to Normandy had
been authorized. However, on y June at 155o a message from London
to a Resistance group in Brussels suggested that a second invasion force
was already at
sea
and heading for Belgium.
German Intelligence
suggested that the British knew the Brussels group was controlled by the
Germans but OKW overruled this possibility and took the message at
face value. In fact the message was probably misinterpreted for no such
imminent. But perhaps more critical was Garbo's message despatched on
8 June and received by teleprinter at OKW at 2230 on 9 June 1944. It
was seen by Krummacher, Jodl and Hitler and stated:
After personal consultation on 8th June in London with my agents Jonny, Dick
and Dorick, whose reports were sent today, I am of the opinion, in view of the
strong troop concentrations in South-East and Eastern England which are not
taking part in the present operations, that these operations are a diversionary
manoeuvre designed to draw off enemy reserves in order then to make a decisive
attack in another place. In view of the continued air attacks on the concentration
area mentioned, which is a strategically favourable position for this, it may very
probably take place in the Pas de Calais area, particularly since in such an attack
the proximity of the air bases (would facilitate the operation by providing contin-
ued strong air support.63
A further message confirmed Garbo's suspicions:
I never like to give my opinion unless I have strong reasons to justify my assur-
ances, thus the fact that these concentrations which are in the east and south-cast
of the island are now inactive means that they must be held in reserve to be
employed in other large scale operations.
The constant aerial bombardments,
which the area of the Pas de Calais has suffered, and the strategic disposition of
these forces give reasons to suspect an attack dat region of France... I learnt
yesterday that there were seventy-five divisions in this country before the present
assault commenced. Supposing they were to use a maximum of twenty to twenty-
five divisions, they would be left with some fiffy divisions with which to attempt a
