MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
172
would await a vacancy in a field division. 68 From then on, the majority of
troops trained day in, day out, for D-Day - then many months away. But
such a long training period inevitably generated a high degree of bore-
dom in the Allied armies. In April 1944, Private Morton Eustis of the US
Army was desperate to get into action before the war ended: 'I don't
credit the Army with being sufficiently far-sighted to make their training
so boring that men are really anxious to go into combat just to get away
from it, but this is what actually happens' 69
Once the basic and Arms training was completed, almost all the train-
ing for D-Day was concentrated on getting to the invasion area, either by
practising parachute or glider drops or sea-borne assaults, and then
executing particular attacks upon specific fortifications. This taming of
the assault problem was perfectly logical but this often meant that train-
ing for post D-Day came second best. For example, Dominick Graham,
a gunnery officer with the West Somerset Yeomanry, never practised in
conjunction with an armoured division, nor did he know of any infantry-
armour joint exercises? This was especially critical in Normandy where
the Bocage, the dense patchwork of sunken fields bounded by thick
hedges, could only be taken in close-knit armoured-infantry support
because tanks were too vulnerable without infantry and the infantry
simply could not make any progress without tanks. This was particularly
problematic in the British army where the regimental traditions inhibited
some of the co-operative developments that the Americans, especially
Patton, managed to construct.
In principle, the intention was that all personnel would know precisely
what their task was. This was not to be an invasion where the individual
simply had to get ashore and do what they thought was right, because
everyone would have a particular role to play and a particular place to be;
in effect, it was an invasion planned and trained for along clear principles
associated with managing a Tame Problem. Private J. L. Wagar, a rifle-
man in C Company, the Queen's Own Rifles of Canada, recalled the
value of this training:
We climbed down the nets to get on board. At this point I don't remember
anyone saying anything. Each man's job had been set and memorized days before,
and there was really nothing to say. We knew the with of beach we had to cross,
the mines we had to avoid, the bunkers, the gun positions, the wall we had to got
over or through, the streets and the buildings of the town we had to take, the
minefields, the possible enemy strength, the perimeter we had to establish for the
next wave to go forward.
This did not mean that the pre-1941 command and control approach
survived the Dunkirk debacle because the German blitzkrieg had manifesty
MOBILIZING ANGLO-CANADIANS, COMMONWEALTH, VOLUNTEERS
173
exposed the weakness of such an over-controlled approach. Instead, the
new Battle Drill developed after Dunkirk had asserted that change was
afoot and that while the strategy would remain in the hands of the senior
officers, the tactics could be developed by whoever was responsible on
the ground. In effect, as the opening address suggested: 'We give you the
theme, you provide the orchestration' 72
In practice, the drill laid down what a section should do in particular
circumstances and this was first practised on the parade ground and then
in the field. Once some degree of finesse had been achieved at section
level the platoon then practised a larger drill until all potential situations
had been covered.
This was the theory that became formulated into
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) that then became the new ortho-
dory, and often proved just as inflexible, for to tame a problem in this
way assumed that the consequence of the action was entirely predictable.
Sydney Jary, on the other hand, a young officer with Somerset Light
Infantry in Normandy, was adamant that the real education in war only
came in combat itself:
We had learned in a hard school how to skirmish, infiltrate and edge our way
forward. The right or left flanking platoon attack so beloved of the Battle School
staff would rarely succeed in the Normandy bocage. I remember being locked into
the timetables of meticulously planned large battles.
These inevitably left the
junior infantry commander no scope for exploitation. If you found a gap in the
enemy defence, adherence to the artillery programme, which could rarely be
altered, effectively stopped any personal initiative?3
The exercises which drilled the SOPs also undermined any thought of
boing outside the boundaries of tradition because the umpires only
awarded high scores to those units and individuals who acted appropri-
ately, that 1s, Who secured 'enemy' guns or achieved clear cut territonal
advantages - and held on to them. But when the real tighung began in
Normandy it was difficult to unlearn the traditional measures of success,
even if the fluidity of the battlefield ol ade the measures virtually irrele-
ant. In short, when the taming plan established objectives then only the
chievement of those objectives counted - fOit other objectives were
preferable, but not planned and only emerged in the battle, were learn
ng points that it took the Allies a long time to appreciate.74
The persistence of authoritariais, command and control systems was
sal pervasive in the British Army, however, and many of the self-styled
elite' units operated along radically different lines, often having more in
ommon wid the SOPs of the Wehrmacht than the traditional infantry
units of the British Army. Amongst these were the Commandos.
