145
144
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
One casualty that was neither expected nor acceptable was that of
Churchill himself who, on 30 May 1944, a week before the invasion,
casually informed Eisenhower that he wanted to go along to watch the
invasion from HMS Belfast. When Eisenhower protested against his idea
Churchill informed Eisenhower that, since Ike was not responsible for
the naval crews he would sign up as a member of the crew of HMS
Belfast and go anyway. Eisenhower drew on his greatest networking
powers and persuaded King George VI (who had also wanted to go) to
threaten to go too if Churchill insisted. Churchill was adamant that the
King could be prevented by the Cabinet from joining but nobody could
prevent him. In the event, Churchill had already boarded a train taking
him to Portsmouth to embark on HMS Belfast when he received a final
telephone message from the King that eventually dissuaded him. Had he
not turned back the King had given Admiral Ramsay orders to physically
prevent him from embarking.18 The last thing either Admiral Ramsay or
any other Allied military commander wanted was Churchill disturbing
the months of planning and training that had gone into the operaton
Dut it is a symbol of the political intrigue and negotiation that prevalled
et the whole operation, it is also worth pondering just now powent
Churchill was - when he couldn't even secure his own transport for the
big day!
6.5 Planning for the enemy
On partemar concert was the interventionidf the German may. it was
to finated at the time that the Kriegmarine would have in the region up
available),
o five destroyers, 130 submarines (of which 40 would be immediatel
I1 torpedo boats, 60 E-boats,
60 R-boats,
30 M-class
nese pes and ou miscend eous craft. In all about 350 Cean have
vessels would threaten the invasion - but against them would sail almost
1,000 Allied ships. From April 194t onward here had been a significant
mede la dearly by the Anegsmarine andu ne Canadian destroyer dau
been sunk, taking with it its German attacker. 19
On 20 May the tirst German submarine was spotted in the wester
shame and alled forces covering the area were boosted to seal off wi
intended vasion area. But the main fear was mine-laying which dramat
cally increased from May 1944, though it remained of marginal signit-
ace ful luise most of the mine laying was undertaken by arcraft di
Allied air superiority simply deterred most German sorties 20
The disparity in aircraft was just as great. Vee Allies estimated that a
total of 590 German aircraft would be operationally available in the area
ALLIED GROUND STRATEGY
800
600
500
400
300
200 -
100 -
15 June
20 June
25 June
30 June
05 July
10 July
15 July
20 July
25 July
German tanks facing
German tanks facing
the Americans
the British
Figure 6.3 Comparison of German tanks facing US and UK forces, 15 June - 25
July 1944
(320 long-range bombers,
ten reconnaissance aircraft,
65 fighter-
bombers, 75 twin-engined fighters, and 120 single-engined fighters) -
though according to German sources only 319 of these were within
range on the day.21 Only in land forces did the Allies lack overwhelming
numerical superiority but even here the Allies landed about 50 per cent
more troops than the Germans had available to defend the whole of
Normandy.
Despite all this evidence concerning the German approach to strat-
egy, especially their reaction at Anzio, from the very beginning of plan-
ning Overlord it was assumed that the German
defenders
would
withdraw from the Normandy coast, after their initial attempt to prevent
the invasion, to the Seine to give themselves air cover from north-
castern France and Belgium. Thus the planners made little effort to
construct contingency plans for Hitler's demand that no ground was to
be surrendered and no-one was to retreat. As a result the possibility that
the countryside just inland would be significant was discounted: the
the field commanders.
The problem was that the bocage? countryside of Normandy, espe-
cially towards the Cotentin peninsular, was ideally suited to defensive
action, since it comprised thick high hedgerows surrounding small fields
which could easily conceal tanks, anti-tank artilery ane supers and
offered the attackers little alternative but to fight furiously for every yard
of ground.
