LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
114
4.8 Conclusion
The intent of the Allies to land a very large invasion force somewhere was
already well known to the German High Command and was expected at
any time from January 1944 on, but probably in the spring or June/July.
Even taking into account the poor information gleaned by the Luftwaffe
in May and June an array of simple errors by the senior German command-
ers left the Normandy coast bereft of adequate time and leadership.
First, early on 5 June a large armada of ships was spotted milling
around the Portsmouth area and was picked up by the Cherbourg radar
just before it was hit by Allied fighter-bombers. That information was
available but its significance denied by the senior naval commander. Had
it been followed up the German defenders would have had almost 24
hours to prepare.
Second, at 1957 on 5 June the first elements of that flotilla, a British
mine-sweeper flotilla, was close enough to the Normandy coast for the
British lookouts to see individual houses. Incredibly, no German lookout
spotted them and that can only suggest inadequate deployment of troops
on the ground by German local commanders.
Third, at 2115 on 5 June the BBC broadcast the verse that the
German security services knew meant an invasion was imminent,
certainly due within 48 hours. That information was ridiculed by senior
commanders on the grounds that the BBC was hardly likely to announce
the invasion in advance.
Fourth, at 0145 on 6 June the fleet was spotted but, despite its direc-
non, the wrong army went onto full alert and the "right army was told
not to go on full alert.
Fifth, within six hours of the landings it was certainly clear to many
junior commanders in the field - given the identities of their attackers -
that Normandy was the main invasion site.
But on each and every one of these issues the hubris of the senior
German commanders, and their consequent refusal to listen to their
subordinates, effectively undermined the German opportunity to do
what could so readily - if not easily - have been achieved: they could have
thrown the invaders back into the sea. Thus it was not simply that the
Allies' intelligence system was superior to the Germans, nor was it that
the Germans were betrayed by double agents, nor that the French
Resistance effectively uncoupled the German defences from the inside.
All of these issues were important but none of them were fatal to the
Germans. What was fatal was the poverty of their senior leadership. The
soldiers and junior leaders of the Wehrmacht were in most cases at least
the equal of, and usually more effective than, their Allied counterparts
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
115
and their actions on the ground - the "small things' - should have been
enough for the big thing -
the defence of Normandy - to have been
successfully achieved. But the philosophy of German combat - decentral-
ized execution - that had served them so well in the past, was destroyed
by the combined actions of several German military commanders, partic-
ularly but not only Hitler. The Allied leaders did not so much win the
battle for the beaches on 6 June, rather the German leaders lost it on 5
June; they had treated the impending invasion as a Tame Problem that
they - and only they - knew how to solve, rather than a Wicked Problem
that would require the effective collaboration of many people. But what,
precisely, was the German strategy for resisting the invasion?
