164
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
in the First World War and carefully thought through by Fuller and
Liddell Hart were ignored by the British - but not the German army.
Anyway, since surly members of the Empire, not German Panzer armies,
were the envisaged enemy, what possible role could armoured warfare
have? Surely, ran the orthodox arguments of the inter-war period, the
real issue was one of morale and that morale could only be achieved
through discipline induced on the parade ground and inspections, not
through irrelevances like combat training or technologies that lessened
the importance of the bayonet charge. This
"mechanization mania',
suggested an article in the Army Quarterly, was adverse to efficiency and
The army officer corps in all this had changed little, it was still a life
of privilege based on inherited wealth and rank and it was irredeemably
the cultivated amateur that dominated the mess. Indeed, it had to be
because the pay was considered more of an honorarium than a salary;
it was an institution that gentlemen attended (on a part-time basis)
while they waited to inherit their estates. Thus 'training' was entirely
unnecessary because an officer's life was merely an extension of the
public school that most officers had already attended. Riding was the
only really essential skill for a British army officer, not because it
improved the ability of the cavalry but because it symbolized all that a
gentleman needed to lead soldiers. The abject irrelevance of all that was
not encapsulated by equine matters was most starkly revealed in the
January 1939 edition of the Cavalry Journal. As the editorial stated, 15
as poulticult to find very much to write about in this editorial'.ss
Anyway, the most important issue was the development of character
not some theoretical understanding of the science of war,
British character - apparently - could always be relied upon to improve
a pragmatic resolution of any problem - in sharp contrast to the rule
bound operations of the German officer corps; in fact the opposite was
the case.36
Not every branch of the British forcese as quite so engrossed in the
minutiae of status.
RAF officers, for example, were more concerned
about er hancing their flying skills and increasing their professional
expertise, though it still allocated medals it he early part of the war on
the basis of rank not valour. But the cultivated slovenliness of the pilots
was altogether too much for the army and associated with what the army
regarded as a distinctly unsavoury attitude towards discipline and drill. It
was self-evident to the army that the RAF had confused ideas about the
role of the military. As one army ofticer/euggested, the state of the
uniform was crucial, and one wouloynever find army officers with their
top-button undone - the iconic mark of an RAF pilot. 37
MOBILIZING ANGLO-CANADIANS, COMMONWEALTH, VOLUNTEERS
165
One could perhaps forgive the undone top jacket button of the 'fighter boy', but
not the slovenliness so widespread on some RAF stations .... While the Army offi-
cer would do all he could to smarten his up by the lining of lapels, creasing of
trousers and sleeves, and so on, many RAF officers (and of course, the habit quickly
spread to the men) seemed deliberately to set out to be as untidy as possible. 38
Note, however, that Montgomery was as notorious as Patton for not
wearing standard uniform. While Patton wore ivory handled pistols and
a mirror helmet, Montgomery usually wore corduroy trousers, a turtle-
neck sweater, a sheepskin jacket and a beret with two badges on it.
And while the British strenuously avoided anything so controversial as
politics and religion over dinner, the army officers mess went one better,
prohibiting any discussion about military matters and concentrating on
What was important: gentlemanly pursuits, sports, character development
and 'good form'. As one hospitalized officer recalled hearing his Colonel
exclaim when he spied two military books by the bedside: What the devil
are you reading those for?' He would certainly not have been reading
them to enhance his decision-making capabilities because subordinate
officers had virtually none to enhance.39 Hugh Dowding recalled the
great contrast between the theory of freedom of thought - which
allegedly distinguished the British from the rest of the world - and the
practice that inhibited all unconventional ideas.
'As for expressing an
opinion which differed from the general point of view', one officer
remembered, 'that would be unheard of ... It would be considered very
bad manners not to agree with the senior officer. Göring hau come to
the same conclusions when on an exchange visit with a British regiment
before the First World War where officers were banned from talking
shop' in the mess, were mesmerized by parade bashing, bored rigid by
neid craft trainins, and were certain that war was won by bradlot
tactics or Management. 41
Une might be forgiven at this point r-r wondering whether the britis
did indeed assume training to be a Tame Problem since it seemed to have
so little to do with the 'science' of war, but for the British, experience had
seemed to point towards "character' as being the critical divider between
military success and failure, and that character most certainly excluded any
requirement that subordinates might have something to offer their super-
ordinates when it came to understanding war. In the First World War
British military leadership expanded such a philosophy of 'destructive
consent to the point where seasoned commanders in the held falled to
questione heir superordinate commanders, even when the latter
perceived to be wrong.
Rawlinson's original plan for the
For example, Haig
demanded changes
in
offensive and Rawlinson
accepted the changes, even though the latter knew they were unwarranted
