98
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
beaches were revealed. Simultaneously, all naval personnel were sealed in
their landing craft or ships and all troops sealed in their camps and no
contact was allowed between service personnel and civilians.?]
To ensure that the cloak of secrecy that hung over Overlord did not
extend to obscuring the identity of Allied vehicles they were all painted
with a white star on both sides and the top.?2 Similarly, all Allied aircraft
involved in D-Day were painted with three white strips around the wings
and fuselage.?3 This involved virtually all the white paint in the country
(100,000 gallons or 1,500 tons) and took 48 hours and 20,000 paint-
brushes to achieve. Security was so tight that even on the second mission
of D-Day the crew of a Halifax bomber was still not informed that D-
Day was officially on, they were merely told: If you have to jettison any
bombs please don't do it in the Channel as there will probably be a tew
extra ships around!?+ Sam Stone, a member of 'Sweet 17 Gee', a bomber
in the 337th Bomb Squadron, 96th Bomb Group, wrote that he was
awakened at 0200 on 6 June for a briefing and, since he never knew the
target in advance, was unprepared for what happened next - a major at
the door checked everyone's name off but no-one knew why. Then the
cover over the map was withdrawn to reveal Normandy and another ofti-
cer climbed onto the stage and said, 'Anyone who divulges any of the
information given at this briefing will be shot' 75
Even the problem of media correspondents suddenly disappearing on
the eve of D-Day was forestalled: on 24 May (the day after the provi-
sional date for D-Day had been set for 5 June) 60 correspondents
boarded the landing craft and remained there for 24 hours? On the eve
of the intended D-Day, 5 June, Bradley briefed the three accredited jour-
nalists aboard Kirk's flagship, the USS Augusta, about the plans and
corrected himself when he unwittingly said that they were going to swim
64 tanks ashore' -
- even at this late stage DD tanks were still top secret.?"]
But not everything went to plan. On the night of 4 June It Colonel
Hellmuth Meyer in the HQ building of the German 15th Army was
handed a message that his troops had just picked up from the interna-
tional press: Urgent Press Associated NYK Flash Eisenhower's HQ
Announces Allied Landings in France. Meyer knew this could not be
true because he had received no information from German sources about
a landing and because he was still aware ng the second part of the coded
message for the French Resistance giving them 48 hours notice. In fact,
Joan Ellis, a teletype operator had simply been practising to improve her
speed and by error the message iisd been sent rather than removed. The
message was deleted by Irene Henshall but?& at 1640 the newsflash
reached the US cast coast and thousands of people poured onto the
streets to celebrate with one minute's silence though the news did not
99
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
leak out in Britain?' But if keeping hold of the truth was difficult
enough, discovering what the enemy was up to seemed impossible; that
is, until Ultra.
4.5 Ultra
The early advantage in code-breaking had been with the German navy's
Beobachtungs-Dienst because they had cracked the
Royal Navy's
Administrative Code and the Navy Cypher and were reading up to half
the Royal Naval signal traffic by April 1940 - though never the signals of
Flag Officers or the Commanders-in-Chief. Only in 1944 was German
ability significantly denuded. 80 Much of the Allied advantage in informa-
tion and communication was supplied by "Ultra', the Allied code name
for the system to reveal the secrets of the German Enigma encoding
machine, capable of 200 million transpositions for any single key. The
first Enigma machine had been built in 1923 by Arthur Scherbius and
developed by the Cipher Machine Corporation of Berlin. The encoding
produced a message so complex that a replicant machine, working on the
identical coding system (one of 3 x 1018), was necessary to decode it.
Fortunately for the Allies, a box containing
Enigma
machine
addressed to a German firm in Poland was intercepted at the Polish
customs and its contents photographed in 1929. From then on it was a
rush to keep up with the frequent changes made to the German machines
with first the Polish, then the French and British, and finally the
American intelligence agencies all becoming involved in cracking the
codes. They were helped by a German called Hans-Thilo Schmid who
sold an instruction manual and updated information to the French
authorities in 1931 and the entire body of experts was ensconced at
Bletchley Park, England in 1940 to maintain Allied knowledge of chang-
ing codes and technical enhancements to the Enigma machines.
So complex was the code that it was assumed that only lax discipline
on the part of a handful of German operators and the capture of a code
would enable the Allies to crack it.81 The latter occurred when David
Balme, a Royal Navy sublieutenant, went down into the hull of the
German submarine U-110 after it was attacked off Greenland in May
1941. The U-boat's captain, Fritz Lemp, had rigged the usual scuttling
charges to destroy the boat and its encoding machine and documents but
the charges failed to ignite. All the materials were rescued from the
submarine by Balme and his crew and immediately returned to Britain.
l'he submarine, meanwhile, was reported as having been sunk so that the
Germans would not be aware of the find. Once deciphered the materials
