362
COMMANDING IN CRISES
their section of Mike Red under heavy mortar and machine-gun fire,
losing 26 soldiers in the initial assault and over 100 more in the rest of
D-Day. A and C Companies of the Royal Winnipegs were also pinned
down on the beach for two hours, despite being reserve units following
on behind the first assault waves that had already moved inland. But
Within a further hour almost all the beaches were secured 39 Even then
casualties could be high for incoming troops. D Company suffered more
than their predecessors even though they landed just before 0900 when
several of their landing craft struck (now submerged) mined obstacles. *
The experiences of those attacking Bernières behind Nan Red and
Nan White beaches in the 8th Brigade were rather different from their
colleagues further west. Both squadrons of DD tanks from the 10th
Armoured Regiment (The Fort Garry Horse) waded, rather than svan,
so shore because of the weather conditions, and they were consequendy
slightly behind the infantry which were also in front of the AVREs.
Worse, the naval and air bombardment once again seemed to make litte
impression on the defences.
The main strong point (WN 28) facing the Queen's Own Riles
(QOR) on Nan White at Bernières comprised two anti-tank emplace-
ments, seven machine gun posts and two mortar posts.
The prior
comparament had damaged a calmed o per cent of the buildings in the
cut had not tie strong point and the Queen's Own killes lost so
soldiers and took a luther wounded in storming it without tank
support. The QOR also had to storm two 50mm anti-tank positions and
lost hed lly again in the absence of tank support. What made the position
even more difficult was that the AVRE's could not launch their petards
against them because the infantry were already too close to the strong-
point. The solution was provided by one bulldozer driver: he filled one
of the strong-points up with sand and suffocated the incumbents.
Nonetheless huge congestion stymied the attempts of the Canadians
to move south at speed from Bernières, not simply because of the sex
wall breaching problems or the very limited beach area available at high
tide, but because the entire reserve Brigade was ordered to land here on
an White and not on Nan Ked where the North Shore Kegiment was
taking heavy casualties, particularly from the St Aubin-sur-Mer strong-
point. f) This essentially meant that all traffic had to travel along a single
road to Bény-sur-Mer that was captured by mid-afternoon. 42
On Nan Red at St Aubin-sur-Mer, the Neah Shore Regiment and 48
commando faced stone and brick buildings reaching down to the sea
behind the seawall. 43 This is also the area where what is probably the
most famous cine film of the D-Day landings was taken: True Glory. It
shows the second wave of assault troops, either A or B Company of the
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
363
North Shore Regiment on Nan Red at La Rive who touched down just
alter 0800. A still from the film is reproduced, next to the house as it
currently exists, in Photos 14.1 and 14.2
so poor had the pre-assault bombardment been that Lt Colonel James
mouton of to commando subsequently tound only two houses alons
the front had been hit by anything other than fire from the assulting
troops. WN 27 dominated the beach with its 50mm anti-tank gun which
had fred around / shells and hit several DD tanks before it was tinally
Photo 14.1 'True Glory' House, D-Day 1944
Photo 14.2 True Glory' House today
