12
LEADERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND COMMAND AT D-DAY
would include: developing a transport strategy, or an energy strategy, or
a defence strategy, or a national health system or an industrial relations
strategy; and, in our case, developing a strategy for a successful invasion
of France. Wicked Problems are not necessarily rooted in longer time
frames than Tame Problems because oftentimes an issue that appears to
be Tame can be turned into a Wicked Problem by delaying the decision.
For example, President Kennedy's actions during the Cuban Missile
Crisis were often based on asking questions of his civilian assistants that
required some time for reflection - despite the pressure from his military
advisers to provide instant answers. Had Kennedy responded to the
American Hawks we would have seen a third set of problems that fall
outside the Leadership/Management dichotomy. This third set of prob-
lems I will refer to as Critical.
A Critical Problem, e.g. a 'crisis', is presented as self-evident in nature,
as encapsulating very little time for decision-making and action, and it is
often associated with authoritarianism - Command 31 Here there is virtu-
ally no uncertainty about what needs to be done - at least in the behav-
jour of the Commander, whose role is to take the required decisive action
- that is to provide the answer to the problem, not to engage processes
(management) or ask questions (leadership). Of course, it may be that
the Commander remains privately uncertain about whether the action is
appropriate or the presentation of the situation as a crisis is persuasive,
but that uncertainty will probably not be apparent to the followers of the
Commander. Examples would include the immediate response to: a
major train crash, a leak of radioactivity from a nuclear plant, a military
attack, a heart attack, an industrial strike, the loss of employment or a
loved one, or a terrorist attack such as 9/11 or the 7 July bombings in
London.
That such 'situations' are constituted by the participants rather than
simply being self-evident is best illustrated by considering the way a situ-
ation of ill-defined threat only becomes a crisis when that threat is
defined as such. For example, financial losses - even rapid and radical
losses - do not constitute a 'crisis' until the shareholders decide to sell in
large numbers, and even then the notion of a crisis does not emerge
objectively from the activity of selling but at the point at which a 'crisis'
is pronounced by someone significant and becomes accepted as such by
significant others. In another intriguing example the British government
under James Callaghan was apparently in free-fall in 1979 after Callaghan
returned from an economic conference in the West Indies as strikes in the
British public services mounted. Asked how he was going to solve "the
mounting chaos' by journalists at the airport Callaghan responded, I
don't think other people in the world would share the view [that ] there
PROBLEMS, UNDERSTANDING AND DECISION-MAKING
13
is mounting chaos'. But the headlines in the Sun newspaper the follow-
ing day suggested he had said 'Crisis - What Crisis?'. In this case the
formal political leader was unable to counter "the critical situation', as
constituted by the news media, and Labour lost the subsequent general
election. 32 Similarly, it would be difficult to state objectively at what
point the Battle of Britain became a crisis and when it ceased to be one
because that definition rested upon the persuasive rhetoric of various
parties involved. As Overy suggests,
Many of those 'decisive strategic results' became clear only with the end of the war
and the process of transforming the Battle into myth. The contemporary evidence
suggests that neither side at the time invested the air conflict with the weight of
historical significance that it has borne in the sixty years since it was fought. 33
The links between Command and the military are clear, and may well
explain why discussion of non-military leadership has tended to avoid the
issue of command or explain it as authoritarian leadership that may be
appropriate for the military but not in the civilian world. 34 These three
forms of authority - that is legitimate power - Command, Management
and Leadership are, in turn, another way of suggesting that the role of
those responsible for decision-making is to find the appropriate Answer,
Process and Question to address the problem respectively.
This is not meant as a discrete typology but a heuristic device to enable
us to understand why those charged with decision-making sometimes
appear to act in ways that others find incomprehensible. Thus I am not
suggesting that the correct decision-making process lies in the correct
analysis of the situation - that, again, would be to generate a determin-
istic approach - but I am suggesting that decision-makers tend to legit-
imize their actions on the basis of a persuasive account of the situation.
In short, the social construction of the problem legitimizes the deploy-
ment of a particular form of authority. Moreover, it is often the case that
the same individual or group with authority will switch between the
Command, Management and Leadership roles as they perceive - and
constitute - the problem as Critical, Tame or Wicked, or even as a single
problem that itself shifts across these boundaries. Indeed, this movement
- often perceived as 'inconsistency' by the decision-maker's opponents -
is crucial to success as the situation, or at least our perception of it,
changes.
Nor am I suggesting that different forms of problem construction
restrict those in authority to their 'appropriate' form of power. In other
words, Commanders, for example, having defined the problem as Critical,
do not only have access to coercion but coercion is legitimated by the
