178
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
actually more Canadian fliers (17,000) were killed. The Ist Canadian
Army was never a wholly Canadian outfit because it needed further
infantry and artillery from Britain to be operational. On the other hand,
such was the dearth of British officers in the British Army that over 600
Canadians volunteered under the Canloan scheme as officers to help lead
British infantry divisions. On average each British division took 40
Canloan officers.'! Some British officers served with the American
forces: for example, David Niven, then a Lieutenant Colonel, went
ashore on Omaha Beach with the American Ist Division. 2
The Ist Canadian Division saw action in Sicily, and the 2nd Division
was destroyed at Dieppe. The 3rd Canadian Division, which landed on
D-Day on Juno Beach, arrived in Britain in the autumn of 1941, just
before the Canadian 5th Armoured Division.
But the Dieppe disaster
effectively prevented the 3rd and 5th Divisions operating together on D-
Day, as had been planned, because the 5th were sent to Italy to avoid
repeating Dieppe at Normandy and destroying the Canadian forces on
one day? 3 Thus the Canadians who comprised the 3rd Canadian Infantry
Division landing on Juno Beach on D-Day were all volunteers.
In the air almost 54,000 Canadians also served abroad, either in the
Royal Canadian Air Force or the RAF. Canadian pilots and air-crew were
involved in all branches of the air forces, attacking German destroyers
and U-boats and contributing 19 per cent of the 1,200 sorties cartien
Out by the RAF's Bomber Command on 5-6 June. On the night of 12
une a raid against the Arras railway marshang yard led to the loss O1 si
Canadian piloted planes, including that carrying charies Mynarsk who
won th Victoria Cross.94 The Royal Canadian Navy also provided
around a third of its entire sty eth in support of the D-Day landlig
(9,78 people, and 126 ships, including minesweepers, destroyers and 44
landing craft) (in 1939 it only employed 1,500 people).?5
the diverse ethnic origins within the Canadian forces mirrored the
ethnic diversity of those on the Allied side us fought to regain freedon
do tell counties, or in support of countries identified do suero?
pilots, 5 squadrons of French pilots, 4
related. For example, in the KAF there ere 14 squadrons of Polsn
squadrons of Norwegians, 3 squadrons In Dutch and 2 squadrons of
squadrons of Czechs,96 4
Belgia The Poles (who had signed an agreement with the Soviet
union for the repatriation (to Britainlof POWs captured during the
Soviet invasion
Armoured Division which was deployed in August 1944 as part of the
of Poland in 1940) also
provided the
Ist Polish
Canadian ist army, do wed as five warships on D-Day itself. there wer
also 800 Danes involved, mainly on board the ships.
Beyond occupied europe there were thousands of Commonwealth
MOBILIZING ANGLO-CANADIANS, COMMONWEALTH, VOLUNTEERS
179
troops from all over the British Empire in the five designated overseas
commands: the Middle East, East Africa, Persia and Iraq, India and
Malaya. The Australians and Indians were mainly deployed against the
Japanese, while the Canadians, New Zealanders and South Africans were
deployed in Europe.98 The Australian 9th Division had fought in Italy
and was destined for Normandy until it was withdrawn - much to
General Guingand's dismay - to fight the Japanese. Nevertheless there
were 11,000 Australians in air and ground crews involved in the airdrops
of the British 6th Airborne, and some flew six of the 16 Lancasters in
Lconard Cheshire's 617 Dambuster Squadron, dropping bundles of
window' to simulate an attack upon Calais, and also bombing the Pointe
du Hoc gun emplacements. In all, there were ten Royal Australian Air
Force squadrons in the UK and the rest worked within the RAF. Some
1,100 Australians also served as naval crews on D-Day." The New
Zealanders had one division in Italy, one in the Pacific, and 35,000
assorted personnel in Britain, mainly in the RAF (two JU88s were shot
down over Omaha Beach by New Zealand pilots flying RAF Spitfires) or
with the Royal New Zealand Air Force or the Royal Navy. Many of the
landing craft on D-Day were also piloted by New Zealand naval crews. 100
7.7 Conclusion
The paradox at the heart of the British forces is that they achieved so
much from such a poor beginning. They inherited a cultural system
desotted with the pretensions of class and the gifted amateur neither or
which proved of much utility in Normandy.
They also inherited an
impoverished material base, partly as a consequence of the poverty of
political and military Leadership in the inter- war period. Despite this, the
British had already developed a mobilization system and training pro its
dures that generated an army which after see began to master is
chemy, helped considerably by their Commonwealth
and other
collagues. Indeed, where that army mirrored the training and organiza-
ton followed by the Wehrmacht it proved remarkdory successiul. But un
basic problems of Leadership remained at the heart of the British Army in
it ticular: the most qualified individuals seldom entered the infantry and
it was that renance on the officer corps for decision mans at accon
that effectively undermined the development of initiative by the orcumar
infantry soldiers. This self-fulfilling propnecy effectively provided the
German army, itself based on a much more flexible and decentralized
system, Withd Clear strategy for immobilizing the wester alles: Kil tel
officers and NeUs, In short, so critical was formal Leadersip on the
