216
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
than any other division - a symbol of their youth but also an emblem to
differentiate them from all others. Not all the officers were diehard Nazis
though. Captain Hans Dischke, for example, had fought in Russia for
two years before joining the 12th SS HJ, was uninterested in the "Nazi
nonsense on the political level at the officers' school ... so when I joined.
the 12th SS I had no thoughts whatsoever of trying to indoctrinate the
lads ... We did, however, have a very strong belief in our own county,
and since we were engaged in a war we saw it as our duty to win if poss-
ble. Certainly, we would rather die than let the Bolsheviks take over
urginally entry to the SS Lebstandarte (Bodyguard) unit had ou
very strict: at least 1.8 metres tall, good health, no criminal record, joined
the Nazi Party before 30 January 1933, no filled teeth,
tioned body' and proof of ancestry back to 1800 for soldiers and 1750-
IO IOI IS. The black uniformed Leibstandarte Adolf Hiter (Lar),
led by sepp Dietrich, was involved in the "night of the long knives in
by 1943 had become the lst
Lerostanaarte. Dietrich, whom von Rundstedt referred to as "decent Dur
stupid appears to have been no strategist or military theorencian, but ne
was immensely popular with his 'boys' as he called all his troops, and d
Offide come commander. He was also very visible in the don my
something which most Allied senior ceo manders were not.-
ne derstandare nad diso already lost 53 per cent (2,01 of ,))%)
in the nist nive months of fighting on the Russian front but had gained i
reputation as ferocious soldiers -as though von Rundstedt was unim-
pressed by its initial performance in Poland. 22 When they were reformed
They were sent to recapture Kharkov in the spring of 1943, and onc
again suffered enormous casualties -
Once more the LAH was rebuilt and hall ,f the division was thrown into
4,540 (44 per cent of the total.
the dee ice of the Reich at the battle of Kursk in July 1943 where w,/5g
casualtes were taken. then, following te: retreat from Russia over the
winter of 1943/44 the LAH was st nost annihilated: by March 1944
there were just 1,229 membell left. It was this rump that provided the
equipped in Belgium.23
core for the LAH that fought in Norr's ndy after the division had re-
Their approach to war could not have en more different from that
ot this ypical Allied soldier. As one SS captain put it, perfectly capturme
the antithesis of the Allied approach to managing the war:
t was those defensive battles in Russia which I sed l always remember for the shees
beauty of the fighting, rather than the victorious advances ...
S cached a point where we were not concerned for ourselves or even for Germany,
After a time we
MOBILIZING THE GERMANS: WEHRMACHT AND SS
217
but lived entirely for the next clash, the next engagement with the enemy. There
was a tremendous sense of 'being', an exhilarating feeling that every nerve in the
body was alive to fight.24
By March 1944 this division was reduced to three tanks,
armoured assault guns, 41 officers and 1,188 NCOs and soldiers. Thus
when it arrived in Normandy to attack the Allies in June 1944 half of the
division had been with it for less than a month. Despite this enormous
turnover in personnel it remained a feared - and despised - enemy. 25
When Sepp Dietrich, who led the defence of Caen in Normandy, died in
1966, his funeral was attended by 7,000 former Waffen-SS soldiers 26
The 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend (H) was raised virtually
from scratch in June 1943 and for most of the Normandy campaign
(after Major-General Fritz Witt was killed by an artillery or naval shell on
14 June) it was led by Kurt Meyer, Nazi Germany's youngest General at
thirty-four. The 12th SS was the first Waffen SS unit in action in
Normandy and it was very effective and very large: over 20,500 people
were within its ranks, so popular had been its recruitment campaign. As
a consequence over 2,000 soldiers were transferred to the depleted
Leibstandarte to make up its numbers.27
The 12th SS was supposed to be composed of youths born in the first
half of 1926, which meant that the Hitlerjugend division was not full of
fanatical children, since two thirds were 18 during the Normandy
campaign and the rest slightly older.28 By comparison, the average age of
the American soldiers in Europe at this time was 26. Nevertheless, chil-
dren were engaged in other units as soldiers towards the end of the war.
But, as Reynolds makes clear, What made the HI division different was
that it was based on eighteen year olds' 29 This age-based commonality
aso undermined any regional allegiances that the members may have had
in precisely the same way that the Zulu impis were organized. Equally
important, the training provided was different from that given to the rest
of the German forces - and markedly in contrast win the dorm for the
Allied forces. Physical fitness, character training and weapons training
vere the three critical activities and the three critical prohibitions were
monol, tobacco and women. This so or sane - and the similantes
between the HJ regime and the Spartan regime are noticeable30 - was
not, however, buttressed by the authoritarian obsession with discipline,
square-bashing' and respect for authority so beloved of martinets in all
conventional armies. Parade bashing may have proved of great utility
either in practical terms for the practising of close-order battle tactics
used up until the American Civil War, or even for the indoctrination of
blind obedience that every conventional ar Sy allegedly operated on, but,
