258
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
before the invasion bringing the total to 125 - just enough for the first
three assault battalions, but leaving the follow up units to land in LCVPs.
The execution of the plan left much to be desired - and much to be
learned for Overlord. The disembarking Marines were forced to delay
their exit from the carrying ships when it was realized that they were
directly under the bombing route. Then the failure to co-ordinate the
naval and airborne bombardments led to both a 35 minute gap between
the two and a radically shortened aerial assault. As the Marines
approached the beach, the fires caused by the bombardment prevented
the naval ships from firing right up until the landing and although
communications lines were cut precious little material damage had been
done to the defenders. Thus at a distance of 3,000 yards the line of 125
Amtracs came under direct fire from the beach guns which destroyed half
of them. Meanwhile, the LCVPs could not even cross the reef, leaving
the follow-up forces to wade ashore or transfer into one of the few
remaining Amtracs returning from the beach. The only area where the
defensive ring was penetrated was on Red Beach 3 where two destroyers
put the large Japanese guns out of action, allowing the Amtracs to move
through the sea wall. Eventually, after three days of fighting, the defend-
ers were overcome.
Only 146 of the 4,700 survived (including just 17
Japanese). Of the 12,000 attacking Marines 1,027 were dead or missing
(as were 29 Naval personnel), 2,292 were wounded. But significant
lessons had been learned and on 1 February 1944 these new techniques
and technologies were deployed against Kwajalein Atoll when all the
infantry from the 7th Infantry Division landed in Amtracs, and after
three days and 334 deaths the atoll was captured. 109
For the rest of the Pacific war vital lessons were learned: Amtracs were
fitted with thicker armour and some upgunned to carry 37mm or 75mm
guns in turrets while those invading Okinawa on 1 April 1945 often
carried four 30 calibre machine guns - but only two Amtracs were
shipped to Normandy and both these appeared on Utah. I hus although
it had been clear
from the Pacific and Dieppe, that conventionally
propelled and unarmoured landing craft with bow-facing doors exposed
the assault waves to considerable enemy fire, and although no vehicle was
immune to artillery fire, an armoured Amtrac with a rearward opening
maguld enable troops to be carried across the most exposed part of
the assault - the beach. Such vehicles were already available by D-Day
because 500 LVT(A) - Amtracs with an enclosed and armoured hull
supporting a 37mm gun - were supplied to the US Navy
and Army
between 1942 and 1944. Indeed, they were used again en masse at
Saipan in the middle of June 1944 when 150 LVT(A) Is were deployed
in support of the 600 VTs carrying 8,000 US Marines in the first wave
MANAGING LOGISTICS: 'BAG, VOMIT, ONE.'
on a four mile assault of the beach. Even more useful was the LVT(A)2
which was like the LVT(A)l except the armour was increased and the
37mm gun removed - thus providing a well armoured personnel carrier
- of which the US Army used 200 between 1943 and 1944. The final
LVI variant before 1945 was the LVT(A)4 which carried a howitzer
rather than a 37mm tank gun. In fact they had originally been used just
for carrying stores and troops and were photographed in Parade on 15
August 1942 carrying troops - so their availability was clearly not
unknown to the Overlord planners. 110
Nor was the utility of this vehicle questioned by those using them in
combat. When the 10,000th LVT rolled off the assembly lines at FMC
on 14 May 1945, Vice-Admiral Cochrane, Chief of the (US) Bureau of
There is not the slightest shadow of doubt that the overwhelming victories of our
forces at Tarawa, Kwajalein, Saipan, Tinian, Guam, Palau and Iwo Jima could not
have been possible without the Amtragasagnly they that could navigate the
coral reefs which the Japanese thought were their sure defence. It follows, there-
fore, that the war against Japan would be far from its present reassuring stage had
it not been for the thousands of Amtracs turned out by your company!!
If the failure to learn the lesson of the Amtrac in the Pacific cost the
assault troops off Omaha dearly, did the Allies learn much from the other
aspects of amphibious assaults in the Pacific prior to D-Day?
mVell, duplicates of Betio's defences were built in Hawaii on
Kahoolawe Island and it became clear that only rocket carrying aircraft,
and armour piercing naval shells fired as howitzers with a very high angle
of descent, had any chance of penetrating them. That lesson also seems
to have bypassed most of the Normandy planners, but not all of them.
Major General Corlett, for example, had commanded the US 7th
Infantry Division against Japanese forces on the Kwajalein atoll which
had fallen for a fraction of the cost in casualties of the attack on Tarawa
and he had suggested the D-Day assault use the new Amtracs. But
Corlett was, in his own words, "squelched' by both Eisenhower and
Bradley when he suggested it to them in a meeting. s A response that
Corlett put down to himself being A son-of-a-bitch from out of
town'.** Admittedly, it was probably too late to provide large numbers
of these vehicles but even a few would probably have proved invaluable
and two were certainly operating off Utah Beach (one of them is still
there). After all, at least 24 were sumekpiled in England by 23 March
1944 (the photo of them was emilergoed until after 6 June 1944).115
Even after Omaha the western p' catre commanders avoided any
signiticant deployment of Amtracs, thouve, three 'Buffaloes' as the
