36
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
Unlike the last mass amphibious raid, in Gallipoli in 1915, nothing
could go wrong because the 199 page attack plan, partly written by
Montgomery but under Mountbatten's overall leadership, guaranteed
success - or so the planners argued. In fact the planners were so confi-
dent that they demanded that no Canadian unit commander use his
initiative since this itself might undermine the guarantee of success. In
fact, Major-General J.H. Roberts, the Canadian CO, was quite optimistic
about the whole affair, for The plan is good, the men are keen and they
know what to do. 56
If ever there was an attempt to tame an essentially Wicked Problem
this was it. In the end the effect of this was that the results were both
disastrous and, in this case, directly attributable to the strategic leaders.
The British Commandos, fortunately, refused to accede to the plan and
won the right to use whatever tactics they thought best at the time. That
plan was probably akin to another of Montgomery's used in 1944 -
Operation Market Garden at Arnhem - that prompted the Polish
General Sosabowski to ask after seeing the plan, 'But what about the
Germans?57 Major Brian McCool of the Royal Regiment of Canada,
captured and interrogated by the Germans at Dieppe, was equally uncer-
tain. His interrogator said to him, 'Look, McCool, it was too big for a
raid and too small for an invasion. What is it?' To which McCool replied,
If you can tell me the answer, I would be very grateful'. 58
There was no overall commander since the naval and army command-
ers had equal status. There was no aerial bombardment, not just because
Leigh-Mallory was reluctant to provide any bombers but because Major-
General Roberts, CO of the Canadian 2nd Division, preferred to use the
element of surprise than the element of explosives.59 There were no
airborne troops because the weather forecast was unfavourable. And,
despite Mountbatten's insistence that a naval bombardment be provided,
Admiral Pound, then the Ist Sea Lord, refused to risk any battleships in
such dangerous waters.
So on 19 August 1942, against a very inauspicious background in
which the Allied leaders vied with each other for insanity badges, 0,000
Canadian infantry and tankers, 1,100 British Commandos and 50 US
Rangers crossed the channel in 237 vessels to execute Operation Jubile,
as it was now called. No. 4 Commando was led by Lt Colonel the Lord
Lovat, whose corduroy trousers and grey pullover marked him out as a
confirmed eccentric. Eccentric or not, at the cost of around 16 dead and
40 wounded,
cliffs at
Varengvillea and eliminated 108 of the 112 German defenders, blowing
up the six 150mm gun battery and re-embarking on time with the four
remaining German
prisoners. Lovat was deeply unimpressed with the
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
37
planners and considered the raid 'a disaster ... the changed plan [was]
nothing short of suicidal'.60
The element of suicide was most clearly visible among the Canadian
infantry assaults in the centre. The fire of the defenders' guns decimated
the first waves of the Royal Regiment of Canada, and naval officers with
drawn pistols forced the second waves out of the landing craft to certain
death. The troops had nowhere to hide - they could not climb the 12-
foot sea wall and there was no cover. At 0800, after almost two and a half
hours of butchery, the Canadians who were still alive began surrender-
ing, though the final fighting ceased at 1630. Of the 650 Royals who
landed, 614 (95 per cent) were either dead or wounded or captured.
Back at the beach the commanders on the ships were unable to see the
beach itself because of their own smokescreen and unable to contact the
Royals ashore for three hours because most of the radios had been lost
or destroyed.
Just to make matters worse, confused signals about success then led to
the further landings of the Fusiliers Mont Royal and the Royal Marine
Commandos. The former group landed just in time to be captured. The
latter group landed last in thick smoke, and when Col. J.P. Philips, their
commanding officer, saw the catastrophe that had preceded them he
ordered those craft still at sea (carrying 1,000 troops) to return to the
ships. At last a withdrawal was ordered for 1100. The retreat was chaotic,
so overloaded were the boats that some
Canadian troops shot their
German prisoners to lighten the load. By 1220 the last evacuees were
taken on board and just over an hour later the sorry convoy headed back
to Newhaven on the English south coast.
Though the raid was an unmitigated disaster, the Daily Mirror's head-
line ran: 'Big Hun Losses in 9-hr Dieppe Battle'; the first casualty of war
had already fallen. When the debriefings finished the results were cata-
strophic: 5,100 troops landed and 3,648 failed to return. The 2nd
Canadian Division no longer existed: 907 were dead, 568 wounded, and
1,946 were prisoners. Of the 100 Churchill tanks that embarked only 27
reached the beach and none could negotiate across the shingle let alone
burst through the defences of the sea wall. The Commandos lost 247
dead, wounded and prisoners.
The Royal Navy lost one destroyer,
landing craft and 550 sailors. The RAF lost 106 planes and 153 aircrew.
The Luftwaffe lost 48 aircraft and 162 aircrew. In total, only 591
German casualties were inflicted with 297 of these dead. It was, as the
Vichy government informed their German overlords, a great victory.61
The British Army's unofficial newspapers told a different but ambiguous
story. According to Parade on 29 August 1942,
'It may be some time
before the complete story of the Commando raid on Dieppe is told,
