MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
US General Staff intervened and demanded immediate production at the
original specification. The second and related event was the media cover-
age of the Sherman, for complaints about it grew to a crescendo during
the battle of the Bulge in the winter of 1944-5 when, for probably the
first time, Allied armour faced mass German armour - and suffered
The first 20 Pershings arrived shortly after the Battle of the Bulge was
over, in February 1945, and they were divided equally between the US
2nd and 3rd Armoured Divisions. In an early engagement on 20
February one M26 destroyed two Tigers at 1,000 yards; admittedly these
were flanking shots and the M26 90mm gun was the same as that used
by the M36 tank destroyer but, nevertheless, it was a remarkable achieve-
ment for an Allied tank, 114 It was also cause for a media celebration as
Washington Post, noted in its 22 March 1945 edition:
-C covers canaly to get a news that te To m
has gone into mass production. It is the opinion of the men at the front, appar-
ently, that they will get the new tank in numbers when it is no longer needed, ic.
when bly var is over ... an investigation is thoroughly in order. It should take up
he reasons tore long delay in getung thily ?ershing in production. It should
likewise find out why our tanks are inferior to the enemy's. 115
Expeculo something like this, in early to arch 1945, Marshall asked
eisenhower for his views on the Sherman, given the increasingly bad
publicity it was having at home - including a vociferous campaign for a
congressional enqury, Eisenhower replied that, of course, the Sherma
could not outgn the ranther in a slugging match but it could succeed
oy lising tactics - That is outtlanking the lanthers. But his next response
is more uportant, for he stated that 'with the imminent addition of the
petershits tank to the Army's arsena, i would
soon be superior in every way? 116 Eisenhower then queried Major
General Kose (US 3rd Armoured Division) and Brigadier-General White
Us znd Armoured Division) about the Sherman. Their collective reply
was that, Wherever possible, they used artillery and aircraft to destroy
Panthers, not Shermans, though Eisenhower suggested that most of
their concerns were restricted to the rare occasion - in his estimation
when a Sherman met a Tiger Or Panther head on. He even went on to
Bot that, with hindsight, things could have been handled differently
sut the Sherman had been the only available tank in 1944 and early
1945. this, as 1 have already suggested, was simply not true, but for
problem until the
eisenhower the point was that the weak?ly is of the Sherman was not a
American press made it a problem.
Moreover,
eisenhto r had admitted to Marshall on 21 February 1943 that 'we are
295
TECHNOLOGIES
still too weak in AT [anti-tank] and AA [Anti-Aircraft], and we still don't
yet know exactly how to handle the Mk VI tank [Tiger]' 117 But within
two months Eisenhower saw for himself three Tigers destroyed by the
British in North Africa. He did not establish what kind of weapon had
destroyed them, though it was very unlikely to have been another tank
and much more likely to have been an artillery shell. Thus the "problem'
of the Tiger was apparently resolved because Allied tanks did not need to
be up-gunned or armoured if the artillery could take care of them. That
was fine if the troops were defending against an attacking Tiger with anti-
tank guns in position, but it was not much comfort to attacking infantry
or tankers facing dug-in Tigers and Panthers.
Thus the viability of the official US doctrine on tank warfare may
have been appropriate for a war of manoeuvre where the speed and
aPparent reliability of the Sherman would simply outpace the ability of
the German armour to retreat and regroup in strength. However, two
points are worth considering here. First, the top speed of the Sherman
was 26mph; the Panther could move at 35 mph and even the Tiger
could manage 23mph. 118 Given that the mechanical reliability of the
German tanks was unknown at this time, it seems foolhardy at the very
least to assume that the Sherman could simply outpace its opposition so
that heavy armour and guns were unnecessary. Second, the critical issue
here was that D-Day itself was not a war of manoeuvre - at least not eit
omaha Beach and not subsequently in the Normandy bocage. There 1t
was a war of attrition in which armoured firepower was crucial - and
crucially missing from the Allied forces.
In the absence of many of
bart's Funnies, and totally reliant on Shermans that were vulnerable
o verd me power, and knowing that the beach was heavy delenaca
and that traditionally the Germans did not retreat, it should have been
dear that there was never going to be an immediate breakthrough by
highly mobile tanks - unless all or most of the defences and defenders
were neutralized by heavily armoured and gunned tanks. Furthermore,
even a breakthrough from the beach was a breakthrough into the bocage
- the kind of territory that 'highly mobile' tanks were virtually irrele-
wait. Indeed, the bocage countryside of Normandy was almost exacuy
signed to provide advantage to whichever side operated the best
Protected and best gunned vehicles, and to significantly disadvantage
any vehicle that sacrificed these elements of tank design in favour of
speed and reliability. 119
This is not a question of using hindsight - it is a question of evaluat-
ing the limits of the official tank doctrine.
That doctrine was flawed
mder the best of circumstances - as opponents of fatton,
especially
ueneral Rose, voiced at the time of the decision to produce Shermans
