LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
24
of body and head blows to the point where either a points victory is
assured or the opponent is weakened to the point of collapse. Karate, on
the other hand, is premised on a first knockout blow because there
maybe no time for a second or subsequent attack. Of course, sport karate
has minimized this in the same way that boxing has altered bare-knuckle
fighting, but in essence the karateka - a practitioner of karate - should be
intent on stopping an opponent with a first and decisive blow. In this
respect the American strategy mirrors karate and the British strategy
embodies boxing; neither is guaranteed success and neither requires
greater bravery than the other - but they are different. In the end the
American karateka failed to deliver the knockout blow in Normandy and
the fight turned into a bloody attrition more resemblant of a 15-round
heavyweight boxing match than a karate tournament; neither Allied
leader managed to ensure the execution of their preferred strategy. And
a primary reason for this was that no one on the Allied side had told the
Germans what they were supposed to do to facilitate the roll out of the
plan.
General George Patton certainly embodied the essence of the karateka
and he had always hoped to be in command of the drive from Normandy
to Berlin but his temperament was, according to Roosevelt and Marshall,
profoundly unsuited to the delicate task of keeping the feuding family of
Allies together. The Quebec conference in August 1943 agreed that an
American would become the supreme commander to lead SHAEF
(Supreme Headquarters of the Allied Expeditionary Forces), yet
Churchill had already told Brooke that the job was his. But when it
became clear that the American input to Overlord exceeded that of the
British, Churchill had to submit to an American commander. Henry
Stimson - Roosevelt's Secretary for War - also suggested that the British
should not lead the campaign because their preference was for 'pinprick
warfare' which wouldn't work and because 'their hearts are not in it' for
the necessary head-on assault.3
Roosevelt's preference for the supreme commander was General
Marshall but since Marshall was already US Army Chief of Staff this
would have involved a demotion. Moreover, the American senior
commanders - Admiral King, Admiral Leahy and General Pershing - had
all warned Roosevelt that only Marshall was strong enough to deal with
the British over strategy. Roosevelt then settled on General Eisenhower
(the only other American officer that would have been acceptable to
Churchill) who, at the time, was in command of the Italian campaign.
Many Americans, though, regarded Eisenhower as too keen to compro-
mise with the British - some even referred to him as the 'best commander
the British have? 4 But Roosevelt was certain that such a tactful approach
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
25
was essential if the Anglo-American relationship was to remain firm. 5 As
General Bradley recognized, 'compromise is essential to amity in an Allied
struggle'. Moreover, although Eisenhower's previous career had prima-
rily involved administrative positions (he had served as a desk-bound
major for 20 years) he had by 1943 overseen three successful joint Allied
amphibious landings and his diplomatic and political skills were regarded
by many as an essential ingredient to holding the feuding Allies together.
The compromise that cemented the Americans to the British involved
the latter supplying all the deputy commanders but the cement rapidly
dissolved onto a quagmire of political infighting and lobbying. Churchill
immediately began to lobby for Alexander (then in Italy) rather than
Montgomery as land commander but when Marshall insisted on taking
Air Chief Marshal Tedder from
Italy
as his air
controller Churchill
baulked at losing both Commanding Officers (COs) from the Italian
theatre.
With
Brooke also lobbying
against
Alexander
(whom he
regarded as inadequately strategic in orientation) and for Montgomery,
it soon became clear to Churchill that Montgomery would have to be
given command of the ground forces.
Eisenhower,
who preferred
Alexander, regarded Montgomery as arrogant, inflexible and abrasive,
while Montgomery considered Eisenhower an amateur at war. As
Montgomery quipped,
'Ike
doesn't know the difference
between
Christmas and Easter'?? Eisenhower, who did know
the difference
between an intemperate comment and a constructive criticism, was duly
appointed in December 1943 and drew upon his recent past to plan the
immediate future. He made it quite clear that two leadership qualities in
particular were crucial for Allied success: co-operation and morale:
Our Mediterranean experience had reaffirmed the truth that unity, co-ordination
and co-operation are the keys to successful operations. War is waged in three
elements but there is no separate land, air or naval wars... Not only would I need
commanders who understood this truth but I must have those who appreciated
the importance of morale and had demonstrated a capacity to develop and main-
tain it. Morale is the greatest single factor in successful war .... It breeds most
readily upon success; but under good leaders it will be maintained among troops
even during extended periods of adversity. A human understanding and a natural
ability to mingle with all men on a basis of equality are more important than any
degree of technical skill.8
Eisenhower took many of his staff from the Mediterranean campaign
with him, including Tedder as his second in command and Bedell Smith
as his Chief of Staff. Ramsay, who had organized the Dunkirk evacuation,
was again appointed to direct naval forces for 'Operation Neptune'
(transporting 1 million troops and their supplies in six days). Air control
