366
COMMANDING IN CRISES
and it proved almost impossible to secure provisions on 6 June with
Allied fighter-bombers constantly patrolling the skies.53
It was 1515 betore reports suggested the 12th SS were on the move
- a mere 15 minutes after the leading reconnaissance units left Lisieux -
and by the time they got to Evrécy, a couple of miles south-west of Caen,
they were almost out of fuel and had been attacked many times by Allied
fighter-bombers. The 5th SS Artillery of the division, for instance, lost
three of its 15 howitzers on the journey. Worse was to follow for those
Allied fighter-bombers had also destroyed the fuel dump at Eve,
Nevertheless, the 12th SS HI attacked the Canadians moving inland
from Juno Beach, only to find themselves counter attacked by a naval
and aerial bombardment that forced the Germans to retreat. By that time
the 5th SS Artillery had lost another three guns. They dug in for the
night and when the Canadian attacks resumed, soon found themselves
out of ammunition, having to › ait 2 hours for replenishments to arrive. 54
On D-Day +1 the expected German counter-attack also finally materi-
alized first at Buron, north west of Caen, where 23 captured North Nov
Scotian infantry were
executed by the 25th SS Panzergrenadier
Regiment of the 12th SS H/ Panzer Division under Kurt Meyer. 5 The
following day the Royal Winnipeg Rifles were attacked at Putot, juSt
sooth of Caen-Bayeux road, west of Bretteville. This time 40 Canadian
Tols were cecuted, again by coth so Panzergrenaaters of the lath os
H). At least to were executed in the garden of Kurt Meyer's own n
order. at the Abbaye d'Ardenne, sell i of them at Mever's direct
But murdering POWs was never going to stop the Canadians
anca by the end of D-Day around 21,400 troops had landed on Juno
14.4 Sword Beach
At Sword Beach, in particular Queen Red and Queen White, covering
he most casterly end of the assault area, the defences were expected to
be the toughest, with the large guns at Le Havre and the large number
of boats expected to
problems for
the British
Furthermore, south of Sword lay Caen, and Caen was deemed to be the
funnel through which all German reinforcements would have to Pass, 58
For this reason a very large naval bombarding force was stationed oppo
sits the beach. The British 3rd Division was primarily concentrated just
cast of Lion-sur-Mer on Queen Beach, a narrow area just to the west o
Quistreham situated between the deep shelving beaches of Roger Beach
and the cliffs of Peter Beach to the west - an area more appropriate for a
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
367
brigade. So narrow was the area that two midget submarines were
deployed to mark the boundaries offshore.
The lst Battalion of the
South Lancashire Regiment was to land on Queen White while on their
east the 2nd Battalion of the East Yorkshire Regiment was to land on
Queen Red Beach nearest to Ouistreham. The dividing line between the
tro beaches was exactly where the German strong-point WN 20 lay and
both brigades were required to ensure its destruction. The Division was
Then to move rapidly south via Périer-sur-le-Dan to take Caen.
for D-er about 5,000 Commandos were involved in the special
Services Group, headed by Major-General Sturges, Royal Marines (RM),
and subdivided into two groups. the ist special service brigade under
Digadier Lord Lovat (Nos. 3, 4, 6, 10 and 45 KM) landed on sword
near Ouistreham on D-Day, silenced the coastal battery, and headed for
the drop zones of the British oth Airborne to support the eastern tank
of the landings and protect the bridges over the Orne River and the C can
Canal. The 4th Special Services Brigade under Brigadier Leicester (all
RM units - Nos. 41, 46, 47, 4Jr RM Commando) landed on all three
Anglo-Canadian beaches: No. 41 eue-o Sud were to land separately on
sword at Lion-sur-Mer and Juno at St Aubin respectively and head
towards the radar station at Douvres.
However,
both groups were
delayed and no link up was achieved. The following day the two units
-our then the group was too weak to attack the station which was
eventually captured by No. 41 on 15 June. strong Point WN 20A was
also to be taken by 4l Commando on their way to Join up with $8th
Commando. In the event the assauring group failed to take WN 20A
until D-Day+2 and it was
into this gap
that the primary German
armoured counter-attack was made.
One troop' (No. 4) captured the gun battery at Ouistreham before
returning to link up with Lovat while No. o went straight to the briage.
rhe Oustreham battery housed six 155mm guns and No. 4 troop was
accompanied by two troops of French Commandos under Commandant
Kieffer 60 The Grand Bunker at Ouistreham, Which is still clearly visible
from the ferry, and which controlled the local anti aircraft fire, was
captured with 52
German POWs on D-Day+3, after all the guns it
controlled had been silenced. 6l
Ironically, while these Commandos were probably the best prepared
and trained British troops, their army colleagues in the 3rd Division were
Probably the least prepared. They had only begun training in December
1943 in Scotland where poor weather had hampered preparations. Not
until the end of March was it possible to practice close-support fire and
a beach assault simultancously.62 Indeed, some tanks had never practised
disembarking from an LCT until D-Day.63 It was fortuitous, then, the
