LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
54
that would prevent Allied aircraft from attacking the assumed Panzer
counter-attacks - had persuaded Eisenhower to monitor the reliability of
his weather experts for months beforehand, and twice a week in May
Eisenhower tested the forecasts of his advisers. But the critical problem was
that accuracy beyond 48 hours was difficult, yet at least that length of time
was necessary to get the assault troops and the first reinforcements across
the Channel. 116 What made the decision to go even more difficult was that
the huge assembly of soldiers and machinery had to begin embarkation
procedures several days before D-Day itself, when it was not self-evident
that the invasion would occur within the next few days.
Clearly the
weather was a Wicked Problem, but it is important to consider two other
related aspects of the weather. First the Germans misread the weather and
allowed themselves to be misled by it. Second, Eisenhower's decision
allowed the weather to lead them secretly across the English Channel.
On Sunday 28 May Captain James Stagg, the chief meteorologist of
the RAF and the SHAEF Meteorological Unit ('Six feet two of Stagg)
and six feet one of gloom' Admiral Creasy called him) forecast that
'mainly quiet wind conditions would continue during the coming week
....(Risk of a gale seemed rather small). When he was asked What will
the weather be on D-Day in the Channel and over the French coast?' he
replied; To answer that question would make me a guesser, not a mete-
orologist? l17 By Wednesday 31 May he advised that prospects were not
favourable for weather after Sunday 4 June. By Friday 2 June the 'pres-
ent relatively quiet weather may end about Tuesday' (6 - D-Day), and
'no improvement - risk of Force 5 winds now forecast for Monday' was
the summary of Saturday 3 June and D-Day was subsequently postponed
for 24 hours. 18 So poor were the forecast conditions that it was
commonly assumed to be the worst weather in June for 50 years. 119
Nonetheless, loading for the groups furthest away, such as the 29th
Division in Falmouth and Fowey, began on 31 May and for the next few
days the south of England crawled with transports, troops,
fear and
adrenaline soaked anticipation. Eisenhower spoke of this time as the
point at which the whole mighty host was tense as a coiled spring 120
and twice a day he held a weather meetings at 2130 and 0400 using
information relayed by the four Allied warships stationed in the Atlantic
and by the six RAF Mosquito aircraft of No. 1409 (Meteorological
Reconnaissance) Flight. 21 The reports were analysed at three different
ground stations in the UK:
the British
Meteorological Office
Dunstable, the Admiralty in London and the US Army Air Force centre
at Widewing, Teddington. From 1 June until 5 June the Widewing
experts - using a method of comparison with prior weather maps - were
as optimistic as the Meteorological Office, helped by a Norwegian,
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
55
Sverre Petterssen, and using wind and temperature observations from
high altitude provide by the RAF, were pessimistic; the Admiralty usually
favoured the centre line. Stagg,
seconded from the Meteorological
Office, leant heavily towards the Dunstable analysis. 122
On the German side the weather information was sparse at best: the
stations on Jan Mayen Island, Spitzbergen and on the Loften Islands
had been destroyed, all the German ship stations had been sunk, and the
U-boat fleet was unable to operate freely. 123 But on 2 June a storm lashed
the Channel and it must have seemed self-evident to both sides that no
invasion could take place. Certainly the
German Chief Meteorologist,
Colonel Professor Walter Stöbe forecast rain, cloud and high wind. 124 To
Rommel, well aware that 5 to 7 June was a likely period for the invasion,
the poor forecast all but eliminated the chance of an invasion. He
assumed a good five clear days would be necessary - as they had been for
all their previous amphibious landings, in North Africa, Sicily and Italy.
Unfortunately for the Germans,
unpredictability was almost the only
predictable thing about the weather in the Channel and unpredictability
has always been a primary ally of successful military leaders. 125
By Saturday 3 June the forecasts from two of the ships in the Atlantic
were completely contradictory but despite the calm weather in London,
Stagg advised a postponement and this was confirmed by the 0415 meet-
ing on the morning of 4 June: the wind was west, 3-4, backing south-
west and increasing to force 5. Since some of the convoys had already set
sail they were recalled. Section 'U2A' of the Utah convoy (each force had
around 12 separate convoys divided into three or four sections) had left
Salcombe at 1653 the previous day and had accumulated 138 ships in the
course of its journey, including 128 LCTs. Four hours after the recall
message had been sent it was 25 miles south of the Isle of Wight - just
38 miles from Normandy - before it was successfully intercepted. 126 Had
this force continued and been spotted it is very likely that a catastrophe
would have awaited the main invasion force. By the time this section
eventually reached Omaha Beach some of the officers had been on the
bridge for 70 hours without sleep - yet only seven of the 128 LCTs failed
to make the final assault. 127
The predicted "storm' clearly did not reach some parts of the
Normandy coast. Private Franz Gockel, a machine gunner overlooking
Omaha Beach at the Colleville 'draw' or exit, reported on the evening of
the 4th that 'nothing moved on the calm surface of the water' 128 But by
5 June the wind off the eastern Normandy coast was between Force 4
and 5, the rain lashed down and German mine-layers had been forced
back into harbour. 129 As far as the Germans were concerned there was no
