282
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
Gudgin summarizes British tank development, it was 'too little, too
late' 67 Just how little can be assessed by comparing the 1939 with the
1942 tank production figures in Britain. In the former only 969 tanks
were made, by the latter 8,600 were produced, and even that was signif-
icantly insufficient. 68
By Christmas 1941, Churchill had already reached the same condu-
sion, admitting that: 'I am not sure that speed is the supreme require-
ment of tanks, certainly not of all tanks.
Armour and gun power decide
the matter whenever tank meets tank' 69 However, the new tank coming
off the assembly lines in Britain at that time
was the Churchill - which
was already approaching obsolescence in the face of rapid German
advances in gun power and armour. A vote of censure was demanded by
some in the House of Commons and Churchill went ahead with the
Dieppe raid, in part to test the new armour available: all three flame-
throwing tanks were captured and all 28 Churchill tanks were either
destroyed or captured. In September 1942 the Select Committee on
National Expenditure produced a damning report of the tank and gun.
design and utility and Churchill admitted that the report was a masterly
indictment which reflects on all who have been concerned at the War
Office and the Ministry of Supply. It also reflects upon me as head of the
government and upon the whole organization ... the committee have
certainly rendered a high service in bringing this tangle of inefficiency
and incompetence to my notice'. 70
Yet the British did have a gun capable of taking on the German tanks,
and it was ready by June 1941, this was the 17lb anti-tank gun. Britisn
tank design was undertaken at Chobham, separately from gun design
which took place at Woolwich, and far more emphasis was placed on
designing the tank than designing the gun. However, a technical report
in November 1942, allegedly signed by Montgomery, had suggested thar
the already fitted 75-mm gun was 'all we require' so the 171b gun vas
initially consigned to the artillery? However, on Christmas day, 1942,
Churchill called for the then secret 17-pound gun to be adopted as soon
as possible?? It was ironic, then, that by August 1943 Montgomer
noted in a report to the Vice Chief of the Imperial General Staff in
London: 'It is gun power that counts in battle ... We must produce a
Iquudue a gun as primary armament which is superior to the present
88mm of the enemy? 3 This was to be the Firefly.
I's e Firefly had been developed from the experiments of Major
George Brighty, who had insisted - contrary to almost everyone else -
that the Sherman's 75mm gun was (a) inadequate and (b) could be
replaced by the British 17lb anti-tank gun, even though the Sherman's
turfet was objectively too small to cope with the assumed recoll action o
TECHNOLOGIES
283
Photo 11.4 Sherman Firefly Tank
the latter gun. By re-engineering the turret and moving the tank radio
into a new external compartment,
the large gun was fitted into a
Sherman MALAC from late 1943 but there simply were not enough of
them available by D-Day.74
However, three problems remained: firas the tank was still poorly
armoured compared to the Panthers and Tigers it would have to face.
Second, because of the long barrel, the Firefly could not operate as an
amphibious tank - the barrel poked through the canvas screen thus
losing all buoyancy. Third, although the Firefly could, in theory, outgun
even the best German tanks when it fired Sabot ammunition, these were
armour-piercing shells and, while effective against other tanks, this
amited their lise in infantry support operations.
Montgomery must shoulder a consideratis portion of the blame for
the british landing on D-Day with the American sherman which was
under-gunned
and under-armoured. Yet,
complained bitterly about the state of weapons in 1940)76 was positively
Montgomery (who
glowingas his fulsome praise for British tanks only two months after D-
We have had no difficulty in dealing withe German armour once we have grasped
problem. In this connection British armour l - Played a notable part. We hav
uning tols r from the Panther and Tiger tanks, they are unreliable mechani
cally and the Panther is very vulnerable t's m the flanks, our 17-pdr gun will go
dhe reh them. Provided our tacticalle good we can deliar them without
