284
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
TECHNOLOGIES
285
15,000 were ordered - but only 15 produced before the end of the war.
With the Tank Corps officially disbanded in 1920 and only a small Tank
Board in existence after 1922, US tank development between the wars
was negligible. This was made worse by a War Department policy of
restricting tank development to a maximum weight of 15 tons which
meant that all development of light tanks had to go under the name of
combat cars'. This basically resulted in the US being the least advanced
Indeed, not until the 1940 Blitzkriegs did Congress relent and start
supporting the development of tanks. In 1940 only 330 tanks were built,
but this increased to 4,052 in 1941, to 24,997 in 1942 (more than the
entire German tank production between 1939 and 1945), and to 29,487
in 943. In total the US produced 88,276 tanks and 3,816 self-propelled
Photo 11.5 Sherman M4 Tank
US tank doctrine was rooted in the assumption that tanks should not
engage in tank destruction but operate like mechanized cavalry, bursting
Unfortunately, Montgomery forgot to inform the Germans who were
through enemy lines to disrupt their logistical supply and generating the
ofien mystified as to why the greatest industrial powers on earth should
kind of shock to the enemy's will to continue which the German blitzkrieg
attempt an invasion with such a poor tank as the American M4 Sherman.
seems to have brought about. In contrast, it was the job of the massed
rank-destroyers to destroy tanks, hence tanks did not need heavy armour
11.5.3 American tank development
or armament; speed and mobility were their essential requirements.
Us tank design was notoriously different from all others: it produced
Given the superiority of many Allied weapons and technologies, espe-
very tall tanks which were thinly armoured, weakly gunned but were also
cially in aircraft and radar, it seems surprising that tank technologies were
quick, relatively reliable and mechanically robust
in other words
woefully inadequate.
Certainly, Patton, the doyen of American tank
warfare, suggested that it wasn't the tank that won the war but the
mechanical horses. In 1939 the annual research and development buager
for tank development was just 205,000.° But it wasn t just parsimony
artillery?& And Blandford suggests that the artillery, the queen of the
battlefield', broke up every single German counter-attack on D-Day?"
that hindered the US tank, it was cultural conservatism.
A revolutionary suspension system had been developed by 1. Water
Graham suggests that a long learning curve was necessary for the Allies,
Christie that provided for large vertical wheel movements and thus a
and especially the British, to realize where their relative strengths lay: We
nore flexible and a faster ride than anything the US had. It also facil-
only won our battles when we learned to concentrate our forces and do
Tated a wider track to distribute the weight better, but after producing a
What we did best, which was burn sem Pponent under tons of high
mall number of experimental versions in 1931 and 1932, the Ordnance
explosive' 80 But,
as I have suggested above,
the culture
Department rejected the original design and replaced with a variant
Leadership of the British military establishment were the real problems.
known as the T3 (T for Test model). Christie subsequently sold two
On the American side, too, Patton's diminution of the role of the tank
n sem' the Soviet Union who copied the suspension directly for the
should be seen for what it was - an attempt to obfuscate his own role in
T34 and scrapped everything else. The T34 was the tank that shocked
emasculating American tank design.
If British tank development was podr, on the American side, things, ir
Tiger in response. 83
he Germans in 1941 and persuaded them et launch the Panther and the
anything, were worse. The only Americon tank of the First World War
was the ford Three-ton Tank, based on the chassis of a Model i and
pert, that none of the four light tank divisions (armed only with
The Polish war had demonstrated to Guderian,
the German tank
using two of its engines, it carried a single Browning machine gun an
machine guns) had been successful and therefore heavier tanks and up-
gunning was essential for any further
invasions.84 The results were
