364
COMMANDING IN CRISES
put out of action by AVRE petards and DD tanks at about 1115, after
four hours of resistance. St Aubin itself was not captured until the
evening.
On the west side of St Aubin, on the limits of Juno, the 4th Special
Service Brigade of 48 Royal Marine Commando were to land after the
North Shore
Regiment and move westwards to link up with 4.
Commando moving towards them from Sword Beach.
Commando had assumed their approach would be covered by the
preliminary assault of the Canadians but in the event two of the six
Commando boats were caught by the beach obstacles, and all were fero
ciously attacked by the machine guns and mortars on shore. Thus 15
minutes after the 8th Canadians had stormed across Nan Red Beach No.
48 Royal Marine Commandos suffered heavy casualties from German
beach defences that appeared to have recovered from the initial shock
and had not been originally eliminated. In theory they should have been
covered by smoke mortars fired from their own boats but so quiet was
the run-in that just after O730 the mortar troops had dismantled their
weapons and stood ready to land with the rest of the Commandos. BY
the time they had resumed their firing positions many of the casualties
had already been caused. As they moved inland they had already lost hali
their strength with 75 per cent of these casualties occurring on the run-
in to the beach itself, many from drowning.* But progress away from
he beach through Langrune sur Mer was still dangerous for many ot the
houses had been wired with booby traps by the defenders and winking
them out took an inordinate amount of time and effort.
Overall, the landings on some areas of Juno Beach that were
adequately covered by the defenders were very costly. Between 1,000 and
1,200 casualties were taken from the 21,400 who landed at Juno (5 per
2-2t |12 per cent were expected]) of whom 340 were dead compared to
2,200 casualties of the 40,000 at Omaha (5.5 per cent) 45 Howevet;
since there is considerable uncertainty about both the number landed
and the number of casualties we should treat all these figures with some
aan, Certaiy for those divolved face costacies from the
beaches the prospects were bleak: of the 100 members of the 6th Field
Company, Royal Canadian Engineers, only 26 were still working at the
no of the day. And of the so soldiers in No. 10 Platoon, A COmpany af
the Queen's Own Rifles of Canada (QORC), only nine got off the
beach to The casualties of both brigades were roughly the same: the
SORC lost 143, the Royal Winnipegs had 128 casualties, and the North
Shore Regiment lost 125.47
Yet some individuals on Juno went to extraordinary lengths to get
onto the beach. Major de Stackpoole of 48 Royal Marine Commandos
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
365
tound himself in the water after his LCI was hit. Fifty of the survivors
rete picked up by an LCT which, it turned out, was under orders to
Courn to England, and the skipper refused all the requests from the
commandos to take them to the beach first. Thereupon de stackpoole,
already wounded in the thigh, dived overboard and swam to shore. 48
Les bo KIos an Company C in the LORe was not that keen,
but neither did he need to be told what to do: "The ramp dropped and
ve poured off in single file into waves up to our waists, running
orders were being shouted: "Off the beach! Off the beach! Get to the
Wall?" Relieved someone's tension I suppose, But I don I know anybody
who had to be told What to do on that beach'. By 0900 the assault was
sull taking neavy casualties but, bizarrely, within another 40 minures a
beachside cate had opened for business amidst the continuing camage,
The German response inland of Juno was, at best, tardy. The Allies
we very concerned about the possible movements of the Else Paneer
division southeast of Caen and the 1oh so fil lanzer Division,
mccepted radio traffic had suggested reconnalssance patron of the erot
were on the move by 0640. But no major movement of armour was
Meccied by the Allied air reconnaissance until the diernoon. in fact Le
British oth Airborne drops over the Orne had already severed all tele-
phone links between Caen and Ranville (Just To the east Of regasus
enge) so the 21st Pansergrenadiers preparo lo dead delet
bay had no idea whether the brid of thad indeed been taken
Furthermore, such was the state of confusion on the morning of D-
Day that SS-Obersturmführer Hansmann of the 12th SS Panzer Division
had to drive 80kms north to Bayeux before he knew that the lands
were by sea as well as air. At 0745 he arrived just intand of Arromanches
to see the British landings and was convinced that that this must be the
invasion! What else can it be? Soon there will be more ships than water
But who will believe this, iing: hasn't seen it himself? himself?'51
Hansmann's CO, Fritz Witt, with his deputy Kurt Meyer, led the 12th
SS HJ Panzer Division, which had been stationed at Lisieux,
Cast of Sword Beach, and did not reach Caen until midnight on beanie.
The 12th SS H) had been formed on 24 June 1943 and spent a yearif
Belgium training with cadres drawn from the Ist SS Leibstandarte Adolf
Hitler (LAH). In April 1944 the 12th SS H) had moved to Lisieux and
from there, on 6 June, they proceeded north to
thousands of 18 year old
privates, they would drive 'the small Allied landing force into the sea'. 52
But the fuel shortage that had resulted from Allied strategic bombing
was exacerbated by the siting of most reserve stocks in 15th Army area
