YUL
COMMANDING IN CRISES
Percée around noon, though the beach was still under heavy fire 201
Eventually 121st Combat Engineers were responsible for its capture but
some of their members had landed as far away as Exit D-3 and 75 per
cent of the equipment had been lost on landing. Consequently it took
them much longer than anticipated to accumulate sufficient troops and
explosives to overcome the defenders.202
Gradually the Americans worked their way up the bluffs inland but by
1900 the line of objectives for D-Day on Omaha Beach had still not
being achieved and 50 tanks had been lost, with 50 landing craft sunk 203
But the troops were ashore and 18 different fire-fights were continuing
around the three villages of the area. By about 2030 hostile action against
the beach area controlled by the Ist Division had ceased and the
Commanding General, First Division, and his staff established their HQ
on the beach. 204 For the next two days after D-Day, as Captain Friedman
of the l6th RCT recalled, 'we pretty much just licked our wounds and
tried to find out who was alive' 205
On the evening of 7 June the first units of the 2nd Infantry Division
began landing on Omaha, and within 24 hours they were all ashore,
moving inland through the boundary line between the 29th and the Ist
Infantry Divisions towards Trévières and on to the relatively undefended
Cérisy Forest, north of Balleroy 206 By the evening of 8 June the US
forces from Omaha and the British forces from Gold had linked up,
forming an uninterrupted territory from Ouistreham to Vierville. But the
congestion on the Anglo-Canadian beaches delayed the reinforcing
armour, and the deployment first of the 2lst Panzers to stall the British
off Sword Beach and the arrival of the 12th SS H] to stall the Canadians
off Juno, electively stymied Montgomery's attempts to take Caen for
Nonetheless, D- Day had proved remarkable successful, with the single
exception of Omaha, and even that had been saved from catastrophe by
the individual and collective acts of American soldiers on the ground and
Allied sailors and flyers in the sea and air. In particular, the destroyers
seemed to have played a pivotal role in reducing the defensive fire of the
Opposition. By the end of the day each of the 11 destroyers off Omaha
Beach had fired between 400 and 1,200 five-inch shells at the beach
a gets. lieutenant joe smitounf go beachmaster was not alone in his
conclusion: "There is no question in my mind that the few Navy destroy-
Es that we had there saved the mission' 207 His opinion is supported by
Colonel S.B. Mason who inspected the German defences at Omaha after
he invasion did suggested that they were impregnable to conventional
army artillery and that only the Navy's pounding had loosened them
enough to chable the troops to break through. But heavy shelling by the
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
407
sea-borne cavalry alone had not won the day. That also required inepti-
tude on the part of German senior commanders.
14.8 German responses on the beaches
Initially it appeared not just to Bradley but also to the Germans that the
invasion was lost. Sometime between 0800 and 0900 Colonel Goth,
commanding WN76, the fortifications overlooking Omaha Beach at the
Pointe et Raz de la Percée near Vierville, sent a report to It Colonel
Ziegelmann, the 352nd's Operations Chief:
At the water's edge the enemy is in search of cover behind the coastal-obstacles.
A great many motor vehicles - among them ten tanks - stand burning on the
activities.
Disembarkation from landing boats has ceased ... the boats keep farther out to
sea. The fire of our battle positions and artillery is well placed and has inflicted
considerable casualties on the enemy. A great many dead and wounded lie on the
But this was before the destroyers moved in. And it was not just the
aggressive action of the navy that undermined the German defences on
Omaha, for at the very same time the destroyers began their assault over
the heads of the troops pinned down on the beach, the German defenders
were beginning to run low on ammunition. For example, the Ist Battery
of the 352nd Artillery regiment behind Omaha Beach had seen their
ammunition stockpile reduced by 50 per cent just a fortnight before D-
Day to make it more ' secure. Major Werner Pluskat, in command of four
of the batteries, had told General Marcks that should an invasion occur his
guns only had enough ammunition for 24 hours, to which Marcks had
replied: "If an invasion ever does come in your area you'll get more ammu-
nition than you can fire? 209 But when a truck carrying the shells back to
the front was sent during the attack it was itself destroyed by naval shell-
gobefore it reached the battery. P'rivate Severloh fired 12,000 rounds210
of ammunition from his MG42 machine gun post on the bluffs above
Omaha and was forced to use tracer-fire, normally used for night firing
when he ran out of standard ammunition. As a result the eight destroyers
out to sea could, at last, pinpoint him and quickly destroyed his gun posi-
tion. At the same time, all the other guns in Resistance Nest 62 ran out of
ammunition and the gun crews withdrew inland 211
Furthermore, because the Germans had been ordered not to retreat
they could continue to fire taton the attackers - at least
until the
