YUL
386
COMMANDING IN CRISES
A, G, F, and E were to land on Dog Green, Dog White, Dog Red, and
Easy Green respectively. Each company comprised around 200 soldiers
and each LCVP carried one officer and 31 soldiers. These were to be
followed by various specialized units, engineers, anti-aircraft batteries,
light artillery etc., and some 50 minutes later, the second wave of infantry
would arrive in the shape of the Companies I, K and C. The first heavy
artillery would arrive on the DUKWs at H+110 minutes and by H+180
minutes the navy salvage vessels would arrive to clear any broken or
destroyed vehicles as the infantry companies moved deep inland. That
was the theory and it was a theory suitable for Tame Problems.
Indeed, some soldiers were sure that the precise scheduling of D-Day
almost in itself would ensure victory. In the words of Private Barnes,
Company A, 116th Infantry RCT: 'It seemed so organized that nothing
could go wrong, nothing could stop it. It was like a train schedule'. But
Cota had warned his troops that little would go to plan:
This is different from any of the other exercises you've had so far.
The little
discrepancies that we tried to correct on Slapton sand are going to be magnified
and are going to give way to incidents that you might first view as chaotic ... The
landing craft aren't going in on schedule and people are going to be landed in the
wrong place. Some won't be landing at all. The enemy will try, and will have some
success, in preventing our gaining a lodgement. But we must improvise, carry on,
not lose our heads. Nor must we add to the confusion. 130
Captain Miller of the 175th Regiment agreed, and suggested that his
troops forget about the operational plan for the regiment, which was
thicker than a telephone directory and could not be torn in half: "Forget
this goddamned thing. You get your ass on the beach. I'll be there wait-
ing for you and I'll tell you what to do. There ain't anything in this plan
that is going to go right 131 He was right - but the problem was if he
didn't survive the landing the ordinary soldiers would be completely
bereft of command, so dependent were they upon their officers and
At 0250 the ships of Force O began anchoring 11 miles from the
beach, and at 0315 the troops began debarking to the landing craft, most
in sections of 31 people including one officer at the bow (which explains
their terrifying casualty rate followed by a five soldier rifle team, a team
of four wire cutters, two BAR teams with two soldiers each, two Bazooka
flame-thrower team,
teams of two soldiers, a single mortar team of four people, a two soldier
Bangalore Torpedoes, a medic and an assistant team leader. Since they
of the demolition team using
assumed that no re-supply would be available for 48 hours each soldier
had to carry two days food and am Ino, jon. With six or seven sections
387
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
to a company, and 30 LCAs on each of the three ships carrying one of
the three battalions of the 29th Division, the craft headed for Omaha
Beach at a steady nine knots - at least two and a half hours' standing ride,
but for many it was to be much longer.
The naval assault was executed on time but it appears that little
damage was done. Worse, the bombing aircraft were ordered - much to
Bradley's dismay who was unaware of the decision at the time - to delay
their bomb drop by 30 seconds because the early morning mist and the
smoke from the naval gunfire effectively obscured the target and the
USA wanted to avoid any friendly-fire' incidents, 132 So far adrift were
the bombs from their targets that only two sticks of bombs landed within
lour miles of the coastal defences 133 Here is an example of a crisis being
generated because of the fear of being held responsible for what might
hae been an error of judgement. The consequence was that almost no
damage was inflicted on the defenders. As a direct result many of the
verman artilery spotters remained untouched in the bluffs. As the offi-
a report suggested, the (German artillery) fire was obviously observed
because enemy batteries would be silent until cratt beached, when there
would be a few quick salvos, usually right on target' 134
no jolt plan begal traying the moment the bombers missed their
age and the by tanks sank in the choppy water. Many of these first
assault troop died, party because the division's armour and communi-
cations tailed miserably: 57 ot the 96 Di tanks allocated to maha sank,
as did most of the radios, and ten of the first landing craft containing 310
vidiers 135 The 743rd Tank Battalion was supposed to land 32 DD.
Shermans from the & LCTs in Companies B and C from 6,000 yards off
shore. But after all but five DD Shermans from the adjacent 741st Tank
Battalion covering the Ist Division's beaches had sunk, the CO of the
743rd recognized the Critical situation and ordered his DD Shermans
directly onto the beach. One of the 743rd's LCTs was hit and destroyed
hit the beach 136
as it neared the beach and all four tanks were lost, but the other 28 tanks
the artillery support for the 1l6th Re I was as sparse as the DD- Tank
apport. The 11lth Field Artillery Battalion had twelve
howitzers on 12 DUKWS and at about 0730 liaison officers were to land
and establish tiring positions for the guns to support the infantry,
assumed by then to be moving inland beyond the bluffs. Each DUKW
aso carried 14 artillery soldiers, 50 rounds of ammunition, sandbags and
other extraneous material - but that gave the DUKWs little between the
top of the boat and the water. The liaison officers tried to warn the
DUKWs to stay off the beach since the fire was too intense but no radios
could be found. Not that sighting the guns was the major problem
