58
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
Source: www.metservice.co.nz/learning/weather_d_day.asp
Figure 2.1
Weather forecast for 5 June 1944
At about 0530 on D-Day an Allied plane reported conditions over
Normandy to be 'shocking' with 'low cloud and heavy rain', 139
The poor weather might convince the Germans that an invasion was
unlikely and it would help to impede the inevitable German response if
they could be persuaded that Calais was the real target - an issue of
strategic misleading that we will come to later. But another route was to
remove the infrastructure that would allow the movement in the first
place, in other words, to use aerial bombing to protect the landing
beaches from both the armoured divisions and, equally important, the
3 Allied Air Strategy
3.1
Introduction
This chapter begins with an analysis of the American bombing strategy
that focused upon oil production and then proceeds to evaluate the role
of Operation Pointblank - the attempt to destroy the Luftwaffe before
D-Day. In this, the strategy of the Allies was to fight and win a war of
attrition - the boxer's approach - and it was remarkably successful if very
expensive in Allied air crew. We then consider the effectiveness of the
Transportation Plan design to disrupt the French rail and road system
and how aerial and naval bombardments were supposed to destroy
German coastal defences. The latter task was much less successful and can
be attributed, in part, to the tardy nature of the political decision-making
by strategic leaders and to the inability of commanders to recognize the
limits of aerial bombing against fortified gun emplacements. Finally, the
campaign to provide aerial cover for the invasion itself is reviewed. Once
again it is often difficult to trace 'effects' back to individual strategic deci-
sions made by leaders and, more than anything else, success can be traced
back to the individual and collective decisions of thousands of pilots and
air crew to do what they considered best at the time and in the space that
they found themselves inhabiting.
3.2 The Oil Plan, Operation Pointblank and the
destruction of the Luftwaffe
It may be recalled that one of the preconditions for a successful landing
in France was domination of the skies and the prevention or interruption
of German reinforcements to the battlefield. As ever,
what at first
appeared to be a relatively tame strategic requirement soon embroiled
large numbers of Allied political and military leaders in all kinds of feuds
about personal domination over resources and strategy. For the most part
the Allied air leaders were unimpressed with the ground plans for D-Day,
believing it an unnecessary and distracting sideshow from their priority -
which was to bomb Germany into submission. This was not just a dispute
59
