262
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
over it. Additionally, an acoustic mine, the "oyster mine', which operated
when the sound of the ship's engines and a change in water pressure
occurred simultaneously, had been constructed. 121 These could not be
swept by existing equipment and were extremely effective - but Hiter
was concerned lest the Allies retrieve such a mine and copy it, so
although 2,000 acoustic Oyster mines were stored at Le Havre they were
only to be laid in an emergency. Ironically, Goering recalled all the mines
in May for redesign and although they were ready for deployment by
carly June the air interdiction effectively held them up until after Di
Day. 122
Against this mighty armada, the likes of which had never been seen
Detore nor since, the German navy mustered six E-boats from Le Have
which fired torpedoes at the ships at the eastern fringe of the landings,
sinking the Norwegian destroyer Svenner at 0510 - the only Allied ship
sunk by the German Navy on D-Day, 123 HMS Warspite then attacked
the E-boats sinking one and driving the rest back to Le Havre where they
were destroyed by fighter-bomber attacks. 124 Unknown to the Germans
ra who had assumed that E-boats operated beyond the range of British
radar - the British navy had developed ship-based radar that electively
sealed the B-boats in their harbours 25 Even when the Germans had
amassed a sufficiently large number of E-boats to attack the Allied ship-
ping, air attacks usually kept them at bay. For example, on 14 June a large
concentration of E-boats was reported at Le Havre and that night 18
Mosquito bombers and 335 Lancaster bombers led by Group Captain
Leonard Cheshire, dropped over 1,000 tons of bombs on the flotilla,
sinking 3 torpedo boats, 10 E-boats, 2 R-boats, 15 minesweepers and
patrol vessels, plus several smaller craft, as well as damaging a further 19
vessels. It was, according to Admiral Kranke, 'a catastrophe. Losses are
-sembly nedvy. It Will haraly De possible to carry out the operatons
Panned with the remaining forces. Not until the night of o fuy was
doe major assault on Allied shipping carried out when 26 human torpe-
does - a real torpedo beneath another torpedo with a human pilot rather
than a warhead - were launched and two British minesweepers sunk.
two nights later, another 21 'human torpedoes were launched, si
one rollsh minesweeper; none of the attackers survived. On 5 August, 10
"explosive motor boats' (unmanned boats containing 660 pounds of
explosives) were launched at the frout Line guarding the eastern flotilla
Only one explosive motor boat hit its target (an LCG) while the rest were
destroyce. One further major attack occurred on 9 August in which 2.
or the dideo 2o boats (16 explosive motor boarind 4 control boals
were destroyed without Allied loss. 128
MANAGING LOGISTICS: 'BAG, VOMIT, ONE.'
263
10.9 Conclusion
this chapter has focused on the means by which the Allies transported all
the troops and matériel across the channel. Given that this was the largest
amphibious landing ever attempted - and therefore the most complex
single operation ever undertaken - mistakes and failings were inevitable,
but by and large this part of the operation was a huge success, primarily
because the Allies had developed processes to manage the Tame
Problems. Yet not everything was Tame: Air Marshall Portal's interjec-
tion to Admiral Cunningham forced his superior to reconsider the block
ships that protected the artificial harbours; Churchill's irascible demands
forced subordinates to look for solutions not problems; and undoubtedly
there were many invisible people who persuaded others to do things they
git were beyond them, all in the name of the war effort.
But not everything either "went to plan' or "worked out for the best.
the decision not to use the Amtrac vehicles was to cost the American
oops on Omaha dearly, for while the British had their armoured
'Punnie' to protect them, the Americans had precious little. That deci-
sion was not rooted in any rational analysis of the Tame requirements but
from a mixture of political and cultural issues: since the 'shock and awe'
of the pre-invasion bombardment would destroy or disorient the defend-
ers What was the purpose of armoured and tracked landing craft: And if
the artillery tests on Japanese defences had proved how little they were
affected by conventional bombardment then surely the answer was to use
more of the ineffective weapons rather than rethink the problem? Here
indeed was a recalcitrant Tame Problem that bore more resemblance to
a Wicked Problem - and that would have required a more collaborative
cort on the part of formal leaders. Given the political in-ighting that
divided the Pacific and European commands it is little wonder that the
lessons of the former should find so little application in the latter.
