232
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
the majority, the decision to stay and fight was bound up with notions of
solidarity and comradeship with close compatriots, of duty, of honour, of
the avoidance of shame, or of revenge. For a minority the clear and pres-
ent danger of being shot by your own side was probably sufficient to hold
them in place. However, the reason to stay and fight appeared to get
progressively less appealing as the war progressed. Most soldiers soon
understood that survival was not coincident with skill but with luck and
at that point a rational calculation of odds unnerved all but the strongest.
It may seem paradoxical then, that almost all the concerns for shell-shock
or simply combat fatigue derived from the Allied side in Normandy when
the Germans had already been at war since 1939. In reality, of course, the
Germans fighting in Normandy in 1944 were often as green as their
opponents. Just taking the members of the LAH as an example, the orig:
inal division which had invaded Poland, had lost 53 per cent in Operation
Barbarossa, 44 per cent at Kharkov in the spring of 1943, and 27 per cont
at Kursk in the summer of 1943. In effect, almost no members of the
"veteran' LAH that fought in Poland were still with it in Normandy. Bur
such was the strength of its identity that it again performed outstandingly
in Normandy, and had to be completely rebuilt after its few remnants
escaped through the Falaise gap.
Nevertheless, the identity of the 'ordinary' soldiers defending the
beaches does seem relevant. The units defending Omaha Beach ver
neither first rate infantry nor wholly German, but many had already
served on the eastern front and were again to put up stubborn resistance.
If anything, the ethnic diversity of the American forces was considerably
more than the Ost battalions, though their identity was probably a lot
more cohesive. In effect, it was the self-identity of the defenders not their
ethnic origin which seemed to matter.
for most of the Allied troops the war was little more than a job rather
than a political crusade; something to be donc as quickly as possible, and
althougn the elite units in the Us and British armed forces were volun
teers - as were all the Canadian combat troops at this time - few appeared
to have had the political desire to risk their lives to rid the world of
fascism. More seemed to enlist to detend their country rather than attack
another, because of love for their own rather than hatred of the other,
and because it appeared at the time to be an exciting prospect. Onc
blooded, and this was usually literally, sck h troops wanted only to get
through the war and to get home but this 'semi-detached' approach to
the war should not be interprete? as implying a generalized risk-avoid-
ance. On the contrary the 'poony loody infantry' of the USA constructed
a carefully honed image of apparent carelessness that grew directly from
the independent and rugged individual of the frontier and the inner
MOBILIZING THE GERMANS: WEHRMACHT AND SS
233
city. The British were more constrained by the military spit and polish
traditions of the empire but they too remained dedicated to their cultural
traditions of collective solidarity and emotional reticence. And on all
sides of the Allied line, the worse the conditions became for the poor
bloody infantry the grittier became their identity and the less reliant they
became on formal leaders.
The Wehrmacht might have been the most professional army of the
war, and the SS and HJ units were certainly the most fanatical, and the
least constrained by conventional morality, but their collective fanaticism
did not overawe the Allied troops who were also driven to succeed, not by
a desire to turn the world upside down but simply to turn it the right way
up again and go home. For the average Allied soldier on D-Day, the war
vas probably going to be won at some point in the future so there was a
strong reason not to risk one's life unnecessarily. Furthermore, getting
ashore alive was probably all that most had trained for and thought about
for months now, and having achieved that there seems to have been a
limited desire to take the war straight to Berlin. Certainly, after the war
Dempsey accepted that they had not set their sights sufficiently high -
surviving the landing was all most of them could think about.?! But this
inability to exploit the immediate advantages of a surprise invasion had
arcady cost the Allies dearly on the three previous amphibious assaults:
scly, anzio and salerno. If Montgomery die not mipy sue speedy
movement with his term 'cracking about' deep behind enemy lines, then
What did he mcan? Ironically, all that Montgomery stood for contradicted
such a devolvement of initiative to
subordinate
commanders, for
Montgomery was the arch planner, not the arch anarchist.
Private Shroeder saw some of the earliest enemy prisoners on Omaha
Beach, ironically taken by Captain Dawson now transformed from
mmobilized pessimist to mobile optimist and moving up the bluff. The
prisoners were really roughed up. Their hair was full of cement, dirt,
everything. They didn't look so tough. So we started up the bluff carry-
ing our stuff with us,
and others
started following
us.92 Stanley
Whitehouse, on Sword Beach, contributed to the gradual demythologiz-
ing of the 'Master Race' of defenders by de helmeting prisoners. As he
called "Remove his helmet and the mighty Wehrmacht warrior looks far
less terrifying' 93 Indeed, one of the most common reports on D-Day
was that the captured German soldiers wie:, after all, not much like
supermeck But this was precisely the point - the defenders, German
i non-German - were not supermen, they were just ordinary people
but they were to prove incredibly difficut, to prise out of Normandy.
that difficulty lay as much in the inadequacy of the Alled taming and
command systems as in anything else.
