278
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
and/or unreliable gear boxes. As the Allied report - published in August
1944 - suggested, despite Allied optimism about the vulnerability of
Tigers they had simply proved to be unroadworthy in retreat rather than
unbattleworthy in defence: in Normandy the latter was more important
than the former. 49
The second German response to the Russian T34 was the 45 ton Mk
V, or Panther, developed by MAN with a 75mm high velocity gun and
sloping armour like the T34. Not only did sloping armour prove far more
difficult to penetrate than vertical armour, but it enabled designers to
reduce the weight of armour without sacrificing its defensive capabilites
- as long as the shot hit the armour horizontally. Some 4,814 Panthers
were built by MAN and Daimler Benz by 1945 and some versions
agapanther - tank destroyer) carried the 88mm gun. And as long as the
tank was defensively dug in, the thicker armour and, on the Panther, its
angular construction, gave greater protection, especially against the
lower velocity shells from the Allied tanks: 75 per cent of Allied direct
hits failed to penetrate Panther or Tiger tanks and most Panthers and
Tigers could continue operating even after one or two penetrating direct
Admittedly the traverse mechanism of the Panther - and for that
matter the Tiger -
was cumbersome and slow. One Sherman watched by
field surgeon Brendan Phibbs managed to fire three 76mm shots into the
front glacis plate of a Panther before it fired back - but no shot pene-
trated, leaving the tanker to scream over the radio net: 'Ping Pong bals,
fucking Ping Pong balls just before the Panther's single shot disabled the
Sherman instantly. 51 However, a Panther was destroyed by an M36 tank
destroyer with a 90mm gun from 100 yards straight through the same
front glacis plate. 52 Even a lone 75mm Sherman could destroy a Panther,
but it was a very unusual rather than a common event. 53
11.5.2 British tank development
British designed tanks were poor compared to their German counterparts
though it had led the world in tank design in the early post first World
War period. Indeed, a 40-ton Anglo-American heavy tank, the MK Ill of
Liberty or International Tank, and a flame-thrower tank, were on the
drawing boards in good time to lead the planned Allied offensive mi
1919.54 However, with the war's termination the British Treasury, as
usual, starved the research and design bodies. In 1936, for example, the
Treasury only provided £270,000 towards the design and developmen
of all tracked vehicles, including tanks. The most important tank that wa
developed, the Vickers Medium Mhe : 1, was first built in 1923 and still
TECHNOLOGIES
279
used as a training tank in 1942. It had what was at that time a high veloc-
ity gun, though it was only capable of firing armour piercing shot
intended to destroy enemy tanks. Indeed, the 6lb (57mm) gun used in
the First World War would have provided an adequate platform for inter-
war development - had it not been derived from a navy design and there-
fore politically unacceptable to the army. Moreover, as with American
doctrine, tanks were regarded by the British High Command as mecha-
nized cavalry, built for speed and mobility, not to attack, or withstand
attacks by, other tanks. As the Secretary of State for War suggested, he
had been forced to make the 'unpalatable' decision to mechanize eight
cavalry regiments - a decision akin to asking a great musical performer
to throw away his violin and devote himself to the gramophone 55 The
gramophone that then existed in the form of the British Army's tank
strength was probably better described as a pin and a broken shell: of the
375 tanks in existence, only 71 were not officially classed as already obso-
lete. 6 Thus by 1939 the Germans had trained 187,000 tank and truck
drivers while the British only had 550 tanks and had to borrow 14,000
civilian vehicles to transxamit the BEF to France, 57
The regimental traditions of the British army also inhibited the kind of
co-operation achieved by integrated tank and anti-tank artillery in
German armoured divisions, though the regimental blockage was itself
marginal compared to the simple inadequacy of combined arms train-
ing. In eftect, the tank, artillery and infantry units by tradition oper
ated independently of each other, thus undermining what chance there
was of transcending superior German armoured units. General Archibald
Wavell confirmed this in his note to General Auchinleck in June 1942
after Tobruk had fallen:
inferiority of material probably [was the] primary caused defeat of our armour
but inferiority of training and leadership also howaju! inqeen responsible. We
asver get TIME to catch up and our leaders are mostly untrained by German stan-
dards and most of them have yet to grasp fully tiid principles of co-operation of all
arms on the battle field and of concentreason of forces though we have done all
we can to impress these on them.59
Not only were there markedlynk-wer British than German tanks, the
ormer were also radically under-gunned. The British tank at the time
used a 2lb (40mm) gun designed in the 1930s when tank armour was
catively thin, but once tank armour ine roved the gun was obsolete
Even the replacement 6lb (57mm) o-s of limited value because most
British tank turrets could not be re-engineernt to cope with the increased
recoll. Initially tres lid not necessarily matter for most 1940 German
