2N45
338
COMMANDING IN CRISES
the glider to rebalance it. 43 Whatever the distance Leigh Mallory later
called it the finest feat of airmanship in the entire war' 4 The first glider,
No. 91, flown by Staff Sergeants Wallwork and Ainsworth, landed at
0016 and 23
members of the
2nd Battalion, the Oxfordshire and
Buckinghamshire Light Infantry (52nd Foot) and five sappers from 2nd
Platoon, 249th Field Company Royal Engineers, exited the plane.
On hearing the gliders land Wilhelm Furtner and Helmut Romer, the
German sentries on the canal bridge, assumed a bomber had crashed and
were taken totally by surprise. So despite landing so close to their target,
and despite the sentries being aware of a plane crash-landing, the exiting
glider troops were met by silence. "It seemed quite unbelievable, recalled
John Howard clearly expecting a
firing!'45
situation,
"there was no
No. 1 Platoon, under Lt Brotheridge, stormed the bridge,
putting the machine gun post on the northern edge out of action, and
ten raced across the bridge sending the two sentries scuttling back to
the west end near the café under fire. They immediately knocked out the
sumn did a bie which was unmanned at the time becduse lie
solfison commander, Major Hans Schmidt, had stood down many of his
soldiers and was himself asleep with his girlfriend in the nearby village of
Within five minutes the other gliders had landed and D Company had
taken its objectives suffering just one death on landing (L.
Corporal
Greenhalgh) and one further death in the assault against the 50-strons
German garrison (Lt Brotheridge). Many
of the German defenders,
though not their NCOs, seemed to have fled in terror. 46 Heinz Hickman
and four other members of the German 6th Independent Parachute
Regiment had been about to cross the canal bridge from the west when
they heard the firing and took up defensive positions, but not for long.
unstool a coward but at that moment i got frightened. if you see a far
platoon in full cry, they frighten the daylights out of you ... the way they
charge .. the way they fire, the way they ran across the bridge.... Then
I gave the order to go back. What could do with four men who had
never been in action? 47
The attackers knew that the demold ion charges were set to be act
vated from the pill box because Georges Gondrée, the owner of the cate
on the bridge, had already informed the French Resistance who had
passed the information back to London.48 But although the wining was
in place, the charges had been removed to prevent accidents or sabotage
and were stored in a house by the canal-bridge.
Shortly after the assaults Major Schmidt returned from Ranville in an
ope half track with a motor cycle escort and the group was fired on by
the troops on the canal bridge. The motor cyclist was killed and his bike
THE AIRBORNE ASSAULTS
339
wentinto the river but Schmidt's vehicle ploughed across the river bridge
only to be stopped at the river bridge's west end by more firing from
Sweeney's platoon. The captured Schmidt then proceeded to lecture
Captain Vaughan, the Medical Officer, about the futility of the attack and
the inevitable victory of the 'master race'
, ending his diatribe with a
request for Vaughan to shoot him. "This I did,' remembers Vaughan, in
the bottom with a needle attached to a syringe of morphia. Ihe effect of
this, it seems, induced him to take a more reasonable view of things' 49
At 0050, Just half an hour after the attack on the briages had startea,
and right on time, the first of the 2,200 reinforcing paratroopers from
Tch Parachute Battalion could be heard circling overhead. But the poot
visibility and high winds scattered them all over the countryside and it
was aother minutes before they arrived, and even ten only burd
turned up and without any heavy equipment. Before they had arrived the
first German counter-attack had been launched at
0130 from the
Bénouville direction in the form of a Panzer Mk IV. This could only be
sopped by Sergeant Thornton firing the only available PIAT:
don't mind admitting it, I was shaking like a bloody leaf as this bloody greas
thing appears. The lads behind me were only lightly armed with bren guns, rites
and grenades. They wouldn't stand a chance if I missed and the whole operation
would be over. I was so nervous I was talking to myself, 'This is it! You mustn't
miss. The first tank, a MK IV, had begun moving slowly down the road. I puled
the trigger on the PLAT. It was a direct hit. Machine gun dips inside the ta, with
oft grenades which set off shells. There was the most enormous explosion, wite
Dits and pieces flying everywhere, and lighting up the darkness. To my delight the
other tank fled
....50
in fact the tank partly blocked the road but, more portag, an
y might by an Army spotter plane nad secure to does
and radioed the co-ordinates back to HMS Warspite. After a few salios
the German armour retreated.51 Thornton's attack and the naval gunfire
persuaded the Germans that the bridges were held by a strong group that
could only be assaulted with reinforcements and in daylight - several
nours away. In that time the owners of the cate, eorge and theresa
vondrée, offered their building for use as a hospital - and dus up and
astributed the 98 bottles of champagne George hau duned true sarden
The unreality of war continued the next morning when two Italians,
discovered in the
Working for the German Todt Organization, were
ledges nearby; they were ted, and turned loose.
They
immediately
resumed the job for which they had turned up: crecting anti-glider poles
on the fields where the gliders had just landed. 52
