270
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
cent of the claimed hits were actually successful. 21 Here is an intriguing
example of attributed Leadership - for many soldiers seemed to have
viewed the rocket-firing Typhoon as their saviour that would lead them
through the enemy; that this attribution was empirically false does not
seem to have made much difference to the troops.
But neither minesweeping Flails, nor rocket ships, nor rocket firing
typhoons could cope with the heavily fortified gun emplacements; that
was a job for the AVREs.
AVRE (Armoured Vehicle Royal
Engineers) - was a Churchill tank fitted with a variety of devices but
usually a spigot' - a 12.5 inch diameter mortar to fire 7.5 inch 40lb
petard (hollow charge) carrying a 26lb explosive charge (flying dustbins"
as they were called). It was designed to destroy concrete fortifications
and had a range of 230 yards though 80 yards was regarded as its most
effective distance. But again, many of these were not delivered until just
before D-Day, and many had not been test-fired before D-Day - an
important issue since the AVRE's Petard had the distinct disadvantage of
having to be reloaded from outside the turret. 22
Other AVREs were fitted with assault bridges, or fascines or carried
explosive snakes'. Some of the 180 AVREs used on D-Day on the
Anglo-Canadian beaches were used to carry the demolition engines,
whose job it was to disable beach explosives and defences. Without such
armoured protection the demolition engineer's task was virtually impos-
sible - as had already been demonstrated quite clearly in the Dieppe
fiasco in August 1942.
Photo 11.2 AVRE Spigot
TECHNOLOGIES
271
The US response to the problem of protecting demolition engineers
was begun in February 1943 when the US Army Corps of Engineers
requested a similar scheme to the British initiative that led to the AVRE.
Several experimental Sherman developments resulted, with the gun
removed and side doors cut to facilitate movements in and out of the
vehicle, but the trials were both slow and unsuccessful. Eventually 100 of
the new vehicles were ordered but only two were ever made and neither
left US soil. American combat engineers were thus left without any
protection whatsoever and they paid the price of political and technolog-
ical leadership failure.23
The British also developed a 'Bobbin' tank which unravelled a long
stip of canvas for it and subsequent vehicles to travel over soft sand. A
lan was even developed specifically for night-fighting, Code named a
COL (Canal Derence Light), the 13 milhon candle power lamp, designed
oy Professor Mitzakis, was fitted to Matilda and Grant tanks and capable
of throwing a beam a 1,000 yards long and 350 yards wide. It was
demonstrated to Churchill late one evening in 1943 in Penrith when six
Tanks it up the Prime Minister as he relieved himself against a bush. Sixty
CDLs were landed in Normandy but they were never used for the role
intended. According to several tank experts, the CDI would have proved
itself very capable, and Mitzakis suggested that it had been kept so secret
that even the generals that should have used it were unaware of its capa-
bilities 24 Finally, and probably most revolutionary of all, Hobart and his
team devised the DD amphibious tank (Duplex Drive - or 'Donald
Ducks' as they became known).
11.4 The DD tank
The floating tank, originally invented by an émigré Hungarian - Nicholas
Straussier - had simply been a tank supported by floats, and several Soviet
and German experimental amphibious tanks had been designed (140
were supposed to be converted for Oper-Vion Sealion in 1940, the inva-
on of Britain). In fact, amphibious tanks had een around since the mid
introduced its amphibious T-38.25 But
Delaforce26 suggests that it was Churle ill's idea to support one with a
anvas screen. The idea was initially resisted by the Admiralty because
the tank had no rudder,28 but Cisurchill was adamant that it was essen-
ial because *C Dieppe raid had shown how costly unsupported assaults
y the infantry were. DD equipment wa- available as early as 1941 and
initially a Tetrarch and then a Valditine tank was tested but eventually the
