354
COMMANDING IN CRISES
14.2
Gold Beach
On Gold Beach, between Port en Bessin to the mouth of the River de
Provence on the extreme western end of the British assault area, the main
assault was carried out by the 50th Northumbrian Division (5th East
Yorks, 6 Green Howards, Ist Dorsets and Ist Hampshires) and the 7th
Armoured Division (The Desert Rats). The assault took place on the
Most easterly beaches: Jig and King, roughly between Arromanches and
la Rivière with le Hamel at the centre. The division, led by Major General
Graham, was to move south to take Bayeux on the evening of D-Day.
The assault plan for the main body of troops was similar to the other
Anglo-Canadian beaches:
H-7 hours:
RAF bombers attack German positions, especially the
coastal batteries, flying 1,316 sorties and dropping
5,853 tons of bombs
H-75 minutes:
H-60 minutes:
RAF bombing ceases
USAAF bomb beach defences, flying 1,083 sorties and
dropping 7,348 tons of bombs; larger naval ships
engage coastal batteries, smaller ships engage beach
defences
H-15 minutes:
H-5 minutes:
H Hour:
H+7 minutes:
H+45 minutes:
LC(R)s launch rockets on beaches; Self-propelled
artillery open fire on beach when in range
DD tanks swim ashore
Assault engineers mine & obstacle clearance vehicles
land
Assault Battalions land in two waves
Reserve battalions land, followed by beach contro!
Parties, Bren gun units and self propelled anti-tank guns
(MIOs), non-DD Shermans, Crocodile Churchills, and
beach trackway vehicles?
H-Hour on Gold Beach was 0735, almost an hour after the American
attacks, to allow time for the tice ushugep up the channel, and ten
minutes before the Canadian assaults on Juno further east. It also allowed
extra time for the bombers and navy to destroy the defences, and since
many of the defenders were in seaside houses and not the concrete gun
emplacements of Omaha, the German casualties were higher. Certainly
the evidence suggests that defender's fire was minimized by the prior
bombardment and that the invasion went exactly to plan in some arcas.
Le Hamel proved particularly difficult and was not captured until
around 1600. Partly this was because low cloud cover had prevented
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
355
accurate bombing and the 75 tons of bombs planned for the area were
dropped 3,000 yards south of the beach. Also missing was the 147th
field Regiment of self-propelled artillery that should have shelled Le
Hame on approach from the sea.® However, the navigating and control-
ing craft were both delayed and, as a consequence, the 147th fired on
the beaches to the east of Le Hamel. It was also the case that the German
gun emplacements were almost immune to the low trajectory shells fired
trom the destroyers off the beach and the first three of four Flail tanks
were hit by fire from the anti-tank guns.
Finally, no requests for addi-
tional shelling were made by the
Hampshire Regiment - because both
attackers,
the
1st
Battalion
the
the commanding officer and
second in command were killed in the initial assault and because the
Battalion had landed several hundred yards east of their designated lana-
o position - in tact precisely where the Dorsets should have landee
They had also lost all their radios and could not, therefore,
supporting fire from the naval ships - though someone in authority could
presumably have contacted their nearest associates with a radio.
Particular problems derived from the 75mm casemated gun on the
caront which destroyed at least six Allied tanks before Demo pulour
action. Eventually, a combined bombardment by the destroyers
and
several LCFs and LCGs, using 4.7 inch guns, co-ordinated with a land
usnugh the west by the ist rants, successtully stories the derence.
but the area was not completely secured until 2000. On the beach itself
most of the initial work had been completed by 2030, when 1,200 yards
a tou open and by the end of D-Dayt, by when so obstacles
had been removed or destroyed and two miles of coastine were declared
As on Omaha Beach, one of the reasons that the Allied soldiers eren-
ally made progress against a seemingly impregnabie enemy defence
system was simply that the defenders ran out of ammunition. Fonmani-
pe, Fritz Buchte, manning an MG42 machine gun, ran out of ammun..
non so one of my helpers at the guys luote core butter ned.
We were obliged to use rifles and grenades, but this was very hard as the
British tanks and infantry were shooting at us and son so behind us.
Suddenly our sergeant appedred and said, "It's no use, we re surrounded!
of 716th Infantry
We must surrender!" '1l
Division, had also surrendered when he ran out of ammunition - though
he too was surprised that the British troops moved so slowly in the
beach, as much as anything because of the preposterous amount of mate-
nial they each had to carry. 12 Even the casemated positions on Le Hamel
did not stock enough ammunition to hold up the British attackers. Peter
Wolf Agnussen of the 711th Infantry Division held on until two AVRE
