256
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
were concerned was the deployment of armour, especially tanks, to
protect the troops as they disembarked under fire. There was already
plenty of information available from Dieppe about what was likely to
happen when unarmoured troops landed on exposed beaches facing a
heavily gunned and emplaced enemy, but the experience of the American
Marines and Army in the Pacific provided not just further evidence of the
problems - but a possible solution: the Amtrac.
10.7 (Not) Learning from the Pacific
In the invasion of Betio Island in the Tarawa Atoll in the Pacific, between
20 and 23 November 1943, the US Marines faced 26,700 Japanese
troops, 1,000 Japanese labourers and 1,200 Korean labourers ensconcea,
it was alleged, in the most heavily fortified area in the world. At just two
miles long and one mile wide, the Japanese had installed 14 large coastal
defence guns, 40 other artillery pieces and more than 100 machine guns
firing through a four foot coconut log wall. In all there were 500 pill-
boxes. As the
Japanese commander, Rear Admiral Keiji Shibasak,
boasted, 'A million men cannot take Tarawa in a hundred years', 106
Some of the emplacements had concrete walls eight-feet thick which
proved to be impervious to the largest naval shell fire despite the pre-
landing bombardment from the sea and air that saw, on average, ten tons
of high explosives fall on each of the 291 acres.
The US 2nd and 8th Marine Divisions were carried to the beaches
either on the conventional LCVP (Higgins Boats) or the LVTs (Landing
Vehicle, Tracked). The LVIs or Amtracs (Amphibious Tractors), Or
Alligators as they were known, had originated in civilian tractors built for
working in the swamps of the southern states. In 1936 Donald Roebling,
an engineer who had retired to Florida, witnesses a disastrous hurricane
and re-designed a vehicle with his son, John, that they had first dreami
up in 1934,107 The tracked vehicle, the alligator', was one of the few
that could traverse the Florida swamps or the marshy everglades to rescue
the beleaguered population on behalf of the Florida Red Cross.
rescue mission was covered by Life magazine in 1937 and the article was
read by one individual who immediately saw a greater use for it: the
Commanding General of the US Fleet Marine Force in the Pacific. Using
diagonal track cleats and an aluminium construction, the Roebling all-
gator or amphibian was first prototyped in 1939 and could reach speeds
of 10 mph on land and 25 mph in the water. It had a cruising radius of
400 miles and steered either by disengaging the tracks on one side or by
reversing the tracks on
one side. The prototype drew only five feet of
MANAGING LOGISTICS: 'BAG, VOMIT, ONE!'
257
water fully laden with well over 20 people and could drop 6 feet from
land to water without capsizing. The provisional cost was put at £3,600
and by 1940 the US Marine Corps was convinced the vehicle was critical
for them. In November 1940 the United States Navy and United Sates
Marine Corps ordered 200 to be made with light steel rather than dura-
lumin and by 1941 the first 100 were delivered. By the end of the war
18,620 had been made.
The first military Amtrac - LVTI - was one of 1,225 built by
Roebling and FMC (Food Machum speerporation) in July 1941. It had
capacity of 24 troops plus three crew and it travelled at 6 mph in the
water and 12 mph on the land. The slow speed of the vehicle and the
short life of the tracks led to a two months delay while the design was
redeveloped at the California Institute of Technology. In June 1942
demonstrations of the new prototypes were held for the US Navy, Army
and Marine Corps.
Most of the LVTs went to the US Navy and Marine Corps but 485
Went to the US Army and 55 were sent to the Anglo-Canadian forces. Its
first operational use was at the battle of Guadalcanal on 7 August 1942
and some - especially those for transporting personnel rather than
materiel - were fitted with appliqué armour. Of the 2,936 LVT2s, 1,507
were used by the US Navy and 100 sent to the Anglo-Canadian forces.
From 1943 the LVT3s had their engines moved forward so that a rear-
loading ramp could be used but the most popular British use was of the
LVT4 which could carry 30 soldiers, had a rearward loading ramp, and
could mount four machine guns. Most of the LVTs used in Europe,
however, known in Britain as the Buffalo, were unarmoured with a trap-
door exit at the front. As many as 500 wd e sent to Britain or Canada.
But Tarawa, in November 1943, bys the first assault which used
Dentracs in large numbers to carry troops. 108 Fitted with propellers and
tracks these Amtracs could travel at four knots in the water and 20mph
on land - and they had rearward facing doors. Critically, this meant they
did not have to disgorge their vulnerable contents straight into the sights
of enemy gunners at the water's edge, but could travel across some reels,
sand and barbed wire right up to)-le enemy emplacements and unload
their occupants from the relative safety of the back of the vehicle. The
'byines' General Smith had demanded more Amtracs to carry his troops
forward but Admiral Turner, the amphibious force commander had
overruled his request, insisting that the LCVPs were quite adequate for
the tasid riven that Rear Admiral Kingman, the commander of the ships,
had promised to 'obliterate' Betio before any Marine landed, Turner
presumably thought Smith's request unnecessary. Nevertheless Turner
eventually accepted the request and 5(5,nore Amtracs were delivered
