LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
42
would lead Overlord - indeed he had even packed to go to London
before Roosevelt told him to stay - but straight after Teheran Roosevelt
informed Eisenhower of the decision to send him instead. But before the
Allies landed in France, they had first to land in Italy.
On 9 September 1943 Allied troops landed at Salerno, partly because
the desire for surprise prevented any pre-assault naval or air bombard-
ment, to be 'welcomed' ashore by two, and soon afterwards six, German
divisions. A relatively small amphibious operation cost 15,000 Allied
troops and the outlook for Overlord looked grim - though one lesson
allegedly taken on board was the critical role of the pre-assault. The
'allegedly' is important because the US beaches only received a 40-
minute bombardment on D-Day and that was retrospectively acknowl-
edged as inadequate by Rear-Admiral Hall75 That the Utah attack was
so successful can be put down, in part, to the more accurate bombing of
this beach and to the fact that this area had the weakest section of
defences: only 15 per cent of the fortifications here had been bomb-
proofed by 6 June. 76
Churchill had yet one more card to play, for he still feared that
Normandy would simply
produce a catastrophe that would outscale
anything like Salerno. As he mentioned to his doctor on the way to the
Cairo meeting with Roosevelt just before Teheran, he was more and
more certain that an invasion of Northern France as Planned must
fall'. Churchill's fears and Montgomery's concern for minimizing casu-
alties were self-evidently problematic to the Americans, keen as they were
to square up to the German army as soon and as violently as possible.
'The shadow of Passchendaele and Dunkerque'
suggested Stimson,
Roosevelt's Secretary for War, 'still hang too heavily over the imagination
of these leaders [Churchill and Montgomery]' 78
Yet Churchill was not quite finished with the Mediterranean and in
December 1943 he persuaded the Combined Chiefs of Staff to hurl a
raging wildcat' onto the beaches at Anzio (60 miles north of the German
lines in Italy and 30 miles south of Rome - which was the target) "to rip
the bowels out of the Boches' " This two division attack would, accord-
ing to churen, lorce the Germans to mu-e a strategie retreat lan to the
north - though Eisenhower suggested instead that the Germans would
as indeed they did - stay put rather than withdraw. Thus, although the
Allies planned an advance through Italy premised upon a German strate-
in withdrawal to a line roughly from Genoa to Venice, again nobody
informed the Germans of their part in the plan and they fought a bloody
holding battle - much as they were to do in Normandy.80
Unfortunately no-one on the Allied side seemed to have learned from
the Anzio landings, or indeed the invasion of Italy as a whole, that the
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
43
Wehrmacht simply did not operate on the same form of military rational-
ity that pervaded the Allied side: when the going got tough the Germans
did not retreat, they simply got tougher. Partly as a consequence, Major-
General Lucas' assault on Anzio, which started so well (13 dead, 97
wounded and 44 missing from a 40,000 strong force) failed to maintain
momentum after eight German divisions surrounded the landing site
('the world's largest self-sustaining prisoner-of-war compound' was how
the Germans saw it). The 'wild cat' became, again in Churchill's word: 'a
stranded whale'. Churchill had presumed the Germans would run from
the wild cat when in fact they did the opposite: Churchill's 'scissors' had
simply been stopped by the German 'stone' 81 The omens for Normandy
did not look good but Anzio should have proved to be a necessary stage
in the taming of Normandy, that is, by bringing the realization that the
German defenders would probably not retreat to shorten their defensive
lines but would stay put and slug it out until one side or other was
2.5 Taming (some of) the problem through planning
Having undertaken a significant degree of practice, much of which ended
up as a bloody run rather than a dry run, the next set of nested problems
within this Wicked box involved the detailed planning for the invasion,
that is effectively an attempt to tame the problem, or at least tame those
parts that could be tamed. This raises an important issue about problems
because they seldom come neatly packaged in a box with a label saying
'Tame' or 'Wicked' or 'Critical' and more often to arrive as much outside
as inside a box and with no labels or confusing labelling. Thus, to accept
that the strategic issues were Wicked does not mean that no answer will
be forthcoming, but rather that some elements of the problem can be
tamed while others will become Critical and still others will always remain
obscure and beyond any simple taming procedure.
Lt General Morgan was appointed as Chief of Staff to the Supreme
Allied Commander (COSSAC) to plan the full scale invasion of France -
"Operation Overlord' - but his introduction to the problem could hardly
have been more Wicked. General Alan Brooke handed Morgan the
conclusions of the Combined Commanders which suggested that an
invasion with at least ten divisions was necessary but that only enough
transport for five would be ready by the due deadline. As Alan Brooke is
reported to have said to Morgan: 'Well, there it is. It won't work. I know
it won't work, but you will bloody well have to make it work? 82 This was
little different from Brooke's own experience
of taking
over from
