YUL
408
COMMANDING IN CRISES
ammunition ran out - but could not mount any kind of counter-offen-
sive in depth, particularly when so few senior commanders were available
and the defenders were strung out across the entire coastline and unable
to move for fear of drawing down naval or aerial bombardment. Indeed,
when the firing on the beach lifted a little on Dog White at around 1000
many of the troops were thankful but bemused as to why. Later, some of
the defenders were interviewed by Roy Stevens and they declared that it
was not the encircling troops that worried them but 'we got scared with
all those boats out front, and we just got up and left' 212 Private Franz
Rachmann, from the German 352nd Division was firing one of the
machine guns that was massacring the Americans on the beach and he
also suggests that the infinite mass approaching him was crucial to their
success; as he recalled I shoot, I shoot, I shoot! For each American I see
fall, there came ten hundred other ones! 213 But the impression of the
German troops at the front line was not that taken by their commanders
back at headquarters.
Despite this gradual attrition of the defenders, the reserves of the
352nd Division were redirected away from Omaha. Some went to
retirecte
execute a counter-attack against the Rangers holding Pointe du Hoc
while the bulk went to the British beaches after a report arrived at 0800
suggesting a breakthrough at Arromanches. A report sent at 1100 to the
HQ of the German 84th Corps at Littry still suggested that the Omaha
landing was repulsed and General Kraiss, the CO of the 352nd, sent to
battalions (around 1,000 troops) of reinforcements to the British sector
where the need appeared greater. 214 Such a decision was always likely
given the confusion that prevailed: at 0900 Lt Ulrich Radermann of the
German 5th Parachute Division had arrived at the HQ to find out what
Kraiss wanted the 5th Paras to do - for their CO, General Meindl, had
yet to receive any orders. When we reached 84th Corps HQ we found
panic and a complete lack of decision-making. I did not know what to
make of it, and when i tried to telephone my own HQ at Kennes and
speak to General Meindi it proved impossible to get through. I decided
all I could do was try to investigate the situation for myself 215 By the
time the two battalions of troops arrived at Gold Beach they were too
late and too decimated by air attack to make any difference; in effect, the
poverty of German Command allowed the invaders at Omaha just
enough space and time to secure a footing.
By 1300 Exit E-1 was finally opelled up but at precisely this time
General Marcks dictated a note to Army Group: 'Landing near Vierville
as good as repulsed'. It was not. Even General Salmuth's offer of troops
from the 346th Infantry Division was turned down: "We don't need
them', he was told. Kraiss also had access to Kampfaruppe (Battie
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
group) Meyer which could have been called up to Omaha, but Kraiss was
more concerned about the paratroopers to his west and at 0310 had
ordered Meyer to deploy his three battalions of 915th Panzergrenadiers
from their base at Bayeux westwards to the River Vire to protect his
flank. When the landings had started Kraiss had halted the movement of
Meyer's Panzergrenadiers and about an hour later one of the two battal-
ions (II/915th) was ordered north to Colleville sur Mer where Allied
forces were reported to have broken through near WN 60, WN 61 and
WN 62 (Fox Beach). The II/915th should have arrive just east of Fox
Beach by 0930 - in time to stem the Ist Division's advance up the bluffs
- but, thanks to Allied air attacks, it arrived about five hours later and five
At around the same time that Bradley was considering withdrawing
from Omaha, von Rundstedt reported to Hitler's HQ: 'Still no clear
picture whether we are seeing the diversion or the main attack' 218 Quite
what criteria von Rundstedt was using is unclear but the size of the inva-
sion force should have suggested by this stage that whether another
attack at Calais was planned or not, this was a serious and substantive
attempt to land a large body of troops - and that should have initiated
the immediate movement of local Panzer reinforcements. Equally impor-
tant, the 7th Army, on the basis of reports from the 352nd Division at
Omaha, suggested that the main thrust of the attack must be at the
British beaches and not across the Cotentin
peninsular to
capture
Cherbourg - as they had assumed after the initial airborne landings -
because the Americans were only attempting a sea-borne landing at
Omaha and this was being repulsed. As the War Diary of the 7th Army
states, 'From 0600 hours the seaborne landing began, with its main
thrust between the Orne and the Vire 219 At 1620 the 7th Army HQ had
still not heard of the attack on Utah Beach, so severely disrupted were
we communication by the bombardment and the paratroop drops. 220
Indeed, it could report that: *Operationally there is at present no partic-
ular cause for concern since, to cut off Normandy, the east coast of
Cotentin has still to be taken. It is noticeable that here airborne troops
have been committed without direct support from the sea.... Since 16.30
(however) the enemy has carried out heavy follow-up landings from the
sea in the Madeleine sector' (Utah Beach).221
On the day after D-Day, Ziegelmann proceeded from the 352nd's HQ
in Molay-Littrey, nine miles south of Omaha, and should have arrived 30
minutes later at WN 76 (overlooking Omaha Beach at the Pointe et Raz
de la Percée) - but it took him 5 hours because of Allied fighter attacks.
*The view from WN 76 will remain in my memory forever' he wrote.
The sea was like a picture of the "Kiel review of the fleet". Ships of all
