YUL
COMMANDING IN CRISES
because by 0900, 1l of them were at the bottom of the sea. They had
been unloaded in their DUKWs from the LSTs at 0200 and seven had
sunk as they waited for the run into the beach. On that run one more
sank, leaving just four and three of these were hit by gunfire. The remain-
ing DUKW, with Captain Shuford on board, was prevented from land-
ing in the 29th Division area by a control boat and moved onto the Ist
Division area - where the same thing happened. Shuford eventually
landed his exhausted troops on a Rhino offshore and the howitzer ended
up with the lst Division. 137
At first Omaha looked like it was going to replicate Utah for there was
almost no German fire as the 48 craft of the 116th RCT's first assault
wave approached. Captain Sabin of the US Navy remembers there being
"no sign of life or resistance .... There was an intense quiet, so quiet it
was suspicious' 138 But up to 800 defenders had other ideas.
The detailed plan to assign particular companies to particular beaches
at particular times was almost immediately invalidated because the
currents that moved across the beach drew most of the assault craft off
course. At 0600 the leading boats reached the official Line of Departure,
2½ miles off shore, when they were to form their final assault lines at the
designated time of departure - 0613. At that time 24 boats carrying the
four first wave companies (A,F,G and E) set off in a line 1½ miles long,
led by the LCTs carrying the 74lst and 743rd Tank Battalions of
shermans. Within sU minutes all four leading companies were to have
landed, folowed by a further el Socipanies within the next 30
minutes. Within two hours the entire 116th RCT was to be ashore.
Half a mile from shore nine LCT (R)s loosed their salvos of rockets but
already the casualties were mounting and no German shot had come near
them as yet: LCA5 from Company A had been swamped 1,000 yards off
shore and as they got past the 500 yard mark enemy fire began, sinking
another Les from company A. the remaining four boats grounded
precisely where they were supposed to, just east of the Verville drav on
Dog ureen - right in tront of the best defended area of the beach. In
landed most of the soldiers had been in the small landing craft for at least
four hours and many were sea-sick. In fact, so bad were the conditions
that a colonel recalled seeing some of his men in their waterlogged land-
gogot caring whether they lived or died'. 13 Ironically, because the
guide boat for Company A - one of the few guide boats left afloat-
landed exactly where it was suppoded to, right under the barrel of an
oomn gun emplacement, its elasted direction prevent it from ning
directly upon them and they manasted to signal their company in with
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
389
flags. However, the result was a disaster because Company A was now
isolated in its accurate landing with Companies G and F well down the
beach leaving the defenders around Vierville to converge on A Company.
As one correspondent noted at the time, there was 'a line of American
soldiers waist deep in water and immobilized by fear. Descending arcs of
tracers were entering the water around them, and they could not bring
themselves to move. They seemed as permanently fixed in time and space
as those marines in the statue of the flag-raising on Iwo Jima. 140
According to the official history, 'As the first men (of Company A)
jumped, they crumpled and flopped into the water. Then order was lost.
It seemed to the men that the only way to get ashore was to dive in head-
first and swim clear of the fire that was striking the boats. But as they hit
the water, their heavy equipment dragged them down, and soon they
were fighting to keep afloat'. 141 All the US soldiers wore M26 Life
Preservers but unfortunately they could not support a fully laden soldier
and to remove much of the equipment a soldier had first to ditch the life
preserver. 42 The irony was that these had replaced the cork lifejackets
used in Sicily: these could support a soldier but a jump from a ship at any
height above the water often resulted in a neck injury or death as the cork
Ten minutes later no officer or sergeant on A Company remained both
alive and uninjured. By the end of 15 minutes, A Company has still not
No orders are being given by anyone. No words are spoken. The few able-bodied
survivors move or not as they see fit. Merely to stay alive is a full-time job...
Above all others stands out the first-aid man, Thomas Breedin. Reaching the sands
he strips off pack, blouse, helmet and boots. For a moment he stands there so that
others on the stand will see him and get the same idea. Then he crawls into the
water to pull in wounded men about to be overlapped by the tide. The deeper
float them to the shore, raftwise 4
Some 96 per cent of the 200 men of A Company were killed or
wounded on D-Day and the eight uninjured survivors - who had hardly
fired a shot - were huddled under the sea wall trying to secure some
protection from the defenders and Lieutenant Nanace was the only offi-
cer left alive. 145
The first assault wave of the 116th (Companies A, G, F and E) accom-
panied by Company C ot the 2nd Rangers - or what was left of them -
were now either on the beach or at the water's edge. To all intents and
