320
COMMANDING IN CRISES
.. is the single most potent factor in preventing breakdown'. A feeling
shared by Major Paddy Boden of the Rifle Brigade writing of the desert
war in which 'A large body of men sharing a common experience over a
period of months and even years, isolated from all contacts with their
home country, developed a set of customs, habits and even jargon of
their own' 6? This "brotherhood of the damned' as Ellis call it, postively
revelled in, rather than chaffed at, their isolation, just as the soldiers of
the New Model Army had done in England 300 years earlier. Indeed,
the more isolated and terrible became the situation the more united the
combat unit became, seeking solace in their solidarity and comfort in
their community. For, as one American put it,
it is just those men whose lives are most miserable, the very toughest soldies,
those whose job is to kill, maim and destroy, it is just those men who are the most
gentle, considerate and moved by feelings of sympathy for others....
War binds
the more tightly together than almost any other branch of human activity... and
the paradox is that war, that institutionalizatot of hate, is rooted in its opposite,
at only the love of one soldie dier another keeps armies conerent."
provided rationales and excuses for behaviour that would otherwise lis
deemed 'excessive', such as the killing of surrendering troops.
But Ellis
summarizes the main positive point: 'not a billion cheery exhortations, a
million sergeant-majors or a thousand scaffolds could have made a jot of
difference'. A US Marine wounded on Okinawa put it more blunty:
*Men ... do not fight for flag or country, for the Marine Corps or glory
or any other abstraction. They light for one another'.? Or in Henry s
words (Via Shakespeare), On assuring all those that wanted to leave before
Agincourt that he would not stop them. For We would not die in that
man's company that fears his fellowship to die with us'???
Lewis Mumford concluded, on the basis of his soldier son's letters,
that combat soldiers 'knew comradeship and experienced love, some
times to a degree far beyond their civilian experience.
War, which
plainly brutalized men, also raised some of them to a saintly level? 73 But
tadt brutality also left soldiers with only a fleeting concern for their
comrades once dead or wounded: few hospitalized soldiers actively
sought a quick to return to theinow aund few units seemed to have
made enquiries as to the health or imminent return of such soldiers. * As
Levi suggested with regard to survival in the concentration camps: 'Our
Wisdom ... lay in not imagining the future. For the Allied troops in
Normandy survival and possibly getting home was what drove most of
321
COMMANDING
the troops on and if that meant, as Patton had suggested, going through
Berin first, then so be it. To the chagrin of many anti-Nazi-German-
Americans or Jewish Americans in the war, most GIs did not hate the
Germans, at least as long as they were not directly involved in combat
and had not seen their friends killed or wounded.
12.4 Conclusion
t would seem self-evident that the motivation to stay and nignt amongst
tops of most kinds was composed of a relatively small number of crucial
factors. For most it seems to have been ideological glue rather than phys-
cal force war nept them. A signeant properton of German woops it
Cems to have been ideologically attached to Hitler, or at least to the
German state, though such 'political' unity was probably relatively rare
However, the
amongst the Allied troops, at least the main groups.
centripetal force that glued the Allied troops together was just that - the
group - and it was recognizing the group cohesion that enabled many
commanders to coerce those thinking of deserting during moments of
crisis. Under extreme conditions of privation and danger the sinews of
mutual dependence seem to have spawned in most places and bound
soldiers together in a very powerful emotional grip.
That also implied
that successful Command depended upon understanding these motiva-
tons and working with them rather than against them so that the groups
facilitated the superordinate's commaa-i instead of undermining it.
In this chapter there have been several examples of how followers
attach themselves to particular commanders that appear to embody this
relational sensitivity and few that reproduce the convention that soldiers
We driven by fearing their commanders more than they fear the enemy.
we have also compared the combat philosophies of the warns soup
and considered how these provided different frameworks for commana.
For the most part the German model of Command was aligned with the
propositions outlined in the previous chapter to some degree; the cin
culty of providing top-down, rule based and plan driven Leadership in a
• aunt radical instability encouraged them to dup a system rooted
in Auftragstaktik (mission) rather than the Prussian Befehistaktik (an
we shall see in the next chapter, the Allied elite units tended to copy this,
uncompromising order), so that Intention displaced a dueer order. As
but not so the main infantry units that did, nost of the actual ngnuns.
