724
RETROSPECTIVE
The issue of Leadership has also noticeably shifted from a concentra-
tion at the top of the individual political and military leaders discussed in
previous chapters to a perspective that focuses on the management of
resources and processes and then to consider the significance of
Command at the "sharp end'. Allied organizational superiority lay in
strategic not tactical terms and success came through the superior plan-
ning and better management of production but this was almost negated
by the better tactical fighting abilities of the defenders. However, that
superiority at the tactical level was radically undermined by the inept
strategic decision-making of the German High Command which more
than compensated for the poverty of some Allied technologies, such as
tank design. On D-Day it was the tactical Command of junior officers,
NCOs and ordinary soldiers that rescued the so called strategic superior-
ity of the Allied senior commanders. In contrast, the strategic failures of
the German leadership were not rescued by the German junior
commanders - even though many such officers knew what needed to be
done. In short, the poor bloody infantry of the Allied side made up for
the errors of their senior leaders and managers while the poor bloody
infantry on the German side were generally able but usually unwilling to
do the same for their leaders. As surely as the junior Allied commanders
commanded their troops to success, the senior German leaders led theirs
to defeat.
Another way to put this is to consider the result through Archilochus's
notion of the Fox and the Hedgehog: "The Fox knows many things, but
the Hedgehog knows one big thing'. In this case the German Hedgehog
may well have known more about combat than any other army - indeed,
it was the world's greatest army. But hedgehogs are apt to forget that
other things matter. In this case the Allied fox may not have been quite
as effective as a combat soldier on an individual basis - but success on the
battlefield could not be reduced to the martial skills of individuals; it was
as much to do with ensuring logistics, securing air domination, remov-
ing the u-boat threat, and keeping the Soviet Union on side and in time
as it was with individual valour on the battlefield. Indeed, the German
penchant for tactical innovation on the battlefield seems to have left them
bereft of strategic planning off the battlefield. Such a conclusion might
go a long way to explaining the initial success and subsequent failure of
the German spring offensive in 1918, as well as the failure of Operation
Sealion to invade Britain in 1940, the failure in the USSR in 1941, and
the failure in Normandy. 56
So where does this leave the issues f problems and decision-making?
Un the one hand it should be clear that problems do not and certaimly
did not arrive in neat boxes marked "Tame' or 'Wicked' or 'Critical';
POST-D-DAY
427
istad they come in a sprawling mass that seeps out of any container and
embodies all kinds of elements. Thus if the problems approach is useful
i can only be as a heuristic device, not as an attempt to match the so
caled real world'. That said, there are many occasions when the assump-
ton that problems are Tame rather than Wicked encourages an approach
best described as 'more of the same'
when oftentimes that approach
xems entirely redundant. Thus the Allied problems of confusing the
umans do to te landing place and time were not ones that had been
aced and solved before and hence the collaborative efforts employed
trough a Wicked approach seemed eminently appropriate.
Yet the
German response to the invasion was one closer to the slow and deliber-
¿c avoidance of decision-making when the growing crisis actually
«qured a Commander to act as soon as possible. Many German
commanders had historically done this but their subordination to Hitler's
personal whim effectively undermined their entire response.
On the other hand the Allied Arsenal of Democracy was built using
precisely the Management and skills that had solved the relatively Tame
Problems of mass production - management skills that the Germans had
before the war but could never a au don compete given the incompetence
and nightly d the neart of the keich, thus the Allies, and especially
le Americans, mass produced thousands of aircratt but the Germans
simply could not produce the thousands of pilots needed to shoot them
a down. Similarly, while the German superionty at the level of the indi-
dual combat soldier may have been significant - other things being
equal - things never were that equal. Indeed, the German penchant for
the heroics of combat seemed to have positively enervated their concern
for the more mundane aspects of war, like fuel, munitions and food. The
normous administrative tail of the Allied armies,
in contrast to the
German reluctance to have anyone in uniform who was not actually
lighting at the front, essentially meant that the longer any operation went
on the less likely were the Ges umon mo be successful. It was not so much
Guns rather than Butter than won wars (as opposed to individual battles)
but Guns and Butter. As several German machine gunners insisted, it was
only when they ran out of ammunition that they stopped firing: logistics
as much as heroism proved to be ty: arbiter of fate in Normandy.
at the same time when the probl ns facing both sides on D-Day
turned Critical it was the German army - historically the more adept at
low level Command - which failed to act appropriately, while the Allies -
historically poorer at the flexibility required of mission Command -
and into Normandy.
bodied enough junior commanders to get the troops off the beaches
Here is the final point to reinforce the importance of all three
