358
COMMANDING IN CRISES
though there was no evidence of any German casualties. At this point in
the day of the 850 Green Howards who had started the day over 840
were still functioning effectively - though most of the casualties were
officers or NCOs 24 Estimates for the total casualties on Gold Beach vary
but they were probably around 300 on the beaches themselves (roughly
200 Green Howards and 100 East Yorks) and about 1,000 for the whole
of D-Day.
By the end of D- Day the Green Howards were just one mile short of
their planned objective, the Caen-Bayeux road. This was achieved the
following day but their relative success and security were rudely shatered
on 11 June when they attacked hill 102, south of Cristot. Unbeknown
to the attackers, a unit of the 12th SS H] had recently moved onto the
hill and the failed attack cost the Green Howards 250 casualries, includ-
to one officer trom the sth/ 7th Royal Dragoon Guards who was
captured by the 12th SS and, though wounded, was tied to a tree branch
and dragged into the open each time British artillery opened up on
German positions. The officer died after about three hours.? The hill,
overlooking Caen, was not taken until 25 June, D-Day+19.
At the extreme west end of Gold at Le Hamel No. 47 Royal Marine:
Commando landed and trekked west to take Port-en-Bessin. In fact they
wund themsewes nedding for the wrong deach and as they moved paral-
el to he coast to correct their approach tour of the 14 landing craft were
sunk. Despite some hostile fire (one Commando
suggested to his
comrades that 'perhaps the beach was private') 47 Commando took the
beach area with minimal casualties but lost 50 per cent of their number
aking be name and tort-en-Bassin. As a result they did not take the
port wanted for its primary role as an oil terminal - until the following
afternoon. The latter was also the point at which the US and British
assault areas joined and it was finally captured at 0400 on 8 June, though
the first contact between US and British troops occurred on the evening
of 7 June. The port was found to be capable of disembarking stores ara
much higher rate than assumed and by D-Day+6 it was handling 1,000
tons a day26 By nightfall, about 25,000 troops had landed on
Beach.
14.3 Juno Beach
Of all the units training for D-Day the Canadian forces destined for Juno
Beach had begun first, as carly as October 1942. Juno Beach was situated
to the cast of Gold Beach and the west of Sword, and was divided
between Mike (Red and Green) and Nan (Green, White and Red)
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
beaches. The 3rd Canadian Infantry Division which provided the assault
roops was divided between the Canadian 7th Infantry Brigade (under
IpeBug. Foster), supported by two squadrons of the óth Canadian
Armoured Regiment,
and the 8th Infantry (under
Backadder), supported by 10th Canadian Armoured Regiment. Behind
hese initial assault units came Brigadier D. G. Cunningham s reserve Ith
Canadian Infantry Brigade supported by the 2/th Canadian Armoured
The 7th Infantry Brigade was divided into two.
Winnipeg Alties, supported by A Squadron the 6th Canadian Armoured
Regiment, on the western flank, Warpelud to land on Mike Green and
Mike Red, capture Courseulles and move south to Pierrepont. Second,
the Regina Rifles, supported
of the 6th Canadian
Armoured Regiment, on the eastern side, who were to land on Nan
Green, take the eastern section of Courseulles and move south to
The 8th Brigade, further east still, comprised The Queen's Own Rifles
or Canada (QORoC) destined to land on Nan White and capture
Bernières, Beny-sur-Mer and move south to Anisy. On Nan Red, the
most easterly beach, the North Shore Regiment was to take St Aubin-
sur-Mer. The reserve 9th Brigade would then land on Nan White, pass
through the positions of the 8th Brnade and move south. In addition,
the Canadians were to cut the
Caen-Bayeux road
POrgueilleuse, destroy the bridges on a ten mile section of the Orne
river, and link up with the British 3rd Infantry Division to their east on
The assault troops had to delay their landing for around 10-15
minutes due to rough seas and to ensure hie tide could lift them over a
icef a mile off shore 27 In addition, one of the assault groups (J1) had
approached the beach down the wrong mine-free channel to the west of
their intended channel adding a further delay. 28 The cumulative delays
meant that when the landing craft beached the tide was so high the beach
obstacles could not be cleared properly. Fortunately the obstacles were
rather more sparsely deployed than had been feared and so casualties
from the Teller mines were limited on the approaches, though many craft
Were lost when they tried to reverse out from the beach. As a result, fully
20 out of the leading 24 craft were sunk, as were 25 per cent (36) of the
landing craft in the first wave, and 90 of the 306 landing craft used on
Juno that day.29
The 19 DD tanks of B Squadron 6th Armoured Regiment heading for
Nan Green to lead the Regina Rifle Regiment ashore, east of the river,
were supposed to launch at 7,000 yards but it was decided that the
