22
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
approach - both sides claimed they had the answer to the problem, they
just disagreed on the answer. For the Germans a Wicked Problem
approach would have been to admit the difficulty of the decision and to
facilitate a more collaborative approach to secure some political agree-
ment, but Hitler's default response to such issues was the precise oppo-
site of this and to use (as he saw it) Darwinian competition to allow the
strong to prevail over the weak. Worse, since Hitler only really trusted
himself for such complex decisions his decision to demand personal
control over the deployment of the Panzer reserves effectively reduced a
Wicked Problem to a Tame one that only he could solve. Tame prob-
lems, as was suggested in Chapter 1, are resolved by science and expert-
ise not by political collaboration and compromise; unfortunately for the
Germans Hitler confused a Wicked Problem with a Tame Problem. This
did not mean defeat was an inevitable consequence of this decision -
there were, as we shall see, plenty of opportunities for the Germans to
rescue victory from the jaws of defeat, and plenty of opportunities on the
Allied side to rescue defeat from the jaws of victory. But this is to get
ahead of ourselves: let us begin by considering how the Allies responded
to the strategic questions of the day: where to invade, when to invade and
how to invade?
2 Western Allied Strategy:
the Boxer and the Karateka
2.1 Introduction
Strategy is fundamentally the concern of the senior leadership in war-time
for both political and military leaders. This was the land of those with an
obsessional focus on long-distant goals, and the first strategic decision
the Western Allied leaders had to make was whether to concentrate on
Germany or Japan. Despite the greater fear and animosity amongst the
American population for the threat from Japan, it was apparent to most
- though not all - the political and military leadership that Germany
posed the greater threat. Moreover, the USA was the only significant
Allied power in the Pacific, especially after Britain's ignominious expul-
sion from Singapore, and therefore the USA assumed that the post-war
situation in the Pacific would be relatively simple to control. In effect,
political leadership for all the Allies was as much concerned with the post-
war settlement as it was with finding a way to win the war.
The second strategic decision was where and how to take the war to
Germany: the USA was intent on a direct assault through France and
eastwards to Berlin; the UK regarded this as problematic and preferred
to weaken Germany first through a series of smaller assaults, coupled
with an emphasis on strategic bombing, to the point where a very much
weakened opponent could then be knocked out with a frontal assault if
necessary. This was not just related to Churchill's concerns about British
manpower for he also had ambitions beyond the war, and they principally
involved ensuring that Western Europe came under British influence
after the war.
However, the longer the war continued and the more
delayed the invasion of Europe became the more important became the
American influence - but also the more likely that the USSR would get
to Berlin first.
This division in strategy replicates two different martial arts: boxing
and karate. While boxers sometimes knock their opponents out in the
first round this is an unusual occurrence and the more traditional strat-
egy is to wear the opponent down through attrition by delivering a series
23
