190
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
combat responsibilities) who demanded to know why the sergeant's unit
had not gone forward as ordered at 2000 hours. "What's the big fucking
rush? Where the fuck you think you're at, Louisiana on manoeuvres? This
ain't manoeuvres, this is real shit, and I'm going out there not you' 37
The post-war Senate Special Committee to Investigate the Nationa
Defense Program (chaired first by Truman and then by Mead) was also
scathing about the armed services' officer corps. It was clear, according
to the committee, that no management system existed for rewarding the
alert, the intelligent, and the farsighted' nor indeed, for punishing the
careless, the stupid and wasteful' 38 Yet ironically precisely the same
condemnation could be made of the armed forces in general, because it
was already carelessly, stupidly and wastefully misallocating the 10 per
cent of the population composed of African-Americans.
8.4 Racism and recruitment
The intelligence testing system that processed the civilians into various
units of the armed services was as fallible as any educational or Out
intellectual test: it suggested that a quarter of all those tested were it-
crate while half the Whites and per cent of the African-Americans add
a mental age below 13 years. Since the tests involved questions such as,
'Scrooge was a character in which of the following:
Christmas Carol, Romola or Henry IV?', and 'What is the term for spad
perspective in renaissance art?' we can rest assured that scientific and
cultural objectivity was never a strong point in them. but the pratud
satan ences were to keep most African-American soldiers out of alle
combat units until late in the war. Lat. "pere were two African-American
infantry divisions (92nd and 93rd), an African-American talk battalion
/01st). here was also a squadron of A can-American ughter plot
(the 99th Fighter Squadron - the Black Eagles) who trained at a training
centre in Tuskagee, Alabama. This squadron, together with three other
African-American squadrons flew Mustang P-51s in the 332nd Fighter
T. "p' in Italy. By the end of the war the 332nd had shot down 10s
enemy aircraft 3 But these pilots were engaged on two fronts:
fought two wars', recalled one,er one with the enemy and the other back
home in the United States of America - Hitler and Tim Crow 40
In 1940, although African-Ameng ans made up over 10 per cent of the
total population, there were only 4,000 African-American troops in the
US armed services, including j3st 12 African-American officers in the
army. By 1945 over 1 million African-Ar" rican men and women were
chrolled. The relative absence of black trody early on, especially comb.
MOBILIZING THE AMERICANS: TECHNOLOGY AND ICEBERG
191
troops, was not a result of simple tardiness. On 13 September 1940
Roosevelt had denied that African-American men would only serve in
labour battalions and insisted that they would enter all arms of the serv-
ices, including the combat arms. But the Secretary of War, Stimson, was
adamant that
Leadership is not embedded in the Negro race yet and to try to make commis-
sioned officers to lead men into battle - coloured men - is only to work disaster
to both. Coloured troops do very well under white officers but every time we try
to lift them a little bit beyond where they can go, disaster and confusion follows
... I hope for Heaven's sake they won't mix the white and coloured troops
together in the same units for then we shall certainly have trouble. 41
That hope proved to be fulfilled and - to the profound disappointment
of the African-American community - Roosevelt agreed that racially
homogeneous units would prevail, and General McNair,
for one was
relieved for "The introduction of Negroes throughout our fighting units
would tend to leave a commander with no
outstanding units' 42
However, Judge Hastie, then the African-American Dean of Law at
Howard University was appointed as a 'civilian aide to the Secretary of
War in October 1940, and when Benjamin Davis, an African-American
colonel in the army, was promoted to the rank of Brigadier Genera
some of the African-American hostility to the government dissipated. *»
But this did not stop some of the more offensive elements of the segre-
gation continuing. For example, medical care for troops was stricuy
divided on racial grounds so that no African-American doctor or nurse
would tend a white soldier, no white medic could tend a black soldier.
Patterson, the Secretary of State for the US War Department, on the
other hand had pressed for an African-P"erican armoured force,
veneral Marshall insisted that the repurpopulation did not have the
requisite skills to operate the technology
properly.
onciaco, It is definitely not to the best interests or national detent to
ncrease the number of Negro units in the Armoured Force, nor to
ament any Negro units therein' ** However, when A. Philip Randolph
threatened a massive march on Washington to proclaim black grievances
in July of 1941 the government blinked. On 25 June it insisted that all
future government contracts would have to employ a non-discrimidden
clause. Further unrest followed fights between African-American troops
rom the 4th engineering Battalion and white mans and police in
Gurdon, Arkansas in August 1941. But despite intense pressure the
government refused to desegregate the army, arguing that it simply
reflected society as a whole and therefore could not change radically in
isolation. In January 1942 Patterson accepted a proposal to organize an
