COMMANDING IN CRISES
394
YUL
Photo 14.8 Looking west from WN-71 onto Dog Green at Vierville
and partly leaderless body of infantry, without cohesion, with no artillery
support, huddled under the seawall to get shelter from the withering
fire'. 165
Two aspects are important here. First, the noise of battle would have
made anything other than a direct shout into the ear of an individual
probably irrelevant. Thus, any kind of 'speech' to a company of soldiers
was simply out of the question 166 Second, Canham focuses upon those
he clearly assumes responsible for the inertia: his own officers, not his
ordinary soldiers.
The role of the latter is to do what their officers tell
them - and if their officers don't tell them what to do they don't do
anything except try and stay alive. Thus although the cause of the imme-
diate problem is very probably the responsibility of senior leaders else-
where who have misorganized the bombardments and the design and
deployment of supporting armour, the immediate solution is laid at the
feet literally in this case - of the local commanders. Once again, the fail:
ure of senior leaders can only be rescued - if it can be - by the acts of
subordinate commanders. It should also be noted that the 29th Division
had never Detore been involved in combat - and to some extent this
maght explain their initial inertia. Inexperienced troops and officers may
have been relatively eager to get to the beaches but were immobilized by
their inexperience once they were in difficulties.
Company e then to made good use of the smoke then arising from the
blufts but their boats landed right in front of German resistance nests ans
they took more casualties as they moved to the shingle line.
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
Bare of F Company tried to get his soldiers off the beach "but it was
horrible - men frozen in the sand, unable to move. My radioman had his
head blown off three yards from me. The beach - barely 30 metres wide
in places - was covered with bodies - men with no legs, no arms - God
it was awful. It was absolutely terrible. 167 Sergeant Warner Hamlet of F
Company demanded that those around him get up and run for the sea
wall. But to do that meant risking the bullets, fighting through the
barbed wire by hand and running across the shingle that was being
peppered by mortars.
Even when troops managed to land and reach the bluffs relatively
intact their problems were not necessarily over. Company G's six LCVPs
had drifted just east of Les Moulins on Easy Green, but the soldiers had
been protected from German attack when crossing the 350 yards of sand
by the smoke emanating from the grass fires in the surrounding bluffs.
Most of them made it to the seawall but military inflexibility acted to
decimate them. When they realized they were 1,000 yards east of their
wagnated landing spot (Dog White) they were ordered to more west
1,000 yards, a process that took them two hours and cost them many
Slowly groups began to move across the beach, over the wall and up
Into the bluffs. Private John Robertson with Company F landed on Dog
ah, opposite t-s, the draw at Les Mowins, and was content to lie fat
against the sand until a Sherman headed straight for him from the water,
at which point he ran for the sea wall, after all crossing the beach looked
like suicide, but better than getting run over' 169
Major sidney bingham, CO of 2nd Battalion, 1l6th, had tour of his
company commanders dead or wounded and rest scattered across the
beach and insists that "the individual and small unit initiative carried the
day. Very httie, it any, credit can be accorded company, battalion or regi-
mental commanders for their tactical prowess and / or their co-ordination
st the action. In other words, what mattered was not so much the
visible and heroic actions of the commanding officers, but what the lower
anking otticers, the sergeants and so forth actually dia - as opposed to
said, Further evidence for this is provided from the ordinary soldiers, in
this case by Private Carl Weast: 'It was simple fear that stopped us at that
shingle and we lay there and we got butchered by rocket fire and by
mortars for no damn reason other than the fact that there was nobody
there to lead us off that goddamn beach. Like I say, heh man, 1 did my
iob, but somebody had to lead me? 171
a geant William Lewis was another of those waiting to be led over the
shingle where he lay prone trying to stay alive as long as possible. Then
Lieutenant Leo Van de Voort shouted at him: 'Let's go, goddam, there
