LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
60
about saving lives because the air commanders were already overseeing
an air strategy that was decimating their own aircrews, it was also about
the domination of the air forces over the armies, and in the American case
of building a political case for the separation of the air force from the
army. Nevertheless, air commanders were not the chiefs of staff nor were
they able to dominate their political leaders so, in the end, they were
forced to divert resources to support the invasion of Normandy; this was
just as well because without the interdiction of German reinforcements
and without the almost total air domination on D-Day by the Allies, it is
very unlikely that the ground strategy would have worked.
In January 1944 Tedder and Solly Zuckerman - a British scientist who
had observed the effects of bombing in the Mediterranean
concluded that bridges could not be successfully attacked from the air -
drew up plans for a 90-day bombing campaign to destroy the French rail-
way system and then to destroy the coastal defences. But the Allied air
forces commanders were, at best, reluctant supporters of the Air-Strategy
- the so called Transportation Plan - to support D-Day. Fortuitously, the
leaders of both air forces were also very concerned that if the Luftwaffe
was not ground into the dust in early 1944 then the development of the
ME-262 jet fighter would render all their efforts futile. In that respect
the leaders of both air forces were at one with Eisenhower.
Nevertheless, if D-Day seemed vital to Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill
it did not to General Carl Spaatz, leader of the US Eighth Air Force.
Spaatz mirrored his airmen in his frequently unshaven and unkempt
appearance and occasionally flew bombing missions with them as a nose-
gunner. He also had his own strategy for winning the war: daylight preci-
sion bombing of the German industrial machine, especially its oil refining
potential - the Oil Plan. Indeed, he claimed he could end the war in 30
days if he was given the resources to destroy German oil production and
thus bring German industry and the Luftwaffe to a halt.' At a meeting
on 25 March, however, Spaatz admitted that his plan would have no
instant effect upon Germany and would therefore be of marginal value to
the invasion. Eisenhower therefore supported Tedder's plan for interrup-
tion the transport system and, since it was Tedder's plan and not Leigh-
Mallory's (whom Spaatz detested), Spaatz agreed.2
In fact, by D- Day German armaments manufacture was a third higher
than the previous year and by July 1944 it had peaked at 45 per cent
higher. In 1940 Germany had built 10,826 planes and by 1944 this had
soared to 39,807. June 1944 also marked the peak production of tanks
and U-boats. But oil production, especially the synthetic oil made from
combining coal with hydrogen, was desperately short. By July 1944 only
53,000 tons was produced, just over a quarter of the May consumption
ALLIED AIR STRATEGY
61
total of 195,000 tons. 3 By 11 August 1944 the Luftwaffe was so short of
oil that it prohibited all flights except those undertaken by fighter aircraft
against Allied bombers. * Even these aircraft preserved what fuel they had
by not starting their engines until positioned on the runway for takeoff
- having been towed from the hangars by cows.5
By February 1944 the first leg of the Overlord aerial strategy, the
Transportation Plan, had begun when Allied air forces were retargeted to
destroy the German fighter industry, and although fighter production
actually increased it was probably slowed by the bombing. That had been
part of Spaatz's strategy since January 1944 when he had realized that
simply attacking aircraft manufacturing plants was not going to destroy
the Luftwaffe. This also explains his support for electronic technology
that would facilitate daylight bombing under poor weather conditions: if
he could continue to bomb German industrial targets in poor weather
that would force the Luftwaffe up to defend them and hence increase the
potential casualties the increasingly inexperienced pilots would suffer
from risky landings and takeoffs. More significantly, the raids forced the
Luftwaffe into the air to attack the bombers where they, in turn, were
attacked by the Allied fighter protection. This classic war of attrition fits
the Tame Problem criteria of known processes and prior expertise for it
was the superior numbers, technology and experience of the Western
Allies that prevailed over their under-resourced and ill-experienced
German opponents.
Much of the technical superiority derived from the new American P-
51 D Mustang fighter, quicker than, and as manoeuvrable as, the Spithre
but with a much greater range, at 2,300 miles, allowing it to cover the
deepest Allied bomber raids into the heart of Germany. The Allied
bomber escorts, especially the more robust P-47 Thunderbolts,
also
began pro-actively seeking out German fighters either in the air or on the
ground, rather than just reacting to their attacks. The results were devas-
tating for the Luftwaffe: on just 14 missions between 8 March and 30
May, on average 56 German fighters were shot down. The declining
quality of the Luftwaffe pilots is clear both from the asymmetric casual-
ties and from the numbers brought down by individual American pilots:
three pilots claimed four 'kills' and seven claimed three 'kills'. On 6
August Major George Preddy, the leading Mustang pilot, shot down six
In fact, the number of hours flown by trainee Luftwaffe pilots before
engaging in combat was about 170, only marginally more than half the
310 hours spent by US pilots in training.
The consequences to the
Luftwaffe were an ever-increasing attrition rate due to accidents and
combat. In November 1943 an Allied report suggested that the Luftwaffe
