LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
beach was laced with a double row of tetrahydra and hedgehogs and by
11 May over 51/,000 beach obstacles were in place.-* Anything break-
ing beyond these strong-points would then be met by the mobie
reserves, the third line of defence. However, Rommel's primary focus
lay on the beach itselt. As he insisted: "The high water tile must be the
main fighting line' 25 But there were weaknesses, both in the gaps in
defences and in the vulnerability of the defences; it was, as one German
General called it: 'a thin, in many places fragile, piece of cord with a few
Even those knots could be fragile: the very strength of the defences
also operated against the defenders since they assumed that many arcas
ta be successy neid by second rate troops (and 2o per cent of tie
German army was over 34 by 1944), leaving most of the elite to stave off
the Red Army in the east. In fact, 20 German battalions were transferred
from the west to the east on Hitler's direct orders and he had promised
von Rundstedt that 60 "Eastern Volunteer' battalions would replace
hem. as commentan was later to argue, these were mostly "torme
i led and ll-equipped. What earthly to
Nuld such troops be agams the chemy s weight or technical skil. Wha
eason was there to beneve that these Volunteers would even pretend to
fight against their Western allies? It was all quite insane' 27 As early as the
spasts of 1943 von Rundstedt had already concluded that the situation
was lipossible dha he visited Hitler to demand increased resources but
riter treated mim to a two hour monologue on the eastern tront and
von Rundstedt left empty handed. Worse, many of the engineers and the
construction workers in organization loat that were destined to build
te coastal defences were transported north to the V-weapons sites with
out his knowledge.
The inadequate German defences in NorriS ndy were not simply the
result of a false assumption about the Pas de Calais being the target but
also because the Kriegsmarine (Gerhen navy) had assured everyone that
the fortress at Cherbourg would be able to defend the
ormandy beaches with ease while tie western beaches were simply too
difficult to use as an invasion platform. Equally critical,
Hitler was
conduced that, by far the most importat thing for the enemy Will De
o gain a port for landings on the largest possible scale. This alone gives
a wholly special importance to the west coast ports and orders have
therefore been issued designating them fortresses
,28 In fact Vice
Admiral Krancke had already warned Hitler that "The few available
destroyers, torpedo and speed boats can only harass an enemy landing.
but they cannot effectively impede it' 2all Jevertheless Grossadmiral
eDönitz ordered every available U-boat to attack the invader's shipping
GERMAN STRATEGY: HARD SHELL, SOFT SHELL
125
on D-Day, and 17 left Brest under cover of darkness but on the surface
- as ordered. Four of these were put out of action within hours by Allied
mentality, merely buttressed this approach. The result was that the effort
to break through the initial defences of the hard shell was much more
difficult than assumed, for the Allies believed that the Germans would act
as von Rundstedt suggested and reproduce their traditional soft shell
approach - make a tactical retreat and take advantage of their Panzer
groups to break up the Allied movements inland. But such was the cost
involved to the defenders in pursuit of Fortress Europe, that the defence
in depth' strategy was uncoupled from the tactical retreat, hence once the
German defence shell cracked, the defenders were unable to retreat and
regroup thus - eventually - allowing rapid penetration inland. In effect,
what was a Wicked Problem: how to deal with the invasion, had been
reduced to a Tame Problem by Hitler's intervention and refusal to back
either one or the other strategies of resistance properly.
The gaps
between the fortresses provided self-evident points of vulnerability - as
ven von Rundstedt acknowledged: "The strength of our defences is
absurdly overrated. The "Atlantic Wall" was an illusion; conjured up by
propaganda - to deceive the German people as well as the Allies .... It
was a nonsense to describe it as a wall', Hitler himself never came to visit
it, and see what it really was' 3) Rommel privately referred to the Atlantic
Wall as 'a figment of Hitler's Wolkenkuckucksheim (cloud-cuckoo land). 32
For example, most of the communication systems from the defences back
to headquarters were telephone landlines not radio links - and thus very
vulnerable to enemy bombardment from the air or sea.
Most of the
equipment was composed of captured weapons for which there was often
a lack of ammunition and little in the way of fire-direction equipment -
critical for engaging ships at sea or precise points on beaches 33 In fact,
Goebbels, the German Minister of Propaganda, turned the wall from an
admission of the limits and weakness of Germany, into a symbol of defi-
ance, calling it the boundary line of " Festung Europa' - Fortress Europe.
It was 'a fortress', admitted Franklin D Roosevelt, 'but a fortress without
a roof 34 But why was Rommel, the arch Panzer general, not given
complete control over all the resources available to defend Normandy?
the answer to that question explain teem german fallure On D-Day was
not a consequence of inadequate technology but inadequate strategy and
bureaucratic incompetence.
