85
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
84
Sicily. But the public humiliation of Patton played perfectly into the
requirements of Fortitude South - because the Germans could not
believe that the Americans would remove their most feared opponent
from leading the expected invasion. Thus, when Patton's name became
connected to FUSAG - and the invasion of Calais - they were assured
that FUSAG was the force to fear not any feint led by somebody else and
landing somewhere else.
Patton's habit of embarrassing his political and
military superiors
continued throughout 1944. On 25 April he was due to open a 'Ladies'
Welcome Club' at the Ruskin Rooms in Knutsford, Cheshire. Known to
Eisenhower as
"Chief Foot-in-the-Mouth',
Patton was warned against
saying anything controversial.® He finished his speech - which he was
assured would not be reported anyway - by saying, 'It is the evident
destiny of the British and Americans [long pause] and of course the
Russians, to rule the [post-war] world. The next day the papers were full
of his final sentence, but they excluded 'and of course the Russians'
Naturally all those not British or American on the Allied side were
alarmed at the thoughts, but none more so than the Russians - and none
so embarrassed as Eisenhower. Breuer speculates that Patton's presence
in England as part of the FUSAG deception may have been missed by the
Germans and some intelligence elements on the Allied side may have
framed Patton simply to ensure that the controversy would be noticed in
Germany - and thus increase the assumptions about a Pas de Calais inva-
sion led by Patton.'
it was certainly the case that German maps as of 31 December 1943
did not show the whereabouts or even existence of Patton's First US
Army Group, even though they did suggest that 55 divisions were pres
ent in the country (when there were only 38). Indeed, the Germans
consistently overestimated the strength of the Western Allies - even when
they used aerial reconnaissance rather than the false information fed to
them by 'turned' agents. For example, on 25 April 1944 they estimated
that sufficient shipping was in place to carry twice the number of divi-
sions that was actually available. 10 But whatever the truth, the Germans
assumed Patton's real role was as commander of the 'real' invasion force
that would land at the Pas de Calais, probably just after a diversionary
attack further south to draw away the Panzer forces 11
Even the German military leadership was used to deceive itself. In May
1944 General Cramer from the German Afrikakorps was repatriated to
Germany from Britain under a prisoner exchange scheme organized
through the Red Cross. Cramer was transported south through the
country but false road signs, incorrectly identified army units, and care-
fully constructed overheard' conversations, confirmed to him that the
Photo 4.1 Ruskin Rooms, Knutsford, Cheshire
