18
LEADERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND COMMAND AT D-DAY
while others were more successful. In Part 2, I consider the role of
Leadership at the level of strategy on both sides of the conflict and exam-
ine the difficulties both sides had and the role of subordinates in inhibit-
ing or allowing their superordinates to make decisions that increased or
reduced the risk of failure. Of course, I am not suggesting that either
strategy was accurate' - that is predestined to succeed or doomed to fail-
ure - rather I want to note how often success and failure are fleetingly
and tantalizingly available to both sides and even in hindsight it is not
possible to predict what happened.
Part 3 considers the role of Management at the Operational level, in
this case the focus lies on the mobilization of the various countries
involved, the management of logistics and the role of technology:
tart + looks at Command and Critical f'roblems, particularly the role
of commanders in both the airborne and amphibious assaults.
Part 5 provides a retrospective view on the invasion and our under-
standing of it.
Part Two
Leadership and Wicked
Problems
This operation is not being planned with any alternatives. This operation
is planned as a victory, and that's the way it's going to be.!
Introduction
In this part of the book I will use the theory of Wicked Problems to try
and explain the strategic decisions employed by all sides in the lead up to
D-Day. As suggested in Chapter 1, Wicked Problems are designated as
the responsibility of leadership, defined as a decision-making category
where the novelty or recalcitrance of the problem implies that the deci-
sion-maker cannot know what to do, and where he or she needs to know
what process to deploy to engage the necessary collaborative effort to
make some progress with the problem. Oftentimes Wicked Problems do
not have a solution - such as crime, for example, which will always be
with us: we may limit or encourage the extent of crime but we will never
be able to rid ourselves of crime. Other forms of Wicked Problem - such
as global warming - do offer the possibility of action that effectively
tames the worst excesses of the problem, without necessarily 'solving' it.
Still others - such as developing a strategy to invade France or resist that
invasion - will come to some form of conclusion, but it's unlikely in the
extreme that the strategy will roll out as planned. If the latter did happen,
if everything worked perfectly to plan, it is more likely that the problem
was Tame, and therefore open to a scientific solution rather than a polit-
ical agreement - as Wicked Problems tend to be settled by. Of course, the
failure of a strategy may generate a Critical Problem, a crisis that requires
the role of a Commander but these will be covered in Part 3.
