296
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
rather than Pershings. But in the initial phase of the assault there was
never any possibility of deploying the official doctrine - how could tanks
aot engage other tanks - or worse, gun emplacements? Without the extra
armour provided by Hobart's Funnies on the Anglo-Canadian beaches
they too would have suffered much higher casualties. And had the Urah
forces landed on the correct beach, and not fortuitously against the
au upart of the entire beach, casualties there would have been much
higher too. In sum, the doctrine was flawed and the assault phase was
hag cally inadequate to the task. However, the one thing where the US
had a sighlicant advantage overoan ugmans was in its producuon
capacity - providing it could produce tanks more quickly than the
Germans could destroy them. In short, the Tame response to the prob-
lem did eventually manage to overcome the problem but at considerably
higher cost than necessary. Anyway, should not the weaknesses of the
Allied tanks on D-Day and in the first stage of the invasion in normandy
tave more than compensated for by their grossly superior nava
gunfire and air bombardment support?
11.6 Naval gunfire and air bombardment
In theory we significance of competing tank and gun performances
should have been of marginal significance because the naval and air
bombardment was to have been so great that few, if any, of the defend-
ers would be either alive or sufficiently conscious to have fired upon the
attackers. This theory bore a remarkable resemblance to the theories
developed by General Haig as to the guaranteed success of his offensives
in the First World War and was probably about as realistic. Yet, ironical,
the planners for D-Day assumed a casualty rate that implied the initial
bombardment would not succeed in silencing the derenders of the
Atlantic Wall.
At 0520 that aerial bombardment bega'll and at 0535 the German
coastal batteries began fring upon the shipping - much to the relief of
the warships who were forced to hold their fire until 0550 unless fired on
to avoid hitting the aircraft. In fact at least two Allied aircraft were shot
down by friendly fire' from the warships, Some of the shells from the
largest saips were enormous. MMS Rodney, for example, had nine 1o-
Ich guns firing and prompted one of Howard's soldiers at Pegasus
Bridge to exclaim: "Blimey, sir, they're firing jeeps' 120 Jeeps they may
have been and accurate they often were, but even the enormous naval
guns generally failed to destroy many of the German casements,
strong were the protective
encasements of steel and concrete.
As
297
TECHNOLOGIES
Ambrose concludes: From the point of view of the soldiers going ashore,
the great naval bombardment was as ineffective as the great air bombard-
ment' 121 Dieter Hartmann-Schultze was an anti-tank gunner with the
German 711th Infantry Division on Sword Beach and found himself
bombarded for an hour by the armada of naval ships off the cost at first
light. When the bombardment finished he emerged from his shelter and
found to our amazement that only one gun had been damaged, even
though a huge number of shells and bombs from planes had fallen about
us. 22 Hans Ulrich Hanter, of the neighbouring 716th Infantry Division
also emerged to find that although some positions were destroyed, many
remained virtually undamaged, strangely enough. 23 This was hardly a
novel experience, at least for the British - almost every failed offensive in
the First World War had failed because of an
inadequate artillery
bombardment and a failure to understand the strength of German forti-
fications 124 Indeed, the experience of the US forces in the Pacific theatre
had long suggested that naval and aerial bombardment was inadequate
to completely destroy coastal fortifications.
However limited was the effect of the naval bombardment even fewer
of the fortifications had been destroyed by the pre-invasion air bomb-
ing. The official diary of the Royal Winnipeg Rifles assaulting Juno
Beach notes that at 0900: 'The bombardment ... failed to kill a single
German or silence one weapon ...
2125 It certainly did not knockout the
heavy battery at Mont Fleury firing on Juno
Beach. Actually, the
defenders assumed the smoke and the absence of direct attacks upon
them implied that a landing was, or perhaps would de, occurns else-
where on the coast. Even when the far more accurate naval bombard-
ment persuaded the defenders that an invasion was planned for them the
effect appeared marginal: only around 14 per cent of the bunkers were
destroyed. Nevertheless, the shock of the bombardment left many
detenders disoriented and prevented some the inland batteries from
firing accurately since their "spotters' were now amongst the quivering
defenders. 126 Despite all this, 90 of the 306 landing craft destined for
Juno Beach failed to get there, as did half the DD tanks and 85 per cent
of the Royal Marine Centaur tanks, mainly destroyed by mines or the
very artillery that was supposed to have been silenced. 127 Even the tanks
that did make the beach were not necessarily welcomed by the invading
troops: Captain Daniel Flunder blew the track off one of his own tanks
when it began crushing his troops in front of it as it progressed up the
beach and refused to stop. 128 But blundering and inadequate Shermans
were just one of the problems facing the Allies, another was their other
