312
COMMANDING IN CRISES
Thus not all war is perceived by all combatants as dreadful and as
deeply repulsive because many combatants look back fondly to thei
fighting days as the times when they were most 'alive' - if indeed they
were. This may be derived from the common reports from the front thar
the intensity of life is multiplied by war to the extent that every moment
is qualitatively different from every moment in peace. Critically for us ths
implies that Command in war does not necessarily derive from harsh
disciplinary systems, though it may. Successful commanders, then, mal
be those who recognize these primary drivers of soldiers' motivation and.
exploit them. In effect, their soldiers teach them to be commanders by
responding or not responding to particular acts of command.
that great friend of the lowly American soldier - Or "dogface' - Emic
Pyle, was quite clear that "There is an intoxication about battle, and ordi-
nary men can sometimes soar clear out of themselves on the wine of
Se choton. That emotion is not i! roja pendent upon dea
combat but can be readily perceived in those who are about to go int
combat: watching a unit of British Commandos,
Eric Sevareid noticed
the intensity of the moment:
a stood beside a commando major and wants he assault troops take fondn
• Now and then [the major reached out and touched a passing soldier; jus
ouched him, saying nothing.. I knew suddenly that 1 vIS looking into his oper
heart and that I understood how he felt. The war had become his very life; these
nen were all his world. Here with them, under the dark moon, in the middle or
the hellish noise, he was intensely alive. Elsewhere he was half-dead.?2
Delaforce, quoting Lt General Brial- Horrocks, puts forward the
strongest claim to this paradox at the heart of war: 'Nobody enjoys tigh
yet ale forward area in any theatre of war, the sharp end of ti
sattle, do we used to call it, Is inhabited by young men with a glean
their eye, who actually do the nighting'. Indeed, it often seems that tie
tves of every soldier in combat are focused wholly and intensely on ti
present, for they cannot remember anything before the war and ther
often appears to be no future other than war.
ate is also the denght in destruction - of property and people wat
Provides the most difficult issue for civilians to understand. The unmit-
sace preasure in wanton destruction encapsulated by the destructon o
ivil property in the form of 'mindless vandalism' continues to bemuse
anti outrage people, but there are self-evident traces back into the
ictions and emotions of those involved in its military equivalent. Bert
Damsky from the US Ist Infantry Division, then across the beaches, and
across France into Germany, entered a German house set for dinner.
There his unit ate the fine food and drank the fine wine from a clean.
COMMANDING
313
white tablecloth and off fine china plates. And when they had finished
they wiped their mouths on the tablecloth and proceeded to smash all the
plates against the wall and rip the tablecloth to shreds -
"It was',
exclaimed Damsky, 'a really great feeling' 24
However, much of these 'attractions' quickly wane as the spectacle
becomes commonplace, as the excitement of danger turns into the dread
of death, and as the destructive impulse draws closer to the perpetrator.
Once a soldier has been to hell and returned it was usually difficult to
retain any of the assumptions that war could be a 'glorious adventure.
Sergeant Bob Sheldrake, with the British 55th Antitank Regiment, 49th
Division, had seen enough at 'hell-fire corner' near Rauray in France in
the summer of 1944 to obliterate any such assumptions:
Dead strewed the road - who was fool enough to stay there long enough to move
them? As tanks and carriers passed to and fro they champed over those bodies
churning them to a pulp of flesh and rag. I saw a carrier make a skid turn on the
corner and strip the skin backwards over a ghastly trunk until the flesh lay exposed,
widly pink and shining for the brief moment it arched as if in living torment
before it slur at arojado the ignominy and desecration of the mud. so this 15
war- here was no glory, no proudness of scarlet uniforms and military music, but
a bloody mashing and pulping of human beings.
The ordinary man's war cannot
be glorified, necessary it may be, but it is vile in the extreme.?5
that 'vile necessity' was certainly a strong motivator for many who coud
se no pleasure in war but were sucked into the maelstrom by all kinds
of forces, including duty and outrage. As Drez concludes about the
American volunters: 'They came for all the reasons under the sun' -
though Pearl Harbour was a particularly significant one.26
But importantly, perhaps the mod influential issue beyond Pearl
Harbour was the 'lead' played by the movies. Many soldiers spoke of
their experiences in terms of the films they had seen Which often matc
the experience either less alien or quite unreal, as if they were actually in
a movie about war rather than in war itself. However, the actuar expen
ence of combat often generated a marked distancing from such glossy
representations of heroic deeds and a considerabie anupaty towards
those who continued to peddle them.
Hence when John Wayne - who
was refused entry to the armed forces because or nis age (ot), his three
Children and his injured shoulder - arrived in rawall to perform for u
wounded survivors of Okinawa he was met by a stony silence due men
oooed off the stage. As Edwin Hoyt suggested, there was now,
[Bogart or wayne could suggest about toughness that malence we rea
ity of combat'. And for many soldiers it was not macho heroism that
kept them at the front subject to incessant dangers but the fear of shame
