COMMANDING IN CRISES
398
YUL
TELES
Photo 14,10 Leaderless American troops under the cliffs at Colleville sur Mer
Near Exit E-1 Lt Commander Joseph Vaghi, beach master of Easy
Red, landed 500 yards short of the cover provided by the sand dunes but
having reached the high water mark found himself, like everyone else,
simply unable to move for the machine gun fire emanating from the
bluffs and from WN 64 and WN65. At 0800 Colonel George Taylor, the
16th RCT's regimental commander landed and, after working his way up
to this line of troops trying to find cover from the fire, stood up and
demanded his troops move forward. An officer, perhaps Colonel Taylor,
told Vaghi to use his megaphone and tell the soldiers to move forward.
At that point a sergeant pushed a bangalore torpedo under the
concertina barbed wire and told his unit to 'follow him' through the gap.
They did and ran straight onto the mined plateau before the bluffs where
many were killed or wounded. 180
Around this time Taylor (though there are suggestions it was Cota
leading the 29th Division) uttered his now-famous remark: There are
only two kinds of people on this beach: the dead and those who are
about to die. So let's get the hell out of here!'181 Clearly, given the noise
and danger, only a handful of people would have heard Taylor - Lt Jack
Carrol heard it but he was only s yards away - and probably just a few
were motivated by it to do something. But it may be that even a few inds-
riduals changing their actions - and showing a successful run across the
beach was possible - would have been enough to persuade others to do
399
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
the same, this starting a small 'social avalanche' of troops towards and up
the bluffs. Carrol followed another young officer up the bluffs past mines
that had already killed and maimed countless soldiers and when they
came to the last few yards before the cliff top the officer threw himself
on the ground detonating a mine and killing himself. 182
Not everyone was persuaded: Captain Friedman, now motivated to
move, came across three soldiers lying prone while the rest were making
ancifort to advance. After they refused to move Friedman drew his pistol
and threatened to use it on them - prompting one to turn on him shout-
ing: Captain, are you out of your fucking mind?" 183
Those that got to the Atlantic Wall found little respite
and no
commanders: all the officers that had been in the first wave were either
dead or injured. So even the soldiers that were not already dead or
wounded seemed to lie on the beach or crouch behind whatever obsta-
de they could find, hoping they would not get shot. It was as if their
entire world had been shrunk in time and space to a tiny envelope of
sand. As Bill Friedman with the 16th Infantry Regiment on Omaha
Beach recalled:
For one so intimately associated with the assault landing, my experience was
confined to a few yards of the beach - at least for the first two hours. Along with
thousands of men escaping from the assault landing craft, I lay immobile behind
the largely imagined protection of the famous shingle ledge at the beach's high
гшqошщй. All I could see was a long line of men taking cover each side of me,
and a bluff to my front. I really had no desire to see more. As for understanding
or preciating the great forces, Herculean efforts, good and bad guesses, brilliant
strategies (and there were those too), unit and individual actions, and the astro-
nomical number of interrelated events, I had not the foggiest....
We were totally
mmobilized. I did not know what to do or where to go. I remember looking at
the sea and the water was red, there were bodies and equipment just rolling in the
.. Along the line of men on the shingle I saw people jerking as they were
it with the impact of bullets and shrapne moulow it didn't count ... I was
cassured because 1 was shoulder to shouder with other men. There was some-
thing reassuring about having warm, familiar human bodies next to you ... even
if they're dead.
. At one point I was still lying down and shouting in the car of
the Regimental S4. He was a major. My clhuth was next to his ear; it was so noisy
he could not bear me otherwise. While Ile,as trying to make myself understood
above the din, a bullet struck him dead. 184
le, geant Norfleet, also trapped at the water's edge, had no intention
of staying there and did not need any heroic commanding officer to tell
him what to do, indeed: "The decision not to try never entered my head
•I noticed a Gl running fron' right to left, trying to get across the
beach... An enemy gunner shot him as he stumbled for cover ... 1
