88
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
in the same period 22 The disparity is partly explained by the Allied air
mainland Germany which in the previous months had
persuaded Hitler to withdraw many of his fighter squadrons to defend
the Reich. But it was also the case that many of the airfields in France had
been badly damaged by more recent Allied bombing raids rendering
them inoperable. In fact, General Galland, commanding officer of the
German fighter forces, claimed that even if all the available fighter aircraft
had been scrambled against the invasion they would still have been
outnumbered by 20 to 1.23 About 600 Luftwaffe aircraft were in France
on D-Day but less than half of them were in flying distance of Normandy.
It was clearly impossible to conceal Exercise Fabius - the four-
divisional dress rehearsal assault on the south coast of England in the first
week of May - but even this embodied an element of deception. In
particular the wireless traffic was organized so that it would mirror the
same traffic on D-Day itself, thus, hopefully, persuading the Germans
that Overlord was simply the second dress rehearsal. Even Churchill was
involved in this deception after Eisenhower had persuaded him to insert
a sentence about the likelihood of 'many dress rehearsals' in his speech to
In the run-up to D-Day 49 airfields within 150 miles of Caen were
attacked but only four were within the Normandy area while 11 were
close to the Pas de Calais. Similarly, 19 rail junctions around Calais were
bombed while none were hit in Normandy nearer than Rouen. Even the
presence of so many fighter aircraft around Southampton was masked by
a 66-squadron attack on Calais on 29 May in which the aircraft first flew
to bases in Kent, Surrey and Sussex before taking off for the attack.?0
So secret was Overlord that Stalin only knew the month and general
area for the invasion, de Gaulle (whose offices in Algiers had been penc-
trated by a German spy) knew even less, and Eisenhower solved the tricky
political problem of not telling de Gaulle by showing him maps marked
"ss p Secret' which had been so altered that even Eisenhower could not
recognize them. Knowing de Gaulle's vanity, Eisenhower gambled that
de Gaulle would not ask for clarification as to where in France the maps
referred to; he was right.27
But keeping the secret proved to be an enormous problem, Normally
privileged diplomatic communications were banned on 17 April 1944
(excluding the USA and the USSR), though this did not stop two
American officers from revealing classified information about D-Day at
two separate parties; both men were returned to the US in disgrace.
Nor did it prevent an envelope full of Overlord information falling open
in a Chicago post office wsno! a US soldier, Sergeant T.P. Kane, had
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
89
mistakenly sent it to his sister. Kane remained under surveillance by the
FBI for the rest of the war.28 In England, Theodore R. Nuttmann, a
Second Lieutenant of the US Adjutant General's department, was court
martialled for disclosing classified (BIGOT) information to Lieutenant
Robert A Wahlquist, but this was one of a very small number of leaks.
The American forces were not alone in their poor security: Brigadier
Lionel Harris, the CO of Overlord Communications, left the complete
plan for Operation Neptune in the back of a taxi. Fortunately it was
handed in to Scotland Yard by the driver.29 And, of course, although the
names and locations on the maps were changed to reveal only the code-
names there were many French soldiers in the Allied forces, some of
whom came from Normandy. Hence members of the French Commando
unit in No. 10 Commando immediately recognized Ouistreham and the
Caen Canal 30,31 Bizarrely, there was also a full scale alert when the Daily
Telegraph crossword in May and June 1944 contained five words in its
answers that seemed incredibly coincidental:
'Overlord',
"Utah',
"Mulberry', 'Neptune' and 'Omaha' 32 The compiler, Leonard Dawe, a
54 year old physics teacher at Strand School, Effingham, was interviewed
by Mis but no action was taken against him, or his brother-in-law who
worked in the Admiralty - Eisenhower was aghast: This breach of secu-
rity is so serious it practically gives me the shakes' 33
Nor was the cartoonist in the John Bull reprimanded for correctly
guessing - and illustrating - the Normandy beaches as the probable
target in their 'Old Bill' cartoon of 27 May 1944.34 Ironically, in 1943
Major F.O. Miksche, a Czech, had published a book, Paratroops, which
had already suggested not just that Normandy was a good invasion spot
but that paratroop drops - in precisely the spot where the 82nd and
101st Airborne were due to land - would be the best way of occupying
critical points.35 But although the Germans - and particularly Kurt
Student, founder of the German airborne forces - were aware of the
book 10;y assumed, wrongly, that it was just part of the deception plan
to turn attention away from the Pas de Calais. In fact Fortitude was itself
just one deception plan, albeit the fulcrum, around which Overlord's
success depended.
4.3 Beyond Fortitude
A whole series of similar but smaller scale deceptions were deployed to
keep various other German armies out of 10 ormandy including wireless
operators in the embarkation ports who maintained radio-traffic on D-1
When most of the ships were already at sea.36 Beyond this: 'Operation
