56
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
At 1745 on Sunday 4 June Stagg announced a 'substantial change ...
It is now likely that there will be a fair interval starting about mid-day
today and lasting till about dawn on Tuesday ... cloud amounts will
probably be substantially smaller than given in the forecast this morning;
winds will also moderate temporarily on Monday night and at first on
Tuesday; weather on subsequent days will continue unsettled and
disturbed'. At 2100 hours on the same evening Stagg announced 'some
rapid and unexpected developments ...
an interval of fair conditions
Which ... should last at least until dawn on Tuesday ...
winds will be
mainly Force 4 on the English Channel coasts and Force 3-4 on French
Channel coasts' 130
What followed neatly encapsulates the collaborative process required
for Wicked Problems, for still no technical or objective answer existed.
Despite the cheering that followed Stagg's report, Leigh-Mallory advised
a second postponement to help air-cover and bombing, but he was told
by Eisenhower to stop being pessimistic. Montgomery advised him to go
- though the predicted 36-hour window might have left only the first
waves on the beaches and thus it would have been relatively easy for the
Germans to push them back into the sea. But a further postponement
would have meant delaying the invasion for several weeks - in fact until
17 or 18 June - just before the great storm lashed the Normandy coast
on 19 June destroying the Mulberry harbour in the US sector. To have
gone then would have been disastrous and to have delayed once more
could have had a devastating effect upon Allied morale and may have
allowed the Germans to realize the true intentions of the Allies. As it was,
the landings took place in winds approaching Force 5 or even 6 in some
places - though the exercises had been limited to Force 4 conditions. 13l
Ironically, then, the indeterminacy of the weather led the Germans to
conclude that an assault was impossible and led the Allies to believe that
it was feasible.
The weather, as it turned out, was better than the
Germans expected and worse than the Allied hoped for and as a conse-
quence the assault secured a remarkable ally. As Eisenhower said: 'Some
soldier said the weather is always neutral. Nothing could be more
untrue. The weather was no friend of the Allied soldiers during the
crossing but the very discomfort they suffered provided them with a
degree of protection from the German defences that no prior bombing
campaign could hope to match. At 2145 (4 June) Eisenhower, already
suffering the immense strain of a supreme commander that, he argued,
'no-one could understand', 132 asked for his commanders' opinions as the
rain poured down amidst the wild winds outside. Leigh-Mallory was still
reluctant, while Montgomery remained keen but Ramsay reminded
Eisenhower that either way a decision had to be made in 30 minutes or
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
57
the Navy would need another 48 hours notice. Eisenhower then summa-
rized his decision: 'Well, I'm positive that we must give the order; the
only question is whether we should meet again in the morning. Well I
don't like it but there it is. Well boys there it is, I don't see how we can
possibly do anything else'. 133
When Bradley, aboard the Augusta, was informed that the invasion
was on he was very worried about the weather prospects:
That evening as I fell into bed worrying about the weather, I was quite uneasy on
three counts:
1. Unless the wind and surf abated, they might swamp our DD tanks in their
unsheltered run to Omaha Beach. We had bargained on the shock effect of
those tanks. It would hurt us badly to lose them.
2. If the overcast were to prevent spotter aircraft from directing naval gunfire, we
might lose the effectiveness of our principal weapon in the initial assault. 134
With but slight superiority in ground forces, we had banked heavily on this fire
support to help break through the water's edge defences. Fear of losing the
naval gunfire worried me more than the likelihood of a washout in heavy-
bomber missions.
3. The Channel could be distressingly cruel to GI stomachs. A heavy surf might
defeat our troops with sea-sickness before they landed. 135
A further early morning weather meeting was planned for 0400 but by
2300 every vessel in the assorted fleets had been given the green light
and by midnight the convoys were moving. Eisenhower went back to his
trailer to sleep but was awoken at 0330 by the buffeting of the wind. The
planned 0400 meeting to consider recalling or confirming the invasion
began at 0415 - just as the rain and wind died away. Eisenhower listened
to his commanders once more and despite the fears of the air force lead-
ers he was more concerned that a postponement would undermine both
morale and the secrecy they had worked so hard to maintain. Moreover,
he was also certain that the German defences would grow stronger with
each day and fearful that the German secret weapons might be able to
inflict terrible damage on the crowded British harbours. 136 Finally - and
after a full eight minutes of silence according to Air Vice Marshall Robb
- he announced: 'OK Let's go' 137 He then went back to his trailer and
wrote out a press release for the possible failure of the landings:
Our landings in the Cherbourg-Havre area have failed to gain a satisfactory
foothold and I have withdrawn the troops. My decision to attack at this time and
place was based upon the best information available. The troops, the air and the
Navy did all that bravery and devotion to duty could do. If any blame or fault
attaches to the attempt it is mine alone. 138
