348
COMMANDING IN CRISES
commander in the west a free hand, every situation is discussed at length.
We'll miss the right moment to strike back and
then it will be too late ?86 Thus 160 German tanks were stood to, fulled
and ready to move, and they sat there waiting. Not until lotu did fliter
order the 12th SS HJ and the Panzer Lehr to resume the movement
towards Caen that Von Rundstedt had ordered and OKW stopped 7 It
was what General Warlimont called the chaos of leadership in the Leader
State. The decision - to leave things as they were - according to Lit
eneral Zimmerman, chief of operations, left von Rundstedt fuming
with rage, red in the face, and his anger made his speech unintelligible' 89
Xet the specine question of releasing the OKW Panzer divisions was not
even raised at the conference called on D-Day and von Rundstedt failed
Inevitably, the hopelessly byzantine command structure hamstrung
te bedbully of te commanders on the ground. As ambrose concludes.
The truth is that despite individual acts of great bravery and the fanaticism of some
rachrmacht troops, the performance of the Wehrmacht's high command, mide-
ranking officers, and junior officers was just pathetic. The cause is simply put: they
were afraid to take the initiative. They allowed themselves to be paralyzed by
batle orders coming from far away that bore no relation to the situation on the
battleneld. Ine contrast between [the Allied leaders] in adjusting and reacuns
U despered statons, due their German counterparts could not have bee
And where stupidity fell away, naiveté replaced it: between 1430 and
1500 on D-Day the Ist SS Panzer division LAH was ordered to remain in
Belgium. On 9 June German intelligence reported that the main Allied
landing would occur on 10 June in the Pas de Calais region and Ist so
Panzers were moved to bruges to prepare for an attack that never came.
The attack had already occurred over 200 miles away. As Rommel drove
back to Normandy his diag osis of the situation to his driver, Helmin
wang, was dire: "If I was commander of the Allied forces right now I could
anish the war in fourteen days'. General Erich Marcks, commander o
the XXXIV Corps until his death on 12 June, would have agreed for he
had thought that 10 June was the last date to defeat the invasion.??
13.8 Conclusion
Rommel was unduly pessimistic for it took another 11 months to finish
the war in Europe but nevertheless he recognized that a fatal blow had
THE AIRBORNE ASSAULTS
349
been struck against Fortress Europe from which it would be almost
impossible to recover. What is intriguing about the air drops is that they
embody a microcosm of the critical difference between the Allies and the
Nazis While the latter's success in the first two years of the war had been
grounded in
Auftragstaktik
- mission control - that replaced
Befeblstaktik - an uncompromising order, that flexibility at the local level
nad been progressively undermined by Hitler.
Ironically, while the
conventional units of the Allies tended to follow in the tracks of
Befehlstaktik their more elite units,
including
the airborne
worked through Aufragstaktik. This may have partly due to the nature
of their tasks but also derived from their cultural preference for devolved
control. On D-Day the massive dispersal of paratroopers and guder
troops effectively forced Allied commanders to work through small and
often informal structures. In contrast, where Auftragstaktik was precisely
what the situation required from the German commanders their shae
back into Befehlstaktik destroyed what chance they had for throwing the
invaders back into the sea. That chance was significant: if the Panzer divi-
sions had moved towards the coast when they were first ready all the
landings could have resembled Omaha and the whole operation might
have been in jeopardy. As it was the Allied confusion in the air mirrored
the German confusion on the ground, giving the seaborne troops a night-
ing chance of gaining and retaining a foothold in Normandy: Command
- good and bad - not luck, was the springboard to success.
