210
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
problems the American army generated for itself through its promotion
of a status-based hierarchy that mirrored their British allies.
This fed
directly into the overtly elitist and discriminatory allocation policy that
saw the regular army despising the National Guard, African-American
troops shunted into service roles and the least educated white troops
corralled into the rifle companies. In turn this policy was rationalized by
recourse to the technical nature of the war machine the US was building.
this was a war of technology that could be managed to victory, rather
than led to victory; though, as I shall suggest in later chapters, that tech-
nology was itself soaked in social and cultural mores and was never the
objective' choice of scientific analysis. Yet, despite - and in some was
because of - the exclusionary and elitist nature of the army, those soldiers
who did end up metaphorically at the bottom and literally swimming in
blood, constructed self-images that inverted their status from the loves.
to the toughest. And this machismo was embodied not just in their resi
in te towards soldiers of all ranks that were not at the sharp end, but abo
in their clothing and, more importantly, in their small group solidarity a5
bands of brothers. so while the problem of winning the war did noc
contain a lage element or management, successful Command on t
ground was also necessary and almost always related to this boundan.
constructing phenomenon: leaders, both combat officers and sergeants,
had to gain access to, or at least respect from, this social group in orde
to cad it anywhere. Unfortunately, the top leadership failed to capitalize
on this tough their management of the replacement pony - noela
attempt to appease public opinion on signincant regional casualties. An"
result that critical social suppo se quagened over time and the proportion
of traumatized soldiers crept ever-higher.
This may also reflect the
scheral attitude of most american soldiers to the war: in marked contes
to their more corday motivated German enemies, most is init
preted their status more as employees of Uncle Sam rather than disciples
of Adolf Hitler. In the next section I consider how the latter developed.
9 Mobilizing the Germans:
the Wehrmacht and the SS
5.1 Introduction
German mobilization had started in 1935 and the system operated along
strict age categories. The 100,000 members of the Mannheer, the post-
Versailles Treaty army that the Germans had managed to preserve,
formed the nucleus of the army with many individuals assuming the posi-
tions of officers or NCOs in the new German army. In fact the Mannheer
was restricted to 4,000 officers - but had it had 18,000 SNCOs and
30,000 JNCOs so that with 50 per cent of the soldiers recognized as
having some formal leadership role it was effectively leaderful. After the
invasion of France in 1940, Hitler had even managed to demobilize
several categories of older troops (partly to employ them in munitions
factories for the future wars) but the categories - and the criteria for
avoiding military service - became progressively tightened as the war in
the east foundered and the war in the west began again. Only German
nationals were permitted to join the army, at least until 1942 forced a
change of policy when it began recruiting non- Russians from the USSR,
though the Waffen SS had recruited foreign volunteers from 1940.1
However, German economic organizati, / for war was never as effi-
cient as its military organization: it could turn out the most effective
tombat troops of any nation but fighting a long war required more thin
the Command of crises and the Leadership of Wicked Problems,
*quired the Management of Tame Problems, but the latter either eluded
hem or were never regarded as important. For instance, when Operauon
Barbarossa was launched in 1941 the Wehrmacht only took a few weeks
extra supplies with them - assuming that the Soviets could be destroyed
in just ten weeks of fighting:
Priorities were either not set or often
changed in line with Hitler's increasing penchant for intervention and
direction as the war progressed. In other vards, Command took increas
no precedence over both Leadership and Management. aced, it ti
colish campaign, he intervened only once when he ordered an an didel
on Warsaw on 15 Suumber (subsequently rescinded or
211
