212
MANAGING TAME PROBLEM:
Rundstedt's request) - Hitler had also wanted to invade the Soviet Unio
in the summer of 1940 originally but had been dissuaded by keite! and
Jodi. Beyond the logistical problems, the strategy was confused, it
three competing aims: destroy the Russian armies, seize the indura.
regions, and cut off the Baltic. Guderian was particularly солстк
"Three army groups, each of approximately the same strength, vet i
attack diverging objectives; no single clear operational objective seemed
to be envisaged'. 3
Yet for the most part the German economy,,
supported by it
conquests, survived well during the war. Indeed, food supplies remains!
stable - thanks to the wholesale transfer of supplies from occupied cour-
one, particularly the Netherlands, and working hours remained stable i.
50 hours per week. Only when this was increased to a standard 72 hou
week in the latter part of the war did absenteeism increase markedly and.
even then night shifts were rare. (The average British working week was
48.6 (51.2 for men). The total civilian workforce stood at 29 million
Germans (14.2 million men and 14.8 million women) and 7.1 foreign
workers (slaves, POWs and so on). By September 1944 over one third of
the workforce was non-German, but many other sources of labour were
unused. For example, s.5 million (of 5.7 million) Soviet POWs died l
their camps. By D-Day the German prisons held 190,500 prisoners and
the Wehrmacht had called up 12.4 million men and 3.3 million of thes
nad become casualties. An additional source of loss was the quarter of a
million Germans who were arrey soon the first half of 1944, 2,607 of
Whole were executed. Fence while the combat efficiency of the vera,
troops was usually higher than their enemies, the strategic leadership and
economic management was often palpably worse.
9.2 The Wehrmacht, the SS and the Ost battalions
the adoption of a static defer u strategy was in itself a novelty for the
German army. German strategy had long focused on offensive armoured
warfare deeply rooted in speed and un tensequence, decentralized deu
sion making to take advantage of l' al conditions, threats and opportu
tes, Despite the assertion that this form of Blitzkrieg Was a direc
un a uence of German economic realities (especially the inability t
"Sit a prolonged war through inadequate Management), there is die
evidence that economic "realties' conditioned the strategy. The strateg
was a cultural choice, not a determined consequence of economics." The
corollary of the over-rehance on formal leto ers on the part of the Allied
armies was its opposite in the German ally: they had proportionatel
MOBILIZING THE GERMANS: WEHRMACHT AND SS
213
fewer officers than either the American or British army and this necessar-
ily put more emphasis on NCO leadership.? For example, the US 29th
Infantry Division had 14,281 members, of whom 747 were officers (5.2
per cent). Of the 13,027 members of the German 352nd Infantry
Division, only 405 were officers (3.1 per cent). In general the British
Army was even more top heavy and operated with officers making up 6.6
per cent of the total at the beginning of the war, climbing to as many as
7.7 per cent of its total numbers by 1945.8 One of the reasons for the
extra American officers was the provision of formal reserves - or execu-
tives', should any of the original officers be killed or incapacitated. On
the German side all troops were expected to pick up the responsibilities
of leaders wherever necessary and it was not deemed essential to have a
'second team' waiting in the wings all the time?' In other words, the
German army had effectively deeper Leadership than either of the main
Allies: there were fewer formal chiefs but paradoxically more people will-
ing and able to become 'acting' chiefs as and when required or to prevent
their superiors from making mistakes. Once again this reflects the differ-
ence emphasis placed on the Management of problems - the US
approach - or the Leadership of problems - the German approach.
But the irony is that while the Germany army was much better
equipped to replace dead and injured leaders in the field, their lines of
authority at senior level were so deeply bureaucratic that the Wehrmachts
top hierarchy remained implacably inflexible.
To immobilize
American, and especially the British, army one only needed to kill or injure
the junior officers, but to immobilize the German army one only needed
to keep the senior leaders alive. This was not only with regard to the chaos
at the planning and production centres of the Reich induced by the Nazi
system' but also in specific military decisions made by Hitler. Four of
these were critical. First, his ill defined war objectives in the Soviet Union
that ensured that none was achieved. Second, his order to Paulus at
Stalingrad not to surrender that doomed the 250,000 Germans who died
plus 84,000 of the 90,000 who surrendered. Third, the Mortain counter-
attack in early August 1944 which played straight into the Allies' hands
and led directly to the slaughter at Falaise. And finally, the Ardennes
offensive in December 1944 that squandered whatever reserves the
Wehrmacht had left. In C94t that sqlers subordinate Generals either
failed to voice their concerns or allowed Hitler to bully them into submis
sion with catastrophic results for the Germans. Nor was it always the case
that refusal to accept Hitler's demands led to death or even dismissal:
Kesselring frequently refused to accede to Hitler's Whim but remained in
command, at least until injured in an air attack on October 1944 in Italy.
He had recovered sufficiently to resume control in February and then
