326
COMMANDING IN CRISES
of the beaches. The two US airborne divisions, the 85th and the 1015t
were to drop behind Utah Beach and secure the western flank, the Britsn
Oth Airborne Division was to drop east of Caen and secure the easten
flank.
The 'All-American' 82nd Airborne Division,
led by Major-General
Matthew B. Ridgeway, was originally a triangular division with two
Parachute Infantry Regiments (PIRs) (504th and 505th) and one Glider
Infantry Regiment (GIR) (325th). The division had been involved in the
invasion of Sicily on 9 July 1943 where one-third of the gliders (69) had
been cast-off too early and crashed into the sea and 56 more gliders were
Sattered over a 25 mile area; only 12 landed in the right place? In
November 1943 the two parachute regiments were recalled to Britain to
plan for D-Day but the 504th Regiment stayed on active service in lay
until April 1944 and was unfit to participate in the Normandy landing,
ts Place was taken by the 507th and 508th PIRs. The 12,000 troops of
the 82nd destined to land on D-Day were based at Leicester.*
the one Airborne Division was originally supposed to top west o
Sauveur Le Vicomte - to the north-west of the 101st Airborne Division.
The paidenute drop of its three sane; timed for 0100 on D-Day anu
aimed to cut off the Cotentin peninsular by destroying the bridges over
he River Douve. At 0300 the s25th Glk, carrying reintorcements and
field artillery, were due in to support the three PIRs. In fact, the drop
cone of the 82nd had been moved ten miles east towards St Mere-Eglise
across the Merderet River on <o May, Just ten days before the planne
after information was
received from G-2 (the intelligence
intion of the General Staff at SHAEF) on 14 May that the German 915t
Infantry Division had moved from Nantes to the base of the Cotenti
peninsular - exactly where the drop had originally been planned.®
The "Screaming Eagles, the American 101st Airborne, under Major-
veneral MeekenD, taylor, was a new unit, formed from dements of the
82nd Division in August 1941. It also comprised three
Infantry Regiments, the 50lst, 502nd, 506th, and one Glider Infant
Regiment, the 327th. Its first CO, Brigadier General Lee, told his new
recruits at their inception: The lOlst has no history, but it had a
renacerous with desany. But Lee was not part of that destiny because
he was ill in spring 1944 after it had been shipped to England in
september 1943 along with the 3rd Armoured Division, and Maxwell
Taylor replaced him. Maxwell Taylor was not a paratrooper but, in line
with the traditions of the airborne, he jumped with them over Normandy
in what was to be only his third jump.
The 101st was to drop north of Carentan behind the Utah Beach arca
to secure the exit routes or 'draws' and the key bridges at Carentan -
THE AIRBORNE ASSAULTS
327
which were the links between the two American beaches and a key area
for cutting off the Cotentin peninsular and attacking Cherbourg. The
arca had been heavily mined making control over the exit routes of crit-
ical importance.
Major-General Richard Gale was in command of the British Oth
Arborne ® Gale had won the Military Cross in the First World War and
took over the newly formed Ist Parachute Brigade in September 1941.
Besides protecting the eastern flank of the Allied invasion beaches, the
6th Airborne
Division had three
specific
coup de main (surprise)
missions. First, it had to disable the Merville battery which was thought
to be capable of shelling Sword Beach with its 150mm guns. It Colonel
Otway and the 9th Parachute Brigade supported by some of the 3rd
nee: Brigade would be responsible for this. they would be rem
forced by three Horsa Gliders, each carrying sU members of yth
rarachute battalion to assist in the assault at 0430. Second, It had to
capture the bridges over the Orne River and the parallel canal that
Protected the castern flank of the invasion. The intact bridges would then
allow Allied reinforcements to deploy to the east and secure the tanks or
the beach-head from enemy incursion.
Howard,
Six gliders under Major John
and
carrying
Oxfordshire
Buckinghamshire
180 troops of the
2nd
Light Infantry and
Field Company
Royal
Engineers, had the unenviable task of capturing two bridges cast of later,
one Over te Urne River and one over the calla de Denouvie. the latter
subsequenty known as the Pegasus bridge are the cap bag bete
ist and 6th Airborne Divisions? They would be reintorced by No. 4 and
cements of No.10 Commando that would land on sword beach an
restroy the coastal defence battery at the site of the former Casino Der
marching the six miles inland to the bridges. A third task was the destrue-
tion of four bridges over the River Dives at Robehomme,
Bures (two
bridges) and Troarn, and one bridge ovin the stream at Varaville.
All
these blown bridges would impede enemy reinforcements from the eas
and were to be executed by a mixed Anglo-Canadian unit led by Major
Tim Roseveare.
13.3 The 82nd Airborne
the 20,000 paratroopers of the British 6th Airborne, and the US 82nd
and 10lst Airborne Divisions, left Britain from 22 airfelds on board
1,200 transport planes (primarily C-47 Dakotas) and 700 giders - the
largest airborne assault in history, ' Some aspects of this operation could
not be tamed - that is practised for - and the pilots of the paratroop
