292
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
fitted with the available 90mm guns while the Commander of the Army
Ground Forces demanded a block on such a development since it would
"encourage tank units to stalk enemy tanks' - a job best left, according to
doctrine, to the tank destroyers. As General McNair (the arch-proponent
of tank-destroyers) wrote to Marshall in November 1943 to decry the
utility of the alternative T26 Pershing tank that was a match for the
Panthers and Tigers: 'There can be no basis for the T26 tank other than
the conception of a tank versus tank duel - which is believed unsound
and unnecessary. The primary mission of tanks is the destruction of those
hostile elements which are vulnerable to them - not anti-tank guns' 109
So while the Germans - in response to the attacks by the well armoured
and gunned Soviet tank, the T34 - began building even better armoured
and gunned tanks, such as the Panther and the Tiger, the American
designers divided their resources between new tank-destroyers to break
up German Panzer formations, and tanks to exploit the apparent gaps
that the tank destroyers would create. Here is an interesting case for the
Tame/Wicked division. The decision to continue with the Sherman
certainly smacks of a Tame approach because the Pershing was, for the
US army, a total break with traditional doctrine and thus fits neatly
within the Wicked criteria.
The final chance to provide a viable tank to lead the D-Day invasion
occurred in January 1944 at a demonstration held on Tidworth Down
for all the Allied commanders to evaluate their weaponry. After the small
arms and artillery was demonstrated the Sherman was shown, followed
by a film of the M26, the Pershing. No working model of this tank
existed in the UK at the time but the American ordnance and armoured
forces board had tested and approved it and the main production site, the
Tank Automotive Centre in Detroit, was ready to go into immediate
production and its production schedules implied that it would be ready
for D-Day. At the demonstration the most senior armoured commander
was Gieneral Patton. Despite opposition, particularly from the American
General Rose, who wanted the Pershing to replace the Sherman, Patton's
view prevailed and the production of the Pershing was subordinated to
the Sherman. As Cooper concludes: "This turned out to be one of the
most disastrous decisions of World War Il' 110 In effect Patton's Tanks
conception of the tank as (lightly) armoured cavalry - with an emphasis
on speed - stymied the positi-a toponsidering the tank as a new mode
Nonethalass ne sOOn ac the Shermane landed in Normandy the varif.
erous complaints of the tankers and the field commanders rose to chal-
lenge Patton's support for the Sherman. After just five miles into
Normandy the 3rd Armoured Division lost 87 Shermans and requested
TECHNOLOGIES
293
that Washington reverse its decision to place Sherman construction ahead
of Pershing. Even the AFB who had fought so hard to ensure the
Sherman prevailed over the Pershing subsequently complained to the
Ordnance Department - ironically the only institutional supporter of the
Pershing - that the army was having 'to close to short ranges in order to
destroy opposing tanks.
The destruction of the enemy has been accom-
plished at great cost in tank materiel and personnel and is reflected in the
current critical shortage of tanks' 111
At last, but after D-Day in June 1944, an order for Pershings was
finally placed, but even then it was delayed until December 1944 by an
attempt by the Army Ground Forces to change the gun back from a
90mm to a 76mm weapon. The other concern with the Pershing was
that the AB wanted to ensure that no weapon system entered service
until it had been thoroughly tried and tested.
In fact several weapon
'stems entered combat in precisely this format but the AFB was assidu-
ous in demanding a delay to the T26 while all its technical problems were
resolved. In contrast both the Panther and the Tiger entered service in
Sperimental formats and still managed to inflict severe damage on the
Soviet Red Army. The Soviet's T-34 was admittedly built extremely
thackly and had a poor finish - but then it was not expected to last more
than 14 hours. The Sherman was tested to a 40-hour reliability minimum
- though again many did not last that long. 112
Once the US Army had demonstrated the weakness of the Sherman in
a test in early July 1944, Eisenhower reacted quickly to solve the prob-
em, but by then beefing up the Pershing order would take a further four
onths, until November 1944, to roll off the production line. But this
is to ignore the test in January 1944 which had already shown what the
Pershing could do, and it could have been ready for D-Day (over five
months away) - if Patton had not decided against it and in favour of the
Sherman. Small wonder, then, that Patton's response to Eisenhower's
quest for reports about the Sherman was that it was perfectly adequate
for the jod, especially si-tam its speed and mobility. g
Of cours the hacare of Normandy undermined the sionificance of
mobility and enhanced the importance Of (German) armour and gun
power, but even as the battle moved to the Roer plain in November
1944, the mud proved impassable to the Shermans because, despite
being lighter than their German opponents, the narrow tracks of the
Sherman converted the smaller weight into a greater pressure through
the tracks. But it still took two further events to push the Us authorties
nto mobilizing all their resources for the production of fershings. the
no event was the Germans breakthrougs in the Ardennes, which began
cucing the Shermans to shreds in alge numbers and at this point the
