170
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
many resented the way the disciplinary system seemed more intent on
humiliating them
than on
organizing a combat unit.
The Anglo-
Amenican commands followed conventional military doctrine in assum-
ing that the only way to create and maintain a mass army was through
mass coercion, to the point where individuals did not think for them-
selves but reacted instantly and positively to whatever command they
were given. For different reason both the UK and the USA adopted very
similar training methods. In the US the military establishment deemed
the problem to be the endemic individualism of US culture, but for the
British the problem was configured as one relating to the 'collective ind-
vidualism' which became manifest in British trade unions, a utilitarian
adherence to self-protective collective resistance. The solution to both
problems was the same: the Anglo-American armies would administer
"intensive shock treatment'. That would render the individual helpless
before the institutional power of the military, and this would then allow
the latter to rebuild the former in its own image. As Henry Giles quickly
if youd on joining the US Army, The first thing the army teaches you is
It you've got any brains it's best to keep it to yourself' 63 This shock
treatment would force the individual to recognize that the group was
citral not the individual, and that the group's role was not to protect is
own interests but to advance the interests of the body politic and its
substitute authority, the army.
The result was a British "bullshit' and American 'Chickenshit" system
that saw soldiers digging 6 foot graves for a carelessly dropped cigarette,
cleaning tollets with tootndrusnes and endlessly perrecting marchin
techniques on the parade square. Little seemed to have changed since the
1926 British infantry-training manudoreneg had just two topics: (1), 155
pages on various aspects of drill; (2), 64 pages on 'ceremonial' o* Lucku
10 the Germans there was little or nothing that resembled combat train-
ing, but then that would all be taken care MY by the orders that would be
sily the oters. they, in turn, havirs been thoroughly versed d
send traditing would be "naturally' capable of doing wider wa
necessary to maintain that most impod ant winning tormula: morale. Int
924 Bas in cavalry training manual was little better: of the sl/ Page,
21 pages (56 per cent) were devoted to equitatil, 96 pages (-5 per
cent, were devoted to drill and ceremoni and only 30 pages p
my to weapons and field operations. Thee ontrast with the Roya fil
rorce, where professional and technical expertise was far more significant
und disciplinary perfection of limited relevance, could hardly be mu
complete. It was not a nabonal cultural hang-up but a social class hang
up. Solly the taming of the British working class began on the parade
ground how were the skills of combat to be instilled?
MOBILIZING ANGLO-CANADIANS, COMMONWEALTH, VOLUNTEERS
171
7.4 Training the British Army
The British began recruiting 200,000 officers as soon as conscription was
inaugurated. In 1939 the British Army operated on the ratio of one offi-
cer to every 15 soldiers and this ratio was decreased through the war so
that by 1945 one in every 14 members of the army was an officer - a
higher proportion than either the German or US armies.
In 1939 aspir-
ing officers were usually required to spend some time as regular soldiers
from where, with the recommendation of the unit commander, they
attended one of the 35 Officer Cadet Training Units for further training
of about four months, depending on their specialism. By the end of
1942, following the German precedent, War Office Selection Boards
were established to improve the selection procedures. For those officers
going beyond junior positions, and uninterested in regimental attrac-
tions, the Staff Colleges at Camberley, Haifa (Middle East) and Quetta
(India) provided 6 month courses for batches of between 60 and 200
officers. 06
For non-officer recruits to the British Army six weeks basic training
was provided, comprising drill, physical fitness, weapons handling, map
reading and tactics. The time was used to assess recruits through the
ubiquitous Tests of Elementary Training (TOET), and recruits were allo-
cated to various units on the basis of their performance, their preferences
and the service's requirements. Additional special-to-Arm' training for
different units of the army then began at the destination unit.
The shortest Arms training (ten weeks) went to the
infantry,
oreneg, as was the US intantry, of those who had the lowest skills and
Q test scores, plus those who had volunteered. The Royal Signals who
received 30 weeks training was the longest of all. Royal Engineers, OF
sappers' had 17 extra weeks of tuitinod sane those sent to the armoured
divisions received Z4 weeks extra training, Party because marty-five
od san armoured Fighting vehicles (AFV) were in service during the
war, and partly because the intention was to ensure that each soldier
could operate as a crew member of any armoured vehicle in an emed
geney. Even bicycles had to be trained with. Corporal Bill Bowdidge, 2nd
Battalon Royal Warwickshire Regiment, recalled now the adopton or
the vehicle called for new methods of drill and formation riding;
company would fall in the usual way with the front wheels of our bicy-
des pointing to the right at an angle of 15 degrees, the orcers l mont
of their piatoons holding their bicycles in the same way and the company
commander, with his bicycle, facing the company. 7
After A Is training, each soldier would spend around o weeks with a
reserve division before moving to a "holding unit' where the soldie
