64
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
crazy. If we're expecting an invasion the squadrons should be moved up
not back! And what happens if the attack comes during the transfer? My
supplies can't reach the new bases until tomorrow or maybe the day after.
You're all crazy!'28
The Allies had 11,500 aircraft available on D-Day, including 3,800
fighters, and they hit Normandy exactly at the time that Priller forecast,
but by then Priller's fighter wing had shrunk from 124 planes to just 2.29
tarly on the morning of D-Day Priller received a phone call from 2nd
Fighter Corps HQ informing him that some sort of invasion is taking
place. I suggest you put your wing on alert'. Priller was less than pleased:
Who in hell am I supposed to alert? I'm alert. Wodarezyk is alert! But
you fatheads know I only have two damned planes! 30 Even if there had
been more planes available to Priller it is not clear whether there would
have been enough fuel available for anything like a constant assault upon
the beaches because just the day before D-Day a message had demanded
that only pre-authorized flights could take place, due to the renewed
interference with (the) production of aircraft fuel by Allied action' 31
Thus the Luftwaffe was noticeable by its absence and by 1000 hours
although German aircraft had been seen between 35 and 50 miles south
off Le Havre none had ventured near the beaches and the Allies had only
lost one plane, missing after being hit by ground-fire.
As Lt General
Dihm, Special Assistant to Rommel suggested after the war:
Except for this air supremacy, it would have been possible, in my opinion, to
Prevent a successful invasion during the first days after the initial assault. These
were the most critical days for the Allies. Later, the constant and increasing rein-
forcement of the Allies could be less and less equalized by the arrival of German
reinforcements, hindered by the destruction of important traffic routes. 32
In fact, the Luftwaffe had made several attempts to attack the beaches
but seldom penetrated the defensive cover provided by the Allied aur
forces. For example, the 3rd Airforce (covering France, Belgium and the
Netherlands) group of Ground Attack Aircraft had two squadrons of
Focke-Wulf FEW 190s and was responsible for virtually all the ground
attack missions over the Normandy beaches of D-Day. Five were shot
down as they moved forward from Saint Quentin to their forward base
at Laval on the morning of 6 June. In the afternoon, 13 aircraft set out
to attack the British on Sword Beach but all bar two planes were driven
oft by fighter cover. The two that made it had no time to assess whether
they had inflicted any damage with their bombs. The following day 24
FW 190s again headed for Sword and this time none managed to get
through. In the meantime two FW 190s were shot down by Mustangs
ALLIED AIR STRATEGY
65
and four were destroyed in an attack upon Laval airfield. On D-Day+2
three attacks were launched against the beaches and none got through,
though one FW 190 was shot down. D-Day+3 saw six FW 190s and two
ME 109s destroyed for no palpable gain and the 3rd Group was stood
down to await reinforcements since they had run out of aircraft. 33
The German fighter cover was provided primarily by the 168 Me 109s
and FW 190s of the lst Group of the Il Fighter Corps (Jagdkorps) from
Le Mans airfield (200 more planes arrived on D-Day+2 and a further 100
on D-Day+3). These planes had virtually no radar assistance by D-Day
and by D-Day+3 all the planes were fitted with a 550lb bomb for attacks
on the ships off the coast - but none of the pilots had any experience in
ground attack operations and no ship was hit in either the attacks of 8 or
9 June. On 10 June the airfield at Le Mans was bombed by the RAF and
half the planes were destroyed on the ground, the rest had to move to
Alençon. In the following week the Ist Group of the 2nd Jagdkorps
claimed to have shot down 12 Allied planes for the loss of nine of their
own pilots (25 per cent of their D-Day strength). 34
In the event the Germans claimed to have made 319 sorties on D-Day
though Allied figures put the number much lower with only 36 over the
Anglo-Canadian beaches, and of these seven were shot down, while the
US 9th Air Force shot five more down. When four Ju-88s did appear
briefly over Omaha at dusk on D-Day one was immediately shot down
by anti-aircraft fire from the ships and the other three fled the scene. Off
Gold Beach LCF2 (Landing Craft Flak) shot down a German fighter on
D-Day35 while beach balloons on the US beaches brought down one
fighter and the 474th AAA shot down a P 51 with 'friendly fire' on D-
Day+1 off the American beaches.
So good was the information from
Ultra by this time that warnings of three Luftwaffe raids were received by
the beach commanders before the planes appeared - one raid arriving
four hours after information was received that it had been ordered. 36
Despite this, the HQ ship for co-ordinating fighter-cover against incom-
ing Luftwaffe attacks, HMS Bulolo, was itself bombed on 7 June in an
attack which killed three officers - although the FW 190 that made the
attack was itself shot down by anti-aircraft fire from other ships.3? Only
one other German attack caused any significant damage when a single
FW109 destroyed over 100,000 gallons of fuel and 400 tons of ammu-
nition stored on Sword Beach on D-Day+1. On the Allied side 14,000
sorties were flown and 127 aircraft shot down. 38
The results of the destruction of the Luftwaffe were evident not just
on D-Day but for several weeks afterwards. When the breakout through
St Lô was being organized the US army had 4,400 vehicles in an area of
about one square mile. This was contrary to all traditional tactics which
