318
COMMANDING IN CRISES
as did the British 6th Grenadier Guards and the 8th Royal Fusilies.*
Just after D-Day a Canadian paratroop battalion went on hunger strike
in protest against the harsh discipline imposed by their new commander.
Later in the campaign for Caen, on 11 July, a section of the British 5ih
Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry (DCLI) fled before a German
counter-attack:
They had come running back in panic through the ranks of the (4th) Somerst
A wounded officer of the DCLI had been trying to prevent them; he had been hit
in the jaw, so that part of his face had dropped, and he was waving a pistol and
trying to shout, making horrible sounds ... Some of the Somersets were so badly
rattled that one sergeant had leapt into a sitting position on his slit trench, pointed
his rifle down the line of his own men, and shouted that he would shoot che fint
bastard who moved' 55
As one unnamed bnitish officer explained about his battalion in
Normandy: "It is no longer a battalion but a collection of individuals.
I here is naturally no esprit de corps for those who are rightened (as we
all are to one degree or another) to fall back on. I have twice had to draw
my revolver on retreating men'. 56
Thus effective commanders in a crisis take coercive action against their
own followers but the problem is not explaing why these incidens
occurred and how they are resolved but why they occurred so rarel.
after all, it was widely known that the British and Americans were very
unlikely to shoot deserters - in contrast to the First World War when the
British alone found 31,000 soldiers guilty of desertion and executed 266.
Indeed, desertion, or absence without leave (AWOL) was the largest
single offence heard by the British Army Courts Martial. In 1940-4.
12,000 soldiers were found guilty, rising to 20,000 by 1943-41. In
fect, desertions rose not with defeats but with the prospect of final
The same cannot be said for the German army, though disciplinary
problems only became significant towards the end of the war. Twenty
thousand German soldiers were executed during the war, primarily on
te easter kent. In operation barbarossa, for example, members or
the Ss Kampfgruppe Nord deserted before a Soviet counter attack at
Salla. Even the soldiers on the western front became a target for the S
in the last few months of the war when many were executed for deser-
tion. 60 4,000 were shot between January and September 1944, 1,605 of
these for desertion. 61 And by this time many Allied soldiers began to
recognize that the replacement German troops were neither trained,
armed, nor led as well as had the initial Wehrmacht soldiers. 62
319
COMMANDING
12.3 Combat and ideology
It also seems to have come as a shock to both sides when the stereotyped
chemy failed to correspond to the assumed pattern. Fred L. Rau with the
USAF recalled a young Luftwaffe pilot, captured on his first mission at
Christmas 1944 stating that 'Hitler is a madman and a butcher' but
explaining that did not fight for Hitler, but for Germany 63 Contrarily,
the German photographer, Hans Ertl, was clearly surprised by the atti
tude of the British officers he witnessed being captured in Normandy:
Whereas the ordinary British soldiers willingly replied to the questions put by our
interrogators, the officers behaved in
downright arrogant,
even insolent,
manner. There was no more of that the fight is over attitude; no longer anyica in
of the fairness and comradeship which I remembered from the battles in Africa in
1741. There, the first thing you did was offer the captured enemy a cigarette
order to smoke a 'pipe of peace'. Here, you had to reckon with one of those hate
filled British officers possibly knocking the proffered cigarette out of your hand,
deliberately to provoke a serious argument. 64
There were, however, few ideological zealots in the Allied armies
whose perspective ranged far beyond the day to day living and dying that
surrounded them. And that was especially true for the North African war,
often fought out in vast empty spaces without many civilian spectators or
casualies. Indeed, this may be one reason that Rommel was so often
regarded by the British troops as a professional soldier - who played by-
the rules - rather than a soldier who never spoke out against Hitler's poli-
cies, unless they seemed to place German success in jeopardy. And it was
Rommel who volunteered to become the military adviser to the Nazi
Party's SA in 1933 - hardly the action of a professional soldier disinter-
ested in political machinations. Yet for most soldiers such issues were
far beyond their everyday experience:
Fite the average soldier, once he was in combat, his view became microcosmic, and
he lived only from day to day, barely daring think about the end of the war,
increasingly unconscions that kie had any meaning beyond the unreminting shas
linew of endles combat. The soldieli-became increasingly bound up with his tiny
fraternity of comrades who shared his sufiteng, and they alone came to represent
the real world. In the last analys, the slither konght for them and them shove,
because they were hit friendhe and yeese the delined himself oly in the hape ch
their respect and needs. 46
Ur as the British Second Army's poychiatried, uggested in July 1944,
The emotional ties among, the men and between men and then thikers
