SEE HE
TUL
410
COMMANDING IN CRISES
sorts stood close together on the beach and in the water, broadly eche-
loned in depth. And the entire conglomeration remained there intact
without any real interference from the German side! I clearly understood
the mood of the German soldier who missed the Luftwaffe. It is a
wonder that German soldiers fought hard and stubbornly here? 222
But the future could only get worse for the Germans, for whom no
hope of reinforcement or relief was now available. The German 352nd
Division had suffered about half the absolute US total of casualties on D-
Day at 1,200 but this was three times the number of relative casualties at
20 per cent of the total strength available. By 9 June the entire Omaha
coastline was in US hands and the 116th was rested. Ziegelmann calcu-
lated that by that time the fighting strength of the 352nd Division had
been reduced by two thirds and it was now defending a corps area
(requiring two divisions (six regiments)) with the equivalent of just one
regiment. (By 13 June the 352nd Divisional strength was down to 25 per
cent; the following day the 29th Infantry Division had suffered 2,400
casualties, 17 per cent of its initial strength; within four more days 25 per
cent (3,500) of the 29th's initial strength had become casualties, with
1,000 deaths. By the end of July 90 per cent of the 29th Division's rifle
companies - 5,211 soldiers - had become casualties. 223
On the evening of 9 June Kraisse ordered his remaining defenders to
retreat - contrary to Hitler's orders - to the line of the River Elle - a
night march of between seven and 16 miles depending on the sector -
and to dig in and await reinforcements. These were on their way. On o
June the 984th Infantry Regiment of the 275th Infantry Division
stationed in Brittany began moving east with the Kampfaruppe Heins.
The to day journey of 125 miles by rail took seven days as most of
the travelling had
to undertaken at night on foot.
Fallshirjägerdivision (3rd EJ (Parachute) Division), which was only
raised in November 1943, was directed to support Kraiss on his western.
side, did not even start their 190 mile move from western Brittany until
the evening of 7 June and there was only enough transport and füel to
carry a third of the troops, the rest had to go on foot.224
Still the Germans rerused to deploy their forces in the north to help in
Normandy. Even General Bradley could not believe that the Germans
would remain fooled by Operation Fortitude for so long:
in devising this cover piah, we had hoped for no more than a modest delay, a week
or two at most, untu we had sufficient divisions ashore to secure the Normand
landing. Even now 119911, I cannot us terstand why the enemy believed for so
ung in so transparent a hoax. For once we landed in Normandy, only a tool cou
have thought us capable of duplicatecoro gigantic an effort elsewhere 225
THE AMPHIBIOUS LANDINGS
411
Luckily for the Allies that fool was Hitler but there were, by this time,
many on the German side who did know that the Normandy invasion
must be the main force of the attack. Major Hayn of the 84th Corps, for
example, reported at a meeting on the evening of D-Day that: 'Three
airborne divisions have been positively identified. That's three quarters of
all the parachute units known to be in England. As well there are US elite
formations of the Ist and 4th Divisions. It is incomprehensible that over
there they would sacrifice their best attack units for the sake of a mere
diversionary manoeuvre'. Major Wiegman reported from the Caen area
that 'The British 3rd and Canadian 3rd Divisions had been identified by
about noon. We know that the 50th London and 7th Armoured
Divisions are also there. All that's missing is the 51st Highlanders and the
Ist Armoured Division and we'll have Montgomery's entire 8th Army
from Africa at our throats! If this isn't the invasion what are they going
to come with? 226
14.9 Conclusion
The intention on D-Day was to achieve a solid area approximately 10
miles deep and 60 miles wide. The width was achieved but there were
large gaps in it: between Omaha and Utah (11 mile gap), Omaha and
Gold (7 mile gap), and Juno and Sword (3 mile gap) but, apart from the
isolated 192nd Panzergrenadiers in the latter gap the discontinuous line
was not a critical issue because the battlefield as a whole had been
No single corps had achieved its aims. The British 30th Corps on Gold
had not reached Bayeux; the Canadian half of the British Ist Corps on
Juno had not reached the Bayeux-Caen road nor linked eastwards with
their counterparts on Sword - who were still short of Caen. On the
American side the 7th Corps on Utah had failed to secure the line of the
Merederet river nor linked up with the 82nd Airborne at St Mère Eglise
and, most critical of all, the 5th Corps on Omaha was only just beginning
to make significant progress inland and the Rangers at the Pointe du Hoc
were only just hanging on.
yet although no group had achieved its targets completely all had a
secure foothold and the impregnable Atlantic wall had only lasted
between one hour (Gold, Juno,
Sword and Utah) and one day
(Omaha). The British had reached the outskirts of Bayeux but neither
taken it nor Caen, nor cut the N-13 road that unked them; the
Canadians at Juno had achieved the greatest distance inland (6 miles)
but had not taken the airport at Carpiquet and had suffered the second
