266
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
Where mined beach defences remained submerged specialized underwa-
ter demolition teams were to be sent in to make sea-lanes safe and to
mark them for the following landing craft. However, safety had a cost:
the casualty rate of these teams was amongst the highest of all. On Utal
Beach - the safest of all - only 13 of the 40 Underwater Demolition
engineers survived the day, and only two of these were uninjured despite
the use of Kapok Jerkins, a novel protective suit designed to resist the
destructive power of underwater explosions.?
Following the underwater demolition squads were the combat engi:-
neers. The engineering requirements for D-Day were two: first to open
up 50 yard gaps in the wire and minefields to allow initial exits from the
beaches. These were to be opened up by special engineering assault
gapping teams. Second, behind the gapping teams, support enginering
teams would widen the gaps, set up the communications to link the
beach to the ships (including radios, semaphores and heliographs with
coloured lights to inform the ships what to send in the next wave), and
generally ensure an adequate traffic flow.
After D-Day the beach would be cleared by the engineering battalion
beach groups who would also be responsible for establishing ammunition
and fuel dumps. So important were the engineering tasks that 25 per cent
of all the troops landed on D-Day were engineers of some kind. For
example, on Omaha the first wave involved 1,450 assault intantry and
546 engincers (including 126 American Navy demolition experts,
though the normal proportion was 8 per cent. Omaha was 7,000 yard
long With between /0 yards of sand (at high-water mark (aWM)) and
400 yard (at low water mark (LWM;). It was covered by the oth and oth
Engineering Special Brigade making up the 5,632 members of the
Provisional Engineer special brigade Group. Another 2,500 enginee
landed with other units. (Utah was covered by a single unit, the Ist
Engineering Special Brigade).
yOmaha's obstacles comprised two main lines: 250 yards from the
HWM was a 50-yard deep line of Element C, Belgian Gates, covered
with Teller mines. Fifty yards closer to the beach was a 50-yard deep line
of wooden posts and ramps supported by three staggered rows of
hedgehog obstacles. (Fortunately, there were no Teller mined posts on
Utah).* By nightfall, about 34 per cent of the combat engineers on
Omaha were dead or wounded and 60 per cent of their equipment had
been lost or destroyed.' Moreover, they had been unable to complet
their task of blowing 16 gaps in the beach defences, though four had
been opened. Partly this was becauty the initial bombardment left many
defenders alive and fully capable of nt king the beach a no-go area. This
then slowed the demolition down so much that the rising tide covered
TECHNOLOGIES
267
many other obstacles before they could be dealt with. Partly it was
because the fire was so intense that many infantry soldiers crouched
behind the obstacles thus preventing the engineers from blowing them
In total, around 304 of the large landing craft of various forms were
lost or disabled in the initial assault on the Normandy beaches, half to
mined obstacles and the rest to artillery and accidents. The numbers
included 131 LCTs (97 on the Anglo-Canadian beaches and 34 on the
American beaches), and 21 LCIL) [carrying 200 soldiers] (9 Anglo-
Canadian and 12 American). The differential implies that the heavy US
casualties on Omaha were caused more by problems on the beach rather
than getting to the beach.?
Indeed, while the troops tip-toed carefully around the mined obsta-
des, and even before they tried to cross the triple line of concertina
barbed wire that was strung out along Omaha beach, the Whole beach
area would be under fire from the gun emplacements and the machine
guns. And since these were often set at oblique angles, the defenders
were protected from attackers' fire directly in front of them, while being
able to provide enfilading fire along a pre-set angle of the beach to the
side. Should the attackers appear to be gaining a foothold, the defenders
could often retire through a maze of concrete tunnels back to safety
some distance from the beach, often to the mortar units whose mortars
were already zeroed in onto specific beach positions.® In fact one analy-
sis suggests that the most lethal German weapon was the 81mm mortar
With an effective range of 2,500 yards which caused three times more
casualties than machine gun bullets. Indeed, there are claims that two-
thirds of all the Allied casualties in Normandy were due to mortars. 10
Most concerning to the Allied troops seemed to be the fact that the
norar shell, unlike most other shells, was almost inaudible in flight.
certainly very tew Allied soldiers were killed or wounded by the
uerman's secret beach weapon - the Goliath (Leichte Ladungstrager
SdKfz 3031) which was a remote (wire guided) controlled tracked
container filled with 75kg or 100kg of explosives. 2 But there was
another reason for the disproportionate losses at Omaha: the absence of
specialized armour used on the Anglo-Canadian beaches - the Funnies.
11.3 The Funnies
it was obvious after Dieppe, at least to (O-neral Paget, Commander in
nt rage and the bayonet', that is the time between the end of the sea and
or the Home Forces, that the gap between what he called the
