52
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
With five invasion beaches now planned (from west to east: Utah,
Omaha, Gold, Juno and Sword), the initial overall strategy was to secure
the flanks through airborne troops and move sufficiently far inland to
prevent the expected armoured counter-attack pushing the troops
straight back into the sea. If the Calvados coastline was isolated by the
pre-invasion bombing of the road and rail network, sufficient numbers of
troops, artillery and armour could be poured in to facilitate a rapid
assault upon Cherbourg thus in turn facilitating the liberation of France
by the winter of 1944. Precisely how this occurred was, and is, the
subject of much dispute. The British and Canadian troops failed to take
Caen early on as German armour raced to defend it, and the delay under-
mined the initial momentum of the invasion, a delay which was eventu-
ally ended by an American breakout, Operation Cobra, in the West under
Bradley who assumed command of the 12th Army Group on 1 August
with Patton in command of the Third (US) Army and Hodges leading
the First (US) Army.
omar Bradley, the son of poor farming stla k, had been commissioned
ET ut and enjoyed considerable support from Marshall and
Eisenhower throughout his career. Given his modest background - in
contrast to Patton's - Bradley was known as the 'GIs' General' and
regarded as a deliberative and methodical leader, again in complete
contrast to Patton but much closer to Montgomery's style. After
Operation Cobra, Montgomery claimed that he always intended to pes
the German forces at Caen to allow the Americans to swing round unhin-
dered; but there has been an immense amount of controversy over this
claim by Montgomery - or 'God Almonty' as the Canadians referred to
him 113 What is clear is that von Rundstedt, and the rest of the German
High Command, were uncertain whether Normandy was the real inva-
sion or just a large scale deception. Either way, it was preferable to keep
the main German defences against the Anglo-Canadian forces at Caen
because if it was a ruse they could be transferred faster from Caen than
from the American beach-head further west. If it was not a ruse then the
Caen defensive line blocked the direct route to
Moreover, since transportation was so difficult in Northern France, it was
actually easier to move the Germatt u cements around Paris and
south of Normandy, the short distance to Caen rather than the longer
distance to the Cherbourg region. 14 Bradley subsequently argued in
defence of Montgomery that although in the minds of most people
success in battle was measured in terms of mileage gained; the public
was stirred up by Monty, the less he would advance'. Note here the
would and it difficult to understand that the greater the hornets' nest
contrast between the US metaphor for war - American football - where
WESTERN ALLIED STRATEGY: BOXER AND KARATEKA
53
progress is measured in yards gained - and the British metaphor for war
- cricket, where whichever side accumulates the highest total score is the
eventual winner. More importantly, this then raises a problem for leader-
ship because whether the eventual success of Bradley's breakout was a
result of Montgomery's strategy or Bradley's skill depends upon which
source one believes. But a greater problem is establishing whether the
breakout was ever a result of any decision by a senior leader since there
were so many variables and so many individual and collective actions that
determined which way the course of the battle would go.
Part of the dispute hinges around the use of "phase
Montgomery in the April presentation of the final plan to the political
and military leaders. Montgomery had marked in phase lines to suggest
where he thought the Allies should have reached by certain days, finish-
ing with them reaching the Seine on D-Day plus 90. Bradley thought
they implied a level of rigidity which he disapproved of and he demanded
that the lines be removed from the American forces. Montgomery also
suggested, after the campaign, that it was obvious that the Germans
would have to funnel their reinforcements through Caen and therefore it
was the primary job of the Anglo-Canadian forces to stop them linking
up with their colleagues further west who would be the primary target
for the US forces (Montgomery, 1995: 106/8). D'Este (1983) claims
that Montgomery's 'hinge' was indeed the original plan, as noted on 7
April, but it was intended to be unleashed at Falaise not Caen and
Montgomery changed the plan retrospectively to maintain the myth of
his invincibility. Indeed, as Gray concludes, given Montgomery's claims
about Caen 'being taken by speed and aggression on D-Day itself...
there was no question of using the city as "a hinge" or maintaining a
defensive posture on the flank? 115
Either way, since the weather in early June over the Channel was so
poor the Germans decided that the invasion would not occur in the
immediate future; the Allies could not have organized the weather
indeed was an insoluble Wicked Problem - but they could, and did, take
advantage of the uncertainty it offered.
2.7 The weather
Several issues were important to the competing strategies for control over
Normandy but few were so indeterminate as the weather.
Given the
chances against the right wind, tides,
light and cloud cover, the Allies'
strategy hung precariously on the fickleness of the weather, even in
summer. In fact, the significance of the weather - especially cloud cover
