102
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
Cotentin peninsular was cleared of mines by US forces without any help
from the local Norman population whatsoever - even the many French
fishermen who stood to gain from the operation and also stood just
watching. Others seemed certain that the Germans would win and thus
to help the Allies in the short term was to court danger in the long term.
For example, Sapper Anderson was told by one Norman farmer that the
Germans would soon come and push the Allies 'back into the sea' 93 In
Brest, in contrast, the local Breton population were far more helpful. But
many French civilians, and many Normans, were active in the far more
dangerous activities of the French Resistance, the Maquis. Over 2,700
members of the Norman French Resistance are known to have died over-
all and around 3,000 were involved in action for Overlord: eight bridges
and 100 German vehicles were destroyed, and many rail and telephone
lines were cut in Normandy alone.*
Keeping the Germans misinformed was just one part of the Allied
communications strategy, a second element was securing information
from the French Resistance and informing them about targets and dates
for the invasion. While Rommel waited in May 1944 in almost complete
ignorance of Allied intentions, Eisenhower received 700 radio reports
and 3,000 written despatched from the French Resistance,95 The
network of spies organized by MI6 was particularly valuable in providing
information of the German defences to the Allies. Gilbert Renault, who
had worked for Eagle Star Insurance in France before the war, fled with
do Gaulle and returned via Spain to set up a network of Allied spies to
cover the coast of Normandy and Brittany. By the autumn of 1941
Renault had 100 agents working for him in Normandy alone and
managed to develop a further 14 networks or Centuries. Centurie-Caen,
led by Marcel Girard, a cement sales representative, involved 1,500
agents in 1944.
While several famous individuals joined the Resistance, such as Marcel
Marceau whose father had been executed by the Germans, and Jacques
Cousteau, the inventor of the aqualung, most of the activities were
undertaken by people who were, and often remain, unknown. Some,
however, achieved enduring positions in history. Amongst these was
René Duchez.
René Duchez, who worked with Centurie-Caen, was a 40 year old
house painter living in Caen but was originally from Lorraine - the site
of the First World War German occupation. On 8 May 1942 Duchez's
smatter of German had enabled him to be hired to decorate the local
offices of the Todt Organization on the Avenue Bagatelle in Caen. The
CO, Bauleiter Hugo Schnedderer, was organizing the building of the
coastal defences and had left the 12 duplica sets of blueprints marked
PLANNING TO MISLEAD
103
Sonderzeichungen-Streng Geheim (Special Blueprint - Top Secret) on his
desk while he explained what painting was required. When Schnedderer
left the room momentarily Duchez placed one set of blueprints - which
were clearly important even though he was unable to understand their
contents - behind a mirror in the room and then left. Three days later,
when he returned to start painting he discovered that Schnedderer had
been replaced by a new CO, Adalbert Keller, who saw no need for the
redecoration and refused Duchez access.
However,
when Duchez
suggested he would do the work for nothing Keller allowed him to start.
After two days' work, on 13 May, Duchez managed to steal the blue-
print, measuring 10 feet by 2 feet, hidden in a paint tin to the Centurie-
Caen HQ, the Cafe des Touristes in Caen. Still unaware that the blueprint
was for the Normandy section of the Atlantic Wall from Le Havre to
Cherbourg, Duchez passed the map to Maurice Himbert, a motorcycle
repairer with official permission to visit Paris to purchase spare parts. As
Himbert rode to Paris, Renault travelled there to pick up the blueprint,
but one of Renault's agents was arrested, tortured and revealed Renault's
identity and destination. As the Gestapo searched Paris for Renault he
escaped with his family through Port Aven in Brittany on a lobster boat
which rendezvoused with a British trawler and landed Renault and family
safely in England. On 20 June 1942 the blueprint was handed over, still
in its biscuit tin container, to the military authorities and its significance
finally assessed. As Colonel John Austin, an ex-Oxford University don
from Christchurch College and head of the Intelligence Section then
concerned with the Atlantic Wall, explained,
It scored a very great hit.
It turned attention sharply to this weakly defended sector - showing that
many earlier estimates of the strength had been alarmist.,
and that a
good deal of photographic interpretation had been in error' 96 Centurie-
Caen were not informed of the significance of their find, for fear of alert-
ing the Germans should one of their agents be arrested and reveal the
information, and the Todt Organization never officially reported the loss
of one of the blueprints to the Wehrmacht.
Thus the Allies had two years to work out how best to overcome the
critical first line defences of the Germans.?? The following year a trip
around Normandy by Hiroshi Oshima, the Japanese Ambassador to
Germany, resulted in a further long and detailed description of the
defences which was sent in code to Tokyo by radio but broken by the
American Purple Cipher.98
Centurie-Caen continued their observation and mapping activities
along the coast, with Robert Thomas co-ordinating the completion of
4,000 maps by the coastal agents, each responsible for a 15-mile streten.
Some, like Olgvie Vaudlin, noted developments on her knitting pattern
