196
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
relationships between the British and Americans but they also stimulated
the Americans to reconsider their whole approach, just as Dieppe had
from 26 January 1942, many of the US troops (and by 1945, 4
million people were in the Allied forces) spent at least some ume.
-tain, and huge numbers of bulldings and facilities were required. Fo
crample, the 185,000 personnel of the US 8th Air Force alone required
103 new airfields and the American forces as a whole occupied 100, u
1,100 locations across the country.65 When US troop
arrived in Britain many of the local people were shocked by what they
saw as the bizarre segregation policies sk the Us army. they were ei
mocktarted When Diack and white Americans began shooting each
other' , what Betty Mackay, a London evacuee living in Dorset, thought
resembled a Wild West guntight it -the streets of Portland's Kerome
The US War Department (1942) had issued all US service personnel
Sung to britain with a leatlet explaining sid le of the quirks of the brtish
but focusing far more on the similarities between the nations. After all,
the pamphlet suggested, 'in their major ways of life the British and
American people are much alikh. They speak the same language,
in belleve in representative governmeru in freedom of worsmp,
freedom of speech'. But it went on to rs nind the Americans that though
the british were different in some Whats, they were still Allies. Inus the
british lare reserved, not unfriendly … They are tough' but they were
ns braggarts and disliked Americans who were always 'showing oil, i
the end, the pamphlet went on, you could get used to the weather, ant
although they may seem 'Old fashioned' they were not enamoured o
neir Union Jack tag, they were 'flexible and sensitive', very courteous,
very law-abiding, and - eventually - could make "the best friends in the
world'. Indeed, the British even had women giving orders to men!"
cris sizing the King, graciously accept that the British could not make
Play, the amencans were warning o stay out of arguments, arou
coffee, but they had put up with mt re than most Americans would ever
hee. All in all the GIs were encouraged to 'be friendly', to 'play fair', not
to cat too much, not to say 'I look like a bum' in public, of say "bloody"
- in mixit company - 'it's one of their worst swear words', and not to
in the cinemas - 'even if it means missing the last bus"
avoid standing to attention when the British national anthem is playing
National Guard unit. The 29th Divisis n's General Reckford was also
the western end of Omaha was the ¿UU, of the 29th Division, a
replaced, by Major General Gerow traigraduate of the Virginia Military
Institute not West Point) in Febri", y 1942. Gerow was himself then
MOBILIZING THE AMERICANS: TECHNOLOGY AND ICEBERG
197
replaced in July 1943 by Major General Gerhardt - who was a West
Pointer and, like Patton insisted on wearing shiny cavalry boots. Despite
his reputation as a disciplinarian Gerhardt's first order gave the 29th
Division - used to training seven days a week - three days leave. As far as
Gerhardt (or 'Uncle Charlie' as the 29th Division troops called him after
this) was concerned, battles were won at the battalion level and if his
battalion commanders were not up to it, then he wanted them out. What
followed was a ruthless application of management assessment and that
was particularly likely if the officer in question was a National Guard offi-
cer: all three Regimental COs in the 29th Division were regular officers
and when they were replaced in Normandy they were replaced by regu-
lar officers. In an intriguing interrogation of the role of his leaders
Gerhardt asked all the junior officers about their senior officers and then
Put his three regimental commanders on 'trial' in front of their immedi-
ate subordinates,
asking them questions about military technique,
weaponry and drill that every soldier should know - including regula-
tions concerning the wearing of helnt et chin straps. He even insisted that
his own driver clean his jeep as often as it needed cleaning - sometimes
five times a day.
In the summer of 1943 Gerhardt's new second in command arrived -
General Norman Cota - ex Ist Division and ex Combined Operations
Headquarters (Bolkoski,
1999: 15-53,
The result of the
Gerhardt/Cota combination on the 29th Division was a focus on train-
a autod to some of the trainces at least, must have seemed fanatical:
some companies lost 50 per cent of their personnel in the process as it
got tougher and tougher. 68 Gerhardt insisted that the 29th Division stop
restricting the firing of live weapons to supervised sessions on the firing
range and he encouraged his soldiers to carry arms and fire at whatever
they liked if they were out on the Cornish moors.
Other novel forms of
training were less popular: swimming in frozen streams was one but this
was just a preparation for the amphibious assaults the division practised
from september 1943 on the northm modcoast between Braunton and
Barnstaple. At Bidetord Bay the Americans built a replica German strons
point with concrete walls six foot thick along the beach. Since the sile
was too small for practising divisional assaults,
the three regiments,
116th, 175th and 115th were rotated through the beach on three week
19urses in late 1943, with the 116th taking a refresher course in early
1944. Many of the assaults upon strong points required the building of
mock-up gun emplacements in Britain and systematic drills to counter-
ict the nervousness that would clearly occur during the real attack. but
the main Amphibious Assault Training Centre was on the south bevon
