300
MANAGING TAME PROBLEMS
gunner and seven riflemen; by comparison the smallest German section
involved 13 men, providing them with sufficient firepower to act inde-
pendently of any supporting section, unlike the British section. 42 Iris
ironic, then, that what usually hampered the mobility of Allied soldiers
was the presence not the absence of machine guns, in most cases German
machine guns.
At the level of ordinary infantry rifles both the Germans and the
British used bolt action weapons which required the user to fire one
round at a time and to pull back the bolt to reload the next bullet from
the magazine. The American standard rifle was the Ml Garand, a semi-
automatic weapon that would fire a bullet from the eight-round maga-
zine each time the trigger was pressed until all eight had been fired, ar
which point the cartridge clip was itself ejected. Some troops carried the
lighter MI carbine which fired smaller calibre ammunition and had hali
the lange or the Garand. The MI Garand was generally held to be the
best infantry rifle of the war, but it was not without its critics or competi-
tors. 43 Life magazine, a supporter of the rival Johnson rifle, insisted thai
It would be tragically dangerous to go to war with the Carand.*
Official US Army manuals suggested - again before the war - that the
rate of fire of a rifle squad (11 soldiers armed with MIs was so great that
enemy troops would not be able to keep their heads out of their foxholes
for more than an instant. * This was ironic given the fre power that the
comparative troops could generate, simply because the average German
unit had so many more machine guns than the average Amencan (or even
angio-Canadian) unit - a lesson that only the Germans, apparently, had
learned from the First World War. For example, the rate of fire per
minute from an Ml Garand was 32, and from the Carbine version 40.
This was, indeed, much faster than the German Mauser - originally used
in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-1 - at just 15. But the firing rates of
the submachine guns of both sides reversed the advantage: the German
MP 40 firing rate was 200 rounds per minute (RPM) and the American
Thompson was 100 RPM (the American BAR was 500 RPM). At the
machine gun level the difference was even greater: the Us Browns
could manage 500-525 RPM depending on the model, but the MG 4.
could spew out 1,200 RPM. This difference was compounded by the
number of troops carrying automatic weapons.
of the
For instance,
14,281 soldiers of the US 29th Infantry Division who landed on Omaha.
11, /06 carried rifles, 93 carried Thompsons, 143 BARs, and 157 carneu
Browning machine guns. That equated to a combined theoretical small
arms fire power of 677,540 RPM (assuming
rifles were the faster firing carbines). Against them the 13,027 soldiers of
- generously - that all the
the German 352nd Infantry Division, cried 9,569 rifles, 1,592 MP +0
TECHNOLOGIES
301
submachine guns and 718 MG42 machine guns.
That equated to a
combined theoretical firepower of 1,323,535 RPM. In other words, the
small arms fire power of an average German infantry division was almost
twice that of its larger American counterpart. The equivalent firepower of
the 15,976 members of the German 3rd Parachute Division was even
greater at 2,082,535 - that is, over three times greater than the average
American infantry division. 146 In short, in terms of small arms fire the
American forces were quite simply outgunned, and their British allies
even more so. Fortunately for the Americans facing them, the German
3rd Parachute Division only had 70 per cent of its allotted weapons on
D-Day - but even then it remained better armed. It is hardly surprising,
then, that the Allied infantry so frequently went to ground and called for
artillery support when under fire from German positions - they were
simply outgunned.
McManus is scathing about the assumption - rooted in Marshall's
(1947) carly post war writing - that the ordinary infantry soldier was
reluctant to fire unless armed with a fully
automatic weapon. +7
McManus suggests the 'myth' of the 'ratio of fire' theory was never based
in any form of evidence and was quite contrary to the truth. On the other
hand, there does seem to have been an 'unwritten soldiers' maxim: 'if
Ou shoot at them, they will shoot at you. That may explain some of the
reluctance of the Allied troops to fire: since the German machine guns
were superior to the Allies in both quantity and quality, to fire upon a
German position was to bring down upon the head of the initial shooter
an avalanche of return fire.
Equally important, American gunpowder
produced a Diue flash and smoke - providing the vermans - who used
smokeless and flashless powder - with an excellent way of spotting
them. 48 Thus, unless the initial shooter was certain of eliminating the
arget, or generating a heavier firepower, it was not always sensible to
open fire. 149 The consequence was that for all that US manuals spoke of
winning battles through dominant fire-power', neither the infantry nor
the tanks, could match their German counterparts and they had to rely
pon artillery or aerial supporting fire to even up the odds. It was not,
then, that Allied infantry were unusually reluctant to advance without fire
support - their planners had left them with almost no choice.
Moreover, even though the Allied infantris was far more mechanized
that the German equivalent and the M-15 and M-16 half tracks provided
an armoured assault unit that the opposition could never match, the self-
evident superiority of German tanks and German infantry weapons began
gnawing away at the Allies' confidence that the material power of the US
would guarantee victory. 150 Admittedly the sky was often empty of the
Luftwaffe and most Allied troops did not meet large numbers of Panthers
