132
LEADERSHIP AND WICKED PROBLEMS
5.4 Conclusion
Rommel's hard shell and von Rundstedt's soft shell strategy were proba-
bly both adequate to some extent: near the coast the tanks were vulner-
able to shipping attack and away from the coast they were vulnerable to
air attack; either way they were vulnerable because the Luftwaffe had
ceded control of the sky to the Allies. Only poor weather and/or night
movements could hope to succeed - and ironically the weather was poor
carly on D-Day and there was enough warning to move the armour into
position under cover of darkness before the landings occurred, but the
strategic ineptitude of the Hitler and the military High Command eftec-
tively undermined this window of opportunity. After all, Major-General
Doolittle, CO of the American 8th Air Force, worked from research
as 24ing that poor weather would hinder or prevent flying for as many
as 240 days a year (66 per cent) 63 Similarly, on 19 February 1944,
Eisenhower admitted in a letter to Marshall that the Italian evidence
worried him. "For the past five days there has been good weather in Italy
and our reports show an average of 1,000 sorties per day. Yet with only
two main roads and a railway on which to concentrate, our reports show
a steady stream of enemy traffic by night', 6 In short with much poorer
weather and a much denser network of roads in France, even a monu
oly of the air would not bring the German logistics system to a halt. Thus
it was always going to be a possibility that irrespective of the strength of
the relative air forces, the German armour might be able to move
towards the beaches under cover of cloud or darkness. Eisenhower relied
critically upon one thing to ensure success on the beaches, even at the
expense of the airborne attacks:
if we were nor depending so definitely upon the bombardment effect of ou
bontects to nep us tactically and strategically, there would be available a greatly
erable period both preceding and following D-Day.65
we a the part of both day and night bombers for a very consid-
In fact the cloud base was too low in the early part of D-Day to facil-
itate nignter-bomber activity thus providing von Rundstedt's option of
moving the reserves with some hope, especially if Hitler had released the
armoured units of the 7th Army to help. And Rommel's original counter
invasion plan would have deployed the 12th SS and Panzer Ich almost
xactly Pere tie me marking the sed objectives for D-bay wou
have been And since the sea bonyardment proved insufficient to
destroy the beach fortifications Rommel'st lan could also have worked
GERMAN STRATEGY: HARD SHELL, SOFT SHELL
133
but only if he had sufficient forces to hold the Allies on the beach for
long enough to get a sufficient number of his tanks to the beachhead to
push the invaders back into the sea. Ironically, then, D-Day morning
provided precisely what the Germans needed - but the decision of var-
ous leaders, coupled with the inept command and control system,
prevented any large scale movement until it was too late.
Since the tanks of 21st Panzer Division did indeed almost reach the
coast between Sword and Juno on the afternoon of D-Day - only being
stopped by anti-tank guns not aircraft - it is clear that Rommel's aerial
pessimism was misplaced. Indeed, even without the Luftwaffe the
Germans stemmed the advance into Normandy after D-Day for two
months. Ironically, it was Rommel who placed an embargo on the move-
ment of the 21st Panzer Division without his personal order - and von
Schweppenburg who had ordered it to move towards the coast. Indeed,
von Schweppenburg claimed that on 17 July just before being wounded
by a passing Spitfire, Rommel had admitted to one of his officers It
would perhaps have been better after all to have held the Panzer divisions
back? 67 It was also alleged that Rommel had confided to one of his aides
on 7 June that the war was lost: "It is better to end this at once and live
as a British dominion than be ruined by continuing this hopeless war? 68
However, the fatal compromise induced by Hitler and never adequately
challenged by his commanders, coupled with his indecision, ensured that
the necessary strength to remain at the coast was missing.
Nevertheless, it is important to remember that Hitler' indecisive
actions on D-Day did not derive from any fear of invasion on his part,
quite the opposite, he positively welcomed it, since, he argued, it would
provide him with the opportunity to defeat the Anglo-American forces
with such vigour that neither Roosevelt nor Churchill would survive. As
he reported to his generals on 18 March 1944:
Once defeated, the enemy will never try to invade again. Quite apart from then
neavy losses they would need months to organize a fresn attempt. and do invasion
failure would also deliver a crushing blow to British and American morale ... We
shall then transfer (our divisions in the west) to the eastern front to revolutionize
the situation there ... so the whole outcome of the war depends on each man
fighting in the west and that mean the fate of the Reich itself.69
After being informed of the invasion Hitler went to a reception for the
new Hungarian Prime Minister in Salzburg 70 On hearing of the inva-
sion Hitler proclaimed: 'The news couldn't be better. As long as they
were in Britain we couldn't get at them. Now we have them where we
Can destroy them'? His confidence seems to have been supported by a
large proportion of the German population for an SD report at the time
