pg_0029.pdf:
V10326 (28) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
22
If an acknowledgment is also required from those to whom it
has been repeated, " all ack" will be used. To reduce signal
traffic, however, acknowledgments should be asked for only
when the sender must know at once that a particular message
has been delivered.
14. Signature.—All messages will be signed by the originator
with his name and rank only.
15. Originator's instructions.—The originator is responsible
for informing signals of any precaution necessary in the method
of transmission. This he does by signing in the appropriate
space at the foot of A.F.C.2128; he need not delete the space
not signed. He will write any other instructions in the space
marked " Originator's Instructions. Degree of priority."
16. Degree of priority.—If a special degree of priority (see
para. 17, below) is required, the indication (e.g. " immediate ")
Will be written in full in the space marked " Originator's
instructions. Degree of priority." In multiple address
messages the copies for some only of the addressees may require
a degree of priority. Originators will ensure that this is given
only to those copies which require it.
17. Priority.—Messages are sent in the order in which they
are handed in unless a special degree of priority is indicated
by the originator.
They will be classified in accordance with their relative
urgency as follows :—
i. (a) Most immediate ;
(b) Emergency operations.
ii. Immediate.
iii. Important.
iv. Other official messages.
v. Private messages, if they are to be accepted.
Precedence of despatch for messages franked in the same
way will be according to the time of their receipt by signals.
18. " Most immediate." -Only a commander-in-chief or his
chief general staff officer will frank a message in this way. It
will be reserved for occasions of vital urgency; it not only
gives absolute priority of despatch on army signals system but
on those of the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force, and on those
controlled by the civil administration.
V10326 (28) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

