pg_0091.pdf:
V10326 (90) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
84
Motor-cycle orderlies will be sent on ahead to act as point-
duty men. They will report to the head of the unit when the
tail has passed them.
9. Action on meeting obstructions
On meeting an obstruction or damage to the road every
effort must be made to find a way forward. A passive attitude
of waiting for it to be cleared must never be adopted.
The nearest officer or senior N.C.O. will :—
i. Reconnoitre for a local deviation, which may be along
tracks, through fields or across country, and, when
found, order vehicles to take it.
11. Order another officer or N.C.O. to collect men and
proceed to clear the obstruction.
ili. Organize anti-aircraft defence.
10. If no local deviation is possible and the obstruction will
take some time to clear away, sub-unit commanders and
above will order vehicles to take the first suitable deviation
selected either from a deviation list, board or map. They will
take steps to inform all concerned in the column and the
control post next in rear of the situation with a message
giving :—
The site and nature of the damage or obstruction.
The rough estimated time to repair or remove it.
The action taken to get the column forward.
11. Movements by night call for a very high standard of
training and discipline. Owing to the extreme difficulty of
rectifying mistakes if columns once get on to the wrong road.
the route must be marked with the greatest care.
12. In the case of all moves by night orders will define
what lights may be used.
13. Adequate arrangements must be made for dealing with
break-downs. Light aid detachments should move at suitable
intervals throughout the column, and in defiles where the danger
from air attack is high extra resources must be available under
the officer controlling that sector of the road.
The primary consideration in all cases is to clear the damaged
vehicle from the road to allow the free passage of other traffic.
V10326 (90) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

