pg_0014.pdf:
V10326 (13) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
7
with the initiative of subordinate commanders, who should be
left freedom of action in all matters which they can or should*
arrange for themselves.
3. So that all parts of a force may understand clearly the
task allotted to each part and thus be able to co-operate fully,
the whole of the orders for any particular operation by the
force should, wherever possible, be embodied in one operation
order and not in a series of separate orders to different parts
of the force.
4. When a detachment is made, its commander will be
specified in the order. If the detachment is composed of
different units; a rendezvous must be arranged at which:
representatives of units will meet the appointed commander
or his representative.
*5. Notwithstanding the greatest skill and care in framing
orders, unexpected circumstances may render the precise
execution of an order unsuitable or impracticable. In such
circumstances the following principles will guide the recipient
of an order in deciding his course of action.
i. A formal order will never be departed from either in
letter or spirit so long as the officer who issued
it is present, or there is time to report to him and
await a reply without losing an opportunity or
endangering the force concerned.
11. If the above conditions cannot be fulled, a departure
from either the spirit or the letter of an order is
justified if the subordinate who assumes the
responsibility bases his decision on some fact
which could not be known to the officer who issued
the order, and if he is satisfied that he is acting as
his superior would order him to act were he present.
iii. If a subordinate neglects to depart from the letter of
his orders when such departure, in the circum-
stances of sub-para. ii, above, is clearly demanded,
he will be held responsible for any failure that
may ensue.
iv. Should a subordinate find it necessary to depart from
an order, he will immediately inform the issuer of
it, and the commanders of any neighbouring units
likely to be affected.
6. In emergency, an order may be given to a subordinate
commander without being passed through the usual official
channels. The commander who issues such an order will
V10326 (13) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

