pg_0017.pdf:
V10326 (16) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
10
reproduction have been made, it may be possible
to issue copies for subordinate commanders to
take away with them when the conference is over.
v. A staff officer can make notes while the verbal orders
are being given and confirm the orders subsequently
in writing. These confirming orders will be studied
for any modifications to the verbal orders, though
the issuer of the order should indicate whether any
modifications have been made.
When it is
impossible to issue a complete confirming order
in time, such an order should be confined to
essential points, such as objectives, starting lines,
boundaries, routes and times. It must not be so
short, however, that those not present when the
verbal orders
were issued will be unable to
co-operate.
vi. Tracings may be used to shorten the length of a written
order.
vii. Parts of an order which take some time to prepare,
e.g. barrage maps, may be sent out after the main
order.
4. Orders must be checked and it is advisable to detail an
officer to check all map references as orders are issued.
5. If orders are sent by telephone they will be written down
by the recipient and repeated back to the sender. When
sent by radio-telephony they will not be repeated back.
6. Alternative methods of communication should be
employed whenever it is necessary to send an important
circumstances are such that on despatch eact nonde wement of
the receipt of the message cannot be expected.
5. Form of orders, instructions, reports and messages
1. Written orders, instructions and reports must be precise,
and as brief as is consistent with clearness. They must be
easily legible, must be timed, and must be signed by the
sender, who will give his rank, appointment, and formation
or unit. Paragraphs should be numbered to facilitate reference.
2. The need for clarity combined with brevity is even
greater in the writing of messages, and superfluous words,
headings and numbering of paragraphs must be avoided. In
V10326 (16) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

