pg_0039.pdf:
V10326 (38) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
32
CHAPTER V
SIGNALS SECURITY
19. Wireless security
1. All messages sent by wireless (W/T and R/T) are liable
to interception by an enemy. The approximate position of a
wireless station can also be determined by an enemy using
direction-finding apparatus.
The following precautions may therefore be necessary to
obtain wireless security.
i. Wireless silence.
ii. Wireless restriction, including use of cipher for W/T
and restriction in the use of R/T.
ili. The periodical changing of wireless frequencies and
call signs.
2. Wireless silence.—A commander who is anxious to conceal
the dispositions and movements of his troops will risk the loss
of surprise unless he is prepared to impose complete or partial
wireless silence. No fixed rules can be given since the
importance of secrecy must be weighed against the need for
control and information, but as a general guide wireless
silence should be observed by all except the following : —
i. Reconnaissance troops and aircraft when no other
effective means of communication are available.
The unit or formation headquarters receiving such
wireless messages will acknowledge them by
wireless and may ask for any necessary corrections,
but this does not permit the full use of its wireless.
ii. A unit or formation headquarters, when its forward
elements are in contact with enemy troops and
it is, itself, exercising tactical control of operations.
iii. A unit or formation in cases of extreme urgency, when
no other effective means of communication are
available.
The wishes of a commander in the matter of wireless silence
are often better conveyed in the form of an operation instruction
than in an operation order.
3. Wireless vestriction.—Although messages may be inter-
cepted, an interval must always elapse before the enemy can
act on the information received.
The sending of W/T
messages in clear and the free use of R/T are therefore justified
V10326 (38) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

