pg_0027.pdf:
V10326 (26) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
20
3. A.F. C.2128 should be used for all messages. Those for
D.R.L.S. (see Sec. 13) will be placed in envelopes marked
D.R.L.S., signed by an officer and handed to the signal office.
To enable signals to trace the receipt and acknowledgment of
the message, the originator should put a reference number on
the envelope.
4. Nothing must be written above the space provided for
the address " To."
5. Address " TO" and " FROM " :-
Addressees and originators of messages will be designated
by their code names (see Sec. 22) or, when these are not used,
by their abbreviated titles, as indicated in Appendix IV.
Officers' names and appointments will never appear in the
address spaces "TO" or " FROM " unless it is essential for
some special reason.
6. Multiple address messages.-The following rules will
apply to multiple address messages :—
i. If a message is to be delivered by signals to more than
one addressee, one copy of the message will
normally be handed in to the signal office for each
addressee.*
The address will be written on each copy in a straight line
or lines, without punctuation, thus :—
LUDO SAGO NOPA FIDO BONO
It will be signalled as written to all addressees.
ii. " Repeated"-In order to distinguish between those
to whom the message is addressed for action and
those to whom it is repeated for information only,
the originator will write the word "rptd"
before the first address of the latter category,
e.g. i—
LUDO SAGO NOPA iptd FIDO BONO.
Each recipient will then see to whom the message has been
addressed and repeated.
iii. " All informed." —In certain routine messages when it
is of no importance for an addressee to know to
what others the message has been sent, the
expression " all informed " may be used at the end
of the text. The use of this phrase will give signals
the authority to omit irrelevant addressees when
signalling the address "TO," thus reducing the
time taken in transmitting the message.
* When this is not necessary the signal officer will inform the originator concerned
V10326 (26) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

