pg_0092.pdf:
V10326 (91) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
1.
2.
85
APPENDIX IX
MARCH DISCIPLINE
I. Mechanized columns
Unit control
i. Duties of officers.—Officers will be evenly distributed
throughout the column and must know the destination
and route. Whenever possible an officer, who may
be a commander, will move at the head, and another
officer at the tail, of all units and sub-units (coy., etc.).
A proportion of the remaining officers, mounted on
motor cycles, should patrol the column.
ii. Duties of N.C.Os. if groups are formed.—A group
commander will travel in the leading vehicle of his
group. A N.C.O. on a motor cycle should move in
rear of each group, or in rear of an equivalent number
of vehicles when running
evenly dispersed. One
N.C.O. or man on each vehicle and all motor-cyclists
should be in possession of a map, preferably marked.
Driving
i. Speed (m.i.h.) at which a move is ordered will usually
be given to drivers as cruising speed. Leading drivers
are responsible for maintaining a steady cruising
speed and others for keeping the correct distances.
Whenever possible a driver's assistant, if necessary
a relief driver, will be detailed to keep a lookout to the
rear and signal to the following vehicle.
If another
man is available he will sit beside the driver, watch
the vehicle in front and assist in maintaining the correct
distance. He will also watch for traffic direction signs
along the route. Correct distances must be kept and
on no account must vehicles at halts be closed to
distances less than the minimum ordered.
ii. Minor errors in density or cruising speed will be adjusted
gradually and not suddenly.
ii. Overtaking. — Except in independent running, the
peemaine signice Asia which must be apecial
which must be at once
displayed by any vehicle which has broken down or
which cannot keep up its scheduled rate.
independent running a faster vehicle will never be held
back owe than cess or loss, hot the fAs density
V10326 (91) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

