pg_0033.pdf:
V10326 (32) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org
26
ii. Wireless sets for communication between their own
formations and units are provided by the Air Force.
Details are contained in The Employment of Air Forces
with the Army in the Field
13. Means of intercommunication and their
characteristics
1. Means of intercommunication in the field are :—
i. Line telegraphy and telephony (L/T).
ii. Wireless, either wireless telegraphy (W/T) or radio
telephony (R/T).
iii. Visual signalling (V/S).
iv. Message carrying by any suitable agency, ranging
from a dismounted orderly to an aeroplane.
v. Liaison personnel.
vi. The army postal service.
2. The characteristics governing the use of items i to iv,
above, are given in full in Signal Training (All Arms), 1938,
Chapters XXI and XXII.
3. It is important that staff officers should realize the
limitations, and the need for economy in the use of the motor
cycle despatch riders of the R. Signals.
When possible, a despatch rider letter service (D.R.L.S.) is
organized, running periodically between headquarters on a
pre-arranged time table. The D.R.L.S. should be used as
much as possible, in order to reserve the other means of
communication for more urgent messages.
When a D.R.L.S. is in operation certain officers specified
in standing orders are authorized to send by special despatch
rider urgent messages which can neither be sent by telegraph
nor wait for the next D.k.L.S. run.
4. Liaison personnel.—Officers and N.C.Os. acting as liaison
personnel, are one of the most useful means of intercom-
munication, especially in the forward area. They are not
merely bearers of messages; they should be acquainted with
the plans and intentions of the commander whom they serve
and thus be able to amplify and explain any orders they bring
to subordinate commanders. It is also their duty, on their
return from subordinate units, to be able to give the superior
commander a clear picture of the situation there. Thus they
must be specially trained men, on whose judgment and
knowledge a commander can rely.
V10326 (32) Digitised by the Vickers MG Collection & Research Association - www.vickersmg.org

