pg_0062.pdf:
Page No.
SECRET.
Summary of Events
Time
Date
The following are general induotions regerding censorship: -
ta to those on those dinare on ta any have milete roace, nevitably
4o1ititos the tall: of enony egenta and ney indirectly sacrifice the lives
a his comrades.
For this reason,
logel cooperation of ell ranke is ensentiel.
censorshiy is necessery and the full und
exhaus vivee
(1) strength, norole or physical state, or orgenisation of our forces,
including any connents on the absence or presence in
the theatre of
or disclosure rogarding the formation to
detach ents,
allude
to the location of a unit by such reference as "where we spent our
last holidey" or sinilar expressions.
(111) mement of equipent, of ony kind.
(tv) Distingutching signs used for identification of formations, units
(v) Elens and forecasts or orders for future operations, whether lown
or merely runoured or sunised.
(vi) Commications - such as the use, condition or probable extensions
of road, railveys or other transportation factlities, bridging
operations, otcu
(vil) State of mintenance services, including any reference to reserves.
(wii) Position or description of billets, bivouaes or caims,
2 Casualty aigures berore c11101a1 pub11020101
(x) alect of any action by the
eneny. Any renerk which might tend,
lê published, to encourare the cieny. to cause despondency in our ow
aces or beonid
to incite a feeling of hostility anong the people
In the theatre of var or in neutral countries.
(zi) criticians and statenents caloulated to bring into disrepute our
forgos or those of our Allies.
(a) In the case of letters to Prisoners of War Political matters vill not
be discussed.
Plo use of cuy forne of coco, obscure or indirect reference is prohibited.
Ciphers and shorthund will not be peritted.
Crosses (kisces) exo pemitte
providon elvoys, that thoy do not appeer to be
wed in & coco, 0. ge nuber of Xs in lines of vurying length and shape.
corred onionce in any foreign language is pormitted.
Where Censorship
ciaot bo comica out in the Unit, letters should be sont under senarute cover
mritica shoula be vltten on the fice de the envelope.
In such cases the languege in which the letter is
In corres onconce with uny os the folloving :-
8) Fount reside it in Posolen cuntrios.
Person residont or slationed at OURATIAR.
bers of the crow of any norchant ship.
British prisoners of wes.
(ice s cha Ces Vill not bive to nose of their unit or stution but
In the event of a
Censor, LONDOn.
Cath co he not the son on an hay Do Bi Do chof Postal
miters ue no this corvice will notity the Chier Postal
Dotal

