314
Normandy 1944
on Caen, Operation CHARNWOOD. Montgomery used air power to smash
German opposition, and CHARNWOOD witnessed the first use of carpet
bombing in support of the land campaign. The Caen raid was, however, as
counterproductive as it was ineffective. To prevent bombing short, RAF
Bomber Command confined the target zone to the city proper even though
the German defenses were outside the city. The result was heavy French
civilian losses, negligible damage to the enemy, and devastation that
slowed the British ground advance. Moreover, due to the complexity of
orchestrating the bombing attack, a five-hour delay occurred between the
bombing and the ground assault, allowing the enemy to recover. The raid
did make a significant, though unintended, contribution to the fall of Caen,
however. Stray bombs destroyed several bridges and sharply reduced the
Germans ability to supply their forces in the northern part of the city. 54
As in EPSOM, Anglo-Canadian forces initially met with success as
they launched concentric attacks on the beleaguered and greatly outnum-
bered German defenders. Inexorably superior numbers and firepower drove
the enemy back. Moreover, the by now seasoned British 3d Division out-
fought and mauled the green 16th Luftwaffe Field Division that had entered
the line only three days before. After two days of heavy fighting
Montgomery's formations finally fought their way into northern Caen on 9
July, four weeks behind schedule.
Nevertheless, southern Caen and the strategic heights to its south that
barred the way to the Falaise Plain remained in enemy hands. That the
Germans now held a shorter, more defensible front behind the Orne River
backed by excellent observation from high ground made further Anglo-
Canadian advances problematic. Only with greater firepower could
Montgomery progress at a tolerable cost in lives and materiel. The need for
massive fire support and the stockpiling of sufficient supplies to guarantee
success meant that it was not until 18 July that Montgomery launched his
next major attack, Operation GOODWOOD, out of the Orne bridgehead,
the ground east of the Orne captured by airborne forces on D-Day. Three
major tactical problems confronted such an attack, however: the difficulty
of achieving surprise, the constricted size of the bridgehead that limited
employment of massed artillery, and the resulting reliance on aerial bom-
bardment that the first two difficulties engendered.
The GOODWOOD plan was Miles Dempsey's, and he convinced a
skeptical Montgomery that he could win the ground that Montgomery des-
perately needed to placate the air marshals and the Americans, while keep-
ing infantry losses low and "writing down" German strength by having
armor spearhead a deep penetration operation toward Falaise.55 By nature,
Montgomery opposed deep penetrations as too risky and he privately main-
tained grave doubts about the possibility of an armored breakthrough to
Falaise 56 Nonetheless, he adopted Dempsey's ambitious plan to achieve
his own less grandiose goal to tie down and write off German reserves.57
Britain: Montgomery's Best Batsmen Fall
315
A new attack was necessary to continue to hold German reserves at
Caen while the Americans prepared for their COBRA breakout bid, and the
Orne bridgehead offered the best prospects to both gain ground and to write
off enemy reserves. Moreover, given the mounting infantry shortage, the
massed employment of armor appeared the only way to minimize infantry
losses. 58 At the same time, Montgomery had to "talk up" the operation to
gain the needed air support and as part of his continuing campaign to hold
the Germans at Caen. Much of the controversy surrounding GOODWOOD
stems from the fact that Montgomery publicly adopted Dempsey s plan,
while privately maintaining grave doubts; and to gain the necessary air sup-
port, he exaggerated GOODWOOD's objectives to Eisenhower and the air
marshals, all of whom he deliberately misled into believing he was about to
launch a full-scale breakout. 59
In the event, GOODWOOD was ill conceived and executed; the con-
centration of the attack force in the narrow Orne bridgehead cost Dempsey
the element of surprise and restricted the deployment of forces. The offen-
sive followed the typical pattern of British operations in Normandy. Carpet
bombing and artillery fire smashed the British armor through the German
forward lines to extend the bridgehead to the foot of the high ground south
of Caen. But, after great initial success, the Germans reacted swiftly. Local
reserves conducted a delaying withdrawal though a deep defensive belt that
slowed the British advance, while fortified village strongpoints within the
defensive zone deflected and disrupted the armored advance and delayed
the follow-up forces.60 Moreover, as with EPSOM, the constricted corridor
created enormous traffic congestion that threw off the entire timetable of
the advance.6l When British armor finally approached the commanding
Bourguébus Ridge late on 18 July, it arrived already depleted and with little
infantry and no artillery support. 62 It then encountered a German gun line
of heavy antitank and antiaircraft guns emplaced on the high ground that
repelled piecemeal British armored attacks and inflicted heavy losses. 63 As
evening approached and Allied tactical aviation left the battlefield, robust
and well-coordinated German combined-arms counterattacks threw the
British armor back with further heavy losses.64 Dempsey attacked for two
more days, even though the offensive had lost its momentum, until
Montgomery intervened to halt the operation on 21 July. Nowhere had
British forces established a firm presence on the Bourguébus Ridge.
Flawed doctrine, as much as poor planning, was at the root of
GOODWOOD's failure, continued poor coordination denying the British
forces greater success. Critics of GOODWOOD miss the fact that the oper-
ation was consonant with prevailing doctrine about the employment of
armored forces.65 And since this doctrine failed to coordinate armor and
infantry, the plan naturally separated the two arms.6 However inadequate-
ly, Dempsey addressed the sluggishness of his troops in exploiting success,
and admonished his armor to bypass opposition, leave it to be mopped up
