374
Normandy 1944
maintain a cohesive and disciplined army. Moreover, numerical inferiority
often motivates the outnumbered to greater exertion, and in Normandy
German commanders repeatedly asked their troops to do the unreasonable.
Time and again weak German forces made determined stands that held off
much larger Allied forces, and, just as frequently, tired and depleted
German troops skillfully pressed local counterattacks to regain lost posi-
tions. It is apparent that the Westheer endured serious manpower, equip-
ment, and supply shortages before collapsing in August-absorbing more
punishment than the Allied armies could have sustained if the tables had
been turned.3
On D-Day the Germans failed to throw the Allies back into the sea.
Rommel had clearly understood that if the Allies gained the advantage of
surprise, it was unlikely that he could prevent their getting ashore in
strength somewhere. 4 He saw the task of the Atlantic Wall and its defenders
as disrupting and containing an invasion while panzer reserves moved up to
drive the Allies back into the sea. The German defense proved weakest in
opposing the Utah Beach landings in the eastern Cotentin Peninsula largely
because the Germans had thinly manned the sector in the belief that exten-
sive inundation barred a seaborne assault. The Germans came closest to
defeating the landing at Omaha Beach on the western Calvados. Here, poor
weather, the swamping of most of U.S. amphibious armor, and the defen-
sive strength of the terrain behind Omaha Beach-coastal bluffs bisected
by draws—all contributed to the attackers' difficulties. Rommel had also
reinforced the defenses here during late spring with the 352d Infantry
Division, a redeployment the Allies had not fully recognized.
Most of the German difficulties on D-Day stemmed from the bad
weather. The absence of many senior commanders and disruption of com-
munications by aerial and naval bombardment seriously obstructed German
countermeasures.? Moreover, Allied domination of the skies prevented the
Luftwaffe from making its influence felt. Immediately after D-Day, the I SS
Panzer Corps tried to drive the Anglo-Canadians back into the sea. After
these efforts failed, the Germans shifted to defense on 10 June to contain
the Allies in a narrow bridgehead, as they had done at Anzio, while they
rushed the Il SS Panzer Corps to France from the Eastern Front for a coun-
teroffensive to smash the bridgehead. In the interim, the Germans stubborn-
ly defended before Caen and St. Lô to deny the Allies both control of these
communications centers and of ground for maneuver.
The defensive advantages of the terrain, the realism and effectiveness
of German defensive tactics, and the refinement of defensive techniques in
light of Normandy's combat conditions allowed the Germans to conduct a
protracted defense despite being greatly outnumbered and outgunned. Both
the bocage terrain of low sunken roads, dense hedgerows, and small com-
partmentalized fields in western Normandy and the Campagne de Caen, the
open rolling plain that stretched from Tilly to Troan strongly favored
Germany: The Defeat of the Westheer
375
defense. 8 The Germans also employed sophisticated defensive tactics
refined through two world wars. They quickly appreciated the defensive
advantages of the bocage in the U.S. sector, in particular. Troops dug deep
into the banks of its hedgerows for protection against indirect fire, and
widely used mines, booby traps, and demolitions to slow the U.S. advance
and to exact a heavy price for every yard relinquished while reinforcements
German troops endeavored to conduct defense in depth that aimed to
disrupt the coordination and momentum of enemy attacks. But initially
both practice and circumstance led the Germans to employ Eastern Front
defensive techniques that emphasized linear defense, forward concentra-
tion, firepower, and immediate counterattack. When the German Seventh
Army went over to the defense on 10 June and sought to confine the Allied
forces in a narrow bridgehead, lack of troops and the absence of prepared
defenses inland initially forced it to adopt a linear defense. But Allied
artillery, aircraft, and naval gunfire inflicted heavy losses on forward con-
centrated defenders during June and German losses steadily mounted. 10
Thus, as reserves arrived in mid-June, German troops quickly returned to
defense in depth to minimize casualties and buttress defensive strength.
The relative shortness of the front allowed the Germans in late June to erect
defenses in depth in the southern Cotentin, in the thick bocage south of
Caumont, and before Caen. "1
While German defenses in Normandy varied in detail according to
topography and local conditions, after mid-June they conformed closely to
doctrine. Troops erected defensive zones that consisted of an outpost line, a
forward defensive position, and the MLR. 12 Troops, strongly reinforced
with firepower, lightly held the forward belt as the defenders of the outpost
line held their positions only as long as it took to gain intelligence about the
size, composition, and objectives of an attacker. The Germans held the for-
ward battle zone more strongly. This zone comprised mutually supporting
company defense positions, reinforced with firepower, sited in depth, and
often built around village strongpoints in Eastern Front style. The forward
battle zone's task was to disrupt, disorganize, and retard an attack, and
hence its defenses were made up of an elaborate network of dugouts,
machine gun posts, and antitank gun positions that provided interlocking
direct fire. At the same time, tsar mans triangulated indirect fire onto
fire zones within the forward position. The Germans held their main
strength in the MLR, in the rear of which they stationed mobile local
reserves, strongly reinforced in firepower, to counterattack rapidly any pen-
etration of the MLR.
Despite the popular image of nazi fanatics defending to the last round,
merman Army troops, if less so the Waffen Do, rarely made senseless saen-
rices. 13 When the MLR became untegible, doctrine instructed troops to
retire to previously prepared rear positions, reorgalize, link up with locat
