250
Normandy 1944
chasse, the VIII Corps, his best, but as yet unblooded, troops to head the
offensive. With strong air, naval, and artillery support he hoped to smash
through the powerful German defenses and capture the city. However, mis-
fortune dogged the offensive from the beginning. The neighboring XXX
Corps failed to take the commanding Rauray Ridge on the flank of the
intended assault during the night of 25-26 June, and much of the planned
air support failed to materialize due to poor weather. Both these failures
badly hindered the entire attack. Nevertheless, concentration and massive
fire support allowed the VIII Corps to penetrate the thin German linear
defenses of the 12th SS Panzer Division and establish a bridgehead across
the Odon River. Thereafter, the 11th Armoured Division advanced through
the bridgehead to seize the vital height of Hill 112 beyond. By 28 June
Montgomery had torn a 6-mile gap in the German defenses, captured the
dominating high ground that overlooked Caen, and rendered a heavy blow
to German hopes to retain Caen indefinitely.
But Montgomery's very success attracted German reserves from other
sectors of the front that vigorously engaged the flanks of the penetration
and pinned British forces in place, hampering the movement forward of the
follow-up forces tasked with consolidating the ground won. The British
advance also coincided with the arrival of the fresh 9th and 10th SS Panzer
Divisions of the II SS Panzer Corps from the Eastern Front. As German
reserves dangerously massed to counterattack the narrow British corridor
and the slim Odon bridgehead, the cautious Lt. Gen. Miles "Bimbo"
Dempsey, commander of the British Second Army, abandoned Hill 112,
withdrew to a shorter, more defensible line and dug in. Between 29 June
and - July, te vill corps repulsed a series of heavy but poorly coordinated
German counterblows in some of the toughest fighting of the Normandy
campaign.s
These attacks were part of the long-aweed German strategic coun-
terofensive. After corralling the Allied forces in a shallow lodgement dur-
is sulle, and although he could not prevent the fall of Cherbourg, Kommel
eagerly awaited the arrival of the fresh II SS Panzer Corps with which he
pet to legal atonal maneuver and return to the offensive. On so
une, elements of lIve SS armored divisions led the major counterottensive
that was to throw the Allies back into the sea. The SS troops nurled them-
serves against the newly established British bridgehead over the Odon
River i an enort to break through to the coast and split the Allied loug
ment. Despite strong armored and artillery support, at least by German
standards, the ss troops made little headway in the face of Allied defensive
petered out on 2 July after heavy losses.
firepower and an inadequate German logistic situation. The operation
The failure of this counterblow confirmeded at the Allied lodgement
had become permanent, and in its aftermath Hitler announced a new strate-
3y for the Western Front. The German forces would conduct an unyielding
A Campaign Overview
251
defense to pen the Allies into a narrow lodgement through a savage battle
of attrition that exploited the defensive advantages of the terrain and interi-
or lines to deny the enemy the room and favorable terrain needed to con-
duct mobile operations. This decision locked the Germans into an attrition-
al battle, in range of the Allied fleet, that they could not ultimately win.
The heavy losses sustained during EPSOM as well as the need to
rebuild supplies and organize air support meant that it was not until 8 July
that Montgomery could resume the offensive toward Caen with a rare mul-
ticorps attack on the city. This was CHARNWOOD, an all-out drive for
Caen, the D-Day objective that Rommel had denied him for over a month.
Montgomery relied heavily on air power to shatter enemy resistance, and
the operation saw the first use of heavy bombers in support of ground oper-
ations in Normandy. The Caen bombing raid was, however, as controversial
as it was ineffective: it caused heavy French civilian losses, inflicted negli-
gible damage on the enemy, and, with the resultant devastation of the city,
produced mounds of rubble that slowed the Allied ground advance.
Moreover, delay in launching the ground attack in the aftermath of the
bombing allowed the enemy to recover. The raid, therefore, failed to live up
to the excessive hopes that it could blast the German defenses into
oblivion.
Nonetheless, as in EPSOM, Anglo-Canadian forces initially met with
success as they launched concentric attacks on the beleaguered and greatly
outnumbered German defenders. Inexorably, superior numbers and fire-
power drove the enemy back, and the now-seasoned British 3d Division
outfought and mauled the green 16th Luftwaffe Field Division that had
entered the line only three days before. After two days of heavy fighting,
Rommel conceded defeat in this attritional battle that he could not sustain,
Anglo-Canadian forces finally fought their way into northern Caen on 9
July, four weeks behind schedule, and the Germans effected a planned gen-
eral withdrawal behind the Orne River. Northern Caen was now in Allied
hands, but the southern half and the strategic heights to the south, which
barred the way to the excellent tank country of the Falaise Plain beyond,
remained firmly in enemy hands. Moreover, the German retreat behind the
Orne gave them a shorter, more defensible front. The prospects for further
successful Anglo-Canadian advances without inordinate casualties faded.
Meanwhile on the U.S. sector, after a few days' rest, recuperation, and
reshuffling, the First Army struck south in strength toward St. Lô on 3 July.
In highly defensible terrain that consisted of low-lying marshes and thick
bocage hedgerows the Americans made slow progress, and the next three
weeks consisted of bitter and costly close-range combat in which U.S. units
inexorably, if slowly, ground toward St. Lô in grim attritional warfare.
Despite reinforcement by Collins's VII Corps and fresh divisions from
Britain, the U.S. First Army still struggled to advance in the thick
bocage that greatly aided defense, Maj. Gen. Troy H. Middleton's VIII
