348
Normandy 1944
preparation, narrow attack frontages, coordination, good reconnaissance,
and massed artillery support.34 His operational approach reflected his (by
Canadian standards) extensive combat experience and accurate apprecia-
tion of German defensive techniques. Simonds emphasized that contin-
gency planning against German counterattacks must form an integral aspect
of all operational planning 35 The operations of the Canadian II Corps in
July, though, demonstrated that Simonds had an uphill struggle to inculcate
this approach in his few short months as corps commander. His troops typi-
cally remained wedded to the British methods and procedures absorbed
during the previous four years.
On 18 July the Canadian II Corps launched its first attack in
Normandy, ATLANTIC, the Canadian element of GOODWOOD, which
was Montgomery's push south from the Orne bridgehead. The II Canadian
Corps was to support the right wing of the main British drive by capturing
German-held Caen south of the Orne River and then seizing the Verrières
Ridge, the commanding high ground to the south. 36 ATLANTIC represent-
ed the first Canadian multidivisional corps-level operation in northwest
Europe. Simonds's plan called for the 3d Division to advance southwest
along the eastern bank of the Orne from the British airborne bridgehead to
capture the Caen suburbs of Colombelles and Vaucelles. Having loosened
the German grip on the south bank of the Orne, the green 2d Division was
to strike across the Orne, mop up southern Caen, and storm Verrières
Ridge. 37 Simonds's plan was more sophisticated than earlier Canadian
operations: for the first time the staff integrated tactical air support to
engage enemy defenses and reserves moving up. 38
Despite a more refined plan, ATLANTIC met with only partial success.
This was as much due to the inexperience of the 2d Division and II Corps
headquarters as enemy resistance. The 3d Division attacked down the east-
ern bank of the Orne front, made steady progress and obtained its objec-
tives. The 2d Division, however, experienced much greater difficulty in its
first operational employment since its 1942 disaster at Dieppe. Its mission
In ATLANTIC was also more difficult in that it had to conduct an opposed
crossing of the Orne. By midafternoon on 18 July, the division's attack had
stalled in confusion as its follow-up battalions got mixed in with its attack
battalions and as Canadian artillery fire repeatedly hit its own troops. 39
Ineptitude continued to afflict the 2d Division when it renewed its
offensive the next day. Its unseasoned assault companies advanced beyond
their start line, were again badly hit by their own artillery, and stalled short
of Fleury. Throughout the day, the infantry proved unable to occupy its
objectives.40 On 20 July Simonds committed the reinforced 6th Brigade,
without armor support, to storm Verrières Ridge.41 During the morning the
Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders took St.
André,
the South
Saskatchewan Regiment consolidated on a forward slope along the ridge
Canada: Learning the Hard Way
349
line, and the Fusiliers Mont Royal took Beauvoir farm but halted short of
Verrières.
The brigade received a drubbing late on 20 July when the Ist ss
Panzer Regiment counterattacked in heavy rain that prevented the usual
Allied defensive artillery and air support. The SS armor caught Canadian
antitank guns and armor moving up and picked these off. Without antitank
support, the South Saskatchewan Regiment and the Fusiliers Mont Royal at
Trotéval farm were quickly overrun and dispersed by the panzers. 42 The
Canadian 2d Division hastily threw the Essex Scottish Battalion forward,
also unsupported, to restore the situation. But the SS troops encircled half
the battalion and drove the remainder back in disorder. 43 Another German
counterthrust the next day penetrated the Essex Scottish positions and only
a well-orchestrated counterattack restored the Canadian center.
Although ATLANTIC pushed the Germans back from their strong
defensive position along the Orne, it failed to gain the heights south of Caen
that dominated movement across the river-and Canadian forces again suf-
tered heavy losses. 44 For the 2d Division, ATLANTIC proved to be an igno-
minious return to battle, which left three of its battalions badly mauled. The
difficult task given the raw division was beyond its capacity in its debut
operation. Canadian intelligence had also underestimated the strength and
depth of the German defenses.45 Inexperienced Canadian troops had coordi-
nated poorly and failed to bring firepower to bear, while poor weather had
curtailed artillery and air support. Most seriously, the Canadians had again
underestimated German
capabilities. 4o
After
the
failure
GOODWOOD/ATLANTIC Montgomery undertook further limited attacks
aimed at holding German reserves at Caen while U.S. forces launched the
Operation COBRA breakout bid on 25 July.47 Simonds's corps launched the
first of these holding attacks on 25 July, a renewed assault on Verrières
Ridge, called SPRING. The two Canadian divisions reinforced by British
firepower attempted to storm the ridge on a 4-mile front. To obviate
German observation from the ridge, Simonds launched his initial break-in al
night to seize Verrières, May, and Tilly astride the ridge. Thereafter, British
armor was to drive south to Cintheaux in a classic exploitation role. 48
SPRING marked further Canadian efforts at adapting to overcome the
German defenses: Simonds, for the first time, seriously endeavored to cam-
ouflage his attack to preserve surprise. Supporting artillery fired timed con-
centrations, instead of the standard creeping barrage, to disguise the time,
location, and axis of advance 49 SPRING witnessed other innovations too.
Artificial moonlight, created by bouncing searchlights off low cloud cover,
aided the night attack on 24-25 July. 50 With two divisions massed on a nar-
row front, backed by enormous fire support and innovative tactics,
Simonds expected excellent results. 51
SPRING was, however, a complex operation that depended on careful
