144
Preparation: 1919-1944
infantry in 1943, and though it endeavored to increase the supply of trained
infantry drafts-by transfers from the RAF Regiment and from antiaircraft
gunners- these required many months of retraining. During the spring of
1944, the army disbanded existing formations and stripped Home Forces to
bring divisions up to strength and provide replacements to cover
OVERLORD's first three months' projected losses. 205 The United Kingdom
in 1944 was thus a nation with a manpower shortage, and the diverse needs
of the services and of industry strictly limited army reinforcements.
Consequently, manpower concerns solidified the caution inherent in
Montgomery's operational approach and firmly established casualty mini-
mization as a cornerstone of British operational art in northwest Europe.206
During 1943-1944 the capabilities of British ground forces continued
to improve, however variably, and adaptation was by no means universal.
The continued lack of holistic doctrine hampered army efforts to enhance
combat effectiveness. The army culture disparaged theory and elevated
improvisation, obstructing doctrinal development, and thus the army relied
more on extemporaneous pragmatism than a formal, explicit doctrine. 207
Dual impulses drove wartime doctrinal development: the War Office and
the experiences of senior British commanders. Doctrinal development was
thus both top-down and dualistic. This duality forged an army that pos-
sessed multiple, and sometimes conflicting, doctrines as the individual
styles of senior commanders modified official doctrine.208 Doctrinal ideas
flowed both from the War Office and from senior commanders and it was
through the confluence of these ideas that a unique Commonwealth style of
warfare emerged.209 This de facto decentralization of doctrine sometimes
resulted in a sharp dichotomy between official doctrine and the reality prac-
ticed by individual commands.210
Of the senior commanders, Montgomery had the greatest influence on
doctrinal development. As commander of South-Eastern District in 1941-
1942, he taught his embryonic operational ideas to much of the Home
Forces before his approach matured in North Africa.211 By 1944,
Montgomery was intellectually ascendent within the army because of the
zeal with which he expressed and disseminated his ideas, his professional
reputation, his unrivaled experience, and his excellent relations with senior
officers. Once in the ascendent, he nurtured protégés, like Oliver Leese in
Italy, who spread the gospel according to Monty, 212
By spring of 1944 Montgomery's operational thinking had reached its
definitive form.213 His military thought, while somewhat innovative, was
grounded in the conservative bedrock of interwar British military thought
and his ideas, like most Commonwealth generals, adhered to traditional
gunner methods. His intellectual ascendancy and the crystallization of his
operational approach effectively narrowed the parameters for innovation in
northwest Europe, and ensured that his army group largely failed to absorb
lessons from the Italian campaign.
145
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
Lack of holistic doctrine hampered army efforts to enhance its offen-
sive capabilities during 1942-1944. Unrealistic expectations generated by
the "small conflict" and the "massed armor" mentalities dogged refinement
of offensive doctrine. Throughout 1942, attack doctrine had continued to
envisage the armored division acting in a cavalry role as a fast, exploitation
force designed to employ "soft-spot tactics" -concentrating on an existing
gap in the enemy line-rather than fight its way through.
Doctrine also
continued to overemphasize the hitting power of the armored brigade and
underemphasize combined-arms teamwork in exploitation. 214 Fundamen-
tally, such a quixotic doctrine reflected the army's failure to preserve the
experience of World War I, its repeated defeat, and its inexperience in
armored warfare.
But even after British forces abandoned the offensive spearhead role of
armor during late 1943, attack doctrine remained fundamentally flawed.
For it still emphasized a ponderous, centralized, deliberate, three-staged
attritional battle on a narrow front. Frontal attacks first pinned the enemy in
position; then artillery smashed the infantry into enemy positions, where
they then consolidated on the objective; and finally armor moved through
the gap torn in the enemy line to push into the enemy rear.215 Whereas
British attack doctrine stressed concentration of effort and narrow-front
attacks to maximize offensive striking power, it was poorly attuned to
German defensive tactics of defense in depth and immediate counterattack
to disrupt, contain, and repulse enemy attacks. The slow, deliberate pace of
British attacks not only gave the enemy time to recover from the massive
preliminary bombardment and respond, but narrow attack fronts often
caused terrible traffic congestion and allowed German flanking fire and
counterattacks to so cripple attack momentum that follow-up units could
not move forward quickly or smoothly. So, British attack doctrine was fun-
damentally mechanistic, ponderous, deliberate, and controlled; its emphasis
on units' consolidating after a break-in before exploiting led to fatal delays
that made penetration of enemy defenses unlikely.
The tradition of imperial defense meant that the army failed to stress
field training and thus never really committed itself to retraining while in
combat theaters. 216 This reluctance to retrain on the battlefield further
slowed the pace of innovation, and the army remained poorly structured to
reassess its practices and disseminate new ideas. Of the senior British com-
manders, only Montgomery demonstrated a strong commitment to retrain-
ing. However, once he had developed what he considered a battle-winning
formula in the desert in 1942, his operational and tactical ideas barely
changed thereafter. 217 He was reluctant to address other inadequacies of
British arms, for as long as he had good artillery, air power, and administra-
tion he believed he would prevail. Montgomery was thus both a boon and a
bane to wartime reform: he did stress retraining and learning, but only of
his solutions. His ascendancy, therefore, narrowed the areas in which
