40
Preparation: 1919-1944
high cost of victory both exacerbated Canada's historic isolationism and
fueled pacifism between the wars. The never again ethos gripped interwar
Canada even more powerfully than it did Britain. Such influences merely
reinforced Canada's historic unwillingness to finance peacetime military
preparation 82 Canada demobilized in 1919 and reverted to its traditional
militia. The Great Depression brought further sweeping cuts in defense
spending after 1929,83 Since Canada's geostrategic position presented few
potential aggressors, no rationale existed for large defense expenditures in a
period of severe economic crisis. The Canadian military thus suffered seri-
ous and sustained neglect from which it lost its expertise, its excellence,
and even the essence of its profession. Little of the knowledge of modern
warfare, gained at such a high price in Canadian lives on the Western Front,
survived this neglect in the face of inevitable personnel turnover. 84
In the face of pacifism, the Depression, and the prevailing small-war
mentality, the Canadian government provided the barest minimum of funds
to keep the mechanism of defense alive as the government allowed the
nation's military-industrial complex to run down. 85 The heavy cost of vic-
tory in World War I fueled antimilitarism between the wars and the
Depression reinforced anti-institutional sentiments, spawned labor and
political unrest, and intensified disenchantment and distrust of the govern-
ment. The French Canadians of Quebec, in particular, remained as bitterly
hostile as ever to cooperation in imperial defense. Not surprisingly,
Canadian politics thus focused on domestic issues and interwar govern-
ments displayed little understanding of, or concern for, strategic and
national security issues. 86
Emphasis on home defense, public concern over the growing Japanese
threat in the Pacific, lack of popular consensus on the need for military pre-
paredness, and lack of consultation with Canada's prospective allies, let
alone joint planning, all prevented the maintenance of effective military
forces in the interwar period. The government inevitably subordinated mili-
tary considerations to what was politically feasible: Canadian politicians
and treasury officials thus resisted increased defense expenditures through-
out the 1930s.87 The standing of the military in Canadian society was a fur-
ther obstacle to military preparedness. Few Canadians viewed the military
as a prestigious, respectable, financially rewarding, or honorable profes-
sion. The militia's chronic understaffing was thus not only a function of
stringent financial restraints, but also reflected its low social prestige, even
during the high unemployment of the Depression years.
The interwar militia consisted of a small, permanent professional
cadre, the Permanent Active Militia (PAM), and a larger, part-time Non-
Permanent Active Militia (NPAM). Underfunded and undermanned, the
militia barely preserved Canada's military experience 88 While the PAM
comprised dedicated career soldiers, the NPAM mustered for a mere ten
days of annual exercising and undertook almost no collective training, 89
The Interwar Period
41
The militia's theoretical fifteen divisions existed on paper only; the largest
formation it could actually field was the brigade. Its force structure-domi-
nated by infantry and cavalry but lacking artillery, armor, supporting arms,
mobility, and a logistic tail-quickly became unbalanced and outdated. It
was also utterly ill equipped to fight modern war: it possessed no modern
antiaircraft guns, almost no tanks or armored cars, no medium or heavy
artillery, and few infantry weapons, let alone many motor vehicles.90 The
equipment it did possess was of Great War vintage and had become both
obsolete and worn out by the 1930s. Such was the extent of the military's
neglect between the wars that in the absence of any realistic threat to
Canadian security, that it was barely possible for the Canadian military to
even defend Canada. The establishment of a expeditionary force for service
in Europe was clearly impossible.91
Resistance by the Canadian government, treasury officials, and citizens
severely circumscribed the militia's endeavors to enhance its capabilities in
the late 1930s in the face of increased threats to Canada's national security.
Modest increases in annual defense spending materialized after 1937 as the
Canadian government prudently invested in coast artillery, warships, and
planes to bolster its domestic defense capabilities. But the government
directed most funds toward the Pacific, where the prospects of a Japanese-
U.S. war were growing, in the belief that the Royal Navy could protect
Canada's Atlantic seaboard. These logical defense priorities brought about
a proportionate decline in funding for the militia during the late 1930s.92
The militia could thus achieve few substantive reforms. There was no
expansion of the PAM, though in 1936 the NPAM finally reduced its num-
ber of paper formations, began very limited mechanization, and expanded
artillery and services.93 In addition, the government extended the militia's
annual training from ten to eleven days, but even this most modest of
improvements had to be bitterly fought for. The decline of Canada's mili-
tary-industrial complex also seriously hampered rearmament in the late
1930s. Lack of a domestic arms industry made Canada dependent on
Britain for all its ordnance, save small arms and some field artillery. But
since Britain had also embarked on crash rearmament it had no modern
weapons to furnish to Canada. What British hardware Canada did acquire
was obsolete. In the financial, political, and cultural climate of the late
1930s what appears most remarkable was that the militia managed to
enhance its capabilities at all.94
Only in the late 1930s did Canada begin rudimentary planning for pos-
sible involvement in a European war. War Scheme Three of 1937 called for
the dispatch overseas of a three-division-strong "Mobile Force" but identi-
fied no possible deployments or missions.95 By 1939 revision had curtailed
the Mobile Force to two divisions, but no progress had been made in identi-
fying deployments or missions. Thus, when Canada declared war on
Germany on 10 September 1939, a full week after Great Britain, Canada
