52
Preparation: 1919-1944
heavy weapons, communications, and headquarters. The German infantry
that went to war in 1939 was better equipped and trained than its counter-
parts.
There was, however, little that was revolutionary about the German
artillery arm in the 1930s. The Treaty of Versailles had reduced the German
artillery arsenal and banned mobile heavy artillery. 156 As a result, the
artillery arm struggled to meet expansion needs in the 1930s. It was slow to
motorize, and overexpansion meant that even in 1938 heavy artillery
remained both largely horse-drawn and in short supply (see Table 1.2). 157
Nonetheless, in the early 1930s it raised experimental motorized and chem-
ical mortar batteries. Moreover, the mobile 105mm light field howitzer
standardized in the 1930s proved well suited for the fast, mobile operations
envisaged by the Germans.
Emphasis on fast-paced, offensive maneuver
war, though, obviated the need for a centralized artillery arm. In fact, the
organization of German artillery reflected skepticism that massed artillery
fire could make a decisive contribution to offensive warfare. Instead, the
Heer envisaged the decentralized forward employment of artillery at the
battalion and regimental level to disrupt and to harry, rather than shatter, an
enemy already
offense.
outmaneuvered and unbalanced by fast-paced ground
Table 1.2 Growth of German Artillery Arm, 1933-1938
Year
Horse-drawn Battalions
Light
Heavy
Motorized Battalions
Light
Heavy
Total
1933
1934
1935
1936
+ ∞0
1938
70
114
107
33
228
Source: Tessin, Formationsgeschichte, 41-48.
The popular image of excellent air-ground coordination created by the
blitzkrieg notwithstanding, in September 1939 the Luftwaffe had very limit-
ed capability to support the Heer and lacked an effective system for close
air support. Like other air forces, it remained principally committed to
strategic bombing and direct support of ground forces remained a tertiary
mission. But the lessons of World War I had led it to devote greater
resources to creating an air superiority fighter force; and Germany's
geostrategic position compelled the Wehrmacht to approach air-ground
cooperation with greater open-mindedness and less interservice rancor than
The Interwar Period
53
other militaries. 158 Luftwaffe doctrine thus advocated a more integrated
approach to war and recognized the need for air power to assist the land
battle. Nevertheless, close support remained subsidiary to the air superiori-
ty, interdiction, and strategic bombing missions that dominated Luftwaffe
rearmament in the 1930s. 159
The Spanish Civil War had given the Luftwaffe practical experience of
the problems of air-ground coordination from which it drew important les-
sons. The static warfare that had dominated that war due to well-matched
ground forces led the Condor Legion to develop a primitive close-support
capability. Although demonstrating the accuracy of the Stuka dive bomber
as a precision bomber, the Luftwaffe gained no experience of close support
of fast-moving mechanized forces in mobile warfare in Spain. Thus, in
September 1939, the Luftwaffe had only a very limited close-support capa-
bility. For the Polish campaign, it allocated to direct support a single wing
of obsolete aircraft relegated to this task because they were unsuited to
more important missions. Moreover, the Luftwaffe lacked tested procedures
for operating in support of armored forces, and structurally the German
system of air-ground coordination was poor. Thus serious tactical, organi-
zational, equipment, and training weaknesses limited conduct of the air-
ground battle. 160 Expansion of the air force and navy also fueled interser-
vice rivalry as these services sought to acquire ground force capabilities.
Göring's quest to expand the Luftwaffe's sphere of control led to a bitter,
but ultimately successful, struggle with the army over antiaircraft artillery
and airborne forces. The army and navy, too, clashed over control of coast
defense and coast artillery.
In September 1939, Hitler mobilized a "window front" Heer in which
Germany committed all its ground forces to the field. The German order of
battle displayed an impressive 103 divisions, but all were understrength
and underequipped. 161 Only half the army comprised trained combat
troops, the rest were reservists and Landwehr (the World War I veterans
Who had undergone hasty refresher training). German reserves were almost
nonexistent and supply stocks negligible—a mere six weeks' supply of
munitions. 162 Not only was everything in the shop window, but the army
was heavy on "teeth" and short on "tail" because Hitler committed every-
thing in an effort to quickly overwhelm Polish resistance.
The outbreak of war, however, found Germany unprepared for pro-
tracted war, and its armed forces were weak long-term instruments of
aggression because Germany lacked the raw materials and industrial capac-
ity necessary for prolonged war. Moreover, despite its aura of modernity,
most of the Heer, like German society, remained horse-drawn. 163 The
strategic weakness of the German petroleum industry, the relatively unmo-
torized nature of German society, the limited supply of armor, and adher-
ence to an as yet unproven tank doctrine all placed real constraints on the
extent of mechanization. The limited size of the German armored force in
