128
Preparation: 1919-1944
Army initially did not perform well in Tunisia. To understand this it is nec-
essary to examine the genesis of the "new army" in the United Kingdom.
The Home Army's force structure changed dramatically during 1940-
1942, and as the threat of invasion receded a more balanced force emerged.
The poorly equipped infantry force of 1940 gave way to a better trained,
supplied, organized, and balanced force strong in armor and artillery. The
expansion of these arms reflected the ascendancy of the principle of
machines over men that flourished after Dunkirk as ordnance offset the
army's numerical weakness 132 Reequipment progressed and reorganization
also marginally increased combat power and greatly strengthened logistic
support. 133
The Royal Artillery, in particular, steadily enhanced its effectiveness
after Dunkirk. It remedied its defective organization as field regiments
restructured their two twelve-gun batteries into three eight-gun batteries,
doubled the number of forward observers, and reintroduced survey par-
ties. 34 This reorganization restored the one-to-one battery-battalion ratio in
divisions, thus fostering affiliation and cooperation. From 1941 on, infantry
also began to take part in live-fire artillery exercises, and the appearance of
workable field radios in large numbers brought improved coordination. 135
Radio allowed a great advance in fire-control methods that were largely the
work of General Parham, who used modern communications to cut
response time and increase flexibility as gunners devised, in 1941, the ten-
minute quick barrage. Moreover, the switch of forward observation officers
(FOOs) to armored observation posts (OPs) during 1941-1942 improved
their survivability, and in late 1942 gunners added the artillery spotter.
These reforms forged an increasingly effective artillery arm capable of
rapid, massed fire support. 136
Nevertheless, tactical deficiencies, which derived from lack of combat
experience, limited artillery capabilities in 1941. Indeed, most enhance-
ments remained theoretical because inexperience obscured continued defi-
ciencies. The terrible muddles and command errors witnessed during
Exercise BUMPER (September 1941) starkly highlighted the Royal
Artillery's tactical weaknesses. Confusion between "in support" and "under
command" created major command headaches; and units decentralized
artillery in accordance with prevailing desert practices. Gunners continued
to neglect fire planning and most fire remained observed, which resulted in
several mock concentrations falling on friendly troops. Exercise BUMPER,
nonetheless, was a watershed in the wartime development of British
artillery. Its revelations led to the brigading of army artillery into Army
Groups Royal Artillery (AGRAs) during the fall of 1942. Yet the army
could only exploit the potential of new fire control methods by overcoming
the command problems exposed by BUMPER. During 1942, restoration of
artillery command authority led to a resumption of fire planning, which
Britain, 1939-1944: Toils and Troubles
129
allowed new quick-survey techniques perfected by the 38th Division to
reduce response times for massed fire to six minutes. 137
Another major advance in artillery effectiveness was the development
of the air observation post (Air OP)-artillery officers, in direct communi-
cation with gunners, flying in low-level Auster light observation planes that
could land and take off on rough terrain near the front to observe and direct
fire. Air force opposition to the concept and the long and bitter service
rivalry that ensued seriously hampered the development of artillery spot-
ung, however. Prewar trials had taken place, but the first joint RAF-army
air OP unit did not see action until TORCH. 138
That these advances were technical rather than tactical partly explains
why the Royal Artillery innovated relatively quickly: technical adaptation
generated considerable consensus. Tactical innovation proved more diffi-
cult. Continued lack of higher training and the rarity of map exercises
involving integrated artillery problems obstructed improved coordination.
Likewise, range shoots typically took place in a tactical vacuum and rarely
involved counterbattery work. Most significant of all, however, was that
these reforms in Home Forces developed independent of the changes in
artillery practices that occurred in the western desert.
The new army also required an expanded logistic base to undertake
simultaneous offensives in distant theaters. Growing material plentitude, as
Britain's war mobilization hit full stride, brought improved supply support.
During 1941, the creation of essential services caught up with the meteoric
expansion of combat units. The need to fight in multiple theaters greatly
increased British logistic requirements, yet from 1942 this tail expanded
beyond the reasonable demands required of it. Logistic overinsurance, first
Witnessed in Norway and France, became pervasive once resources became
abundant. 139
Revitalization of the infantry was also necessary if the army was to
take the offensive. After Dunkirk, the War Office revised tactical doctrine
to stress small-unit fire and maneuver, which became the basis of battle
drill. But these efforts met with only partial success because they failed to
address the infantry's two fundamental weaknesses: manpower quality and
inadequate firepower. The army only marginally improved infantry quality.
Its most substantive reform was a major reduction of infantry battalions
during 1941-1943; but the troops were mostly transferred to the expanding
armor and artillery branches. Lack of firepower also dogged the infantry
throughout the war. Even in 1944 infantry retained the same personal
weapons, the .303 Lee-Enfield rifle and the magazine-fed Bren gun, they
had started the war with. The Bren, though portable and reliable, could not
match the higher and more sustained rates of fire of German belt-fed
machine guns. Limited use of machine guns and mortars paralleled at com-
pany and battalion level this lack of squad-level firepower. The Vickers
