228
Preparation: 1919-1944
uation. Victory was only possible—as Rommel clearly understood—if the
Germans defeated the Allies on the beaches. But such an outcome was
unlikely. Even though the Westheer possessed the raw strength to repel an
invasion, its defensive posture inevitably gave the Allies the initiative and
ensured that the initial stages of the invasion would pit Allied strength
against German weakness. In fact, the Germans required four preconditions
to prevail on the second front: that intelligence sources provided some fore-
warning of the time and location of the invasion; that the Kriegsmarine and
Luftwaffe at least contested Allied supremacy at sea and in the air; that
powertul, armored reserves were available nearby to launch immediate,
heavy counterattacks before the Allies could consolidate their lodgement;
and, finally, that the Germans could restore and maintain rail communica-
tions to the battle zone.
To achieve these preconditions and defeat the invasion Hitler appoint-
ed Field Marshal Rommel as commander in chief of Army Group B in
northern France on 31 December 1943. While a superb tactician and opera-
tional commander, Rommel had no better grasp of the strategic or logistic
dimensions of war than the other German generals. He was a bold, hard-
driving, and, by nature, offensive-minded professional, and this emphasis
quickly surfaced in the anti-invasion strategy that he orchestrated. 180
However, there was little boldness left in a Rommel who recognized that
German chances for victory were slim. His strategy to defeat the enemy on
the beaches was the only one with real prospect of success. Hitler veered
toward Rommel's plan, but he never fully backed it in the face of the oppo-
sition of the commander in chief in the West, Field Marshal von Rundstedt,
and of Geyr von Schweppenburg, the commander of Armored Group West.
Rommel energized German morale as much as Montgomery did across the
Channel, but he was unable to deploy the ground troops to his satisfaction.
Nevertheless, he innovated defensively, developing the use of foreshore
obstacles and of "Rommel's asparagus," stakes driven into the ground to
obstruct airborne landings, to further delay and disrupt an invasion. 181
Yet Rommel lacked the authority to mount an integrated interservice
defense of the West, and the German inability to present an effective joint-
service defense was the greatest flaw in their anti-invasion preparations.
Neither the Luftwaffe nor the Kriegsmarine could effectively assist in
repelling an invasion. The Allied air forces had shattered a Luftwaffe,
already badly weakened by the attritional battles of 1943, in the skies over
Germany during the spring of 1944 as it tried to defend German cities,
industry, and civilians. Moreover, the shift in production priority to fighters
meant that the German Third Air Fleet in France had negligible ground
attack and airlift capabilities. Only a major redeployment westward of anti-
aircraft batteries— despite the need to protect German civilians from bomb-
ing attacks-allowed the Luftwaffe to even begin to mitigate the growing
impact of Allied air attacks on German communications, 182 As seriously,
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
229
the Luftwaffe's meager long-range reconnaissance force was unable to sup-
ply intelligence about the location and timing of the invasion. It was only in
mine-sowing operations that the Luftwaffe marginally impeded Allied inva-
sion preparations.
The substantial Luftwaffe ground organization also could not offer
much support in the land battle. Its paratroop formations would conduct a
stubborn defense in Normandy, enhancing their reputation as an effective
elite, but they lacked a counteroffensive capability. The most significant
Luftwaffe innovation in support of the impending ground battle was the
reluctant consolidation of its mobile antiaircraft units in the West into the
III Flak Corps in the spring of 1944, intended for a dual air-ground defense
role. However, the retraining of the corps had barely begun by D-Day and,
despite claims to the contrary, it never lived up to expectations in
Normandy. Finally, in the absence of air reconnaissance, the Luftwaffe
depended upon its extensive network of radar stations and air direction cen-
ters in France to provide at least some warning of invasion. But these were
highly vulnerable to air attack, and most were put out of commission in the
days before 6 June, rendering the German defenders blind. 183
Nor could the Kriegsmarine, with its surface forces in the West
reduced to small escort and patrol vessels, offer much challenge to the
Allied invasion fleet. 184 The best anti-invasion assets available were fast E-
boats that could harry invasion shipping with hit-and-run tactics, but these
were only capable of local tactical successes. Instead, the Kriegsmarine
High Command pinned its hopes on forty-nine U-boats that it earmarked
for anti-invasion operations. Yet this force was utterly inadequate for the
task, and the shallow, narrow, and congested waters of the English Channel
posed serious limitations to U-boat operations 185 So, the most significant
contribution the Kriegsmarine made to the defense in the West before D-
Day was to mine the Channel, which compelled the Allies to divert consid-
erable naval assets to mine countermeasures. The Kriegsmarine also hoped
that its numerous heavy coastal batteries could drive off an invasion fleet,
but wartime experience had repeatedly proven that such passive defenses
could not succeed in the absence of air superiority. 186
The Westheer significantly and rapidly enhanced its capabilities in the
six months prior to D-Day. However, misguided decisions by Hitler con-
cerning the scale of expansion slowed the German buildup, dissipated
German strength, and exacerbated dwindling mobility. Yet the gradual
modification and honing of German doctrine, tactics, and training during
1943-1944 was as central to the resurrection of German combat power in
the West. The basic soundness of German doctrine, rooted in realistic,
detailed analysis of both Germany's and her enemy's combat experiences in
World War I, meant that the Heer had only to adjust and refine as experi-
ence and changing conditions required. The pace of innovation and adapta-
tion accelerated during 1943-1944 as the Heer shifted its focus to defense
