392
Normandy 1944
After the breakout from Falaise, the specter of a much larger encir-
clement on the Seine loomed. The sharply reduced mobility, catastrophic
supply situation, and mounting demoralization of German forces presented
the Allies with a strategic opportunity to annihilate the enemy against the
Seine River. But, in late August, the Germans pulled off their greatest suc-
cess of the campaign as they extricated virtually all of their remaining
forces in Normandy across the Seine in a remarkable feat of organization
and improvisation. The retreat east to beyond the Seine, which ended the
Normandy campaign, had important consequences. The salvaging of vital
staffs, specialists, and veteran cadres allowed Hitler to flesh out a new
Westheer in the fall with which he launched the December 1944 Ardennes
counteroffensive. In fact, success on the Seine was crucial to Hitler's abili-
ty to resume the offensive in the West during mid-December 1944.
A number of factors explain why the Germans were able to salvage so
much of their army. They retreated skillfully, despite grave handicaps, after
21 August in a full-scale, staged withdrawal behind the Seine. 101 At the
same time, the Allies were unable to interdict effectively this retrograde
movement. Allied air attacks had destroyed every bridge across the Seine
north of Paris by D-Day and, despite herculean efforts by engineers, air
attacks demolished bridges faster than the Germans could rebuild them. 102
Increased use of ferrying and of pontoon bridges greatly increased traffic
across the Seine from late June, but these ferries could not accomplish a
rapid mass evacuation. 103
Changing strategic priorities, increasing demands for air support, and
the weather all prevented Allied air forces from impeding the German
retreat. The Allies radically revised their interdiction plan after 9 August to
slow the German retreat. Even though the Seine bridges remained a high
priority, Allied aircraft increased attacks on targets east of Paris and also
the Touques and Risle River bridges west of the Seine. 104 But the planes
had barely resumed large-scale attacks on the Seine bridges on 18 August
when SHAEF decided instead to try and capture them intact. Tactical avia-
tion turned to transportation targets, a shift that relaxed pressure on German
communications.
The U.S. breakout also vastly increased the number of
targets and inevitably dissipated Allied air power as aircraft supported
ground operations across the entire front from Brittany and along the Loire
to Paris, 105 Moreover, the punishing strikes against the Falaise pocket dur-
ing 16-21 August focused the attention of Allied air power and curtailed
attacks on the Seine bridges. Finally, unseasonably bad weather for late
August also aided the Germans, grounding all Allied daylight air missions
on 21 and 23 August. 106
The failure of Montgomery's tired and weakened forces to pursue
aggressively the retreating enemy also aided the German escape. The
Germans used over sixty crossing points over the Seine and employed
every conceivable means of crossing, including ferries, barges, rafts,
Germany: The Defeat of the Westheer
393
yachts, and rowboats, as well as pontoon and boat bridges at night. The
German experience in large-scale river-crossing operations in the East
aided these efforts, while the strong antiaircraft defenses erected along the
Seine to protect the crossings reduced the effect of Allied air attacks. 107
When forced to retreat in daylight toward the Seine the Germans suf-
fered heavy losses from air attacks, and the catastrophic fuel situation
forced the Germans to abandon motor vehicles and heavy equipment in
droves. 108 Yet the Germans managed to pull out virtually every soldier and
most of the equipment that made it as far as the Seine, 109 Though badly bat-
tered and bruised, the Westheer escaped to fight another day.
Despite the emphasis of British and American historians on the con-
fused chain of command in the West, German command fragmentation had
little impact on the campaign. Rommel was never able to assert control
over the Normandy battle the way he had in North Africa, and the cam-
paign offered few opportunities for his famed creative generalship. He had
concluded by 11 June that the Allies had established a permanent lodge-
ment and that Germany was doomed 110 His greatest achievement was his
intuitive orchestration of the defense in depth south of Caen that shattered
Montgomery's GOODWOOD offensive. Although he despised defense,
Rommel adopted those logical defensive counters to his own offensive suc-
cesses. 'I But, like the other generals, Rommel neglected the U.S. sector
during July. 112 His being incapacitated by an Allied strafing attack on 17
July (ironically at St. Foy de Montgoméry) once again salvaged his reputa-
tion from the disgrace of defeat. Neither Hans von Kluge nor the iron-hard
Walther Model could alter the outcome in the West.
An increase in communications difficulties obstructed the German
defense of Normandy. The occupation forces relied heavily on land lines
that were vulnerable to sabotage, and by 1944 mobile field radios were in
short supply. Increasingly effective Allied radio interception and direcion
finding brought repeated air attacks on German communications and heavy
loss of signals equipment. The paralysis of German communications under
the impact of Allied air mastery contributed directly to the Germans inabil-
total collapse.
The unbalanced nature of German military capabilities contributed
directly to their defeat in France. The impotence of the Luftwafe and the
Kriegsmarine left the Heer to shoulder the burden of thwarting the inva-
sion. The Luftwaffe diverted many aircraft from the defense of the Reich in
an effort to impact the battle raging in Normandy, but to little avail. is
Though it made determined, and often near suicidal, efforts to aid the
