168
Preparation: 1919-1944
mations reached the United Kingdom. The 1st Tank Brigade, 3d Infantry
Division, and 5th Armoured Division arrived in 1941; the 4th Armoured
Division in 1942, and the 2d Tank Brigade not until 1943. Given Canada's
elevated national status and the memories of the heavy loss of Canadian
lives during World War I, it was inevitable that Canada would demand to
exercise independent command of its ground forces now that it had five
divisions overseas. Canada thus formed the Canadian First Army in the
United Kingdom on 6 April 1942 and raised a second corps headquarters in
1943. By the summer of 1943, the Canadian Army Overseas (CAO) had
reached its definitive force structure of five divisions and two brigades.
As the Canadian Army gradually materialized in the United Kingdom,
many factors retarded its activation and working up. Equipment shortages,
inadequate early war training, and the lack of established Canadian doctrine
all militated against its becoming quickly operational. No army can fight
well without effective weapons, yet in 1939 the militia remained utterly ill
equipped for modern warfare. It had almost no modern antitank or antiair-
craft guns, few Bren guns, and even fewer mortars; it was virtually immo-
bile, and its artillery was largely obsolescent. 4 Reequipping the army for
combat encountered numerous obstacles and was protracted: even in June
1944 some Canadian formations still lacked authorized ordnance.
Canada's neglect of its defense industries seriously impeded the
reequipping of the CAO and increased Canada's dependence on British,
and later U.S., arms. Yet Canada was unable to produce quickly its own
weapons. The Canadian government's prewar belief that it could rely on
Britain while Canada resurrected its military-industrial complex proved
false. In reality the reverse was true. The limits of Anglo-American arms
production, coupled with prevailing military realities, meant that early in
the war Canada would receive obsolete weaponry from its allies.?
Moreover, what little ordnance Canada had available, however obsolete,
was put at the disposal of Britain in its hour of greatest need in 1940.8 But
once its armaments industry finally got into gear during 1942, Canada then
diverted most of its war production to Britain, the Commonwealth, the
Soviet Union, and China. In fact, in the last two years of the war no less
than 71 percent of Canadian armament production went to other nations.'
This reality reflected that political and economic, as much as military,
considerations governed the channeling of Canada's war production. The
Canadian government adhered to the principle of "material over men," that
fully giving of the nation's industrial resources could both offset Canada's
limited manpower commitment to the Allied cause, and thus minimize
casualties, and simultaneously drag Canada out of the Depression. Such
motivations, whatever their merits, had significant military ramifications.
Canada's prodigious sale of its armaments left Canadian forces under-
equipped and delayed both reequipment and the acquisition of combat
readiness, 10
Canada, 1939-1944: The Politics of Neglect
169
Canadian ground forces might have been more effective had the nation
been able to produce its own quality weapons. But inexperience, lack of
infrastructure, and its position as a junior partner in a multinational coali-
tion restricted Canada's wartime weapons development. Initial expansion
of the armaments industry in 1940-1942 produced British weapons for the
British Army, a process that reinforced the anglicization of the Canadian
military. Canada retained a small, if precarious, capability as an independ-
ent weapons developer by designing hybrid weapons that combined exist-
ing Anglo-American equipment and technology. In 1940 Canada developed
the Ram tank, which married design features of Anglo-American armor, but
the Sherman tank soon superseded it in Allied service. Canada proved more
successful in developing self-propelled artillery, where the Sexton, which
mounted the British 25-pounder gun on a U.S. chassis, became standard
equipment in the self-propelled artillery regiments of Anglo-Canadian
armored divisions. Despite this enterprise, the wartime Canadian Army
fought largely with British ordnance.
Tardy reequipment seriously hindered acquisition of combat readiness.
Reliance on obsolete hand-me-downs and the diversion of war production
to other combatants brought lengthy equipment shortages and repeated
reequipments, which badly delayed the combat preparation of Canadian
formations. Most units earmarked for OVERLORD only acquired the
heavy weapons they fought with in Normandy in the year preceeding D-
Day. In some cases, like the 4th Armoured Division, formations had not
even completed reequipment by 6 June. lI
Inadequate training also hampered the CAO's combat preparation.
Repeated barrack square parading and monotonous, repetitive drill sapped
the optimism, enthusiasm, and vigor of many a volunteer. Nor was training
intensive: troops spent the majority of their time on duties and fatigues.
Moreover, with no battle experience available, training inevitably lacked
realism and the dearth of qualified personnel for combat commands led to a
lack of quality instructors. Uncertainty over potential theaters of opera-
tions, army missions, and force structure hardly helped forge quality train-
ing either. Given these realities, Canadian training was slow and patchy at
best in the early war years.
In 1942, the army became obsessed with the new battle drill training
methods recently introduced in the British Army. Designed to restore the
small-unit tactical flexibility that the BEF had lacked in 1940, battle drill's
emphasis on assault courses, highly controlled live-fire exercises, and flexi-
ble small-unit fire-and-maneuver drills was a welcome change from bar-
rack square drill and improved the ebbing morale of the Canadians in
Britain. During 1942-1944 the CAO extensively practiced battle drill. But
how an army trains is far more important than for how long.
The time
devoted to such training would not be rewarded in combat because the tac-
tical doctrine that underlay battle drill was incompatible with the de facto
