248
Normandy 1944
toward its D-Day objective of the Carpiquet airfield, despite the known
movement of powerful German armored reserves toward Caen.! The
Canadian spearhead was ambushed and outfought by the vanguard of the
12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend and thrown back in confusion.
Further local Canadian reverses followed as German armor conducted an
aggressive defense, probing for weak spots in the Allied lines that they
might subsequently exploit in a planned, general counteroffensive. On 8
June SS troops defeated the Royal Winnipeg Rifles and retook Putot?
Three days later, the Canadian 6th Armoured Regiment and the Queen's
Own Rifles of Canada launched a hasty and ill-conceived right-flanking
movement through Le Mesnil Patry to seize the high ground south of
Cheux. But a lightning German counterattack decimated this force and
threw the Canadians back to their start line in disarray.
In front of Caen too, Montgomery's assault divisions found themselves
embroiled in bitter fighting against the expected German armored counter-
attacks that sought to split the Allied bridgehead and drive the enemy back
into the sea. A combination of tenacious British defense and Allied domina-
tion of the seas and the skies, however, effectively stalled the counteroffen-
sive planned by the I SS Panzer Corps before it had ever really got started.
In the aftermath of these abortive initial offensive efforts, the Germans
assumed the strategic defensive across the entire front on 10 June and thus
effectively surrendered the initiative to the Allies. Rommel hoped that this
situation would only be temporary as he awaited the arrival of fresh
armored forces in particular the Il SS Panzer Corps from the Eastern
Front —with which he hoped to launch a well-planned and organized strate-
gic counteroffensive intended to divide the Allied bridgehead. While
Montgomery's forces beat off these aggressive initial German coun-
terthrusts, Anglo-Canadian forces were unable to advance in the face of this
massed armor and the 21st Army Group in turn had temporarily to assume
the defensive in mid-June because its assault forces had exhausted them-
selves in ten days of continuous, heavy combat. The struggle for Caen
bogged down into a grim, bitter and protracted battle of attrition that lasted
for six weeks.
After firmly establishing themselves ashore at Utah Beach on D-Day,
the troops of Gen. Lawton "Lightning" Joe Collins's U.S. VII Corps struck
north and west to quickly seize the strategically important port of
Cherbourg at the northern tip of the Cotentin Peninsula, and thus guarantee
the logistic base for a permanent lodgement. Stiff enemy resistance around
Montebourg and on the Quineville Ridge, however, slowed the U.S.
advance. General Collins's forces also pushed slowly west and south to
gain ground for operational maneuver, and after a stiff fight took the impor-
tant communications center of Carentan on 12 June, facilitating the perma-
nent connection of the two U.S. bridgeheads the following day.
In the meantime, Maj. Gen. Leonard T. Gerow's U.S. V Corps contin-
A Campaign Overview
249
ued a slow, but inexorable advance on St. Lô from Omaha Beach in the
face of diminishing enemy opposition from the chewed-up German 352d
Infantry Division. On 7 June, U.S. and British forces linked up west of
Bayeux and then pushed south to cross the barrier of the Aure River by
June. However, by the time that the U.S. 29th Infantry Division assaulted
across the next water obstacle, the Elle River on 12 June, the powerful
German 3d Parachute Division had arrived from Brittany to slow the U.S.
advance on St. Lô to a crawl.3 With priority accorded to Collins's advance
on Cherbourg, Gerow's depleted and tired forces could launch only weak
and poorly supported attacks that were easily beaten off by the German
paratroopers, and the V Corps offensive came to a halt in sheer exhaustion
two miles short of St. Lô in mid-June.
Back on the Cotentin Peninsula, where there was stiff and undimin-
ished resistance, General Collins abandoned the original campaign plan
that called for a direct advance on Cherbourg. Instead he shifted the weight
of the offensive westward, and on 15 June the Americans struck west to cut
the Cotentin Peninsula and isolate Cherbourg from the main body of
German forces. With U.S. offensive strength now concentrated and with the
German defense attenuated by two weeks of bitter fighting, the renewed
drive rapidly crumbled a German front already badly weakened by previous
broad-front attacks. The seasoned U.S. 9th Infantry and 82d Airborne
Divisions spearheaded the offensive and advanced boldly and aggressively
to break the backs of the German defenses south of Valognes. Collins's
troops then dashed westward to Barneville on 17 June to cut the peninsula
and isolate Cherbourg. 4
During the last two weeks of June, the Americans directed most of
their strength and resources to the campaign to capture Cherbourg and its
vital port facilities. Isolated from reinforcement and resupply, the German
position in the northern Cotentin was ultimately untenable, but the
Germans conducted a delaying withdrawal back to the outer city defenses,
seeking to buy time to build a new front in the southern Cotentin and
destroy Cherbourg's port facilities. The final U.S. combined-arms assault
on the city began in earnest on 22 June, and, despite stubborn resistance,
Cherbourg was in U.S. hands by 29 June. All resistance in the northern half
of the Cotentin Peninsula ceased by 1 July. The Allies had gained their first
port in France, but German demolitions ensured that it would be weeks
before the first supplies could be off-loaded at Cherbourg.
Back on the Anglo-Canadian front, after a week of consolidation,
replenishment, and preparation, General Montgomery launched his first
major offensive in Normandy on 26 June, designated EPSOM. He began an
ambitious operation designed to penetrate the strong enemy defenses west
of Caen, cross the significant obstacles posed by the Orne and Odon Rivers,
and gain the high ground southwest of the city, thereby outflanking Caen
and rendering its defense untenable. Montgomery employed his corps de
