288
Normandy 1944
With the German front ripped apart, the U.S. First Army expanded
COBRA. The VII and VIII Corps continued their push south and the next
thus poised to attack into Brittany.
The most intensive and effective U.S. tactical air attacks yet seen
accompanied the COBRA ground operations. Indeed, COBRA witnessed
the largest and most effective application of tactical air power up to that
point in the history of air warfare. 105 A major development was the increas-
ing shift in tactical air support from the battlefield interdiction that doctrine
advocated to close support as Elwood "Pete" Quesada's IX TAC came to
the aid of Bradley's struggling ground forces. 106 Quesada extended and
refined the Horsefly system of air-ground coordination developed during
the late spring of 1944 in Italy to provide "armored column cover." 107 He
organized continuous air cover for armored formations and innovated tech-
nically to create effective means of coordination via tank-mounted air sup-
port parties fitted with very high-frequency (VHF) radios attached to
armored divisions. These innovations forged excellent coordination
between tactical aviation and mechanized forces during the breakout. 108
The development of armored cover represented the greatest advance in
the U.S. conduct of the air-ground battle in Normandy, 109 Tactical air power
seriously hampered German countermeasures, redeployments, and resupply
operations. Moreover, the novel daylight drop of delayed-fuse bombs that
detonated after dark and the use of radar- and radio-controlled blind night
bombing disrupted German nighttime movement. 110 As German columns
retired southward all along the front they suffered heavy air attack. On 29
July in the Roncey pocket air force, artillery, and armor smashed German
units as the U.S. 2d Armored Division repelled numerous enemy efforts to
break out. The air strikes by the IX TAC on the pocket proved to be the
most damaging Allied tactical air strikes yet launched in the European
Theater of Operations (ETO).111
From COBRA on, U.S. fighter-bombers widely provided armored
cover for armored spearheads. 12 Such cover for the armor improved intel-
ligence available to ground forces, which allowed them to bypass resistance
more easily. It also facilitated the ground advance because this cover pro-
vided rapid-response air attacks when armored forces met opposition. 113
The provision of this cover clearly aided the rapid advance of U.S. armored
forces across France during August 1944.114
Bradley also employed his armor en masse and in depth during
COBRA in accordance with proven doctrine. Once the armor was out in the
open, American mobility came into play. On 31 July the 2d Armored took
the communications hub of Villedieu-les-Puits, while on the eastern flank
the XIX and V Corps pushed southeast to tie down German reserves. What
had begun on 25 July in pessimism had ended a week later in a breakout. 115
The United States: The Leviathan Triumphant
289
A combination of factors had brought success. Operationally, U.S. per-
formance during COBRA was excellent: the infantry divisions had execut-
ed a fast break-in, and armored forces performed a textbook rapid exploita-
tion. The most devastating carpet bombing of enemy ground forces, a more
sophisticated and powerful artillery fire plan, and the strongest tactical air
support of the war to date paved the way for the ground advance. Technical
innovation-the First Army using for the first time both the Rhinoceros
hedgecutter and armored column cover during COBRA-also contributed
to success.116 When coupled with waning German strength and increasing
German logistic shortages, the result was a breakout.
On 1 August, General Bradley's 12th U.S. Army Group became opera-
tional and took over the First Army and Gen. George Patton's newly acti-
vated Third Army. U.S. forces were now able to conduct the fast-paced
maneuver war that the peacetime army had trained for. While the First
Army advanced southeast and occupied Mortain on 3 August, Patton's
armored divisions fanned out into Brittany: the 4th Armored Division took
Rennes and Vannes to isolate Brittany, and the 6th Armored Division raced
deep into the peninsula to seize Pontivy. Nonetheless, most of the enemy
was still able to retire into the ports of Brest, St. Malo, and Lorient. During
the breakout U.S. forces for the first time went on the defense to thwart a
major German counteroffensive that aimed to seal off the U.S. penetration
and isolate the Third Army. The advance by the Americans had left their
center thin, which the enemy tried to exploit. On 5 August, the Americans
first detected a German buildup around Mortain. Eleventh-hour Ultra intel-
ligence warned of an enemy attack and allowed the First Army at the last
minute to shore up its defenses and to take good defensive positions for the
onslaught. 117
On 6 August, the Germans struck west in strength at Mortain toward
Avranches on a 10,000-yard front with five divisions. l18 Despite reinforce-
ment, U.S. forces were still thin on the ground and occupied unprepared
positions. Moreover, the troops still had little experience in coordinating
defensively, and the infantry lacked the antitank capability to repel concen-
trated enemy armored attacks. Though the enemy offensive demonstrated
the weakness of towed U.S. antitank guns as the German push overran the
823d Tank Destroyer Battalion at Juvigny-Le Mesnil-Tove, the stubborn
combined-arms defense of the 30th Division slowed and disrupted the
enemy advance. 119
The availability of the 4th Division in close reserve allowed the
Americans to react immediately. Bradley recalled the 35th Division and
counterattacked northeast between Mortain and Barenton. The under-
strength German forces, Operating with tenuous supply lines, suffered
repeated artillery and air attacks. 120 This combined-arms, air-ground
defense halted the Germans well short of Avranches. In retrospect, the deci-
sive factors in U.S. success were the stubborn combined-arms defense by
