88
Preparation: 1919-1944
August 1943 on the transfer of high-quality personnel from service to com-
bat units began. 113 Circumstances, however, circumscribed the AGF's
efforts to improve manpower quality. Mobilization was all but complete,
and the AGF could not alter the War Department's distribution of manpow-
er to the armed services; it could only reshuffle its existing manpower. The
army's commitment to homogeneity and uniformity meant that, unlike the
British Army, it raised few special forces during World War II, ensuring
only minimal diversion of quality manpower from the AGF. 114 In
September 1943, the AGF initiated an infantry program to improve troop
quality and morale, 115 Yet this program was only cosmetic; a more substan-
tive effort was the introduction of the Physical Profile Plan in February
1944 to classify manpower according to physical strength. But this
occurred too late to radically improve manpower quality before OVER-
LORD, even though it did marginally increase the quality of army replace-
ments during the Normandy campaign and freed more high-quality person-
nel for the AGF.
In 1944, the army reversed its manpower allocation priorities in favor
of the combat arms: the army cut back its Specialized Training Program
(ASTP), aviation cadets were transferred to the AGF, and antiaircraft gun-
ners were retrained as infantry. In addition, the army redoubled its efforts to
get troops to volunteer for the infantry. Although such efforts were insuffi-
cient to rectify fully the inequalities caused by manpower policies they did
bring a gradual improvement in AGF troop quality during 1944.
From 1943 on the army, like its Allied counterparts, experienced a
manpower shortage. But it proved able to shuffle its available manpower to
meet its needs. As early as August 1942, the army had begun inducting
"limited-service" personnel into rear headquarters and front-line service
units, but the army maintained its strength overseas largely by cadreing
divisions that remained in the United States. 116 Despite these efforts there
was an infantry shortage by early 1944, but the army exhibited vigor, drive,
and tenacity in freeing fit combat troops for service overseas. 117
During 1943-1944 the army and the USAAF also overcame many of
the problems that had plagued air-ground cooperation in the Mediterranean.
(The army also vigorously improved the aerial recognition skills of its
troops.) 118 But solutions to the command, communication, and control (C3)
problems eluded the U.S. military before the Normandy campaign. The
first effective C3 system emerged in Italy in the spring of 1944 with the
forward air controller (FAC) system known as Horsefly. This involved
FACs flying in observation planes with direct radio communication to both
air and ground units. This was a great leap forward in coordinating air-
ground assets and proved very effective in interdicting enemy rear areas. It
was less effective in the immediate combat zone, however, and the USAAF
was unable to perfect better close-support techniques before OVER-
LORD. 119 Nonetheless, by 1944 the USAAF had become more effective at
The United States, 1939-1944: The Leviathan Awakens
89
close air support: it had made major strides in overcoming the problems
that had bedeviled air-ground coordination in Tunisia and Sicily, but the
major change was the virtual neutralization of the Luftwaffe, which allowed
the USAAF to provide close support rarely hindered by enemy air power.
In Sicily and Italy the USAAF tested and developed the methods of control
and communication, the doctrine, and the commanders who led the air bat-
tle in northwest Europe. Technological advances contributed to the
increased effectiveness of U.S. tactical aviation too as the USAAF
deployed new fighters—the P-38 Lightning, P-47 Thunderbolt and P-51
Mustang-that doubled efficiently as fighter-bombers. 120 The development
of external fuel tanks that greatly extended combat range and increased
payloads also contributed directly to the increasing success of U.S. tactical
aviation.
With a new generation of high-performance fighter-bombers equipped
with drop tanks, close air support became an important, regular, and inte
gral component of ground operations for the first time in Italy during late
spring 1944. The burgeoning of U.S. close air support capabilities in 1944,
though, was aided by a remarkable coincidence of circumstances: alongside
technological advances, the battering taken by Allied heavy bombers over
Germany during the winter of 1943-1944 finally softened doctrinal preju-
dices against close air support. 121
The use of strategic bombing forces in the direct support of ground
forces represented a final development in the application of air power to
land warfare. On 15 February 1944, the Allies made their first use of "car-
pet" bombing tactical targets in the combat zone as 250 bombers dropped
600 tons of bombs on Monte Cassino. One month later 435 bombers
dropped 1,000 tons on Cassino. Despite their awesome destructive power,
these initial attacks were not very effective: carpet bombing obliterated the
monastery of Monte Cassino but allowed the Germans to dig deep into the
rubble. The novelty and complexity of this form of attack prevented the
Allies from fully mastering carpet bombing prior to OVERLORD.
Flaws still existed in U.S. air-ground coordination on the eve of D-
Day, but the alacrity with which military commanders addressed these
issues suggested that they were likely to perfect their execution of the land-
air battle in northwest Europe. By 1944, close support had become an inte-
gral element of U.S. aerial operations, and was becoming integral to the
combined-arms team. The increasing effectiveness of tactical air support
powerfully reinforced the striking power of U.S. forces as they prepared for
OVERLORD.
The final element of the successful Allied air-ground battle that would
be waged in northwest Europe was the orchestration of a systematic aerial
interdiction campaign. The first Allied attempt at this was in March 1944 in
Italy with Operation STRANGLE, a deep interdiction mission to sever
German communications. 122 Although it failed to isolate the battlefield,
