214
Preparation: 1919-1944
ment, training, and character from that of 1939. Its determination to exam-
ine its combat performance thoroughly, honestly, and critically and then to
retrain and to innovate at every stage contributed directly to the devastating
German military victories of the early war years. The most significant
change was the evolution of German defensive doctrine on the Eastern
Front, where distance and troop and equipment shortages precluded
defense in depth and forced the Ostheer to rely on linear defense and
immediate counterattack. Initially viewed as temporary expedients, by
1943 these defensive techniques had become standard as the Heer revised
doctrine to maximize dwindling combat power by honing its doctrinal
edge.
German adaptation and innovation was typically decentralized and
emerged largely from the bottom up. This decentralization meant that the
Heer adapted relatively swiftly and proved able to surmount many of the
challenges it encountered in battle. Indeed, the hedgehog defense of winter
1941-1942 probably saved the Ostheer from collapse. Improvisations
retained at their core the four basic principles of German defensive doc-
trine: depth, maneuver, counterattack, and firepower. German forces
employed fortified villages, heavy weapons echeloned in depth, and alarm
units to create artificial depth. Yet Hitler's orders to hold fast, declining
mobility, and loss of air superiority increasingly restricted German opera-
tional maneuver. Denied room to maneuver, the Heer resorted to firepower
and immediate counterattack to hold the front, and these principles became
the core of German defensive tactics for the rest of the war. Immediate
counterattack, in particular, frequently proved decisive in restoring German
positions in the East. Defensive tactics, therefore, increasingly stressed
speed over mass. The Ostheer inculcated in its troops the need for immedi-
ate and constant counterattack in response to the progressive dwindling of
German combat strength and mobility, which both hampered conduct of
elastic defense and mandated increased reliance on static defense, firepow-
er, and counterattack. Such tactical and operational innovation temporarily
kept Germany's enemies at bay during 1942-1943.
As the war turned against the Axis and the strategic initiative passed to
the Allies, the pace and scale of German innovation accelerated as the Heer
shored up its shrinking combat power. During 1939-1942 the Heer had
largely adapted ad hoc in reaction to unforeseen challenges, but, as it shift-
ed to defense during 1943-1944, adaptation became more systematic and
widespread. The result was a transformation in the character of the Heer
that led to a marked, if ephemeral, restoration of its combat power during
the spring of 1944.
The pace of adaptation accelerated during 1943-1944 as Soviet forma-
tions first halted the German advance at the gates of Stalingrad and then
slowly began to push back. 110 Indeed, the destruction of the Sixth Army at
Stalingrad and the recoiling of the southern sector of the Eastern Front dur-
Germany, 1939-1944: Blitzkrieg Unleashed
215
ing the spring of 1943 finally shocked the Germans out of their complacen-
cy and forced them to revise their estimates of Soviet capabilities. The
respite of spring of 1943, which followed Manstein's stunning counterol-
fensive that threw back the Soviet spearheads in the south and regained
Kharkov, allowed the Ostheer to examine the lessons of the 1942 cam-
paign.
Study revealed that doctrine had to be revised both because defense in
depth was rarely possible and doctrine provided little guidance for forest
and swamp fighting or for hedgehog defenses. Ill During 1943, the OKH
thus revised combat practices to reflect battlefield reality and to maximize
its dwindling combat power by honing its doctrinal edge. It informally
adopted as standard the expedient defensive techniques of linear defense,
holding fast, and immediate counterattack developed in the East. While the
Heer continued to adhere in principle to the Truppenführung and to pay lip
service to elastic defense in depth, in the field troops increasingly modified
basic defensive practices as informal doctrinal adaptation percolated up at
the front, at the local level. 112 Central to this process were the divisional
field replacement battalions that acclimated new recruits to local fighting
conditions, taught recent battle experiences, and honed combat techniques.
Frequent and extensive dissemination of unit after-action reports spread
these defensive adaptations along the entire Eastern Front during 1943 as
the Heer absorbed the most effective adaptations into revised training and
During 1943 the OKH also endeavored to enhance its artillery arm
The Heer's mobile offensive orientation early in the war had worked
against massed, centralized employ pasiend dictated that the regiment
remain the primary fire unit. But the desperate defensive fighting on the
thinly manned Eastern Front during 1941-1942 restored artillery as the
backbone of German defense, and artillery once again became the most
effective means available to counter enemy mobility and maneuver war-
fare, both in the East and in North Africa. During 1943, the army thus
aised its nirst artillery division to provide massed defensive me suppor
Il pasip ter counteroffensive punch. Despite its efforts, the Heer was
unable to enhance substantially its artillery capabilities. The artillery divi-
sion experiment proved unsuccessful because the formation was too large
and unwieldy, and mounting equipment shortages forced its disbandment in
spring 1944.114 Indeed, heavy losses of guns and towing tractors prevented
the consolidation of artillery into larger formations and steadily degraded
bility, 115 The loss of air superiority also lessened German arulery effec-
liveness because gunners were denied aerial observation, which reduced
their accuracy. The mounting Allied ser threat forced gunners adopt elabo-
rate camouflage, redeploy their i uns frequently, and to limit barrages. At
the same time, growing ammuni it shortages curtailed the massed fire
required to stop enemy penetrations.
